THE SECOND part of the Myrror of Knighthood.

CONTAINING TWO Several Books, wherein is entreated the valiant deeds of
Arms of sundry worthy Knights, very delightful to be read, and nothing
hurtful to be regarded.

NOW NEWLY TRANSLAted out of Spanish into our vulgar tongue by R.P.

IMPRINTED AT London by Thomas Este. 1583.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and my very good friend, Master Edward Cordele,
Esquire.
ARISTOTLE (right Worshipful) being demanded, what benefit he had obtained
by Philosophy, answered: This is my gain, that uncommanded I can do that I
ought, and avoid doing that I should not; For, (says he) the ignorant for
fear of punishment abstain from evil, but the sapient can shun the same of
their own accord: noting, that studious exercise brings experience, and
makes as well civil policy, as martial prowess apparent. For which cause,
there have been sundry in times past, and some in this our present age, that
have not only penned with great labor the laudable works of Antiquity: but
also with as much travail have imitated certain old writers, by inuenting of
histories, no less profitable to repulse other hurtful pastimes, then
pleasant to pass away the tediousnes of time. Amongst the number of which
late works, there chanced about a three years since to come into my hands,
the first part of a Spanish translation, entitled, The Mirror of Knighthood:
which being published was so accepted, that I was importuned by sundry
Gentlemen (my very friends) to procure the translation of the second part:
whereto, (partly to accomplish their desires, and partly for the vulgar delight
of all) I condiscended.

And finding this Spaniard adorned with all good exercises, which pertained to
the exalting of virtue, and the extinguishing of vice: I labored (as much as
in me lay) to find an English Patron of conformable quality, whose
countenance might as well prefer him with the courteous, (...) protect him
among the envious. But I had not long bethought me, when the consideration of
your worships courtesy with the good report of your virtue, expelled that
doubt, and encouraged me to present you with this work. Beseeching you to
accept in good part, this poor present at the hands of him, which wishes to
you long life, with the continual increase of virtue, prosperity, and health:
and after this life endless felicity.

Your Worships most assured: T. E.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have here published the second part of the Myrrour of
Knighthoode, to the end that I might both satisfy thy desire, and yield unto
thee the delight, that by reading thereof thou may receive. About the verity
of the history I will not contend, neither would I wish thee to be more
curious to inquire, then thou would be desirous to ^ift the truth of each
transmutation in the Metamorphosis of Ovid, or ^uerie tale in the works of
Aesope: but to consider, that as the one by the transformation of reasonable
creatures into sundry brutishe shapes, shadowed the deformity of their wicked
lives: and the other by the manner of his beasts figured the beh^uiour of all
the estates of men, wishing a reformation of the ^uill, and a confirmation of
the good: So our Author has pleasantly compiled this present work, as well to
animate these that are by nature forward unto the exercise of arms, for to
exalt their fame: as also to provoke them that have hitherto slept in the bed
of security, to shun their wonted sloth, with desire rather honorably to
loose their lives in the defense of equity, then shamefully to live with
perpetual infamy. And whereas there are some so stoycall to contemn the
reading of historyes, alleging that their vain delight withdraw many from
other virtuous studies. I answer, that in any matter where vice is
reprehended, virtue is no way hindered, and although I must needs confess,
that the learned works of the liberal sciences are principallye to be
preferred, so it cannot be denied but that the pleasant style of a well penned
history, is as it were a whe^stone to the mind, being almost dulled with
continual study: and albeit there shall (peradventure) want the like grace of
eloquence in the translation as is requisite, yet I doubt not but the variety
of the matter shall make a sufficient recompense. Moreover (courteous Reader) I
request thee to note, that whereas the beginning of this part follows not
consequently upon the same book which was published in the name of the first
part, it is not to be imputed to any error committed in the translation of
this second part: for that it is verily the self same, that bears the title
of the second part in the Spanish tongue, but the book that lacks, is the
second book of the first part, which with as much speed as may be, shall be
joined thereunto. In the mean time, accept this in good part, which I now
present: wherein thou shall find the strange and wonderful prowess of the
worthy Trebatio, and his sons, nephews, kinsmen, and sundry other courageous
knights, mixed with many lamentable and sorrowful histories, together with the
redress of the wronged innocents. And so I end, committing this my labor, to
thy courteous consideration, and thy self to the Almighties tuition.

Thine: T.E.

THE FIRST BOOK of the second part of the Mirror of Knighthood: wherein is
entreated the valiant deeds of arms of many worthy Knights.
THE CRVELL Battle which past between the Knight of the Sun and the fierce
Giant Bramaraunt, in which bickering the Giant perceiving he must needs have
the worst, murdered himself. CAP. I.
WHEN THE GLITTERING armor of Aeneas of Troie was at the request of his Mother
Venus forged in Vulcan his shop, the well s^eeled hamme^s did not temper and
beat it with grea^er (...), ^hen the heroical son of Trebatio ((...) the
stou^ Pagan Bramarant through the midst of the Grecian woods,) did with his
(...) blows upon his armor, mangling by little and (...) his strong and
lusty body, so much the more their choler increased, as the combat did endure
between them. There were present at this bickering the renoumed* Emperor
Trebatio, Alicandro the king of Hungary and his Grandfather, with many other
puissaunt Princes and great Lords, who with no small admiration did behold
^he exceeding fierceness with which they let drive their blows, the one at
the other, which did resound an Eckoe in the air, and yielded a terrible noise
in the woods. This battle did continue between the^ ye space of two long
hours, and albeit it was fierce and sharp, the valor of the incensed knight
of the Sun prevailed not to abate or exstinguish the rage of the Pagan, and
much less could the force of the Tartarian quail in any sort the courage of
the princely Grecian. The skirmish being hot, and the redoubted son of Trebatio
perceiving that it endured very long without certainty who had the better:
heerevpon being greatly inflamed with fury, lifted up his peisant club above
his head, and did discharge it upon the pagan his left shoulder, in such sort,
(that notwithstanding his strength) he was forced to shrink backward, and so
fell flat upon his right side, being greatly dismayed at ye blow, and much
more at the fall: he began to recover himself at length by the friendly help
of an ash tree which was close by him, for otherwise his unwieldy body had
taken more pause upon the ground. Scantly had be taken good footing when he
perceived the knight of the Sun sort him another sequence aunswerable to ye
first. The Giant being unprovided of any trumpe to cast in his way, whereupon
he was driven to close with the Grecian, and having ceazed his body with his
sharp talents, he began to gripe him very hard: The heroical Prince seeing
himself thus embraced contrary to the custom of all courtesy, began to
shift, for to avoid this course entertainment so well as he might, but wanting
more time then courage he was thereby tript to the ground. And finding
himself laden with his enemy he was thereby compelled to forsake his club, and
by all means to seek to shake off that unfriendly burden. Therefore catching
Bramarant by the middle with no less agilitie then fury, he did violentlye
pull him underneath: whereby he requited him in part, for the discourtesie of
the former fall. There did they both show their inestimable forces, and passing
nimblenesse of body, in this cruel and dangerous encountering. And thus they
long time tumbled and tossed each other on the grass, some times not moving
for want of breath, otherwhiles wallowing together to get the masterie,
yielding forth most terrible groninges, by reason of the great pains and
weariness that they sustained in this hard conflict, at length they set each
other at liberty, and then start upon their feet, and began to fight as
fiercely as before. The Knight of the Sun drawing out his Sword, supposed
that no resistaunce of the enemy, how strong so ever it were, could suspend
the execution of his purpose, the Moore likewise took hold of his heavy
trenchaunt blade, cursing and banning his Gods, that they had endued this
Knight with so great force and prowess. Being in this brainsicke mood, he
would not attempt to make experience of his enemies force again, but
flourishing his sword amongst the troop, caused the^ to sunder themselves and
so in flying, made a broad lane between them, and ran to shrowde himself
into the thickest of the Wood, that he could, leaving the people in a great
admiration: The noble knight of the Sun when he beheld that his champion
betook him to his heels in so great have, whether he did it for fear (which
was unlikely being a stout champio^) or for devilish madness, (which might seem
true) being no christian, called for his horse, and could not be persuaded
from pursuing ye Pagan, by the Emperor his father, making a semblaunce of
great anger by his countenance, his horse being brought by one of his
esquires, he mounted into the Saddle very lightly, without help of his
stiroppes, and broching his courser with the Spurs, he made him run so
swifte, that he seemed another Perseus upon his Pegasus, to them that beheld
him. He ceased not to course up and down the Forest, with set purpose to
single out his Enemy, and not to rest until he had subdued him, or else to
be conquered by the virtue of his adversaries force.

Noble Rosicleer perceiving his brother to be inclyned for to take revenge of
the Pagan, and thereby mistrusting least that some froward mischaunce might
attend upon him (which fickle fortune does usually afford), heerevppon did
call for his horse and armor out of hand, which being brought with as much
speed as might be, in so short a time he being furnished with his own weapons
and armor, he leapt up nimbly into ye saddle, and posted through the forest
in as great have as he might, following his brother in the same path whether he
went, where we will leave him, to make rehearsal of that which did befall in the
Emperors court, in the mean time: when as ye beholders had somewhat staide
themselves in remembering this notable battle, and had as it were forgotten
the sharp brunts ye two champions sustained, the Emperor with ye rest were
somewhat recomforted to see how lovingly Rosicleer did follow to aid and succor
his brother, and discoursing by the way of the battle, and of the incredible
strength and courage of the Pagan, they withdrew themselves into their tents:
being not long there, news was spread abroad in the court of the loss of
Clarim^nt, which report when the Empres hard, it laid such an impression of
grief in her Imperial heart, that albeit she was an Empress and had ruledome
of many nations, yet had she not so much power over her self, but presently
thereupon she fell into an extreme Ecstasy between the Empress Claridianas
arms. The Queens and Ladies beholding so tragical and sudden mischaunce,
they clustered altogether, and with certain drugs which they had about them in
a readiness, they somewhat revived her again, she being before greatly
distraughted out of her wits and senses. And with sorrowing sighs replenished
with much martyrdom, descending from the bottom of her heart, bathing also
her beautiful visage with two streams of salt tears gushing from her eyes,
with a lamentable voice she delivered certain speeches, which did move the
assistaunts unto very great compassion: To whom the emperor came (although he
was God wot, in such plight himself, that his case rather required more
comfort) then to visit the comfortless: yet notwithstandding he with a grave
countenance, very lovingly did cherish and persuade her: which speeches of his
sauoured somewhat of an angry show of reprehension, in the end he wrought so
much with her, as she was fully recovered and contented. The Emperor not to
seem daunted with any thing, but to make a more apparaunt show of his valor,
he commanded his huntsmen to continue the sport, and in outward semblance
seemed to be so merry as ever he was, whereas in truth he was secretly wringed,
for the exceeding great passion which he saw the lady Claridiana endure, for
the sodeine absence of him who was newly married unto her, and had begotten her
with child. After three days were passed, they were desirous to return to
the City again, and taking up their tents, they laid all things in order,
and in readiness to proceed on their journey. But as they began to martch on
their way, they might perceive coming a long by the Forest side a Coach, all
covered over with black Searge, which four horses did draw, trapped with
such like black furniture. Before it eight knights came riding, with
Targettes and armor, all out of order, and broken, which did very well
express, that they escaped from some dangerous and hot skirmish. Behind the
Coche did attend as many more knights, having their armor suitable to the
first, all did bear black devices, the barbature of their Horses, aunswerable
to the same. The Emperor and Knights which beheld this same show, being all
black in mourning wise, did rain their horses to know what came in the same
Coach.

Here must I digress and recite unto you the cruel order and miserable end
of the unfortunate Pagan, and will return at length to relate unto you, what
did betide the Emperor and his company, after this sight of the Coche. The
devilish More Bramaraunt ran through the Grecian forests (a hellish fury
being his guide) yelling and braieng against his Gods, and as a starued Tiger
he trauased the woods, cutting down oaks, and r^oting from ye ground pine
apple trees, as if they had been sle^der reeds. And being plunged in this
pansiue mood, he entered into ye highest degree of his melancholic passions,
debating with himself, why should it not be possible yt his mighty hand should
conquer and subdue one silly Knight. But other sometimes descending from ye
mood into a more mad and frantic kind of behavior, this disturbed Moore did
bend himself toward the midst of ye wood, and keeeping on his right hand, he
repaired toward the brink of a broad and deep river which ran by that wood,
where he purposed to ease his weary lims: and the better to perform his
desire, he unlaced his helmet, and hurlde it scornfully to the ground. Now the
infernal furies began to visit the Moore, and attended to sting his poisoned
breasts, in such sort, that what with desire of revenge, and sorrow for his
late mishap, he was all kindeled in fire, having tossed many thoughts in his
crabbed mind. In the end, he cast up his wretched eyes to the heavens, saying:
O ye treacherous Gods, ioyn in league to defend your selves from mine
unfortunate hand, stay not, but muster your forces together, for if mine own
hand in the mean while be no impeachment to the cause, by pulling out my
heart, I will change the color of these christalline waters with the
Sacrifices of your blood: for no doubt there rests more valor in this one
knigh^, then in you all, when you are together. O ye dastardly cowards, where
are ye now become? Trust ye to this, that I have in more regard the worthiness
of that knight that fought against me, then I have in lyking your famed forces.
And seeing yt neither your powers nor my strength, may not paragon to his
courage, and to the end, ye shall not flatter your selves with a good opinion of
your own sovereignty, being insufficient to succor me, and much less unable
to suppress my will, or bridle my desire, I will renounce you all, and trust no
more to your favors. After he had thus spoken, forthwith he began to pull in
sunder his strong and bright shining armor, and what with outragiousnes, or
with sorrow which did greatly gall him, he cast from him one piece here,
another there: and blaspheming against al his Gods, he said: What does it
avail me your virtue, your favors, or mine own strength? is it not
altogether weakness? is it not a show without substance? Have you not
suffered my father to be slain without taking revenge? have you not seen me
subdued, wanting forces to requite it? Might not my father have been preferred
before Jupiter for gravity and wit? before Alcides for prowess? and before
Mars for courage? Can I otherwise conceive, but that you are all dastards, in
yt you take no revenge: deaf, in yt you will not hear the complaints of the
oppressed: and blind in that you cannot see the deserts of me. I should think
truly my fathers forces exceeding you all, ye have been a mean to breed his
death so soon. Why did you not assist me against ye Emperor Trebatio? why did
you not maintain me against ye knight, yt has conquered (...) in ye field. O
ye faint har^ed wretches, what has brought me hither, thus in the prime of my
youth to be put to shame, by being subdued of this knight. I will use such
means, yt none of you shall take revenge of me, by dieng at my enemies hands:
neither shall any have occasion to triumph and say, yt he has slain the
knight Bramarant. And speaking these and like speeches, he took his sword into
his hand and said. O good and faithful sword, release me from ye shame which I
deserve, in that I have not executed yt, which I did covenant to atchieue by
thee, since yt neither thy trencha^t edges, nor my approved stoutnes have
sufficiently played their parts, to satisfy that, whereunto my promise has
bound me. A cowardly arm did hold thee, a dastardly heart did direct thee, and
an evil guerdon be thy glory. Well, I will shroud thee in such sort, yt
hereafter thou shall not stand any other hardy knight in steed, nor be
subject to any man as thou have been to me. This only thing I request of
thee, if any of ye Gods carry ye good will to take the up to serve their own
needs, expres in what small regard my vnco^quered heart held the^, and thou shall
perceive, that they are not so valiant and stout as I am, or ever have been.
Having thus said, he cast it in the deepest part of the river, not having any
more weapons but a poor poynado, which usually he did wear about him: and
taking it in his hand, delivered these speeches unto it. Thou silly bodkin
shall finish ye piece of work, which all Christendom was never able at any
time to begin, I mean in bereauing me of my weary and lingering life, for I
above all men only deserve to leese it, seeing that I being the son of so
valiant a Father, have not showed any spark of that valor which by right
ought to descend to me from mine auncestour, since then I have digressed, I
repute my self unworthy to be registered for his son. O how worthily do
thou deserve death unfortunate Bramarant, since there are so few buddes of
valor springing in thee. And let me not deny but that mine ancestors
deserved to find much more favor at the Gods hands then I have done.
Forasmuch therefore as my cas^ is so bad, I will neither commend my soul to
the tuition of the Gods, neither will I crave of any man so small a favor as a
grave for my wretched body. Yielding forth these reasons with a great and
pitiful sigh, descending from his heavy heart, he stabde the Dagger amiddest
his ribs, which pierced unto the liver and heart, and so the vital powers
striving with death, and his miserable carcass beating up and down the small
sands for life, there dyed in this sort the most valiant and stout Pagan,
whose semblable the world did never yet bring forth, most unworthy (God
knows) of so cruel and pitiful an end.

The worthy Knight Rosicleer finding Bramaraunt giving up the ghost, after he
was dead, did entombe his corpse near unto a Pineapple tree, wherein he did
ingraue an Epitaph. Cap. 2.
THE last pang and deadly gasp that the valiant Tartarian yielded, being
distressed between life and death, was ouerheard by noble Rosicleer, who by
chance (pursuing him and his brother) repaired to that place where the Moore
lay wallowing: and aiming very well by his sorrowful sighs, that he endured
heaps of passions, rained his horse toward that way where he heard so shrill
these gronings, and staieng a while to hear his pitiful complaints, laid
himself squat upon ye ground, not far from whence ye dead pagan lay imbrued in
his blood. And wondering how so deep a river might change his color by the
loss of the blood of one man, began to toss^ the dead corpse up and down,
presuming in himself, that rather the passion of the mind or the weight of
his armor then any deadly blow that he had received, had brought him to this
extremity. In the end, seeing his visage so besmeared with blood, as he could
not truly guess what Knight he might be, insomuch as he never saw him but
in his Beauer. Heerevppon he wondered greatly, partlye to see that this Knight
was so strong timbered, but principally to see his stern and sour
countenance. And by as much as he could gather by his foresaid complaints, he
imagined him to be the executioner of his own body. He pausing somewhat in a
mase, in viewing this lamentable slaughter of Bramarant, without moving his
eyes either one way or other, until in the end he looked up, being greatly
afflicted in his mind, and deeply sighing, cast his eyes that way where the
Moore his armor lay strawed as you have already heard, and seeing them to
be so great and strong, he went about for to piece and lay them all in order,
which thing being done, he knew by the device ingraued in them, that this was
Bramaraunt the More, which lay thus murdered. His stout heart could not
brook this sorrowful Sacrifice, but in considering of the miserable end
which did befall upon this Tartarian, he could not but shed from his eyes
some trickeling tears, saying: O wretched world, what booteth so much the
mighty limbs and exceeding forces of any man, when as thou with thy smooth
and flattering face, do draw them at last that follow thy course* to such a
wretched end, and at the pinch of all their pangs thou forsakest them. O
Bramarant, Bramarant, whose forces did resist the mighty Grecian army, the
incomperable strength of my brother, the tried knight of the Sun, and have
not had power to suppress thine own outrageous passions. Alas thy valor
and noble courage did require, nay rather deserve, more glory, and more
guerdon then this. Thy strong and fast knit members did merit to be entombed in
a more rich Sepulcher, then in this weat and small sands, and God knows,
never deserved to be a pluming stock to the ravenous Fowls of the air. What
did move thee, O most unhappy amongst all men, to make thy angry arm
bereave thee of thine own life? It could be nothing else I am sure, but thy
surpassing great pride: What did move thee to this untimely death, as it well
may be termed, since thy fortune has been such, I will not suffer thy body
to be pulled in fitters with hungry beasts and ravenous Harpies, neither
will I see thine armor dispearsed in such sort, without bestowing upon thee
the due desert of honor, which are sufficient witnesses of the sacrifice of
thine own body, and a testimony of that which thou did offer up to thy
Gods, by sprinkling the pleasant ^ieldes and green grass with such a crimsin
color. And after having thus pitifully bewailed the Moore, he took his
helmet, and pulling out the murdering dagger, which was nailed close to the
hiltes in his body, he dug a deep grave therewith, wherein was inter^ed the
miserable body of the unfortunate Tartarian. Likewise he did hang the armor
upon a very fair and high Pine apple tree, which was near unto his grave,
and with the point of his Daggar did ingraue this Epitaph in the rind of the
Tree.

This Pine with stretched arms oreshades a valiant knight,
Whose body here interred lie^, and Bramarant he hight:
In strength and feats of arms, he most men did surpass,
A Pagan borne, his native soil and land Tartaria was.
His own right hand, a woeful case, himself did slay,
And re^t his heart which never was subdude before that day
Trebatios son first there this mighty More has found,
Twixt life and death, and with his hands ingrau'de him in this ground.
A Monument too base unfitting his degree,
Whose blood and acts in tomb of gold interd deserud to be*
In this fair growing pine for honor of his name,
He did ingraue these lines, to be a record of his fame.
And placed his armor here, forbidding any Knight,
To take it hence, unless he be as stout as he in fight.
And who so shall it wear, must wars continue still,
With Grecian Lords, as Bramarant did, this stands for my will.
Now having finished this piece of work, he said: Pardon me valiant Moore,
I beseech thee, because at this time and in this place I do not attribute so
much honor to thee as thou deseruest: yet I do promise thee by the faith of a
Christian knight, to fulfill every point in this Epitaph, (I esteem so much)
though it be done with the loss of my life. And to make the more assurance
of this my promise, I vow that no year shall pass, but tha^ I will come to
visit thy Sepulcher, to see and know who has been so hardy and ventrous,
as to think himself worthy to carry away thy heroycall armor.

And in speaking these and such other like words, he did not forget to mingle
them with some trickling tears, his courageous heart was so tormented in
meditating of the lamentable end of this desperate More. Having finished his
talk and travail, without longer abode, he mounted upon his cours^r, and
directed himself thorough the thickest of the Wood, determining always to
accomplish yt which he promised, although it did import so much in it, as the
weight of his life, as you shall perceive hereafter. This valiant knight
continued not without great grief of mind, in remembering the order of ye
death of Bramarant, which did continually occupy his memory. And as he went
thus drowned in sudde^ of sorrow, he knew not, neither cared he which way his
horse did carry him, until the darkness of the night surprised him, so that
he could not pass any further, wherefore he was constrained to light from
his horse to walk on foot, and to remain in that place all Night, wherefore
he unbridled his horse, and gave him liberty to feed on the sweet grass,
(whereof he had great need) having endured much travel before. He likewise
unlaced his helmet, and laying it under his head in steed of a pillow (being a
course bolster for an Emperors son) rested his werie lims upon ye green
medowe. And thus being alone and solitary, he could not suspend the
remembrance of those passions, which the day before he had passed. Also those
conceits did call to account more sorrows, and made him to be grieved for his
long absence from his best beloved Oliuia, whose beautye he entertained so
deeply in his mind, as neither time, place, nor any fortune whatsoever, could
separate her from his good opinion. Nourishing his mind with this sweet
passion, he continually tossed too and fro: and in the end, seeing the bright
shining Moon, and fixing his eyes upon it, he began to contemplate the divine
power of almighty God, not wondering also a little, how that ye heavens were
beautified with golden stars, and how the great Architector of the world, had
settled every one in his due and con^enient place, which ingendered a great
confusion in his mind. These cogitations summoned him to sleep, wherein he
had not taken long rest, but yt he heard on his le^^^ hand a harmonious sound
of some musical instrument, and therewith all so pleasant and Angelical a voice
answerable to the same, yt he supposed it to descend from ye heavens. The
prince start up, and softly went through the dark thicket^es, to the end he
might approach the more nearer, thereby to be pertaker of that celestial
music, but he was hindered of his journey, for that Dianas brightness was
eclipsed with a Cloud: wherefore then lifting up his eyes, he might discrie
under a broad Pine apple tree, a certain Lady sitting upon a quishion of
black velvet, embrodered with diverse pretty knots of gold, whom he supposed
to be that Lady, with which her divine harmony delighted his troubled
spirits, her fair and yeolow hair untied, and hanging down beneath her
ears, did rest upon her comely shoulders, in such seemly sort, and so long,
that some part thereof touched the black velvet cloth, which did seem with
their golden color to represent some golden emblem, wouen in the same cloth.
She had before her Christalline breast, a goodly Lute, whereon she played (as
you have heard) this sweet music. There waited upon her person nine fair
damosells, arraied all alike, with gowns of black velvet, and on her one side
there lay prostrate a lusty and strong knight well proportioned in body, and
tall, harnessed in a black Diamond armor, without any other device, who was
very attentive to the music, which the fair Lady did sing: the tenor of
the which is comprised in these vearses following.

Strain forth a voice conformed to my heart,
and let my fingers heavy stops apply:
Whilst that my tongue in words bewray such smart,
as who them hears, may know in life I die.
Fowls, beasts and worms, that neighbor near this place,
All in your kinds, assist my woeful case.
Yea even the fish that in this river dwell,
whose clear sweet streams my tears have bitter made,
Will stay to hear the process which I tell,
the Nymphs also that haunt this grouie shade:
And Ecko eke, full glad of such a mate,
Will in my words bemone her passed state.
I love (aye me) whereby my joys I lost,
and am not loved, wherein fresh grief I find:
Proud Tyrant thou, with shame thy conquest bost,
thy faith, my fame, staind by thy cruel mind,
Who gotst with guile the guard of my good name,
And leau'st me now to ransacke of defame.
Cannot my face where nature prints her prays,
thy liking draw her A.b.c. there to know,
My hairs excel bright Phoebus golden rays,
my eyes more clear then stars in frost that show.
My cheeks likewise, for perfect white and red,
resemble blood that in the snow is shed.
The rest vnnamde does match all these likewise,
but lo my faith my form too far does pass,
Yea, form and faith he shunnes and does despise,
whom ceaseless I pursue from place to place:
Whereby though often my tender lims I tire,
My will yet fresh, through hope and sweet desire.
She made an end of her song with a pitiful sigh, and letting her lute fall
out of her hand, with a trembling voice she said. O Prince Zoylus, if thou
did or would know the great travail that this careful Damoisell
susteyneth for thy only cause, I do verily think, that albeit thou had
tasted of the water of the enchanted well of Merlin, yet could it never work
such effect in thee, as to make thee careless of my torments, since they are so
sharp, and I have sustained them so long.

These words were no sooner uttered by this sorrowful lady, but presently, the
knight start up, who was laid down close by the Lady, and could not be quiet,
until he had answered her thus. What breath has love made in your breast,
most delicate damsel? how has he subdued you with his blind force, unless
the great disdain and coffeehouse that the Tartarian Prince showed you do
oppress you, I know not why you should complain: why should not you quite his
discurtesie with like disgrace? why should you not make him taste of ye sower
which seems so bitter to you? You sent for me (you know) to come into Greece,
only to be revenged of his cruelty: and how often have you wished his head as
a Sacrifice in respect of his contempt? And how comes it now to pass, yt in
your songs he is remembered with such affection, thought upon with such
plain^s, and called upon as a divine creature? Believe me and doubt not of it
(good madame) if Fortune be so favorable to assist me in my purpose, I will
in such wise contriue these matters, that you shall never have any occasion to
lament his life, neither yet to suspect that he does bestow his good will and
liking upon some other Lady.

The afflicted Dame notwithstanding all these his comfortable speeches, could
not strip her self of any part of these exceeding sorrows, which so deeply
did sting her, whereupon she answered him in this order saying.

Prince of Mesopotamia, I sail even now between two doubts, whereby I do
not only doubt, but am also persuaded my shipwreck is hard at hand. For if
I become so froward, as to envy him whom I wish to be my friend, or that I
have so cankered a mind as to seek to destroy him whom I love so well, what
might be said of me otherwise then of a fained lover, and cruel homicide:
again, if on the other side I pardon his death, whose life and disdain breeds
me this sorrow might argue too much pity without desert. Alas, what luck
had I, that love should intrude himself so forcibly into my poor heart, and
govern there as chief Lord, and could he not have battered the breast of
Zoylo, whose de^ence in resisting had been more strong then mine, but the
weakest must to the wall, and the least able must bear the heauiest burden.
How gladsome would that day be unto me, wherein I might see my Knight abandon
his strangeness, and extend more favor upon me: or else alas, how willing
would I be that my afflicted heart were drawn out of his place by his bloody
hand. The poor Lady being not able to speak any more, wrong her hands
and stayed her self against a Pine apple tree, which was behind her back, at
the view whereof the Mesopotamian knight in great sorrow laid himself down
again, upon the green grass. And the Grecian Prince wondering at this
strange adventure, returned very softly to that place where he left his horse
feeding, with intent and purpose to encounter that Knight, so soon as Titan
should appear to light the world with his beams, and for no other cause but
only to deliver his friend from that prepensed malice. And when as ye fiery
Phaeton began with his glancing beams to shine, the Grecian Prince put on his
armor, laced his helmet, mounted upon his horse, and with a soft pace made
toward the Prince of Mes^potamia, who was now prepared to undertake his
journey with his company. After they had travailed a while, the Prince did
epsy them passing through a fair champain or field, and was greatly abashed
at the exceeding beauty of the Lady, whom he viewed a long time, and love
having tickeled him for that she was so rare a Phoenix, he thought for her sake
he could subdue all the world: wherefore he turned his eyes toward that
place where the Knight was, and if before he wondered at the Ladies comely
graces, not much less was he now amassed at the strong body of this knight,
and at his huge and well fashioned weapons, whereby he reputed him to be some
worthy and noble champion. After he had shaked off this imagination, he said
unto him: Knight, take thy weapons and armor for thy defense, for I am
desirous to have some trial of thee, before that thou do prove thy valor
with the Tartarian Prince, thereby peradventure to quite him (if I can) from
the like battle which thou do intend to have with him, at the request of
this Lady, and therefore I mean to prevent that devilish purpose which thou
have promised to accomplish The Moore heereat began to swell, and very
scornfully and with a fearful countenance replied. What fury or devil of
hell has placed so foolish a thought in thy brains, to undertake that exploit,
which the best of the Gods never durst enterprise: and not able to speak any
more, his cholar and rage was so great, he laid both his hands upon his
sword, and therewithal let fly at the Grecian Prince such a blow, that he
made his head redouble in his breast plate, and upon the neck of the same, he
discharged another upon him, which made him yield backward. The Grecian Prince
wondering at his incomperable strength and nimblenesse, drew out that strange
and unknown sword, which the Queen Iulia did give him, and lifting it above
his head with one of his accustomed blows, he did smite it upon the pagan his
helmet, which made him bow down his head to his saddle Pomell, so that his
senses were almost benumbed with the force of it, but being recovered, he
began by little and little to smite and wound the noble Prince, yet his
dexterity in fighting could little prevail, for the Prince stood not still,
but did so b^stur himself, (and with as great fury as the other) that he did
scarre his enemy in diverse places, which he felt not without great pain,
although he made no semblaunce of the same, whereupon the battle being
before but kindled, was now on a hot flame, both of them burning in revenge,
and therefore continued a good while furious and fierce, slashing maine blows
between them, which sounded a terrible noise in the thickness of the wood, as
if many Smithes had been hammering upon their Ansieldes. But whosoever had
then beheld the appalled countenance of the Lady, he would no doubt have
taken her for no living creature, so much did this desperate and fierce combat
astonish her comelye face. And thinking upon the valiant enemy of her
Knight, who like a Bear that has lost her yonglinges a^sailed him evermore*
on the one side she wished in her heart the victory over him, and on the other
side fearing to see her self all alone, she desired greatly truce between
them, and that they might part friendly, and that which did most glad her
mind was, yt oftentimes she did imagine (and yet but doubting of ye matter) if
perhaps this should be the knight whom she did take so great pains to find
out, and that which did confirm her surmise, was, that she heard him at the
first name ye Tartarian prince. In such and other like thoughts and doubts, the
comfortless Lady passed away her time: In the mean while that the
courageous Knights were busy how they might dispatch the one the other. But ye
crabbed Moore with both his hands gave the stout Grecian such a blow upon his
helmet, yt he made his horse neck a pillow for his head, wherewithal he began
to thumpe and beat all his feeling, and in this senseless sort was Rosicleer
carried up and down the plain by his horse, ye Moore pursuing him to cut off
his head, but as God would have it, he awaked as it were out of a dream, and
furiously recovering his sword, he turned back again, and repayed the
Paganne with such a forcible blow upon his friendly helmet, that his
wonderful strength made the well tempered steel to yield, and therewithal it
made him fall backwardes upon his horses buttocke, casting out blood out of his
mouth, his horse carrieng him here and there amidst the pleasant fields more
then half dead, but Rosicleer would not follow him, but did attend whether
and about what he went, who tarried not long but yt he inioyed his former
senses and strength, (being once almost dispossessed of them) and abashed to
see the Prince to have surmounted him by lending him such a cruel blow, so
extremely did all the furies in hell conspire in his breasts, that now having
reared up his swoorde, which fell from him by force of that unreasonable blow,
he broched his horse with his spurs amain, and with incredible swiftness he
encountered with the Grecian Prince, and hit him so mortal a stroke upon one
of his shoulders, that it made his bones rattle within his skin, but he
failed not to leave the print of his swoorde in some part of the sinnowed
flesh, so that now the battle seemed to be but begun, such was the
fierceness of both these stout champions. And both of them employed their
forces in smiting of each other, and also their wits were not idle how the one
by some s^ight might sooner cut off his enemy, because it grieved them both
that the battle begun two long hours since, should endure any longer
without advantage of any part, wherefore both did their diligence to finish
it by some way or other. And all this while it was very hard to know
whether of them had the better over the other, being equivalent in prowess
and manhood. But the courageous and fierce Grecian being angry in his mind
to see one only Knight to keep him at the staffes end so long, replenished
with an infernal furye, he began a fresh to double and redouble his mighty
and peysaunt blows upon the Pagan, whereat he had good cause to wonder: and
perceiving that his strength did more and more increase with his courage, he
began to blaspheme against his Gods, yet notwithstanding like a firce Lion
he thought to tear in pieces the worthy Grecian, wherewithal he let slip
so devilish a blow upon his head, that with the loss of his understanding,
he did almost fall from his horse: The worthy Rosicleer quickelye again
recovered, and seeing himself to be in such a plight, he turned his horse
so nimblye, that he scarce left his treading in the ground, and now when he
saw himself iumpe with his enimye, gathering together his forces and standing
upright in his stiroppes, he weelded his sharp Swoorde between his strong
and mighty arms, and thundered so deadlye a blow upon the Moore his
head-peece, (who indeed was not provided for any defense) the force whereof
made a division from the scull even to the very shoulders, the wretched Pagan
falling down dead to ye ground, ye most part of his blood came gushing out of
his body. Unneth had he fallen from his horse when the trembling and troubled
Lady did also fall from her Palfraie, as one that should give up the Ghost,
whom when her Gentlewomen did epsy, lighted all of their Palfrayes, and with
streams of salt tears began to lament her woeful case, and to accurse her
froward fortune, every one striving about her, to try if they could by any
means restore her again to her memory. The Prince seeing her in this
extremity, did also forsake his horse and come toward the place, where this
miserable Lady lay like a stake, and causing one of her Gentlewomen to fetch
a little water from the river which was hard by, he besprinckeled her
beautified visage with it, and thereupon she came to her self again, and
opened the dimmed windows of her dark body, and when she beheld the Prince
so nigh her, with a profounde sigh and pitiful voice she said. O cruel
homicide of my faithful and valiant champion: thou thirsty bloudsucker of the
royal blood of Mesapotamia, dispatch now, dispatch I say, to execute thy
fury with thy imbrued Swoorde upon my sorrowful heart, and speaking these
words she fell again into an ecstasy as before, which Rosicleer marking, and
gessing at her inward pain by her extearne countenance, he turned himself to
one of her Damoysells, which as he thought among the rest of her train seemed
the chiefest, in knowing most her Ladies secrets, and said unto her:
Gentlewoman, I see (God knows, not without great sorrow be it spoken) ye
grief yt your Lady indureth in viewing my face, therefore I pray you tell her
from me, that I entreat her to go to the Emperors court of Greece, and there
present her personage to his majesty, and certify him of all these accidents,
and there to stay my coming, for I mean shortly to return thither, and then
I promise her, that there I will use such means yt she shall inioye to her
great contentment, that thing, the want whereof does so greatly grieve her, and
because my words may carry more credit with her, you shall tell her, that
one of the Emperor Trebatio his sons, the greatest friend that the Tartarian
Prince has, did inform you this much. And heerevpon not tarieng for any
replye, he mounted upon his horse, coursing through the forest. When he was
gone, the Gentlewomen helped their lady by certain drugges which they brought
forth for preventing such mishaps, and so recontinued her health again, and
afterward expressed to her all that which the knights imparted unto them, which
report comforted her not a little. The grief which the Lady and her
Gentlewomen did sustain, in seeing a strange Knight glaunce by them armed,
and to remain in the wood alone without succor or comfort of any, I would
here set down before your eyes: but I am enforced to return to the famous
Rosicleer, and at this present, I will not make recital to you, what Knight
that was, who parting from Rosicleer did appear again unto him at his going
out of the forest.

Prince Rosicleer travailing on his way, having alredie taken leave of the
Princesses Ladies, did chance upon a certain adventure, and of the success
he had therein. Cap. 3.
THE valiant Rosicleer being departed from the sorrowful princess, went as he
thought the nearest way through the forest to find his brother, with set
purpose to make him acquainted with that which you have already heard, and
afterward to return back to Constantinople. So it happened that fortune
guyded him into a broad and large way, which was his direct pathe to
Constantinople, and turning him to the foot way where he saw a great gate in
hope to learn some news of the knight of the Sun. He had not travailed
long, but he descryed a far off a rank of men all armed, and they drawing
more near unto him, he perceived that they were xx. Knights armed with black
armor, and their head-peeces and beueres of the same color, and in their
company came a Chariot, all covered with black Searge so close, that it was
impossible to see what was within it, ye light came in through two windows
which were placed at the side of the Chariotte. Four horses did draw it, all
clad in black cloth, and there did ride two fair dwarfes, as guyders of the
same, all apparailed in black. Behind the same there came likewise ten
Knights clothed in like sort, and by their countenance they wear all right
sorrowful, so that the troop of the Knights that came with the Chariot were
thirty in number. With this heavy countenance and great straungenes, they
passed by Rosicleer, without speaking any word unto him: whereupon the Prince
came to those that waited behind, and demanded of them in courteous wise,
what they were, which were enclosed in that ^orrowfull Wagg^n, but the Knights
were so heavy and sad, that they made him no answer, but passed on forward,
which bred a more earnest desire in Rosicleer to know who was within, since that
with such mild speech he had demanded, and could not be resolved to any
purpose. And heerevpon without taking any further advise in the matter, he
rushed among them that enuyroned the Chariot, only to see what was within it,
but ere he might come near it, he was lette^ by two of the Knights which said
unto him: Stay thee Knight, stay thee, for if thou longest to know who is
here, thou shalt be hindered from it by us, which stand here to no other
purpose. It is my desire (said Rosicleer) and willingly would I be satisfied of
my request without entering into the combat, and if ye would afford me so much
courtesy, as to tell me the cause of so great sorrow, I should be heartelye
glad. Thou may not understand it, answered one of the Knights, at this
time, therefore depart thou hence in peace, unless thou will make experience of
our forces, which do attend upon it. I know not (replied Rosicleer) how it
shall betide me, but truly whether you will or no, I am purposed to see what is
within it. After he had thus spoken, he laid his hand upon his sword, and
without tarriaunce for more speeches, he hit one of them so strongly, that he
killed him. His companion seeing this, let drive at the Prince with all his
force, but the fierce Grecian suited him a pasport suitable to his companions:
which thing drove their companions into a wonderful admiration, and heerevppon
forgetting all courtesy, they altogether enuyroned the Prince, and struck at
him on every side: but the valiant Grecian seeing himself in such a prease,
it was not long, but that he did vnharnesse some, and maimed other some, and
others he struck down dead, and cursed was he unto whom he lent a full
blow. In such sort the Prince skirmished with those Knights, that they
began to recoyle, fearing the death, considering that it was better to
disclose to him that which with such humanity he had demanded of them.
Heerevppon the knights with blushing countenance made toward the Knight, and
being so weary as they were, which turned to their own harm, they struck
freshlye at him again, whereupon the Prince did cut and mangle them at his
own will. He then perceiving the small resistaunce that they made, he came
unto the Chariot, and pulling up the coue^^ure, he saw that there was within
it, a dead body all imbaulmed, and on the head of it, there was the Crown of a
King, which head unto the breast was divided in sunder with some blow, and he
did repute him for such a one by his royal garments, which were all imbrued
in blood. There sat in a Chair covered with black Cipers, at the foot of
this dead king, a Gentlewoman of a middle age, leaning her cheek upon her
hand, and her eyes shut, she bedewed her face and breasts with innumerable
brinish tears, and near unto her there sat another Gentlewoman, who seemed
to be but ten years of age, all wrapped in black, which Gentlewoman was so
fair, that she appeared unto his view more divine then humane.

The renowned Grecian Prince with great admiration and no less pity, beheld
this sorrowful sight, and at length the distressed Gentlewoman, opened her
heavy eyes, and seeing the Knight, knew he was none of hirs. Thervppon with an
angry countenance she said unto him, Who are you sir Knight which have been
so bold as to come and see what is here without my commandment? where are
my Knights and keepers which have not depended you the passage, nor brideled
your exceeding boldness? The courteous Grecian who greatly bewailed the sight
which he saw, and the great dolor wherein the Gentlewoman was, he answered
her soberly. Madame, I am a Knight, whose help if it might stand you in steed,
though it were with hazard of my life, you should find it ready at your
commandment: and as concerning the guard which have attended upon you, they
have done what lay in their power to prevent me, but all could not prevail.
The Lady attentively heard the speeches of the Knight, and hearing the tidings
he delivered her of her Knights, she lift up the other side of the covering of
her Chariotte, she espied some of her Knights murdered, other some hurt, and
other some all to be trampled under the horse feet. After she had seen the
great overthrow of her Knights, with an angry countenance she turned her to
the Knight and said: The Gods send thee a perpetual plague, since that in such
sort thou have entreated the best Knights in all my Province, and since that our
misfortune has been so great that thou have had the power to vanquish my
keepers, I beseech the Gods, that thy forces hereafter may prove as weak, as
my troop is now poor and slender. Follow on thy way, and suffer me to go
mine, with that company which has escaped thy cruel hand, what would thou
farther learn then that which thou have already seen? Besides this, my
griefs cannot afford me so much time as to recount them, neither has thy
courtesy wrought in me such good will as to recite them. When she had thus
spoken, she opened one of her casements, and made sign to the dwarfes which
^idde, that they should whip the horses, which when they had done, they went
like the wind, leaving ye Prince more discontented then he was at the
beginning. And without more tarriance, he continued on his journey, greatly
blaming the courtesy of so evil mannered people: and he travailed a long
time without encountering any thing worthy the recital, until he came unto
the shore of the Sea, wherein he saw a great boat of very fair workmanship,
upon which he had great delight to look, yet he did not forsake his way, and
he had not continued long in riding, but that he heard a woman's voice as he
thought, call unto him: Knight of the Princess Oliuia, succor this captive
Gentlewoman. At the call hereof, the Knight turned his head, and gazing on
all sides, he could not see who called him in such have, and so following his
way, he heard again a new voice which said unto him: Knight of Cupide,
thou never deniedst to any thy help, and wherefore do thou not succor me.
The Prince greatly astonished, turned himself to see if he could perceive who
called him, which thing when he could not do, it bred a bitter passion in him.
Going forward in his journey more careful then he was, he heard the third
time a voice cryeng unto him. O son of Trebatio, courageous Rosicleer, what is
become of that pity which was wont to dwell within thy valiant heart, toward
the succouring of the oppressed Ladies, why do thou now begin to fail me.
When he heard himself called by his proper name, it did strike him into a
greater dumpe then he was in before, heerewith imagining that the voice came
forth of the ship which he saw at the shore side, he lighted from his horse,
and nimbly leapte into the Boat, and his horse as if he had understanding
followed him. They were no sooner in the Boat, but it began to cut the Seas
with such swiftness, as the wind which has long time been imprisoned in his
cave, and could not get forth at any chinke, and it blewe now in such sort, as
Juno by long intercession entreated Eolus, who untying the chains, commanded
the Winds with all their fury to transport the enamored Aeneas and his
Troyans army into the deapth of the seas. Rosicleer was greatly amazed to see
himself thus swiftlye conuayed, and saw not any in the Boat which so often
^ad cried to him for succors. Here we will leave speaking of Rosicleer, and
will return to declare unto you, the many worthy deeds that his brother did
accomplish, suffering him to ride in his boat, as already has been recited
unto you.

The great sorrow that the knight of the Sun received in thinking of his own
disloyalty, and that which happened unto him. Cap. 4.
THE Knight of the Sun with great fury and have, wandered through the
Forests of Greece, as it has been already declared unto you, kindling the
air with fire, with that burning cholar wherein he was wrapped, unhappy had he
been, which at that time durst have undertaken to have resisted his purpose,
for while he was in this mood, there had been no roeke so hard, but he
would have torn in pieces, nor no hill so steep, but he would have pulled
down. In this sort he went all the day not finding any print of that he
sought for. The dark night did overtake him in the thickest of the Forest,
whereby he was enforced to a light and ease his horse, who fed upon ye green
grass, and he leaned himself under a high Pine tree, the place being so
solitary, it was a mean to draw him in mind of many things which had
already happened unto him, and specially it renewed the fresh assaults of
that love which passed between him and the Princess Lyndabrides musing with
himself what should move him so unkindly to forget her, and in comparing the
beauty of the Princess Lyndabrides with his beloved wife, he found the
Empress did far exceed her, and heerevpon the knights good will began to
kindle, and was inwardlye glad of his own choice, but this affection was
soon extinguished, so firmly setteled was that good will be bare unto the
Barbarian Lady. The impression whereof was so deep, that he altogether
forgot the ancient love that he had borne unto his beloved Empress,
whereupon with sorrowing sighs he sounded forth his grief, and with brinish
tears he said. Is there in the world any knight so little attainted with
love as I am, or can there, be any one so ungrateful as I, since that I bestow
no care upon one, so furnished with beauty, and endued with so many excellent
virtues. Alas Lyndabrydes, right worthy do I acknowledge my self to be
chastised with love, since that without reason I have transgressed his bounds.
As there is nothing in me to merit your divine beauty, so am I altogether
unworthy (being a disloyal Knight) any so vnderserued courtesy, but I will
promise you to execute upon my self a more sharp revenge, then lay in you to
give me, since that I have forfaited that bond wherein I was bound unto you. Oh
miserable knight what say thou in thine own defense, how can thou excuse
thy folly? have thou blotted out of thy mind yt sovereign courtesy of thy
Lady? or have thou suspended the sweet memory of her divine beutie, being so
rare an Empres? Oh traitorous heart why have thou yielded to this folly? and why
do thou not now repent this passed falt, since that love which first
enthralled thy mind, does now without ceasing torment thy heart? Oh wretch
that I am, what condign punishment may I bestow upon my self. O sacred
Emperico, thou gave me free possession of all, without reserving any thing,
thou did surrender to me thine Empire, and thou did yield to me thy
liberty, and I careless of my faith, and neglecting thy courtesy, could not
intertaine a good opinion of thee alone in my heart, according to thy desert,
but have been prevented by the Tartarian lady, who has made a breach in my
affection. Forgive me I beseech thee: Oh sorrow, oh intolerable grief, no
less sharp then death to see my heart divided in twain. Is it possible yt I
can live and sustain these nipping passions which assalt me* with this the
miserable knight sent forth a scalding sigh, and by his countenance appeared to
be plunged in great sorrow, insomuch yt the ecko of his bitter passions moved
ye shiuering leaves to quietness, and the percing air to a certain calm stay,
only to hear ye plaints of this oppressed knight. In this heavy plight, and
woeful cogitation ye afflicted Grecian spent ye weary night, until the
glistring Sun with his radiant beams, did shine upon the green grass and
sweet budding trees, and moved the chirping birds with their golden lays to
warble forth their sugered tunes. At that present hour the knight of the Sun
brideled his horse, and without setting his foot in the stirop he mounted upon
him, leaving the raines on his neck, to the end he might go where best liked
him, he had not long iourneied but he was come near unto a river which ran
through the Forest, his horse being very dry entered into it, altogether
careless of the exceeding anguish wherein his Master was, whose mind was so
perplexed in considering his strange mishap, that he forgot where he was,
until the bubbeling of the Crystal water awaked his benumbed senses, and then
seeing himself in this golden stream, and gasing on every side he espied the
armor of the valiant Moore, which was chained for a monument unto a Pine apple
tree. The Prince stayed long in viewing them, greatly admiring at such an
adventure, and approaching more near, he might well discern by the head piece
that the armor belonged unto the Moore whom he had sought with great labor
and pain, which sight did greatly trouble his mind. And turning his horse to
see the strangeness of this misfortune, he saw the bloody alter where the
Moore had committed this sacrifice, and near unto it was annexed a goodly
grave closely couched by a lofty Pine, wherein was engraven certain vearses,
which when he perused he might perceive that they were compounded by his
brother, and when he ^ad by reading of them, gathered the sorrowful end that
the valiant Moore made, he could not so well govern his affection, but yt his
eyes distilled gushing streams of water, greatly deploring with himself the
froward fortune of so valiant a man, where by imbruing his hands in his own
blood had thereby eclipsed his former honor. Then greatly exclaiming against
the wretchedness of this world, and the looseness of the people, he did note
the solemn vow his brother made, and therewithal did remember the fruits
of his virtue, and thereupon desirous to join with him in travail, he did
ingraue with his dagger somewhat under the other Epitaph, these vearses that
follow.

Whose travail strange shall lead him to this place,
to view this shield and strong Tartarians grave:
That man I warn that he do not deface
the same, deuisde by Rosicle'er the brave.
Whose brothers blood the quarrel shall maintain,
Against such knights, that would this armor gain.
When he had written this, he walked up and down by the grave, and by chance
saw ye dagger wherewith ye Moore had killed himself, and taking it in his
hand, he said: Truly thou have great cause to lament, since that thou have been
the instrument to murder the best knight that ever ware armor, and in memory
hereof thou shall stay here, saying this, he lift up his arm and struck the
Dagger into the pine tree up to the hiltes, and without any more tariance he
took his horse and travailed on through a young grove, the night being very
close, till at length he repaired to one corner of the River, which was all
shadowed with the green branches of Pine apple trees, and not far from the
River, he discerned an old ruinous house, which was very ancient, and as it
seemed no man did inhabit it, and as he made thetherwarde, he heard the voice
of one which as he thought sang very sweetly, whereupon he rained his horse and
directed his way thither. Not far distant from a tree he saw a green armor
engraven with perfect gold very richly, and there was fast tied unto a bough of
ye same, a shield of fine steel, the field being green, wherein was portrayed
a Mermaide, which in shape seemed to be a Goddess of the seas. Likewise close
unto the shield, there was chained a rich helmet, which was very strong. It
might well be thought by the riches of the armor they appertained to some
valiant man, and also it seemed the time was long since they had been hanged
there, for that the washing of the water had wasted the brightness of the
color. The knight of the Sun with an earnest desire beheld them, and saw
the body of the Tree ingraued with this word Florisdama. And when he could by
no means understand the conceit hereof he became very pensive, and ballancing
to his mind the fortune that chanced to him in the Island of the wild Fairie:
heerevpon he imagined this other was not much different from it. The Grecian
dwelling in this dumpe, turning his eyes he saw that all the trees there a^outs
did carry the name of Florisdama, and in some places it was shortly written
with an F. and a D. It chanced also among those trees he spied a sword fast
chained, which by the dama^ king and bravery of it, might be gessed to belong
unto some worthy Knight. These things procured the Knight of the Sun to
imagine, that this Knight ended his days desperately, through the sweet
enticing baits of love, which thing drove the Knight of the Sun into a
greater maze then he was in before, and therewithal engendered a desire in him
to see the end of this adventure. The stearne of his ship being thus guyded by
a careful Pilot, he returned back to the place where he first heard the noise
of the instruments, and the farther passage he made, the shriller he might
hear the sound, whereupon he travailed so long, that with ease he might
perceive the sorrowful Knight touch his Lute, with a panting heart, and
sometime intermedled his music with a sweet voice and a pitiful dittie. The
knight of the Sun was greatly inclined to know him that bewailed so bitterly
his mishap. And hearing him begin to sing certain verses, he stood still. The
sorrowful Knight of the Forest, began in this sort.

O Direful death! when shall the hour be
so long desirde, for to dissolve my grief:
That this my corpse bereaved of breath by thee,
in Mistres praise my soul may find relief.
Oh Atrapos (in deserts where I pine,
And living, die) do thou my thread untwine.
O loathed life! oh most unhappy fate!
wherein I feel such force as none may bide.
Injurious Dame, (which broughtst me to this state)
thy cruel dealing plainly is espide:
Yet thus I deem, and so my self persuade,
My moan, no mirth unto thy heart has made.
But sure I fear my fortun is not so fair,
that I for thee should bitter death sustain:
Yet if it chance, this still shall be my praire,
that ere my end, I may thy sight attain.
Ay me poor wretch, my wish would work my woe.
Thy irefull face would cause my grief to grow.
What force I that? If God would give consent,
that thy white hands a while before I dye
Might comfort me, I should be well content,
whether with friendly or with frowning eye
Thou me beheldst: For, being traind to grief,
Till life be lost, I look for no relief.
But what avails me my vain desire?
too childish is this fond conceit of mine.
No hope can help to that which I require,
these deserts are unfit for one so fine.
Yet often times here me thinks thy face I see,
With mercy mixed, anon with cruelty.
And even as one which spectacles does wear
in eight parts cut, can have no perfect sight,
(In that from one, such sundry forms appear):
even so my fancy never falls out right.
For in my sleep I only shadows see,
When substance sweet is farthest of from me.
Sometimes I prove, and forth I put my hand,
and think to feel the thing I hope to find:
But then (alas) my dream I understand,
and torments fresh do newly vex my mind.
So that these trees as witness of my care,
To hear my plaints to silence them prepare.
The time I sing to ease my heavy heart,
conuerts in fine to former misery:
Ah cruel Dame, that I (without desert)
for loving thee, in country strange should die.
But what know I, that thou do this intend:
Heavens grant thy sight to me before mine end.
Here he ended this song, the Knight of the Sun gathering by his dittie the
wretchedness of his estate, he could not but acco^panie his pitiful music
with many streams of brackish tears renewing in his mind the old storms that
lately battered his breast. Whereupon he then alighted from his horse, (which
before he had not done) and with a soft pace he marched toward the old
ruinous house, where he saw a knight prostrate upon the ground all clad in
cloth of gold, which in truth was torn in many pieces, and perceiving the
Knight to be of a goodly stature and very well proportioned, and so young that
scarce might be seen any hair on his face, and therewithal so fair, that
the knight of the Sun never saw any one that might match him, he greatly
wondered. This enthralled knight having his eyes shut up, h^^ guished forth
trickeling tears so fast, that almost with bl^bbering he had dis^igured his
face. As the Knight of the Sun viewed all these things attentively, the young
forlorn man without opening his eyes, turned him upon the other side and
said, Oh Prince of Dacia, how much better were it for thee to die then to live
in this continual thraldom. The Grecian prince stood still to see if this
sorrowing knight would renew his plaintes, who immediately after with extreme
dolor began to say. Oh death, what do I feel, whether are thy forces fled,
why have thou now forsaken me, since at this present thy courtesy might favor
mine estate. Oh cruel Fortun^ (admit there be any*) art thou not satisfied
with tha^ injury which thou have already extended upon me: wilt ^hou needs
inioyne me to suffer more penance: make an end I say, of thy greedy desire,
make me not sometimes merry and more often sorry. When he had finished these
speeches, he began to slumber, and immediately with a sorrowing sigh he began to
say. Alas Fortune, how many things are there framed by thy hands, sweet in
all men's taste, and sour in my disgestion, pleasant to many, and bitter to me.
After this he took again his instrument, and with an harmonious stroke and
pitiful voice he sang these vearses.

O Heart more hard then Hircan Tiger fell!
and are more deaf then senseless troubled seas:
O causeless foe, whose rigor does excel!
to thee I yield, thy anger to appease:
Take tyrant wrathful, wreake of me thy fill,
That ending now, my grief remain not still.
My heavy cheer, and evil that is past,
my fainting voice, my case so comfortless,
Thou moandst not once, so merciless thou wast,
nor stirdst thy foot, to ease me in distress:
But time will come, when sorrow has me slain,
That thy repentance will increase thy pain.
Ah cruel, how can thou the love forget,
that each to other we in youth professed?
Which when I mind, full many a sigh I ^et,
for that was it which first bred my unrest:
And for the sweet, which then by thee I felt,
I find sharp sour, O most unjustly dealt.
Tell me wherein I have offended thee,
or when I slackt thy service any way:
Then how can thou so much unmindful be,
when often in secret thou to me would say:
That in my absence, Lucifer so bright,
Nor gladsome Phoebus once should give thee light.
I gone, thou vowest, the waters should not yield
their wonted solace, nor the pleasant Rose,
Or any flower of the fragrant feeld:
such love thou said, thou did on me repose.
Which was but small as now the end does try,
That thus distressed, thou sufferst me to dye.
Oh Gods of love, (if so there any be)
and you, of love that erst have felt the pain,
Or thou thy self, that thus afflictest me!
hear these my words, which hidden grief constrain:
Ere that my corpse be quite bereaud of breath,
Let me declare the cause of this my death.
You mountain Nymphs which in these deserts reign,
cease off your chase of savage beasts a while,
Prepare to see a heart oppressed with pain,
address your ears to hear my doleful style.
No strength, remorce, no work can work my weal,
Love in my heart so tyrantlike does deal.
O Driades, of lovers much adorde,
and gracious damsells, which in euenings fair
Your closets leave, with heavenly beauty stord,
and on your shoulders spread your golden hair,
Attend my plaints: and thou that made'st me thrall,
If thou have power, give speedy death withal.
Ye savage Bears in caves and dens that lie,
remain in peace if you my reasons hear:
And be not moved at my misery,
though too extreme my passions do appear.
Ye Mounts farewell, ye fragrant fields adieu,
And silver streams, high Jove still prosper you.
He finished his song with many a bitter sigh, and he was so windlesse with
sobbing, that he lay as it were in an ecstasy stretched upon the ground. The
Knight of the Sun entering into this ruinous lodge, finding the Gentleman in
this wretched estate, he began ne to behold the proportion of his face, and
with extreme dolor wept, as well in ballauncing his own passed misery with
this young knights, as also for that he verily reputed him to be his brother
Rosicleer, or else some near kinsman of his, for that in beauty and
strongnesse of body, he resembled him so much, yt there was but small
difference between them, saving only the beard. While the Grecian Prince was
beholding this sorrowful sight, the inthralled knight with a deep sigh
awaking, and seeing the Knight of the sun before him, he wondered what might
draw so comely a Knight unto so solitary a wood, and therewithal he reared
up his body, and sitting upon ye green grass, with many a drerie tear, he
beheld ye shape of the Knight of the sun, and enforcing himself to speak, he
said: Sir Knight, insomuch as fortune has directed you hather to accompany me
in this desert place, sit by me I pray you, and pardon my folly, in that you
have found me so disordered. The Prince without making any answer, sat
down as the Knight entreated him, being very desirous to know the end of
that adventure, and what cause made him demean so tragical a life, he being
set, he told the Knight, that the desire he had to understand the bark
vearses that were in the trees, and likewise to hear his sweet songs, which
so harmoniously he sang, moved him to forsake his way, and to repair to this
ruinous lodging, and therwithall made render of his service to the knight.
While the Prince delivered these speeches, the comfortless Knight was musing
with himself, what he might be, who by his comeliness appeared to be
valiant, and by his courtesy to be honorable, and therewithal was very
desirous to know what he was, and being somewhat stinged with the bitter
passions which he had already sustained he said.

Alas sir Knight, how little is the body touched with the doleful cares of
the heavy heart, and how slenderly now a days is the guerdon of a faithful
friend, as mine own experience can best relate it, so shall your courtesy
move me to impart the well spring of all my woe, and then I beseech you judge
how unworthily I am tormented, I cannot otherwise think but you will pity my
m^shaps with some sorrowing sighs, especially if at any time you have tasted
the bitter pills of love, and I promise you I would be heartely glad that it
might stand with your pleasure to make me acquainted with your name, to the end
I might know to whom I might disclose my wretched estate. The Prince made him
answer and said. I am son to the Emperor Trebatio of Greece, and am called
the Knight of the Sun, brother unto the renowned Rosicleer, whom you greatly
resemble, and be thus persuaded, that the sparks of love has kindled as many
glowing coals in me as in any other, and has left as deep impression of
sorrow in my poor heart as in any other Knight. Therefore Knight as I have
satisfied your request, so I pray you unfold to me the cause which makes you
live so pensive. In so doing, I will swear by the almighty God, I will
hazard my life to purchase your desired quietness. The Prince of Dacia which
had already heard of the prowess of the Knight of the Sun, heerewithall
began to shake off part of his martirdomes, and knowing the worthiness of the
knight, bowing down his body somewhat low he said. Although yt my mishap have been great in susteining such continual griefs, yet do I esteem it sle^der,
since yt heerby I have purchased acquaintance with ye flower of all chivalry,
whose valiant heart does bemone my oppressed estate, and whose only counsel will
determine my exceeding torments. Since the^ renowned prince ye love has already
made a passion in thine heart, whereby you may ye better be an eye witness of my
wretchedness, or to say the truth of my cruel death: Understand you then
that I am Don Eleno Prince of Dacia, son to Cadislao, brother to the high and
mighty Emperor Trebatio your Father, and to the beautiful Florisena Daughter
to the king of Cypres and Nygroponte, under whose wings I was nourished till I
was eight years of age, and was trained up in ye regal sort as was incident
to my parents estate. Being of this age, spightfull Fortune who is slipperie
to all men, and leuells commonly at the contented mind, spun me so course a
third, as I fear me in the weauing it will prove my utter destruction. This
blind Fortune I say, conuayed to the king my Father his court the beautiful
Princess Florisdama, daughter to the king of Nygroponte, brother to my Father,
she was equal to me in age, and so endued with beutie, that she seemed
Angelical. While I was thus young, the burning flames began to scorch me,
which now do singe me, and we were so allied, that without any suspicion we
walked where we would, and most commonly we spent our time in a banqueting
house which was half a mile from the City which was right fair, and
compassed about with christalline streams, and green meddowes furnished with
sweet flowers we lead so pleasant and princely a life, yt we bestowed all our
care in catching chirping Birds and young ^eauerets. Our mutual good wills
was so great, as seldom did we forbear each others company, mine proceeding
of an inward desire to have her to my wi^e, and hers in regard of the affinity
which was between us. This ^ugured life continued until we were fourteen
years of age, the which time we bestowed in hunting, to the great comfort of
my heart (though in the end not to the hearts ease of my mind) my Florisdama
having a crossebowe in her hand, and a bugle horn about her neck, little
mindful of that sorrow which galled me so much. While she continued this
vain in hunting, it begat a singular good will in me to see her shoot,
having her golden locks somewhat laid forth, and upon her head was knit a
garla^d of all sweet smelling flowers, she had a gown of white Satin all laid
over with gold lace, which made her seem so celestial, that she had been able
to have quailed the heart of Cupid. Believe me and doubt not of it, valiant
Prince, that Venus in her most bravery did never excel her. Neither could
the inchaunted Circ^s with all her cunning, frame so much beauty in her face,
to beguilde those whom she thought to entice. My desire still increased to
behold so much beauty, and the beautiful Lady settled all her care in
chasing the little Fawn, which when she had gotten at any advantage, she
would surely shoot and speed, whereupon I would speak softly unto my self and
say. Alas, that arrowe we^e better bestowed in my heart, for being once dead,
I should avoid an hourly death, which pearceth me every day. Therefore be
assured of this, Knight, that I sustained not so much joy by her company in
the ^aie time, but I endured as great torment in the night by her absence.
Being thus wasted in woe, Florisdama had a narrow scantling at the cause of
my passions, and yet was she not fully resolved that it was for her sake, and
therefore with making shows of love she demanded what wringed me in such
sort, either whether it was an imperfection in my self, or a want of boldness
to discover it, having as I have already declared attained to the age of
fourteen years, I was dubbed Knight by my father, God knows how grievous it
was to me to be separated from the thing wherein I ioyed so much. The
imagination whereof I refer to your discreet judgment, most worthy Grecian
Prince, since that already you have tasted the same sauce of cruel love, and
alas how grievous were those thoughts unto me which brought unto my mind the
enter-course of speech, the kind familiarity, the pleasant walks, and the
comely graces of my divine Florisdama, your passed misery may easily have an
ame at ye same, and my present estate may best discover it, what shall I say
more, right worthy knight, but my passions were so bitter, and my help so
slender, that I lost my color, forbear my meat, and grew to be so weak,
that an inkling thereof came unto my ladies ears, who perceiving in what poor
and low estate I remained, entreated me most earnestly to disclose unto her
the cause which pinched me so greatly, promising me that if my sorrows might
be relieved through the favor of any Gentlewoman, she would strain her
self to release them if it were possible, and would hazard her self to
procure her favor which had so much enthralled me, whereat with watrie eyes I
thus answered her.

Alas Florisdama, love has laid such a corsiue to my heart, such a flame
unto my lights, and such a sting unto my breast, as it has reduced me to
this state wherein you see me. Oh sovereign Lady, how much better had it
been for me, that rather in my green years and in the midst of my hunting,
Atrapos had shredde in sunder the twist of my life, then now to continue in
sorrow without any hope of release or delart of relief. The Angelical Lady
seeing me weep so heavily, could not but distill some few tears from her
christallin eyes, albeit she did not thoroughly feel the bottom^ of my inward
grief, and therevppon she said thus.

Ah my loving brother, let me obtain that favor as to manifest unto me the
cause why you fail in sorrow, and as it seems remodilesse, granting my
request, I promise you to procure with all diligence that there may be some
salve that may cure that festering wound which seems to cancur your heart and
impair your joys, for if you give me credit I am persuaded there is no Lady
so ungrateful as to deny you her love, being so valiant a Knight as you
seem to be: and again, knowing the worthiness of your progeny, the
disposition of your mind, and those incomperable virtues which shine in you:
Alas why should not the courage of your mind suffice to kindle the
affection of all the Ladies in the world. And for that it has been your
course Fortune to yield and surrender the interest of your good will to the
subjection of one Lady, relinquishing all other joys and pastimes. I mean
not as now to shrink from you, but with all my endeavor to relieve and
succor thine estate, until such time as my care and practice may have light
of her, that has brought so worthy a Knight into such a Laborinth, and has
clean bereaved him of his liberty, and dispossessed him of his former joys:
spare not therefore to imparte unto me what it is that wringes you: thereby
then shall you perceive the willingness I have to do you good. And the great
care that I will execute, to stay the ranck^ur of your disease. The pithie
persuasions of this angelical Lady, were so sweet and comfortable, that they
caused such bashfulnesse in my heart, that it moved me to change color,
and through modest shame I could not, no nor I durst not open my lips for to
untwist unto her the bottom of my grief, but craved pardon, promising her,
that at our next meeting, I would bewraie who she was, that galled me so
greatly, she being satisfied heerewith, and my words carrieng some credit
with her, she departed from me: but the terrible night that I suffered, what
with visions, dreadfulnesse of dreams, mistrust of good Fortune, I refer the
taste of those pills to your sau^ury and mature judgment, noble Prince. For
sometimes I thought good to disclose and discover the whole state of my pain.
And immediately I would charm those thoughts, preferring a cruel death before
a perpetual torment, but yet in the end I concluded with my self, and
thought it good to unfold the plaites of my sorrow to so good a Physician,
whose skill I knew could help me, if disdain did not let it. I thought it
good to entertain her courtesy as one that could enfraunchise my bondage, but
wanting ability to perform my desires by means of inward pains, which
hourly griped me. I thought it not impertinent to use a policy by
(Metaphora.) And having decreed with my self how to handle this practice, I
rose very earlye in the morning, and shoouing off all fear, I apparelled my
self more brave then I was accustomed, and went out of my Chamber to present
my self to her, who had more authority over me then my self. And lo, I
found my mistress attending for me, desirous to hear the exposition of that
riddle which so darklye I had propounded unto her. The time was exceeding
favorable and the place most convenient, so that I had very good opportunity
and leisure to disclose the secrets of my heart. And surely she had no
sooner discovered a glimmering of me, but she came to encounter me immediately,
(whose Angelical and brave beauty surpassed the twinkling Stars,) and: he^
great desire remaining to know the cause of my sorrow, with a gracious and
smiling countenance she approached to me and said on this manner.

Loving Cousin, the place is now so convenient as y^ you need not to make it
strange to me wherein you are so grieved, I beseech you blush not to rehearse
your pangs, which I know do sting you, and in so doing I promise you I will
adventure my self in any danger, how great so ever it be, to remove
those pinching passions which so greatly afflict you. Then I seeing the hour
so fit to make my market; I took out of my bosom a fair bright Crystal
glass, and with a panting heart, I said.

Fair Lay, and the only nourisher of my life, receive this Glass, and
therein shall you see the Image of her who is the procurer of my martirdonie,
and encreaser of my woes: mark well her countenance, and then tell me I pray
you whether it lies in your power to use any authority over her, I am
persuaded she is so near a friend of yours, as you only may dispose, which
being true, I earnestly require you, to fulfill that which you have promised
me, even for affinities sake, and for promise made* I am bold to crave you to
keep the couenaunts which you have made with me.

After I had thus spoken, with great have and quickness she took the glass
out of my hand. And drawing off the cover she looked therein, whereupon she
coniectured straight that she was the breeder of my woes, which sudden and
strange thought altering her color, she remained greatly grieved, staring on
me with a stearne and wrathful countenance, believe me the memory thereof as
yet redoubles my sorrow, for considering then with my self how bitterly she
harped upon this string, and what a passionate mind did feed her
melancholyke humor, I would more willinglye have spared my life, then to have
her wast her self in sorrow, through the green imagination of that (...),
which not being applied. I had no comfort left me but death: and yet with
this strange demeanor she was not contented, but starte up, and rolling the
beams of her christalline eyes toward me, as though they were sparks of
fire kindled with malice, she said.

Cousin, hardly could I ever have been persuaded to have found you so
presumptuous, as to have given the onset to any thing which might prejudice
mine honor, or offend my mind, partly for that you are bound to please all
Ladies, but principally for that you should not harm your friends, among whom
albeit I have been least able, yet have I not been most unwilling to stand you
in steed: since therefore these considerations have not prevailed to quench the
firebrande of your foolish love, I enjoin you upon the penalty of my
displeasure, not to make me stain my credit, by imbruing mine own hands in
mine own blood: for in so doing, your villainy shall be published to the
world, and the loss of my life shall make your traitorous heart accessarie to
my murder.

After she had ministered this corosiue unto me, she returned into her closet,
leaving me so benumbed of my senses, and so surfetted with this banke^, that
not being able to digest it, I sonke presentlye to the ground, lying as it
were in a trance, where I was found by the maidens of honor, which attended
upon the person of the Queen my mother, who seeing me in this pitiful
plight, bethought them immediatelye of those drugges, which might awake my
dulled senses: and as it is seen commonly, that women are timorous in such
tragedies, they yelled and shriked in such sort, that the Queen my mother
ouer-hearde them, who wondering at the cause of this clamor, and less thinking
of my distressed estate, repaired unto the place, whereas I lay thus martired,
and seeing me lulde and rockte up and down in the Ladies lappes, so bathed
in tears, and so hopeless of life, she wringed her hands, and what with
their cha^ing of me, and pitiful noise they made, I felt my self somewhat
revived again, and when I opened mine eyes and saw my self enclosed with so
many Ladies and Damosells, and she absent whose unkindness had dragged me
to this misery and torment, I sodainlye fell again into a trance, and after
long travail, and no less sorrow, they summoned together my vital spirits.

When I was the second time brought from death to life, I found they had
stripte me, and laid me in my naked bed, the same company continued with
me, which came first to visit me. Likewise there came to comfort me certain
Knights and Gentlemen, who demanded of me where I felt my greatest grief,
and what was the cause of it. I then considering with my self how despair
did rule the stearne of my boat, and how frozen I found my Mistress her
favor (though undeservedly I was despised) I did request them to be quiet,
and to depart from me for that time, giving them to understand, that I was
disposed to sleep, which courtesy they presentlye granted me.

Now Cousin, and worthy Prince of Greece, you may guess what discontented
thoughts, what bitter imaginations, what sudden alterations of mind, and what
sundry sorrows I masked in, being hemmed in between despair and death. I
know not I assure you what humane or earthly body were able to sustain so
many tortures or so often rakings as my oppressed mind did, having not any
helping card in my hand, nor any hope that my Fortune would prove better.
In this perplexity at midnight I arose up and apparelled my self, putting on
my armor, the which I think you have seen. Amongst these thick bushes, I
caused a Lackie to make ready my horse with as much secrecy as might be, and
taking my horse I departed out of the palace without ^arrieng or resting in
any place a moment, but with continual sighs and sorrows, in the end of eight
days I attained unto this place where you find me and perceiving it to be so
proper and convenient to shed my complaints in, I unbridled my horse in this
wild fields, and determined with my self here to end my days, where I have
remained this two years, demeaning this sorrowful life, wherein you see me
now, nourishing my self, with such fruits, as this wilderness does ^eelde.
And sometimes the shepherds that come hither to shroud themselves from the
Suns parching heat, do favorably bestow some pittance on me, and keep me
company according to their leisure. Thus have I unfolded unto you (most
excellent prince) the beginning, not the ending of all my sorrows: see I
beseech you, if you can call to mind any remedy that may stay the rankling of
my disease, which has continued so long, and wasted me to the very heart.

Unneth had he rehearsed these words, but his senses began to fail, he was so
overcome with sorrow in rehearsing the tale.

How the Grecian Knight persuaded his uncle the Prince of Dacia, to accompany
him, and leave that sorrowful and desolate life: and of that which after
happened to him. Chapter. 5.
THE joy that the Princely Knight of the Sun received in finding his Cousin
in the pinch where some comfort would do him good, can hardly be here
expressed, especially for that he knew him to be the son of the King of
Dacia his Uncle (of whom till now no mention is made in the book before)
because of the long sickness that the King sustained, and therefore was his
name concealed, and his valor clowded by means of his misfortune, albeit in
truth the heroycall deeds of his son did almost equal his ancestors in
every degree, as shall be said hereafter. And as I said before, The Prince of
Dacia remained in a trance, embraced between the arms of the knight of the
Sun, by reason of the words that he spoke, yet in the end he wrought such
means that he revived again, promising him that if any thing did lie within
the compass of his power which might bannish his sorrows, he should find
him ready to perform it, and he would rather die then see him linger his life
without any spark of comfort. This great kindness was friendly received by
the Dacian Prince, and after many cogitations he thought it most convenient to
return to his Country, and also it seemed him best for his most safety to
cut the seas, for being unprovided of a horse, he might fall into some
danger, being strongly encountered. Whereupon without more tarriaunce the
Prince armed himself with his guilt armor, and girded his sword close unto
him, and mounted behind the Prince, and so going where Fortune would guide
them, and where the horse made choice of the way, in the end after a little
space they came to the shore of the sea, where they found a straight and
narrow path, hard by the same, which seemed to them the direct passage to
find some haven, where they might travailing imbarke themselves, and in this
manner as I have told you, they saw coming toward them in the sea a fair
bark well rigged and trimmed, wherein they saw no pilot to govern it, but it
made directly toward the place, which when the two Princes saw it came so
near the land, they alighted, and drawing more near, there lanched forth a
Gentlewoman all alone, in a mild kind of speech she spoke and said unto them.
Noble Princes, the wise Lyrgandeo which at this present is resident in
Constantinople, commends himself unto you both, and by me has sent you this
fair bark, which with his art shall bring you where he has extreme need of
your valor, and farther he prays you not to stand in suspicion of that which
I say unto you, for ye truth is, he has great occasion to put in proof your
soueraign knighthood. The knight of the Sun his heart throbbed with joy to
hear the news which the Gentlewoman told him, and especially for that it
should be his good Fortune to do him pleasure, which loved him so tenderly,
and had done so much for him in his childhood, and heerewithall the Dacian
Prince leapt into the bark, and after him his noble cousin, leading Cornerino
by the bridle, and tourning unto the Gentlewoman, he said unto her on this
wise.

I am assured that mine old and approved friend the wise Lyrgandeo does
favor me so greatly, that he will not see me staide for lack of a ship,
either to pleasure my self or to do him a good turn. The Gentlewoman having
done great reverence, turned her speech to Don Eleno and said to him.

Ualiaunt and amorous Knight, Lyrgandeo kisseth your royal hands, and willed
me to tell you that your captiued heart somewhat lately amended shall in the
end be thoroughly helped, to your no less comfort then great joy, and because
your present estate is sorrowful and fraughted with grief, he sends you this
armor which is aunswerable to your mourning mind, wrought with a Metaphore,
which declares your passions already passed, and saying this, she took the
trunk wherein the armor was laid, and albeit the Prince made have to give
the Gentlewoman thanks, she was so nimble in vanishing away, that his
thanks came too short, whereat he was more abashed then before. The Knight of
the Sun tying his horse in one part of the vessel, saw standing by him
another more beautiful, the which he knew presently the Gentlewoman had
brought for his cousin, and making toward him to see what armor the wise man
had sent him, being laid abroad, saw them wrought all with one work, LL,
and the sheeld was of strong and fine steel, the field black, and therein was
set a grove, so lively as there appeared to be nothing but trees, and likewise
there was wrought in it many fine inventions, which did testify to be the
artificial work of the wise Lyrgandeo. And in the midst amongst those
trees there was a fair Lady shaddowed, apparelled in a strange attire, in her
countenance she was very sad, her hair ^littering all about her ears.

The sight of these strange devises made the Dacian Prince very pensive, and
caused him to marvel much at the great art that was used in the framing
hereof, it was so dainetely handeled. But in the mean time that these two
Princes were thus musing and beholding these strange things, the ship slyst
the Seas, with a brave gale of wind, and carried them so swiftly that when
they called to mind the strangeness hereof they were greatly astonished. In
this wise they sailed six days, not knowing whether they went, nor whether
the ship would carry them: neither could they see any land, but they were
assured of this, that they were directed by the will of the wise Lyrgandeo. And
sailed not toward Dacia, whereat the Prince Eleno was greatly discomforted,
but this grief was somewhat stayed by the gentle persuasions which the knight
of the Sun used.

After the long and wearisome travail which these two noble Princes sustained,
one morning by the peep of the day, they did discover not far from the
place where they were, the land, toward which coast the Ship sailed
amain, the Knights very joyful hereof began to arm themselves, with set
purpose to land there. Not long after the ship came to the shore with such a
bottom rush, sticking fast in the sands, that they thought she had been slit
in sunder. Which sudden chance made them with all speed to leap to the
land, assuring themselves that the wise Lyrgandeo had ordained the stay to be
made there, wherefore without tarrying any longer, they took their horses and
mounted upon them, and presently after the Prince Eleno made proof of the
goodness of his horse, which was sent him by the wise man, and broching his
sides with the Spurs, he found him very ready, strong, and light. The
noble and worthy Knight of the Sun his Cousin stood by and did behold him,
wondering how comely he backed him and managed him, the hor^e in his judgment
seemed to be of great price, and very swift in coursing, imagining in this sort
he always thought that this young Prince was the very portrature of his loving
brother Rosicleer.

These valiant knights not meaning to sleep out the day, they undertook
their iourny, and in travailing they came to a narrow and straight lane which
lead them by the foot of a huge and steep mountain, they had not long rid,
but they entered into a broad and rough path, always hoping that the country
would prove very pleasant and well shadowed to ride in: but after they had
told all their ^^rds, it fell out contrary, for it was a champaine so^le
destitute of inhabitauntes, and altogether unprovided of victualles, which
discommodities galled these worthy Princes very greatly, and that which
grieved them most, was, that they knew not whether they went, neither could
they meet any one that might guide them in what place and Country they were.
Travailing onwardes they found that this crooked way was divided into two
broad lanes: And then being in a doubt which way they might take, stood
still, and in the end they did determine between them to make a division, the
one to take the right hand, and the other the left. And thus these two valiant
knights parted the way between them both, being right sorrowful that their
late acquaintance, was so untimely separated by a crooked lane. The one having
lost the sight of the other, they rode very sadly, and the Knight of the Sun
travailed all that day, and could not happen upon any path that might guide
him to some town or Uillage. The night wrapping her self in her brown
Mantell, made the Grecian alight from his Cornerino, nigh unto a fair Forest
and green meddowe, adorned with all sweet and smelling flowers, and pulling
of his bridle he suffered him to feed in the green meadow. This valiant knight
being somewhat weary of the travail he had ye day before, laid himself
down upon the green and pleasant grass, to ease his weary limbs and to
pass away the night, where he slept until such time as the graie morning with
the notes of the sweet singing birds awaked him. This valiant Prince being
start up, returned unto his new begun journey, and travailed so long, that at
the last he came to a very fair and clear river, and going along by the
brinke of the same he beheld, how by reason of the calm wind that did
blow, there did arise many small bubbles in the water, the sight whereof did
greatly delight him, until such time as he discried in the same certain little
streams and drops of blood, at the view whereof he was stricken into a
meruaiolus admiration, and the farther he went, the streams did more plainly
show forth the skarlet color thereof, in such sort, yt the clear and
christalline water had lost his natural color, and was changed into a
crimosin, which strange and unacquainted case procured the noble knight of the
Sun to be half amazed, and meruailed greatly whereof should proceed such
abundance of this bloody water. And having an earnest desire to know the head
spring of the river, and the occasion thereof, he caused his horse to have his
pase somewhat more fast, always having an eye to the way from whence ye
bloody streams descended, but in the end he lost the sight thereof, by reason
of a little hill which was between him and the river, and there he was
constrained to take another path, which did lead him unto the top of the
said hill, which in truth was not far distaunt from the brook or River, And
when he came to the top of this hill, he beheld there a pillar of Marble
stone artificiallye wrought and firmelye fixed in the ground. Upon the highest
part of the pillar, there was fastened a chain, whereat hanged a very fair
table of Cipers wood, and therein was written certain words, which this
noble Knight began to read, the contents were as follows.

TO the Knight or Damsel, whose froward and perverse fortune shall lead this
way, I desire thee not to proceed any farther, but to return again: for
true it is, that here thou can find no other favor but death, with
oblation of thy blood, in memory of that sacrifice, which once Queen
Arcalanda made, who slew her self with her own proper hands, and sharp two
edged sword, using the greatest cruelty that ever was heard of, both to her
self, and to me Bramidoro King of Sardenna: for she at once wrought her own
hasty and untimely death. And I live still, yet for her unhappy end, through
exceeding sorrow, ever dieng.


Little account did the valiant Knight of the son make of these threatening
words, which were there written, but wayed them as wind, and as one desirous
to see the end of this so strange an adventure, not regarding the peril
thereof, he took his journey forwards, determining to come again to the
waters side. So long he travailed y^ at last he came to a little Temple, that
was very curiously wrought, erected to the use of the greatest cruelty that
ever was heard off. Near unto that Temple he saw four dead bodies, whose
heads were cut of, and as it appeared by their apparel, two of them were
Knights, and the other two Damosells, then casting his eyes a side toward a
fair and green field which was hard by, he beheld a great number of heads,
which were the heads of those that had been slain, amongst which were the
four heads of the new slain bodies, that he before found dead, for the
fresh blood did as yet run out upon the ground. This lamentable spectacle,
this noble Greek beheld, with such surpassing sorrow, as almost no heart can
comprehend: but being ravished as it were with desire, to be resolved of the
effect of this so monstrous inhumanitie, he proceeded farther, till at length
he approached the Temple, where he discovered a posterne door to be open, and
incontinent alighting from his horse with a heroycall courage, being incensed
with anger, he rushed in, hoping there to have found the homicide, which was
the chief auctor of this tragical cruelty. Being entered, the first thing
that appeared to his view, was a very fair Altar curiously wrought, and upon
it the dead figure of a very fair Lady, through whose body was thrust, a
terrible two edged sword, likewise at the foot of the same Altar, was another
figure of a huge and mighty Giant, being ten cubi^es in height, all marvelous
curiously wrought in Alabaster with strange and subtle devises, who kneeled
with both his knees on the earth. This noble Knight was very much amazed, at ye
sight of so strange a matter, and yet not satisfied, he went into a little
Court^ there adjoining, and found that it was all hanged with black clothes,
which represented great sadness and sorrow, and in those clothes was figured
diverse dead men and women. Hard at the foot of the foresaid Altar was made
fast in the earth, even to the brimme thereof, a sesterne of lead, into which
the blood of those that were slain, and their heads cut off in sacrifice, was
poured, and out of the same ^esterne it was conuayed under the earth by a
gutter very secretly, the which went unto the River, whereof we spoke before:
and this was the same blood, which the valyant Prince did see, in the channel
of the river, even the blood of the four headless bodies that he found newly
slain. On the other side of the Altar he saw an old man with a fair white
bearde, sitting in a chair, who leaned his aged head upon his left hand, and
his elbowe upon the chair side, whose eyes were shut, and his countenance so
sad, that it appeared there was in him no comfort, but only great sorrow and
mournings. This valiant Greek who greatly desired to understand the end of
this sorrowful antecedent, approached unto the sleeping old man, and pulling
him by his apparel for to awake him, this careful old man presently lift up
his eyes, and with out any delay or farther demand he said. O gentle and noble
^night, what crooked fortune has brought thee into this perverse and accursed
place, wherein is exercised so much sorrowful impiety, and whereas thou may
expect no other thing, but death, by the hands of the most cruel Giaunt that
ever thou have heard of, take therefore my counsel, and return the way thou
came, and that speedely before thou be espied, for otherwise it will be hard
for thee to escape from death. Then the worthy knight of the Sun answered
and said. I give thee great thanks for thy counsel (good Father)
nevertheless I request thee to declare unto me the cause, for that as yet
being ignorant of farther peril, thou seem to persuade me to so great a
fear. To whom the old man replied, for y^ thou seem unto me to be of an
incomperable perfection and exceeding force. I will not let to declare unto
thee with as great brevity as I may this tragical matter, whereby thou may
well perceive the singular profit that thou shall receive in following this my
counsel which I have given thee, and so with a sad and heavy countenance,
mixed with many salt and bitter tears distilling down from his aged eyes, he
began in this wise and said.

This country wherein thou now art, is that ancient and famous kingdom of
Tinacria, which not long since, was governed by one of the most puissaunt Kings
that ever reigned therein, or in any Province heereabout: but death, by his
accustomed fury, deprived him of his life, and all his loyal subjects, of a
virtuous and loving Lord, leaving the guiding of the Kingdom, in the power of
two very fair and Angelical damsels, his daughters, who represented the
former virtues of their noble and late deceased father. The eldest of the^ was
named Arcalanda, and the youngest Garasilea. Not long after the death of the
king their Father, this fair Arcalanda was requested of love by the king of
Sardenna, whose name is Bramidoro, a giant of huge and mighty bigness, (as by
the stature which thou do here see) thou may easily suppose: but this
virtuous queen not only denied her consent in marriage, but also to hear the
message of the ambassadors, and would in no wise see them, so that they
returned without any answer. Then this Giant seeing ye great disdain and
small account that the Queen made of him, and how little she esteemed of his
love, being more inflamed with fury then any other reason, and trusting in
his incomperable strength, with five hundred knights he transported to
Tinacria, and landing in the Port of Saragosa, he there began to make known
his unmerciful cruelty, hoping that he should obtain that by force, which
by fair means he could not win. The Knights of Tinacria, like true and
faithful subjects obeyed the commandment of their noble Queen, and made
diverse and sundry valiant skirmishes with the Knights of the Giant: but by
reason of his great force and surpassing strength, they were always
constrained to retire to the City, not without much loss: for that this Giant
had in his company to aid him a brothers son of his, who in valiance and
force of arms equalled well near his uncle. And in such sort they maintained
the wars, yt in small time they put the city in great peril to be lost, and
likewise the whole kingdom. The knights and subjects of this noble queen
Arcalanda, not able long to resist ye Giants forces, and seeling themselves
meruailously oppressed and in great distress, began to persuade with their
queen yt she should accept his demand* and grant to marry the aforesaid
giant. Then this unfortunate Lady understanding the feebleness of her
subjects forces, and the effect of that which they had declared unto her, and
feeling in her self such impossibility to accomplish the demand of the
giant, that the accepting of it would be more grievous unto her then to receive
y^ death, she remained for a time in so deep a study, (being confounded as it
were by her own conceits,) that she could neither give answer unto them, nor
yet declare any thing of her mind: But in the end lifting up her angelical
face, with a cheerful and merry countenance, she said after this sort.

My renowned and well approved knights, it is a very great thing to
persuade, nay rather to force my own will to the fulfilling of your
requests. The pure and chaste Goddess Diana does well know the great wrong that
I shall commit against her, in not performing y^ vow which I have promised unto
her long since: nevertheless the consideration of your loiall fidelities has
taken ^uch deep root and impression in my heart, that I am more careful of
your safeties, then of the vow which I have made unto the chaste Goddess
Diana, wherefore I am determined with all speed to accept his offer.*
Therefore out of hand let messengers be dispatched unto the king of Sardenna,
to ask and demand of him truce for the next day following, ^o the intent
that I may make some publyke sacrifice, as well to appease the wrath which the
chaste goddess Diana may conceive against me, as to satisfy my own heart, for
not fulfilling my vow: so incontinently without any more delaie the Knights
dispatched a messenger unto the king, giving him to understand of all that
had passed, and the determination of their Queen. The exceeding great
comfort that this king did receive thereat, the time will not permit to declare
unto thee, but with right good acceptance of the truce he granted to all that
was demanded, and moreover proffered himself to be present at the same
sacrifice. The next morning when that Phoebus with his golden beams did
scarcelye appear, they began to prepare all things in readiness for the
sacrifice) (which has since been the occasion of so many inhumane
sacrifices,) and in the midde way betwixt the City and the Camp of the
Sardenians, they erected a scaffolde all covered with cloth of gold very
rich, and upon the Scaffolde about the middle thereof was placed a fair table
covered also with a carpet of cloth of gold, and upon it a chafindish of
coals burning. This being done, there was straight ways heard a sweet and
harmonious sound of clarions and Trumpettes, and sundry other kind of
instruments, these went before the people, and next unto them were brought
fifteen rams, all adorned with fine white wool: and after them followed
five Bulls, with huge and mighty^ horns, being all black of hair: and after
them there followed five kine, and with them a certain number of the Priests
of Diana, singing their accustomed songs in the honor of Diana: then followed
a great company of knights all armed with strong armor and bright, without
any other device: and after them came the Marquis of Modique, bringing in his
hands the image of Diana, and on either side of him two Knights of great
estimation, each of them bearing in their hands great vessels of gold full
of most precious and sweet Wine. Then after all this came the beautiful
Queen Arcalanda, apparelled with a roabe of state, being of great and
inestimable value. And with this ceremony they went upon the Scaffolde, where
the Marquis placed the image of Diana, behind the Chafingdish of coals that
was there burning: and the Priests continued still singing their songs, which
customablie they used in the like sacrifices, drinking of the precious Wine
that the two Knights did bring in the golden vessels, and all at once they
brought low the stout and untamed necks of the Bulls, and the rest of the
other beasts by cutting their throats, whose blood they sprinkled all about
the Sacrifice, and opening their bowels they took out the inward parts,
with the call on the liver, and put them upon the Chafindish of burning
coals, and with this slaughter they did make sacrifice unto the chaste
Goddess Diana, and the Priests fell down flat upon their breasts on the
earth, and so ended their sacrifice. At the sight of this ceremony was present
the king of Sard^nna, and his cousin, his brothers son, both armed with all
their armor, and very attentive to this that I have told you. The Sacrifice
ended, this unfortunate Queen commanded silence to be made, and all the
company being stilled, she raised up her self upon her feet, and with a
heavy voice distilling many salt tears, she said.

O most excellent and chaste Diana, in whose blessed bosom the chaste and
undefiled virginnes do recreate themselves. Unto thy divine excellency I do
commend these my last Sacrifices, craving record of all the Gods, that I have
procured and done my best, and yet still do, for ever to be thine: for whose
sake O mighty Jupiter, I know not how thou do consent that I by force
should loose that, which thou by thy omnipotency and almighty Deity,
ought to keep and defend: and not to suffer that I thus should be
compelled to deliver my body into the power of him which with all tyranny
would seek to have the use of the same. And nevertheless if to this I do
not consent and agree, behold the utter ruin and sorrowful destruction both
of my self and also of all my true and faithful ^ubiects approaches, the
which proceeds only by means of my beauty. Oh sacred Diana, is it possible
that thou do consent, that so worthy a Damsel, descended from so noble a
race, and nourished in this my Country, should procure to spot the
worthiness of her predecessors, without respecting my beauty, or regarding
the chaste vow that unto thee I made, but that I must needs violate my self
against all humane nature. Well, seeing it is so, I am content, and beseech
thee to receive the solempnitie of this my death, which I offer in sacrifice
unto thy Deity: for me think there is no reason, that one unfortunate Lady
as I am, should be the occasion, that such a noble Kingdom as this is,
should be brought to ruin and decay. Oh my loving subjects, by you I am
constrained to surrender my self unto him, who cannot choose but entreat you
ill, and indamage my Country, which thing is contrary to all our
expectations: in consideration whereof, I am here constrained with my own
trembling hand, to cut off the flourishing branches of these my days: for
this I swear unto you my dear and faithful subjects, that I had rather offer
my soul into the society and sacred bosom of Diana, than to yield my self
unto this deformed figure. And thou King of Sardenna, ye greatest tyrant
amongst tyraunts, behold here I yield unto thee my body to use according to
thy will and pleasure, requesting only this one thing of thee, (if there be any
pity or mercy in thee) considering that thou inioyest that which thy heart
desired, that thou suffer these my loving subjects to live in peace,
wherefore come now I say, and receive that which is thine. And thou O chaste
Diana, accept likewise that which with so much blood I offer unto thee. And in
finishing this sorrowful speech, she drew out a fair and bright shining
sword, which she had hidden secretly under her gown, and putting the hilte
upon the scaffolde, (little looked for of all those that were present) she
suddenly threw her self upon the point of the said sword, so that not all
that were there, could deliver her, for ye point passed through her body in
such sort, (as thou do see here by this figure portratured) rendering her
soul to her tuition, unto whom she offered her sacrifice. What should I here
declare the lamentable sorrows and pitiful lamentation that was there made for
this unhappy mischaunce, committed in the sight of all the people, I say it
was such that the woods eccoed, and their pitiful shrikes ascended to the
heavens: but none was more galled with grief, then the afflicted Giant, who
rose up, and like a man distraught fomed at the mouth, and roaring with
horrible cries like an infernal creature, in great fury he rushed amongst the
people throwing them down on every side, till he came upon the scaffolde, and
approaching to the dead body of the damsel, he took her in his arms, and
with a terrible and fearful voice he said. Oh my beloved joy and erst my
only hearts delight. Is this the desired sacrifice, wherein through thy
desperatenes thou have deceived me? who loved thee more then my self. Is this
ye truce thou requiredst for one day only, therein to conclude both thy death,
and mine also. Oh noble Queen, and my beloved Lady, if this were thy intent,
why did thou not first sacrifice me thy servant and love, wholly subjected
unto thy beauty. Woe be unto thee thou unfortunate King of Sardenna, that for
thy fault and lack of looking too, thou have lost her, whom thou made Lady
of thy heart. O ill granted truce, whereby my heart has lost that, (yea without
all hope of recovery) wherein only it had lately rest. O Diana, is it not
sufficient, that they do worship and honor thee, but that thou will have all
goodness to consist in jealousy? Tarry therefore, for I will make that thy
determined purpose shall mitigate thy malice, and thy own device shall be thy
destruction: for I vow by the d^uine Jupiter, because thou have permitted this
detestable act, that so long as I live, thou shall not be worshipped for the
chaste Diana, but Arcalanda in thy steed shall be adored. I will procure moreover
to diminish thy name, yea, utterly to extinguish it, so that there shall be no
more memory remaining of thee, for that thy blondie tyranny does deserve no
less. What shall I more speak (gentle and noble Knight) of the anguish and
deadly sorrow that the King sustained, for no sooner had he delivered these
speeches, incensed with fury, he set his hand to his sword, and overthrew the
image of Diana, that was there, and parted it in two parts: and yet not content
with this sacriligious fact, he descended from the scaffolde, exclaiming
against the sorrowful Tinacrian people, and saying: O villains and traitors,
it is not possible but that all you were consenting unto this cruel fact, and
determined evil. And uttering these and such like reasons, in his devilish
fury, he began to flourish with his sword cutting, killing, and wounding on
every side, with such unmerciful cruelty, that in a small time there did not
remain one of all them, that were there present, but I alone: and by reason
that I was one of the Priests of Diana, he saved my life, although he little
esteemed it. Then when this fierce and bloody devil did see that all were
slain, and that we two only remained, he took the dead Queen in his arms,
and commanded me to follow him with my prayers and orisons accustomed unto
Diana, and bringing her to this place, he straight ways commanded this
Chapel to be builded, in this order as you now see, and promised by vow unto
all the Gods, to sacrifice every week six persons, naturally borne in the
land of Tinacria, three men, and three women, in satisfaction of the bloody
sacrifice that they consented to be offered by their deceased Queen. And it is
now two months past, since they have used this tyranny: and it is not only he
that does persecute the poor people of Tinacria, but he has also to farther
him in this his devilish determination, his brothers son, being of like
cruel disposition as himself. And in this sort do these two hell-houndes
exercise themselves in this detestable murder, insomuch that the City is
almost left desolate, and there remains very few which does maintain the
wars. And you shall understand moreover (gentle Knight) that the City is so
strong, that it is not possible to win the same, neither by force of arms,
neither by hunger or any other ingen, for that it is so well furnished with
munition and vittailes: yet in the city there are but a small number of
Knights, which for their great fidelity and love unto their Country, have not
left it desolate, but do defend it to the uttermost of their powers.
Nevertheless to the judgment of all men, although for a time they do never
so politikely defend and make resistaunce against their enemies, yet in the
end they shall be driven to yield and to render themselves: for that in two
battayles which the people of the Island have had, the devilish Gyaunt has had
ye victory, so that now they remain in great fear, for that the strength of
these two tyrants, is incredible to be told. Now here (gentle Knight) I have
declared unto thee that which thou so greatly did desire to know, requesting
thee to return back again, he way that thou did come, and to keep thy
self from feeling the event of this expressed evil. The noble Prince which with
strange attension gave care unto this sorrowful Priest, being fullye
determined to adventure his life for to violate this cruel and wicked custom,
answered, (not according to the counsel the which he gave him, but according
unto his courageous determination,) saying. Friend, where is (I beseech thee)
the abiding of this unmerciful giant, and which is the way yt leads thither.
The old Priest replied, His Castle is two leagues distaunt from this temple:
but what shall it avail thee to know the same? and what profit will thou get
by going thither, but only death: but if thou will needs adventure thy self,
the same which brought thee hither, is ye direct way thither, for other there
is none. Moreover, the valiant prince demanded of him if he could advertise him
how many knights and what store of people the Giant had about him, and he
answered that the most part of them that were about him were servants, and that
all the rest of his knights and men of war, were placed in other castles and
fortes of the Island. And while they were occupied in this communication, they
heard without the chapel horsemen, as it appeared by the treading and noise
of their horses. Wherefore to understand what they were, they staid their talk,
and the prince issued out of ye chapel, where he found six knights, armed with
very good and strong armor, who were alighting from their horses to enter into
ye chapel, but when these knights espied the Prince so well proportioned and
of so good disposition, and with his armor of strange device contrary unto
theirs, then one of those six knights which seemed to have more authority
then the rest, said. Oh Knight, what infernal fury has hardened thee to
adventure hither, knowing the custom which is used here. But it seems unto
me that rather ignorance is the occasion hereof, more then any other thing,
wherefore I am content to let thee depart again upon condition, that thou
leauest with me thy armor and thy horse (if it be thine to give) for that they
do greatly delight me. This valiant Prince dissembling his anger, with a very
merry and smiling countenance made answer.

You have said true, ye ignorance has brought me hither, for yt I am a
stranger in this country, and never understood that any such cruelty has been used here till now, that this good old man has told me. But to give
thee my armor* I am not determined at this time, for that I am not accustomed
to travail without it. And as for my horse, I do insure thee that he will let
none take his back but my self, therefore it were best thou ask some other
thing, for that in this I pretend not to accomplish thy request. They
understanding the words which the Prince answered unto them, one of the six
knights pretending more hardiness then all the rest, replied. I will see how
thou can defend thy horse, and with that he went to lay hand on the horse
bridle, which he had not so soon proffered, when the fierce horse opened his
mouth and with great fury he caught him by the shoulder, and lift him up from
the ground, and in his fall he all to trampled and troade him in pieces, and so
slew him. At the which this noble Prince could not refrain from laughing, and
merrilye said.

In this sort does my horse reward them that be so bold and hardy of
enterprise. Then the Knight which did first speak unto the Prince, said unto
him with exceeding great anger. I do promise thee for certainty, that this
great disorder and outrage which thy horse against my companion has done shall
cost thee thy life: And on a sudden another of the five knights which
remained drew out his swoorde, thinking to have cut off the horse legs, but
this expert horse with great lightness shunned the blow, and on a sodayn^
rose on his hinder feet, and with his fore feet he played so with his helm,
that he broke it all to pieces and threw the knight dead to the ground: the
which fact did greatly amase these knights of Sardenna. The^ the noble Prince
with a pleasant semblaunce said. I am afraid that if in this sort you battle
with my horse, he will in ye end deliver me from all danger of the loss of my
armor. Then this other knight hearing these words, which he took to be a
great reproach unto him, being almost ouercom with anger, in a great fury and
rage he drew out his sword, and flourishing it about his head, he said. The
great outrage which thy horse has here done, (as I before said) thou shall
speedely repay with the loss of thy life, and uttering these words, he smote
the Prince upon the helm so vehemently and with such courage, that the very
sparks of fire sprung out, and fell burning to ye ground. This noble prince
feeling y^ blow not looked for, determined that that miserable knight should
not go unpaid for his good deed, least he should praise himself for doing
it, but with great^ anger and fury he stroke the knight such a blow a little
above the wast, that it almost parted him in two pieces, so that he fell down
dead to the ground. Then the other three Knights seeing this terrible and
unmerciful blow, made no tarr^eng, but all at once fell upon ye prince,
doubling their blows to bring him to his end, that it was wonderful to see,
but this worthy Knight, who little esteemed of such dangers, stroke one of
them so hard upon the head, that he cut him down to the breast, and he fell
down dead upon his other companion. And tourning to another, at one blow he
parted his sheeld in pieces, and cut off his arm from his shulder. Then the
other knight which remained alive, seeing his companions to be so ill entreated
by one only knight, thought it best to save his life by trusting to his legs,
rather then to repose any confidence in his prowess, for that he thought it
would little prevail him, and betaking him to his feet, he fled away: Of
whom this noble Prince made small account, but let him go, the old priest of
whom we before spoke, was present and beheld all that had happened, and
meruailed very much at the great prowess of the unknown Knight. And this
noble Prince seeing himself clear of them that would have done him wrong,
returned unto the Priest and asked him if he had any thing that he might
eat, and requested him to let him have it, for that he hungered and had great
need thereof. Then this Priest gave him such meat as he had for himself,
still persuading the Prince for to return again the same way he came, and
not to put himself, into that so dangerous and terrible an adventure, but
this heroycal prince made little reckoning of his requests, but giving him
great thanks for the good entertainment he gave him, he took his leave of him,
and went the same which lead way toward the castle where the giaunt dwelt, and
travailing by little and little with an easy foot pace, he anon had a sight
thereof, and perceived that it was very fair to behold, and walled about
very strongly, which he beheld not long, but that he hard a Trumpet sound
with marvelous sweet melody, and at the sound thereof there looked out of a
window a giant, being a young man of great and large bigness, and comely in all
parts accordingly, his face was very ire^ull to look on, but not ill
favored, but rather seemed to be adorned with a senere kind of gravity. This
Giant looking that way where this noble Greek was, he asked him with a high
and mighty huge voice.

Knight, what do thou here so securely seek, and what would thou have,
not respecting this my unfortunate and unhappy custom, but without any fear
thereof thou approchest hither, presenting thy self of thy own free will to be
sacrificed. But this worthy Greek in the mean time that the Giant spoke
these words did contemplate himself in beholding the huge making and the
great strength that did appear he had by the proportion of his members.
And placing his words with great discreation he answered and said. I come to
demand battle of thee O King, not for that thou have at any time grieved
me, or given me cause, but only to take away and frustrate (if it be
possible) this evil and di^ellish custom which thou maintainest, or else to
loose my life in the quarrall, therefore if thou do think good to proceed
in this thy hellish pretense, take thy armor and arm thy self and come
forth, and here in this field I will abide thy coming, where I hope by the
favor of almighty God, that with thy death thou shall pay here the tribute
of all this tyranny which thou have used. The Gyaunt remained still at the
window beholding this worthy Grecian Knight, for that he seemed unto him to
be a Knight of great valor and prowess, (by his comely proportion, and by
the devises that he had in his armor he seemed to be a stranger) with a
familiar countenance he said.

I would somewhat reply unto these thy words, but because thou shall not say
I speak like a Thrush in a cage, I will refer it till such time as I am with
thee in the field, if thou dare to abide my coming. And so without any
more speaking he withdrewe himself from the window, and with a terrible voice
he called for his armor, in the mean time this noble Greek did peruse his
harness in all parts that it was well, for it was needful, as hereafter you
shall hear.

Of the terrible battle that this Grecian Prince had with the Giant, and of
all the adventures that chanced in the said battle. Chap. 6.
THis worthy Grecian knight lifting up his heart and eyes unto heaven, craved
favor and help of almighty God, requesting his aid against so great and
terrible an adversary, and being thus in his prayer he sodeinly heard a great
noise and well consorted sound of Trumpets, the which made melodious and sweet
harmony, and not long after this the gate of the castle was opened, where out
issued the Giant at all points armed with very rich armor of fine steel,
and upon his right shoulder a great clubbe barred with iron of a huge weight,
and at his girdell a very big and broad sword, and about his neck there
hanged a rich and strong Shield, whereon was portratured the same devise which
he saw on the Altar in the Chapel. In his demeanor, he showed himself to
be valiant, and with a gentle countenance he came toward the place whereas
the Knight abode. All this, the noble and courteous Greek did steadfastly
behold, and prayed God, that of his mercy he would abolish this evil custom
that he did maintain, and that he would give him grace to acknowledge his
error wherein he had transgressed, and that he might be converted unto the
knowledge of ye true faith, for that it was great pity, to see so much
cruelty remain, in so noble and worthy a personage, as he was, or in so well
proportioned a body as he seemed to have, and thus this noble prince remained
in beholding his personage till such time as the Gyaunt drew nigh unto him, who
without showing any defiaunce or countenance of pride, said. I believe
(gentle Knight) that this my presence has put thee in some fear of my force,
therefore for that thou seem to be a knight well disposed and of great valor,
I yield unto thee the battle. And if so be thou mistrust thy power, I give
thee lisence to return from whence thou came, or else if thou so please, to
remain with me in my company. But this valyant Greek as one nothing daunted,
without moving of his countenance answered and said: Do not thou think O
king, that the bigness of thy body, although it show thee to be of great
strength, makes me in any part either to marvel or fear, for that my
sword has been accustomed to abate the courage of diverse such as thou art,
but that which makes me most to muse, is, y^ god has suffered thee so long
time to exercise this cruelty. And again, that thou being adorned with so
gentle disposition and courage, unto my seeming conformable, would maintain
so cruel a custom, without either fear of God, or regard of his laws.
Nevertheless considering thou have no knowledge of the true God, but of other
fained Gods, I do not so greatly muse that thou have followed thine own
appetite so much, but take my counsel, and bestow not this thy great strength
and force in the service of those evil Gods, but turn unto my God, and in his
defense and faith (which is the right faith) exercise these thy good gifts,
with the which he has endowed thee, and if thou will thus do, I will take
thee for my friend and keep thy company, for that thou ^eemest unto me to be
of so good a disposition, and one y^ does well deserve to be had in reputation.
For verily, it is convenient (worthy King) that thou leave this cruelty which
thou do here use, being so far different from natures rule, and to forget
this service which thou do unto the Devil, which is the only willer of
this damnable work: and so reforming thy life, I would wish thee to become a
christian. For I promise thee it does not a little grieve me, that so worthy a
knight as thou art* should through unbelief perish and be dampened: and if
already thou have any remorse in conscience, or perseverance of this my
speech, accept my counsel I request thee, which if thou do, I promise thee to
be always thine, and by firm frindship to unite my self unto thy
fellowshippe. Contrariwise, if thou persist in this thy pretended tyranny*
prepare thy self, (and that speedely) unto battle, whereby thou shall
perceive how smally I fear thy force, (as thou do fondly suppose.)

The Gyaunt which was very attentive unto all that the Prince had uttered,
replied in this wise. Before we begin our battle (sir Knight) let me
request this little suit of thee, which is, that thou unfold to me thy name,
forasmuch as by thy comely proportion thou seem to descend from some noble
progeny, and by thy behavior to be of no less prowess then authority: the
one arguing in thee no small valor in fight, the other no little eloquence to
subvert thy foe. The heroycall Prince discreetly marking with what sober
aduisement he delivered these speeches, with no less mildensse, returned unto
him this answer, saying. Forasmuch as I will not in any respect be accounted
either quarellous by concealing an answer, or disdainful by denying thy
request, understand then (O King of Sardenna) yt I am a Grecian borne, and
named the Knight of the Sun, son unto the renowned Emperor Trebatio, and
brother unto the invincible Rosicleer, whose courage as yet was never quailed
in fight, neither hethertoo has my heart been vanquished by any force: for
although as yet I have detracted time, by means of this my conference, it has
not been for any conceived fear, but the only grief of my conscience, which
is not a little afflicted with sorrow, to see so worthy a personage as thou
art, so impiously to lead thy life: admonishing thee friendlye to forsake thy
former wickedness, and to revoke the abominable sentence of thy froward
will: and seeing I have both answered thy demand, and thou understand my
desire, I would feign be certified whether thou will accept me for thy
friend, or defy me as thy foe: that either by thy subversion we may favorably
conclude, or by thy persisting, proceed to the combat: for although for thy
sake I chiefly wish for peace, yet for mine own part, I am indifferent. Great
is the joy (answered the Giant,) that I conceive at the sight of thee, whose
worthiness is so much wondered at throughout the world, and to the end I may
both try thy famous strength, and thou feel my renowned force, I accept ye
battle, with this condition, that if by thee I be now vanquished, I will not
only in my armor blaze forth the honor of my conqueror, but for ever
hereafter I will submit my self willingly to thy commandment: and if my
Fortune be so friendly that I subdue thee, thou shall in satisfaction leave
unto me, the thing thou most likest: which is my life answered this noble
Prince, as a due reward for my weakness. That were much more then I would
willingly request (replied the Giant): but if, (which indeed is doubtful)
thou escape my hands, thy horse shall suffice me, if likewise he feel not my
fury, in that (as I suppose) he is of so singular properties.

If thou obtain the victory (answered the Prince) I promise thee my horse,
which I will here in safe^ye leave, both for that if thou win him thou shall
be sure to enjoy him: and also for that I never use in any battle to fight
with advantage. Wherewith, with no less agilitie then courage, he left the
saddle, and drawing out his sword, courageously he said: Giant, prepare for thy
defense, for behold me ready to begin the fight: and therewithal he gave
him so furious an overthwart blow upon the waste, that the sparks of fire
fell burning to the ground, and the strength of the stroke constrained the
Giant, to stagger sidewarde, three or four steps, deceiving him for that
time of the dangerous blow, which with his peysaunt clubbe he had provided to
indaunger the Prince. But when he felt this course intertainment, his cholar
double increasing, he lyghtlye recovered, and lifting his clubbe above his
head, he determined to repaye the Prince with such unreasonable interest, that
at that one blow he would end the battle: (which in deed if in the
descending, it had lighted on the Greek, it had not a little indaungered
him). But the noble Prnce being of no less prowess then experience, and
nothing unacquainted with such skirmishes, having an eye to the maine, by the
nimblenesse of his body made way for the blow, which without harming him,
fell to the ground with such terrible furye, that it caused a resounding
Echo, in the woods and mountains there adjoining.

The valiant Knight of the Sun, greatly misliking so monstrous a weapon as
that ^lubbe was, determined (with as much speed as possiblye he might) to
deliver himself from the danger thereof, and before the Gyaunt could recover
another blow with the same, he struck again at his hands, with so great
force and incredible fury, that he cut his heavy clubbe a sunder, and
moreover if he had followed his blow, both clubbe and hands had ^allen to the
ground: Then when the Giant remained with no more then a yeard of his club in
his hand, much meruailing thereat, he threw the rest at him with such rage,
that it whisteled in the air, but the knight perceiving the troncho^ to
approach, stepped aside and let it pass by, and closing with him, with the
strength of his Herculine arm he stroke him such a blow upon the thigh that
the harness brake all to pieces, although they were exceeding strong, and
wounded him upon the thigh, which wound although it were not much, yet the
abundance of blood that ran from it did greatly trouble him. The Giant
seeing himself so ill entreated, with a wonderful and outrageous fury, gave
terrible and fearful shrikes, and out of his helmet issued forth a thick
smoke, and therewith he drew out his huge and broad^ sword, and shrouded
himself under his strong sheelde, and began with great fury to redouble his
strokes upon the knight, the which the noble Prince with great nimblenesse
defended him from. Now here began ye brauest and best fought battle that
ever was seen between two knights, there might you behold the whole
strength and valiantness of giants, there might you perceive all the prowess
of knighthood, with every policy used in arms, there might you see how these
two knights pressed one upon another, and procured one to hurt another, and
also to ward the cruel blows, yt the one bestowed on the other: there might
you view the sparks of fire like lightening flash from their terrible strokes,
and the pieces of harness flying in the air, having no compassion the one of
the others pains, but each one seeking to have the vauntage of his enemy,
trauesing ground from one place to another, that it was right wonderful to
behold, and how like two ramping Lions they endured for the space of two
hours, without receiving any rest, neither could it be perceived that any of
them both did faint, but rather the longer they fought, the more their fury
kindled and their strength augmented, of the which the Giant much meruailed,
and feeling the great force of his adversary which was before him, was not a
little amazed, but that which most grieved him, was, that he could not fasten
one blow to his contentment upon his enemy, for which cause he began to
exclaim against his Gods, but especially against Mars, for tha^ he was
persuaded, that he was descended from Heaven, to make that combat with him,
whereby to work his destruction. And therewith his fury double increasing,
with an infernal anger, he multiplied his blows with so great have and
strength, that he caused the Greek, to bestur himself from one place to
another to make his defense: but he as one which was not idle, but by these
means the more inflamed, letting slip the bridle of all patience, his valiant
and heroycall courage double increased, and his strength and lightness did
surmount in such sort, that under his harness in more then ten places he hurt
the Giaunt, and although the wounds were not great, yet the blood that issued
out, was very much. Then the Giant seeing himself in such a pickle, threw his
shield from him to the ground, and with both his hands took his great
cutting sword, and heauing it aloft, he let it fall with such wonderful fury,
that it was very strange to behold. But this politic Prince seeing on which
part this terrible blow would fall, determined not to receive it, but with a
light leap did clear himself from the fall thereof, the which fell to the
ground with so great and terrible have, that the half of it entered into the
earth, and by reason that the stroke was given more of anger then of cunning,
by the great strength that he put to it, he could not keep himself, but was
forced with the stroke to fall with his breast upon the pommell of his sword.
He was no sooner down, but the Son of Trebatio gave him another upon his
helm, that it sounded as though he had stroke upon a bell, wherewith the Giant
fell flat to the ground, greatly astonished, and almost beside himself. This
valiant Greek when he saw him in this trance, laid fast hold upon his
helm, and with the exceeding strength that he set to it, he pulled it from
his head. The Giant which was then somewhat recovered, caught hold upon the
skirt of his harness, and pulled the Knight toward him with such strength,
that he was not able to make resistaunce, but needs he must go whether his
strong arm carried him. Then gladly would this noble Greek have defended
himself from this peril, but he in no wise could, for stumbling upon the
Gyaunt he lighted on his breast, in such tumbling sort, that he fell on the
other side of him, and seeing himself so overthrown without any power in
himself to provide for help, he gave a loud cry and said. O Jesus Christ the
son of God deliver me from this danger, so incontinently as soon as he was
at the ground, with a light and valiant courage he rose up again,
pretending not to show any pity or favor in this fight, and returned to the
Gya^t whom he found on foot and ready to defend himself, and approaching nigh
him, because he would show the greatness and valiant stomach that he had,
he said. Ualyaunt King, take to thee thy holme, for that I will not that for
lack thereof thou do loose the surmounted valor of thy heart. The Gyaunt
which had proved by experience the great prowess of his surmounted strength,
and again seeing his noble courtesy in offering him his helm, with an humble
and meek voice he said. Ualiant Prince, I pray thee tell me if it be true,
that thou art he which at the beginning thou saydest thou were, or whether thou
art the God Mars, which is come down from heaven to destroy me, and to make
my strength of no estimation. This worthy knight then placing the point of his
swoorde upon the ground, and leaning his arm upon the cross of the hilte,
not making any outward apperaunce of weariness that he had in this battle,
with an amiable countenance he said.

O king, if thou would acknowledge this great cruelty which thou
committest, and the small reason which thou have to execute it, and how
greatly thou do err and art ouerseene, in thinking that thou seruest thy
Gods in maintaining and defending such extreme tyranny, thou should do
much better, and so return unto the knowledge of my God, who is the true
creator of heaven and earth and all that therein is* Then the Giant replied unto
him and said: Of truth (gentle Knight) thou know well how to extol thy God
in whom thou dooest believe, but how shall I know that this thy God is of
more goodness and virtue then my Gods. Unto whom the Prince answered and
said. Oh king, that is very easy and apparent to be seen and perceived.
Tell me I pray thee that if at any time thy Gods have in their own causes
had any power or defense? no surely, for if they had, then would not they have
suffered themselves to be so ill entreated of them who should worship and
serve them, for if at any time your Gods do not grant unto your requests,
and perform that which you would have them do, then you begin to curse and
to banne them, and speak the worst that may be spoken of them, and some of
them you throw into the fire and burn, and other some you pull out of their
Tabernacles, and tread them under your feet and polute them, and presently you
leave them and change them for other new Gods, and unto them you do your
worship till such time as they likewise fulfill not what you ask of them,
and yet these poor and unfortunate Gods are in no fault, for that at any time
they cannot help themselves, but does burn in the pit of hell. So that it
comes of a great simplicity yt thou will believe in the devil, who is the
author of all evil, and forget the creator of all things, who has given
thee this thy strength and prowess, and will deliver thee in all thy
necessities. Oh king thou should not need any other proof, but only that
which thou thy self did unto the image of Diana. For in thy anger thou
did throw it down and cut it with thy sword, and did unto it all the
evil that thou could, so that if they had had any power, think thou
then they would have suffered that thou should have offered this outrage
unto them, no I tell thee thou might not have been once so hardy as to have
moved against them. The Giant who then was somewhat touched with the truth, said.

Worthy Prince, I henceforth promise thee, that I will serve this thy God and
will desire thy frie^dship and remain thy friend, for yt thou have opened my
eyes and given me the light of ye true life. And for yt I may the better bring
to pass and accomplish this my determined purpose, I will without tarrieng take
my journey to Constantinople, to ye end to be instructed in ye doctrine of ye
faith, and understand perfectly ye power of thy god, not doubting but to have
the aid and help of the valiant Emperor thy Father, and by his means to be
the better informed. And noble Prince I do desire thee to declare unto Tefereo
my cousin and brothers son, all this my pretended purpose, and persuade him
to leave of this evil custom, and not continue in it any longer. And moreover
to give order unto all his knights and Gentlemen, that they follow no more
this wicked race, but command them to return unto their own Countries, and
to remain there in the good governing thereof, with his brother Tramarando.
And the like words he spoke unto his own knights that were there present at
that time, and when the valiant knight of the Sun heard these words, which
proceeded from the Gyauntes heart without any dissimulation, he received so
great pleasure therein, that incontinent he threw his sword to the ground, and
pulled off his helm from his head, and ran and caught the Giant in his
arms, and with great love embraced him, giving him to understand the great
contentment that he received to hear that he would forsake his false Gods, and
turn to the true and living God, the author of all goodness. The Gyaunt when
he saw his face discovered, he much meruailed to see the great beauty of that
Prince, and took him fast by the hand, and departed toward the Castle,
reasoning with him of diverse matters by the way, And when he came to the
Castle, he straight ways commanded that a ship should be made in a
readiness with all kind of furniture belonging to it, for that without any
delaie he would prosecute his voyage, and so curing himself of the small
wounds which he had, which did a little trouble him, he commanded straight
that they should bring him somewhat to eat, for that it was needful, as well
for the great travail he had in the former battle, as also for the loss of
so much blood which ran out of his wounds. And when he had eaten and dined
according to his desire, without any more delaie or further resting himself
he stayed not so much as to pull off his harness, but departed out of the
Castle, and entered presently into the Ship, and without taking any farther
leave he commanded to hoise up the sails, and caused the Mariners to direct
their course toward Constantinople, leaving great charge with the knight of
the Sun for to bury the body of Arcalanda, which he promised to perform
with all his heart. And straight ways he finished it, for in ye same Chapel
under the alter he caused her to be buried, and upon her for a perpetual
memory caused an Epitaph to be written, as in the story hereafter shall
appear. So this giant being departed his journey, the knight of the Sun
without any more tarryeng asked where he might find this Tefereo, and when he
was informed of the place he took his journey thetherwards, and left order
with the people that there remained, that they should not remove nor depart
till such time as he returned again. So long he travailed that day that the
night drew on, and toward his left hand he heard a great rumor and noise of
harness, whereat he turned about that way with Cornerino his horse, where we
will leave them, to tell you of all that which happened unto the knight Don
Eleno of Dacia.

How the knight Eleno had battle with Tefereo the Giants cousin, and the
success that was therein, and how the Prince Eleno by a strange adventure was
separated from his cousin and Tefereo. Chapter. 7.
AFter that this knight Don Eleno of Dacia was departed from the knight of the
Sun, all that day he travailed without meeting of any body, and when night
approached it waxed so dark that he was constrained to withdraw himself out
of the high way, and to repose himself in a fair green field, where as he
let his horse feed of the grass that did there grow, and he laid himself
down under a fair and green Willow, thinking there to take his rest, but ye
place being solitary was fitter to occupy his amorous mind with his old
thoughts, and to call to remembrance things past, then for any ease: neither
was there any near to give comfort, or to bemone him, and calling to mind the
answer which he had of the fair Florisdama, in such sort it afflicted his
mind, that he remained a great while without any memory, but as one half
dead, leaning against the body of a tree, that whosoever had seen him at that
time, would rather have judged him dead than alive. In the end he came again
to himself, and being somewhat eased with the tears that distilled from his
eyes, of the grief he had, he took his lute in his hand, which he always
carried with him for his comfort, and began to play on it very sweetly, and
with his sweet voice mixed with agreeable music, he represented the dolor of
his heart, and sung the sorrow of his subjection by love, which song is
contained in these verses following.

ACcord your sounds unto my careful songs,
ye silver streams that pass this grouie shade,
Refrain your course a while, to wail my wrongs:
whose former weal, by love is woeful made.
My bliss to bale, my pleasure unto pain.
Converted is, and I in care remain.
And since I seek in siluane shade to shroud
my self so often, my sorrows to declare:
Ye savage Satyrs, let your ears be bowd
to hear my plaints, with speed your selves prepare.
Trees, herbs, and flowers (in woods and fields that grow,)
While thus I mourn, do you some silence show.
Sweet Philomela cease thy songs a while,
and will thy mates their melody to leave,
And all at once attend my mournful style,
which will (I know) of mirth your notes bereave.
If you desire the burden of my song,
It Is sighs and sobbes, that are constraind by wrong.
You furious beasts that feed on mountains hie,
and rest^esse rome with rage your pray to find,
Draw near to him, whom brutish cruelty
has clean bereft of rest and ease of mind.
For quite deuoyd of reason, love or kind,
Are these great plagues to my poor heart assignde.
But since that Fortune is so much my foe,
that force perforce I was inforst to part,
From her whose presence first procurde my woe,
and for whose absence now I feel this smart:
This only one thing rests to comfort me,
I will be firm, though still she froward be.
In that I love, and am not lou'de again,
my life I loath, and only death require.
But since my prowess is not proved plain,
to show my love, I longer life desire.
And when in field my martial force is tried,
Sweet Death from thrall my heavy heart divide.
This dolorous Knight could not proceed forwards with this music begun, by
reason of a Damzell, which was in that place unknown unto him, and therefore
unlooked for, who with a soft and mild voice saluted him, and this Knight
returned her again the courtesy she offered. Then this Damsel right
sorrowfully said. It does well appear sir Knight that thou do not know
how near thou art unto the peril of death, considering that so without all
care thou art publishing these thy passions of love. Unto whom he answered and
said.

I do know very well fair Lady, that always I bear about me a deadly
peril. But alas, how can I help that, although this occasion has brought me
into such extremity, considering that it is so ordained. But to what end fair
Damsel, you have uttered these words, I am as yet altogether ignorant,
wherefore I would be very glad to know somewhat, whereby I might have occasion
to forget these thoughts, and to bring my self in care of some new defense.
Then this Damsel drew nigh to him and said, Thou shall understand sir
Knight, that this Country in which thou art, is the old and ancient Kingdom
of Tinacria, whose happy days, which in times past it had, are now abated,
and the great felicity thereof is turned to confusion. Then this Damsel did
relate unto him, all the whole story that you have heard, which the old
Priest told unto the Knight of the Sun his Cousin: but the great sorrow that
he received in the hearing of so great cruelty, constrained a few salt tears
to fall from his eyes, from the which he could not refrain. And proceeding*
forwards in her talk, she said, You shall understand sir Knight, that I am a
Damsel belonging to the Countess of Modica, who is now in company with the
virtuous Queen Garofilea, in the City of Sarragosa, here in the land of
Tinacria, by whom I was sent about certain business, and came now from
thence. Uerely, the hearing of this terrible and heavy history, did very
much cause this noble Knight to lament, and compelled his heart to earne,
although on ye contrary he did rejoice very much, for that now in the
beginning of his knighthoode, he might imploie himself and his valiant courage
in such terrible conflictes, whereby he might win to himself a renowned name
and report, if so it please God that he may go forward with this enterprise.
So he determined with himself, to loose his life in this quarrel, or else to
set the same City at liberty, although he gave not the Damsel to
understand any thing concerning this his intent, who in the end of many good
reasons and pitiful persuasions that she used in coun^ailing and persuading
this worthy knight Don Eleno for to have very great care and to look well unto
himself, that he did not fall into the hands of this cruel Giant, she took
her palfray and departed her way toward the City, to the end that she might
enter in at the gates before the day did break, whereby she might not be
discovered of the enemy. So this Damsel departed, and left the Knight in
great anguish and sor^^w^ of mind, as well in thinking of the cruelty of this
uncharitable Giant, as also, for that the night was so long that he could not
put his determined purpose in ure, but in the end the gladsome day appeared,
at which time this worthy Knight perused his armor, and surely armed
himself, and lased on his helm, and taking his horse, he rode the way which
led toward the City, being the same way which the Damsel went. He had not
ridden far when he discovered the City, which was meruailously adorned with
Towers and fortresses, but yet round about it was to be seen a marvelous and
dolorous spectacle of dead men and women torn in pieces, and others hanged by
the neck upon Iybbets hard by the walls, and some upon trees which were in
the field nigh at hand, which caused the Prince to stay, and to sigh with great
sorrow and tears in the beholding of so inhumane cruelty, and in bitterness
of heart he said, O Lord how wonderful be thy secrets, yt thou suffer this
Knight to use so great cruelty without punishing of him, it cannot be without
some great mystery which thy divine Majesty does pretend. I beseech thee (O
Lord) to give me so much grace and strength, that I may cause this great
crueltye to be taken away, and utterly to cease. O noble City, I cannot judge
what anger fortune should receive of thee, in yt she consents thou should
be subject unto such unmerciful people, so much without pity and compassion.
Well, I may say, that as Grecia may brag her self of most excellent, wise and
learned men which it has brought up, even so may thou complain, that
against thee has been fostered two terrible and abominable tyrants. And in
saying these words: he drew nigh the gates of the City, which for fear of
the cruelty of the Giant, they kept shut, and taking hold at the ring thereof
he began to knock* which he had not so soon done, but ye lifting up his eyes,
he beheld to descend from above out of a bulwark a great free stone which was
cast down by the hands of a Gentlewoman, which came so suddenly, that he
almost had no time to deliver himself from receiving the fall the^^of, and if
the lightness of his horse had not ben the quicker, he must needs have taken
the blow on his head, which would not have fallen out well with him. But when
this Gentlewoman saw that the stone fell down without doing any harm, with
a grievous and terrible sigh that proceeded from her heart, she said.

Art thou that cursed Tefereo, through whose cause the most part of the
mournful matrones of this distressed City are made widows, and with great
affliction are enforced to bewail the loss of their loving husbands and
well-beloved sons? Art thou he that does not only content thy self to kill
them and tear them in pieces, but also hangest them before our eyes, and
garnishest the walls of this our unhappy City with the bodies of them? Art
thou that son of the devil, which without all fear of the Gods has put our
City in this extreme necessity? Oh cruel tyrant, open the eyes of thy
understanding, and let some spark of pity reign in thy heart, and suffer
not that for thy cause only so worthy a Country as this is should be
destroyed? Let it suffice thee yt thou have already been the occasion that all
these noble matrones of this City, have lost their rest and forgot their
estate, and are now become as scowtes in the wars, and frame themselves to
wear armor. This gentle knight of Dacia would not suffer her to proceed any
farther, but cut off her tale, and with great soberness he said.

Gentlewoman, I am not he that you take me for, but I come hither rather (if so
be I may) by some means to procure your rest, and deliver you from this
outrage that is offered you. Then this gentlewoman with much more anger
answered. O traitor, do thou think that by thy treasons and subtiltyes to
increase our care more then hitherto thou have done? Get thee hence traitor,
for thou art the most fall and cruel man in all the world, for thy
naughtiness we do well understand, and to all the world it is known* O
immortal Gods, you do well know that on the earth there is no strength
sufficient to root out this devil and cursed tyrant from amongst us? why do
not one of you come down from heaven and confound him with your deity. The
good will which has brought me hither, gentle mistress, answered Don Eleno,
does not deserve to be thus ill entreated of you, who for to procure your
liberty will put his life in adventure. I suppose I do deserve better
enterteinement at your hands. Well, let it be what it will be, said this
Gentlewoman, but touching thy coming into the City, it is labor lost to
speak, nevertheless if thou art not that cruel knight whom I did take thee
for, turn thee about and look toward the corner of yonder tower, which
stands amongst the green trees, and there thou shall find him, whom I do
believe without seeking for thou bring with thee, and so without any more
speaking this Gentlewoman went from the wall, and left this knight alone. Then
the Prince Don Eleno seeing himself alone, took the way which the
Gentlewoman showed him, wherein he had not travailed far, but in the midst
of a groaue amongst a company of green trees, he saw a very fair house
and well wrought, whereunto when he approached he found that the gates were shut
and closed very fast. And drawing nigh the gate, he took the ring in his hand
and gave a great stroke, at the sound whereof there looked a man out of a
window of the same house, and by the riches of the armor that the Knight
ware, he knew that he was none of their company, but said unto him.

Who art thou that art so hardy being a stranger, which without fear do
call at the gate, whereas thou can not escape, but must of necessity suffer
death. Friend answered this Dacian Knight, go thy ways and tell thy Lord
Tefereo, that here is a knight of a strange Country that has a great desire
to speak with him. This man without any aunswering went away from the
window, And not long after, there was another window opened more lower then
the first, from whence there looked out a knight who seemed to be of a gentle
disposition, his face somewhat swart of color, who with great courtesy said.
Knight what is it that thou would have, for I am he whom thou do seek
for: that which I would have answered Don Eleno, is, that thou do leave
this devilish custom which thou do here maintain, for that a knight of
thy disposition and manner should rather occupy himself in breaking these
evil customs, then in maintaining them, for these be not works of a knight
the which thou do, but of an infernal devil, I therefore much marvel how
thou using so much cruelty, thou do live with so great ease and without
care. Come therefore thou tyrant and arm thy self, and I hope thou shall
here pay the tribute of all these evils which thou have done, for it is not
reason that so devilish and cruel a man as thou art should live. These
reasons did little trouble this Giant, neither made he any reckoning of them,
but with his accustomed sobriety, he answered.

Miserable knight, thou do not know how here thou do seek thy own
death in demanding battle of me, therefore return again the way thou
came, for thy tender age and smooth face without a bearde does move me to use
this my virtue and courtesy with thee, and considering that thou art a
stranger and not of this Country. Then this Dacian knight answered. It is
not this that I do seek, but to accomplish this which I have told thee, and
if my words are not sufficient to cause thee to leave this which thou do
exercise, I do believe that my sword will ere long compel thee thereto, for
either I will die the death or else I will deprive thy body of that dampnable
and accursed soul, and send it whether as thou have sent many a better then
thine is. To these words this Tefereo answered nothing at all, but withdrewe
himself in great have from the window, and called for his armor, the which
was all black, and of a very fair and strange making, he was with a trice
armed, and being on horse back, the great and princely Pallaice gate was
opened, whereat issued out this Sardenian with a gentle and demure
countenance, and after him followed a page with two spears in his hand, of
the which Tefereo took the one, and sent unto the Prince the other, who
standing in need accepted it, and without farther reasoning they turned their
horses about with such courage and quickness, that the like has been seldom
seen between two knights. And when each of them were come into their appointed
place, they set spurs to their horses with as great force as the thunder in
the air, and meeting together in the midde way with their spears, their
shockes were so terrible that it was wonder to see, so that not one of them
failed of his blow, but joined in such sort, that the staves (although they
were very strong) brake, and the sheeuers of them separated themselves in the
air with great violence, and yet the valiant knights both remained in their
saddles, no more moved then a rock by the sea side. But when either of them
beheld the little harm they had done in this their just, they both with their
swords in their hands returned their horses, and began to strike so extremely
the one upon the other, that their bodies felt the force of their arms, and
although their harness was not cut, yet it could not be but their flesh should
receive damage. In this sort travailed these two knights more then an hour,
without knowledge of any advantage, but either of them were inflamed with
anger to see his adversary to endure so long, and the knightly courage of each
of them did more and more increase, and their exceeding cholar was such, that
the battle began to be more terrible then at the first. But this furious
Tefereo somewhat feeling, and therefore by experience knowing the surpassing
strength and valiant courage of his enemy, although he did not greatly
marvel at it, yet it did cause him to be more furious, and being incensed in
such sort, that with both his hands he took his sword, and struck at him
such a stroke upon the helm, yt the blow sounded through all the fields, and
made an ecko in the mountains, that by ye weight thereof the Dacian knight was
constrained somewhat to incline his head downwarde and remained a while without
his remembrance, but his horse being scarred with that terrible stroke, gave a
great leap toward the one side, by the which he delivered his master from the
second blow, which Tefereo thought to have bestowed on him. The Dacian Knight
being again recovered, and not a little abashed at this blow, setteled
himself in his saddle, and throwing his shield from him to the ground, he
took his sword fast in his hand, and stroke Tefereo so terribly upon his
helm, with his sword some what flatling, (by reason whereof, the force of the
blow somewhat abated, it slid down upon his left shoulder,) that it
constrained him to stoop forwards with all his body, and if he had not
clasped his arms about his horse neck, he had fallen down to the ground,
and with the force of this great blow, the horse was constrained also to boow
his fore feet, who with a sudden and furious force rose up again: whereat this
noble Dacian warrior, with great have pricked his horse with the spurs,
pretending to make an end of this cruel battle with his second blow: but
it fell out contrary, for that Tefereo coming again to himself, as fierce
as a Lion, thrust forwards against his adversary, procuring (if it passed not
his power) to repay again with interest, that which he had received. Now here
began a new their battle, and their forces multiplied in such furious sort,
that all the mountains and valleys, were occupied with the noise of their
terrible strokes. The courage was so great of these two Knights, yt many times
they lost their wits, with the weight of the terrible raps which they received
one of another. Then this Prince Don Eleno said to himself, that if all the
rest of the Knights with whom he should have battle, were of no less
prowess then this present Knight, that he feared quickly to be disgraced: and
on the other side, Tefereo found himself very sore troubled, and saw that he
was in so great distress, began to invoke upon his Gods for aid. The prowes,
strength, and policy was such between these two Princes, yt whosoever had been present to have beheld ye same, would have said, yt there was between them
expressed, all ye knighthood in ye world: for it was wonderful to see, how
sometimes they pressed forwards, and presently retired backwards, as well to
bestow as to avoid their terrible strokes. It was full three hours, yt these
noble knights thus contended together, and yet there appeared not in them any
kind of faintnes, but by their behauior, there strength seemed still more and
more to increase. Then this heroycall Dacian not accustomed to find such
resistance, began to forget al patience, and as one overcome with anger clasped
his sword fast in his hand, and being settled in his sadle, he stroke ye giant
so hard in ye midst of the helm, yt with ye heuines of ye blow, he was forced
to fall backwards upon ye crupper of his horse without any remembrance, and
with ye great strengh the Prince put to this blow, his sword flew out of his
hand, and hanged by the wrist band, which while he recovered, Tefereo returned
to himself, and with outrageous anger (provoked by ye great pain he felt)
with both his hands he struck such a blow unlooked for at Don Eleno with the
half sword upon the visour, in such furious sort, that it bereaved him of his
sight, and glauncing wise it descended down upon the head piece of the horse,
but by reason of ye first blow ye last had small strength, so yt it did but
little harm, notwithstanding it amazed the horse in such sort, yt with his
staggering the Prince was constrained to use policy to keep himself from
falling from his back, but when his horse was recovered, he returned again,
so inflamed with anger as though sparks of fire had issued out of his mouth,
and crushing his teeth together, he uttered these words. O thou infernal devil,
is it possible, yt by thy strength so evil bestowed on thee, thou shuldst in ye
beginning of my knighthood, put me in danger to be overcome, by one only blow,
I protest by ye honor yt I owe unto ye progeny from whence I proceed, yt if by
this one blow I bring thee not to the point of death or overcome thee, yt I
will never wear armor more against knight, and so with great rage he returned
against his adversary, yt he did not only fear him, but if there had been there
a whole army of men, considering his fury, they would have been afraid, and
pressing forwards ye prince raised himself in his stirrops, and stroke the
Giant so terrible and wonderful a blow, that the blood gushed out of his nose
and mouth, and therewith he fell to the ground as though he had been dead. He
was no sooner down, but with great lightness the Dacian Knight leapt from his
horse, and stepped to the Giant to unlace his healme, which while he was a
doing, he heard a voice which said, Do not kill him knight, do not kill
him, and tourning his head about to see who it was that so disturbed him, he
perceived it to be his cousin the Knight of the Sun. (This was the great
noise of harness, that the Knight of the Sun heard toward his left hand, as
before I have told you.) So when Don Eleno had pulled of the Gyaunts helm, he
withdrew himself apart, and his cousin alighted from his horse, and presently
came and embraced him with exceeding joy, and no little love, which the more
increased, when he considered that the Knight which should vanquish so great a
Giant, could not be but of great valor, as it appeared by that furious blow,
by which the Giaunt was meruailously martyred: for the astonishment was such,
that in a great while after Tefereo could not recover himself, till such time
as they brought water from the house which was hard by, and threw it in his
face, by which means, he came to his remembrance, and seeing himself in such
a pickle, and the sword of his conqueror prepared for his death, I do
refer unto your iudgemens, what such a valiant Knight should thereof
conceive, and with a very great and sad sigh he said.

Oh thou that have robbed me of my surmounted honor, content thy self to
inioye this my great and high glory, and suffer me not to sustain any farther
shame in saving of my life, with the inioying of which, I shall never
hereafter receive joy, but every day, yea, every hour thereof, will
represent unto me a thousand deaths, in remembering that one arm has had so
much strength as to bereave me of that which so many with all their forces,
have not had power to maintain themselves against. I know not wherefor thou
detractest time, make an end of me, for that thou have had so much power to
overcome me,) I earnestly desire thee. And never think that thou shall be Lord
of the thing which thou have overcome: for otherwise I will not yield my self,
but only to death. For they may account him only conquered, which having
strength to defend, submits himself unto the mercy of his enemy.
Therefore gentle Knight I do beseech thee, not to show any pity toward me,
but to finish with my death this tragical triumph which fortune and time has
now bestowed on thee. These two Knights and Cousins were very attentive to the
words that this mighty pagan uttered, and liked exceedingly of hi^ reasonings,
and in reply, Don Eleno answered, Although that Fortune, (nay rather God)
thus in the beginning of my glory, has given me this victory, and liberty
therewith either to extend cruelty or clemency, yet both ^or thy words which
touch me to the heart, and for thy prowess, which I so much esteem, I
protest unto thee, I wish rather never to have been borne* then willingly upon
thee to execute this extremity, considering what a blot it is unto noble
Knights, to have the name of tyrants, for that it depriueth them of all the
honor and glory, that strong arms can any way atchieue. Therefore know
worthy Knight, that the royal blood of Dacia desires not the death of
Tefereo, neither was it my request to have thee overcome, but only to have
thee converted from thy cruel conditions, to the end that I might enjoy thy
friendship. Then the valiant Knight of the Sun did cut off their talk, to
the end he might declare unto them, all that happened with the other Giaunt.
Which when Tefereo heard he was sore abashed, and with great sobriety he
said: Well, seeing it is so, that the flower of all Knighthood and the glory
of arms, is possessed by you and your kindred, I vow that from this day
forwards, I will not remain any longer my own, but nominate my self as only
yours, and in delivering these speeches, in the best manner be might he arose
up from the ground, and with great love embraced them both. And after
salutations ended, they entered altogether into the Pallaice, whereas they
remained all y^ night, for to repose themselves, considering the great
travail and pain which they had passed. The next day in the morning, although
they had more need to have taken greater rest, yet there altogether they
mounted on their horse backs, and took the way that lead them to Saragosa
pretending to enter within the City, and there with all humilite to crave
pardon for all the injury that was past: but their travail was all in vain,
for that before time they of the town, having had sufficient trial of
Tefereos cruelty, would not by any means open the gates, always believing
the lamentable spectacle before their eyes, and therefore fearing that they
would deceive them. So that when these noble knights perceived it was labor
lost to stand long in contention, these people (though then causeless) being
so incredible, they returned back again toward the Castle: and all the way
they went, being almost by the sea side, these two Cousins saw their ship
coming toward them in great have, and staieng their horses, they saw, that
she was fast at ye waters side.

The knight of the Sun perceiving well, that her coming thither was for no
other cause but to inuit them to come aboard her, which Eleno and Tefereo
condescending unto, they presently did: and sent word by a page of Tefereos to
command all those of Sardenna that they should set at liberty all the
Country, and without farther delay return unto their own houses. These
worthy Knights were no sooner entered into their Ship, but she began
presentlye to spread her Sails, and shoouing from shore, in great have she
launched in to the maine Sea, wherein with prosperous winds they sailed two
days, but the third day very earlye in the morning, they discovered a
Galley, governed with six Oars on a side, which came rowing toward them,
and being joined together, they beheld that there was in the same a very
fair Lady, whose hair of her head was dispersed abroad, and her self very
ill entreated by an discourteous Knight. This sad and distressed Lady with a
sorrowful voice and pitiful lamentation, cried out for succor unto the
heavens: at whose complaints and discourteous handling, these Princes received
great anger. The valiant Dacian Don Eleno being in all points prepared to
fight, laid fast hold on his sword, and with great lightness leaped into the
galley, into the which he was not so soon entered, but that these two vessels
were loose, and voyded the one from the other, so that not one of his other
friends had time to follow him, and the swiftness was such in the departure,
that in a small time either of them lost the sight of the other.

By reason of many accidents, which are to be accounted in this history, it is
convenient I imitate the good musition, who to content all those, which attend
to hear his melody, changes into many tunes: therefore now we will leave
these three knights, and return unto the Emperor, to declare such things as
chanced in his Court.

By what adventure Floramonte was delivered from the peril he was in, and how
the Princess Claridiana was delivered of child, and how she was comforted
in all her trouble by the wise Artemidoro. Chapter. 8.
WIth great joy and contentment departed the Pagans, that carried away the
In^ant Floramonte, understanding that Fortune had greatly favored them, to
bestow on them so good a price. Wherefore with great have they got themselves
to the Sea. Wherein they had not trauayled long, but that upon a sudden they
discovered a ship, which was coming toward them, all black, and out of it
proceeded very fearful and wonderful lightenings, accompanied likewise with
terrible* Thunder, seeming by the force thereof that the heaven opened: and
when the ship drew nigh unto the Gallie of the Pagans, it was presently
covered with the thick and terrible lightenings, in such sort, that it
deprived all them that were therein of their sight, and with the great fear
that they received, they fell flat down upon the floor in the Gallie. And
when they came again to themselves they looked about to see if they could
perceive what it should be. And then they could not find the infant
Floramonte, for whose loss they lamented greatly. You shall understand that
the wise Lyrgandeo by his learning had delivered the infant from them to keep
him close and in secret, for that he understood by his art of ye great wars
that was pretended and made ready for in Grecia, in the which wars should be
slain the flower of all knighthoode, and that it should be in great danger
to be lost and utterly destroyed. Also he did comprehend by his learning to
know how this infant and one other that was then begotten (but not yet borne)
should be the greatest help and chief of this victory, coming by chance to
the end of the conquest, likewise he did know that if this child should at
any time before this adventure use armor, that he should be put in great
peril of death. This was the only occasion that he set him at liberty as
you have heard, and did inchaunt him in such sort, that none other could
clear him of it, but only he which should be his companion and aid in the
great necessity of these wars: which was the son of the heroical knight
of the Sun, and of the Empress Claridiana, of whom thou shall hear
hereafter. Thus this wise Lyrgandeo having delivered this child that none in
all the Court knew of it, returned thither again, and from that day
forwards kept it secret to himself, not suffering any to understand
thereof, nor of any other thing that he foreknew in his heart by learning.
All those of the Court were very sad, for that the Emperor was so
sorrowful, forasmuch as he could hear no news of his sons, as I have
before told you, determined after he had ended the hunting, to return
back again to the City. And in the way as they should go, they discovered
coming toward them a Wagon, which did represent much dolor, (and this was
that which Rosicleer did find,) and there they remained to see what it should
be, and when the Wagon drew near where the Emperor was, they lyfted up a
cloth wherewith the wagon was covered, and out of the wagon there issued a
Lady, who lead a maiden child by the hand, all covered with mourning
apparel, which did represent great sorrow, and of so marvelous beauty, as
it was to be wondered at. This Lady when she understood which was the
Emperor, she kneeled down at his feet, and with sundry sorrowful sighs,
she lamentably said.

Considering that all distressed women and oppressed damzells, forasmuch as
they are women and of the weaker sort, do find in thee (Oh sovereign
Emperor) succor and defense, what should those that descend from noble and
royal estate hope for at thy gracious hands? Among which number this which
does present her self before thee, is neither the least in birth, though now
one in most misery, for redress whereof she craves thy aid and defense.
Thou shall understand O sovereign Emperor, that this child is right heir
apparent unto all the kingdom of Lyra, of which she has been dispossessed by
marvelous great violence. The Emperor when he heard that this was the Queen
of Lira, he did reverence her, and took her by the hand, and caused her to
stand up, and embraced her with exceeding show of love, and offered unto her
his person and all his power at commandment for her help and succor. Then
the Lady would have kissed his hands, but the Emperor would not consent
thereunto by any means, but took his horse to proceed forwards on his
journey, and for courtesies sake took up the young queen behind him on horse
back, and the Emperor Alicandro took also the other Lady. In this guise
they returned unto the City, for to put in order all things for the departing
of the Emperor Alicandro, and riding by the way the emperor Trebatio
demanded of the Lady the cause of her coming to the court, the which she did
declare unto him, not letting in her tale to show by shedding of salt tears
from her eyes, the sorrow that in heart she conceived, and in this wise she
answered. High and mighty Emperor, in the kingdom of Lyra not long time
since reigned the father of this young Queen, in so great prosperity and
fame, that he was not only honored of his own subjects, but also feared of
the borderers thereabout. Nigh unto this kingdom there is an Island called
Roca^or, which bears this name for the great strength it has, as well in the
buildings with Castells and towns, as by the inhabitaunts of the same, who are
very strong, of the which Island was Lord and governor a Giant of a marvelous
huge and mighty bigness, being also proud and of very ill conditions, who
has a son of a more greater stature and fierceness then himself, such a one
as I believe has not his like in all the world, and for that he had this
vauntage over and above all other, it seemed unto his Father, that there was
none so convenient in marriage for his son as was this Damzell, daughter unto
this aforenamed king, and heir unto the kingdom. And thus being wholly
determined, he sent messengers unto the king to demand his daughter in
marriage for his son, but the king made them answer very rigorously, (and
although the Giants are greatly feared; yet the power of this king was such
that he did esteem them but little.) But when the Gyaunts Bulfar and
Mandroco (for so were they called) did perceive with what disdain the king
answered them, they were ready to burst with anger, nevertheless Mandroco
gave counsel unto his Father, saying: That he alone was constrained herein to
return for his honor and no other, and that it touched him to make answer
unto them, and that he would never be accounted to be his son if he did not
wholly revenge himself. Then Bulfar who well knew the great strength of his
son, very much rejoiced to hear those his reasons which he uttered, and
commanded straight ways that it should be put in ure: and so with f^ll
determination in as secret manner as they possibly might, they gathered
together five hundred of ye most valiantest knights yt were in all the Island,
which were almost all of their affinity, with yt which knights very secretly
they arrived unknown in the land of Lyra, and very closely in the beginning of
the night, two miles from the city, they put themselves into a little grove
that was nigh at hand, whereas they remained unespied two parts of the night,
then upon a sodeine when ye people were all at rest, and little suspecting any
such sodeine misfortune, they entered the city and never rested till such time
as they came to the kings palace, at which entry and first encounter the king
himself was slain, by a cruel blow that Mandroco stroke him on his head, as
you may behold here where the body lies on a Beer within the wagon. This
Bulfar made such destruction in the entering of the palace, that in a small
time he possessed it for his, and so descending through the city, by reason yt
those knights which he brought with him were of great power and strength. And
again, that those of the city were unprovided of all defense, with very
little a do he overcame them all and brought them under his subjection, by
compelling them to yield: So I a miserable woman more then half dead in
beholding so great damage d^n^ by a false door that belonged to ye palace, I
went out, whereas escaped also many of the kings knights yt were taken on a
sodeine: so I took my way forwards and came to Hircania, for that the king
thereof was my brothers son, and cousin unto this Princess, who received us
very well, and was not a little sorrowful for our misfortune. From which
place we sent to demand of the Gyaunt to surrender unto us, that which with
great violence he had usurped, and answer was returned, that they would
not do it, except this young Queen should first marry with Mandroco, to
the which we would not consent for that he was so deformed. So seeing his
determined purpose, we sent once again, demanding whether he would give us
the body of the dead king, to the which they did straight ways grant. And
Mandroco sent us word, that for so much as we would not consent unto that
which he did require us, tending to our own quietness, to the end we should
understand how little it was that he did esteem of us, he swore with a
solemn oath never to depart out of the Kingdom, for the space of two years,
with condition, that in this time we should seek two Knights, who by their
great force and chivalry, should overcome his father and him in the field,
and then they would depart the land, and return to their own Country. And
contrariwise if we did not procure, to bring these two knights to the
battle, or else to deliver unto them this Lady within that prefixed time,
that Mandroco, might mary with her, that then they would fully possess
themselves of all the kingdom, and fortify themselves in such sort, that all
agreement notwithstanding, we should never return to Lyra again. And so
understanding their imbassage, I determined to come to this Court, whereas I
do understand is all the prowess, and flower of Knighthoode in the world. So
here I present my self (noble Emperor) before you and all your Knights, in
asking favor and requesting help to revenge us of so great wrong, as we have
received: and thus she finished her talk, and with great weeping, she held her
peace.

This noble Emperor received very great sorrow and grief to hear this
lamentable tale that the Lady told, and to see that fair young Damzel so
dispossessed of her right by such extreme tyranny, and with a mild
countenance he answered. Noble Duchess, since that thy good fortune (though
the efficient cause thereof be to too badde) has brought thee there* where
with all good will ye shall receive succor and comfort, I request you to take
your rest, and be quiet, and leave of this your mourning. And although there be
knights in this my court, that are able to comprehend such enterprises, by
their great prowess and strength: yet I do look every day for them, to whom I
may commend greater affairs to be done then these, wherefore rest you a while
till two do come, of whom I have more dominion over, and to them will I commit
this charge. There were many knights present that would very feign have
offered themselves to this enterprise, but hearing the pretense of the
Emperor, they durst not in any wise attempt it, but kept silence.

Then this duchess began to tell them of all the success that happened unto
her knights by the knight of Cupide. Unto whom the Emperor said: that
knight is one of them to whom I will commit the charge of your combat, and I
am right glad that the service he shall do you in this enterprise shall be
the occasion that you shall forget this anger that you have against him. So
with these and like reasons they drew near the City, whereas straight way
they began to prepare all things in a readiness for the departing of the
Emperor Alicandro, and in a short time all things being provided, this
Emperor being also ready with a very good will entered the ship, and
carrying with him the Prince Meridiano, and his well-beloved spouse, and the
Troyan Oristedes, he taking leave of the Emperor with a better countenance
then his heart would consent unto, committed the sails unto the wind, and
with a prosperous voyage they went a land at Tenedon, whereas we will leave
them, for to tell you what chanced unto the Empress Claridiana, who was very
sad for the absence of her spouse, and likewise to see her self so great
with child, (although in the great hall she continually showed a merry
countenance.) So it happened one day being in conversation with the Empress,
and the queen Lira, there entered into the great hall the worthy Prince
Clauerindo, all armed with his accustomed harness, and leading by the hand a
very fair Damsel, all apparelled in black velvet, and after her there came
other nine fair Damosells, all apparelled after the same manner. This Damsel
if you do remember is she, whose keeper Rosicleer did kill, which was the
Prince of Mesopotamia, and ye knight which came to her at her complaint and
sorrow, was Clauerindo, who in great secret followed the knight of the Sun,
and because of the great confidence that he had in the friendship of Zoylo, he
promised her favor and succor: for the which this fair Lady who was
daughter unto the king of Tiglia, came in this order as you shall hear. In the
mean time that all this happened, there chanced a thing of very great
admiration, which was, that the Tartarian being at that time in the hall as
the Damzell entered, he made a great noise without any more tarrieng, neither
was there any that could stay him, were he never so strong, but running
forwards as a man distraught, he went out of the Pallaice. The sorrowful
Lady seeing this, fell down to the ground as though she had been dead. And
Clauerindo beholding the ingratitude of this Tartarian, would have followed
him, but the wise Lyrgandeo stayed him and would not suffer him to go,
saying: They should let him alone, for that all they should procure to follow
him should be in vain. And so retourning unto the Lady he practiced such
remedies, that very quickly she returned to her self again, and then
promised her such remedies, as should in the end restore her to rest. And
when the Barbarian Lady did know who he was, she did meruailouslie rejoice.
So this Tartarian went to the sea side, and with great diligence embarked
himself in a ship that was there ready fraughted for Spain, which he did
in such great have and diligence, that before Bargandel and Lyriamandro could
turn themselves, the ship had hoised sail, and yielded her self unto the
wind, the which was the occasion that these two did the like in taking another
ship, who sailed after the first, with determined purpose, with all their
powers to procure that this Tartarian should return again, whom we will
leave now sailing on their voyage, for it is necessary for our history to
relate other matters in this Chapter. Let us return therefore to the Emperors
court. The Empress Claridiana seeing her time at hand to be delivered with
child, was very sad, and knew not what to do, but in the end of many
thoughts she determined to decypher all her secret unto a maid she had who was
called Arcana, to who^ she did disclose all the secrets of her heart. This
Arcana seeing the great friendship and courtesy that the princess showed her,
in opening her secrets more to her then to any other, and had a more trust in
her then in the rest, kissed her royal hands, and promised her to be no less
secret then dilligent in all her affairs. So they determined between
themselves and did provide as it was best for their purpose, to be
continuallye alone and without any company, but that which did most trouble
and gave greatest care unto the Empress Claridiana, was, for that she did not
know to whom to give the charge of nursing that, which should be borne of
her, yet the maiden who was very wise, subtle, and discreet, had ordained all
things in good order, for she had in great secret disclosed it unto a very
honest matrone of the city, saying, that she was the party that should be
delivered, and gave unto her very largely of gifts and jewels, with promises
of a farther benefit for to keep her counsel therein. It was not long after
when that with great pain and grief this noble Princess was delivered of a
very fair son and daughter, being of so great beauty that it was
wonderful to be seen. The son had under his left side a marvelous and
very strange mark, which was a spear of such a fiery prospect that it made
them afraid to touch it. The Empress took the^ both in her arms and with
many bitter tears she blessed them, and returned them again unto Arcana,
willing her that she should dress them, and put all things in order to send
them to the nurse, the which she did with great diligence, wrapping and
swaddeling them up in very fair and rich clothes, according to the best guise
that she could, although she were but little acquainted in such like matters.
She had not scantly made an end of swaddeling them, when that upon a sudden
with a great rumor, as it seemed unto the Empress and Arcana, one of the
walls of the chamber where they were did open, whereat did enter a Serpent,
very horrible and fearful to behold, from whom there proceeded great
flames and sparks of fire, who stayed not, but went straight unto the place
whereas the two little Infantes were, and at two mouthfulles he swallowed them
clean up, and so without doing any more harm or making any longer tarrying
returned out of the Chamber the self same way that it came in, leaving the
Empress in so great fear, as in such cases is required.

And being in this great trance she looked toward y^ place, where the Serpent
went out, and she saw enter in thereat an old man, which came with a staff
in his hand, whom straight way she knew very well to be the wise Artemidoro,
who with great courtesy saluted the Empress saying: Madame, take you neither
care, pain, nor grief of yt which is done, neither trouble your self for
your children, for that there could be no more done, then that which is done:
for all is convenient and necessary for the establishing both of yours and
their good fortune. And more I do certefie you, that the time should come,
wherein you shall receive more joy and comfort, then now it does cause
anguish and sorrow. And thus without any more reasoning he returned and went
out again at the place whereat he entered, and he was not so soon out, but
that the wall closed again as even as it was before, and no sign of opening
could be seen. After that he was departed the empress and her maid remained
reasoning and meruailing at this sudden and strange case, and after they had
considered of many things, they determined between themselves to keep all
very secret, till that by opportunity were offered them, what they should do.

The Prince Brandimardo of whom I told you of, was so inflamed with the fire of
Cupide, whch kindled in him thorough ye love of the young queen of Lyra, whose
name was Ardisilora, yt he could find in himself neither rest nor joy, and
his passions were not so secret, but that this young queen did perceive them,
and spared not to repaye him again with a kind of honest and single love. Of
whom we mean to declare more in the process of this history, and of their
wonderful acts which they did: for you shall understand, that this young
Queen, being a horseback and armed in her armor, proved another Claridiana,
as shall be rehearsed in that furious battle between the Greeks and
Africans. And you shall moreover mark, that all that you have heard in the
process of this chapter, was ordained by the wise men, which I only note, for
that those which shall read the same, may the better understand the history.

How that when the King of Hungary was taking his leave to depart, there came
a Giant, having a cruel and furious countenance, who defied the Emperor and
his sons, and of all that chanced therein. Cap. 9.
THE king of Hungary seeing yt it was time for him to return to his own
Country, it happened one day being in company with the Emperor his son in
law, he said unto him: My loving son, I would very feign before my
departure (if it were possible) that my son were come, to the end I might
have him with me, seeing that my Nephews do not come, but since their
tarrying is so long, I must be content to take patience, and (...) their
companies return home into my own Country, least peradventure this my long
absence be cause of some insurrection or commotion. The Emperor would very
feign have answered him, but upon a sodeine and unlooked for, there was raised
a great rumor amongst them that at that present were in the Pallaice, and
demanding what was the occasion of such sodeine alteration, they saw entering
in at the gate a very great and mighty Gyaunt, of more then sixteen cubits
high, of strong body, and double the bigness of any other ordinary man, he
was armed with very strong and rich armor, and he carried upon his shoulder a
great and heavy Mase, and at his girdle a very fair and broad sword, and
without doing reverence or showing any kind of courtesy, but with a proud
and arrogant voice he asked: Which amongst you is that false and treacherous
Rosicleer, son unto the traitorous Emperor Trebatio? All that were there
present (were not a little amazed, as well in beholding the huge greatness and
strange form of the giaunt, as also of his great pride and boldness in his
words) answered him not a word. Then the Emperor, as one unto whom it most
belonged to make answer* with great sobriety and wisdom, as in such like
matters he was accustomed to use, replied. Grant, Rosicleer at this present is
not in the Court, for the which I am very sorry and conceive great grief,
for I am sure if he were here present, he would soon tame and bring down
this thy great pride, and mitti^ate thy malice, and soon abate this thy
unreasonable bold enterprise, which thou have attempted. And in that thou
dooest say that I am a traitor, I answer that thou do falsely lie, like a
naughty and ill taught knight, for I never used treson toward any man,
neither would I at any time consent thereunto, but I have procured to the
uttermost of my power to punish it. When the Giant heard this answer, being
more kindeled with rage, he said. Emperor, thy words be spoken very
fondly and without fear, as the Cock upon his own dunghill, here thou see
me mighty and strong, insomuch that being in thy Country I do make thee
quake, and more I would do (...) thou (...) a^roade. Thou great beast and
deformed creature, replied the Emperor, for that thou shall understand how
little here in Grecia we esteem such monsters as thou art, tarry a while, for
in place of my sons, because they are not present for to give thee thy
payment according unto thy deserte, in me being their father, thou shall find
such resistaunce, that I hope by the favor and help of almighty God, to take
that devilish and infernal head from thy accursed shoulders. So the Emperor
in great have with a knightly courage called for his armor. This Giant seeing
the disposition and prowess of the Emperor to be so valiant, with a great
cry he said. O ye feminine Gods, is it possible that your deity does
consent, that alonely one man is so hardy and courageous to enter into the
field with me. Emperor, take to thee one hundredth of ye best knights you have
about thee and come, for altogether I will cut you in pieces, for yt my gods
will not permit yt he in who^ al their power consists should have battle with
one knight, and in saying these words, he did show the great pride yt rested in
his heart. Here you may judge in what perplexity ye Empress and all her
Ladies were in, to see so ill favored a monster before them, I promise you
they were all in a manner without remembrance and clean beside themselves,
but Claridiana never moved her countenance, but was very quiet. In this mean
time while the Emperor was arming him self with as great have as he might,
the fierce Gyaunt which burned in anger, thought that the Emperor tarryed
very long and said: What do thou Emperor? why do thou not cause thy
knights to arm themselves as I have willed thee, for that both of thy self
and them I pretend ^o end the weak days, and in saying these words he went
unto the place whereas the Emperor was arming himself, there the Empress
Claridiana put her self before him, and stroke the Giant such a blow on the
breast with both her hands with so great anger, that she made him to withdraw
backwards, and in the end was forced to fall, and she said: Thou devilish
beast, what think thou in thy heart to do, and what is thy pretended
purpose? and seeing the giant in so great fury, she cried out and said: Oh
holy God deliver these thy knights from all evil, for he arose up with such
ire from ye ground, that a great mountain had not ben able to make any
resistance against him, if it had not happened, that in the same extremity
there entered into the hall that gentle and valiant giant ye king of Sardenia,
who understanding ye contempt of ye other giant, and how much he had misused ye
emperor with his proud speeches in the hall, he was very greatly incensed, and
yt the emperor should understand ye great love yt he bare unto his son, ye
knight of ye Sun, like a furious lion he attempted the battle before the
Emperor could be ready to make y^ assault, and lifting up a great club which
he had in his hand, he said: O thou foul dissignred monster, far more proud
the^ apperteineth to ye order of knighthood: first before thou approuest thy
strength with any other, thou shall feel the force of me. The great disdain
that was in this giant whose name was Bust^afo* arg^^^ yt he l^tle esteemed ye
other, but without replying any answer, they began to flourish with their great
and mighty Mases, that the great noise of the Emperor, neither the shrikes
of the Empress and her Ladies, would suffice to make them withdraw
themselves ye one from the other, but terribly they let fall their heavy and
mighty blows one upon another, that their strong helmes were bruised, and they
inclined their heads unto their breasts. So then there began a cruel and
mortal battle, one of the most terriblest in the world, for the strength of
their blows were so outrageous, that with the least blow they gave, it was
thought that the great hall would have fallen down. The Empress and her
Ladies what with the great grief they had, and again, with the exceeding
heat that began in the hall, withdrew themselves into their Closettes and
Chambers, and likewise the knights that were present, departed and left them
alone in ye hall, saving the Emperor only remained at the door, to keep
the entry yt none should either go in or out, who was very well armed. And
Brandimardo and Claueryndo were with the Empress Claridiana, beholding this
cruel battle, not knowing who this great Gyaunt was that travailed so much
for the honor of the Emperor and his sons. In all this time these Gyaunts
had no other care, but in brusing and mangling one another flesh, with so
great strength, yt whosoever beheld them meruailed at their fierceness, and
without doubt, all the furious rage of Gyaunts consisted in those two, as it
did appear by the terrible and outrageous strokes that they bestowed between
them, for with the great strength and the sound thereof, the whole palace did
not only shake, but also the whole City: in this sort they continued a great
while without taking any breath, and all the floor of the hall was full of
hoales, with the heavy blows that had escaped by. Thus they long continued
without knowledge of any masterie between them, but still they procured the
one to indamage the other, and to be revenged one of another, with so great
rage and in such sort, that they seemed rather to be rash and unreasonable
Gyauntes, then expert and valiant knights: and in this their great fury they
both lifted up their great and heavy clubs, in such sort that their blows met
and discharged together, with such surpassing strength, that the club of the
King of Sardenna, was parted in twain, but the mace of Bustrafo discharged upon
the other, although almost in vain, for that it had lost the former fury by
reason of the first encounter, nevertheless it made his healme to sound as an
anfielde when it is stricken on with a hammer. Then this king seeing he had such
an adversary, thought it not good to use delay, but with great have he drew
his sword, and at such time as Bustrafo turned the second blow he could by no
means shun or apart himself from it, but bare it off with his sword, and the
fall of the blow was such, that the mace was cut clean a sunder, and the
great end rolled on the flower in the hall. Bustrafo seeing himself dispossessed
of his heavy mace, threw the tronchon which remained in his hand, at the King
of Sardenna, who received it upon his shield: but the strength of it was so
unmeasurable, that it glaunced on his shield, and flewe upright to the top of
the hall, and the king retired back three or four steps, so that it was a
wonder he fell not to the ground. In this time, Bustrafo had space to draw his
sword, and to shrowde himself under his shield. Now there began a new, a more
cruel and rigorous combat between them, then at the first: for Bustrafo at
his first blow, stroke the King upon ye shield, and parted it in two pieces,
and with an infernal fury, it descended on his helm, and hurt his head, but
ye wound was not very great, yet the blow rested not, but glauncing on the
harness, fell to the ground, whereas it made a great hoale: but in the mean
time this new converted King, was not idle, neither did his adversary escape
his payment for the blow past, but having his sharp cutting sword raised on
high, he discharged it with such exceeding force upon Bustrafo, (who received
it upon his shield) that with ye great strength thereof, it parted it in
pieces, and descended upon his helm, taking away with it all that it touched
both of the harness and flesh, which fell together to the ground, so that
Bustrafo remained very sore hurt. And when he saw his own blood, the battle
began a new to kindle, in such sort, that in a very small time, each of them
were sore hurt in sundry places, wherout issued so much blood, that all ye
hall was sprinkled therewith. This fierce Bustrafo seeing himself so ill
entreated, his anger still more increased, and gave ye Sardenian such a blow
under the wast, that it ^hewed his hard harness, and part of the swoorde was
sheathed in the flesh, wherewith he was very sore hurt: so with the anguish and
terrible pain that this Sardenian felt, he gnashed his teeth together, and
with great furye he stroke at the head of Bustrafo, who well knowing the weight
of his blows, stepped a side, which was the occasion, that the whole force of
the blow could take no effect, but with the point of his sword, he cut him on
the visor, and it descended to his breast, and so downwards, insomuch, that it
divided the harness and hurt him very sore, from top to toe, by means of
which wound, he suffered great grief, especially being in the place, where it
was.

The deeds which in all this time chanced unto that valyant Rosicleer, we will
here declare, and leave these two Giaunts, with their perilous, and well
sought battle, till such time as occasion do serve to to go forward with
the same. You do remember, how that we left Rosicleer within his inchaunted
boat, sailing on the deep seas, under the protection of Neptune. And so they
travailed for the space of five days, and as many nights, without seeing any
thing, but the starrie firmament, and the furious waves of the sea, with out
knowing whether they did sail. In the sixth day of their navigations, they
beheld coming toward them another great Foyst, who came with no less fury,
then their boat sailed, and the course thereof was directed right with them.
So when they drew nigh together, the Foyst passed by so close, that they might
well see and discover who was therein, and they perceived within the same a
damsel who seemed to be dead, and by her stood a monstrous Giant, and by the
maste of the Foyst there was tied a terrible Griffin, which caused great fear
in them that beheld it.

The Foyst made such great way, that Rosicleer had no time to leap into
her, which caused him to be very sorry and he was ye more ince^sed, for that
he could not be thoroughly certified what this adventure was and what the
strangeness thereof did signify, and with the anger that he had, he began
to curse all inchauntments, and all them that used it: but all this did profit
him but little, for that in a short time it sailed out of sight. And looking
about him, he saw two ships, which were in a great fight, and very fiercely
the one assaulted the other, to whom the boat wherein the Prince was,
directed his way with so swifte course, that he almost had no time to put on
his helm. And with these two ships was another boat, which by the force of
arms was brought in subjection and overcome by ye other two ships, and all
the people were slain that was in her, saving a few which had withdrawn
themselves into the poope of the bark for their defense, amongst whom, there
was one of a very great and excellent stature, who with strong and mighty
blows, caused all those that approached unto the place where he was, to
withdraw themselves, but by reason that they had been very long in this
battle, and that they had troubled him very much, he could not choose but be
very weak and weary, in such sort, that if it had endured long, he must
needs have finished the sight with his death.

After that Rosicleer had well beheld and noted the great strength and fierce
courage of the Knight, it seemed unto him to have known him, and viewing the
device that he had on his armor, he knew that it was Zoylo the Tartarian,
and straight way without any more tarrying he leaped into the ship, and
began to let them know the strength of his strong arm, for in such sort he
besturred him, that at the first blow he cut off helm and head, of one of his
enemies, and not being content with this, he began again to strike first on
the one side and then on the other, so that there was not one that was so
hardy to abide his terrible blows, but when his adversaries saw his fury,
there joined more then thirty of them together, pretending to assault him, but
amongst them there was one who seemed to be the principal of them all, said.
Return you all back again and make an end of that, which weak and simple
women would long since have finished, and let me alone with this knight that so
rigorously does behave himself, and with great fury he pressed forward and
stroke the Prince such a blow that he made him astonyed, but this miserable
man little knew that he had to do with the best Knight in the world, for if
he had, he would never have made resistaunce against him face to face. And
tourning to strike him once again, he discovered the device that he had in
his sheelde, whereby he knew him, and was very much afraid of that which
should succeed. The Prince understood by them that were in the ship, that
this was he which did govern them, he stroke such a blow at his right arm,
that he cut it clean off, so that arm and swoorde fell down upon the hatches
of the ship, who seeing himself so ill entreated, with a great noise and
pitiful shrike he entered in amongst his people, and cried for help and
succor, but all was in vain, for that the Nephew of Tiberio stroke him such
another blow upon the helm, that he parted helm and head in two pieces, so
that he fell down dead: but when his company saw this, they altogether fell
upon him with terrible fury, thinking to make an end of him, but he received
them in such order, that quickly he made them to understand the strength of his
victorious arm, for he never stroke blow but either he slew one, or felled
him to the ground, which was the occasion that their hearts fainted, that not
one of them which remained durst approach, nevertheless they had so compassed
him about, that he could not neither on the one side nor on the other make any
way, for when he determined to put himself forwards one way, then the other
began to lay on him behind, so that of necessitye he was constrained in the
end to set upon them all at once, for that they did so trouble him. In this
time Zoilo had somewhat recovered his strength, and was well eased of his
weariness, and seeing the valiantness of his defender, he went toward ye
place where he was skirmishing, and with his sword in both his hands, he
began to make great destruction amongst his enemies, that the slaughter was
so great, and their enemies not able to make any resistaunce, but like
miserable people determined rather to submit themselves to ye mercy of that
new come knight, then to the force of their own arms, and falling all down
at the feet of Rosicleer, they craved pardon of him for their offense, and
mercy for their lives, the which he straight way granted, and said: It is
great courtesy, yea, and no little charity showed toward the evil man in
punishing him, if that he pretend to go forwards and persevere in his
naughty life. Nevertheless if you will promise me, that from this da^e
forwards you will amend your lives, and leave this naughtiness, that you
shall not alonely find in me this which you do ask, but also true and
perfect friendship at all times and in all things that you have need of, to
the which they did all willinglye swear they would perform. This being
finished, the Prince and the Tartarian embraced one another, with great love
and friendship, and Rosicleer asked of the Tartarian what was the occasion
that brought him into so great peril and danger of death. The Tartarian
said, that by force of an adventure he departed the Emperors Court, (but he
did not declare the effect) and how coming in that small ship he was taken
with those rouers, who brought him into that great distress that he had found
him in. Then Rosicleer again threw his arms about his neck, and with great
love he said.

Fortune dealt but frowardly to bring thee out of Constantinople in such a
time, for to lead thee unto this peril, and so began to tell him of all
that he had passed in the Country of Greece. And when he heard him name the
Lady Tetigliasa, he shaked like the leaves of a tree, and said* Oh for Gods
sake my Lord, let not my cares hear the name of that thing which my heart
does so much abhor and detest. For hear I do swear unto thee, that
living I will bury my self in this Sea, rather then to abide that speech.

At the which words the Prince was very sore troubled, but a certain
adventure which chanced him at that very same time, caused him to forgette
this his troubled mind.

How the king of Tire gave an assault to rob the ship where the Prince was,
and how the same king was overcome. Chap. 10.
SOdeinly amongst the knights of those rouers that had escaped from the
hands of the Prince, there arose a great tumult and showting, with terrible
shrikes, calling upon their Gods for aid and succor, and the Mariners in
great have began to vngrapple and loose their ships the one from the
other, and with as great have as they could they hoised up their sails, for
to fly away and escape from the peril which they beheld very near at
hand. But when Rosicleer saw this tumulteous cry, with a very angry voice
he said. What noise is this amongst you captive people? What sudden fear is
this that is come upon you, that with so great have you prepare your selves to
run away. Lord answered one of them, great reason we have to make all
this have which we do, for you shall understand, that there approaches nigh
unto us either dreadful death or cruel imprisonment. This noble and valiant
Prince looked about on every side to see what the occasion should be that
should cause them to work this fact: and straight ways he discovered a very
fair and rich Gallie which came toward the place where as they abode, with
their Sails alofte and a prosperous wind, so that the Gallie in a manner
seemed to fly upon the water. Rosicleer without any alteration asked them,
saying.

Tell me who is it that comes in yonder Gallie, that has put you in so much
fear. Ualyaunt Knight (said they) there comes in yonder Gallie the king of
Tire, a mighty and strong giant being a rouer, we are not able fully to
certify you of his great strength and deformity, but of this we are assured,
yt the very Gods in heaven do fear him, his life and custom is to rob all
that ever he does meet, and if it so fall out, that any do make resistaunce
against him, he straight commands them to the point of the sword with
extreme cruelty: so here gentle knight, judge whether we have cause or not to
do our endeavor for to avoid this great danger. The Prince hearing all this
which they of the ship told him, began to make himself ready to the battle,
and laced on his helm, and put all things in very good order, and when that
all was ready he said unto them that were with him.

O you people of little courage and small strength, I see well you are all base
minded, and that there is no hardiness in you, but only for vile matters, get
you down and hide you in the pumpe of the ship, for I will not consent that
any of you shall run away, neither shall your cries excuse me of this
battle, and so with a loud voice he commanded to bear up the helm, that
the ship might run right upon the Gallie. The Tartarian seeing that they
pretended to give the enterprise, commanded those that were with him straight
ways to put his vessel in very good order, of the which it had great need,
so with as great have and swiftness of sail as was possible, they procured
that the Ship and Gallie might join both together, and in very short time
they were come so nigh each to other, that any man might well discover and
perceive all that was in the Gallie of their adversary. This valiant and
worthy Rosicleer saw the great Gyaunt where he sat in the midst of the
poope of the Gallie in a Chair, where they very plainly saw his
countenance was so terrible, and his body so great, that all those which
were present with Rosicleer were afraid to behold him. And when the Gyaunt
understood that those which were in the ship would not alonely defend
themselves, but also offend their enemies, his rage was such, that in great
have he arose and with a mighty voice he called for his armor, uttering these
words.

O you people most unfortunate, from whence has come this hardiness unto you,
to offend the King of Tire, understanding and knowing, that I am not only
feared of men, but also the Gods in the high heavens do tremble at my name,
and desire to have my friendship. Then Rosicleer answered and said, Make thy
reckoning, that thou have said even as much as nothing, for of my self I
speak, that I am none of the Gods thou namest, neither know I thee by the name
thou tellest, nor yet do I desire thy friendship, nor any others that
practices the like works, as thou do, neither, do I esteem thy
threatenings, nor yet thy furious countenance, neither can thy great body put me
in any fear. And with this, he commanded the mariners to grapple the ship
and Galley together very strongly. Which, when this fierce King saw, with
great anger he arose out of his chair, and not tarrying to lace on his helm,
would have entered into the ship: but Rosicleer perceiving his pretense,
thruste him with so great force, with both his hands upon the breast, that he
made him to fall backwardes into his own galley, and said. Stand back thou
infernal creature, and take thee to thy armor, what, do thou think yt thou
meetest with such as thou art wont to do, to fear them with thy devilish
countenance? Thou shall have need both of armor and hands, for to deliver
thee from the punishment of the just Judge, whose reward shall now be executed
upon thee, for thy unjust works, and cruel customs, wherein thou have long
continued.

There was never seen amongst savage beasts so much anger, as at this
instaunce appeared in the Giant, and with the madness of his heart, he drew
out his mighty and heavy sword, wherewith he would have stricken Rosicleer,
but this valiant Knight with great disc^etion, stepped on the one side, so that
his blow was discharged in vain, only it stroke upon the side of the
ship, and it fell with such great strength that it cut the ship down,
even with the galley.

This noble Greek was nothing at all idle, but having his rare and precious
Sword, which Queen Iulia had sent him, in his hand, he stroke a terrible
and fierce blow at the Gyauntes face, but by reason he was so far off, he
could not reach it, but that the point of his sharp Swoorde only passed
through his cheeks, but if he could have comprehended more of his head with
that blow, he had made an end of the battle. This furious Gyaunt when he
saw his blood before him, he gave a terrible groan, and therewith took his
broad swoorde in both his hands, and with blaspheming and cursing his Gods,
he lift it up for to strike this valiant Greek, who seeing it to descend,
determined not to receive so doubtful a blow, but with great and singular
wisdom delivered himself from it. The blow was such that if it had not
doubled in the maine sail which somewhat disturbed it, it had been sufficient
to have divided the Ship in pieces. This valiant and martial Prince, which
with great discreation and aduisement sustained this battle, had always a
very good eye to the Gyaunt, who for to unloose his Swoorde where it was fast
in the Ship, was enforced to put his left hand to hold fast by the ship
side, whereat Rosicleer stroke with such fury that the Giants hand remained
fast to the Ships side, divided from the arm. But when this terrible and
fierce Gyaunt saw himself lame, and that he had clean lost his left hand,
he began a new to curse and blaspheme his Gods, and procured to hurt this
Greek by all means possible that he could invent, but he provided so to the
contrary, that not one blow which the Gyaunt stroke should either touch or
hurt him, in such sort, that at last when this furious and outrageous devil
striving to strike this Greek Knight, was driven to ballaunce his body,
thereby to reach at him, this Knight let pass the same blow even as he did
all the rest of his blows, and in passing by he gave him such a cruel blow
upon the right arm, that he cut it off almost by the elbowe.

And when this miserable king saw himself without hands, he gave a great cry
and rored like a furious bull, and therewith he clasped himself to the m^ste
of the galley, and with great case he pulled it out of his place, and in an
infernal rage, he would have entered into the ship, but Rosicleer with his
hands once again thrust him on the breast in such wise that he was
constrained to fall down upon the side of the galley, and by reason of his
hugeness and great weight, he lyghted with the one half of his body over
board: and because he had not his hands, he could not help himself, but
tumbled with his head forwards, into the deep and wide Sea, wherein being
drenched, he finished his miserable and unhappy days. Then those which were
of his Gallie seeing this his wretched end, and fearing their own misfortune,
in a marvelous great have vngrappeled the Ship, which was done with such
speed, that when Rosicleer remembered himself, he had no time to offend them,
nor to do them any more harm. Then those which were in his Ship and had
beheld this short and victorious battle, began a new to fall down at his
feet and most humbly craved pardon for their former fear. Then the Prince
turned toward the Tartarian, who all the time of this conflict, was beholding
his excellent and mighty strength, and much meruailed at that which he had
seen, and asked of him what he had determined to do. And the Tartarian
answered, that he would in no wise depart from his commandment, and being
in talk, they, upon a sudden saw two ships, which seemed unto them, that
they were in a great fight. These Princes were marvelous desirous to be with
them, to understand what they were. So this valiant Greek, tourning to the
Tartarian, he said, Prince of Tartaria follow me, and in great have he
leaped into his Boat, and he was no sooner entered therein, but that it
began to make way like a Thunderbolt in the air, so that it seemed sparks
of fire flew out of the water, in such sort that the Tartarian had no time to
follow him, but by reason of the swiftness, he had quicklye lost the sight of
him.

So for that it is requisite, let us leave this Tartarian, who was very
sorrowful being left alone, and commanded the marrineers to make way with
his ship, toward the other two that were a fighting. So this valiant
Rosicleer sailed on in his inchaunted boat, not without great sorrow, for
that upon a sudden he had lost his perfect friend: nevertheless for that he
did understand that he was carried to conclude the things that were more for
his contentment, he was driven to comfort himself, with that which most he
loved. So with these great thoughts, he sailed two days without any adventure
worthy the telling. But the third day very early in the morning, at such time
as Appollo showed abroad his glistering beams, they discovered land, whether
the bark with terrible fury made way: and it seemed unto him to be a very
small Island, where they arrived, nevertheless by the prospect of the rivers,
it appeared to be a place of great delyght, and full of meddowes and other
green fields. So by the resting of this bark a ground, Rosicleer understood
that there he should go aland, wherefore he descended out of the bark, and
after him came his good horse, and to the end he would travel in more
safety, he mounted on his back, and looked round about him, if he could
discover any way or path. But not far from the place whereas he was, he
beheld very fair and sumptuous buildings, wherewith he took the way that led
him thither, and being nigh thereunto, he saw yt it was old and ancient
building. And as he went round about it a while for to behold the same, he saw
yt over the principal gate, was this superscription written. This is the
famous and ancient Temple of the gods Venus, from whence the noble Paris of
Troy, stole the fair Queen Helena: this is the Island of the mother of that
cruel Cupide* the greatest sower of discord in all the world. This valiant
Knight did very much content himself in beholding that old and sumptuous
Temple, the name whereof was spread through all the world, and left not any
thing, neither without nor within, but beheld it fully to his contentment.
After that he had spent a little time in perusing this, he put himself in a
straight way, which was not far from a foot path thereby, whereas he saw a
man that was cutting of wood, of whom he asked what country it was, and who
was Lord of it. This man perceiving that he demanded somewhat of him, was not
able to answer him, but made signs unto him that he was dumb, and moreover,
yt he should return back again, giving him to understand that if he did
proceed forwards, he should find great peril. This noble Rosicleer said then
to himself, I do not know what shall chance or happen me: notwithstanding,
if a thousand that had their tongues should tell me, (yet would I not do it,
nor leave off to follow this my pretended purpose) much more thou, whom I
cannot understand. And so without any more tarrying, he returned unto his new
begun journey, and at the going up of a hill, he beheld a Castle of a mighty
and strange bigness, which was edified upon another hills side. He was a good
mile from it, when he discovered it, and so iournying thetherward; he had not
travailed far, when he found himself in a fair, broad, and smooth way,
whereinto when he entered, he saw certain footings of horses, which appeared
not to be made long before, but that lately they had passed that way: the which
footings he followed, although he found other fair ways, and as much occupied
as that wherein he was, yet for all that, because he would see what footings
they were, he would follow that way and none other, so not very far from that
place where he was, he heard (although it was somewhat distaunt from him, to his
seeming) a great rushing of harness, and the more he travailed forwards, the
more plainer his ears were occupied with this martial music. Till in ye end,
drawing nearer, he perceived, it was a notable and well fought battle, for
which cause he pricked his horse onwardes the faster, in such sort, yt at yt
going down from a mountain, into a fair and broad plain, he beheld at the
foot of the castle very much people and amongst them Giaunts, all which were in
battle against one only Knight, of a maruailous great and well proportioned
stature all armed in russet harnes without any other, devise thereon, who with
his sword in both his hands made a marvelous and cruel slaughter, for that
at his feet there lay many of the knights dead, and also of the Giants,
notwithstanding they did trouble* him very much, so that he was brought to a
very ill pass, for he had hewing and striking on him more then ^ortie knights
and two great giants, it was a thing of great admiration to see how the knight
did besturre himself beholding himself so beset, yet for all that there was
nothing looked for of him but death. Somewhat on the one side a little distaunt
from the battle, he saw a Damzell of a marvelous and excellent beauty, who
with great sorrow complained her self. This valiant warrior seeing what
this knight did for his defense, and by his mighty prowess app^ared to be of
high estate, he descended and left h^s horse, and with a quick pace he
proceeded forwards wi^h his sword in his hand, pretending to aid and help
that one knight, seeing he had such need thereof. Before I proceed any
farther in this battle, I will (although it be somewhat troublesome to the
reader) declare the rest of the terrible battle that was between the two
giants in the great hall of the Court of the Emperor. You have heard how we
left these two Gyaunts Bustrafo and Bramidoro in great contention of the
battle, each one of them indeuouring themselves to win the victory, although
of each part they denied to either other the same. He that seemed to be most
troubled in this battle, was the Sardenian King, and with the thick breath
that proceeded from his impatient heart, his face was inflamed with the heat
thereof. The which his adversary perceived, and like a terrible and outrageous
Tiger, he lift up his mighty sword, letting it fall with such fury, as though
fire had fallen from heaven. The King seeing that by no means he could
escape it, lift up likewise his sword, to ward that terrible blow: but by
reason that that of the Giaunt Bustrafos, was of better steel, and of more
strength, he cut the sword of the Kings in two pieces, and the blow descended
upon his shoulder, and did a little hurt him. When this King saw that his
sword was in two pieces, he was somewhat amazed, yet for all that, he lost not
his knightlye courage, but with a valiant heart pressed to his enemy, and with
that ^^tle that remained of his sword, he stroke Bustrafo, upon his helm such
a blow, (that if it had been with the whole sword, he had cleared himself at
that time of this danger) yet it was not of so small force, but it cut off one
of his ears, and carried away a piece of the iawe bone. This Giant Bustrafo
feeling himself so sore hurt with this terrible blow, pretended to repaye him
with double interest (the which if it had chanced to take effect) it had made
an end of his days: but this new converted Knight, ran in under the blow
of Bustrafo, saying: O Jesus, keep and defend this thy new converted
servant. And so joining together, they embraced one another, whereas began a
maruailous and strong wrestling, wherein they continued a good while proving
their strengths, and procuring the victory, the one over the other, till at
the last, both being not a little weary, they fell down to the ground,
tumbling here and there from one place to another, without loosing their
hold, and in this stri^e Bustrafo his helm fell from his head, by reason that
she laces wherewith it was made fast, were cut in pieces, so that his terrible
and mighty face was plainlye discovered. But they seeing that this wrestling
did little profit them, unloosed themselves: but the King was the first that
rose up, as one that showed himself to have the best stomach, and seeing that
all Bustrafo his head was bare, in that he wanted his helm, he bent his armed
fist, and stroke him such a blow upon the forehead, that his brains flewe
out, and his eyes started out of his head, and there this unfortunate Gyaunt
fell dead to the ground. The King seeing then so good a success in his
battle, fell down upon his knees to ye ground, and lifting up his eyes unto
heaven, he said. I give thee thanks most mighty Jesus, that thou gave me
to understand thy power, and lightenest my understanding for to leave this
error in the which I was led, and to come to the knowledge of thy true light.
Then the Emperor came unto him, and embraced him, saying. Worthy Giaunt, unto
whom it has pleased God to impart so much of his grace, I do most heartely
desire thee to tell who thou art, that we may know who it is, that has showed
us so much favor and courtesy, to the end we may render thee thy due deserts,
for this thy worthy deed. The Giant took off his helm, and showed his fa^e
which was of a sober countenance, all to be spotted with his own blood, and
without moving from the place wherein he kneeled, replied and said, I am
Bramidoro King of Sardenia, who of long time have been subject to the
superstitions of fained Gods, and by the prowess of thy son the Knight of
the Sun, I am come to the knowledge of the almighty God, and am now ready to
receive the sacrament of baptism. Therefore I desire thee (sovereign Emperor)
that it may be straight ways ministered unto me, and likewise one that may
instruct me in all that shall be necessary for my salvation. The Emperor
received great joy to see a person of so great estimation, turned unto the
knowledge of the law and scru^^e of God, and said. Noble king you shall a
while repose your self, to provide remedy in the curing and healing of your
wounds, for it is right needful, and when you are well of them, then shall all
things be fulfilled that you do desire, that shall be necessary for you. This
he said, for that he would have it done with the pomp and right, that to so
high a thing is requisite, and with the solemni^ie yt in such cases they
accustomed to use: and in saying these words, he took him by the hand, and
raised him from ye ground, and led him unto the chamber of the Knight of ye
Sun, where as he was cured of the wounds that he received in the battle, and
was visited of all the Kings, Princes and Knights, that were in the Court. The
dead Giant was drawn out of the pallaice, and carried without the City,
where, in steed of a grave to bury him, they made a great fire and consumed him
to ashes. The third day after this adventure was ended, ye King of Hungary
departed with many other knights, that were very desirous to go into their own
countries to take their ease, at which the Emperor remained very pensive. So
the other day following, being on a sunday, they did ordain a sole^pne feast
for to minister the sacrament of Baptism unto Bramidoro, for he had so great
desire to be baptized, that he would tarry no longer.

How the king of Sardenia was baptized, and how that a Lady demanded a promise
of the Emperor, which he granted, for the which all the Court was very sad.
Cap. 11.
THE next day in the morning being Sundaie, as you have heard, the king of
Sardenia was brought to the Church to recei^e his Baptism* accompanied with
all ^he nobility that at that present were in the Emperors Court. There went
with him for his Godfathers, the king of Bulgaria, and the king of Nisa, and
the Emperor using his magnanimity went also with him side by side, until he
came to the Church of Saint Sofia, whereas the Cardinal of Constantinople
said Service and did baptize him, and confirm his own proper name, when this
was done with all the solempnitie belonging, they returned again unto the
Palace, in the which upon the one side was a very fair Damzell, apparelled
all in black, having no company, but alonely one Page, she had her
beautiful eyes all swollen with weeping, her countenance was very sad,
which did very well declare the sorrow of her heart, and beholding so noble a
company to enter in, she was in quiet till such time as the Emperor entered,
and by his side the king of Sardenia, who was meruailously well adorned, and of
goodly greatness, and of fair and gentle disposition. This damzell did well
know which was the Emperor, whom she did come to seek for, so drawing nigh
unto him there distilled from her sorrowful eyes sa^t tears, resembling
oriental pearls, which ran down ^er cheeks, giving very sorrowful and
grievous sighs, that all those which saw her, were moved with compassion. The
Emperor when he heard this heavy mourning* looked thetherward, and when he
saw her using his accustomed virtue* he put himself before her, And at such
time as he would have kne^led down (he seeing her so fair, and of so
excellent beauty) would not consent unto it, but kept her up by the hand, and
with sweet words gave her a comfortable welcome, and like entertainment. Her
severe countenance, with her well proportioned body did declare that she was
worthy of all this honor. To the comfortable words which the Emperor had
spoken, this fair and distressed Lady answered.

Surmounted Emperor, this my great sorrow is so rooted in me, that I have no
joy to receive any comfort, nevertheless, if it be true which I have heard,
both of thee and thy royal Court, the fame whereof, all the world does
resound: then I am sure that thou will not deny me of my request, for that
hitherto thou have not at any time denied any Lady or Damsel, which has
requested the same, having necessity and need thereof: much more now, being
demanded of thee by so afflicted a Damsel as I am, being martired by the
son of that adultresse Venus, whom I may resemble unto the Uulture, which
always takes for her repast and feeding, the bowels of that unfortunate
Ixion, and the more pain he suffers, the more her hunger increases, so that
evermore by her greedines, he sustaineth a lasting grief, Even so (sovereign
Lord) love does torment me, and always is gnawing of these my afflicted
bowels, yet never do I feel them without love, but rather always, both in
the Winter and Summer, in presence and in absence it does still increase: so
that I am at no time without love, and continuallye my faith increases: and by
no means can I receive remedy for this grief, but by the force and strength
of some stranger, whom I do seek for continually, with great sorrow.
Therefore I do desire thee (O sovereign Emperor) if at any time thou have
passed the pains of love, that thou would pity them that are so sore
afflicted and unfortunate, and do not deny me thy aid and help: for if I
were the daughter of base parents, yet in respect I am a woman, thou art bound
to succor and aid me. Much more, for that I am Lidia the daughter of the King
of Lidia, who for the love of that liberal Brenio of Lusitania, I am
constrained to pro^ure his liberty, and for the perfourmance thereof, your
highness shall not deny me a promise or boon that I will demand, and in so
doing, thou shall perform all that is due unto thy Estate, and by duty thou
do owe unto such as I am. The Emperor who was marvelous attentive unto all
that this fair Lady had said, and very much beholding her great beauty, he
answered and said. Of my faith fair Lady, I will not let to remedy this thy
sorrow much more then I am bound to do by my high estate, and will procure by
all means to ease this thy afflicted evil. Therefore now ask what thou
seem best for thy purpose, for I am here ready to perform all, that by
thee shall be demanded of me. The Lady said, I looked for no other thing but
this, of thy Imperial dignity. Therefore (^ouereign Emperor) it is requisite
that alone without any other company, you go with me to give me this remedy.
The Emperor although he saw that it was a heinous thing at that time to
leave his whole Court and estate, yet did he not show any such countenance,
but with a valiant courage he called for his armor, the which was straight way
brought unto him, being all of russet color, and the shield of the same
color, and there was portrayed in it the picture of lean Death, with a sharp
flesh hook in his hand. All the Kings and Lords that were present at that
time, would have dissuaded him from this his enterprise, but specially and
above all the rest, the ancient Prince of Clarencia said. Sovereign Lord,
it is not convenient nor agreeable unto your high estate, to venture your self
in that, which appertains unto trauayling and v^ntrous Knights: behold Lord,
Princes, although they be liberal in promising, yet they ought to moderate
themselves in performing, neither should Princes be so bountiful of themselves:
for many times by procuring to ex^oll their fame, they abate the worthiness of
their estate. And again, he that has not to whom to give reckoning, but unto
himself, to him alone does Fortune fail. Notwithstanding, thou (O sovereign
Emperor) art more bound to look and have a care unto your own subjects,
more then to your own person. And a good Prince ought rather to subject his
will to the favoring of his people, then to please his own appetite. For
which cause, honorable Lord, you must pardon us, for that we will not
willingly consent, that only for desire of this pompous same, that you do
pretend, we should loose your person. Tell me (noble Emperor) if that For^une
should (as she was wont to do) turn her wheel, and keep your honor from
us, it would not only make an end of you, but also deprive us of the most
noblest and worthiest Lord under the Sun. All those that were there present,
and heard these reasons which the Prince uttered, did greatly praise and allow
his discreet saying. So this honorable Emperor without showing any
alteration, answered and said. Noble Kings and Princes, and my very friends. I
give you great thanks for the good will you do show me, in that you would
not that I should be absent from you: likewise you shall understand, that it
does as much grieve me, to separate my self from your companyes, and I do
think my self blessed to have such noble Knights as you be unto my subjects:
notwithstanding you must consider, that as you do love the body and person of
your Prince, so likewise you should desire and procure his fame and honor, for
you know you have many meats that are very sauourie to the taste of any
man, and yet to the contrary very hurtful to the stomach. It is a very
good thing to live under compass, and that governing is good, by the which
fame and honor is not diminished, as this, for that he that is bound, must
procure, perform, and maintain his promise. For if I of my own free will,
and to feed mine own appetite, had procured and moved this journey, you
had had great reason for to have dissuaded me, but being sought for, and
procured heereto, by this noble and distressed Damsel for her defense, then
what reason is it that I should abandon my faith? Tell me I pray you if now
I should falsify my promise, what hope of confidence hereafter should
remain in you of my virtue? Of truth I say unto you, that Prince which does
not keep and maintain his faith which he has promised in giving his word^,
he is unworthy of life. And seeing that I have granted this journey,
although you be displeased therewith, I beseech you comfort your selves, for
that by justice I am constrained to go, trusting in almighty God to return
again unto you with great honor and renown. What would the world say,
when that for fear of humane things I leave to mainetaine justice and
righteousness, and the observation and keeping of my word? Surely they would
report me for a Prince of small virtue, and deem you (so persuading me) not
worthy of a good Prince, for y^ many times God does show his power, whereas
the weakness of humane things be without all hope. Therefore I do desire you
all (my friends) that you will not withdraw me from this my pretended
purpose, for if I were not willing thereunto, you were all bound to complain
of me. And making an end of these his reasons he began to arm himself. The
Empress that of all this thing was ignorant, when she understood thereof by
some of them that were present with the Emperor, she came with shedding of
many tears for to hinder and withdraw him from his journey: the Emperors
heart was somewhat grieved to hear her sorrowful words, but with an heroycall
courage he commanded her to return unto her closet, and willed all those that
were present to go and bear her company, and would that none should remain
with him but Brandimardo, unto whom the Emperor in great secret said: That
when Rosicleer or the knight of the Sun should* return to the court, that he
should tell them that he was gone to Lidia at the instaunt of the Lady, for
to restore her again to her kingdom. With this he did charge him very much,
and that they should straight ways and without any delay depart for that
place: Brandimardo thought great friendship in this which the Emperor
commanded, and gave him great thanks, with faithful promise to accomplish
the same, and taking his leave, the Emperor straight weie entered into a Foyst
that was there ready with six oars on a side, and hoysing sails they made
such way that in a small time they had lost the sight of the City. This fair
Damsel was very glad, and did exercise her self in no other thing but in
serving the Emperor. In this sort they sailed all that day and all the night
till the next morning: this noble Emperor say in the poope of the Galley, and
by him sat this fair Lady, on the one side, of whom he asked the cause why
she brought him out of Constantinople. Unto whom with many tears distilling
from her christaline eyes, and with great sighs that proceeded from her
dolorous heart, she said.

I have told you noble Emperor that the force of love has brought me to
this extremity wherein you now see me. Also I told you that I am Lidia,
daughter unto the king of Lidia, and was meruailously and daintely brought up,
and much set by of my parents, and now all alone with no other company then
you do see I go subject unto this misery. The great fame of this my
surmounted beauty was so spread abroad, that it was the occasion that many
knights of strange Countries resorted unto the Court of the King my Father,
and amongst them all there was one that came from a far, whose name was
called Brenio, of the Country of Lusitania, being of a marvelous beauty and
no less valiauncie, which did so surmount, that in all the Country has never
been seen the like, and cruel Cupide, I know not whether it was to use his
accustomed policies, or whether he was envious of his beauty, he stroke me
with his poisoned arrowe, in such sort, that I was constrained by that force to
love this unhappy knight, and therewith constrained to forget the royal estate
from whence I descended, I did exercise my self in no other thing, but
thinking on his love, and determined to give him understanding thereof in as
secret wise as I could, so long it lasted that I waxed blind in love, and
feared that he would not understand yt I loved him, wherefore I did plainly
declare it to him, which grieved him nothing at all, (but rather unto my
seeming) he was very well pleased therewith, so by all means possible I did
procure to speak with him, and imagining which should be the best way, I
thought it good to ordain a hunting, thinking there to have opportunity to be
alone in the thickest of the Forest, and there to ease and lighten my self
somewhat of that heavy love, which by sorrow I received, in giving him to
understand the whole effect of my determined mind: so this hunting I put in
ure, and took the mountains and woods, and the hunts men provided the ^ame,
being a great Heart, which Heart was (as in the end it proved) accursed in my
sight, yea, more worse then the sheeld of Pallas in the eyes of Medusa, which
made all people to desire to follow her: so the hunts men followed their game
with such have, that there I was left alone, remaining only in my company this
knight, who was half persuaded of my determination, so I had scant well framed
my eyes to content me in beholding of his christalline countenance, when that
upon a sodeine we were beset and betrayed of a great and furious gyaunt, and
with him eight knights more, in such sort, that my Brenio had not time to
defend us, nor I to call for help and succor, so that we were their
prisoners, and they carried us, and put us into their theeuish Galley, whereas
straight way they hoised sail, and carried us to sea, we being without all
hope of succor, and there was I with great travail delivered from the hands
of a vile thief, that would have dishonored me. And so having the wind
prosperous to their desire, we arrived very shortly after at an Island called
Otono, which is adjoining unto one part of your Kingdom, whereas we went a
land. Noble Prince, I did not feel so much force by my imprisonment, neither
did I receive so much grief for mine own sorrow, as I did for my best beloved
Brenio, who was so laden with yrons and chains, that my heart could not by any
means suffer it, but I began to call them traitors, and that they were no
Knights, but thieves and robbers, saying, that over one ^lone and an unarmed
Knight they have strength to work such violence, but not able to make any
resistaunce against armed Knights. And the Gyaunt answered, Oh how simple
do thou show thy self, in thinking that there is any who is able to
resist our strength, and for that thou shall understand and see how little
we do esteem the strength of men (yea, the strength of the Gods we make no
reckoning of) take this Gallie and all things that shall be necessary for
thy voyage, and take with thee one of these my Pages, and go and seek the
Emperor Trebatio, or either of his two sons, whose fames are spread
throughout the world, and bring them hither, and see whether their strength is
sufficient for to deliver this thy knight out of prison. So I put this iourny
straight in practice, and departed, and in the voyage I escaped with great
danger to be robbed at sea by rouers and thieves, so in the end I came and
presented my self before your highness. The Emperor who was very attentive
to all this which the sorrowful Lady had told him, and understanding the
cause of all her trouble, he answered. Oh happy and venterous knight, to who^
love has showed so much favor, to cause so n^ble as Damsel as thou art, with
thy travail to procure his liberty? how much is he bound unto thee fair
Lady, seeing that thou do deserve the praise of all other women that has
been wounded with love, and these thy deeds to be registered for a perpetual
memory, and for an example to all other ladies* Noble Lidia, of truth I tell
thee, yt my departure from Constantinople was with some sorrow, to leave my
Empire and subjects, but now I am void thereof, and am glad yt I am come to
procure thy remedy, and the death shall be unto me a happy death, receiving it
for a lady that is so loiall. These and such like reason of a perfect lover y^
Emperor expressed, when upon a sudden they were constrained to leave the way
they took, by force of y^ wind, which came with such gales, that they were
feign to take another way, which carried them unto a desolate Island, where by
force of wether they entered into a port, yt was known by the mariners, and
there let fall their ankor* The Emperor who was moved with much compassion of
the great travail of this Lady, and somewhat to refresh her in the air, he
caused her to go a land, and taking her by the hand, he did help her out of
the Gallie, and they rested themselves upon a little mountain, from which
place they might discover a great part of the Island, and more they discovered
a great way from thence, another small mountain, upon the which there seemed to
be a fire, or light, and making little account thereof, they asked somewhat to
eat, which straight way was brought them by the mariners, and so they
refreshed themselves. They had scarce made an end of eating, when that they
heard a terrible shrike, which was such, that the fair Lady lost her color:
but the Emperor rose up on his feet, and looked round about him to see if he
could perceive what it should be, but he could see no more the^, than he saw at
the first, and so returned and sat down again: but he was not scant settled,
when he heard the like shrike again. The Emperor turned and rose up the second
time, and said: Who art thou, that do think to make me afraid with these
thy shrikes, I tell thee that thou art very much deceived: thou will rather
give me occasion thus in offending me, to seek what thou art that make this
terrible noise. And with these words he said unto the Lady, that she should
return unto the galley, for that he would go see what thing it should be, the
which she would not consent unto, but would needs go in the company of the
Emperor. And when the Emperor saw the determination of y^ courageous
Damsel, he threw his shield upon his arm, and laced and made fast his
healme, and so a foot they took their way toward the place whereas the
light was, for that toward that part they heard the noise. And travailing in
the midst of the way, at the foot of a hill, they found an Image of fine
Crystal, which seemed to be wrought by the hands of some excellent workman,
all to be spotted with blood. And it appeared by the wounds that were formed
in the same figure, that it was the Image of one that had suffered great
torments, as well with terrible cuttings, of yrons, as with cruel whippings.
The legs and the arms did seem as though they had been martired and wrong
with cords, and about the neck, as though it had been strangled with a towell
hard wrong, and there was written upon the breast, with letters of lively
blood, this Epitath. I am Herea the Kings daughter of Cimarra, violated and
slain by Noraldino King of Numidia. And thou knight that this present
spectacle shall view, I do desire thee, that if thou do go forward this
way, let it be with great courage, for to take vengeance on this cruelty, for
that I am not of my self able to seek reuengement. This Emperor, who had well
considered y^ great cruelty yt had been used against that unfortunate lady,
being moved with great compassion he said, I do vow that if there be any
means whereby to be revenged of this thy death, to procure it with all my
power: and with this determined purpose, they proceeded on their way, and went
so far, that they perceived, that the light which they had seen, did
proceed of two gates of fine Crystal: and there they saw in the high way, a
great pillar, whereon was hanged a written table, with these contents: Knight,
look well unto the oath which thou have taken, for that this is a perilous
enterprise: and from this place thou have license to return back a gain,
and not to fulfill thy promise, for that the King of Cimarra, will not
constrain nor force any manner of Knight. The Emperor said, As well they may
raise from death to life all the famous Romans, which have been from the time
of Romulus unto Caesar, and all the rest unto this time, as to persuade me to
return from my promise, which I have made: and if they were all present
living, they were not sufficient to cause me to leave my oath. Therefore here
now I do swear again, never to return into Greece, till such time, as I have
performed that which I have said. And thus burning with great desire to see ye
end of this sorrowful adventure, he proceeded forwards, until such time as
they came to the Crystal gates, the which they found open, and at the
threshold^ of the entering there lay a long a great and huge Gyaunt, who when
he saw this knight, he arose on his feet and went unto a place thereby,
whereas was made fast to a pillar a very furious griffon, which with great
speed he did unloose out of his chains, and he was no sooner at liberty,
but that with great fury he flew up into the air more swifter then an Eagle,
and as you do see a Hawke houering in the air, till such time as the Hearn^
rises out of the water, and then with great fury falls down right on her
pray, so likewise this furious Griffon when he saw his time, with a
marvelous and infernal fury descended right down, but when the Emperor
saw that he descended with such fury, he caused the Lady to shroud her
self under an old house that was there at hand, and he covered himself with
his sheelde, and having his swoorde in his hand at that time as the Griffon
descended with so great violence (that it somewhat feared the Emperor)
notwithstanding he lifted his sheelde for to receive that terrible blow of
his claws, which fall was with so great force, that he pulled the sheeld
clean from his arm, but this valiant warrior stroke him such a blow with
his sword, y^ he thought he had cut him in two pieces; but yet he found his
feathers to be so hard, that he had done him no harm, and although his hard
feathers did defend him, not to receive any hurt with the swoorde, yet it
could not be but he must needs feel some grief by the greatness of the
blow, for that with a grievous shrike he mounted up into the air, giving a
thousand tournings. When the Emperor saw himself without his sheelde, which
that infernal Bird had carried with him into the air, and let it fall down
again a great ways distant from the same place where he was, it made him to
have always a very good and diligent eye, to y^ griffon to mark when he
would descend, who straight way began to descend, unto his thinking with much
more fury then at the first. And look even as the Eagle when she has caught
a Uiper, does procure to pull off her skin in striking her upon a hard
stone, whereby to save her self that she be not stricken with that strong
poison, and so in safety to devour her pray: even so did this Griffon flying
here and there from one place to another, to see where he might lay hold on
the Emperor, without receiving such like harm as before he did. And as by
force of the water the Mill carries the stone about with great fury, even so
this worthy warrior bestowed himself for to defend him from this furious
beast, yet he could not do so much, but that he must needs receive some of
his terrible blows, and his swiftness was such in rising into the air, and
falling down, that he could not fasten one blow on him with his swoorde, but
he did hurt the Emperor with his claws sometimes on the arms and sometimes
on the healme, but yet could he never have any fast hold on him to do him
harm, for that he never stood still, but moving here and there, shunning
his blows, and even as a furious Lion, who in the time of sleep is molested
and troubled with small beasts, creeping on him in all places, which he feeling
with his mouth, snappeth here and there on every part round about, so long,
til in ye end being thoroughly ince^sed, at once they pay for all the injuries
that they did him: even so this valiant Emperor used himself with this
terrible Griffon, flourishing with his swoorde round about on every side,
awaiting opportunity at one time to requite him for all the sorrow that he
did him, but in the end seeing that it did little profit him in doing this,
he sodeinly bethought him of another remedy, which was to kneel down with
one of his knees on the ground, that when the Griffin should descend more
lower to hurt the Emperor, that then with as great lightness as he could, he
would rise up, and with more ease strike him, which he presently did put in
practice, So this terrible Griffon descended down, and with one of his sharp
claws he clasped fast hold on the Emperors healme. Then the Emperor seeing
this fierce Griffon now to descend down more lower then he did before at other
times, he thought it not good to be idle at any time, but with exceeding
great lightness he arose up and carried his sword right up with the point,
and by reason that he^ was fast with his claws upon the helm, he could not
loose himself so quickly, but that the Emperor did hurt him in such sort,
that he thrust all his sword into his belly. And when the Griffin felt
himself so sore hurt, he pulled with so great strength, that if the helm had
not left his head, he had pulled the Emperor up into the air with him, which
would not have fallen out well with him, but God was so pleased, that in that
time the lases with the which it was made fast brake. This Griffin feeling
himself pierced with this mortal wound, cut through the air, as a whirlwind,
with great and terrible shrikes, but straight he fell down dead to the earth,
for that the wound reached unto his heart.

The Giaunt when he beheld his Griffin to be dead, made no more a do, but
entered into the castle to arm himself, the which the Emperor well perceived,
which made him to make speed to fetch his sheeld, whereas this infernal bird
had let it fall. So not long after this giant came forth al armed with armor
of a boiled skin, with a great club full of knots in his hand, saying with a
hoarse and terrible voice. Do not think thou knight of the Devil, for all
that thou have slain the keeper of my Castle, that the entering is any whit
the more at thy commandment, and hereof thou may be sure, whereat the
Emperor answered never a word, but rather invited him to battle, and they
joined together like two furious tigers, having their defense in their hands,
burning with great fury the one against the other. Then they thrust themselves
forwards with marvelous force and speed one against another, discharging
their great and mighty blows that it was wonderful to behold. But the
Emperor did not determine to receive the blows of his enemy fully and
whole, but rather procured that he should discharge them in vain, and so he
did, for the Gyaunt lift up his great and huge clubbe to strike him therewith
a maruailous and mighty blow, which when the Emperor perceived it to
descend, he stepped a side with so great lightness, that it seemed to be
wonderful, in such sort that his clubb^ fell down to the ground without doing
any harm. Then this valiant warrior before the Gyaunt had time to recover
and lift up his heavy club again, stroke him on both his arms such a
terrible and furious blow, that he cut them both off, and they fell to the
ground. When the Giant saw himself so sore arrayed, like a ravening. Woulfe he
ran to him and would have embraced him, but the Emperor with his accustomed
knighthoode gave a thrust at his breast, that by the great strength thereof he
thrust his swoorde clean through his body, so that the point came out at his
back almost the half sword, wherewith this Giant gave so great a fall to the
earth, that it seemed a whole Tower had tumbled down. When the Emperor saw
this good success he had against his enemies, and in so short time, he
kneeled down upon his knees, and gave thanks unto our Lord Jesus Christ for
the victory, in ouercomming two such infernal monsters as they were. The fair
Lady seeing the Emperor in battle with so devilish a monster, ran and
fetched his helm which the Griffon had carried away, and brought it unto him
with all the speed that might be. The Emperor who perceived the great care
which this Lady had, and the diligence she used to help him in so great
need, he gave her hearty thanks, and took his helm and put it on his head,
and made it fast, and when he saw that there was none to dis^urbe him of his
entering into the Castle, he went unto the door whereas he found the Gyaunt
lying along at the thresholde, and entered in thereat, and lead this fair
Lady with him by the hand, for that she would never leave him, and so they
entered in at the Castle gates, without finding any to disturb them, and
passed on till they came unto a fair large and great hall, whereas by certain
windows very subtly devised from the top thereof they received light, and
in the midst thereof was a stately bed, adorned all with black clothes,
and upon the bed was the perfect figure of that Image of Crystal, which
they saw in the midst of the high way. The Emperor could not by any
manner of means refrain from shedding of some sorrowful tears, in seeing
before him so lamentable a spectacle, and to think that so great cruelty
should be showed unto a woman of such beau^ie. This pitiful Emperor had
great compassion when he saw first the counterfeit of this tormented creature,
but much more without all comparison, his sorrowful heart lamented when he
beheld the natural body, for that all her flesh seemed to be christalline
stones, by the great whiteness and beauty it had, she had all her legs
spoiled with the torments of cords, and all her body wounded with whippings,
and that cruel and str^ng^ing to well about her neck. The Emperor was a
great while in grievous contemplation in beholding of this lamentable sigh^
(as I have told you) and with him was always this fair and beautiful Lidia,
till at the last, lifting up his eyes, he saw a Table which hanged upon a
beam, whereon was written these words which follows.

O thou knight which have passed by the keepers of this my pitiful daughter,
if thou will confirm the oath which thou have made, lift up the pillowe
whereas her wre^ched head does lie, and under it thou shall find written in a
scrowle of Parchment all the success of her heavy and sorrowful death, for
that in understanding it, thou shall be the more provoked to encourage thy
self to procure her reuengement, seeing that so much without fault or desert
she suffered it. The Emperor did as was there declared, and ratified and
confirmed there a new his oath, and lifting up the pillowe he found a sheet of
Parchment rolled up together, which he opened. Here will I make an end of
this Chapter, to receive some ease in telling of this that is past, and turn
unto the other, to declare unto you the most dolorus and grievous history that
ever has been heard or seen.

How the Emperor did open the scrowle of Parchment, and therein read the cause
why this dead Lady was slain, with such cruel tyranny, and of the great
sorrow that he received for the same. Cap. 12.
YE fair Ladies and Damosells, for that there be some, which without having
any knowledge of your deseruings, that take great pleasure with their venomous
words and poisoned pens to entreat evil of your honors and fame, publishing
unjustly that, which with just reason and by nature, they are bound with all
their ability to restrain. Likewise, all valiant Knights, are bound either
by force of arms, or else by sufficient conclusions, to defend your fame, from
such false detractors. So here therefore I do request, all you bountiful and
beautiful Ladies, to pardon this my over much hardiness, for that here I
presume to declare that, which should be of all understood, and in especial of
your firm loyalty, having for a mirror before your eyes this fair Lady, who
has not deserved to suffer so cruel a death. So as I have told you, the
Emperor took from under the pillowe, the scroll of parchment, and opening it
he read it over, which contained these sorrowful words.

I the heavy and unhappy King of Cimarra, which in times past have been much
esteemed, by reason of my great estate, wherein Fortune sauoured me very much,
as also for two fair daughters, in all points so exquisite, as Nature could
possibly frame, in whom I took much delight but yet in the end, that which I
thought should most content me, the very same was the occasion, yt I received
this great torment, which is such, yt no humane creature can suffer it. My two
daughters (as before I said) were endued with wonderful beauty, and
accompanied with no less honesty then was convenient for their high estate:
whose great fame was blazed all the world over, by reason whereof my court was
honored with diverse strange princes and knights, and specially with those of
Africa, so yt it grew to be ye most noblest court that ever king had. Some came
to see ye worthy knights, and others with great desire to marry with my
daughters* but above all the king of Numidia called Noraldino, who being absent
by ye ^ame of their surmounted beauties was taken prisoner for the love of
them, by force whereof he sent unto me his Ambassadors, desiring me that I
would think well of him, and to give him one of my daughters in marriage, so
(not respecting his accustomed treason, but rather considering the great honor
that might redound thereof for that he was a mighty Prince) I thought it good
to conclude with his Ambassadors, and to fulfill his desire, and granted him
in marriage my eldest daughter. Then I ordeining all things that were
necessary and needful for the same, in all respects convenient for her estate
and my honor, I sent her with all the pomp yt was possible to the kingdom of
Numidia, and I retained and kept in my company the youngest, who was named
Herea, being of far more beauty then her sister, of which this traitorous
and unnatural king was informed by them which he sent to company with my
daughter, they did so much exalt her for her surpassing beauty, that there was
not in him power to make any resistaunce against that cruel and mortal wound
of Cupide, but it constrained him to forget his new married wife and sweet
companion, surrendering himself wholly unto the power of ye absent Lady,
without any consideration that she was sister unto her, that he had already
taken for wife. So this disordinate love kindled and increased in him every
day more and more, and he was so troubled with this new desire, that he daily
devised with him self what means he might procure to obtain her, in such
sort, that no man might have power to withstand him. In the end he thought by
policy and deceit to get her home to his kingdom, and sent unto me,
requesting that I would let her to come unto her sister Melinda to bear her
company, for that therein she should receive great joy and comfort, to
pass away the troublesome time of her Sisters being with child, for that
she said, with her company she should think the time far more shorter,
and should pass it over with much more ease, especially for that the love she
bare her sister was so much as to her own self, and although I was not
advertised of the evil event which might happen in sending her, yet did I make
excuse, that by reason I was an old man, and had no other com^orte but her, I
durst not send her, neither suffer her to understand thereof, for that as I did
suppose, she would receive gre^^ grief to leave me alone and desolate of
comfort. At y^ (...) answer this inhumane King thought very much, and was
greatly grieved: notwithstanding with marvelous (...) and subtlety he did
dissemble it, till such time as my daughter Melinda his wife, should be brought
to bed and delivered, and then thinking that with the great joy and pleasure I
should receive for the birth of the new born infant, that I would not deny
the sending of her. So the ^ime expired, he sent to me again for her: but I
was always firm, being resolved not to let her go from me, but still denied
it, for that she was the whole joy and s^affe of my old age. Then this
traiterous King seeing that by no means he could get her from me, straight way
ordained a mighty and strong army, and came himself to fetch her. And when
I understood of his coming, I went to receive him with great pomp, as was
needful for our Estates: and at our meeting, he requested me with very fair
and loving words, that I would let my daughter go unto her sister, to give
her that contentment which she desired, for that she did love her more than her
self. Thus his crafty and subtle persuasions so much prevailed, by reason of
the humility and love he showed in his words, that I could not frame any
excuse to the contrary, (he was so importunate,) but must needs consent unto
his demand. O immortal Gods, that in so secret wise ye made the heart of man,
that you only can comprehend the good and evil that is hid in it. Who would
have thought, (much less have believed) that this traitorous King by his
sweet words and subtle speeches would have robbed me of my only daughter.
So straight way, when he had in his power, yt which his soul so much desired,
he would not make any delay of his departure, giving me to understand, that he
would not let any time, but carry her unto his wife, for whose sight so much
she had desired, and at whose coming she would receive great joy and
contentment. But what sorrow did I then feel, (nothing thinking of that which
should happen, for that my heart was ignorant of the knowledge thereof) but
to see her depart from me, for whose absence my heart remained in so great
sorrow and heaviness: giving to understand by the outward shows, and by the
tears that proceeded from my eyes, the great pain and passion that the lack
thereof would shortly procure: and in this sorrowful sort, I was forced almost
without any remembrance, to return unto ye pallaice. And they were not so
soon entered into his ships, but as one very gelous to keep close his treason,
he commanded straight to hoyse up sails, and commit them unto the wind, and
having too good and prosperous a weather, in a very short time he arrived in
his own Country, whereas two leagues from the City, he was received of his
subjects with great majesty, who brought with them both horse and Palfrayes
needful for the company. So being all in a readiness, he commanded that
they should begin to martch forward toward the City. This false King still
persisting in his evil determined purpose, commanded (as I said,) that all
the company should proceed forwards, and he with my sorrowful daughter Herea,
remained a good way behind. And when he saw his company so far before, and
they two alone together, he stepped on the one side, and led the way into a
little grove which was hard at hand, fast by a Rivers side. He without any
more tarrieng, carried her into the thickest part thereof, and as it appeared he
was well acquainted in the same, and where he thought it most convenient, he
alighted off from his horse, and willed my most well-beloved daughter that she
should likewise alyght. She in whose heart reigned no kind of suspicion,
alyghted, and sa^e her down by the Rivers side, and washed her fair white
hands, and refreshed her mouth with the same water. Then this dissembling
traitor could not refrain, but by some outward shows, and dark sentences,
gave her to understand, the kindeled fire of love, with the which he was
tormented, and in the end he did wholly declare his devilish pretense and
determined purpose toward her. So my loving daughter Herea, being ^ore
troubled with his importunate and continual requests, with great anger, yet
not without aduisement, she began to reprehende him, giving him to understand,
all that was needful against so devilish a pretense. This unclean King when
he heard, that so earnestly and contrary to his expectation she answered, and
would have rose up from the place whereas she sat, held her fast by her
apparayle, and would not suffer her to arise, but began with soft and mild
words to persuade her to be quiet, and said. O my best beloved Lady,
wherefore will thou consent, that for thy cause I should dye, and may now
very well without being discovered of any, give me remedy for the same? Be
not then obstinate to deny me that, which with so great love I do desire of
thee. Who is here that can bear witness of this my privy desire, and bold
enterprise, neither discover thy gentle liberality showed me? not one surely,
but only the immortal Gods. Understande this for a certainty (my sweet
Lady) that the God Jupiter does receive more grief in this my sorrow, then
in the pain which thou do suffer. This deceived damsel, when she saw that
he held her so fast with his treacherous hand, that she could not deliver her
self, with furious anger she said. Traitor do not thou think that these thy
lecherous words have power to move my heart, to grant and fulfill these thy
filthy, devilish, and lascivious thoughts: for here I do swear unto thee by
the high and sovereign Gods, that first I will permit and suffer my body to
be torn in pieces, then to open my ears unto the hearing of so great
treason. Therefore false King let me alone, and consider with thy self, that I
am sister unto thy wife, whom I see well thou have forgotten, by reason of
this thy insatiable drunkenness, and greedye desire of fit^hye lust. Therefore
if it please thee determine to let me alone, and defile me not, or else to the
contrary be fully persuaded of this, that I will rather dye the death in my
defense. Then this cursed king seeing that this shall Lady, did defend her
self, he took fast hold by her neck, and said. Do not thou think O cruel
Herea, that thou can deliver thy self out of my hands, except first thou
grant unto this my desired will, and if not, I do promise thee in payment of
this great pride which thou do use unto me, to put thee unto the most cruel
^eath that ever was devised for any Damsel or mai^e. This distressed Lady
was nothing dismaide to hear that she should die, but without all fear she
answered. Think not false traitor, that the fear of death shall cause me
to yield to thy filthy desire. The which being well understood by the king,
he said. Understande then and be well persuaded, that either living or dead I
will perform my will and pretended purpose, which so without measure and with
unquenchable fire does burn in my heart. Thus with great strength she did
defend her self, and with a manly courage she kept her honor, but this
cruel and lascivious king seeing that he could not fulfill his evil desire,
in a great madness he cut off a great part of the train of her gown, and
bound it very fast to the hair of her head, in such sort, that with the great
strength he put thereto, and the tenderness of the same, together with his
evil entreating, all the green grass was sprinkeled with the blood that
issued out, whereat he believed that she would have been quiet, and have
consented unto him, but she respected not the evil entreating, but the more he
procured to torment her, the more angry she showed her self against him with
continual denial. When this cruel traitor saw that all would not serve,
he began to forget all faith and loyalty he ought unto knighthoode, and the
respect he should have unto such as she was, but blasphemed against heaven,
and tearing her clothes all to pieces, he stripped her stark naked, and with
the raines of the bridle of his palfraie he all to be whipped and scourged her
white and tender back, that it was full of view spots, with such horrible
cruelty that it was a very grievous and sorrowful ^ight to behold. And yet
th^^ did pro^it him nothing at all: he seeing that this damsel did still
persevere and continue in her defense, he straight ways like a bloody monster
heaped cruelty upon cruelty, and took and bound her* well proportioned and
christalline arms and legs with cords, and made them fast very strongly
unto a tree, saying. O cruel and more cruel then ever any woman in all the
world has been, wherefore have thou been the occasion to bring thy self to
be thus so evil and mischieuously entreated, and only for not giving consent
unto him, which always would have procured thy ease? What dooest thou think,
is it better to suffer to be thus martyred, then to live a most loving, swee^e,
and contented life. Then this evil entreated Lady with a hoarse voice
answered and said unto him. Oh wicked traitor, more hard hearted then ever
knight has been, wherefore dooest thou make any delay, tell me thou enemy
to the Gods, why dooest thou not finish thy cruelty, and take the soul from
this my miserable and woeful body? Do thou not do it, because it shall not
go and complain whereas thou shall receive the reward of this thy merciless
inhumanitie. O you Gods, deny me not my right justice against this false and
traitorous king? Let not to be true executioners of justice in revenging so
dampnable a deed. And thus being wear^ed with the cruel and terrible
torments, she held her peace and said no more. But for all this, the king did
not let to prosecute his cruelty, and with great anger he looked on her,
having his accursed eyes fixed, in such sort that he could not withdraw them
back. Then this tormented Lady seeing him, and being very desirous of the
death, with a furious voice she said: What dooest thou think thou traitor,
the greatest traitor that ever was in the world, wherein do thou contemplate
thy self, thou fleshly Butcher, thou unmerciful Tiger, thou lecherous hog
and dishonourer of the royal crown, make an end of these thy torments, for
it is now too late to repent thee, give me the death, and send me into the
bosom of Diana. This vnpittifull king, seeing the steadfastness that she
had in the defense of her honor, with a cruel and infernal heart, he
took a towell which this Damsel had girded at her wast, and with a brutall
anger doubled it about her neck and pinched it so straight that the soul
departed from the body. O thou knight that by thy prowess do come to read
this Harchment, consider the great constancy and chastitye of this
unfortunate Damsel, and let the grief thereof move thee to take vengeance
of this great cruelty, showed without any desert. So when this infernal
king saw that she was dead, he took his horse and returned from whence he
came, and in a short time he ouertooke his company, and looked with so furious
and irefull a countenance, that there was not one that wae so hardy to ask
him where my daughter was, but one of the knights of my Court which I sent to
bear company with my daughter, having a suspicion by the great alteration
that appeared in the king, and being very desirous to know what was become
of the Princess, for that he came alone without bringing her with him, neither
could he have any sight of her, he then presentlye withdrewe himself back,
and following the footings of the horse, he ceased not until he came unto the
place whereas this cruelty was wrought, whereas he found this miserable Lady
lie dead, in the same sort as I have declared, at the view whereof he
remained almost beside himself, in such sort that he had almost fallen to the
ground. This Knight remained a good while before he could speak, so when he
was come again to himself, he began with a dolorous complaint, crying out
against the Gods and fortune, because they had suffered so great cruelty to
be committed unto this damsel, and making this sorrowful complaint, he
unloosed her from the tree, and laid her upon part of her apparel, and
covered her with the rest, and said on this wise: O cruel hands, what an
infernal heart was that, which did bear thee company to do this
uncharitable sacrifice? Was it not sufficient that this surmounted beauty
should have moved thee to more pity. So with these and other like sorrowful
words that this knight spoke unto the dead corpse, he cut down branches from
the trees for to cover the body, and left it lying so, that it seemed to be a
mountain of green trees, and then determined with himself in the best manner
that he could to dissemble the knowledge of this fact done, he took his
horse and went the way toward the City which lead to the kings Court, in
which he rode so fast that he ouertooke the king and his company at the
entering into the City, whereas the king alighted, and without speaking to
any person he entered into his close^, by reason whereof this my knight had
time to declare unto the Queen all that he had seen, and the dolorous end of
the Damsel Herea her sister. The sudden and unlooked for sorrow mixed with
great anger and wrath, was such in this queen, that she commanded the knight
not to depart the court until such time as more occasion did serve, and she
her self remained making marvelous and great lamentations to her self, all
in secret, for that she would not be perceived, yet with a soft voice she
said: O unfortunate queen and borne in a sorrowful hour, oh unhappy
destiny, which made me to be subject unto the most cruellest king amongst
all kings, I suppose y^ fortune cannot be so much against me, but yt she will
procure to take reuengement of thee? Oh immortal Gods reue^g^^ (...) this so
great and horrible an homicide, and if not, I (...) ^eare unto you that I will
with my own hands put in practice such an enterprise, that you looking down
from the heavens shall tremble for the fear thereof? What do ye, you deaf
Gods, altogether without justice, will you not hearken unto this my grievous
complaint, well seeing you regard me not, I will see if yt you have power to
withdraw me from executing of mine own will. This saying she ^ooke in her hand
a dagger of the kings, and in her arms her youngest son, saying: I do not
wish so much evil unto the world, yt I will leave the son of so wicked a
father to soiourne in it, and in this order she entered into the chamber whereas
the king was, and there she found him tumbling upon his bed from the one
side to the other, without taking any rest, and with sorrowful weeping, and a
terrible voice, she called him traitor, and like a fierce Tygresse with the
dagger, which she carried, she cut the throat of that innocent infant, and
threw it to him on the bed and said, take there thou cruel traitor, the
fruit which thou made within my body, and then she threw the dagger after
him to kill the King: but Fortune would not that it should take effect. This
wretched King, when he saw all this which the Queen had done, he was
therewith marvelous sore troubled, and in his fury, he laid hold upon her,
and did entreat her very evil. But when the Queen saw that the blow took
no effect, and that she could not bring to pass that which she had determined,
she returned upon her self her outrageous fury, taking that bloody dagger,
and thrust it to her heart, in such sort, that she parted it in two pieces, and
so she fell down dead into the arms of him, which was the occasion of all
this evil and cruelty. The great sorrow that this false and and unhappy
King received was strange, in such sort, that he knew not what counsel to
take, but thinking upon the great punishment that might succeed these cruel
acts, he straight ways procured yt the body of the queen should be buried
in great (...). At that time there was a soothsayer, a wiseman in (...), who
advertised him, yt for this cruel fact which (...), his kingdom should be
destroyed, and that it should fall into the hands of him which he most hated,
who was his brothers son, his cousin. The King being advertised of all that
which should happen, he determined to use a cruel policy, which was, he
would set watch and ward throughout all his Kingdom, for to take and arest
all such travelers, as by adventure landed upon his Island, not suffering
them to pass, till such time as they had promised him by oath to aid and
assist him even unto the death against certain his enemies, which would
dispossess him of his Kingdom, ma^^ng them believe that unjustly and without
occasion, they intended to take it from him. Then this my aforenamed Knight,
which had seen and heard all the tragical dealing that is here declared, in
the best wise he could, returned again to my Court, and told me all that
you have heard, which was unto me very sorrowful and heavy news. Judge
here then gentle Knight what sorrow I poor and unfortunate king received,
and what bitter anguish I sustained. So heerewith entered in the great
soothsayer and wise man, called Artemidoro, who came to comfort me, and
certefied me, that all this cruelty should be revenged by a mighty and strong
arm, although before that should come to pass, there should be fought many
fierce battles, and persuaded me to believe it, for that he told me the
truth. So because that this wise man was so well known, I did believe him, and
gave credit unto his words, and requested him for his part, to procure all
that in him did lie, to prefer this my reuengment. So straight way he put it
in practice, and caused a Chariot to be brought, and bad me enter into it, and
in a trice he carried me whereas my daughter was, and commanded me to put her
into the Chariot, and brought her unto this Island, assuring me, that he which
should overcome ye keepers which he would here set, should be the Knight, that
should revenge my injury. And seeing that thou have overcome the keepers that
had the charge of the body of this my murdered daughter, perform now the oath
which thou have made like a valiant Knight: and for the better performaunce,
thou must go unto Cimarra, whereas thou shall find me the unfortunate King
thereof, awaiting thy coming.

At the reading of this sorrowful history, the Emperor and she that was with
him did shed many salt tears, wherewith there did increase in him a farther
desire of reuengement. And so they departed to the Sea side, whereas they did
refresh themselves, and returned unto their voyage late begun.

How the Emperor Trebatio did land himself at the Island Citarea, and of all
things that happened there. Cap. 13.
Here you have heard told how that after the Emperor had read the scrowle
of parchment that was written and laid under the pillowe at the head of the
dead body of the Lady Herea, how he returned to prosecute his journey which
he had taken in hand for the defense of the fair Lidia, and how that they did
imbarke themselves in their Galley, and the sea being pacified of that
boistrous tempest which they received in their last voyage, the Gallie satled
forwards with a very good and prosperous wind the space of three days
without meeting with any adventure. In the end whereof they landed at the
Island of Otonio, which by another name is called Citarea, which straight way
was known by that fair Lady to be the Island where her beloved Brenio was,
and she said unto the Emperor. Lord, this is the Island that keeps hid from
me the whole comfort of my heart. So straight way the Emperor went a land
and took with him the fair Lidia, and commanded that his horse and his
Spear, and the Ladies palfra^e should likewise be taken out of the Galleye,
and when the Emperor had well perused his armor, he armed himself, and
took the way which lead him toward the Castle, leaving on the right hand
the famous Temple, which from far did show the great sumptuousness thereof,
in the gate whereof they did discover and see an armed Knight, who contemplated
himself in beholding the greatness of that Knight. But the Emperor had no
care to know who it was, but with great have they went forwards on their
way, and when they drew nigh unto the Castle, it seemed unto them to be the
fairest that ever they had seen, and as the Emperor proceeded to go up the
hill toward the Castle, he heard one which with a great voice said. O
thou Knight of the Devil or of death, go no farther up, but tarry a little,
for by her which thou do bring with thee I do understand thy demand,
stay a while and I will be straight way with thee, for I think that thou
have already repented thy coming hither. The Emperor who heard these words,
would very feign have seen him who spoke them, and lifted up his eyes
toward the Castle, but he could behold no body. But he tarried not long,
when that out of a narrow way coming down the hill he saw a great Gyaunt,
shaking in his hand a heavy Spear, and when he came to the place whereas the
Emperor abode, he said. Knight, tell me, art thou the Emperor of Grecia or
any of his sons. The Emperor answered and said, I am he (who by the help
of God) may frustrate thy force which thou have done unto this Damsel. Then
the Giant said, O miserable wretch, how thou art deceived, what do thou
think thy self so strong and to have so much strength to do that alone,
which all the world is not able to undo, and with great anger for the words
which he heard the Emperor speak, he took his Spear and did level it in
his hand, and threw it at the Emperor with such fury, that the air did
sound therewith, the Emperor made his defense and received it upon his
sheelde, and the point slidde in such sort, that it glaunced and broke in two
pieces. When the Emperor saw that he threw it at him dart wise, he took his
Spear fast in his hand, and firming himself in his stiroppes he raised up
his body and threw his Spear against his enemy with great strength, who
would have received it upon his sheelde, but the fury was such wherewith it
was thrown, that it pierced both through his sheelde and likewise the body,
that the head was seen come out at the Gyauntes back, the which terrible
blow being seen by them which were in the Castle, was the occasion that
there arose a great vproare therein. The Emperor gave thanks to God for this
short victory, and turned himself unto the Page which came with Lidia, and
bad him take the Spear out of the Giants body and bring it unto him, for that
it was whole, which presently the Page accomplished. He had no sooner
received it, but he saw presently to descend out of the same path way
another great and huge Gyaunt, which seemed to be no less furious then the
first. He came mounted on a a very strong and mighty horse, (for he had need
to be of a great strength, in that he did sustain the carriage of so mighty a
monster as the Giaunt was) and when he was come whereas the Emperor abode, he
looked whether the other Giaunt were altogether dead or not, but when he saw
there was no life in him, and that by that only blow he was slain, he
said: Is it possible mighty brother, that a thing so vile as this is, has had
power so quickly to ^laye thee. And tourning unto this noble warrior, he said:
Tell me Knight of so wonderful a courage, what devil has brought thee
hither, to do us so much harm, as the Gods themselves were not sufficient to
have done. The Emperor replied, The Lady which thou see here, brought me
hither, to deliver and set at liberty a knight, which without all reason thou
do keep in thy Castle, and which with great treason thou broughtest hither.
Of truth I tell thee Giant, that it seems very evil in such Knights as thou
art, to commit such outrages, for that nature has not bestowed on thee these
well proportioned members, nor given thee a body of so mighty a greatness,
for to exercise it in doing of so great wrongs, as you do daily practice. I
therefore do desire thee, by ye honor which I owe unto the order of
knighthoode, and for that thy disposition does greatly content me, that thou
would make satisfaction unto this fair Damsel, the which only I am come
to demand of thee, and likewise that thou would apart thy self from these
wicked customs: otherwise, believe this of a certainty, that even as thy
brother was slain with so small a blow, (not being by my weak arm killed,
but only by his great tyranny confounded): so likewise if thou do pretend
to lead this tirannous life, as thou have hethertoo done, believe me the like
death will happen unto thee. Turn and repeat that once again which thou
have said (answered the Gyaunt) perhaps thy words may win me to do
somewhat of yt which thou do request me, although not altogether. Have thou
me in derision thou vile beast (said ye Emperor) thou shall soon understand
that I know better how to bestow my sword upon thy bones and flesh, then
again to declare that which thou do demand, for that I do see my reasons
do little avail, and that I utter in vain my speeches unto thee, and thou
shall soon see that the sharpness of my Spear shall be no less bitter unto
thee, then it was unto thy late brother: and in saying these words they
returned their horses the one from the other, like the swift wind, and when
they were one straight against the other, both of them stroke their horses with
the spurs, and bare^ their spears very low, in such sort that neither of
them failed of their blows, the gyaunt stroke the Emperor in the midst of
the sheelde, and by reason of the great strength thereof, the stroke glaunced
on the one side, and the Spear sprung up in the air without doing any
harm, but the Emperor chanced to strike him under his sheeld where he was a
little open, so that the point of his spear entered into his belly, and if
his Spear had not been somewhat blunt, with the blow he gave to the other
Gyaunt, he had at this time finished the battle, but with great have both of
them laid hands on their swords, and tourning their horses there began a
cruel and fierce battle. The Gyaunt with the great pain that he had of the
hurt which he received, felt himself very ill, so that his anger did the more
increase, and trauesing his horse from the one part unto the other, procured by
all means to hurt the Emperor, who was not at that instaunt idle, but
according unto his accustomed valiantness avoided his blows, and smote at
him such furious and heavy strokes, that he made the blood to follow in what
place so ever he chanced with his sword to hit, and with the great pain that
the Gyaunt felt, there proceeded from his helm a very thick and hot smoke,
his fury and anger was so much to see himself bestow so many blows, and
not one of them could hurt his enemy, he threw his sheelde from him to the
earth, and took his swoorde in both his hands, and very fiercely stroke his
horse with his Spurs, which made him to leap thither where as this worthy
warrior was, and without any defense he stroke him such a blow upon the
healme, that he made him to dec^ine his head to the mane of his horse, and
being troubled with that great and cruel blow, his horse carried him a while
here and there about the field. The terrible and fierce Gyaunt would have
given him the second blow, but he could not, for that the Emperor was come
again to himself, and being setteled in the saddle, he firmed his swoorde
fast with both his hands, and being incensed with great anger and fury,
insomuch that fire flashed out at both his eyes, he struck his horse with his
spurs, and thrust himself forward, saying: Tarry, tarry thou furious
beast, for that I mean to revenge my self of the blow past that thou gave
me, and without delay send thy dampened soul deservedly to the devil of hell,
and therewith he stroke the devilish Gyaunt such a blow upon the helm, that
he made it sound like a bell, and he without any remembrance fell down
backwards upon his horse crouper, the blow was so terrible and delivered with
so great strength, that the blood started out both at his eyes and at his
nose. And as the Emperor would have turned to have stricken him again, he
heard one with a great noise that called aloude and said: Stand still vile
knight and hold thy hands, except thou will die the death. The Emperor lifting
up his head to see who it was that with so great arrogancy threatened him,
beheld another Giant which descended down from the Castle, of a greater
stature, and seeming to be of more strength and fury then the other two, which
by reason of his greatness was feign to go on foot, for that there was no
horse able to bear him. When the Emperor saw a thing so monstrous coming
toward him, he said with an angry voice: Cursed he that evil and devilish
generation from whence such monsters does proceed, if it please God I will do
my best to abate this thy courage, and in this time the Gyaunt was come to
himself and rose up again, and was prepared against the Emperor, who seeing
him so nigh, with purpose to strike him, took the advantage, and stroke
first, with such an overthwart blow, that by the force thereof it cut his
throat, neck and all, so that the head fell down to the earth, and the body
also like the corner of a great castle. This other Giant seeing his brother
dead in such sort, cried out reuiling his Gods, and with blaspheming of all
creatures* he descended down the hill, and drew out his huge and mighty
sword, pressing toward the Emperor, with such fury, as commonly the fierce
Lion does after his pray, which being well perceived by the Emperor, he
avoided a little on the one side with his horse, and lighted in great have,
and with his accustomed courage he went to meet the Giant, who was ready
with his sword in his hand, and came and stroke at the Emperor a mighty blow,
which he received upon his sheeld, that did then deceive him, and by reason
thereof it fell down upon his healme, and made him s^oope with both his knees
to the ground, loosing somewhat of his sight by force of that furious blow.
The Emperor seeing that it was not then time to sleep, and that the Gyaunt
had his sword over him to strike him again, he being somewhat troubled,
stepped aside and cleared himself from the fall thereof, and therewith preased
to the Giant before he could again recover his terrible swoorde, to bestow on
him a blow corespondent to his rage, and stroke him upon the arm, but by
reason that the Emperor was not wholly come to himself of the former blow he
received, he could not repaie him with his whole strength as his heart desired,
or as he would if he had been come to himself, notwithstanding it was not so
little, but that his sword cut his arm to the bone, wherewith he was so sore
hurt that he could not lift his sword from the ground, with the pain whereof
the Giant did feel himself very ill, and was constrained to change his
sword into his left hand, with the which he stroke blows very much out of
order. In this time the Emperor stroke at him so terryble and thick, that it
did almost amaze him, and when the Giant saw himself so ill entreated, he
began with a terryble voice to call for help of his people from the Castle.
The which being understood by the valiant and heroycall Emperor, he said:
no thou traitor, for neither thy strength nor thy Gods, nor thy people shall
deliver thee, but thou shall die by my hands, and therewith he stroke at him
the faster and with more courage, but within a small time after he saw
descending from the Castle another mighty giant, and in his company more then
forty knights, who with great showting descended down the hill, the which
being seen by the worthy Trebatio, he was persuaded certainly that there he
should dye. And although he was somewhat weary of ye great travail which had
passed, yet he purposed to sell his life very dear, determining that they
should pay well for it before he lost it. Then all they which descended from
the Castle did compass the Emperor round about, and stroke him on every
side without mercy or pity, whosoever had been there to have seen this
worthy warrior, should have had just occasion to say that there was the
valiant Emperor Trebatio, the flower of all knighthoode, for that he alone
defended himself against his enemies, in that great extremity, and if those
giants had not so pressed upon him, he had esteemed ye other knights very
little, but it were the giants that did most trouble and molest him,
nevertheless he that did come in the danger of his blows, might think
himself bewitched or to have evil fortune, for either he was slain or else
maimed, or beaten down to the ground, but yet all this valor that he used
little profited him, except he did first procure to destroy these two
devilish Gyauntes, who through their might brought him into great perplexity,
making him sometimes to decline with his hands to the earth, and at other
times also to stagger here and there. And these shameless people by the
importunate noise of their Lords, procured on every side to hurt and molest
the Emperor, and with the same noise there descended from the Castle more
then three score persons, besides them that were there before. But when the
Emperor Trebatio saw himself so evil entreated and beset on every side
round about, he called upon the name of God, and desired him of pardon for all
his sins, and that he would have mercy on his soul, for that he thought
verily there to end his life, and therewith he encouraged himself a new, and
gathered such strength to his heart, that what with the just quarrel he had,
and the great anger he conceived, he gave unto that Giant (who had called for
succor) such a terrible blow upon the wast, that for all the great force of
his armor, it had almost parted him in two pieces, wherewith he fell dead at
his feet. And at the very same instaunt he stroke one of the knights such
another blow upon the helm, that he divided both it and his head down to the
shoulders. The other Giant when he saw such marvelous blows, began to
exclaim out against Mars, reuiling him, that he had bestowed so much strength
and force on one knight, to declare such prowess as there the Emperor showed.
The rest of the knights were somewhat afraid of that which they had seen
done, and durst not prease so nigh as before they did, yet by reason of the
great fear they had of the Giant, they did not let greatly to molest and
trouble him, and they preased upon him in such wise that he waxed weary, so
that his good heart and noble courage would little prevail him, but that he
must needs be overcome and slain. The sad and sorrowful Lady Lidia when she
saw the Emperor in such great perplexity, with crossing and wringing her
hands, and with bitter weepings she said.

O most unhappy and unfortunate wretch that I am, it had been much better that
I alone had suffered these my pains and passions, then that this noble
Emperor should loose his life in my quarrel, which will be the occasion of
very much sorrow and great tribulation unto the most high and noblest lady
in the world. O famous knight of the Sun, oh renowned Rosicleer, what may you
say when you shall hear that for my cause your father that worthy Emperor
should be slain, it had been better for me (miserable as I am) to have been
transported into a plant as Daphne was, and not to have caused that for my
comfort so much harm should be done, unless it had pleased ye Goddess Juno
to make an everlasting memory of this my true and perfect love, as she did by
Celos in so many Nymphs, of whom unto this day their memory does surmount the
high Throne of their celestial seats. Oh noble Emperor, who by thy
surpassing excellency have brought thy self to die amongst barbarous people,
whereas without all hope of any help, or any respect of thy mighty estate,
thou must receive the death. Here I do make a vow, that before death does
deprive thee of this great valor and strength, to destroy my self in
recompense of the great wrong that I have committed against thee.

The valiant Rosicleer which at that time God and good fortune had brought
into ye place, did cause her to cease this her sorrowful lamentation. If you do
remember, this is the battle I told you of, whereas I left Rosicleer
beholding the great wrong and outrage that so many did against one only
knight. And likewise he did consider the surmounted prowess which that one
knight used, and because he was armed with contrary armor, he could not know
who it was, and much meruailing at that he saw, without any more tarrying, he
lighted from his horse and laid hand on his sword, and with great fury and
anger he pressed in amongst these false knights, and the first that he did
encounter with, was ye disordinate Giant, to whom he lent such a blow upon the
leg that he cut it a sunder, and with the force thereof he hurt the other
leg by the knee, in such sort that he must needs fall to the ground, not
being able by any strength to sustain or help himself. The Giant seeing, and
to his pain feeling so furious a blow, cried with a loud voice, saying: Upon
them valiant warriors, for they are of no force nor ability to resist, at
which noise the Emperor turned his head aside, and saw whereas the Gyaunt
lay all along on the earth, by force of that most terrible and cruel blow.
Also he saw how this noble knight besturred himself amongst the rest of
the Gyauntes knights, which was a valiant sight to be seen, wherefore he
remained a good while in beholding and viewing him, till at the last he knew
him to be his worthy son, even that renowned and invincible Rosicleer. I
need not here to declare the exceeding great joy and comfort which this
worthy Emperor received in seeing him, and especially at such a time being
in great need and necessity, for of long time before that he had not seen
him, neither had he thought ever to have seen him after that time any more,
if at that instant he had not come unlooked for, in yt he could not choose
but to have been slain by those barbarous and uncivil people. Then gathering
unto himself new strength and courage, he pressed in amongst those false and
wicked knights, in such sort that they began to run away, as well
because they saw their Lords and Captains slain, as also for that they
could not in any wise abide the terrible blows of the Prince. So these two
valiant warriors besturred themselves, that they were constrained in hope to
save their lives to turn their backs, and took the way up the hill
toward the Castle, but this valiant Rosicleer followed them with so great
lightness, that before they came half way up the hill, he had slain the
greater part of them. Then the rest which saw themselves so evil entreated,
turned altogether and pressed on him in such sort, that by their force they
had almost constrained him to tumble backwarde down the hill, at which he
was meruailously wroth, and therewith like a courageous Knight he pressed
amongst them with so much fury, that with cutting off arms and heads, he
made them less then they were by the one half. The Emperor by reason of his
great weariness and travail which he sustained, remained at the foot of the
hill whereas the first encounter was, but when he heard the moving and rushing
of the people, he took the way up the hill with so great lightness, as
though the battle had but then begun, and after him followed the fair and
beautiful Lidia, but when the Emperor came in sight, he beheld how the Prince
with great courage followed after those wretched people eue^ to the gate of the
Castle, for they thought to save themselves if they might by any means get in
at the gates, pretending to make it fast unto them, but this valiant Greek
pursued them with so great swiftness that they had no time to fulfill that,
which they had determined, for at such time as they would have shut the
gates, he approached them and disturbed their desire with cutting and hewing
them, in such sort, that he entered into the Castle in spite of their hearts,
and those that were within would have made resistaunce at such time as he was
in the great Court, but this valiant Prince did threaten them, saying. O you
wicked and contentious villains yield your selves prisoners, for be certainly
persuaded you shall find more in me by humility the^ by making resistaunce.
There was one knight which remained, and having more civility then the rest,
answered and said.

Ualyaunt Knight, if we had thought ever to have found in thee so much
merciful clemency, as we have found mighty courage, verily long since we
would have yielded our selves: now therefore we do desire thee if there be in
thee any jot of pity, to manifest thy clemency unto us, for considering we
were servants unto those Gyauntes, we were by duty bound to defend them,
and on the contrary to our powers, offend you. Then this noble prince promised
them their lives, conditionally that they should yield and surrender
themselves. In this time the Emperor let not to enlarge his pace for to
come to the aid and defense of the Prince, but when he came thither, he found
that he was in quiet, and that all those that were left in the Castle requested
peace, and when the Emperor saw that it was then time to discover himself,
full of great joy he fell upon Rosicleer his neck, and said.

Oh my son, I did well understand that in the time of my greatest necessity,
that thou would never deceive me, with great reason I may call thee my
fortunate son, not for that thou were borne in a good day, but also that
love did cause so great affection to thy mother, of whom has proceeded such
finite as thou and thy brother. Now of this worthy Prince what shall I say,
that with very joy he was almost beside himself when he heard his Father the
Emperor speak, for by the sound of his voice he did know him. So straight
way the Emperor pulled of his helm, wherewith this valiant Rosicleer was
fully resolved and without all doubt. When he saw the majesty of his regal
countenance, and his bearde adorned with some royal white hairs, his face
somewhat high colored, by reason of the great travail he received in his late
battles, in the which he showed his great power, and the prowess of the
progeny from whence he did proceed: his son bowed down his knees to the
earth, and lifted up the visour of his healme, and kissed the Emperors hands,
bathing them with the tears, that fell from his eyes, which was forced by his
heart, for the great joy which he received. The Emperor took him by the
hand, and raised him from the ground with great love. If I should here declare
the rest of the extremities, that passed in this their joyful meeting, it
should be very tedious unto the hearers, therefore I do remit it unto such a
father, whose lot it is to have good children, and therewith their like help in
necessity. So without making any more delay, the Emperor would have delivered
out of prison the Knight of this fair Lidia, the which being understood by
them of the Castle, they straight way brought him before the Emperor, with
many other more, which were pertakers with him in the succor of the Lady. These
Knights altogether gave great thanks unto the Emperor, for ye friendship he
had showed them, in helping them out of this their terrible imprisonment. And
thus they remained in great joy and pleasure, as well the Emperor for the
sight of his son, as also all those which were prisoners, for the good
success, that they had, but especially and above all the rest, was the joy of
Lidia, which with the contentment that she received to see her Brenio in her
company, so that she was almost ravished of her wits: but in the countenance
of the Knight, it appeared by his outward show, that he received no pleasure:
the which being understood by this fair Lidia, not knowing the cause whereof
it should proceed to move him thereunto, all her great joy and delight, was
turned into despair.

Then the Emperor commanded those of the Castle, that they should give him
somewhat to eat, and likewise to all the rest which were taken out of prison:
unto him for the great travail which he had passed in this battle, and unto
the rest, for that they had great need thereof. So it was straight way made
ready, and that in very good order, and they all sat down together, at the
Emperors table. So when they had almost dined, and that they were well
refreshed, the Emperor told unto Rosicleer, who that King was which he had
seen in the wagon, and the occasion thereof: for the which he desired him
that no other adventure should be the occasion to let him, but to go straight
unto Constantinople, and to take in company with him Brandimardo, and procure
that the Lady might be restored again unto her kingdom, using all your
diligence to give her him to wife: for that the noble Prince is worthy of no
small honor. And here my son I do profess unto thee, that a more
beautiful Lady in all my life I have not seen, but only the Empress
Claridiana. Also if that fortune do so serve, that thy brother the Knight of
the Sun, come to those parts, thou shall will him, that he do not move nor
depart from those parts, for any kind of adventure that shall succeed, till
such time as I do return, for that now at this present I cannot return,
for that I have sworn and given my word. So there he told unto them all the
history of that unfortunate Herea: at the which all they present received
great sorrow, saving only Brenio, which seemed that he received neither
pleasure nor joy. So when the board was voyded, Rosicleer took his leave of
the Emperor his father, and leaped up on his horse, and took the way which
led him whereas he left his boat. He was no sooner entered into it, but it
began to make way, and sailed with so great swiftness, that the third day he
arrived at Constantinople, whereas at this present we will leave him.

How the Lady Lidia talked with her Knight Brenio, who was very sad,
demanding of him the cause of his disco^tentment: and of other accidents. Cap.
14.
Here you have heard of the great coffeehouse that Brenio did show, at
such time as he came out of the prison, and in how short time, the joy that
Lidia received, was turned into sorrow and sadness: and that she could not
demand to know the occasion, by reason of the company that was there: so she
was driven to pass all that day with bitter sorrows, and anguish of mind,
and without all comfort, till such time as the night approached, thinking yt
when she was alone with him whom she loved more then her self, to ask of him
the occasion of all his pain. Thus her desire being brought to pass, this
false Brenio did unclothe himself, and the time that he was making unready,
he never left weeping, till such time as he was laid in his bed. This fair
Lady leaning with her breast upon the bolster, joined her hands with his, and
said.

My sweet Brenio, what thing has caused thee, thus against the firm love
that I have toward thee, to show thy self so sad, as it does appear by thy
heavy cheer: turn my love, and show a joyful face, and give me some
comfort with thy smiling countenance, and let my troubled heart receive some
ease, of that unmeasurable sorrow which I have sustained, during the time that
these unknown and traitorous people, have kept thee in prison and absent from
my sorrowful sight. What is this my sweet Brenio, have thou seen in me any
occasion to dissolve this faithful love which I bear thee? Let the great
travail, sighs and sorrows move the which I received to find out the
Emperor, and bring him to set thee at liberty: and if this be not sufficient,
consider with what great love I have passed many sorrowful ways and terrible
storms, for to attain thy presence, as now I do. And here I do swear unto
thee by the true and faithful love, which caused me so sorowfully to weep
being on the deep sea, that if I the unfortunate Lidia be not acceptable in
thy heart. Only for that I will not displease th^^, I will with mine own
proper hands open this my loving breast, and sprinkle the blood thereof round
about these thy ungrateful feet Oh what pain and sorrow was in the heart of
this fair Lidia, when she spoke these words unto her ungrateful Brenio, and
yet not one of all her sorrows was sufficient to cause him to show any kind
of comfort unto her. With these and such like extremities, the night passed
away, and when the lightness of the day had entered in at the windows of the
chamber, he arose from his bed, and likewise this sorrowful Lady, which had
passed all the night, with heavy weepings, and sorrowful sighs, without
putting of her clothes, in such sort she went out and followed him.

The Emperor was then risen and ready, and was putting all things in order
that was necessary to pacify and make quiet the people of the country: the
which was done with great ease, when it was known that their Lords were dead,
whom they did without all measure hate, for that they were so great tyrants:
and four great Cities, beside many other fair towns and villages, did
yield and surrender themselves under his jurisdiction. The Emperor caused
them to swear to receive Rosicleer as their true Lord, and they to be his
faithful subjects, and with them likewise all the whole dominion, the which
they did with a very good will: and the Emperor appointed a governor
amongst them, to govern all the land. All this being finished, and that the
Island was in peace and quietness, he commanded to make ready two galleyes,
the one for the fair Lidia and her Brenio, and the other for his own person,
for that he would depart for Africa. So all things was provided presently in
good order, and being ready, the Emperor commanded the fair Lidia to
imbarke her self, and to carrye with her her Knight, who straight way went
aboorde the galley, and commanded the mariners to take their course toward
Spain. Likewise the Emperor did take his leave of all them of the Castle: who
for his noble customs and valiant Knighthoode, after that they knew who he
was, they both feared and loved him with all their hearts. And when he was
embarked in the galley, he commanded the mariners to take the way toward
Africa.

What is he that could signify by any reason the small contentment and joy,
that the fair Lidia received, in beholding the lad and melancholic
countenance that her Brenio continually showed: who without speaking any word,
sailed on till they found themselves in the Ponticke sea, whereas continuallye
it is accustomed with his fury, to terrify those, which do nauigate that
way. So there arose a mighty and great tempest, which was such, that it caused
ye g^^ley to tumble and toss from the one part to the other, in great peril
and danger. Thus they remained three days and three nights in this great
danger, and the fourth day they were driven a land, at a small Island
uninhabited, that was called Rees. This Island was hid in the sea very far
from any land, and was poynted with very great rocks. There they came to an
anchor with their galley, and for to refresh and ease themselves of their great
travail which they had passed, they went a land, and commanded to raise up a
fair Tent which they brought with them, and therein they made a bed, whereon
Brenio lay down to ease himself: and this fair Lidia leaned on the bed side
by him, and was somewhat in quiet, for that she saw that the sadness of her
Knight was a little abated. And by reason of the great pain and dolor that she
had received, and the unquietness in the tempest: and again, for the
contentment she had, to see her Knight in better quiet, her wearied body
required some rest, in such sort, that as she was leaning on the beds side,
she fell a sleep. This false Brenio when he saw her at rest and in a sound
sleep, in great secret he arose from the bed, and went unto the waters side
whereas he had left the galley, and entering therein, he commanded all those
that were alande to imbarke themselves, and to hayse up the sails, and would
not by any means tarry, til that the seas were calm, but rather did put
himself in ye peril of these furious waves, then to inioye the sweetness of
this fair Damsel: and left her all alone, in this desolate and unpeopled
Island. Oh Neptune that gouernest ^he seas, let loose thy furious and
outrageous waves, and sink so unnatural and inhumaine a Knight, and suffer
him not to live, that discourteously did leave this loving Lady in this
distress, who for his delivery had put her self in all this trouble. This
sorrowful lady still sleeping, dreamed, that there was a great and fierce
wild man, which stood before her, with a very sharp sword in his hand,
making as though he would kill her, and she was so troubled with the great
fear that she received, that she gave great shril^es, and called unto her
Brenio for aid and succor, and as she thought, with his hands he stopped his
ears, for that he would not hear her, and seemed that he would not move
himself in any respect. This dreaming lady seeing this, determined to make
her own defense so well as she could, it seemed unto her that there appeared
before her a Centaure, which said, fear not fair damsel, for I am come
hither to aid and succor thee: yet for all that, this wild man did not let
to strike her upon the breast, and as it seemed to her, her breast was all
open, and how that the Centaure put his hand into the wound, and pulled out her
heart, and threw it at the wild man, and said, Take unto thee this heart, yt
without all consideration loved a man, which with such ingratitude has
rewarded her. So straight at the same instant there appeared a Knight, which
likewise laid hold on the heart with the wild man, and they two striued
greatly between themselves with much contention, who should pull the heart
out of the others hands: but in the end, each of them remained with his piece
in his hand, and the heart parted in two. So the piece which remained in the
power of the wild man, turned into a hard stone, and that piece which
remained in the power of the knight, turned into red blood, and being in this
great perplexity, this sorrowful lady did awake, thinking to have told this
terrible dream unto her beloved Brenio, but she found him not in place, and
tourning her face to the other part, to see if she could see him, but she
could neither behold him, nor any other person, of whom she might enquire.
Wherewith she leaped from the bed, and with a loud voice, she began to call for
her Brenio: but all was in vain. So with a swift pace she went down to the
waters side, thinking to have found him there. But at her coming thither, she
found neither him nor any other person, neither the galley which brought them
thither. Then she looked to sea wards, to see if she could disouer any thing,
but she could see nothing but water, which was the occasion that she made great
lamentation. And being very hoarce with the terrible shrike which she gave,
she went up upon a little rock which was nigh the waters side, from whence she
did discover the galley, in the which was her unloving Brenio, whereby she
perceived plainly how she was deceived, and how she bestowed her affection,
whereas was nothing but falshoode: although before time she could not persuade
with her self, that so great treason remained in his heart. The great sorrows
and lamentations which this forsaken Lady made, was sufficient to move the
stones unto compassion. Thus being weary with lamenting, she sat her down
upon the little rock, and leaning her cheek upon her white hand, she fell in
a great sound, in such sort, that in a long space she moved neither hand
nor foot, but when she came again unto her self, she bagan a new to make
great lamentation, and did publish her pain with terrible shrikes, saying: Why
was I not drowned in the Sea, that the fishes thereof might have torn my body
in pieces, or else to have been delivered into the hands of tyrauntes, to have
used their tyranny against me, that my heart might not have felt this
sorrow, neither my eyes have seen this cruelty? O unhappy chance, oh
cruel fortune, why did thou not make me to pass this bitter and
sorrowful life in my childhoode, in such sort, that it had consumed me.
Wherefore did the Gods permit and suffer me to live so long, it had been
far better that I had dyed in my Cradell, and not to live to see my self in
this great affliction without all help: O you mountains, O you wild
beasts, O you deep sea, there is not in you any sense to hinder me, but that
I may publish here the great disloyalty of that traitor, who is the cause
of all this my harm. O cruel and ungrateful fortune, I see that here
plainly without all pity, thou do drive me to the death, and although ye
fault be others, yet thou do apply the pain to be mine. And in this sort,
with great grief, the sorrowful and unfortunate Lady did torment her self.

So likewise, by reason of the great tempest and torment of the sea, (whereof
we before spoke) there arrived nigh the same place, a Knight, with no less
danger, then the others that landed there before. The Pilot seeing that Aeolus
had shut up his winds, and made fast the gates in such sort, that the sail
beat against the maste of the galley, that they were constrained by the force
of oars to return again to sea. For that they did see by all seafaring
tokens, that the weather would be troublesome: they did perceive it also by the
Cornesa, also by seeing the Dolphins, leaping and plunging in the sea, more
then they were accustomed to do. These and such like tokens the wise Pilot did
consider off, who desired to take part where as he might defend himself from
that terrible weather looked for. So with this great desire they stroke the
water with their Oars, and with great fury they tormented their arms, to get
to the land: but the fatal Queen Atrapos, would not consent thereunto, for
that at the hour when the troubled Moon, did extend her beams upon the face
of the earth, and upon the large and deep Sea, then the wind Boreas began to
blow his blast, so that it constrained them of the galley to bring their sail
to a bow line, and to strike it very low, which made the vessel to tumble
and roll from the one part to the other, in such sort, that every time of her
tourning, all they that were in her, thought to be drowned. Then the mariners
thought good to strike and amain their sail, the which they did in great
have, and labored to profit themselves with their oars and by the strength
of their arms. But in the end, when they saw that neither sail nor oars
would profit them, they committed themselves unto God, and left the Galley
and all their goods unto his gracious will, and the fury of water, which
began presently to entreat them in such sort, that it gave them plainly to
understand of their destruction. This was the Galley in which the Emperor
departed in, at such time as the Lady Lidia did take her leave, wherein he
took but small rest, always laboring to aid and help whereas most
necessity required, in throwing out water which troubled them very much,
being driven by those mighty waves into the Galley. Thus were they tossed and
tumbled all the night looking, every hour for death, at length the Sun
appeared and showed his golden face, whereby he did declare the cruel storms
and tempests which was past, and likewise gave show of that which was to come,
by reason that it was darkened upon a sudden, and showed a heavy cheer: so
the winds began to arise and blew more and more, and the waves increased and
rose of a great and huge height, beating upon the galley with such violent
force, that being taken between two billows, the galley brake a sunder in the
midst. These sorrowful marryners which until that time had travailed and
fought with the wind and sea to defend their galley and to save their lives,
were now constrained to strive with death, and endeavor with all their
strengths by swimming for to come to the shore, but all would not serve for
their defense, for waxing weary by the great force of the waters, being able
no longer to endure, they yielded themselves into the hands of God, and their
bodies to the fury of the sea, wherein they finished their lives, the Emperor
Trebatio being helped by ye mighty hand of God, upon whom he always called
in his heart, desiring to deliver him from so terrible a death, praieng him for
the merits of that mighty mediator Jesus Christ, that he would succor and
defend him, who of his wonted mercy heard him, and would not permit that he
should perish, for yt he laid hold of a board which was broken from the galley,
and made himself fast thereto, though it were with some labor, nevertheless
this distressed Emperor thought yt the end of his days were at hand, for yt
the mighty waves kept him a great while under the water, and when he
discovered himself aloft, there came another great wave which stroke him with
such violence, yt it threw him upon the shore, almost without any remembrance,
whereas I will leave him amongst the shingles which were at the sea side, and
of all that happened, I will tell you hereafter.

How the Emperor when he was recovered of the weariness which he received by
the great trouble of the sea, he travailed in the same Island, and how he met
with certain knights, with whom he had battle, and what happened. Cap. 15.
O Mighty princes and valiant knights, and you excellent barons, and all you
which find your selves mounted up in the triumph of felicity, and have all
the contentments and pleasures of this world, even all you together, I do
here admonish, yt you stand not too much in your own conceits, neither be you
negligent nor forgetful, for yt you know, or at the least you have heard say
of the sudden and variable changes of perverse fortune, who respects no man,
for unto them which be most mounted and are in greatest prosperity, unto them
she gives ye mightiest fall: let none show himself proud nor use any
cruelty, because he is in high estate, but rather in ye authority let him use
all humility: for here you have seen ye great surmounted quietness and
peaceable estate, in which the Emperor has endured until this present, and
now you may see unto what an ebb fortune has brought him, there he lay along
upon the sands a great while, until such time as the Sun had almost run three
parts of his daily course before he came to himself, at which time he rather
desired to die then to live, committing his soul unto almighty God, whose
only it was. The night drew on when yt with his black mantell he procured to
cover the brightness of Apollo, at which time this emperor was somewhat
refreshed of his passed travail, and arose up, but he was all to be mired and
full of sand, whereof he made himself clean, in the best manner yt he could,
and began to take his way thorough a very narrow path, but he could not
travail far, for that the night came so fast and it waxed very dark, so that
he was constrained to seek a place where he might rest himself, for that he
would not loose the path wherinto he had entered, so he laid himself down
under a broad pine tree, where as he passed the most sorrowful and afflicted
night that ever knight endured: next unto God he had great comfort by means of
his mighty courage, for to pass over all his adversities, thus he passed all
the night with great desire yt the day would come, and when the day brake it
seemed very fair and calm, and the air appeared quiet, and he travailed out
onwards his way in that straight path, until such time as he came to a very
fair and delectable forest, whereas sundry chirping birds had gathered
themselves together to refresh and shrowde themselves from the parching of the
Sun, yielding very delectably diverse sweet notes. In this forest, he
travailed well nigh two hours, and then he went up to a small mountain which
was at hand, from the which he discovered a very fair and well towred city,
upon the farther side whereof the sea beat against the fair and high walls,
and toward that part whereunto the narrow way did lead, without ye city there
was built a princely palace very sumptuous to behold, and moted round about,
which moat made a separation between the city and ye palace, there he
received great pleasure to find himself in a peopled country and of so goodly
building, for that before he thought he had been in a desert: likewise he
discovered from ye hill, a fair fountain all wrought of Marble, pillar like
with a great bowl in the midst also of marble, out of which did proceed
four spouts running with water, which fell into a great sesterne, and coming
unto it he washed his hands and refreshed his face, and sat him down by it
upon the green grass, with a great desire to eat somewhat, but there was no
body to give him any thing, so he rested himself upon his elbow, and what with
the weariness of his way and with his hunger, and being very pensive for his
troublesome sorrow, he fell a sleep. Not long after there came out of that fair
pallaice certain knights which rode abroad to solace themselves, and by
chance they came to the place whereas the Emperor was, and when they saw him
of so fair a favor and of so goodly a stature, and to their thinking he slept
without all fear or care, one of them said: Out of all doubt this is a knight
of a strange Country, and by his countenance and proportion, it seems that
he is of some high lignage, and that perverse fortune which always is fickle
unto mankind, has caused him to come hither, and brought him to be in this
estate. To the which answer one that was in company, who seemed to be of
greater estate then all the rest, said: that he does rather seem to be some
robber and thief, and one that does lead an ill life, more then a knight of
prowess, and that the sword which he wears, he has stolen from some
travailing knight, let me come and I will awake him out of his sound sleep,
and I will take this sword from him which does not become him to wear, for it
is not to be bestowed on him, and without any more delay he alighted off from
his horse to seek his own death (as it fell out) for when he came to the
Emperor, he pulled him by the beard with so much strength, that spite of his
heart he did awake him, but when the Emperor awaked and saw the hands of that
villainous knight fast upon his beard (which was full of hairs) he with his
left hand stroke him such a blow upon the breast, that he made him to recoile
back, and whether he would or no, he fell to the ground with the force
thereof, and with great anger he rose up, (not making any outward appearance
of the great and incomperable travail that he had passed) he laid hand on his
sword, and without tarrying till the other did arise, he stroke him such a blow
upon the head that he cut him down to the breast, so that he fell down dead
to the ground, in this sort he gave him his payment for his great and unseemly
pride: these knights that came together were eight in number, but when the rest
saw yt which the Emperor did, they prepared themselves to fight, and lighting
from their horses they laid hands on their swords, and wrapped their cloaks
about their arms, and then began a cruel battle, but when this mighty
Trebatio saw himself so beset with the other seven knights, he determined to
sell his death very dear, or else to kill them all, and as you do see the
greedy Lion ranging the Country with his hair bristeled, and raging with
great hunger to find his pray: even so the valiant Emperor began to strike
with his strong arm, flourishing with it in such sort, that on whom it
chanced to light, he had no need of a Surgion to heal him. In a little space
of the eight that were of them, there were four of the^ s^aine, and the rest
were so scarred with his terrible and mortal blows, that they durst not come
nigh him. There was a lackie that came with them, which when he saw this great
destruction of the knights, took the horse of one of them that was slain, and
in great have he gallopped with him toward the palace, crieng with a loud
voice: Armor, armor, come knights quickly and help, for that there is
slain the Earl of Modique his son, and all the rest that were with him, the
queen and Lady of that Country, when she heard that great noise, she looked
out of her closet, and asked who had done that murder, to whom the Lackie
answered, that one only knight unarmed, whom they found a slape at the marble
fountain, has slain them. These words caused great alteration amongst all
them in the palace, and in great have they called for their armor to arm
themselves, but this fair queen asked farther of the Lackie, what was the
occasion which these eight knights offered, to cause that knight to attempt so
hard an enterprise, who told and declared unto her all that you have heard,
and when she understood the whole circumstaunce, she commanded straight that
vproare to cease, and that there should other eight knights go and procure to
take and bring him prisoner, without doing him any harm, for that she was
desirous to know what he should be that was of so valiant courage and so
great a strength. So straight way at the commandment of the queen these
eight knights were ready and armed, and went to the place whereas they were
still in battle, and at such time as they approached, there was but two left
of the eight, that were first against him. And when those two saw the other
eight knights coming, they stepped on the one side, and with a loud voice,
cried. Knights kill this devil, kill this devil, who in this sort has
entreated us. When the Emperor saw that there came other eight armed knights
against him, he could not but judge himself to be in great danger of death, for
that he was unarmed and without any defense, yet for all that, his accustomed
courage did not fail him one ^ot, but he put himself in defense with so great
hardiness, as though he had been armed with all his accustomed armor. Then one
of the eight armed knights who would show himself to be of a more courage then
the rest, pressed forwards with his sword in his hand and his sheelde on his
arm, making show as though he would strike him, the Emperor did ward that
blow on his sword whereon it fell, and with his left hand he took so fast
hold on his sheeld, and with so great strength, that he pulled it from (...)
arm, and with great speed he covered himself therewith, and with a valiant
stomach said: Do not think you disloyal and cowardly knights to take me
prisoner or do me any outrage, first I hope to put you all to the point of
any sword, or to die in my just defense, but by reason that he spoke to them in
the Greek tongue, they could not understand him one word, wherefore
forgetting that which the queen had commanded them, they striued with all
their strength to kill him: the Emperor by reason of the fountain had his
back defended, so that they were constrained to fight with him face to face,
but he which by his hardiness did seem to prease forwards more then the
other, was straight s^aine or very sore hurt. Amongst these knights there was
another which was of a more hardier courage then any of the rest, who many
times did prease forwards, and had hurt this valiant Trebatio in two places,
and although the wounds were not very great, yet it caused his adversaries to
have the better stomach to assault him. This knight which had hurt the Emperor
saw well, yt if every one of the rest had done as much as he, yt this unarmed
knight had been s^aine, and with a loud voice he said: O ye Knights of Tinacria,
how is it possible that one only knight, and without armor, has brought us
into this ieopardie and great extremity, the which words he spoke in the
Tuscan tongue, and so with great hardiness and mighty courage he pressed
forwards, but the Emperor who well understood his words, stepped forwards
to receive him, two steps more the^ he did before, the which was done with
great lightness, and followed his blow so hard, that ye knight was constrained
to receive the blow upon his healme, the which was given with so much strength
and fury, that i^ parted it in twain with the head, and before that he could
return back again into his standing, they hurt him in two or three places,
but it was not much, but the Emperor as he recoiled, stroke two of them, and
that with so much fury that they fell dead to the ground, the rest of the
Knights which remained were meruailously afraid, for that they had felt his
mighty blows, and ^gaine with the sight of those that were s^aine before the
therefore they withdrew themselves back so yt his blows might not reach them.
The Emperor seeing himself at more quietness, retired to the place where he
first was, by the fountain, and there he remained in more safety being better
able to make his defense, so there was left of all those sixteen Knights, but
seven, of the which, three of them were more importunate then the rest, and
dealte with him even as a company of small spaniels with a great mastiefe, who
with their barking run round about him both before and behind, yet not
daring to touch any hair, but when they come before him, the mastiefe makes
the^ afraid, and forces them to run away: so in the same sort was the
Emperor amongst his enemies, and being in this conflict, they heard a great
noise in the city of making have unto armor, and anon they perceived how ye
old Earl did know of the death of his son, who by reason of the great
sorrow and passion that he received was almost beside himself, and commanded
to bring him his armor and his horse, on whom he mounted, and took in his
hand a great and mighty Spear, and rode forth toward the Fountain
whereas the Emperor was, and after this old Earl issued out many of the
people of the City, as well knights as other Citizens. The queen
understanding all this vproare and tumult, fearing that by force of all those
people, there should be slain that knight, who amongst all other was worthy
to live for his great valor and knighthood, she determined to go forth
accompanied with all the nobility of her court, and with many fair Ladies and
Damsells to aid and deliver him from peril, but before the queen could come
thither, the old Earl was there whereas the Emperor was, but when he saw so
many men there dead, and all by the force of one unarmed knight, if it had not
been for grief to see his son lie slain amongst the rest, and also the
fatherly love which did provoke him to wrath, I promise you he would have been
the first that should have procured to set him at liberty, for that he
thought it not possible there should so much valiantness rest in one knight
and also unarmed, against so (...) armed knights, except some of the Gods had
descend^^ ^^wn to help him, but the great affection which the father ought to
have to his son, caused him with great showts and cries to prease in amongst
the knights that were fighting, and to put them apart, and likewise all the
whole multitude yt were there joined together, and with his spear in his hand
he came to the place whereas the Emperor was, whom I will now leave, for yt
the South wind blew in my ear, and has constrained me to move my purpose and
return to Constantinople, whereas ye court of the Emperor remained in great
sorrow for ye departing of their Lord, whose careful countenance seemed to
prognosticate ye great danger that the Emperor should be in, and if there had
not chanced at that time to come to the court the wise Artemidoro, who did
very much comfort the Empres, in willing her not to torment her body with so
many lamentations and passions, for that in this his travail all things should
fall out very well and unto his great honor, to whose words the Empress
gave great credit, otherwise she would verily have been slain with sorrow.
The Prince Clauerindo was he which did most lament at the sorrow of the
Empress, and determined to go forth in the quest of the Emperor, for that
he accounted nothing to be grievous to comfort the sorrow of the Empres, which
would be mitrigated by the seeking of the Emperor. This secret determination
came unto the ears of the king of Sardenia, and he declared unto Clauerindo,
that he would ^eare him company, who straight ways determined together to
take their voyage, and commanded to make ready a fair and strong ship. So
without giving any to understand, in a night they embarked themselves, and
hoysed their sails, and committed their ship thither, whereas Fortune would
carry her. The Empress, although she received great discomfort by her being
alone, yet she did dissemble it in the best wise she could, and did labor with
great discretion to govern her Empire in quietness, thinking thereby to
mitigate her grief, for the absence of the Emperor. So one day (...) in this
sorrow, there was heard a great rumor, which wa^ (...) to proceed of great
joy and gladness. The Empress hearing it, could not by any means imagine
what it should be, and being doubtful, she sent one to know what it was, that
caused that great tumult in the Court: but quickly she was resolved, and put
out of all her doubt, for that it was given her to understand, that the joy
was, because of the Prince Rosicleer, of whom I have told you, who did then at
that instaunt disimbarke himself at the waters side.

What should I here speak of the great joy which the Empress received, I am
not able fully to declare it, but it was in such sort, that for the great love
she did bear unto the Prince, and again for the great comfort which she
received in her sorrowful mind, that with both her arms cast about his neck,
she received him and embraced him, with great joy and contentment. Rosicleer
did kiss her Imperial hands with great humility. The Duchess was present at
this meeting, who knew very well Rosicleer to be he that did make such
slaughter of her Knights coming by the way, and when she came unto the
Prince, she said. Knight, I never thought to give you so loving entertainment
as now I do, by reason that you did entreat me very ill, and all my people,
and caused me to receive great grief: nevertheless, the amends which I hope
to have of so worthy a knight, does cause me to crave of you pardon for this
my former anger, for that the little knowledge and acquaintance I have had of
you, has been the principal occasion of my discourtesie. Then the Prince did
call to remembrance, that she should be the Lady which was in the Chariot, as
well by her speeches, as by the apparel she wore, to whom he answered and
said: Lady, for your great grief I am very sorry, and surely I should
receive much more grief, if occaon should not fall out, wherein I might do
you service. Not for so much in that I owe by duty unto knighthoode, as it is
to be at your commandment: and more, it is the will of ye Emperor my father,
to labor to obtain you all the ease and contentment, that possibly I could:
and therefore only for this cause and purpose, he commanded me to come unto
the Court: so that whenever you think it necessary to put your necessity
in ure. I am here ready at your commandment, to do all that in your service
is convenient. And for that all things in your service shall be fulfilled in
more ample manner, I will that the noble Brandimardo go with me in my company,
for that your defense shall be the more certain. And although the attainment
be never so difficult* yet having him in my company, I hope to make all things
dead sure. Brandimardo re^dred unto him great thanks and did accept his desire
to have him in his company. The Queen of Lira was not a little joyful of this
she heard, and gave great-thanks both unto the one and unto the other, for
their great courtesy showed, and said. Noble and valiant Princes, I do
conceive very much joy in this your great courtesies offered unto me, touching
the restoring me again unto my kingdom: but in the mean time that you do
pretend to make me this restitution, and likewise in satisfaction of this great
courtesy which you have offered, I beseech you to procure unto me (having so
good opportunity, and none more worthier for this effect the^ you, of whom I
may receive it) the order of Knighthood, which is the thing that I so much
desire. This she delivered with so goodly a grace, that the Prince stood and
beheld her, and was much amassed at her marvelous beauty: and replieng unto
the words of the Queen, he said. Oh fortunate Empire, that shall be governed
by so valiant a Princess, the order of Knighthood, Lady, I know not how to
give it, for yt it does wholly and altogether consist in you. There is nothing
lacking but the girting on of the sword by the hands of some worthy Knight:
but who is he that has deserved to obtain ^o do so worthy an act unto so
noble a Queen, notwithstanding seeing at this present it is offered unto me,
I will enjoy the benefit of this great desert, although I well know my
self, not worthy thereof. And with this he took off his own sword, and put
it about the Queens neck, who with a marvelous and cheerful countenance
said, I do receive it by the hands of the best Knight of the world, and here I
do return it unto you again, for with it, I hope to be restored into the
Kingdom of Lira. And whiles she was saying these words, he girte himself
therewith again. Then the Prince said. Fair Lady, I have this sword now in
such estimation, that I do believe no Knight may esteem more thereof, nor
have it in greater price, neither will I change it for any thing in all the
world, and here I do give you great thanks for this your courtesy, and
desire of God speedely to give me occasion, that I may pay this great debt, in
the which I am indebted. And for that I may the better satisfy my desire, I
do request of you to grant me a boon, which upon my faith, I do promise
you, is the very first that ever I did demand of Lady* and that I protest by
the honor I owe unto the order of Knighthoode: Uerilie said the Qeenne, and
it shall be the first that ever I granted unto any Knight. And believe me it
is unto me no small pleasure and contentment, that this my first grant should
be given unto a knight of so noble valor as you are, let it be therefore what
it shall be, I will grant it unto you. And being resoning in this manner, they
were cut off from their talk by the coming of the Empress Claridiana, who
brought leading by the hand, the Lady Oliuia, who came from her closet, whereas
being together, they heard of the news of the arrival of the Prince. If
Rosicleer did receive great pleasure when he did see Oliuia, (unto them that
have reason and discretion of understanding, I leave ye consideration): so
likewise he did much marvel, at the great leanness of Claridiana, for the
which he was very sorrye, and with some reasons he did comfort her, as one yt
knew all the secreat of her heart. All the whole Court received great joy and
pleasure for the coming of the Prince, and all the Knights and Gentlemen came
to visit him. And being dinner time they sat down at the table, and at the
end of the dinner, when that all was taken up, they did determine and thought
it good, that out of hand they would procure to give battle to the Gyaunts,
usurpers of the kingdom of Lira, and that the Queen and the Duchess should
remain in the Court: and with this conclusion they commanded, that for the
next day, should be made ready, all that should be necessary for their
journey. In the Court was made great lamentation and sorrow, for that the prince
would so soon depart, and leave it without any knight of estimation or account
to be made of: for that they were all departed in the Quest and seeking of
their Lord and Emperor: whereas I will leave them. And the Princes Rosicleer
and Brandimardo going onwards in their voyage, left ye Empress with the
government of her Empire, and in her company the Empress Claridiana, and the
Queen of Lira, and the Princess Oliuia. Where let them rest, and now I will
tell you of the success of the two children of the great Alphebo.

How the two children of the great Alphebo, were stolen away, by the Giant
Galtenor, and what afterward did succeed of the same robbery. Cap. 16.
WIthin the wide and deep sea, toward the parts of India where the people
are governed, under the Pole antarticke, and whereas the furious waters with
their great waves and terrible noise, with violent force do make hollow and
undermine the rocks, and strong defense of the port Palato, and the sumptuous
city of Sina, are two very fair Islands, the one of them is called Trapona, a
very great Island and plentiful of all things, wherein reigned a knight of
great fame called Delfo, which was not far off from the other Island, named
Arguinaria, being like wise very abundant of all kind of vittailes, and very
strong and was governed by a Giaunt called, Gedereon Brandembul, a very fierce
man. His power and strength was such, that he was not only feared of them of
the Island, but also of all other Kings and Knights, borderers and confines
upon his Island. He was fifteen cubits in height, and his face very furious
and wild, and his strength surpassed the power of men. And above all he was
very cruel, and had usurped that land of another Giant, who by lineall descent
should have had the government, whose name was called Galtenor. This was he,
which in a Serpentine figure entered into the chamber of the Empress
Claridiana, and stole away her two children, for that he did know by his art
Magic (in the which he was very cunning and expert) that he could not recover
his Island, but by means of the young son, whereof the Empress should be
delivered. For which cause he did steal them away in the form as I have tolds
you, I say two young children newly borne. Then this Galtenor, having these two
young infants in his power, travailed onwarde his journey, and ouerpassed all
Greece, he came unto the uttermost parts and confines of Armenia. And
approaching unto a Castle, by reason that the infants were out of quiet with
hunger, he used the effect of his art, and did inchaunt all them that were
within the Castle, and deprived them of their wits, saving only one Lady, that
was newly brought a bed, whose child straight dyed, to whom he did commend
the two infants. And as at that time this fair Lady was not sufficient to give
them both suck for lack of milk, he did by his art likewise provide a
Liones, which had newly whelped, and a she Goat, which did help her with their
milk, to the nourishing of these two infants. This Lady for the refreshing of
the Infants, did ask license to vnswaddle them, which being granted unto her,
she vnswaddeled the young infant out of his rich clothes wherein he was, and
in making clean of his little body wi^h a fine linen cloth, she saw on his
breast, a very fiery spear, at the which she was greatly amazed, and for this
occasion they gave him to name Claridiano, of ye spear: and the other infant
they called Rosaluira. So in this order as I have told you, were these infants
nourished two years, with these their nourses, and every day more then other
their exceeding fairness and beauty increased, so that they seemed to be
heavenly creatures. This Giant did determine not to depart from that place, til
such time as they came unto age, for that the country did like them very well.
So they were there six years without remoouing from thence to any other place,
in the which time these Infantes were so great of body that they seemed to be
of a dossen years of age. Claridiano was of a marvelous and fair beauty, but
the infant Rosaluira was without comparison, more then any humane creature.
Then Galtenor seeing that it was time to carry them unto Trapobana, he caused
by his art to be brought a Chariot, which was drawn by two great Griphons,
and therein he put the children, and also their nourse: for that the children
did cry pitifully for their nourse, and the nourse likewise shed many tears,
and began to torment her self, when they should be carried away, and so
being in the Chariot they travailed, and left behind them Armenia, and the
fair and white Albania, the great Sea of Caspro, and likewise Marmantina, the
Gran Tartaria, with his surmounted seas, which is separated from the great sea,
they passed likewise by Armenia the great, and came unto the head spring of
Euphrates, which does begin a hundred miles from Damasco, and is compassed
about with two fair cities, y^ one of them to the Eastward called Ierosolima,
and the other is situated to the Ponents, called Sabiosca. Here he caused his
wagon to descend for to ease themselves, and that the children should take
some refreshing: the which was done to the great contentment of them all: and
being somewhat weary of their journey, the Giant fell a sleep, and so
likewise the nourse, who was called Formisa with Claridiano in her arms, who
also was a sleep, but Rosaluira was awake, and being apparailed with very rich
apparel of white Damask, all spotted full of Jewels of gold and pearls,
she descended out of the Wagon, and with her fair yelowe hair, which seemed
to be gold wiers, all hanging down behind on her back, gardished about with
very rich jewels, and without all fear she went unto the rivers side, the
which was beset on every side with very fair Orchards and gardeines, and all
the fields garnished with diverse kinds of sweet flowers and green herbs,
which served for the feeding of many sheep, that were nigh at hand feeding by
the rivers side. And she received such contentment, in these sweet delights,
that before she was aware, she was very far from the place, whereas her brother
and the rest were a sleep.

There was nigh that place a shepherd, which kept certain sheep, and with
that exercise he passed his life, (although with great misery) and in a very
poor and little cottage, who seeing that Infant all alone, and so gallantlye
adorned with rich apparel, he drew near the place whereas she was, and looked
round about him toward all parts, to see if there were any that came after
her to seek her, or if she had any keeper: but when he saw that there was no
body, he took her by the hand, and the child followed him with a very good
will, always looking him in the face. The Shepherd spoke unto her in the
Tartarian tongue, and the child spoke unto him in the Chaldean tongue, and
asked of him somewhat to eat, with a smiling countenance: this shepherd did
partly understand her and lead her unto his house, and gave her a dish of milk
and sops of bread, and the child being a hungered did eat it with a very good
will. The shepherds wife, who was somewhat discreet, seeing the great riches,
that this infant Rosaluira had about her, said, Husband, I do believe that
this child is of some high lignage as it does appear by her apparel, and
surmounted beauty. It shall be very well, that we do keep her here till
such time as we do know what she is. For in keeping and making much of such a
fair creature, cannot choose but redound unto us great profit. And if it so
fall out, that we cannot learn nor know what she is, with this riches yt she
has about her, we may bring our selves out of all trouble, and be more richer
then any shepherd in all this Country. This shepherd received great joy
with the finding this child, acknowledging all that which his wife had said
unto him, to be very good and well spoken: and so in great secret they kept her
eight days, maintaining her in the best wise they could, with such meats as
they were accustomed to eat, always having a great care, at all times when he
went to Ieroshlima, to demand if there were any inquiry for such a child,
although he believed for a certainty, that she was of some strange Country,
by reason of her apparaile, and different language, which was an occasion that
they put in practice their determined purpose: and laing all fear apart, they
took from her, her rich apparel, and put on shepherds apparel, as was
accustomed amongst them, wherewith this child was as well content, as with
the other: and under that course raiment, she did discover so great and
surpassing fairness, yt Diana was almost ashamed to extend her silver beams,
whereas this young feminine shepherd did walk, who always carried in her
hand a little shepherds crook, and following the sheep whereas they did
feed, many times with her golden hair about her shoulders, being of so great
beauty, that the glistering beams of Appollo passing thorough, appeared to
have no vauntage of it. The old sheapheardes wife did very well intrate her,
and made as much of her as she could, for that those jewels was the occasion
of their great wealth. And again this sheapheard was wise, for when he saw
himself rich of money, yet would he not begin to use his wealth too speedely,
because he would not give any to understand of his sudden riches, but by
little and little he did imploie it in buying more sheep, in such sort, that
he came to be the richest shepherd in all that Province, accounting and
esteeming of that child more then if she had been their own daughter. Now let
us return unto the Gyaunt that we left sleeping, who when he awaked and found
missing the infant, was very sad, and took a book, and began to make his
accustomed coniurations to know where she was become, but he could not come
to the knowledge of her nor any thing touching her, and when he saw that he
had not so much learning to know where this infant was, he called to
remembrance the wise Ly^gandeo and Artemidoro, believing surely that one of
them had carried her away, and being in this belee^e, he straight ways
without an^^ more tarrying went into his Wagon, and began again to travail:
but the great sorrow and lamentation that Claridiano made for the absence of
his sister was very greenous to hear. Likewise the Nurse Formisa did bear
him company with many tears and sorrowful sighs, but the Gyaunt caused them
to hold their peace, and did comfort them in the best manner he could, and so
travailing he left behind him the river Euphrates, the kingd^me of Syria and
of Babylonia, the great kingdom of Media, the Gran Tartaria, and the high
mountain Masarpicoronas, in the which Alexander did shut up the Centaures.
Likewise he passed other great mountains, rivers, and kingdoms, which I do
here omit for to avoid tediousness. So long they travailed till they came to
the kingdom of Tigliafa, and passed the Port of Palato, and left behind them
Sina, and put his wagan in the pleasant Island of Trapobana within the Palla^ce
of the king of Delso, before whom he did present himself with this ^oung
Claridiano by the hand, and said.

O good and bountiful king, here I do present thee a pr^s^nt^ ye greatest that
ever was presente^ unto any king: (...) thee this child, and look unto him as
thou would look unto thy own person, for you shall understand, that this is
he that shall restore you into your kingdom, and shall set you at liberty
from this subjection in the which you now are in, and shall put me in my
kingdom, taking it out of that tyrants hands who does now inioye it:
therefore O king do not forget to do this which I have told thee, for if we
do lack or loose this remedy, all the hope that we have in this the
restoring of our kingdoms is lost. The king which in the words of the Gyaunt
had great confidence, giving unto him great credit, took the child by the
hand and set him vp^n his knee, and kissing his fair face, he said: Ah my
good friend, where has been seen a thing of so great beauty and of so fair
and perfect proportion, it is not possible that amongst humane creatures
should be any such, but rather some of the Gods has descended from above,
and has ingendered him. And here I do swear, by that which I do owe unto
the deserving of the mighty Apollo, to have him in possession, and to entreat
and intertaine him as though he were my own proper and natural Lord, and
think my self in this doing to be the most happiest king in all the world,
and thou my friend in the mean time procure to keep thy person from the most
cruel dog, whom I do think is feared of the high throne of the supernal
Gods: one thing there is which only does grieve me and put me in great fear,
which is, that I would not we should bring up so tender and fair a youngling
as this child is, for to be a pray hereafter unto so cruel and monstrous a
beast as he. Then the Giant answered and said: O king put thy self out of all
doubt, for he shall not only abate the courage and fury of this great and
savage tyrant, but also in hearing him named, all the country shall be in a
fear and quake: travail therefore in no other thing but to bring him up with
all the majesty that thou may, for thou shall understand that he is son
unto the most valiauntest Prince in all the world, at which words the child
was in a great dumpe, and blushed in such sort that his face seemed to be a
Rubie: so the Giant took leave of the king, not without great sorrow to a
part himself from that young Prince. The king turned and gave the child
again to Formisa his Nurse, until such time as he came to the bigness and
stature to exercise himself in learning and in feats of arms, the which he
did in so short time, that it put them in great admiration that did teach
him, for that in less then the spare of three years he was so expert in both
of them, that they never heard in times past of any like unto him. Moreover,
in speaking of all manner of languages, he was so perefect, that it seemed how
that all his life time he had been brought up in the place where either of
all the languages were spoken. His understanding and pollycie was such in all
manner of things, that not only the king but all others were persuaded that
he was the son of some of the Gods, by reason whereof they did use him with
such reverence as though he had been a thing sent unto them front heaven.
And when he came to be twelve years old h^e was of such greatness, that he
seemed to be twenty years old, his height was according unto the
mightiness of his members, which were exceeding well proportioned:
perticularly he showed in his countenance a great grau^^ie and sober
disposition, very little talk, but when he spoke, it was with great
discreation, and his words very well placed, very full of humility, and if
at any time he were angry (as very seldom he was) it was in such sort,
that being blinded therewith, he respected nothing. The wise Artemidoro says,
that if this anger does proceed of base things, it were a great vice, and
that it would ouershadowe and darken all other virtues that a man was endued
withal, but he says that it did not come unto him, but by too much force of
the heart, and that it was always accompanied with reason, which did nothing
at all hurt^ him, but rather did the more exalt his deeds, and if it did
chance at any time that he were angry, in looking on them that were present
he put them in great fear. Besides this, he was very pitiful, for that
many times, hearing talk of any terrible cruelties, he would weep for the
compassion he had thereof. The king which every day did see his mightiness
and virtues more and more increase, thought himself very happy to have in
his power so precious a jewel. Many other things I could tell you here, of
the nobleness of this Prince, according as the wise Artemidoro does discover,
but the success of his worthy father does cause me to change my style, to
tell you of his high and mighty deeds.

Of the great pain that the Prince did sustain for the absence of his cousin,
and how he had battle with a certain knight that was very dolorous through
love, and of all that which chanced herein. Chap. 17.
THE grief was very great which the Grecian Prince received for the sudden
absence of his cousin, but he did comfort himself, for that he understood
that the vessel was governed by the art of Lyrgandeo, and persuaded himself
that it was convenient, for that which should succeed, and so dissembling his
sorrow in the best wise he could, he went onwardes his voyage, very desirous
to see land, purposing that if he went alande, being on firm land, not as
then to go any more to Sea, and being still in this determination, he
sailed forwards two days. The next day following when that the Sun had
run a great part of his course, they saw coming toward them a great
Boat or Galley, of which the wind with his blustering gale did fill their
sails, and also it was rowe^ with four Oars on a side, and had the Sea
likewise favorable unto them, and the Princes ship lost her way, for that
the wind was against her, and therefore they stroke their sails and made a
stay, intending to see what was in the other Ship: drawing nigh them, they
heard the sound of a Harp, which made a marvelous sweet and pleasunt noise
in the ears of all the hearers.

And beholding with good aduisement, they saw that within their boat they
brought hanging at the mast an image, which seemed to be of silver, of a
marvelous great beauty, with this title written thereon: Floriana the
daughter of the Duke of Cantabria, Lady of all the beauty of the world. At
her feet she had hanging by little chains of silver, many images of fair
Ladies and damsells, amongst them all there was two which did hang higher then
all the rest, ye one of them had a crown on her head, which seemed to be an
Empress, and the other to be a queen, and every one of them had their names
written what they were, and reading ye titles of those two which hung more
higher then the rest, they saw ye one of them was Claridiana Empress of
Trabisond, and upon ye other was written, Oliuia Princess of great Britain. O
heavenly God, how great was the ire that upon a sudden appeared in the prince,
when he beheld the image of his Lady at the feet of the other which was
highest, and blowing like unto a wild bull, he said: O my very friend and one
of great understanding, if thou do not speedely assist to punish this great
outrage offered me, from this time forth I will renounce thy friendship and
account thee as my mortal enemy, because I see, for ye more augmenting of my
pain, thou have showed me y^ which might have been excused by shunning ye
sight of it. Tefereo which likewise did behold y^ which ye prince had seen,
and saw the great alteration which ye sight had caused in him, and fearing y^
his outrageous cholar, would be the occasion yt he should do some unseemly act,
he had great care of him, and surely he had done no less, but that little and
little they drew nigher with their galley unto ye other boat, and they were so
nigh yt they might plainly hear the music that was within the boat, and for
that it seemed unto them to be very pleasant, they gave attendant ear thereto,
and also to a song that a knight in ye galley sung, which here follows.

Feign would I cloak and hide my heavy care,
and closely bear the burden of my grief,
If spite of will, my woe did not declare
my sundry sorrows, void of all relief:
Provoked by her, that laughes when I lament,
And in my tormen^^, seems to rest content.
Oh blinded sense, whereby I was misled!
and headlong tumbled into Cupides snare,
Where I a while was with my fancy fed,
which meat seemde sweet: but sauce he did prepare,
[A shafte of gold, whose head was dipped in gall]
This hit my heart, and spoyld my taste withal.
I know right well, that lover finds delight,
which now and then has pleasure mixed with pain:
But well may he be deemd a hapless wight,
that void of hope, does helpless still remain.
So wretched I, have ten years sued for grace.
And for reward, have frowns in friendships place.
Ah cruel love, that first did make me blind,
when I beheld the beauty of that face,
Which made me judge her of celestial kind,
and deem her heart dame Mercies only place:
But too too plain I now in fine perceive,
That smoothest shows, do soonest men deceive.
If thou desire my death for thy delight,
with willing heart I will the same forgo:
But know, in heaven there is a judge most right,
that just revenge will for thy rigor show.
Take then no pleasure in my restless pain:
Blood guiltless spilt, requires blood again.
The world likewise of me would deem the best,
and being dead, will term me, firm and true:
But thee (still living) they will so detest,
as thou would soon with tears thy rigor rue.
Wherefore way all, and pity my distress:
Least thou thy self in fine be comfortless.
I well do know thy beauty is so brave,
that only it deserves ado'rde to be:
And such it is, that none the like can have,
Lady or Damsel, whatsoere she be.
As Queen of beauty, thou deseruest to reign:
And this will I against any Knight maintain.
This is that which I deny, answered the Prince unto these words, and with a
high voice, he said, Knight whosoever thou art, come forth and defend this
great lie, which even now thou spakest, for it shall not be answered with any
other thing, but with the loss of thy life. So their barks were joined one
with another, which the Prince seeing, he went and would have leapt into the
other boat: but he was disturbed by the coming forth of a very well set
Knight against him, being of a good proportion, who had heard the words which
the Prince had said, and for to see who it was which spoke them, he came from
under the hatches of the bark. He was armed with green armor, the most
richest that ever Knight did wear, and was full of these two letters F.F. all
gylte. This Knight of the bark issued out not having his helm on his head,
who discovered a very fair face, such as has not been seen, but only that
of the Prince, his beard began to bud as yeolow as the gold, and his hair was
of the same color. And when he saw that the Knight of the Sun had his
healme on his head, and that he was a Knight of so gentle disposition, and with
so rich armor, he almost suspected who it should be, and said with great
gravity, It is not seemelye (especially in a Knight of such disposition as
you seem to be) to speak such proud words as you have uttered, and above
all, unto one that does esteem them so little as I do. The knight of the sun
at ye time was not to strain any courtesy, but answered, It is worse in them
which do presume of themselves as thou do, to speak lies and commit
villainy, in esteeming so little of them, yt are not only in beauty far
passing ye fairnes of this Lady whom thou so honor, but also of more, then
any in the world, and yet thou do put her a degree lower, making her whom
thou do serve to be the Princess of all beauty, what devil has bewitched
thee in this wise, and deceived thee, not to esteem nor to make any reckoning
of the excel^ent Claridiana. Do thou think that the Grecian Prince is not in
the world, or else do thou understand that he is so oloe, that he cannot use
his members to maintain her quarrel against such like falsehood as this is,
which fondly thou forcest thy self to defend, take unto thee thy helm, thou
vile and naughty Knight, ^or thy bold hardiness is worthy of no other thing
but death. By these reasons which ye Knight of the Sun had uttered, that was
confirmed in the other, which before he did suspect, and rested half doubtful
to deal with him, but seeing he must of force he la^ed on his helm, and
commanded the mariners to grapple fast the Barks together, the which was
done with a trice, which caused the one to join fast to the other, and so
without any more words between them, they both drew their swords, and the
Knight with the green armor took the advantage, and stroke the Prince such
a blow upon the healme, yt he made him stoop, and firm his hand upon the
ship boorde, and in great have he doubled another with so great strength, that
he was almost astonyed, and it made him to recoile backwards two paces, that he
had almost fallen down. The Knight of the Sun came straight way to
himself, and lifting up his mighty arm, he chanced such a blow upon the
helm of his enemy (which was as hard and strong as a Dimond) that it gave
such sound, that all the sea was occupied with the noise thereof. And made him
to boowe with both his knees to the ground. The green Knight meruayled very
much of that great blow which he had received: but for that he was strong and
of great courage, he arose straight up again on foot^, and lent unto the
Prince such another blow, and with so great anger, that as it hit him on the
wast, it made him to fall sidewards to the fore ship. The Prince did not
marvel much thereat, but was straight way with him again, and stroke him so
mighty a blow upon the helm, that it made the blood start out at his eyes
and at his nose, and he was so troubled therewith, that he thought a great
tower had fallen down upon him. The Prince seeing him in this trance, did
procure to leap into his bark, but the green Knight by reason he was not
fully astonished, with both his hands thrust at the Knight of the Sun upon
his breast, for to hinder him from his entering, so that spite of his heart he
made him to recoyle, and that in such sort, that he lacked but a little to fall
down backwards, which was the occasion, that his anger did the more increase.
And either of them firming themselves on their feet, there began a new the
battle, with so great anger and fury, that the mariners thought, yt at
every blow the battle would have been ended. Nevertheless, the more they
did fight, the more their anger did increase, so yt their fierce blows were
inco^perable. Oh how much ye knight of ye sun found himself troubled to see ye
great strength of his adversary, for ye except it were in the Knight of Cupide
only, he never in any other had found the like courage and strength, as he did
in this Knight with the green armor, who likewise did no less marvel at
the power of the Knight of the Sun: and with this, in either of them
increased great courage, with like desire to overcome their enemies, procuring
to strike the one the other with great fury, and multiplied so their blows,
that neither of them was without his payment. The Prince was meruailously
amazed to see that the courage of his enemy did so long endure, which caused
his anger in very strange manner to increase in such sort, that he struck at
him such strong and incomperable blows that they were not to be suffered, and
almost no resistance to be made. So long they endured the battle, that the
Sun had made an end of his ordinary course, and the heavy and mourning
night began to throw his mantle ever all the earth, in such sort that they
could scarce see: but they were so kindled in their anger, and so furious in
their battle, that the darkness was not sufficient to separate them, but they
called with a great noise for lights, that they might make an end of their
battle, but Tefereo seeing their determination, conceived great grief that
such a valiant knight as he with the green armor should run in any danger
of peril, he did persuade with ye Mariners, and made signs that they should
vngrapple their barks, and being moved with great compassion they procured to
do it, so privily yt the knights might not perceive it, the which was easily
accomplished, for that they were so blinded in fierceness of this their
battle, that they could not intend to mark it. The grapples were no sooner
taken off, when yt the bark of the knight of the Sun with great force did
separate himself from the other, which when the prince did see, and that he
could not finish his desire, he was purposed to throw himself into the sea,
for to come unto his adversary, but considering that it would little profit
him, he began to exclaim against Lyrgandeo to be his enemy and a robber of
his honor, and saying that he was a vile man and of base blood and lignage:
with this and such like reproach, and other irefull thoughts, the Prince went
onwarde his journey, and upon a sudden his Galley stroke a land, and in a
trice he leapt out of her, and after him went out Tefereo, and caused their
horses to be taken out, and put them into a fair medowe full of very fair
and green grass, where as they did feed. The knight of the Sun being
very full of thoughts and pensive, he would not consent that any should
speak with him, but got him amongst a company of fresh and green trees,
where as he remained till the morning. So very earlye in the morning at the
break of the day he called for his horse, and when all that were with him
were in a readiness, he began to journey, and took his way through a
very straight and narowe path, which brought them unto a very broad and
common beaten way, so they had not travailed long in it, when they saw
coming a Damsel with a very sad and sorrowful countenance, as appeared by
the great quantity of tears which proceeded from her eyes, and she came in
great have riding on her Palfraie, and when she came nigh whereas the Prince
was, he and all that were with him did salute her, the Damsel did return
unto them the thanks, and with the great sorrow yt she had in her heart she
spoke unto them in the French tongue, and said: Oh sovereign Gods, that I
might find in these knights so much strength as the outward show and
appearaunce of their well proportioned persons does promise, then they would
soon give remedy to this my troubled sorrow. Tefereo who was not so troubled
in his mind as the Prince was, answered and said: Of truth Lady your
petition being justly demanded and the cause conformable, we will not only
adventure our persons for your remedy, but also our lives, for that we are
thereto bound by the order of knighthoode, in the favor and defense of Ladies
and Damosells. The Damsel answered and said: I have so much justice on my
side, that I do marvel how the heavens do consent unto it, or why the
humane force or strength of men will maintain such falsehoode,
notwithstanding, gentle Knight, if you promise me to do your best to remedy
me herein, I will declare it unto you, and in the perfourming thereof you
shall redress three things. In the one you shall deliver me of this great
sorrow and pain in the which I now am, in the other, you shall set at
liberty the fair Lady Artalanda, who is accused by the greatest and falsest
treason that ever was invented in the world, and most shamefully imputed unto
that innocent Princess, and by the third you shall get to your selves great
honor, which is the thing that all good and valiant knights does procure
and desire in this world. The Knight of the Sun answered: We know well
that these three are to be esteemed, therefore fair Damsel, for my self and
for my companion I thus much say, that we do offer our persons, with the
conditions aforesaid. In the mean time yt he spoke these words, the damsel
did behold him very much, and it seemed unto her yt he was of a great valor,
and seeing him of so good a proportion and so well armed, she imagined in her
mind that he should be the knight of the Sun by all likelyhoods, according as
she had heard talk, and declared o^^en times in the Court of the French king,
and was persuaded that it was none other, as appeared by all tokens that she
before had heard, and comforting her self with these new and joyful thoughts,
she desired them to alight from their horses, and that if it pleased them to
sit down under a fair green arbor which was there at hand, she would
declare unto them the greatest treason that ever was invented in the world, to
the which these knights did condescend with a very good will, and being set
down amongst those green herbs, the Damsel with a very dolorous complaint
began, and said.

Noble knights and Lords, you shall understand that you are in the kingdom of
France, unto the king whereof it pleased God to give a daughter, of so great
beauty and fairness, that it caused great admiration unto all them that
beheld her, the which fame was spread abroad, which caused very many great
and valerous knights and Lords of this and other kingdoms to repair unto
the Court: amongst them all there came one who was son unto the Prince of
Scotland, and named Dalior, a man of a very good grace and gentle disposition,
and one endued with all feats of good knighthood. Likewise there was another who
was son unto the duke of Guyan, one of the greatest noble men that was in all
France, a strong and stout man and of great pride, and by lignage of the most
valiant and strongest knights in the world^, called Lidiarte. These two
Princes had discord between themselves, and did contend in the service of this
fair lady Artalanda. The great contentme^t the which they received, and the
great bravery they used in apparel in this their service, I cannot here
express. But this fair lady did so govern her self with discreation (who
was endued with it as much as with her beauty) yt she made as though she
understood nothing of their desire, although always she had a better affection
to the good will of the Prince of Scotland, then to the love of Lidiarte, and
for that, love does not permit yt any thing which appertains thereunto
should be kept secret, this vnbeloued knight did apparently perceive it, by
which occasion, the great grief which he received, abated his co^^our and he
waxed very lean, and his face became yelow and wan, and did determine to
change his apparaile o^ joy and gladness, and all pleasures, and to apparel
himself in such sort, that she might well understand his great sorrow and
heaviness. And to the contrary Dalior did show himself in his apparel, the
great contentment that he received, for that he did perceive that his Lady did
show him some favor: the which was unto the young Earl the cause of great
sorrow and grief. Then Love, who never rests from finishing his effects, but
always does with great efficacy make perfect his works, did wound with firm
and faithful love toward Lidiarte, a damsel whose name was Tarfina, being in
the service of this beautiful Princess before named, who loved him so
firmelye, that this miserable Damsel could find in her self no kind of
quietness nor rest, and most of all she now tormented her self, for that she
^awe so sudden a change in her lover. This cruel pain did so much constrain
her, yt she of necessity was driven to seek all means and policies, to
procure how she might at her ease talk with him, and give him to understand,
with her own mouth, all the pain and grief that she did suffer, and the only
cause thereof. And putting this her determination in ure, it chanced on a
day, (as she might say bitter and unfortunate) after dinner when the Table
was taken up, she found time convenient to declare unto him all that her heart
desired, for finding her lover leaning against a cupboord all alone, she came
unto him and saluted him with great courtesy, the Earl did receive her with
no less gentleness, (believing for that she was a Damsel of his lady the
princess, that she had come from her of some message) she seeing so good
opportunity* spoke unto him in this manner. Many times noble Lidiarte, I have
been moved to demand of ^o^ what thing it should be, that has so much strength
and force, which only does not cause you to change your gorgeous and brave
apparel, but also does take away ye color from your gentle face, and in this
manner we^ken all your members. Where is now all your bravery and contentment,
that you were wont to hau^? discover unto me all your pain and grief, and the
occasion of all this your sorrow. Noble Lord let me here understand of all,
and being known of this thy servant, I will procure the best and most assured
remedies, that may be for thy redress convenient. Tell me Lidiarte, if it be
corporal grief, or whether it be a wound hurt by the cruel force of Cupides
dart. My loving Lord, I do desire you to declare unto me the cause of all your
sorrow and grief, and here I do protest and give my faith, to procure with
all my power and strength, by policy and other means to find remedy for
this your tribulation. These and other such reasons, with her words well
placed, spoke this Damsel unto the Earl, with hope that he would declare
unto her, the cause of all his sorrow, and from whence it did proceed. These
sweet persuasions and loving reasons, took such effect in the Earl Lidiarte,
that he discovered all that was in his heart, and the whole occasion as
heretofore you have heard. This damsel when she understood the whole effect
thereof, it grieved her to the very heart, although she did dissemble it, and
kept it secret to her self, and would not suffer him therein to know her
mind: and straight way^ for her remedy, the devil put into her head, a
meruaylous and wicked invention. And for to give contentment unto the Earl,
she told him, that she would declare unto the Princess, all the whole estate
of this his sorrowful pains, and passionate grief, willing him withal to
remember, that the next day at that hour, he should meet her again at ye
same place, for that she would bring him an answer of all that should pass.
And with this she left off her talk and departed, leaving the Earl somewhat
comforted, with the hope of her answer, that he looked for the next day: yet
he stood in doubt of her retourning at the appointed hour, and thought the
time very long: so he passed all that day and night without any rest. And on
the other side this amorous Lady was no less troubled and without rest,
desiring earnestlye the appointed times approaching: even as the wearyed
Mariners being weather-beaten at the sea, and tossed here and there by the
furious force of tempests and blustering wind always in hope that they will
abate, whereby they may have fair and peaceable weather, and so be ^ased of
their great travail. At length, the long desired hour drew on, of their
appointment, and the Earl repaired unto the place: he was scant there, when
that the Damsel likewise approached, almost at the same instant, and the Earl
received her with great contentment: but the damsel said, yt she had no time
to have any great talk with him, but only my Lord this I say unto you, that
this night at midnight she will tarry thy coming, whereas thou shall fulfill
all thy desire, and give thee to understand, how that she is not culpable of
all these thy passed sorrows and griefs, (naming a meeting place, which after
shall be declared). And pardon me, I pray you, for that the time does not give
me any more leisure to talk with you, and so without any more tarrying she
went away, and left the Earl in such great joy, that he was almost in an
ecstasy therewith. The Earl went unto his lodging, where he remained, and
tarried until the time appointed, the which he thought very long, imagining
every minute a whole hour. The hour being come, he went alone unto the place
appointed, and covered himself with a mantle of cloth of gold. He tarried
not long there, when that this unfortunate Tarfina, put her self upon a wall,
where as she put down a piece of timber, whereby the Earl should lay hold on
for to go up.

The Earl with the great desire which he had, thought all very easy to be
done, and so with great lightness he got upon the wall, and descended down
on the other side into the gardeine. And when the Damsel had him therewithin
the garden, she said: My Lord and Earl tarry there a while, by the posterne
gate of the pallaice, being the enteraunce into this garden: for thereout will
issue thy Lady and mistress the Princess, and in the mean time will I go
and advise her, that thou art here, and keep thy self as cl^se, and in as
great secret as may be. The Earl with no small pleasure kept himself secret
and was quiet, abiding (as he ^^oug^e) the Princess coming. He had not
tarried there long when that this wicked damsel came forth, adorned with the
same garments which her Lady the Princess had worn the day before, and
opening very softly that posterne gate, ^he issued out, and drew her self
toward the light of the Moon, or that the Earl might know the garments.
The which when that the Earl saw, and knew that they were her garments, he
thought berely that she had been his Lady so long desired, and without any
more thinking, he fell down upon his knees, and taking her by the hands, he
kissed them many times, and so both of them by great policy and deceit, and
with exceeding joy, did fulfill their desires, and took their leave each of
other, with many pleasant and sweet words, fearing that the day would
appear, they departed. The Earl returned unto his lodging, whereas he passed
the rest of the dark night with great contentment. This Damsel did the like,
putting from her those usurped roabes of the honesty and honor of her Lady
the Princes. So the next morning when it was day, the Earl rose up, and
apparayled himself with the most richest apparel that he had, and went unto
the Kings pallaice somewhat betimes, and so walking round about out of one
chamber unto another, until such time as he came unto the chamber whereas the
Princess was, he lifted up a cloth which was before the door, where he might
well discover the innocent Lady, with a prayer book in her hand, using her
accustomed prayers, and daily devotion. This former dissembled and fained love,
gave him great courage and hardines to enter into her chamber, and entering in,
he spoke unto her certain loving and amorous words, throwing his arms about
her neck, and joining his face unto the face of the Princess: who seeing this
great ^oldnesse, meruailed very much, and with the great alteration of her
heart, her prayer book fell out of her hands, and the arose up upon her
feet, and began to cry out with a loud voice, and said. O holy God deliver
me from this vncur^eous and unmannerly knight. And a^ those words entered in the
Prince of Scotland and certain of the Princesses Damsells, but when the Prince
did see the great boldness of Licharte, he drew out his swoorde with great
anger, and said.

Traitor, thou shall not clear thy self as thou do think to do, having
committed so great treason as thou have done, and his anger was such, that he
stroke at the Earl a terrible blow, which was more of ire then regarding how
he delivered it, the Earl let the blow slip by and running in with the same,
he stroke the Prince such a blow upon the head, that he parted it in two
pieces, and he fell down dead on the floor. The tumult and vproare was such
amongst the Ladies and Damosells, that at their great shrikes the king went
thither, and his coming was in such have, that this unfortunate Lidiarte
could not by any means get away. There came in company with the king,
Beraldo of Bordeaux, and the Earl of Aniow, and the Prince of Viarne, and many
other knights and Gentlemen. And when the king saw the Prince slain, and the
murderer standing by, the king stepped unto him and took the sword out of
his hand, and said unto him. Oh knight without measure or mercy, what has
been the occasion of this thy follye to kill this Prince. There was by a Lady
of the Princesses, (who very grievously lamented the death of the Prince) and
told unto the king all ye truth of the matter as it there passed, and when the
king heard of all this enterprise, he received so much anger, that he himself
in person did carry him into a strong tower which was in the pallaice and put
him prisoner therein and commanded to put on him very great and strong
chains, and without any more tarrieng he called his counsel together, and
opened the matter in public before them all, whereas he was condemned for a
traitor (although there were some which did fear much his great power, but
the king made no reckoning of it) and so before that he would break his fast,
he commanded him to be hanged out of one of the windows of the Tower, and
commanded publicly to be proclaimed all the whole treason, where as to all
men was seen his sudden and sorrowful death. Then he commanded the Prince
to be buried with great honor, as unto such a person did appertain. After
this the sorrowful Tarsina seeing that she was the only occasion of all this
evil, not remembering the loss of her virginity, nor respecting any shame,
which such as she was ought to have and keep, began to tear her hair, and to
scratch her face, and gave marvelous shrikes, that all the Pallaice did found
thereof, and with great fury she went up unto the place whereas her
well-beloved Lidiarte was hanged, and when she saw him dead with so shameful
and dishonorable a death, she began with great lamentation to publish the
occasion of all this evil, saying.

Oh sovereign God, now will I acknowledge this great error which I have
committed and done, for the which I do not deserve one, but a thousand deaths:
Oh miserable creature that I am, and unhappy body that has committed so
great harm and villainy, and only because thou could not refrain thy
disordinate appetite, thy soul must now pay that which thou did consent
unto: Oh cursed delight, that for a little transitory pleasure I would loose
my virginity, thereby causing him whom I loved more then my self, to receive
so miserable a death and evil end, and have likewise brought in great suspicion
the honor of my Lady the Princess, therefore I will give my self the
correction that so worthilye I do deserve, paying with my life and honor, the
prise of my great lasciu^ousnesse and devilish hardiness. And with this she
leapt into the window with great fury, and laid hold on the roape whereby
the Earl was hanged, and slipped down by it till she came and embraced her
arms about the neck of the Earl, and joining her mouth unto his mouth,
which was then very cold and black with the blood, and holding her self
fast with the one of her hands, with the other hand she drew out a little
knife which she had, wherw^th she cut the rope a sunder which he hanged by, so
that both of them fell to the ground, whereas they were all broken to pieces,
and there she dyed. The great alteration which was in the Court, when they
understood of all this that had past, was strange and without comparison. And
although many did hear her complaint, yet there was not one that could tell
wherefore it was, till such time as a Lackie which was nigh her, declared all
that you have heard told, for that he had heard it word for word, but when
the king did know the effect thereof, he was very much amassed at it. And for
that he would there should be a perpetual memory thereof, presently he
commanded that they should be buried both together, in a Sepulcher without
the City of Paris, declaring in it the effect of this dolorous act, the which
was forthwith published throughout all the whole kingdom. So when that this
unhappy death of the Earl came unto the ears of his Father and all his
kinsfolks, they were very sorrowful, and received for it great grief, and
waxed very wrathful, and determined (if it were possible) to revenge the
death of the Earl, and devised continually in secret what order might best
be taken to bring it to effect. So in the end of many inventions, they
concluded, to accuse the Princess, that she should be the only occasion of
all this evil. And the better for to compass and bring this accusation to
pass, they did commit it to the using of the brothers son of the old Earl,
and cousin unto Lidiarte, who was son unto the Earl of Province, an
excellent and valiant Knight. The which accusation he did accept with a very
good will, and for to make their determination of more strength, they agreed to
send unto the kingdom of Sardenia, unto a brother of the king Bramidoro, with
whom they had at that time great friendship, requesting him that he would
send them some one of his lignage to favor them herein, the which he
granted with very great good will, and for that they should the better
understand the great desire that he had to pleasure them in this matter, he
sent them two of his lignage, and by reason that they were Gyauntes and of a
marvelous huge bigness (although all the world did know that the Princess
is without fault and not culpable) yet they dare not put their persons in
adventure, with those two horrible and disordinate monsters. So after they
had made this their traitorous and false accusation, after many and great
contentions they grew in the end to this conclusion, that the Princess should
within the term of fifteen days bring three knights that with these other
three should make and maintain battle in the field for the defense of this
false accused Princess, and if so be that she could within that time prefired
find but two knights, then it shall be at their courtesy to take upon them
the enterprise, and neither more nor less then they three if she did find
but one knight. Now there is twelve of these fifteen days past, so that
within these three days the full time is expired: therefore noble Lords and
knights, let me be resolved what you will determine herein. To loose our
lives for to set at liberty this wronged Lady, answered the Knight of the
Sun, therefore it is convenient without any more delay that we take our
journey thether-ward. Then the Damsel said, how is it that you will take the
enterprise in hand and be but two, and they be three, and besides, almost
invincible. Then Tefereo answered, the justice on the Princess part shall be
the third person, take you no care fair Damsel for that, for although we
are but two, we do little esteem them. When the Damsel saw their liberal
proffer and determination, she was very glad and content, and straight ways
she leaped upon her palfraie and they on their horses, and so rode toward the
City without making any farther delaie or tarrieng.

How the Prince met in Paris the knight of the Images, and of the battle he
had with him, and how they overcame the three knights which did accuse the
Princess, and afterward how Tefereo knew who the knight of the Images was, and
of all that happened besides. Cap. 17.
WIth great have the Prince and all that were with him travailed that day and
the next in the kingdom of France, until they came within two leagues of
Paris, so the next day very early in the morning they arose and travailed
again till they came within the sight of the City, and for that it was very
early to enter into the same, they alighted amongst a company of trees, whereas
by the great thickness they might not be seen of any: and refreshing
themselves by a clear fountain of water that was there at hand, they sat
down and did eat of such as the Damsel had brought with her. So in this
sort they passed the time, till they thought it to be the hour to go unto the
defense pretended, so when the time drew nigh, they perused their armor in all
points, and armed themselves and leapt on horse back. Tefereo if it had not
seemed unto him to be a point of cowardlinesse, would have procured to have
disturbed this battle, for they against whom he should fight were his
kinsefolkes, but yet he thought that he was more bound by the order of
knighthoode to keep company with him with whom he came, and to resist such
like wrongs in the defense of truth and justice, then to have any respect to
his kindred, and especially in such like false accusations. He therefore
determined to dissemble it and say nothing, so with these and such like
thoughts they went forwards till they came into the city, unto the place
appointed for this battle, whereas they found the Princess set upon a
scaffolde, all covered with mourning robes of great sadness, which did declare
and show her great sorrow and undeserved trouble. So likewise all the whole
scaffolde, and all the Ladies and Damosells that came with the Princess were
covered and apparelled correspondent unto her attire. The king was at a window
of his Pallaice with no less sorrow and sadness to see his honor put unto
that blemish as it was. And that which grieved him most was, that not one
knight in all his Court durst give the enterprise, yet was there present all
the whole company of the knights of his Court. So these two Gyaunts and the
other knights came armed into the place with very fair and strong armor,
and mounted upon great and mighty strong horses, saving the greatest of the
Gyauntes, for that there was not any horse that could sustain so mighty and
huge a weight: wherefore he was mounted upon an Elephant. So looking round
about, the Prince saw on the other side of the field the Knight with the
green armor, which he had fought with all in the Bark being at the Sea, as
I have told you, who was in a readynesse to make the battle in defense of
the Princess. This knight there by had hanged upon a piece of timber all the
Images that he brought with him, in such sort as they were hanged in his
Bark, the which when the Prince saw that the Image of the Duchess was above
that of the empress, his anger did so increase, that he had clean forgotte
wherefore he came thither, and spurred Cornerino his horse with so much fury,
that by his force he made the ground whereas he came to tremble and shake. And
when he came unto the place whereas the Images were hanging, he with his strong
arm laid hold upon the device and brake the chains wherewith they were
made fast, and swinged it about his head with such great strength, that he
made them fly to the highest parts of all the Pallaice, the which was done in
such great have, that when the knight with the green armor was come to
disturb him, it was too late, for that his Lady was ^lowen up into the air,
whereat he received so much anger, that without any more ado, he threw his
sheelde at his back, and with both his hands he laid ho^de on his sword,
and stroke the Prince such a terrible blow, that he made him to fall backwards
on his horse crouper, without any remembrance, and with the great strength
wherewith he stroke him, he made his horse to stoop under him. Cornerino being
somewhat amassed at this terrible blow, carried his master round about the
field, but before that the knight with the green armor could double to strike
him again, the Prince was come unto himself, and settling himself upon his
horse back, being firmed in his stirrops, with great fury he threw his
sheelde to the ground, and took his swoorde in both his hands, and pricked
Cornerino toward the place whereas his adversary was, who was likewise in a
readiness to discharge his blow, so both of them together discharged each
upon the others helm, with such fury and force, that the Prince of the Sun
was constrained to fall upon his horse neck as though he had been dead, for
that never blow that ever he received before that time did bring him to the
like perplexity, but only one, the which he received at the hands of
Rosicleer, when he had battle with him. Likewise the knight with the green
armor did nothing advance himself of his deed, for the blow which he
received was so terrible, that he fell from his horse to the ground, and the
blood issued out at his month and nose with great abundaunce, and he stretched
his arms and legs upon the sandy ground as though he had been altogether
dead. The king and all that were with him were very much amassed, to see that so
cruel and sudden a battle should happen, without knowing the occasion
wherefore. And more they did marvel, imagining a little by the tokens of the
horse who that knight should be, which having his enemy for so valiant a
knight in so short time had brought him into such extremity. Now when Tefereo
did see the Prince thus put to his shifts and in such great necessity, and
how that he lay upon his horse neck without any remembrance, he began to
cry out upon fortune, and with great fury he drew out his swoorde and went
against the defenders of the evil accusation, and called them traitors,
(although they were his brothers children.) Here you may see what great force
and strength the truth has, that although they were his brothers childen, yet
he did procure their deaths, for that they came out of their own Country,
into a strange and foreign land to defend treason. The son of the Earl
of Province was ye first that did offer to put himself forwards, to whom
Tefereo gave such terrible and strong blows upon his helm, that without
remembrance he made him fall to the ground as one that were dead. The Giants
when they saw themselves so ill entreated, both of them set spurs unto their
beasts, and drawing out their great and sharp cutting swoords, they did
procure to hurt him with their heavy and terrible blows. In this contention
the valiant Sardenian did show his mighty and strong courage with great
policy and cunning, now striking at the one, and then at the other, and
always providing to let their blows slip aside without receiving any
harm, and such was his policy and lightness, that in a great while they
could not fasten one full blow upon him. Now was the knight of Province
come to himself, and seeing himself on the ground, and his enemy so
courageous between these two mighty Gyauntes, he approached upon the one side
whereas Tefereo could not see him, and cut off one of the hinder legs of his
horse, the horse when he felt himself hurt, would have risen upright
before, but by any means he could not, but recoyled backwarde with his
crouper to the ground, which was yet in such sort that Tefereo had time to
go out of the saddle, with so great anger, that the blood burst out at his
nose, and without any fear before him, he pressed at the knight of Province,
and thrust such a foyne at his breast, that his armor could not deny the
passage but that the swoorde came out at his back, so that he fell down
stark dead to the ground: he had scant drawn his swoorde out of the body
of the knight, when that (without any policy to defend himself, he
received such a terrible blow with the breast of the Gyantes horse, which came
with such great fury that (albeit against his will) he was constrained to
fall tumbling unto the ground, and although the fall was somewhat heavy and
grievous unto him, yet with a trice he was a foot again, and seeing both the
Gyauntes ready prepared against him, for his better defense he thought it good
to put himself on the other side of the dead horse.

At this instant the knight of the Sun came again to himself, and looking
toward the place whereas the battle was, he saw that his friend like a
furious Lion made resistaunce against the two Giaunts. My pen is not here
sufficient to signify unto you the great fury, that on a sudden came unto
this worthy knight of the Son: so that I suppose no Diamond rock had been at
that time able to make resistaunce against him: for with a furious and hoarce
voice he said, Away, away you vile Knights, not worthy of these your great
members, and double forces which you do possess, seeing that with so much
shame this day you have maintained such great treason. The prince carried his
sword in his hand, having reared it on high, ready to strike him that first came
in his way, and raising himself in his stirrops, he stroke the Giant with the
Elephant so terrible a bl^we upon his shoulder, that his double armor was not
able to make resistaunce against this great force, but that it passed thorough,
and divided it in such wise, that he cut off the one quarter thereof, together
with the head, and the rest which remained, fell down to the ground, with so
great wayght, that it made the earth to tremble. The other Giaunt in the mean
time had stroke the Prince such a terrible blow upon the healme, that it made
him to gnash his teeth together, with the pain he felt, which was the occasion
that he was whollye incensed with anger, insomuch that he pressed toward him
with no less rage, then the Hawke which pursues the Hearon, and stroke such a
blow at his head, that for the defense thereof, the Giant was constrained to
lift up both his arms, and the blow descended in such sort upon them, that it
cut them both in pieces, and his sword being fast in his hands, they fell
altogether to the ground. All the whole Court greatly meruailed at these
fierce and terrible blows: and having thus concluded all that they had to do
the Prince returned unto Tefereo, and said unto him, Brother, do you remain
here, till such time that all be concluded that is here necessary to be
done, and in the wilderness of Ardenia you shall find me, in the very same
place, whereas we did rest our selves this day, and I desire thee to procure to
know who is that Knight with the green armor, and whether he be dead or no.
And without any more tarrying he spurred his horse, who made as swifte way as
the thunderbolt, and presently departed the City, and never rested till he
came unto the place, whereas he told his companion he would remain. Then
Tefereo went unto ye Judges, and asked them if there were any more to be done,
in the defense and favor of the Princess: and the Judges answered, that it
was sufficient which was done, and that there was no other thing to be done in
that matter. When Tefereo saw that all was done that was needful, he went
unto the place, whereas the Knight with the green armor was, and pulling off
his helm, he saw that all his face was swollen with the terrible blow that he
had received, and he seemed as though he had been dead. At the same instaunt,
the King was come down from his window, into the place whereas the battle
was: only for to honor these knights and to know who they were. And when he
could not see the Knight of the Sun, he asked for him, and straight way it
was told him in what great have he went from that place and out of the City:
for the which the King was very sorry, and if they had not told him, that it
had been labor lost to seek him, he would have followed to see if he could
have seen him, and have made him to return to have honored him in his
court. Then the King with amorous words requested of Tefereo to tell him who
that Knight was, and he told him with a very good will. And when the king knew
that it was the Greek Prince, he received great sorrow, because he could not
do him the honor, as unto such a knight appertained. But considering that
they could not impute unto him any fault for the lack thereof, he commanded
that the Knight with the green armor, should be carried unto the Pallaice,
and asked his Knights what he was, and it was told him, that he was the Prince
of Spain, who was called Torismundo.

And when the King understood, that he was a Knight of so high lineage, he
commanded yt all his Physicians should join together, and provide all remedies
possible for his recovery, and that they should apply no less core unto him,
then unto his own proper person, the which presently was done, and they did
apply the best remedies that could be gotten, till such time as they brought
him somewhat to his remembrance, although it was with great labor. The prince
of Spain, when he saw himself in his naked bed, his sorrow was very much:
and calling to his mind all that which had passed, the very grief he
received, was almost the occasion of his death.

When Tefereo knew who that Knight was, and that there was no more to be done,
without any tarrying he took his leave of the King, and of the Princess, who
wept very sorrowfully at his departure. Tefereo took the horse of the lame
Giaunt, (who with very anger to see himself in that pickle, would not consent
to the receiving of any cure, neither would he eat any thing, but there
desperately dyed) and leaping upon him he went to seek the Knight of the
Sun. Where we will leave them: for that I am now enforced by the sweet
darts of Cupide, to refresh the wearied ears of the hearers, and to declare
some of his loving wounds, and to leave the furious sword of Mars for a while.

Now to return to the story that is past, whereas if you do remember, that
the Prince Eleno of Dacia, entered into that bark wherein the Knight was,
which would have forced a Lady, and how that upon a sudden their gallyes did
separate themselves, so that he lost the sight of his Cousin the Knight of the
Sun, and of Tefereo, and being entered, he would have made resistaunce
against his adversary, for to disturb him, that he should not commit the
vyolence that he had offered. But upon a sudden they were all vanished, so
that he saw neither Knight, nor Lady, nor Mariners, nor yet any other
person, but only himself in the Bark, with his inchaunted Horse, neither
could he see who brought him thither: and thinking to re^ourne again into the
galley whereas his cousin was, he could not find him: but looking about, he
discerned no other thing, but the Element and the water. When the Prince Eleno
saw himself absent from his beloved cousin, his sorrow was very great that he
received, and began to curse all the wise inchaunters, and all those that do
permit and suffer them, for that they were the occasion that in the world, there
was so much evil done. When this Prince Eleno saw himself all alone, and not
one with whom he might pass away the time, there came unto his mind his
Florisdama, which was the occasion that he turned to his accustomed sadness,
and imagining that he was in her presence, he said: Oh cruel Lady which do
now rejoice thy self, and art at ease in the Kingdom of Dacia: art thou fully
pleased with these my pains? Art thou now pacified, yt thou have brought me
into this extremity and trouble? wherein, I am in the power of I know not
whom, and do nauigate I cannot tell upon what. Thy cruel heart I am sure is
now content, seeing that without desert, for thee I do suffer so many
troubles: which as yet I am not certain, whether thou have pretended or
procured it should be so or no. Oh cursed inchaunters, how many evils have you
wrought by the help of devils, so that by reason of your inchauntments, many
worthy Knights are brought into such like troubles as I am. Here you may see
into what extremity this Magical art has brought me, so yt I can by no
means profit my self of the strength of these my young arms, but am here
in the power of a devil, who will overthrow this bark: but that which does most
grieve me, is, yt I am brought into a place to dye, where of my death shall be
left no memory, but must die disdained of that cruel Lady. So with great
sorrow and trouble, he passed three days, in the end of which, he discovered
a very small Island, which was in the midst of the sea. The bark made thither
with great sweetness, so that in a small time he was fast a ground upon the
sand. It was not long after that the Prince leapt a shore, and when he found
himself out of the bark, he looked round about him on every side. And
toward his right hand amongst a company of green trees, he saw a small tent
armed. Toward which the prince directed his way, with an easy pace, and
entering into the Tent, he saw no body, although he remained a while, and
hearkened if he could here any s^irring, but he could neither hear nor see
any thing: but only he found the print of a little foot upon the sand, and
he had a great desire to know whose footesteps they were, for that they seemed
to be of some Lady or Damsel, and finding the trace, he followed them, and the
more he went, it seemed unto him that the more have they made, whosoever it was
that had left that sign, which made him more earnest in his desire to see the
end thereof. So long he followed that trace, that in the end he came unto a
little mountain, whereas he found scattered about yeolow hair, which seemed
to be threads of gold: and stooping for to gather them up, he perceived that
some of them were wet with spots of blood, whereby he well understood, the
great anger where with they were pulled of from the head. Likewise he saw in
diverse places, how the earth was spotted with drops of lively blood. Then with
a more desire then he had before, he went up to the top of that little
mountain, and having lost the footsteps, he recovered it by gathering up y^
golden hair, he had not travailed far up the mountain, when that toward
the water side he heard a great complaint, which seemed to be the voice of a
woman, and by the faint sound there of he might well perceive that they waxed
weary, for that a while they would rest and be still, and straight way would
return unto their accustomed sorrow and complaint. And the words (which the
Prince did well understand) were these. Oh love, now shall thou no more
rejoice, neither have any longer dominion over me, for that gentle death will
show me so much favor as to finish these my sorrowful passions, and therewith
unloose and frustrate this string of love, with the which thou have bound me,
having a desire to ask reuengement of him, which has been the occasion of all
this evil. I have asked the same reuengement, but it has not pleased the Gods
to hear my request: nay rather they have stopped their ears against these my
continual complaynts: and with this she held her peace, giving a very
sorrowful and terrrible sigh. The Prince Eleno tourning his eyes toward that
place, from whence he heard this comylaint, discovered amongst certain green
trees, a Lady, who was endued with maruailous great beauty. It was so
excellent, that it deprived him of his heart, which he never thought again to
have lost. She was with her hair all about her ears, and meruailously ill
entreated by the violence that she used against her self, and leaning her
cheek upon her delicate and white hand, which was all to be spotted with blood
in many places, which was constrained by the scratching of her nails. The
spots was the occasion to dissolve the great passion which the Prince did feel
for his Florisdama, representing in his heart, the figure of this heavy and
sorrowful Lady: who seeing her of so great beauty, and in such affliction, was
overtaken and wounded with the demeanor of her fair face, and grieved to see
her so evil entreated, in such sort, that in a sound he leaned to a green
tree (amongst many other which were upon that mountain) clean without any
remembrance.

Oh Cupide, thou being but a boy, why do thou use these cruel kind of
feats. Who has taught thee to use such deceits, which is the occasion of
great and endless unquietness. Thou do show thy self to be blind, and yet
thou art more quick of sight then a Hawke. How is it possible that thou do
make us believe, that without seeing thou can hit so right with thy arrows,
and that with so good an aim thou do wound whereas thou will. Thou subtle
boy, do not so plainly show thy self what thou art, if thou dooest think to
deceive me with thy fained innocence? It is sufficient thou showest thy self
naked, for that thou art void of all pity. Oh ye Gods give me understanding,
that I may declare the subtilties and deceits of this false Cupide, for that I
care not for him, neither have I any fear of him. Here this noble Dacian did
feel himself clear of the love of Florisdama, and his heart was new set on
fire with the sight of the fair Lidia, unto whom he had subjected himself,
and remained more without hope of help for his last woun^e, then he was of the
first. And when he came unto himse^^e, and ^elt that he was freshly wounded, he
did delight him^^lf with the yeolow hair, the which he had in his hand, and
considering with what ire it was pulled of, and also calling to remembrance her
complaint, he did plainly perce^^e that the occasion of all this her sorrow was
love. So with these considerations he lifted up his eyes, and did behold the
great beauty of Lidia, and gazed on her fair face, which was disf^gured with
the wounds yt she had made with her na^les in scratching it, and it was all to
be spotted with the blood that proceeded from the same wounds: likewise he did
meditate in the great and thick tears that distilled from her sorrowful
eyes. All these was the occasion wholly to confirm his new grief, and with a
sorrowful sigh looking on the yeolow hair he said. Oh hair, if with the
great ^urye of love thou were torn off, with how much more force is thy owner
graffed in my heart. It had been far better, hair, that thou had still
remained to have garnished that gallant face, which (as it does appear) at
other times did much esteem of thee* then here to be scattered abroad upon
this mountain, and having lost a mistress of so great valor, thou do give
occasion of death unto him, which never offended thee. But in recompense of
this evil which thou have caused unto me, here I do promise to make much of
thee, and to put thee within my bosom, and lament with tears thy desolatenes.
And heerwith, he went toward ye place where she was: at which noise ye Lady
did lift up her eyes, and seeing the Prince, with a soft voice she said: A my
friend, is my Brenio come back again, does he take any grief for his
d^stressed Lidia. This new lover whose heart yerned to see her pain, replied with
weeping eyes. Fair Lady, I cannot answer unto this which you do ask me, for
that I am a strange knight brought by fortune to bear thee company, and to be
partaker of thy sorrow and pain, and to wound my self in beholding (...).
This fair Lady gave ear unto the words of this Knight, believing that he
would have given her some good news, for the mitigating of her sadness, but
she perceived that he was a strange Knight, she lifted up her head, and with
weeping eyes she said. Gentle Knight, if my love have been the occasion of this
thy sorrow which thou do show, I do desire thee to depart, for in me thou
shall find no other thing, but that which only I desire, that is, death. For
what love can they have, that so cruelly are forgotten, what possibility is
there of help in them, that are without all hope. Wi^h so great grief Lidia
delivered these and such like reasons, that the over much anger she had, caused
her to retain her words, so that she could not speak, but gave a maruailous
and sorrowful shrike, that the stoniest heart that ever was, would have been
moved with compassion. This good Dacian, seeing that at that time there was no
remedy for his evil, by reason of the great pain and grief, that the fair
Damsel seemed to sustain, constrained himself by discretion to suffer a
while, considering ye time did give ease unto all things: so hoping in time to
have help of his disease, and turning to talk unto Lidia, he requested her
that she would show him so much favor, as to declare unto him the cause of
all this her sorrow and pain. So this Lady did declare it unto him, in so
sorrowful a sort, and with such pitiful sighs, that the tempestuous sea being
moved with compassion* contrary unto his accustomed noise made a new and
strange rumor in the caves near unto the shore. The Prince with no less
pain attended unto her sorrowful ^ale, so that it was even a tragedy to
behold the heavy and lamentable prospects of either of them. Then in the end
of relating this heavy history, the fair Lidia held her peace, and remained
silent with wonderful sadness. This troubled Dacian wholly yielded unto his
new grief, replied: What fury, what cruel, and what a hardened and stonye
heart had he, that a beauty so far surpassing, could not move him to
yield.

Then the fair Lidia, who well understood from whence these grievous and
sorrowful speeches which the knight had spoken proceeded, yet not giving him
to understand that she had any knowledge thereof, said. Sir knight, I render
you great thanks for the sorrow which you seem to receive at my grief, but
if you be a knight of estimation as by your personage it does appear you
should be, here I do desire you by the honor you owe unto the order of
knighthoode, to perform two requests which I shall desire thee. The valiant
Eleno answered: I do not only Lady grant unto this which you do demand,
but I am wholly subject to your service, and will not refuse to do any thing
that you will command me. Well, seeing it is so, said this fair Lady. I
first request thee to carry me from this solitary land, wherein I have
received so much wrong, and therewith she arose up and began to descend from
that little mountain toward the waters side, at such time as Phoebus finished
his accustomed course.

Of all that happened unto this fair Lidia and to the Prince Eleno, after they
departed from the little mountain whereas they met. Chap. 19.
BY reason of the great darkness of the night, and again for that they would
take some rest, they would not enter into the Bark at that present. The
Damsel Lidia that night entered into the Tent somewhat to rest her weary
limbs, but the Prince remained without whereas he walked up and down all the
night. And as the solitary night is an enemy unto quietness, so being alone
there came to his remembrance many things past, which caused him to sustain
sundry passions, wherefore to comfort himself, he went unto his Galley for
his Lute, and retourning a land, he sat him down behind the Tent, and
began to put his Lute in consort, although the force of love be more full of
discord then concord. So when his Lute was in right tune, h^^ began
forthwith to play upon it, and with a sweet and pleasant voice he sung these
vearses following.

HArd is his hap that still of help has need,
crooked his chance that never ^ase can find,
And great his care that fresh is forced to bleed
By Cupides shaftes, that tyrant most unkind,
who ceaseless plagues the poor afflicted mind,
And having once possessed at will the heart,
The same adornes with wailing, woe, and smart.
Amongst the crew of those that feel this care,
even I my self may most of all complain,
Which now have twice been caught in Cupides snare,
wherein I felt dolor, distress, and pain,
with which oppression yet I do remain:
And so shall still for ought I can descrie,
Till friendly fates accord that I may die.
For why? the Dame whom I in heart adore,
disdaines me not, I will it not deny,
But does with tears her own mishap deplore,
in that a knight she loud, from her did fly,
judge then (ye heavens) what simple hope have I.
She follows him that left her comfortless,
And kills my heart that yielded her redress.
When he had made and end of this song, with the great grief that he sustained
he fell into a sound, so that his Lute fell out of his hands, but within a
small time he came again to himself, and crossed his fingers and wrong his
hands, and distilled from his eyes many ^al^e and sorrowful tears, and
lifting up his eyes unto heaven he remained in this case a great while without
any remembrance. This sorrowful Lady did well hear and understand this
sweet and cheerful song, but by reason that all her mind was upon her
cruel Brenio, his delicate music had no strength to remove ^ne ^ot of her
love. In this sort as you have heard they passed all the night till the
morning, so ^he day b^^ing come, this fair and afflicted Lady arose up and
went out of the Tent, whereas she ^ound the Prince walking up and down, and
with a sorrowful and soft voice she requested him once again to take her out
of that uncharitable Island. The Prince without any tarrieng took her by the
hand and lead her into his Galley, wherein they were scant both well embarked
when that the Gally began to shoue from shore, and to sail with such
swiftness that in a small time they were in the deapth of the great Sea, as
though he which did govern it had been the wise Artemidoro, who for the
delivery of this sorrowful Damsel had ordained all this that you have
heard. This Lady was very much amazed to see her self carried away in that
manner, and durst not ask the prince any manner of question, for that he was
very sad and pensive. Likewise the Prince Eleno considering the great sorrow
and trouble that Lidia received, d^rst not say any thing unto her, so in this
sort they travailed all that day and all the night, till the next day that
they discovered land, without speaking one word the one to the other, and in
a small time the Bark came so nigh the land, that they might discover a very
fair and well ^owred ^^tie, the which was adorned with a very fair haven,
full of marvelous great and strong ships. So this Galley sailed in amongst
the thickest of them all till it came to the shore side, where at their
ariuall, they discovered a land, a very well fough^en and bloody battle,
being hard by the haven, which was made by very many knights, which fought
only against three knights, who balyauntlye did defend themselves, the one
of them was Bargandel, the other two, Lyriamandro and Zoylo the Tartarian, that
if you do remember, when that the vaylaunt Rosicleer in mortal battle
slew the king of Tiro, who was a very mighty and strong Gyaunt, and how
that they saw a good way from them two Foistes, in battle together the one
with the other, and determining to go unto them to see what it should be, the
valiant Rosicleer leapt into his Galley, which was carried another way with so
great fury, that Zoilo was driven to remain, and he departed in great have.
So this Tartarian Zoilo remaining alone in his ship, directed it toward them
that were in battle, and came unto them at such time as they had great ne^e
of his succor, for that they were oppressed by the same ship of the rouers
that met with him, and they were in a marvelous great fight, but with the aid
of the Tartarian, they assailed them in such sort, yt if they had not yielded
themselves to mercy, they had sonke them all in the sea, and taking all their
oths they made them to swear that they should leave that evil and naughty
life. Then they all entered into the ship wherein the Tartarian was, with
determined purpose to proceed forwards whether their fortune would carry them
for to get them fame, and to increase their honor. So the weather constrained
them to ariue in the port of Numidia, whereas you have heard told, in that
country they did constrain all knights that there did ariue, to swear unto
them to aid and help that traitor their Lord. These Princes would not be
sworn except first they would declare the cause wherefore, and heerevpon they
multiplied words, which was the occasion of this cruel battle, which ye
prince Eleno did see being in his Galley. So it seemed unto him to be a very
unseemly thing and unequal, so many against three knights only, who
according unto the great and worthy feats which they did, they gave the
lookers on to understand that they were of noble estate, and for to succor
them he would willingly have leaped a shore, but first he desired the fair
Lidia to remain in quietness under the hatches of the Galley, for that he was
determined to go forth to aid and help those three knights. And without any
more carrieng with great speed he leapt to the shore, carrieng his sword in
his hand, and his sheeld on his arm, he pressed in amongst them all, saying.

O vile knights, cowardes, and of small estimiation* wherefore are you not
ashamed so great a number of you to fight only against three knights, and
therewith stroke such a terrible blow on him that he did first meet, that he
made him in two pieces to fall to the ground, so that in a short time by his
furious entering was known the great power of his arm, in such sort, that
whersoeuer he went, he made a broad way, and with small trouble he joined with
ye three knights, who when they knew of the help that was come unto them,
each of them recovered new strength, and did procure to do strange feats,
because the other should have no advantage of them. And they very much
meruailed who that knight should be of so great prowess, for y^ the blows
which he stroke might well be known from all the rest, for if it had not been
by the armor that he wore, they would have thought him to be one of the
sons of Trebatio. These four knights kept so good order in their fight
against their enemies, that they gave over to fight with them, and began to
showte and cry against them, so that they were constrained to go and seek
their enemies, the which they found to be no good remedy, for that they did
entreat them euilly at their backs, and being very angry heerewith, they
determined to put themselves amongst the thickest of them, which did not fall
out well with them, for that there was of them together more then ten thousand,
the which this valiant Eleno seeing, he threw his sheeld at his back, fullye
incensed with anger, and with his swoorde in his hand all alofte, he pressed
unto that part whereas most people were, and the first he met withal, he
parted him in the midst, and the second he cut off his head, and so went
forwards cutting and wounding now one and then another, with so great fury,
that there was none that durst abide his blows. Is there any doubt that
whilst this Prince was thus troubling and molesting his enemies, that the
other three knights which were with him did stand by and look on, no not so,
but for to sociate his worthy acts, they wrought such wonders in arms, as
the report would seem almost increadible unto the hearers, in striking such
terrible blows that they seemed to be no humane creatures. They did fight with
so much courage that their enemies were constrained to withdraw themselves
back, it was a great trouble unto these knights that they were a foot, for if
they had been on horseback all four together, without doubt very quickly
they had made an end of the conquest, so being in this conflict they ^awe come
forth of the city a great number of knights, and before them came a well
proportioned Gyaunt, armed with very fair and rich armor, who with great
have came unto the place whereas the knights were, and when he saw the great
harm which was there done, with a terrible and fearful voice he said.

Oh immortal Gods, is it possible that four knights has done all this harm,
that a thousand of very good knights are not able to do, and is their strength
and policy such, that not one of the^ have received any hurt. O wretched
knights what had you rather to die in my power then to swear unto so just a
demand as they have asked of you in ye behalf of the king Noraldino. Then
Lyriamandro who heard the words which the Giant had said, answered. There is
not one of us, that for the fear death will swear unto any thing, but first
we will know if the cause be just, because we will not fall unto any crime of
that which shall be contrary unto the order of knighthood. So then I do
perceive said the Gyaunt, that you do not purpose to swear in any thing except
it be first declared unto you what it is, and the occasion thereof. To the
which answered Zoylo, no. Well here I swear unto you by the high Gods (said
the Gyaunt) that I my self alone will bring you all to that stay, that you
would willingly swear, but then you shall have no time. And therewith he
drew out a broad and glistering sword and flourishing therewith he pressed
forwards, then the Prince Eleno stepped forth and requested the other that
they would let him alone with ye giant, the which although it were against
their wills, yet they consented to it, and the other putting themselves all on
the one side, they began again their mortal battle. The Gyaunt with the
great fury he had, did discharge his blow, but it was in vain, for that
the Prince did let it slip by, in such sort, that he could not strike him,
and in putting the blow aside, he cut the said Gyaunt upon one of his
legs, and made a wound, which although it were not great, yet there ran
out of it very much blood. When the Gyaunt did feel himself hurt, and that
he saw his blood run down, he did so kindle in ire, that he let his
sheelde fall to the ground, and laying hold on his great and broad swoorde,
with both his hands he lift it up, and stroke at the Dacian, thinking with
that one blow to have finished the battle, but the Prince for that he was
nimble and light, did procure straight ways to clear himself from the force
thereof, the which he did in such sort, that the swoorde fell down to the
ground, and by reason of the great force and fury wherewith it was discharged,
the Giant was constrained following his blow to fall likewise down upon the
earth. Here the Dacian was not idle, but with both his hands stroke him upon
his strong helm with great courage, and although he could not cut it at that
time by reason of the hardness, yet it astonished him and brought him out of
his remembrance. The Giant which saw himself in this perplexity, with great
fury in the best manner he could, tumbled himself on the one side, and
procured to arise upon his fee^e, but it was not possible for him, for that he
was tormented with great and heavy blows, and forced to fall down again
upon the sand, but yet as soon as he could, he turned once again and
forced himself to arise, but he could not do it with such speed, but first he
must prove again the sharp edge of the Dacians sword, who stroke him such
another terrible blow upon the helm, that it yielded, and he cut his flesh.
The Giant did f^ele himself very ill with that blow, and with the great
fury and anger which he had, he stroke at the knight a terrible blow which
was in such sort, that by any means he could not shift himself from it,
but must needs receive it upon his helm, the which was with such force, that
it made him to fall down to the ground, but this knight with great lightness
tu^bled himself away upon the sands, and in a trice he was on his feet
again, and went toward the place whereas the Giant was, with full pretense to
strike him such a blow, that he should not be able to make any more
resistance. The Giant when he saw him coming would have stricken him, for to
disturb him of his blow, but he could not, for that this Dacian stroke him
such an overthwart blow, that lighting on his foot, he cut it clean off, and
the Giant chanced a blow on his helm, that it made the knight to tumble on
the sand, the giant seeing him down, would have turned to have stricken him
again, but he could not for the lack of his foot, for when he thought to
firm his foot on the ground to prease forwards, he could not make a step,
but gave a terrible fall to the ground, and being sore troubled with the wound
of his head and other wounds, he yielded up the Ghost, and sent his soul to
whom it did appertain. The Pagan people when they saw their stout Captain
dead, with great showts and shrikes they pressed altogether upon those four
knights, but they found the^ neither dastards nor cowards, but they gave them
well to understand yt they were of great val^ur. Then they joined themselves
together back to back, and stroke such strange blows upon their enemies,
and with so great force and fury, that he which had received one blow would
not turn to them again, with great fear they were so scarred. Prince Eleno
being incensed with anger, at the fall that he received by the blow of the
Giant, it caused him to claspe his sword fast in his hand, and with double
fury he pressed amongst his enemies, that unhappy he might think himself
that came to the receipt of the first stroke, for that with an overthwart blow,
he cut his head clean from his shoulders, and returned unto another, and
stroke him upon the wast, so that it had near hand parted him in two pieces,
so with such like blows and feats of knighthood they made them to retire. And
at the same time they saw coming forth of ye city a great number of knights
and gentlemen, which they judged to be about six thousand in an army, and all
on horse back. It could not be chosen but ye this valiant Prince Eleno should
have some fear, seeing so many Knights: notwithstanding, with a loud voice,
and with great courage he laid. Excellent and valyant knights, now is ye time,
(most noble and stout warriors) that we show the great strength and courage of
our hearts, by a plain testimonial in leaving our bodies as sacrificed unto
their wills, and our blood to be sprinckeled abroad, receiving more joy and
honor in our deaths, fighting in our own defense, then to give consent unto
our enemies in ouercomming us. Notwithstanding, this young warrior did not
forget himself, but rather with more furious blows he pressed on his enemies,
and working such terrible feats, that it is very wonderful to be heard: and
so without all hope of their lives, committing themselves unto God, they did
procure by all means, to cut off and make less their enemies, killing them in
such sort, as it seemed to man's capacity impossible. The quantity was so
great, that by reason of the bolud that ran from them, the water on the sea
side was made red, and lost his natural color, and being in this conflict,
there approached all that great company that came forth of the City. And
before them all there came a Knight armed with very fair and rich armor, all
gylded, and something of a good stature and bigness of body, and he had on his
head a royal crown: who when he came unto the place whereas this bloody
battle was, he comma^nded all the people to stand aside, and with a severe
voice, showing great humility, he said. Ualiaunt and worthy Knights, whom
Jupiter defend and keep, I f^^le my self very sore troubled, in seeing
Knights of so great valor and worthiness as you are, to be endued with so
much cruelty against your selves, and only for not swering an oath,
(considering you have chanced upon this adventure) whereby you should make
defense against so great treason again me practiced, of traitors, which only
by tyraunnie pretend to take away my kingdom from me. To the which words, the
valiant Prince Eleno made answer, and said. If thou have justice on thy side,
as thou say thou have, wherefore do you consent to suffer so vile a custom
in this your Country, constraining all strange Knights by force to swear
unto your defense, the which by (...) and order of Knighthood they must do it
of their own free will, if you give them to understand the truth thereof. To
whom the King answered and said, Gen^le Knight, all this which has been done,
was never by my commandment, but by this my Captain whom thou have here
slain. And for that I did understand the great harm which he did, and that
without all reason, I am come hither to remedy it: for which cause I do desire
and pray you, to let the (...) of your strong arms to cease, and to pacify
your s^ou^ courages, and to take in good part, to come and rest your selves
with me, the which you may do with all security. And here I do promise you
to hold and keep my faith and word the which I do give unto you: and then
will I declare unto you all my trouble, whereat you will not only take great
contentment to swear that which I shall request you: but also I believe that
you will of your worthiness take the demand to be your own, according unto
the great right and Justice, that I have on my part. So these four Knights
were satisfied of all that this Morish King had promised unto the^, and by his
words were overcome and yielded unto that which he had demanded of them, and
were determined to go with him: at ye which, ye King received no small joy, for
to have so valiant Knights with him in his company. Then ye King alighted and
caused them to put up their swords into their sheathes, and did them as great
honor as though they had been in their own Countries. Then the Prince Eleno
seeing how that all things were finished, he determined to go for his fair
Lidia, but when the King knew who she was, himself did bear him company, and
took her out of the galley, and brought her a shore. All that did behold her,
did marvel at her great beauty, being mixed with so much sadness. So the
King took her by the hand and bare her company, till he came unto the City,
and carried her unto his pallaice, which was very rich and great, for this king
was one of the mightiest Princes in all Africa. So straight way it was
commanded to make ready dinner, for that it was very needful, the which was
accomplished very sump^uously. When they sat down to dinner, they pulled off
their helmes, which before that time they had not done: and when the Prince
Eleno had pulled off his healme, all the rest did think verelye, that it had
been the valiant Knight Rosicleer, (for that as I have told you) he was very
much like him) complaining for that he had kept himself so close, without
showing what he was in so long time. The Prince with a smiling countenance did
put them out of al doubt, in showing them who he was of the which they remained
very much amazed, and for all that, if he had had a little more beard, they
would not have believed him. The King was very well content and pleased that he
had such Knights in his company, and told unto the^ a great circumstance of
treason, clean contrary to that it was, applying all the injury to be offered
unto himself, mingling his tale with counterfeit tears, which caused these
Knights to give credit unto his words, in such sort that they did swear unto
the King all that he would demand, of the which this traitorous King remained
greatly contented, and ordained for the^ very fair and rich chambers to ease
themselves, with all service needful, and likewise for ye fair Lidia, for he
lodged her in the Queens chamber, and caused many Ladies and Damsells to come
and bear her company, and to serve her in all that was necessary, for that
he perceived how the Prince Eleno did receive great pleasure therein. In the
end of twenty days that these Knights had soiourned with the King, there came
one and advertised the King, how that there was arrived in the port of the
City, a fair ship, and how yt there descended out of her a Knight, and a well
proportioned Gyaunt: and by reason that they would not hearken unto the
accustomed oath, which they that did arrive there should swear, that there
was begun a marvelous and stout battle, with them that did keep the Port,
wherein the knight did marvelous and worthy feats, and likewise ye Giant. The
which being heard by those knights yt were with ye king, they called for their
armor, and were with a trice armed, and there were brought unto them very fair
and strong horses, which the King had commanded to give them, and mounting on
their backs, in great have they went out of the City to the haven side, to the
same place whereas they fought their own battle, whereas they found these
two knights with no less rigor and fury, then they themselves were before. So
straight way, three of those Knights did know, who that Knight and Giant was,
which were in battle, and said, that it was Clauerindo and the King of
Sardenia, whom I told you departed out of Greece in the quest of the Emperor,
and by fortune they were driven into those parts, for that the King might have
more aid for to execute his tyranny. Then the valyant Zoylo pulled off his
helm and said. What is the matter valiant Prince, that you show your self so
furious against him, which in all points is ready to be at your commandment.
At which words, the Prince lift up his eyes, and when he beheld those three
Princes and knew them, he very much meruailed to see them, and left off his
battle, and so likewise did Bramidoro, and all three with their arms abroad,
came to embrace him. And Clauerindo said, It had not gone very well with us in
this conflict, if these knights had not known us, and in saying these words,
he threw his arms about their necks with great joy that he received to see
them: and with no less joy and pleasure all the rest did show themselves and
said. We are those which have most gotten in the knowing of you, for that we
have put apart the great battle that was prepared for us. So with the like
courtesy they received the Prince of Dacia, who, if that the other had not
told him what he was, he would have believed that it had been Rosicleer. So
with these and such like reasons, at the request of the other Princes, they
went with them unto the City, at such time as the King came forth,
accompanied with a fair company of Knights and very well armed, who
received them with great courtesy, and caused ye prince of France to ride with
him side by side. So they altogether returned unto the City, and then to the
Pallaice, whereas they were meruailously well entertained, and there the King
told unto them all his contrary and changed treason, wherefore these two
knights did swear^ and promise unto the King, the same which the others had
done. The prince Clauerindo had so great affection unto the Prince Eleno, that
he would not at any time depart from him, neither would the Prince Eleno do
otherwise unto Clauerindo, declaring unto him all his evils and strange
adventures. At which communication was present the king of Sardenia, and when
he heard him tell of his adventure in Tinacria, and of the battle that he had
made with Tefereo, and how that he was overcome, he with more affection beheld
him, and requested him to hear the whole estate thereof. So the Prince did
declare all, and how that he departed, and how that afterward he found the
princess Lidia, that Lady which carried the Emperor out of Constantinople:
the which being all known unto them, they would straight way go and visit
her, and she received them with her accustomed sadness.

Now for that I have long time forgot that noble Emperor, I will return, and
tell you what happened unto him, at the fountain of Tinacria, where I left
him.

How that the Emperor went unto Tinacria, and of all that passed in the
battle, which he had with the Earl of Modique. Cap. 20.
IN great trouble and affliction we left the valiant Emperor Trebatio, in
the Island of Tinacria, hard by the fountain of marble, at such time as the
Earl of Modique with his spear in his reast, was prepared for to hurt him.
The Emperor seeing him come, he had great care of himself, and being in a
place that neither to the one part nor to the other he could slip back to
save himself from that blow, he did determine to stoop with both his knees
and shorten in his body, for that he was sure he could not ouerrunne him with
his horse, by reason of the fountain that was at his back. The Emperor
defended himself in such sort, that the spear without doing him any hurt
went over his head. The blow was not so soon past when that the Emperor rose
bolt upright, and cast such a thrust at the horse breast, that his sword
entered in up to the hiltes. The horse when he felt himself hurt, gave a leap
into the air with so great swiftnes, as though it had been a whirlewinde, and
in the end, he fell down to the earth with great force, and in his fall, he
caught ye Earls leg under him, in such sort, that he could not by any means
arise. Here might the Emperor have slain or hurt him, but he would not,
for y^ he seemed unto him to be a knight of great estimation. Then all the
people that were there, both them a foot and those on horseback, with great
showts and shrikes they would have set upon him: but they could not come nigh
him at their will, for that the dead horse was between them: and again, the
Earl was a shield for his defense, who was prisoner under his horse right
before him. So at this instant came forth of that fair pallaice, a great
number of knights and Ladies, and amongst them ye fair Queen Garrosilea. And
when all the people saw her they put themselves out of the way toward the one
side, by the which the Emperor understood that she was Lady of all that
Country. She came foremost of all that company, being so fair and so well
proportioned, that she seemed unto the Emperor to be as beautiful as ever he
beheld any in all the world: she was of the age of fourteen years, but yet
her body was of a maruailous and great stature. She was adorned with very rich
robes, and upon her head a crown of gold, which was very great, placed with
such gravity, as her state required. And when she drew nigh unto the place
whereas this warrior was, she very much meruailed at his w^ll proportioned
body and good disposition, and at the severe and fair countenance of the
Emperor, and tourning unto him, in the Tuscan tongue she said.

Worthy and valiant Knight, whatsoever thou art, thou do seem unto us,
that thou art a stranger. Notwithstanding, thou must not think that thou art
in a place, whereas shall be done unto thee any thing without reason, although
I do not know, how thou can excuse thy self, for doing of all this harm,
which I see thou have done unto so valiant and worthy Knights, as these which I
do see dead before thee, only by the strength of thy arm. And wherein I may
most excuse thee, is in their small prowes: for although they were armed, and
thou naked without armor, yet had they neither power nor force to bring thee
unto prison. And therefore, seeing their small force, I determined, being a
woman and a damo^ell, to come forth of my pallaice, to make an end of that:
which without great harm and damage could not be ended by Knights. Therefore
now seeing there is no other remedy, I do desire thee that thou would
yield thy self to be my prisoner, and give unto me the glory and triumph,
that so many worthy Knights could not attain: and put thy whole trust and
confidence in me, and I do promise thee that no man shall do thee any wrong,
or offer thee any thing against reason.

The Emperor did well understand all that the Queen had said unto him, but he
made as though he did not understand her, and turned to ask her what she had
said, in saying, that he did not understand the language, and how that he was
a Grecian borne. Then the Queen who was very discreet, and could speak the
Greek tongue very well, renewed her tale, and spoke that in the Greek, which
before she had done in the Tuscan tongue. Then the Emperor boowed his knees to
the earth, and with an humble voice, he said. I cannot deny, most excellent and
fair queen, ye great grief which I have, for that which I have done, neither
can your knights deny ye just occasion yt I had to do it. For they finding me a
sleep and taking my rest by this fountain, being constrained thereto, by the
travail I received at sea, and being cast aland in this your country, they
did ^ntreate me as they would not entreat a plough man, constraining their
courtesy against my will, and doing that, which the gravity of my heart would
not permit.

In the end seeing that they did so ill entreat me and in such manner, I did
determine first to dye, then to yield my self unto them as prisoneer, neither
would I have altered my intent, if it it were not now by occasion of your
great beauty, accounting my self happy to die at the commandment of so
excellent a Lady: all this time that the Emperor was speaking unto the Queen,
she never withdrew her eyes, from beholding of his personage, and had great
admiration to see the Majesty of his countenance. O cruel Cupide, will thou
now begin to use thy accustomed malice. O false tyrant, I can never talk
in these or such like matters, but thou art always at hand. This queen was
so blinded with love, that without any more consideration, she went unto the
Emperor, and took him by the hand, and made him to stand upon his feet and
said. Ualiant Knight, I do account my self very happy, for that I have had
so much strength, that only with my person I have moved your stout courage to
so great humility. And with this she caused him to put up his sword into his
sheathe, and promising him safety, she led him with her into the pallaice, and
commanded that the Earl should be taken from under the horse, for at that
time he had not so much strength to clear himself from that fall: for that it
was in such sort, that it did broose and entreat him very ill. And when they
came unto the Pallaice, the Queen commanded that there should be given him a
marvelous fair and rich lodging. And for the great complaints which were made
of him, she commanded, that he should be kept in good ward, although ye
prison which she gave unto him, was not so strong, as that which the Emperor
had given occasion unto the Queen to have, and although it were not very
grievous, yet the Emperor could not choose but feel it, when he saw himself
locked up, being never accustomed unto any such trouble: the Queen had great
care of him, and caused him to be healed of those small wounds which he had,
and that with great diligence, in such wise, that in a small time he was whole
of his pain, swellings and other griefs. In all this time, the Earl and all
the kinsfolks of them that were slain, made great have and suit unto the
queen to execute justice upon this knight that was prisoner, but she did
defend the case very much, and excusing him in declaring unto them the small
right she had to do it, and giving them to understand how that they had their
payment according unto their deserts, but by reason of the great importance
that those knights made, she was constrained to keep him straighter in prison,
which was unto her so great pain, that she could scar^e dissemble it. So the
Queen being thus sore troubled she went unto her chamber, and there was
between her chamber and that, where as the Emperor was but one wall, and out
of the Queens chamber there went a door, whereas many times she communed
with him. Thus being very pensive and sore troubled, for that she was
constrained to command that which her heart would not consent unto, she went
her self close unto the door to see if she might comfort her self with the
sight of her prisoner and captive, and she chanced to come the^her at that time
as the Emperor did complain very much of his fortune, uttering marvelous
pitiful and sorrowful words. Oh cruel fortune without all stabilitie,
envious, and the only causer of all my unquietness, I see that no mightiness
nor the power of any Monarch is sufficient to bridle thy disordinate appetite.
Art not thou content in doing me so great evil, in yt thou broughtest me out
of my worthy Empire, clean contrary to the will of my subjects, and did
not hold fast thy wheel till such time as thou had delivered me into the
hands of strange people. It had been better for me to have dyed in the
deapth of the Sea, or else with the edge of the Swoorde like a knight, then to
see my self in the power of barbarous people. O Emperor Trebatio, now after
so many and great troubles in the which thou have seen thy self, and have
over passed them, and by this misfortune thou art put unto that great
necessity, that neither thou cannest profit thy self of thy valiant
courage, neither of the strength of thy worthy and valiant knights.

And so in such like anguish he walked up and down the chamber, and swore that
if he did see himself at liberty, he would not give credit unto any such
fair words as the queen had promised him, and sometimes he threw himself
upon his bed, calling for his valiant sons, and his wise men, saying. Oh my
sons and my friends, if that you did know of all these my troubles, I am sure
that you would give me aid and succor with the strength of your arms, in
leaving this Island desolate, which by you was once restored, and now as it is
happened to the hurt of your Father: or at least ways, if thou Lyrgandeo or
Artemidoro, or any of you would give me succor with my armor and horse, I
do here swear unto you by the almighty God, that in the anger and fury
that I am in, that in spite of all Tinacria I would set my self at liberty,
and leave them so plagued as their deserts do deserve. And with this he held
his peace for a while, and looked round about to see if he could find any
place where he might get out, and seeking he found a very fair and well
proportioned Lute, hanging upon a nail on the wall, the which he took down
and did put it in tune, and began to play with very sweet melody,
accompanied with a very heavy and harmonious voice, and against fortune he
sang these verses following.

YOu worthy wights which fortunes frowns have felt,
and headlong fallen from top of high estate:
And all, with whom she mutably has dealt,
consent with me her falsehood to relate.
Whose double face when smoothest it does smile,
Then means she most the mighty to beguile.
Ay me poor Prince a pattern of her spite,
Who erst on top of all her wheel was plast:
And now have care in steed of late delight,
for regal crown with captives life disgrast.
From Croesus wealth far worse then Codius pore:
Fie froward fortune what can thou do more?
Well, since that I have felt thy farthest ire,
in this distress I flatly thee defy,
And for redress, I only death desir^,
hoping that then my soul to him shall sly,
Whose due it was before that I was borne:
Who with his wisdom laughs thy slights to scorn.
And thus making an end of his song, he threw his Lute upon his bed, and turned
unto his accustomed unquietness, and again complaining of Fortune he said. O
vile coward and ungrateful, tell me where is thy habitation, and thou shall
see if this wheel in the which thou go, can profit thee any thing or
deliver thee, that both thy self and the wheel be not broken all too pieces
by my strong hand, if I go out from hence: and I will never rest till such
time as I have found thee, and although thou do hide thy self in the deep
and infernal places, yet will I not leave to follow thee till such time as I
have rooted out all thy power. These and other like words this sorrowful
Emperor uttered, with so great anger, yt if he had found himself with armor,
there had been no doubt but that he would have broken the chamber whereas he
was prisoner, and in spite of all Tinacria have set himself at liberty. The
Queen which was hearkening unto all that which the Emperor said, was not so
much kindeled with the love of the Emperor before, but now it increased
without measure, when she heard and understood what he was, and if it had
not been for the respect of her estate, out of all doubt she had entered in
where as the Emperor was, but brideling her own will, considering what an
evil report she should have amongst her subjects, if they should by any
means attain to the knowledge thereof. With this and such like extremities
she remained a great while silent, till such time as the force of love did so
overcome her, that she forgot clean all that touched her honor and royal
majesty, and determined to open the door, which without any delaie she
did, which straight ways the Emperor heard, and thinking to be some other
thing, he arose upon his feet, and took his swoorde in his hand (for the
Queen would never consent that his swoorde should be taken from him,) and
when he saw that it was the queen, he did quiet himself, and dissembling
his anger in the best wise he could, the Queen drew near unto the Emperor,
and dissembling what she had heard, she saluted him and said. Gentle knight,
how do you feel your self of your passed travail. To whom he answered, I
can make no other answer, most mighty Lady, but the very same which you
your self may think, if you were prisoner, especially for such an occasion, as
you ought rather to receive favor and camfort, and therefore I cannot but muse
at your highness, knowing in how little fault I am, that you set me not at
liberty, but I do well see that you are a Damsel and subject unto the will
of your subjects, for look what they ordain you dare not resist against
them, therefore fair Lady I do desire you if you pretend to set me at
liberty (as by promise and justice you are bound) let it be out of hand, and
if any of your subjects will say to the contrary, I request the acceptance
of the battle for the defense of my right, with eight or ten, or if they
will, with twenty of the best in all your kingdom, and I doubt not but in
mine own person against them al, to deliver my self from this enthralled
peril: unto whom the queen answered with a very good grace. I do well
understand gentle Knight, that the highness of your heart cannot suffer such
straight imprisonment, as well for that which I have seen of thee, as also for
that which I have heard. So likewise thou may well believe, that which I have
done, has been partly to content my subjects and people, for that this evil
has fallen out upon the person of the most mightiest man amongst them, and of
this be you assured, yt the thing which you would have done, and so much
desire, shall not be done, only for that you are without fault, although they
charge you with it greatly, but also for that thou art Father unto that
excellent knight of the Sun, whom in this my Island they honor for one of
the most high and sovereign Gods, as a restorer of the same, and again, that
it is not decent that so high and mighty an Emperor should in this Island be so
rigorously entreated, as that his cause should be determined by the terms of
justice, unto whom not only they, but the whole world, willingly ought to
serve, for that thou art an Emperor, and father unto such a son. The
Emperor was very sore troubled when he perceived yt he was known, the which
this fair Lady marking, went forwards in her talk, and said: Do not vex
your self, neither be any whit troubled (most mighty Prince) for that you
are known, considering that of such a one as thou art it is reason we do
esteem, according to thy desert, neither can my captive heart consent unto
any other thing but the exalting of thy honor. Alas what shall I say, who
has received most wrong for their imprisonment, it has been only my crystal
breast and captiued heart, they have wronged thy body but for a time, but me,
love has bereaved of my former liberty, in wounding my heart, so that it is
almost incurable. In this (my good Lord) you may understand that I a lone am
she which has the greatest wrong. Thou valiant Emperor have taken away
from the Earl of Modique his son, but thou have robbed me (most unfortunate)
of my heart. Oh how much better had it been for me to have been pertaker with
him of death, then now to live, not knowing what cruel love will do. Oh
immortal Gods, how is it that you have permitted that the tender heart of a
poor damsel, being always willing to offer unto you sacrifices, and
exercising of my self daily in your service, and now in payment of all this,
you have permitted it to be sacrificed unto the cruel will of Cupide, who has
forcibly pierced my feeble heart with his furious darts. I beseech thee (O
Emperor) do not deny me this my unreasonable demand, although thou see
it so far to exceed the mean. Oh virginity, thou may well be compared unto
a rose, which so long as the leaves are reserved wtin the bud, it keeps the
natural color, but when it once begins to blow, then does it quickly change,
even so the flourishing beauty of virgins does no sooner bloome, but Cupide
blotteth it with his despiteful blemish. O foolish queen what caused thee to
depart out of the Pallaice whereas thou were at liberty and without grief,
did thou it for to do honor unto the Emperor, and yet not knowing him.
Well, for what cause so ever it were, see now what is become of it, for that
freely thou have yielded thy self unto him, without reserving any thing in
thy own power. All this the queen delivered with such sorrow and lamentation
that it would have caused a stony heart to have relented. But the emperor who
with a single heart did love the Empress Briana, and moreover being a very
good christian, was not moved with one of these lamentable words, neither made
he any show of love unto the queen, but wishing rather to have had battle
with one of the hardiest knights in all the world, then to have found himself
so suddenly assailed by this amorous woman: wherefore when this fair Lady had
plainly declared all the whole secret of her heart, the Emperor using his
accustomed discreation, did show himself to be very heavy and ^ad for that
which the queen had heard, and taking her by the hand they sat down together
upon the corner of the bed, and began to answer unto her amorous reasons,
although not so much unto her purpose as she desired, saying.

(...) Lady and queen, I am fully certified that from so (...) and beauty
there can proceed nothing without (...), and therefore I did now loose the
confidence of your ^^uour, when I was unknown, much more now that you (...)
know me to be the Emperor of Greece, the truth whereof I do here confess.
And although I find my self in the land where all the people be my mortal
enimyes, yet for all that I will not deny who I am, because my heart
wheresoever it becomes, cannot but use manifestly his noble courage. Here this
Queen did cut off his answer, saying: Oh Emperor I do not ask of thee any
recompense, neither do I demand of thee whether thou be our enemy or our
friend, but the thing which I alone desire of thee is this, to give a remedy
unto this my pain, and a plaster for my sore, for that the view of thee has
been the only occasion thereof. Oh Emperor, what trifling is this, to talk of
that which is not aunswerable unto that which I demand: Oh worthy Emperor,
have compassion on me, for that thou alone may remedy this my evil, for
thou see apparauntlye the need I have of thy help: Oh that it had pleased
the Gods that my remedy were as sure as thy liberty, restore unto me (I
beseech thee) that whereof thou have bereaved me by beholding thee, yield unto
me O sweet Emperor, seeing that I am already yielded unto thee, insomuch that
there is no doubt, but to put into thy hands the spoil of my royal marryage.

The Emperor did lean his cheek upon his hand very pensive, all the time
that this Lady was declaring her complaints, not for that he was without
pity, but for that he was moved with great compassion, and yet not with
determination to satisfy her disordinate appetite, but with fair words to put
her in good hope of remedy. And very feign she would have answered, but
that she was cut off by a Damsel which called her. The Queen dissembling
her heaviness in the best wise she could, went out of the chamber to see what
they would have, unto whom the Damsel said. Lady, there is a messenger come
from the king of Mauritania, which does tarry for you below in the pallaice,
whereat this fair queen did feel her self troubled, the occasion was, for
that this king was in love with her, who was very valiant and of great force,
and began to govern his kingdom very young, with another brother of his, who
at that time was not knighted, nevertheless to hear him named in all Africa,
it made the people to tremble with fear, therefore many times by reason of
his great pride his fame was much abated. This king did determine with
himself to marry with the Queen, either by fair means, or else by force,
and for to put this his pretense in practice, he sent unto her his messengers,
and for a more majesty, he made his own brother Lord Embassodour. And seeing
this history will most entreat of this young man who was called Brufaldoro,
ye wise author would discover his customs and manners, he says yt he was in
the stature of his body well near a leaven foot high, and all his members
conformable unto his height, being endued with incredible strength, he had his
countenance very grave and of great beauty, without any anger, very
tractable, and a gentleman of great courtesy, he detested to do any thing
that was unseemly, he was very ready to correct where it was needful, and
far from any unhuman cruelty: all which virtues were extinguished when he
was angered, for that then in all Africa and Asia there was no wild beast so
fierce and cruel. And many times it has been seen, when his anger had been
past, he would have weapt with great sorrow for the hurt which he had done, he
had one custom which was very devilish (being no small blemish unto all
the rest of his good qualities) that he would never pardon them of whom he
had received injury. So when this Pagan was come into the pallaice, and in the
Queens presence, with a grave countenance and hardy voice he declared his
embassage, and by reason that at that time the queen had not her heart at
liberty, she gave him for answer, without tarrying to take any farther
counsel, that her intent was not as yet to marry, for that she was very
young, wherewith this Pagan departed, and did return to give this answer unto
his brother Bramarandus, at which he was very irefull, and commanded to make
sacrifices unto Mahomet, praying unto him for to change the will of the
Queen, that she might marry with him. Then there was made answer unto him
(by the Devil which had entered into that infernal Image of Mahomet) that
he should not tarry for any other hope to obtain her, but by force of
arms, and that he should procure with all his strength and power for to
marry her, adding that from her should proceed an infant, at whose
valiantness and strength half the world should tremble and stand in fear.
This false God did well divine and prognosticate, but yet he did deceive the
wretched Bramarandus, in saying, that of his seed should proceed such a
child, and when he heard ye answer of this accursed Mahomet, he commanded, yt
withal diligence should be joined together, five hundred of the most
valiantest knights that might be chosen, not only in Mauritania, but also in
Numidia and Garamantes, for that not one King of all these countries would deny
him any thing, with pretense with them and himself in person, to win by force
that, which by fair means he could not obtain: and imbarking themselves,
with a prosperous wind, they came in a small time unto Tinacria: and before
they would go ala^d, they did send their Ambassador a shore, to see if they
did find her first purpose altered. The which message was committed to a
mighty strong Moore, called Forimon: who did declare it unto the Queen with
proud and obstinate words, threatening them with cruel wars, if to the
contrary they would not con^ent unto the marriage. There was present at this
Embassage, the Earl of Modique, and the Earl of Modeli, and the Earl
Farlera, and the Marquis of Aposto, and many other valiant Knights: and
although they made an outward show, that they did not esteem of it, nor made
any reckoning thereof, yet they were in great fear. The good Earl of Modique
with a sad voice said. Oh mighty Jupiter, how well thou have paid thy self
for the great courtesy which thou have showed us, in giving us for our Ladies
and governors, the fairest damsels in the world. For not long since we did
behold one of the^ with her own hands to thrust a sword through her breast (which
was a pitiful sight to see): and now ye other is even at ye point to do ye
like. Notwithstanding now shall my life perish, for to maintain my honor, in ye
service of my Lady and Queen. And with this, they did all determine, rather to
have wars with honor, then peace with shame: waying the little good will the
Queen had to marry with him, and to take him for her husband. And with this
determination, they gave him for answer, that the Queen was not intended to
marry as yet: so that if he pleased to tarry the time he might, if not, he
might do as he thought best, and that they would not let, but defend the
honor of their Lady and Queen.

The messenger not well pleased with the answer, returned to declare it unto
his Lord. And when he was gone, all the Queens Knights determined to fortify
themselves in the City, and make all things very strong, and so they gave the
Queen to understand thereof, whereof she was very well content, seeing them
so well encouraged for her defense. The day following they commanded to call
together all the best Knights of ye land, that they might come to her aid and
succor: for that there were very many in that Island. But that same night
Venus would have wrought one of her accustomed cruelties, if she had not been
hindered, as hereafter you shall hear in the chapter following.

How the Queen being kindeled with the fire of love, and seeing that the
Emperor would give her no remedy of her pain, would have stroke her self
with a sword to the heart, wherewith to have finished her life: and how the
Emperor was constrained to consent unto her will. Cap. 21.
IN the mean time that they were putting all things in good order, as you have
heard, Cupide did not cease, but continuallye tormented the Queen, so that
every day she did not let to trouble the Emperor, with her loving and amorous
complaints, provoking him in what she might, unto her will, who always with
great discretion did delay the same, until the last night that they were
determined to leave the Pallaice, and to enter into the City. Then this fair
Lady endured very great pain, until such time as the clear Diana with the
fairnes of her beams, had passed the half part of her journey, when that all
the people were at their accustomed and natural rest. Then this fair
Garrofilea arose up from her bed with a desperate determination, which the
force of love enforced her to practice, and covering her self with a very rich
robe, she took a sword which had been the King her Fathers, and put it under
her left arm, and in her right hand she carried a light that she might the
better find the door, the which she opened as softly as was possible, at such
time as the Emperor, was very fast a sleep, and when she saw that he did not
hear her entering in, she went unto the beds side, with the light in her
hand, that she might contemplate her self in beholding the grave and fair
face of the Emperor, and unto her it seemed that in all the world there was
not such another, nor that there could be any greater thing to be desired, then
that which her heart did require. In this sort she was beholding him a great
while, until such time, as the sorrowful sighs Garrofilea set, caused the
Emperor to awake, and when he saw the Queen, he was very much amazed, and
would have risen up, whereto ye Queen would not consent, but caused him to lie
still, and setting the light upon a table which was in the chamber, she came
and sat her down upon the bed by the Emperor, and shedding many tears of
perfect and true love, she said.

My Lord, I would very feign know what thou do pretend toward me, most
unfortunate Queen, wounded with the darte of Cupide, only by the sight of thy
exceeding personage. For knowing it, with thy answer I would put in order,
that which I have to do, concerning this my miserable life. I do well know my
Lord and Emperor, that this my bold discovering of my self, has been too
much, and beyond all reason: but if at any time thou have loved, and do know
the great grief that love does cause, thou will not blame me, nor put me in
any fault: and I would yt I could show thee my wounded heart, yt in seeing it so
sore afflicted, thou might take some compassion of me, and that which does
most torment me, is, that I have yielded my self unto one, yt has so little
pity on me. Who has ever heard, yt women should woo and require of men to
love them? But I most unfortunate Queen, have broken that law and custom. O
immortal Gods, what have you conceived against me? Is not ye apparent which you
used against my sister, and now will you use it also with me. I should be requested
of Emperors and Kings: and now I come to request one, that makes no account
of me, neither does my present destruction move him to any pity. Go too
Emperor, make an end and answer me, that therewith I may receive either
life or death. Here may you, which have known what love is, judge what the
Emperor Trebatio might conceive in himself, in this cruel case. One way he
did consider the great loyalty that he ought unto the Empres his wife: and
this constrained him to deny her. Another way, the great desire that he had to
see himself at liberty, and the great love that he did know Garrofilea bare
him, caused his heart somewhat to yield. Notwithstanding, he did procure with
fair and sweet words, to see if he could cause her to change her thought
and purpose saying, Lady, I do see very well, that the force of love is so
cruel, that whosoever he does wound, he leueth them in a manner without
remedy, except it come from them, on who^ they have fixed their heart. I do
not deny, but that your amorous desire is such as he has ordained it, who
spares no creature. But considering your highness and great estate, and the
honor that all such as you are, should have by your royal marriages, I do
more rejoice that you suffer pain, then you should take your ease with that,
unto which sensual love does constrain you. Most sovereign Queen, here I
do desire you, to bridle your affection, and restrain your appetite, that you
fall not into that infamy, which will be the only blemish of your estate,
seeing it appertains so much unto your honor. The queen seeing yt his
reasons did not incline unto that which she desired, shortened his talk, and
said: Emperor, all that which thou have said, and all besides that thou can
tell me, I do already understand, and there is nothing that may be spoken
herein, but I have before this time considered of it. Notwithstanding, love
has more force, then any regard or consideration I should have unto my honor.
Therefore I am here come, fully determined to make a second sacrifice unto my
gods, which afterward shall be lamented by thee. And in saying those words,
she took out the sword which she brought in secret under her roabes, and with
great have she set the pommell thereof unto the ground, and would have thrown
her self upon the point thereof. The worthy Trebatio seeing her in this
desperate mind, leapt quickly out of his bed, and with a mighty courage
caught hold of her, and took the sword out of her hand, saying: Oh blind
queen, what devilish determination is this? The Lady answered, Unlouing Lord,
(...) other thing, but to ease my self by death, for that I (...) not longer
live, as one dying. And saying these words, she fell in a sound in the arms of
the Emperor. Here could not the stoutnesse of the Greek heart make such
resistance, but that with great love he took her, and cast her upon the bed,
shedding many tears with much compassion, and considering the firmness of the
love that the Queen had showed him, he was confounded in his own thought,
and enforced to have done that which he never thought to have done, and so
purposed to give her all her whole contentment: and so joining his mouth to
hers, he remained kissing her till such time as this sorrowful Lady came
again to her self. But when she perceived she was of him so louinglye
embraced, being the thing she only desired, she straightway recovered all the
strength that she had lost, and cast her arms about his neck with exceeding
love, which grieved not the Emperor any thing at all: and in such sort they
used themselves, that the Queen was made Lady, with great co^tentment unto
them both. So with like sport they passed the rest of the night, in great joy
and pleasure. The Queen Garrofilea when she saw that it was day, returned unto
her chamber very pleasant and merry, until such time as it was her accustomed
hour of (...), which was somewhat early yt day, for that the two (...) made
very great have that they might enter into the City, the which was straight
way done. And the Queen brought with her the Emperor, and made him to swear
to be her true prisoner, and not to depart from thence without her will and
leave. So the queen took the Emperor by the hand, and in this order they
went out of the Pallaice: The Earl of Modique when he saw this, could not
choose, but receive great grief, but he did dissemble it, for that he
considered, that in such extremity, so valiant a Knight was needful, and so
altogether they entered into the City. The Queen was very gallant and
pleasant, whereat all her subjects received great delight, and in the chief
street of the City, there was erected the Images of two Knights, made all of
stone, of a marvelous good proportion, and they had over them a cover like a
Tabernacle, very rich and well wrought, because the water should not fall upon
the^, nor any other thing to hurt them. As soon as the Emperor saw those
figures, he knew that the one was the Image, of his son without reading of
the supercription: but when he came nigh unto it, he read the same, which said*
This is the great Prince of Grecia, called the Knight of the Sun, restorer of
the ancient kingdom of Tinacria, and the abater and breaker of the strength
of the most strongest Giants in all the world. And going a little farther, he
saw upon the other Knight this title: Prince Eleno of Dacia, cousin unto the
most valiant sons of Trebatio, the wellspring of all our quietness. Upon
this he looked with great affection, and earnest desire to see his perfect
personage. The Queen did well understand the great joy that the Emperor
received, in beholding the figure of his son, and of his brothers son: for
which cause she commanded that to be told publicly, which was spoken in
secret: and then entered into the Queens pallaice, and the Emperor was carried
into a very fair and rich lodging, whereas by force he must be shut in, to
make as if he were prisoner, for that the nobles of the Realm, would not
consent that he should go abroad at his will. The third day following, this
brave Bramarando with all his Knights, came before the walls of the City, and
spread abroad their Ancients: and he himself upon a fierce horse, drew toward
the walls of the City in great have. He was armed with very strong armor, and
had at his neck hanging a very rich horn of Iuorie, and when he came to the
gate of the City, he lift up the visour of his helm and set his horn unto
his mouth, and began to sound it very strongly, to the end that the knights of
the City should come thither to hear what he would say. So when ye some of
them, such as were near at hand, approached, he said. O you Knights of
Tinacria, whom the sovereign Gods confound, that according as I am informed,
by your counsel, I cannot enjoy as mine own that fair Garrofilea. What do
you, that you come not forth with your armor against me? and show your selves
if you be as valiant to overcome, as politic to give counsel. Some of the
nobles of the court, did well hear what this Pagan did say, and straight way,
they went unto the Queen, for to see what was to be done in this case, to
whom she answered. My friends, you do well see and understand, how little
knowledge I have in such matters, being but a weak and frail woman: in such
a case as this is, unto you it belongs to take counsel, for that you are
knights, and together you may establish that, which is convenient, for heerin I
have little knowledge and can say almost nothing: and with this she held her
peace. These Earls, seeing that with great reason the Queen had answered
them, they would argue no farther with her, but called a counsel. At which
time, the King the second time did sound his horn, to call them again to
hearken unto his speech: and being attendant unto that which he would say, he
uttered these words. O vile Tinacrians, what do you, why come you not forth
with your armor? How is it, yt you are not ashamed to hide your selves from
one only knight, which calls you. Here I do promise you, that your high
walls and deep dithes which you have about your City, shall little profit
you, but yt you shall all dye in my hands like vile knights. And if amongst you
there be not one that is able to make his party good in the field with me
alone. Then come forth two, or three, or four, or ten, for that altogether I
will drive you out of the field: and if these te^ne be not sufficient, then
come you all forth together such as are able to bear armor: for here I do
swear unto you, to make you dye like cowards: but I take you to be such, yt
you will not put me to this trouble, but keep your selves in your city. The
Earls did hear all that was spoken, at which word^ they were very much
grieved, but because they knew the strength of the African, they feared much
his fury, but yet shame would not suffer them to bear the force of these
words, but did determine to go out and take the advantage which the Pagan
did offer them. So amongst them al they chose ten of them that were most
esteemed: who were, the Earl of Modique, and a son of the Earls, a valyant
young man, being of fewer years, then he which the Emperor slew at the
marble fountain, and Fabiniano of Hena, and Robio of Yscla, and other six
chosen Knights. So when they were armed and upon horseback, they opened the
gate of the City, and they went out into the field, all very well horsed. So
when this King of Mauritania saw them, he let go his horn, and put down
the visour of his healme, and called for a great spear, which straight way
was given him by a Knight of his, and with great arrogancy, he went toward
the place, whereas this fair company of the ten Knights abode, and with a
loud voice he said that they might hear him, Who gave you counsel to make
resistaunce against my fury, for that you can find no other thing therein but
death. Then Don Rubio answered, none other: but only to abate thy pride,
therefore take thy choice of the field, for here I defy thee to the death.
All this while Bramarando stood and beheld him with a terrible look, and
seeing him use so great nimblenesse, he thought him to be a good Knight, and
giving a turn unto his horse, he put himself into his place, and being both
ready, they spurred their horses together, and ran one against the other,
and in the midst of their course they met, and neither of them missed their
blow, in the which incounnter this gentle Rubio fell down to the ground, and
the Pagan somewhat stooped in his saddle, and his spear remained whole, and
straight way he put himself in good order. But when he saw that all the rest
which remained, did prepare themselves to make resistaunce, he could not
refrain but with a loud voice, he said.

O vile cowards and defamers of the order of knighthood, come hither unto me,
even all of you, for I do no more esteem of you, then of one only Knight:
and so spurring his horse, he ran against them, and they did the like, and at
one time he received the encounter of five spears, albeit he moved nothing at
all in his saddle: but he did encounter the Baron of Monflet in such sort, that
the spear passing thorough his body, he fell down dead to the ground, and
there with he turned about his horse, with wonderful lightness, and drew out
his sharp cutting sword, and pressed amongst the rest, whereas began a
marvelous and terrible battle. Then the Knights of Tinacria perceiving that
they must either die or ouercom, they began to lay about them on every side,
with so much fury, yt it was sufficient to have hewed an anfield in pieces.
Yet for all their force, they did not seem to molest him any whit. But he
which did show him self most valyant amongst them all, was the Marquis of
Modique his son, and next unto him was the Marquis of Mondeli* and Don
Fabinio. But this strong African laid about him so valiantly, and with so great
fury, that he astonished the^, insomuch yt with the great fury he had, out of
the visour of his helm, proceeded a thick smoke. At this time, he threw his
sheeld on his back, and took his sword in both his hands, that whosoever he
met, he stroke him with such terrible strength and fury, that helm and head
he cut in two parts. The Earl of Mondeli was not at this instant unoccupied,
but with his sword fast in both his hands, he stroke him on the one side of his
helm, which was very fine metal, that he made it sound like a bell, which
caused him to turn up the white of the eye, and he was almost beside himself.
He had scarce given him this blow, when likewise y^ Earl of Modique gave him
another, that made him to decline his head to his breast: wherewith Fabinio
gave him also another blow, which bere^te him clean of his remembrance,
insomuch that his horse carried him round about the field, even as one dead,
with his arms hanging down.

The knights of Tinacria with great fury did follow him, to see if they
could make an end of this their battle, but straight way he came to
himself, and seeing how they had compassed him about, and considering into
what great^ peril they had brought him, he recovered again his sword the
which hung by the wrist band, and tourning about his horse he roared like a
wild Bull which had been bayted, and pressed unto Fabinio, and stroke him so
furious a blow, that he carried away both his sheelde and healme, with a
great part of his head, and he fell down dead to the earth. Then the Earl
of Modique forthwith stroke the Mauritanian such a blow on his arms, yt both
of them were wounded, but most of all the right arm, for that the force of the
blow was more on that side then on the other, wherewith this furious African
seeing him within his reach, with his left fist he stroke him upon the visour
of his healme so great a blow, that without any remembrance he made him to
fall backwards upon the crouper of his horse. Then the Earl stroke at him an
overthwart blow upon his healme with so great force, that he made the
sparks of fire to fly out, the which did grieve him very much, and as one
desperate, he lift up his swoorde with great fury to strike the Earl, who
with very much nimblenesse put himself on the one side, and caused him to
loose his blow, at the which he was very angry, and flourishing with his
sword he chanced to light upon the wast of one of them, and cutting him in
two pieces he fell down dead to the ground, and not resting with this, but
continuing his fury, he lyfted up his sharp and cutting sword, and stroke
another a blow upon the left shoulder, whom he divided down to the girdle.
At this very same time the valiant Rubio of Yscla was come to himself, and
recovering his horse he leapt upon his back with exceeding great lightness,
and joined himself with the four knights which remained of all the rest, and
there he began with great fury striking on the Pagan in sundry places, and
the Earl of Modique and Mondeli likewise did multiply their blows in great
have. At the which the Pagan was so furious, that without all patience he
began to redouble his strokes, and stroke the Earl of Mondeli upon his
healme that he made him fall to the ground very sore hurt, and voiding blood
out of his mouth: yet this blow was not given so much at his ease, but he
must needs receive for it four blows, which had almost deprived him of his
wits. Here Rubio of Yscla began to multiply his blows with so great have,
and therewithal so mightily, that he put the Pagan into great extremity. This
furious king turned for to strike him a blow at his pleasure, but the
nimblenesse of this Tinacrian was such, that many times he made him to loose
his blows, at the which this Pagan was very much amazed, but because he
could not strike him at his will as he intended, he determined to leave him
and to return unto the rest, and at two blows he overthrew two knights, the
one stark dead, and the other very sore wounded, so there remained no more but
he of Modique and Rubio of Ysola, and the earl, which turned again to
horsback, so like desperate me^ without hope to escape they stroke at the
furious Moore, but he seeing himself more at liberty, began to work wonders
upon them, cutting them on the right hand and on the left, in this order they
travailed more then two hours, that the strength and valiantness of the
Moore was not sufficient to subject them. Then this Pagan seeing such
resistaunce, he firmed himself in his stiroppes, and lifting up his swoorde on
high, he stroke such a blow at him of Modique, that without any remembrance
he made him fall upon his horse crouper, and would have doubled that blow
for to have made an end of him, but Rubio did disturb him, giving him such a
side blow upon his helm, that he made him to loose that which he was*
striking, causing his swoorde to fa^^ out of his hand, that he could not
execute it, and the Earl seeing him in that plight, straight ways returned
another on his left shoulder, which grieved the Pagan very sore. In this time
the Earl of Modique was come again unto himself, and setteled himself
again in his saddle, and being firmed against the Pagan, he stroke him such a
blow, that glauncing he gave him a little wound, whereout issued blood. The
Moore feeling himself hurt, returned against him of M^dique, but this light
Rubio was with him him at a pinch, and stroke him another blow on his
shoulder, that he made him shrink in all his body, of which he made little
account, but desired only to go unto him which had drawn his blood, who
likewise with great courage did attend his coming, having both his hands on
his swoorde, so they discharged their blows both together, which were very
mighty and strong, wherewith he of Modique, all his healme being bathed in
blood, fell without any remembrance to the ground, and the furiour Pagan in
spite of his heart declined his head to the horse neck. Then the valiant
Tinacrian quickly turned to strike him, and before that he could raise up
himself again, he stroke him so strong a blow, that without all remembrance
he made him to stagger upon his horse, yt he lacked very little to fall to
the ground. The Tinacrian seeing him in this trance, never left striking him
until such time as he did see that he began to come again to himself, and
knowing that hes power was not sufficient to make resistaunce, he turned his
horse head and with all have rode toward the City, in such sort, that when
the Moore was wholye come again unto himself, the Tinacrian was in safety,
wherein he did wisely, for if he had tarryed, it could not have fallen out
otherwise but that he must needs have dyed by the hands of the cruel Pagan.
Then the Morisco king seeing all the field clear and without trouble, he
felt himself to be very sore vexed with the speedy blows which the
Tinacrians had bestowed upon him, and commanded to carry those knights which
were alive from the rest, unto the tent whereas he should (...), and he
likewise went to take his rest and ease, for that it was very necessary and
needful, and was quickly cured of that small wound which he received. And as
for them of Tinacria, he willed yt they should pronounce their healths with
many remedies, and entreat them honorably, for that he knew very well what
they were, Rubio when he came into the City, without any tarrying went unto
the Pallaice to declare unto the queen her unhappy success. The queen with
great severity, not showing any sorrowful countenance, answered, that he
should go and take his rest, and cure his wounds, saying, that she had such
confidence in her Gods, that they would remedy all these evils, and without
any more tarrying, she arose from the place whereas she was set, and went unto
the Emperors chamber, and told unto him all that had passed, and of that which
happened, in the next chapter* I will declare.

How the Emperor went into the field with the Pagan, and of all that happened
in the battle between them. Chap. 22.
WHen the queen came where the Emperor was, she told him all that had
happened in the battle, as I have before said, of the which the Emperor
received no grief, but rather he was very well content therewith, yet not
showing any sign thereof unto the Queen, he said. Lady, take no grief at
this which is past and gone, for that God will undoubtedly provide that which
shall be requisite for thy defense. Command that I may be provided of very
good and strong armor, for that I have so great a confidence in my God to
abate the great pride of this Pagan. This shall be done with a very good will
answered the Queen, for I will give thee such that no strength shall be able
to pearce it, the which did belong unto the king my Father, and straight ways
at the hour appointed, she commanded them to be brought, the which were of
the color of a very fine Rubie, all to be spangled with very delicate and
glistering stars of gold, and all the grauings were garnished with rich
oriental pearls, wrought with great subtlety. The sheeld was of the same
color, and the field thereof was a mighty great star which covered all ye
whole shield, they were such that no Prince or Lord ever had y^ like. The
Emperor when he saw them he would straight of his own good will have armed
himself and have gone out into the field, but the queen would not consent
unto it, but they passed that night together with great joy and pleasure, which
was so much, that I dare not here with my pen declare it, but of this I am
sure, that when the Queen departed from the Emperor she remained with child,
as hereafter you shall hear. So* when the morning was come, the Emperor arose
up with great desire to go out to the battle, and straight ways there were
called certain knights only for to arm him with those rich arms, and the
fair Queen Garrofilea did help to arm him, and when he was armed he went
out of the pallaice, and at the foot of the stayres he found a very fair and
strong horse, who was very richly barbed and well shodde, and calling for a
horn he hung it about his neck, and took his leave of the Queen, and so
without putting his foot into the stiroppe he leaped upon this mighty horse,
and then being accompanied with a company of noble Knights, he went out of
the City, not without great grief unto them all, which pra^ed earnestly for
his return. And when he was in the field whereas he might be heard, he lifted
up the visour of his helm and set the horn unto his mouth, and began to make
a fearful sound, and after that he had done with a high voice he said. Thou
fierce Pagan that with so great ^ase lie in thy bed, and boastest thy
self that there is none in the world that can bring down thy proud stomach,
take unto thee thy armor, and do thy best to drive me out of the field, for
I doubt not but before thou do it, thou shall find in me some resistance: and
with this he held his peace. This stout Pagan which at that time was at his
rest, was sore troubled, and could not imagine who that knight might be, which
was so arrogant, that he durst alone call him into the field, and desiring to
know what he was that was so hardy, he caused to be brought before him the
Earl of Mondeli, and the Earls son of Modique, and with an irefull voice
said. Did you hear with what great pride that knight has spoken and
challenged me. The Earls answered, yea, then he said: Who have you in
Tinacria that is so hardy to call me to battle with such vpprobious words,
I cannot believe that he is of this kingdom, but if he be, it seems he
should be some vaineglorious fool and one of little understanding. The Earl
of Modique answered, I do swear unto thee O king by the sovereign Gods
that I am in the same doubt: but it may be that it is a knight which a few
days past being very ill entreated by the tempests of the sea, was driven
into this Island, and being without armor he made such a battle with
certain knights, and with so great fury and strength, that being as I have
said, without armor, he did marvelous and heroy^all feats of arms, where he
slew many knights, and amongst them he slew a brother which I had, and it may
be, that the Queen being desirous of his liberty, has given this enterprise
unto him, and therefore I think that this is he that has spoken these
arrogant words. Well, let it be who it shall be, replied the king, for here I
do swear unto thee by Mahomet that I will make him dearly to pay this his
folly and hardiness, and speaking this, he heard him sound his horn again
with much more fury then at the first, and said.

O vile Pagan coward and of an evil nation, thou king of little estimation,
what make thou? wherefore do thou tarry? why come thou not out to take
reuengement of these my words? dispatch and come forth, or else understand
that I will come and seek thee in what place so ever thou abidest: Oh mighty
and unmerciful wrath, how is it that thou have so much power over this proud
African, who with a hoarse voice and terrible words called for his armor, and
because it was not brought him straight way, he did entreat them all very ill
which were nigh him, so yt there was not one of all his knights but at y^ time
would have been glad to have been far from ye place where the king was: when he
was armed he leaped upon his horse, and with a reasonable pace he pricked
toward the place whereas the Emperor abode, who when he saw him come he threw
his horn from him, and let fall the visour of his healme, and took a great
Spear in his hand, wherewith he flourished marvelous strongly about his
head. This Mauritanian was so inflamed with wrath, that he had no mind to show
any agilitie with his Spear, but rather with a wrathful voice he said: I
do believe that with the flourishing of thy Spear and braveness of thy horse
thou think to scarre me, having spoken words that could not be uttered but
by some foolish man, or by some knight of little estimation, or by some one
that is enemy unto Mahomet. The Emperor answered: so much thou may say,
that thou may happen upon the truth, and here I give thee to understand,
that I am a Christian and servant unto my Lord Jesus Christ, and enemy unto
Mahomet, and much more unto thee, therefore make thy self ready to the
battle, and take that part of the field which pleases thee, and I will make
thee to know what my Spear can do. The fury of the Pagan was such, that he
was almost without all feeling, yet he comforted himself in thinking to make
reuengement of the words which he had said, and had a great desire to know
who that knight was which with so great hardiness and courage did speak unto
him, and he asked it of him, saying: Knight, here I do give thee lisence to
speak all that thou will, for that thou art now in place where none can
deliver thee from my hands but only Mahomet, nevertheless I do desire thee
by that God in who^ thou say thou dooest believe, and that so truly and
vehemently thou dooest serve, that thou tell me who thou art, whereby I may
know what he was that has been so arrogant against me. Thou have so coniured me
(answered the Emperor) that I cannot let but tell thee. Thou shall therefore
understand yt I am the Emperor Trebatio of Greece, father unto those clear
lights of al knighthood, the knight of ye Sun, and that valiant Rosicleer,
which by another name is called ye knight of Cupide, if at any time thou have
heard any talk of them. When the Pagan heard that it was he, whose fame was
so much spoken of in all the world, and no less feared, without any more
tarrying, he defied him to mortal battle* and without any more words they
turned their horses, and not sta^eng for the sound of trumpets; they pricked
them with their spurs, and with great violence in the midst of their course,
they brake their spears so easelye, as though they had been made of Canes, and
neither of them received any harm, nor once moved out of the saddles, and
turning their horses about, they laid hand on their swords. The Emperor of
Greece did first strike the Pagan king, so terrible a blow, that he threw
down to the gound a very rich mirror which was upon the crest of his helm,
having in it, the Image of Mahomet, and it was with such strength, that it made
his teeth chatter in his head. At this blow the pagan did not marvel, but
rather gratified his courtesy in the like sort, but the Emperor did bear it
off with his sheelde, and it cut off one corner thereof, and descended upon his
helm, with such force, that it made him boow his head. At the which this
ancient warrior, took so great anger and and wrath that throwing his shield
to the ground, he took his sword in both his hands, and stroke such a blow at
his adversary, that if it had not been that he did defend it very well with
his shield, with that one blow he had finished the the battle: but yet his
shield was cut in two pieces, and the blow glaunced from his shoulder
downwards, and lighted upon the Pagans knee, whereas it made a wound, for that
the blood gave testimony thereof. This fierce Moore, when he saw his own
blood, with great fury he threw from him the rest of the shield that did
remain in his hand, and stroke such a cruel blow at this heroycall Emperor
upon his helm, that it gave a great and marvelous sound thorough all the
plains and fields. The ^urmounted fury where with this terrible blow was
discharged, was the occasion, that he without any feeling fell down upon the
horse neck with all his body. When the pagan saw him in this case, he
procured to give him another blow, but by reason of the Emperors stooping, he
pricked his horse with his spurs, and with a little remembrance he held
himself fast for not falling. His horse with great lightness lept on the one
side, whereby this valiant. Trebatio was clear of that blow. And when he saw
himself so evil entreated by that Pagan, he recovered again his sword, and
clasping it fast in his fist, he discharged upon the Moore so strong and
terrible a blow, that he made him without all remembrance to fall backwards
upon the horse crupper, and there issued out of his helm very much blood, which
proceeded out of his mouth and nose, and seeing him in this trance, he said, I
swear by God, King, that thou have small remembrance, but tarrye a little,
and I will make thee remember thy self better, and giving a turn unto his
horse, thinking to cut off the pagans head, his tourning was with such great
have, that his horse doubled in such sort, that he fell to the ground with the
Emperor on his back, nevertheless with great lightness, with out putting his
foot into the stirrup, he lept into the saddle again. But yet it could not be
so quickly done, but that this strong Mauritanian was come to himself, and
seeing that he was all be bathed in blood, he knew yt he had been in great
peril. Then with wonderful courage he recovered his sword, and settled
himself in his saddle, and with furious blows he began to strike, so that at
every blow, it seemed his strength did still increase, which indeed was true:
for the more his wrath and ire kindeled, the more his fiercenes and strength
increased, in such sort, that every blow which he stroke, was almost
sufficient to overthrow a great Tower. All these feats the Queen did behold
from a tower which was in the Pallaice, greatly fearing the success of this
terrible battle, and praying with all her heart unto her Gods for the
Emperors victory. This furious Pagan was half ashamed, for (...) he could
not bring the Emperor into subjection, although his terrible blows did
double increase, and seeing he could not, he begun to exclaim against his Gods
and said. Oh Mahomet, where is now all thy power and strength? how is it that
thou do consent that one only Christian should make so great defense, and
endure so long. The Emperor which heard all that ye Moore had said, with a
wrathful and angry voice, answered. O thou wretched infidel, how greatly art
thou deceived, in thinking, that he which has no power to help himself, can
help thee and deliver thee out of my hands. I believe with the assistaunce of
my God, before that night do come, to heaw thee all in pieces by the strength
of my arms, and heerwith he never ceased to strike him with so much fury,
that many times he was without any feeling. Thus they continued four hours
without any resting of themselves, but wounding one another. When this furious
pagan saw, that he could not bring to pass his pretense, but that he was in
great peril to be overcome, he stroke such a blow at the Emperor, that with
the mighty strength wherewith it was stricken, he made him to loose his
remembrance, and forced him to stoop unto the horse neck, and after that, he
stroke his second blow upon his back, that the great noise that it made, was
the occasion that the Emperor came again to himsel^e. And he was not scarce
setteled in his saddle, when he lift up his sword, intending to strike the
Moore a mighty and terrible blow: the which when this Africane beheld, and
knew the great strength wherewith it came, with marvelous policy he put it
aside, and made him to loose his blow, and at the same time flourishing with
his sword, he discharged such an overthwart blow upon his throat, that if the
harness had not been forged by Magical art, the Emperor had been in great
peril. Oh what great anger and fury did this mighty Trebatio feel, to see
himself so ill entreated by that furious Moore, and therewith he raised
himself up in his stirrops, and struck at him in such great have, and with so
great strength, that it seemed that then the battle was but new begun. But
when this Mauritanian saw that the Emperor had not lost any of his strength,
but rather that it was more increased, with a terrible and fearful voice he
said.

O Mahomet, what is this? for that I see, that if all the strength of Mars were
here together, it were not sufficient to make resistaunce against this Knight:
and in saying these words, he did procure to offend his aduersarye, with
terrible and furious blows.

Amongst them all, this Mauritanian chanced one upon the Emperors helm, that
he made him to gnash his teeth, where with, without any remembrance, he fell
upon ye horse cr^pper: in such sort, that the horse being scarred with the blow
began to run, and carried the Emperor in that trance, a good while about
the field. The Moore had well thought at that time that he had finished his
work, and with great shouts and shriks he followed him, but all his thought was
in vain. For y^ the Emperor recovered and settled himself in his saddell, and
when he saw himself so ill entreated, there was never Tiger of Hircania, nor
any other wild beast so furious as he was at this time, with his great anger.
Yea, he was so vexed with himself, that with the madness thereof, he crushed
his teeth together, and tourning his horse about a great deal lighter, then at
any other time, he firmed well his swoorde in his hand, and lifting up his
mighty and strong arm, went whereas this Morisco king was, who in ye like
sort came toward him, at that time the Emperor neither remembered life nor
death, nor any other thing, but to take reuengment on his enemy, procuring to
bring him to cruel death, and raising himself up a good spanne in his saddle,
being firmed in his stirrops, he struck such a blow, that at the fall of his
mighty cutting sword, the sparkles of fire flew into the air, and it lighted
on the Pagans healme, so that all the strength thereof did little profit him^,
but he cut his head and all down to his stomach, that this Pagan fell dead
to the ground, the which being seen by his knights they gave a marvelous and
lamentable shout and cry, and without using any more courtesy, they
altogether put their Spears in their rests, and went against this strong
warririour, all on horse back, but here the mirror of all knighthood did
abide their coming with his accustomed courage, and heart? al these Moors made
their encounter on him together, and many of them brake their spears, but for
all that he moved no more then if they had run against a tower. The Emperor
seeing their vilianie, begun to revile them with shameful words, and retourning
toward them, he made them to run away like vile cowards. Unhappie was he
that he stroke, although it were but with half a blow, for it made him that
he had small mind to return again, but by reason that they were very
sorrowful and angry for the loss of their king, many of them did strike at
him on every side, procuring to defend themselves, and not to come nigh his
terrible blows. The Emperor then remembering that if he did not procure to
come whereas the prisoners were to set them at liberty, that it were possible
that they would entreat them evil. Wherefore he put himself among the thickest
of his enemies, wounding and killing all that he found in his way, and all
that he could overtake, although his armor were as hard as Diamonds, yet he
could not escape from the death, so in this sort in spite of all the Pagans he
came unto ye kings tent, and seeing that there joined together much people to
make resistaunce at the entering, it gave him the more desire to enter into the
tent, not knowing that the Tinacrians were there prisoners. The Mauritanians
with all their powers they had made resistaunce, but their strength did little
avail them, for in spite of them all the Emperor went into the Tent, whereas
he met with the Earl of Modique, and the Earl of Mondeli, who were put there
in prison. At this present time Don Rubio of Tinacria when he saw that the
Moore of Africa was overcome, and the great villainy of his knights, he made
great have to go out of the City, and with eight hundred knights, all very
well armed, they pressed on their enemies with so great force, that they made
them look better about them, then before that time they did. When the Emperor
saw the diligence of this knight Rubio, he procured to set the prisoners at
liberty, the which thing being done, he said unto the Earls son of
Modique. Gentle knight, this succor do you receive and your honorable
father, in recompense of the great grief which I caused you to receive, and
without speaking any more words he returned unto the battle which was very
much increased, but when he came amongst them it was quickly brought to an end,
for by reason that they had no governor to govern them, and that the fury of
ye Greek was not to be suffered, they durst not abide, but with great shame
they began to run away, Then those of Tinacria did follow them till they came
to the sea side, killing and wounding all that ever they could come by. So
when the Emperor saw that all this conflict was brought to a good end, and
that the valiant Rubio was by him, he called him unto him and said. My friend,
go and tell your Mistres the Queen, that I request her to pardon me, for that
I do not return again into her City, for I was so ill received the first
time, that I have no will to return the second. And more, I desire her of my
part, that she do entreat better, and give better intertainment unto such
Knights as I am, then she gave unto me, least she get unto her self the name
of a wrathful Queen, and be accounted as one subject unto her own opinion:
and of all other things, if any thing do chance, let her thank none but her
self, for that she has been the only cause thereof. And moreover, I do
desire her not to trouble her self in sending to seek me, for that I say, not
her power alone, but all the power in Africa is not sufficient to return me
again into so great straights, as once she had me in. And so without any more
speaking he spurred his horse, and rode a reasonable pace toward the sea side,
which was not far from that place, and when he came thither, he sought to see
if he could find by chance any bark or galley, to carry him whether he would,
with his good will or else by force. He had not gone far, when that he saw a
very fair and great bark at the sea side, hard aboard the shore. The
Emperor entered into it to see if there were any mariners: his horse which
was hard by him, without being constrained by the Emperor, very lightly leapt
into the Bark. He was not so soon with in, when that the Bark began to make
way, in such sort, that in a small time they were very far at sea. At y^
which the Emperor was greatly amazed: but there was a voice, which did
satisfy him, that said: Mighty Trebatio, Lyrgandeo does govern thee: at the
which the Emperor was very joyful.

So he put his horse in a place by himself in the bark, whereas he found
sufficient of all things needful. Likewise he found all that was convenient
for his own person, which was ready upon a table in very good order, all kind
of dressed meats: and being set down to eat, he was served so bountifully,
and with so great diligence and care, as though he had been in Greece. In this
sort the emperor went sailing eight days, in ye end of which he discovered
land, which had belonging unto it, a fair haven or port, and nigh unto it, a
very fair and great City. The Bark went straight into the haven, and brought
her self to the shore.

Here we will leave ye Emperor in his bark in ye haven, and will tell you of
the great lamentation yt the fair Garrofilea made for that the Emperor
departed in such sort.

How the fair Queen Garrofilea made great lamentation for the departure of
the Emperor, and how at their last being together, she remained with child by
the Emperor Trebatio, Cap. 23.
AFter that all the Knights of Tinacria ha^ joined themselves together, and had
made an end of their battle and travail, they repaired unto the city with
great joy and gladness for their good success. Rubio of Yscla went to declare
unto the Queen his message yt the Emperor had commanded him: at y^ which, the
Queen was so troubled, that she could not in any wise dissemble it, but in a
great sound straight way she fell down as though she had been dead. This
courageous knight when he saw her in this trance, took her up in his arms,
and carried her unto her Strado, or seat: and straight ways when the Ladies
heard the noise, they all came forth to see what the matter was, and when they
saw their Queen in that trance, they began to use all means and remedies
till such time as she came again unto her remembrance. And although it was with
great trouble the queen lifted up her ^yes, and seeing that she was co^^^assed
about with Ladies and others, she shut her eyes again, and gave a great sigh
which came from the bottom of her heart, and in this sort she remained a
great while, and her Ladies and Damosells* seeing that she was so troubled,
determined to unclothe her and to carry her to her bed. Then she made signs
with her hands that they should depart and leave her all alone, whose
commandment they straight ways obeyed, not without great sorrow of all them
that did behold her, for that the queen was meruailouslye well beloved of her
subjects. There was not one that could understand the cause of this sudden
evil, but only the earl of Modique, who discreetly did imagine what it might
be, who kept it close to himself at time, until such time as time and the
matter it self should declare, whether his imagination or thought should fall
out true or no. This afflicted queen when she saw that she was alone, began to
exclaim against her fortune, putting forth these sorrowful reasons. When will thou be content thou perverse enemy, and without all reason. Thou which have
warped such strange webbes in this Kingdom. Thou gave me into my power the
Greek Emperor very poor, and without all comfort of thee, and absent from
all his Empire. This thou did, for that with his sight I should be wounded
with the cruel dart of love, that without all remedy of any comfort, I most
unfortunate damsel should be constrained to set my life to sale, and to sell
my honor as it were with the common cryar, compelling me to do unto my self
that, which I only did, being made blind by him, which would yt all others
were as blind as he himself is And although me life were set at liberty, by
him which without any weapon bereaved me thereof, yet am I not at so much
liberty nor so fr^e, but that wheresoever he goes my heart does follow him.
Woe is me for my virginity (which my parents gave me such great charge to have
a respect unto) that it has been so evil kept, and so lightly regarded me. I
will so chastise my self for thus forgetting of my self, and be so revenged
for the little regard that I have had of my honor, that it shall be an example
to all others which be of high estate: Oh miserable Queen, Oh unhappy Lady,
thy speech is too too foolish: for although this thy desperate hand should pull
out the despised heart of this miserable and afflicted body, yet should not
thou make satisfaction of the dishonor which thou have committed against thy
self: Oh cruel death why do thou not with thy sudden fury set at
liberty (me most unfortunate) from these grievous pains: Oh Emperor of
Greece, those loving and amorous words which thou spakest unto me, I would
they had never ben spoken: O false and deceiving Lord, thou should have
suffered me to have tasted death, when with so great good will mine own hand
would have ministered it to me, and not now to cause me to endure a thousand
deaths, only by thy departure. With these and other like lamentations this
afflicted Lady passed away the time, till at last she found her self to be
quick with child, at the which she received double pain, for that it was
impossible to cover or hide it, and seeing her self in this ca^e* like a woman
hated and abhorred, she determined to discover her self unto her subjects
publicly; and to deliver her body unto them to sacrifice it unto their Gods,
and with this determination one day she caused certain of the nobles to be
called before her, who straight way came at her commandment. Amongst the
rest there came the Earl of Modique and his son, and the Earl of Mondeli,
and the valiant Rubio, and many other knights and Gentlemen of honor, when
that the Queen saw them altogether about her, covering her self with a rich
roabe, she sat up in her bed, being so lean, that all them that saw her
had great compassion, being all set round about the bed, and keeping silence,
she said. Our Gods would make us so s^biect unto time, that only they do not
bring us under their malicious yoke, but also altogether submit us under their
hands, to the end that they may liberally do whatsoever it pleases them, and
as their malice is more then their virtue, having us so yielded at their
commandment, they do entreat us like unto public slaves. And so much
honor is obtained by him which is altogether unfortunate, as may be gotten by
any kind of worthiness. Oh what base and vile things do they cause them to
do whom they get under their wings, if it were lawful for me to speak it I
might tell you many examples of them of the old time, where as fortune using
her accustomed deeds, did get unto her self many and diverse names according
unto her strange effects. Some called her Fortune, venture, or chance, some
honored her as a Goddess for her liberality, others despised her as a ^iuell
for her mutabilitie: But what shall I say to you of her (my good friends) for
that I cannot tell by what terms to name my self, neither do I know
whether she were the beginning of all my evil, or that blind Cupide, who has
so cruelly handled me: well, which of them so ever it was, they caused me to
put my heart into the power of another, only for the remedy of this my
Country, for whose weal (alas) I have lost the liberty of my heart, with
all my wonted joy, and now endure perpetual pain, and an ever pining death: I
have lost my honor and recovered shame and infamy. To conclude, I have lost
the liberty of a Queen, and remain in continual captivity, and yet of all
this, I my self am only in fault. Therefore without making any excuse, here
I do surrender my self into your powers, for that you may as an evil Queen
do sacrifice with me, as also that which I have in my womb. For now my
friends you shall understand that the knight who with his mighty and strong
arm slew Bramarando, was the Emperor Trebatio, father unto him whom you now
honor as a God. This is he that robbed me of my honor, but with my good will
(I must confess) and left me for a testimony of this my evil deed, big
with child. And with this she made an end of her lamentable speech, and
without any more strength to sit up she fell down again in her bed. So
when these Earls and noble knights that were present understood all that the
Queen had said unto them, they were all of them greatly amazed and changed
their colors, looking one upon another without speaking any word, but
printing in their hearts the fault done by their queen, yet not without
consideration that there remained fruit of that surmounted tree, even that
Grecian, which gave unto them great joy and mirth, in such sort, that this
worthy fame had in them more force then the blot that their queen and Lady
had received in her honor. And with this (...) the Earl of Modique rose up,
and answered for all that were present, saying. Sovereign Lady, there is not
one of us that canno deny but that there was a fault, and that you are worthy
of blame for committing this fact, not respecting your royal estate, for the
which we cannot but receive great grief in our hearts, neither can we
deny, but that in reserving the fruit of him which has been the occasion of
this dishonor, will bring unto us a particular joy, and cause great
contentment unto all your subjects, so that (...) shall easily forget the
loss of your honor and honorable virginity: Therefore waying equally the
fault with the profit which shall redound unto all Tinacria, in recovering such
a successor, we do find that thou art worthy of no pain, therefore
sovereign Lady look not upon the error, for that ^erily it was so ordained
by the Gods, that at that instaunt and without looking for this Greek Emperor
came for the defense of our kingdom, and for thy restoring, and has left us
this good successor which we hope shall be delivered out of thy womb, who
shall be a defender of these thy Kingdoms, and a maintainer of us thy
subjects. And here we do desire thee to put away all these imaginations and
griefs from thy heart, and to forget it, and renew thy former joy and
pleasure, in making sacrifices unto the Gods, that they may give strength to
thy person, whereby thou may have good deliverance of that which thou go
with, which unto us will be most acceptable. Great was the joy which the
Queen received at these comfortable words which her subjects had spoken,
and giving them great thanks she requested them to depart til^ such time as
she should be brought a bed. So the time being near approached, she was
delivered of a very fair ^onne, and likewise of a daughter of a wonderful
beauty, for the which there was made great joy throughout all the kingdom,
and they called the sons name Polifebo, and the other young infant Rosal^ira.
The great beauty and fairness that was in these two infants, was such, that
in all the kingdom they esteemed the^ for divine creatures, they were
nourished and brought up with great care and honor: but for all this, the
Queen conceived in her heart a marvelous hatred against the Emperor, and
many times she would go up into a tower which was toward the sea, to see if
that she looking toward the parts of Grecia, might receive any comfort or
take any pleasure, but al was in vain, for the greatest pleasure and comfort yt
she received was, to see these infants to be children unto such a Father, and
endowed with such surpassing beauty, and sometimes she would sit and talk to
them, saying: Oh figures of him, who without all pity wounded my heart, and
left me co^fortlesse with the greatest cruelty that ever woman was left
withal by any knight or Gentleman: how is it possible y^ I have the force to
bring up children of that Father, who has bereaved me of my liberty: Oh
sovereign Gods, that with your powers have sowed in this unhappy land, the
offspring of that unmerciful Trebatio, grant that I may establish in my heart
so much anger, that it may cause me to put from me the love of that adulterous
father: Oh children born for a farther grief, here I do desire the mighty
Gods that your beauty may have so much force and power, that with the beams
thereof you may take reuengement of the dishonor of your mother, and thou my
daughter borne in the dishonor of thy generation, by the loss of my
virginity, ^eere I do swear unto ye celestial Jupiter, yt thy beauty shall
not be inioyed by any, but by him yt shall give thee in dowry the head of thy
disloyal father, y^ by it I may recover part of my former glory. These and
other like words spoke this afflicted queen, and even as she had sworn she
put in practice, publishing it through al her kingdom, and giving information
of the effect of her pretended purpose, and sent messe^gers into Africa and
Asia concerning y^ same, all which she did contrary to the will of her
subjects. And because that they saw her so fervent in her anger, whereto she was
more prone, by desire of reue^gement, then unto any reason, they did all
determine to content themselves, and sh^e for to, give a better courage unto
them which knew her, and unto all such as would prosecute this enterprise,
she gave diverse devises, so that they which did presume herein were not few
in number, but very many and right valiant knights, as hereafter I will
declare unto you. So some there* were which did offer themselves for the
fairness of the mother, before that her daughters beauty should come to
any perfectness, and other some for the love of the daughter, of which there
were very many that lost their honors in Grecia, and sundry lost their
lives, and he which first did offer himself in this enterprise was the king of
the Garamantes, who by hearing report of her great beauty, was in love with
her. And when he heard the message which was brought from the queen by her
Ambassadors, straight way without giving the queen to understand thereof,
he went into Grecia, trusting only in his great strength, of whom when time
serves we will speak. And so it ^ell out, that neither time nor any other
thing was sufficient to remove from the Queen this great desire she had to
seek reuengement, but every day her anger did more increase, neither was the
beauty of his children of so much force, as to mollify the fury of her
stomach, although when they were at six years of age, they were of so
excellent beauty, that the Tinacrians believed that they were the children of
some of the Gods, and not of any humane creature, their bodies and their
beauties were so conformable, for all they which did see the young Prince,
would have judged him to have double the years that he had, and in his body
and face he did so much resemble his brother the knight of the Son, that it was
a thing to be meruailed at. Of the young princess Lyrgandeo would not make
any description, for that he said, that whatsoever thing should be spoken of
her, his pen were not sufficient to utter the worthiness of her beauty, so
this queen was ever firm in this her thought, and for to give them better to
understand, she commanded to renew the signs and tokens, and more, that they
should carry her picture into all parts, the which was the occasion that the
court of ye queen of Tinacria was meruailously increased in honor, with so
many Princes and knights which repaired thither to see this Damsel. When the
queen saw that her kingdom was so honorably nobled more then at other
times, she commanded that upon the gates of her royal palace should be
placed a title, which was contained in these words following.

Attempt not any either Prince or king,
Within Tinacria Court his love to show:
Except that he do first in dowry bring
Trebatios head, our most detested foe.
The faithless father of this Damsel brave,
That restless grief to me her mother gave.
And when all this was finished, she straight way dispatched a messenger to
Grecia, with a letter unto the Emperor, the which she sent by a damsel that
was very trusty and one yt she loved well, whereas now I will leave them till
time do serve for to tell you of the knight of the Sun. But first for yt it is
necessary to this our history, we will declare what Brufaldoro said, when he
knew of the death of Bramarando his brother, king of Mauritania, who being
certified by them y^ escaped alive out of the hands of the Tinacrians, and were
very sorrowful for the loss of their Lord and king, and landing in their own
country they went and carried the news unto Brufaldoro, the which when he
heard, he felt in himself so great pain and sorrow, that in a sound he leaned
himself unto a chair because he would not fall, he was so far beside
himself, in which trance he did not long endure, but came again to his
remembrance, and wish a terrible and fearful voice he said: Is it of truth
that my brother is dead, and the messengers answered and said, that it was
too true. Oh traitors, answered this fierce young man, how durst you come
before me, except first you had taken reuengement of his death. Then they
answered and said. He y^ did kill him, is not a man so soon to take
reuengement of, for that after that we were clear of his devilish fury, it
was told us that he was a christian and the Emperor of Grecia, called
Trebatio. Oh vile people, answered the Pagan, yet will you reply against my
words, get you out of my sight, if it were not but that I am let for lack
of the order of knighthood, I would with my own hands tear you all to
pieces. Oh false Mahomet, thou liar, perjured, and without all faith, is this
the honor that my brother should have out of Tinacria: to be abated and slain
by one alone christian, and in saying these words he entered into a chamber,
where he had the Image of Mahomet all of gold, with twelve Angels on both
sides, this youth took a heavy club and with both his hands he stroke this
poor God such a blow upon the head, that he made him to fall to the ground,
and not resting with this, he turned against them that bare him company, and
stroke on them so many blows, that in a thousand pieces he made them fall to
the ground, and said. O thou false traitor, here will I give thee thy payment
and reward for that which thou have done unto my beloved brother. Here I do
forsake and deny thee, and all them that do believe in thee, for that I will
neither believe in thee nor serve thee, but if I did know the way unto the
place, where as the devil has thee, I would go and seek thee, to give thee
to understand that my fury is more then thy power. And when he had concluded
with this, he went forth of the chamber, and with a terrible noise he called
for his armor, the which was straight way brought unto him, and without
tarrying to be made knight, he commanded to arm him, with armor that was
all white, and made by art Magic, the^ he commanded a ship to be made ready
and furnished, and entered into it, with intent to go to Grecia, and there to
ask the order of knighthoode of the Emperor, and when he had received it, to
defy him to mortal battle, but it chanced not unto him as he thought it
would, for ye the sea with some of his accustomed torments carried him unto the
coast of France, and by reason of his small patience, once being a land, he
would not return to imbarke himself in his ship, but remained with only two
lackeyes, and commanded the vessel to return back again, and so went
traueling whether his fortune would carry him two days. The third day very
early in the morning, he heard a great rushing of armor amongst a company of
trees, and going toward the same noise, he saw a Knight of a very good
proportion against a great^ number of other Knights, in a very fierce and
unreasonable battle. And for to tell you who it was, it is requisite, that we
begin another chapter, in the which I will declare the whole matter unto you.

How that the Knight of the Sun would have tarried for Tefereo, in the place
whereas he appointed him, and how he lost himself in a thick mountain, and of
all that happened unto him after that. Cap. 24.
THe knight of the Sun who was purposed to tarry for Tefereo, whereas he
appointed him, put himself into the wilderness of Ardenia, with a reasonable
quick pace: but because of the great thickness of trees and bushes, being
amongst them: and again, troubled with thoughts, wherewith his mind was
occupied, he lost his way, and in such sort, that although he turned his
horse every way from one place to another, yet could he not find any way, but
rather did so entangle himself, that when the night came, he found himself so
far from the place where as he thought to have remained, that he was in doubt to
recover his way and his company he knew not when: for the which he received
great grief, which was the occasion that he died very evil words against
himself. So being in this cholar, the night drew on, which constrained him to
alight from his horse, and sat him down under a green tree, having set his
horse to feed in the green grass, of the which there was abundaunce at
hand, and so in the best wise he could, he laid him down upon the ground to
take some rest for a while: and toward his right hand he hard a great noise of
the running of water, and being very dry, he was constrained to arise again.
And so he went feeling and following that pittering sound of water, until such
time as he found a little fountain of very fair and clear water, and by
reason of the great drought that he had, without any more tarrying, he kneeled
down to drink thereof, till such time as he had mitigated his great thirst,
and remained there a while to refresh himself, for that the place was very
pleasant: so after a while, he returned unto the place whereas he was before,
and laid himself down to rest. He had not remained there long, but he felt
the water to begin to work in him: For you shall understand, that this was one
of the fountains of Marlin, which he made in that wilderness, and brought the
water, from the high mountain of Olympo. But this fountain whereof the Knight
of the Sun did drink, was that of Disamore, or without love. In such sort it
did work in him, that he did not only loose and forget the love which he had
to Lindabrides, but also, if it had not been for the great force of matrimonye,
and for the pawn that he received of Claridiana, he had likewise forgot her,
and had brought her as far out of remembrance, as he did the Lady of Tartaria.
And this water did not only cause forgetfulness, but also it forced him to
reprehende himself, saying. Oh fool without any understanding, that so long
have had thy heart subjected unto a Lady, that is a stranger unto thy
Religion, entreating thee, not as a man that does proceed from a high and
noble generation: but like the most basest and vilest wretch in all the world.
Tell me thou lost man, who has been affectioned unto a Moore without faith, but
only thy self? Who would have left his natural wife, for to love a stranger
and Barbarian, but thou? Who would give so many sighs in vain, but I most
miserable, giving occasion of everlasting death and damnation unto my soul.

Oh base and gross understanding, in what did thou set thy love? What beauty
did thou see in her, that thou would follow her, as one lost for her love?
What blindness has constrained thee, considering the great valor of the
royal Empress, and with what liberality she has surrendered all her
Kingdoms, and her own person into thy hands. These and other like complaints
he made against himself, without taking any sleep or rest, but was sore
troubled with this thought, till such time as the morning came, and that
Phoebus with his golden beams covered all the earth, then he took his horse
with a more lighter heart, and cleerer of all thoughts, then at the time he
came thither: for that he had as clean forgot Lindabrides, as though he had
never seen her. So all that day he traveled in that wilderness, not knowing
which way to take: and had eaten nothing, neither had he any thing to eat, the
which did trouble him very much. So when night drew on, he discovered a heard
of cattle, which were there feeding in the wilderness, and determined to go
toward that place whereas the heard men were, who received him very well. This
Knight did ask of them, if they had any thing to give him to eat, for that
he was very hungry: the heard men bad him that he should alight, and that
they would give him of such as they had for themselves. So he alighted and did
eat with a very good will, and so good a stomach, as one which had not his
heart nor mind occupied with the cares of love, and there with those heard
men, he passed all that night, till it was morning. So when it was day one of
the heard men did bring him into a very great and occupied way, to whom he gave
great thanks. Then the Knight took that way forwards, which led him toward
Province, intending to see if he could meet with his friend, and did determine
to travail thereabouts, to see if Fortune would bring him that way: he had
not travailed far, when that he discovered another way, which did cross
overthwart the same way, in which he was. And studying with himself which way
to take, it was told him that it was the way which led straight unto Paris:
of y^ which he was very joyful, and remained a while, thinking which way he
might take for to find Tefereo. And being in this muse, he heard toward his
right side a great rushing of armor and armed Knights, and casting his head on
the one side, he saw that there was about a ten knights which came running
toward him with their spears very low, calling him traitor: as soon as the
Knight of the Sun saw them he put down the visor of his helm, and laid hand
on his sword: and at the same time, he beheld on the other side, as many more
Knights armed, which made toward him as the other did. In the end he was
compassed round about on every side with forty Knights, which all cried out
saying, kill the traitor, let the traitor dye, of the which the Prince did
greatly marvel. So altogether they set upon him, and ran at him with their
spears, and stroke him all at once, yet for all that, he moved no more in his
saddle, then if they had made their encounter against a strong Tower: but at
the passing by, he stroke one of them upon the visour of his helm, that he cut
half his head a sunder, and he fell dead to the ground. All the rest returned
with their horses against the Prince, some with their swords in their hands,
and other some, whose spears remained whole, ran at him again, what on the
one side and what on the other, they made a very fierce and strong encounter,
as of those which were the whole choice of them that were in the City, only
to kill him. When the Prince saw himself so enclosed on every side, his
wrath and anger began to kindle in him, insomuch that he took his sword fast
in his hand, and stroke such blows, that whosoever he chanced to hitte, was
either slain or maimed.

At this present time arrived in those parts at the Sea side, as I have told
you, Brufaldoro: and this was the battle, wherein he saw so many Knights
against one only Knight. This Moore did stand and behold them, and was very
much amazed to see the power of one Knight, who brought so many as they were,
into such great distres, which made them to repent and were very sorry that
ever they began that enterprise, but by reason that they were all chosen
knights, they would not but assault him very fiercely, which was the occasion
of their farther harm and destruction, for that the Princes* ire did so much
increase, that it caused him to double his blows, in such sort, that some he
killed out right, and some he wounded, that in a small time he left not one
upon his horse, but all brought unto the state that they could make no
resistaunce, and when the Prince ^awe himself at more liberty, he demanded
what was the occasion of this so sudden conflict, so one of those knights
which was very sore hurt, told him how that they were knights belonging to
the Earl of Province, which lay in wait for him to be revenged of the death
of his son, for yt the whole circumstance of the battle came unto his
knowledge. So the Prince left them, and would not speak any word more unto
them, but his intent was to get him out of the Country, for that he well
understood that neither he nor Tefereo should have any good intertainment at
their hands, and when he would have departed, there came unto him Brufaldoro,
and did salute him very courteously, the Prince did return him his salutation,
and had a great pleasure to behold his good grace and gentilitie. So the
Mauritanian began first to speak and said. Gentle and valiant knight, the
first boon or gift that ever I did demand since the time that I was borne, is
this that I will ask of thee, and the occasion which does drive me to ask
it, is constrained by the great valor and prowess which I have seen in thee,
and sure it is an easy thing on thy part to be fulfilled, and therefore I do
desire thee to grant me my request. The heroycall Grecian which had his eyes
fixed upon him, with great pleasure that he received at his gentle disposition,
answered: As yet I never denied any thing that was demanded of me, being
justly demanded and in a just cause, neither had I any respect whether it be
easy to be done, or difficult, therefore gentle knight ask whatsoever pleseth
thee, for if it stand with justice and reason, that I may grant it thee, I do
promise thee to accomplish it in very ample manner, not only o^e boon, but so
many as thou will ask of me. That which I will ask thee, said ye pagan, is not
to put thy person in any peri^, no, nor yt thou shall move thy horse one foot
out of the place where he stands: but that thou will with thy valiant hand
give me ye order of Knighthood, and arm me knight, the which thou may do,
without any doubt or s^rupulositie. For here I do swear unto thee by my
mighty thoughts, that I am a crowned King. This noble Greek did accept his
demand, and asked of him, if that he had watched his armor. The Moore
answered, I suppose I have watched them enough, for that it is now eighteen
days since I have had them continually on my back. And for me there needs
no ceremonies: for that I am no Christian, neither Pagan, nor Moore, nor Jew,
nor Gentile, neither do I worship nor believe in God: For that the God of the
Christians, I take him for my enemy: and as for Mahomet, I know he is little
worth, and can do less: and the Gentiles have for their Gods, stocks and
stones: and as for the Jews I hate the^ as base and vile people. Therefore I
do neither worship the one, nor believe in the other: but only follow my
own proper appetite. The Knight of the sun could not refrain from laughter at
his words, in seeing him to be a man of so much liberty, and answered him,
saying. By God King, I do swear unto thee, that I have seen few or none of
thy Religion: but whatsoever thou art, I will here accomplish thy desire and
request. Then the Prince asked him, Will thou be a Knight? The King answered,
This I do desire, and seek no other thing, and putting on his right spur,
he kissed him on the cheek in token of honor, and taking a rich sword, which
a page of his carried with him, he stroke him a blow with it upon his
shoulder, and putting of it up again into his sheath, he hung it about his
neck and said, Now King, thy desire is fulfilled, for yt thou art a Knight.
With great good reason may it be said, that in the fields of Province was given
the order of Knighthood, unto the most valiantest Moore in all the world, and
by the hands of the best Knight that ever was. The King was very glad to see
himself a Knight, and gave great thanks unto the Prince for the same,
requesting him very earnestly that he would tell him his name, for that he
might know at whose hands he received the order of Knighthood: the which the
Prince with a good will declared. And when he knew that he was son unto the
Emperor Trebatio, whom he accounted for his mortal enemy, altering his voice,
he said. Oh Mahomet, thou vile God, and full of all treasons, thou have not
lef^ to persecute me, even unto this present time: for thou have brought me to
receive the order of Knighthoode, which was the thing that I most desired, at
the hands of him, which is son unto my mortal enemy. Here I do say unto
thee valyant prince, that I would it had cost me my kingdom, that I had not
received knighthood at thy hand, for that thou art son unto the Emperor
Trebatio, the fal^est traitor, that ever has been seen. The prince somewhat
angry answered him saying, King, it is not seemly in such as thou art, to
speak words which be so false. It is very true, that the Emperor is my father,
and the mightiest Prince in the universal world. And not as thou do
account him a traitor. For the which cause I do tell thee that thou do
falsely lie, like the most vilest Pagan in all thy kingdom: and in the defense
thereof I will drive thee out of the field, and deprive thee of this order
which I have given thee, that thou shalt not exercise it, by taking from thee
thy life. This miserable Pagan, who straight way was subject unto his furye,
with great alteration said. Oh wretched and unfortunate knight, do thou
think that I am one of those Knights that will be tamed by the strength of thy
arm, I wish thee not to believe it. For if thou do prove my strength, thou
shall be sure to find another manner of rigor and force, then thou have found
in those; with whom thou have got thy honor: the prince, whose patience could
not suffer such great pride, but as wrathful as a Lion replied. Thou proud
Pagan, arm thy head, and prepare thee to the battle, for by God I do swear
that I will do my best to cut of such an enemy from the Emperor my father.
The Pagan, without any more replying caused his helm to be ^ased on, and laid
hand on his sword. And the Prince likewise was ready to discharge his blow,
who raising himself up in his stirrops, stroke so strong a blow upon the
pagans helm, that the sound was heard a great way in the fields, and it
enforced him whether he would or not to make reverence, and to hold down his
head being so astonyed, that it seemed a great tower had fallen upon him: and
as he would have setteled himself again in his saddle, he stroke him such
another upon his shield, that he drove it unto his head, which made him to
turn up the white of his eyes with the great grief which he received: and to
keep himself up from falling, both he and his horse staggered on the one
side, which made the Prince to loose many a blow, notwithstanding, he pressed
on him so fast, that he had no time to turn him to strike again. This Moore
was very much amazed at his great force and strength, and struck at the prince
so furious and strong a blow, that he made him to loose his understanding, and
almost to stoop with all his body upon his horse neck. The prince came
straight way to himself, and returned unto ye Moore with so much fury,
striking such a blow upon his shield, which although it seemed to be as hard as
a Diamond, yet for all that, he cut it in two pieces, and the blow descended
upon his sholder, with such a great weight, that the mountains eckoed with the
noise: which made the pagan for fear of falling to hold himself fast by the
Horse mane, very much marueling yt in one Knight there should be so much
strength. Then he threw from him the rest of his shield which was left, and
took his broad sword in both his hands, and drove such a blow at the Prince,
that lighting upon his visor, it deprived him of his sight, and forced him to
fall upon his horse neck without any remembrance. This stout Pagan would have
returned to strike him again, but he could not: for that his horse being
skarred with ye blow, lept on ye one side, which saved him from it. Yet ye
pagan followed to accomplish his will, which he could not do so speedely, but
that the Prince did settle himself in his saddle, and recovered again his
sword, and committing himself to God, as he always was accustomed to do, he
said: Oh holy Jesus for thy names sake, aid and help me. And therewith he
spurred his Cornerino with great fury, that he made him run like the wind,
and in his course he said, Tarry, tarry, thou man without faith, and do not
think that thy blows has done any other thing on me, but only caused my ire
and anger to increase the more, for to procure to bring thee to thy end, and
to send that excommunicated soul of thine to the devil: and in the running
of his horse, when he drew nigh him, he threatened him with his sword, shaking
of it in such sort, that he gave him to understand, that at the next blow he
would make an end of the battle: and therewith he stroke him such a blow on
his helm, that the blood ran out at the visor thereof, and he fell down
backwards upon his horse crouper almost dead. The great force that the Prince
gave to strike him, was the cause that he brake the lether of his right
stirrup, and therewith he fell to ye ground from his horse. But straight way
with great lightness he arose up again, and in the best manner he could he
made it fast, and leaping into the saddle, he returned toward his enemy:
who was with great trouble settling himself in his saddle, and looking up to
the heaven, he showed a pitiful countenance, as though he had been very sore
hurt, as in truth he was. And when he saw himself so ill entreated, and all
his head bathed in blood, he began to cry out against Mahomet saying. Oh
Mahomet, thou art the falsest God, amongst all the Gods, cursed be all they
that do trust in thee, and believe in thee. And of this be thou sure, that I
do not believe now in thee, neither will I so long as I live: and this I do
promise thee, that wheresoever I find any Temple or Image of thine, to break
them down with the strength of mine own hand and furious arm. And with this
anger he lift up his sword alofte, going toward the Prince, who was tarrying
for him in the same manner, and with like fury. And both together, they
discharged their heavy and terrible blows, but the Moors blow was the first
that lighted upon the knight of the Suns healme, so that it made him to
shake in his saddle, and he lacked but a little to fall down, the great
force and heaviness of that blow was the occasion that the blow of the
Prince could not be executed with the fury wherewith it was discharged, for
that peradventure if it had, he had not found himself so well as afterward
he did, for although it hit not right, being stricken with so much madness,
yet it made him whether he would or no, to stoop with his head, and therewith
he straight ways sett^led him, and seeing that the knight of the Sun was
still remaining in without any feeling, he said.

I do not determine to tarry any longer, for that as I do believe, thou art
none other but the God Mars (although thou have said that thou art a mortal
man as I am,) and that thou art come down to give me the order of
knighthoode, and afterward to make me feel the strength of thy arm, and when
he had said these words, he called his Lackyes in great have, and rode
away with as much speed as possible might be. At which time with the noise
of the battle came Tefereo, and as he saw the Prince in that sort, and his
enemy going away* with so much have, he made no longer tarrying, but set the
spurs unto his horse, and with a^ great swiftness as he could, he followed
after him. The Prince when he came again unto himself, and could not see
his enemy, was so kindeled with anger and wrath, that the blood ran out at
his eyes with very anger. This Mauritanian did very well in not tarrying the
fury of the Prince at that time, for with the wrath that he had, hard
Diamondes had not been able to have made any resistaunce against him,
wherefore he determined forthwith to follow after him, but that a Damsel
which was by, put her self before him and said.

Gentle Knight, it is sufficient that Tefereo does follow him, wherefore
venture not thy self a new in that wherein thou do get but very little
prowess, for he that does follow him; will handle him well enough, therefore
come and follow me, for that there is other matters of greater importance
which are tarrying for thee. The Prince when he heard these words beheld
well the Damsel that was talking with him, and straight ways he knew her to
be the Damsel that he and the Prince Eleno had found in the Bark, who after
these speeches went onwardes her way with great speed. The Prince at that
time had not his heart so quieted within him, as to ask her any questions, but
without saying any word he followed her, till they came unto the filde
whereas he saw the Bark wherein the Damsel had come thither, into the which
she entered, and after her followed the Knight of the Sun, but when they were
setteled within the Bark moved nothing at all, whereby they well understood
that it tarried for more company whom he thought to be for his friend
Tefereo, and as you before heard, he with great fury on horse back rode
after the Moore, and made so much* have in following him, that he ouertooke him
in a plain field, and at the great noise and calling that Tefereo made, this
Moorish king looked back, believing that it had been the Knight of the Sun,
but when he saw him and knew by his armor that it should not be he, he
tarryed for him, and when they drew nigh together, he said! Knight, what a
Devil would thou have, that with so great have thou do follow me, and
with so arrogant a voice do call me, Tefereo answered him and said.

Cowarde, to make thee pay the giving of that blow, which thou gave unto a
better Knight then thou art. Then the king said. Oh high Gods, what may this
be, that in the beginning of my knighthoode I should be so reui^ed, and unto
Tefereo he replied: Knight thou lie, for I never left my battle for
cowardnesse, but that as I do well know, he with whom I had battle is no
man, but a Devil, and again I l^fte him for that he gave unto me the order
of Knighthoode, but now thou shall pay for all that which he has done unto
me, jointly with the words which thou have here spoken, and without any
more tarrieng they began to strike many and unmeasurable (...) the one at the
other, the Moore stroke (...) at the Sardenian which was so terrible, that it
made him clean to loose his sight, and to lean on the one side of his horse,
so that he had almost fallen down, but with a ^rice he setteled himself
upright in his saddle again and finding the Moore at hand, (...) a thrust at
him so firm and strong, (...) thrust him clean out of the Saddle upon the
crouper of his horse^ so that he lacked but a little of falling down
backwarde, and seeing him in this sort, with wonderful agilitie he (...) on
the other side, and before that the Moore could settle himself well again,
he stroke him such another blow upon his healme, that he made him to reele
forwards as fast as he did backwardes, and then he doubled him another blow
upon the back, that whether he would or no, he made his head to touch the
buttocke of his horse, and with the great fury that he stroke the blow, he
pricked his horse, which was the occasion that he ran forwards in such
sort, that the Moore had time to recover himself* again, using his
accustomed cursinges against Mahomet, (...) calling him a thousand detestable
names. So these valiant warriors without any farther staring, joined again
together, whereas there began a new battle far more rigorous then the
first, for that they were both furiously incensed with anger, not ceasing to
torment their arms with terrible blows, without all pity, in such sort* that
their blows were delivered more with strength then with any policy. Thus
with terrible fury they bruised one another flesh, that either of them did
feel it very much: this Mauritanian with great fury lift up his swoorde for
to strike the Sardenian, and he placed it in such sort that he made him to fall
upon his horse crouper, but by reason of the great fury wherewith it was
discharged, and again that the Moors horse was somewhat weary, he stumbled
and bowed upon his knees, in such sort, that in a great while he could not rise
up again, and although he spurred him very much, yet it (...) The Moore seeing
that all that he could do was to little effect, cried out against Mahomet,
and with the great force that the Moore used, his horse arose again upon his
feet, at such time as the Sardenian with so outrageous cholar, that the smoke
flew out at his visour, took his great sword in both his hands, letting his
sheelde hang at his back, and stroke him such a terrible blow upon the creast
of his helm, that he made him clean to loose his feeling for a great while.
The Moors horse by reason of his weariness was ready to fall down on every
side: This valiant Sardenian seeing him in that case, and remembering in what
order he had before left the knight of the Sun, without any more tarrying
turned about his swift and light horse, and with as much swiftness as might
be possible, he returned unto the place where as he had left the knight of the
Sun and when he came unto the place whereas the battle was fought between the
two warriors, he found not the knight of the Sun there, but retourning back
again he took his way toward the Sea side, following the foot steps of
them and their horses, and in a small time he came unto the place, whereas he
saw a bark which was at an anchor fast upon the shore, and coming nigh unto
it he knew it to be the very same which had brought them thither, and for to
know of certainty whether the knight of the Sun were there or not, he
called with a loud voice unto them which were in the Bark: unto whom the
Greek made answer, and when he saw that it was his friend Tefereo that had
called, he was very glad, and likewise Tefereo did greatly rejoice to see
him, and therewith he entered into the Bark, and when he was entered therein,
he heard one with a loud voice, which said. Tarry, tarry, thou cowardly
villain, and do not think to escape me without thy due punishment. At which
great noise the Knight of the Sun looked about and saw that it was the King
of Mauritania, which with very great have came toward them. The Prince would
have gone out to him if yt the Bark had not ben so far in the sea, as it was,
for the which he was very sad, and not a little disquieted, yet for all the
anger which the Prince had, he could not choose but say that the king was a
good knight, and of as much might as Bramarant, and somewhat more valiant and
politic, and meruailed with himself whether he were his son or no. So when
the Pagan saw that he could not execute his fury and rage, he began to
roar like a Bull, and although he was not purposed any more to imbarke
himself to sea, yet at that time he was constrained to change his pretense,
and finding opportunity by reason of certain Merchauntes which were
fraighting of a ship to Grecia, he determined to go into her. There he
embarked himself, and the wind being very prosperous they departed, and in
a very short time they arrived at a haven in Grecia, where as he went a land,
and travailed in the Country certain days. So it happened one day that he
found by a house of pleasure, a great company of Knights, Ladies, and
Damosells, which were recreating of themselves. What they were, and what the
king did, in following the Story you shall understand, and I will now leave
him for to tell you of the heroycall son of Trebatio, who for the space of
six days sailed on the Sea with great pleasure, often talking of the great
strength and force of the Moore, the seventh day he arrived in a very fair
haven or port, which was nigh unto a very sumptuous City, the which was
furnished with great ships and Gallyes, and other small Barks and Foystes.
Amongst all these they passed very quicklye, without the interruption of any
person, till such time as the Bark was fast a ground, and perceiving that it
was there convenient that they should disimbarke themselves, they leapt a
shore, and likewise took out their horses, and straight way they leapt on
their backs, and took the way which lead them unto the City, wherein they
discovered on the one part a very fair and great army of men, and likewise
all the field was pitched with very rich Tents, and as they looked about,
straight ways they saw come forth of the City five mighty and strong
Knights, and a very great and strong Gyaunt, and in the other part of the
army one only knight, whose armor seemed to be of a passing fine Rubie, all
to be spotted with stars of gold, and set with Pearls. This sight did like
them so well, that they were looking on that one Knight a great while very
earnestly, and took great pleasure to see his good demenour. The Knight of
the Sun was imagining with himself what knight that should be, that was of
so gentle disposition and proportion, believing certainly that it could be
none, but some of his lignage. This knight passed hard by those two friends,
who did behold them very much, yet he made no staying, but without speaking
any word he passed on forwards, and when he was come into that place of the
field that was appointed for the battle, he put his spear in his reast, at
the which token one of the six knights came forth to make resistaunce, whom
the knight of the Sun did know.

But now for that the history goes in order, it is needful to leave them in
this order, till time shall serve, and to return again, and tell you of the
Emperor of Grecia, that came to the port of Cimarra, and there did disimbarke
himself.

How the Greek Emperor did disimbarke himself at the City of Cimarra, and
what happened unto him there. Cap. 25.
YOU have heard before how that the Emperor arrived at the Port of Cimarra,
which was governed by the Father of that unfortunate Herea, where when he
had put in order his inchaunted Bark, he leapte a land, and going on foot
armed with that rich armor which Garrofilea had given unto him, carrying his
right hand upon the reast which was in his armor, and his left hand voon the
pomell of his swoorde, and his helm close which covered his face, and hanging
at his neck his gallaunt and rich sheelde, with a comelye and grave
countenance he went toward the City, and of the first that he met withal,
he asked what land or Country that was, for that he was ignorant thereof,
and straight way it was told him in the Sarasin language, that he was in the
kingdom of Cimarra, whereat he was not a little delighted, and considering
the knowledge of the wise Lyrgandeo, he went forwards on his way without
staying, till he entered into the gates of the City, and all they which met
with him, did very much behold him, greatly meruailing at his gravity, good
disposition, and wonderful stature. There were sundry that advertised the
King thereof as soon as he was come a shore, how that there was a knight
which did disimbarke himself at the Port or Haven, which came without
government, being armed with very rich and costly armor, and one that was
of an excellent stature and good disposition. The ancient King of the Country
who was advertised thereof before by the wise Lyrgandeo, did straight way
know that it was he which had passed the terrible keepers of his murdered
Daughter.

For you shall understand, that as soon as the Emperor was departed from the
Island, the wise Lyrgandeo commanded that the body of the Lady should be
carried unto Cimarra, aduertising her Father, that the long looked for
reuengement was not far of. And likewise how and in what manner the knight
which did it should come into his land, and also who that Knight should be.
Wherefore as soon as the king was given to understand of his ariuall, without
any more tarrying, being accompanied with all his noble men, and leading in
his hand a very fair and young child, about twelve years old; the most
best proportoined that ever nature could frame, of whom you shall hear no
more in this book, for that in the second book it shall be declared at
large of him. The king went forth till he came to the chief place of the
City, there to meet with the Emperor, whereas likewise he met with this old
and ancient King, who boowing his knees to the earth, and shedding of many
tears, with joy, received him, saying. O high and mighty Emperor, give me
here your hands, that I may discharge the duty that all humane creatures do
owe unto your highness: how much more I, that am bound thereunto, for that
with so much firmness thou would confirm thy oath, and take the charge in
thine own person to work my reuengement. The Emperor was in a great
confusion, to hear himself named, and never gave any in all that land to
understand thereof, but straight way he suspected, that Lirgandeo should
advise him of his coming. And heerewith using of his accustomed bounty, he
took him by the hand, and lifted him from the ground, saying, Good King, the
debt which thou say is due unto me, thou have repayed in showing the
nobleness of thy heart and courage, and otherwise I am constrained by ye order
of knighthood and justice, to make reuengement of that cursed fact, which was
without all pity committed upon thy daughter. And seeing that there can be no
other remedy but only reuengement, here of my part I do offer thee to do
all, that in my power is possible to be done, desiring thee that thou restrain
these tears, and give order that with great speed there may be joined
together all thy power, to the end that we may go and conclude that which in
me lies. The King with a sad voice answered. High and mighty Emperor, this
has been provided for before, for all my people and shires are at an hours
warning, to go to the ayding of so just a cause, and we tarryed for nothing
but only your royal person, who must be the sword of my reuengement.

Thus with these and such like communications, they went unto the Kings
pallaice, which was hanged all with black clothes, for others he would not
consent to have hanged, since the death of his daughter Herea. There was the
Emperor unarmed, and served with as great highness and honor, as though he
had been in Grecia. Notwithstanding the Emperor, would not soiourne nor rest
there much, for the next day in the morning he commanded that all the people
should march forwards unto a haven which was at the uttermost parts of all the
Kingdom, whereas they found ships and barks of all sorts, very well
furnished of all things that was needful. There was three hundred ships one
with another, in the which there was embarked fifty thousand Moors
meruailously well appointed, and committing their sails unto the wind, all
this Navy took their voyage toward Numidia. So they nauigated, and founds
the wind favorable, which brought them unto a port or haven, which was but
two leagues from the Kings house. There, with great joy and pleasure they went
a shore, with out any resistaunce or gainsaying. So when they were all out of
the ships a land, they displayed their ancients, and in very good order they
marched forwards. And at such time as Apollo had made an end of his journey,
and that the dark night came on, they came in sight of the City, and without
taking any rest, toward the land side they pitched their tents, and fortified
themselves in the best wise they could, in such sort, as their good Captain
which did govern them had commanded, without doing any thing to the
contrary. So when all things was put in good order as they would have it, he
commanded that all the army, should go unto the gate of the City that was
most nearest, the which was straight way done: and in three days after they
did no other thing but ease and rest themselves: for that the people were
somewhat out of quiet with their great travail.

The fourth day, the Emperor seeing that there was no sturring in the City,
(the which was done by policy, tarying to see what the enemies would do) the
Emperor called for his armor: and being armed, there was brought a very
fair and mighty horse unto him: and with his accustomed courage he issued out
from amongst his company, and rode toward the wall of the City, and put
himself into a fair green plain nigh unto the walls, and lifting up the
visour of his healme, he set his horn unto his mouth, and did sound it very
strongly, which was to warn them that were in the City, to come to the walls
and harken what he would say: and when he saw that there was much people,
attending to hear him, he began to say. O King Noraldino of Numidia, how
careless thou art in this thy strong country, thinking that the strength
thereof will defend thee, that thou payest not the price of thy naughty
treason, which thou did use with that unfortunate Herea. Take unto thee thy
armor, and for that thou had a heart to commit this evil deed, have now
likewise a courage to make thy defense: come forth of these thy walls, thou
traitor, and destroyer of the royal blood. All they which were on the walls
did hear the threatenings, and straight way went and told it unto the king
of Numidia, who was at that time in communication of wars and of armies, and
of all things that belonged thereunto, and when he heard these news, giving a
great sigh he said. Oh ye Gods, are not you content to see me in this
perplexity, and so much wronged, but likewise with sound of trumpet suffer me
to be outraged in calling me traitor. These feigned griefs and sorrowful words
had so much force, that it moved the hearts of the Princes that were with him,
for to go out into the field for his defense: and in great have they
commanded, that their harness should be brought unto them, with determination
to dye, or to defend his cause. And there was none that had any fear, but
only the Giant, for that he would not give any credit unto the Kings words,
although he dissembled never so muuch: but by reason that he had sworn
thereunto, he was constrained by his oath to go forth with the rest.

So in this order as I have told you, they went forth of the City all six
together: and he which gave the first onset was that valiant and amorous Eleno
of Dacia brothers son unto the Emperor, who with a gentle behavior when he
came nigh the Emperor, said in the Saracen tongue: It is not the part of good
Knights to speak any villainy, especially against Kings whom they are bound to
have in reverence and honor. To whom the Emperor answered in the same
language. Art thou Noraldino King of Numidia? Don Eleno replied, No, but I am a
Knight, and a very stranger in this country: but yet by firm oath, I
determine to dye in the defense of his right. The Emperor answered: He has
neither justice nor right on his side, but it is most apparent wrong which he
does maintain, and there is no reason that such a traitor as he is, should be
by any other defended: neither is it seemly that any Knight of price should
charge himself in his behalf, for that he is a traitor. And likewise he that
does defend him and take his part (in this, that he will sustain and
maintain so great injustice) is pertaker of his treason, and meriteth a
traitors name. And for that thou art his defender, here I give thee to
understand, that I care not for thee, and less I do esteem thee: for that
he which does take upon him to defend a traitor, may well be accounted a
traitor. This valiant Eleno, when he saw himself to be so ill entreated,
answered: Thou lie in so saying, for that I was never traitor, neither do I
proceed of the lynage where traitors ever were: notwithstanding, thou shall
pay me with thy head, the great vncurtesie which thou have used unto me.
Therefore it does stand thee in hand to look unto thy self, and take that
part of the field which thou think best for thy purpose, and leave off
these blazing words to join with me in battle, that I may see if thou can
as well defend thy quarrel, as thou can handle thy tongue. At which words,
there drew nigh them the Prince Clauerindo, and as the Emperor would have
departed to put himself in battle, he did behold him, and straight way knew
him. And casting his eyes on the one side, likewise knew the other three, but
he could not know who the Prince Eleno should be: and for the great desire
which he had to know what he was, he said: Knight, I do desire thee for
courtesies sake to tell me what thou art: and if thou will not grant me this,
then I pray thee to lift up y^ visor of thy helm, y^ I may see thy face? for
here I give thee to understand thy four companions I do know, which is the
occasion that I have no desire to enter into battle with thee. Then Don Eleno
answered and said: Pagan, of the two things which thou do ask of me
(although there is no compulsion) yet will I pleasure thee in fulfilling one of
them: and in saying these words, he lift up the visour of his healme, and when
the Emperor saw him, he believed that it had been his son Rosicleer, and
with a loud voice he said. Oh mighty God, how can this be true, that unto
knights of my lignage should chance so vile a spot, who hitherto in all their
doings have got great honor and praise, and now are come to defend such
apparaunt wickedness and treason. Thou shall understand knight, that I am the
Emperor Trebatio, and would not willingly now be called thy Father, for that
thou art come to defend so apparaunt and known an evil, for I knowing the
unreasonable naughtiness that this king has committed, am come to take this
conquest in hand, for in all my life time I never took a more iuster cause in
hand, neither was there ever in all the world a thing more worthier of
punishment then this, and seeing that my fortune has been such, that my first
enemy that should come against me, seems my son, put thy self here now
before thy high progenitour from whence thou do descend, and for Gods love
do not blot thy stock, in defending traitors and treason, and therewith in few
words he told unto them all the whole history, as before I have told you. Then
this excellent Dacian answered. High and mighty Emperor, although by my name
thou have not known me, yet in calling me son thou did happen on the
truth. For thou shall understand that I am called Eleno of Dacia, son unto
the king of Dacia thy brother, and in that which thou have said that we do
maintain treasons, we are to the contrary informed, nevertheless I beseech
your highness to tarry here a while, and therewith he and the Prince in a
great confusion returned to the place whereas the rest of his companions were,
and turning his talk unto the king, he said. King of Numidia, thou shall
understand that yonder knight is the Emperor of Grecia, my uncle, who in that
small time which we have been with him, has told unto us all the effect of this
thy matter, clean contrary unto that which thou have declared unto us.
Therefore King, there is no reason, that Knights of so high blood and name as we
are should be set to defend lies and treasons: but if it be to the contrary of
that which he has told unto me, have no doubt but tell us the truth. For here
I swear by the love that I bear unto that unloving Lidia, that I will
travail so with my uncle, that greatly with thy honor thou shall go
thorough with this conquest. Then this false King answered. O Knights which
do confess your selves to be Christians, and by the God whom you do worship
have made a solemn oath to help and defend me by the strength of your arms:
how happens it now y^ without any care of your oath, which you have sworn, you
will leave me desolate, and go from your words, being doubtful of the very
truth. The courageous French man answered: Do thou not think King, that our
oaths and words shall be abrogated, rather first we will leese our lives, both
I, the prince, and all our companions: but consider king, that God will not
that we shall imagine amiss of Trebatio, who is a prince of great verity and
truth, and again, our very nigh kinsman. Therefore this, and that which he
has told us, has moved us to come and tell thee, and do say, that none of
us will go from his word and oath if thy cause be just. Then the valiant
Eleno did cut off his reasons, and tourning unto the King he said. King of
Numidia, here I do most humblye desire thee, that with false illusions thou
put not us unto so great travail, for that then it can not be, but either
we must dye in the hands of him whom we do desire to serve, or else, (though
far unlikely) to kill him. Is it possible king, that thou have brought us
unto this estate, that cruelty should govern our wills, without having power
to do any other thing. The King when he saw that the Knights were very
earnest, began to swear with great oaths that his cause was just, and that he
had told unto them the truth of the matter, and if so be that the Emperor had
told them any other thing, it was only to deceive them, and to turn them,
that they should not make his defense, and charged them again with their oath
which they had made and how that they had given their words to be his vpholder
and defender. This worthy Dacian tourning unto his companions said. Knights,
what do you think in this matter, what is it best that we do herein? For
well you do see, that we are so bewrapte and bound one against another, and
cousin against cousin, yet for all that we cannot by any means excuse the
battle. So they did all determine to return unto the Emperor, and to
desire him for to accept it in good part, and to leave off that battle, and
to make the^ believe that he was falsely informed, and when they came unto him
they said. Worthy Emperor, and our only Lord, look well unto this false
information, wherewith they have informed you, and having well considered
thereof, we do all request you, for the love which unto your sons and
cousins, and unto all your friends you do owe, that it may move you to take
no occasion to put us into this extremity, for that by any means we cannot
go from our oath and word. Unto the which the Emperor answered and said. My
loving friends, if that you have given your word and oath to procure to make
defense of so false a King, do you likewise endeavor to perform the same: for
the like will I do to accomplish that which I have promised, for that there is
no more reason for the one then for the other. But this one thing I do tell
you, that it is very apparent that you will maintain the treason of this false
King, as it appears plainly by many reasons, which I have told unto you: and
the principal cause, wherein you may see plainly his treason and falshoode,
is the little have that he does make himself unto the battle, and if he
knew that he doo^h maintain the truth, let him come forth and make his own
defense. At the which reasons they all held their peace, considering the great
reason which the Emperor had declared, and determined that the next day they
would conclude, what were best to be done, and so these six knights returned
unto the City, and the Emperor unto the camp. Of all this that happened, he
that received the most contentment, was the Prince Eleno, for he desired very
much to return unto the City, for that at his departure he left his Lady
very sick, so that he thought not to find her alive, and coming to the
City, he was no sooner alighted from his horse, but he went straight unto
her Chamber, whereas he found her with a mighty burning ague, and seeing her
in that case, he was as one that was beside himself, and the more that her
ague increased, the more furious she did show her self and farther out of
quiet. So this grievous and sick Lady did ask paper and ink for to write a
few lines unto him which was the causer of all this her harm, and making an
end of her writing, without power to do any other thing, with the great
feebleness she felt, she fell down upon her pillowe, and speaking unto Eleno
she said. Ualiant knight, behold here thy Lidia, at her last end: for that
there does not remain in me strength for to give thee thanks, for so great
benefits as I have received at thy hands: yet I carry one great comfort with
me, which is, y^ although I dye, yet thy great loyalty does not dye, neither
my firm faith, and although I was vnloued of an unfaithful Knight, yet am I
beloved of the most courageous knight in the world. This sorrowful and
troubled Prince would not suffer her to go forwards with her talk, but with
shedding of many tears from his eyes, he said.

Oh my sweet Mistress, do not give me to understand that thou will dye, if
that thou mean I shall remain alive. Oh my love, I would rather that my heart
should be parted in twain, by the greatest enemy that I have, then to
remain without thee. Oh my loving Mistres, let this thy youthful years and
great beauty which thou have, encourage thee, and die not in this order: this
feeble Lidia for to show with more feruentnesse the good will which she did owe
unto the P^^^ce, for his great courtesy forced her self to hold up her head,
and he lifted it up with such quickness, as though her weak members had felt
no grief, and as though the fury of that burning ague was not able to resist
her, but with the force of love she sat up in her be^, and with her face of a
fiery color she said. My Lord, time does not give me any place, that with
words I might gratify the great courtesy that of thee I have received: for
that I do feel, that the hour is come, and that the three fatal sisters
have the thread of my life between the edges of their sheeres, so that it
lacks nothing but to put them together: insomuch, that I miserable creature
do feel my soul tremble in my flesh, at this my last hour. But one thing,
(oh my sweet and true lover) I will desire thee before that I do dye, which
is, that thou would procure, that this letter may be given unto that
cruel Knight, who has brought me unto this estate, giving him to understand
of this my troublesome death, the occasion whereof, was his unreasonable
cruelty. And making an end of saying this, this miserable Lady fell down,
without having any more strength to sit up, but let the letter fall out of her
hand before her true lover, who took it up and said.

Oh all my joy, what a cruel knife is this to my heart, to hear thy
complayntes, in giving me to understand the great cruelty that love has used
against thee, without any desert or reason: and verily I do believe, that
these thy great thoughts and griefs, but most of all thy absence will be the
occasion of my death. And if y^ my enemies are not of power to give it me,
here I do swear unto thee by the great and true love which I bear unto
thee, that I my self with my own hands will procure to pull this heart out of
his place, for that it knew not how to give thee contentment paying therewith ye
duty yt I ow unto thee. O happy Brenio that did obtain so much grace and
favor at Venus hands, for to be beloved of the flower of all beauty. The
Clime in the which thou were borne was not so happy as to the contrary my
Clime has been unhappy and unfortunate. Take a good heart my Mistres, comfort
your self and be strong, and be not the occasion that I seek my own death,
and here I do promise thee by thy unhappy success, to bring thee into the
Province of Lusitania, or else to die.

Then this weak Lidia said: Gentle Knight, there is now no time all being
past, for that I do feel my self that this is the last fight. The sacred
Gods will not permit, that before my death I should see his face: for if I
did, I verily believe that I should receive some comfort. O immortal Gods,
into your divine bosoms I do commend my soul, asking no other reuengement
against the causer of all my evil, but that he die of the same infirmity.
And thou mighty Greek, here I do desire thee by the love which thou do
seem to owe me, for that thou see that my death cannot be excused, and that
Proserpina, is tarrying for me, with both her arms abroad for to receive my
soul. And again, that this shall be the last request that by me shall be
demanded of thee, as also to verify this love which thou have showed unto me
to be true, so that I hope thou can not by any means deny me to do it.
How is it possible my sweet Mistres, said the Prince, that now thou art in
doubt of my love, I promise you that my true love does not deserve this
suspicion, and here I give you to understand, that first the mighty river of
Tigris shall forsake her course and run back again, before that any lack
shall be found in me of that I owe unto thy love, neither any forgetfulness
to be the occasion to withdraw me from doing any thing that you shall
command me, therefore sweet mistres ask what your pleasure is, for that thou
can ask nothing at my hands, but it shall be all thine. This weak Lady,
whose power and strength was wholly decayed, and that her hour drew nigh at
hand, with a weak and feeble voice she said. That which I desire, gentle
Lord, is, that this my letter may come unto the hands of Brenio, wherein he
may see how cruel he has been unto his Lidia. So this dead Lady spoke never
a word more, for at that instaunt the destinies concluded to cut the third of
her life a sunder. Here the Prince lacked both reason and patience, here he
lost all his comfort and understanding, and coming unto the dead body of
Lidia, he fell in a sound, and when (by the procurement of the Ladies and
Damsells that were there present) he came to himself, he arose up with a
furious wrath, saying: Is it of truth sweet soul that thou art departed and
gone without me? Is it possible my Lidia yt I shall not follow thee whether
thou do go? Alas what shall I do? where am I y^ I do consent to let thee
depart alone? how is this my only love, shall I loose thee? What is it yt this
cruel heart aileth, that it renteth not in pieces. O Eleno is this the love
that unto thy Lidia living thou did show. At which great noise the other
four Princes entered into the chamber, who were meruailously altered to hear
his lamentations. So either of them in the best wise he could did procure to
comfort him, but this amorous knight with the great anguish that he had, fell in
a sound in the arms of Clauerindo, who requested the Ladies and damsells which
were there in company with the dead body, that they would ordain some thing
to bring him again to his remembrance, and so with such remedies as they did
make he came again unto himself, who then with great rage crieng out, called
for his Lidia. Oh my Lidia, what is become of thee, who for love in another
man's arms did die, and now I die for thy love? Oh the whole stay of all my
life, where art thou my Lidia, my comfort, do thou hear me? Do thou not
carry with thee this thy heart? No, no, for yet I do feel it. Is it possible
that I can live, or life will long sustain me? I hardly believe it. Oh my joy,
do thou come again, I pray thee be not so ungrateful, but stay a while
for I will come unto thee. For now I am certainly persuaded that I am
altogether without life. Fond Eleno if thou be dead, wherefore do thou talk
so much of vanities, wherefore do thou not hold thy peace. And with these
and such like reasons he remained without any feeling, in such sort that it
seemed that he was dead.

The other Princes which were there present seeing him in that case, took him
between them, and carried him unto another chamber, and procured that Lidia
should be buried, which straight way was done, for that the King commanded
his Sepulcher should be open, in which they put this dead Lady. The Prince
of Hungaria did remain in company with the Prince Eleno, for that he would
not let him alone, for he loved him out of all measure, because he did
resemble so much the valiant Rosicleer. So he remained there till such time
as he came unto himself, and the first word that Prince Eleno said, was:
Where is the Letter of my Lidia. Liriamandro did give it him, who taking it in
his hand, he said.

Oh work, and the last work of that white Iuorie hand: here I do swear
unto thee by the honor that I do owe unto knighthoode, not to a part it from
my heart, till such time as the heart of that cruel Brenio be cut it pieces,
and in speaking this he kissed it a thousand times, uttering a thousand
varieties. And straight way with a furious anger, he arose up and said: What
is this Eleno, do thou believe that with lamenting thou shall recover thy
well-beloved Lidia, and not perform that which by her was commanded thee. It is
more requisite that thou do travail and wander, till such time as thou have
performed that which thou have promised, gather unto thy self strength and
courage, for to perform that which thy heart is bound to do. So with this
anguish he arose up at such times as Aurora, with his glistering beams had
spread over the earth.

How that Eleno before he would go into the field, would see the Sepulcher of
Lidia, and what chanced in the battle appointed with the Emperor, his
kinsmen and friends. Chap. 26.
THE next morning when the day was come, all these stout warriors were ready
on horse back, but Prince Eleno, would first go and see the Sepulcher of his
Lidia, and going into the Temple of Mahomet, he went straight unto the place
whereas they told him that his Lidia was, and having no strength to suffer the
great grief that his heart did feel, he said. Oh my sweet Lidia, if thou
do hear my grief and lamentation, let it appear by some outward show in
these hard stones, which has bewrapt and enclosed thy white and delicate
body, that receiving grief at these my lamentations, it may give place that I
may see thee, let this my anguish grieve thee my Lidia, likewise let this my
misfortune grieve thee. But alas what shall I say, is it not sufficient that
the great pain that I do sustain for thy death, but I must bewail my own
sorrow: Oh mistres, at thy death thou made an end of all thy pains, and
mine does more and more increase. And in saying these and such like
lamentations, he drew out his Dagger, and with the point he wrote an Epitaph,
which was as follows.

Here Lidia lou'de and vnbelou'de does lie,
Whose great good will to her small good did bring:
She love did feel, which causeless did apply
to her (perforce) of death the bitter sting.
And though her corpse enclosed here does lie,
her lucklesse fate and fame will never die.
So when he had made this Epitaph, he arose up, saying: here I do promise
thee Lidia, since my fortune is such that I have lost thee, there is no other
that shall enter into this my heart and hard breast. But how can I say that it
is hard, did it not open at the hour when it felt thy absence, and so without
saying any more, he went out of the temple, with all the rest of his
companions, and taking their horses, they altogether issued out of the city,
at such time as the Emperor was arming himself in his rich tent. The fierce
king of Sardenia when he saw that they returned again, unto y^ which the day
before they did entreat of, he could not be in quiet, but said. O king, that
for the defense of thy person we must contend with that man whom we most
esteem, and thou must remain in the field only for the show of a knight, and
we enforced to finish the harm, whereof thou art the occasion. Well, do not
thou think that it shall be so, but persuade thy self, that thou shall be the
first in the encounter, that thou may prove how evil it is to suffer the
^urie of the Emperor of Grecia. O worthy king of Sardenia, answered the king
of Numidia, how the great affection which thou have unto the Emperor, does
cause thee not to give credit unto this my justice and right. Here I do
require thee by the oath which thou made unto me, that thou be the first to
put thy self in the defense of my person. To which the Sardenian answered:
First, the heaven and the earth shall join together, before that I will consent
that my arm shall move it self against him, whom I take for my Lord and
master. And here I say unto thee oh king, that if thou dooest but once again
will me heereto, I swear to thee by the sovereign God, that neither thy
power, nor all thy subjects shall be able to deliver thee out of my hands. So
their communication was cut off by seeing the Emperor to come toward them
upon a very fair horse, who showed so great fury, that it was a wonder to
see. At this present time there appeared coming from those parts which was
toward the sea, two Knights, who were very well armed. If you do remember,
these were the two valiant warriors, the prince of the Sun, and the strong
Sardenian. The great desire that the Emperor had to see himself with the
Numidian, was the occasion that he little esteemed the tarrying for those two
knights, for that he thought the hour was come of the battle, and that the
defender should be (as he had demanded) that false King and traitor, he put
himself forwards toward the place whereas the Princes and the king came. And
when they were together, these Princes with very fair and amorous words and of
great fidelity, endeavored so persuade the Emperor for to leave the battle,
and that therein they should receive marvelous great contentment, if he would
accept it. The knight of y^ sun stood and did behold their reasonings, and
did look for no other thing but furious battle, by all tokens yt they showed
with their hands and other demeanors of their bodies: and knowing five of the
knights, he very much meruailed what should be the occasion, and with this
desire he had to know what should move them to this controversy, he saw a
Lackie which passed by, and he called him, and asked of him in the Saracen
tongue, saying: Friend, tell me if thou cannest what is the occason that does
cause them to make this cruel and furious battle, and who they be that do
make it. This Lackie (by the riches of his armor, and by his good proportion)
judged him to be a knight of estimation, he said: Gentle Knight, the cause of
this controversy and defense, if I should stand to tell you it all, it would
be very tedious, but of all the rest that thou do ask me, I will give thee
to understand that which I do know. You shall understand that the knight
which is alone is the mighty Emperor Trebatio of Greece, and that which he
does maintain is great justice and right, and will give great punishment for
the same, which is that that the others do defend. The knight of the Sun was
very much amazed at that which he heard, and therewith he went toward them
before they had made an end of their reasoning* and so without any show of
trouble he said unto the Prince of Dacia (who was still sore troubled with the
sorrow, as you have heard). Art thou Don Eleno of Dacia, my cousin, and
brothers son unto the Emperor, my Lord and Father? I am he answered the
Dacian, who ought not for to dye, before I give thee thy death, for that thou
have caused so much evil to come upon me, that living I do now die. The
knight of the Sun being almost in a confusion to bear his dry reasons,
answered: Loving cousin, I feel my self somewhat troubled at these thy
words, and greatly amazed that thou art fallen into so great pride to lift up
thy armed hand against thy natural parents, and more being informed, that
which thou do pretend to defend is apparent treason. The Prince Eleno did
cut of his talk and said. Oh my cousin, here I do tell thee, that I do
seek no other thing but death, therefore procure to give it me, for that I
shall think my self happy to die in thy hands, notwithstanding defend thy
self as thou were wont to do, for that thou know it does so behooue thee.
With this fury and forgetful understanding, speking no more words, he turned
about his horse, crying out and saying: I will live no longer, seeing I have
lost that, beside which, to me can be no greater loss. The knight of the Sun
very much meruailed at these his short reasons, not knowing of any thing that
had happened unto him, and wondering that his true heart should commit or
maintain such wrongs, he turned about his horse for to make his defense, in
such sort, that all the knights that were there, were not sufficient to
disturb him, but with great fury they met together with their spears, yet not
one of the^ was moved in their saddles, but remained as though they had been
two towers, and straight way with no less force they began to lay hold on
their swords, and for that the knight of the Sun had a respect unto him, he
did rather procure to make his defense, then in any thing to offend him, but
Don Eleno stroke such a blow at his cousin, that he made him to stoop with
all his body to the horse neck. The knight of the Sun would have taken
reuengement of the same blow, but he considered that he was his cousin, and
that he was ignorant of the cause that should move him to commit this folly,
for the which consideration he did suffer him, and would make no reuengement.
Tefereo who saw all that had passed, and remained in his first place without
removing, til time did serve him to accomplish that which he had determined in
his mind to do, and when he saw occasion for the same, he threw his sheeld
upon his arm, and put his spear in his rest, and made a show yt he would be
doing with ye giant, yt which he perceived, and he put himself in a readiness,
but more to give him to understand what he was, then to hurt him. This furious
Sardenian stroke his horse with the spurs, yt he made him run like the commet
which falls from the side of Trion, and when he came in the midst of his
course, he turned his horse toward the place whereas the king of Numidia was
(who had put himself a part from the rest) with so great swiftness yt by no
means he could keep or defend himself from yt encounter, but by reason of
the strength wherewith it was given he threw them to the ground, very evil
entreated. He was no sooner fallen when that this courageous Sardenian leapt
from his horse very lightly, and found that the king of Numidia was on foot
ready for to defend himself, and crying out: Knights, succor, succor, or
else I am but dead. At the which noise all the other five knights looked about,
and when they saw the king in the power of that valiant knight, they would
have rescued him, but the light of all knighthoode which was the father and the
son, did disturb them, and put themselves before them, and would not suffer
them to give any such aid, but did there great wonders, striking on every
side, in such sort, that now one and then the other they made them to recoile
back. The strong and furious Eleno did but little harm with his swoorde,
neither made he any great resistaunce, the Giant with as little have as might
be went to help the Numidian king, and with a reasonable pace he went toward
the place whereas the king was, (but for that reason would not consent that
such as he is should be helped) with the have that he made, his horse
stumbled, in such sort, that horse and master fell to the ground, of the which
he was very sore hurt and bruised, as it appeared by his slow rising up again.
The valiant Sardenian with great policy procured to bring to an end his
desire, before that any did come to disturb him, and being lighted of his
horse he made have to the King and said: Thou traitor, it shall little profit
or pleasure thee to call for help, for yt in my hands thou shall leave this thy
traitorous soul, who does deserve to suffer all the evils that may be, and
therewith he stroke him such a blow upon his healme, and with so great
fury, that he made him in spite of his heart to kneel with both his knees
upon the earth. So when the Sardenian perceived him to be in this case, with
great valiantness he straight ways laid hold of his healme with his left
hand, and pulled it clean from his head, and with his right hand he smote
him such a blow upon the head, that he parted it in two pieces, and
immediately he fell down dead to the ground, and looking about to see whether
his horse were gone or no, he found that he was nigh at hand. Then he took
the dead king and made him fast unto the stiroppes of the Saddle, and with a
trice he leapt upon his horse, and so without any help of his stiroppes, he
made his horse to run, and so drew the king after him throughout all the
field. The Gyaunt would have succored him, but all was in vain. In this
sort went Tefereo drawing the king after him before all the knights that were
there present and said: Knights, what do you mean to be so still? Why do
you not uphold and defend this traiterous king, in whose strength was all his
confidence? Behold now where he has received the payment, that such evil
works as his deserved, and therewith he rode round about the field as he did
before. The Emperor when he saw that this fact was ended, would that his
cousin Don Eleno, and the Prince his son should leave their battle, which
was between them begun a new, and they were giving one another terrible
blows, but not with such great fury, for that they did know the one the
other, otherwise it would have gone ill on both parts. The Emperor put
himself between them and said.

Oh Knights, cease your battle and hearken unto my words. Eleno which was
still kindled in wrath, had no respect unto those words, neither would he
part, but like a man distraught from himself, he doubled such a blow upon
the visour of the Emperor, that he made him loose the sight of his eyes. The
Emperor who was very angry and not a little grieved, at the small regard
that he had of his words, would presently have revenged the blow, but that
he was disturbed by the Gyaunt, who pulling off his healme went toward the
place whereas these three worthy warriors were, and with a heavy and
troubled voice he said.

Hear me O noble Emperor and you worthy knights, cease this your
controversy and stay your vnweakened arms, till such time as I have uttered
that which I will say. Then the Emperor with his accustomed meekness said.
Noble King, what is it that thou can demand of me, that I would not
willingly accomplish? To whom he answered. Well, seeing it is so my Lord, I
do desire you to return unto your Tent, and take your ease, and to leave off
this, and such like controversies: for that the cause thereof, my cousin and
brothers son, has taken away from between you. And when he had said these
and such like words, he returned unto his companions, and persuaded them
altogether to return unto the City, to the which they all consented,
although it was clean contrary unto the will of Don Eleno. So when they were
entered into the City, they found that all the people and burgesses thereof
were in great lamentation for the loss of their king and Lord, and the more,
for that his death was so shameful and odious. But they rested not till they
came to the Kings Pallayce, whereas they were received, and were unarmed, and
commanded the dinner to be made ready, whereat they were meruailouslye
served. And when that dinner and all was ended, the valiant Giaunt began to
speak in this manner.

Worthy Princes, and my Lords and friends, you do well know, and here you
have seen, how that all our travail which we have had for to defend this
king, has been greatly against our honors, and that neither our threatenings
nor words were sufficient for to disturb the will of the Emperor herein: for
that he knew that his quarrel was very certain and just, which was the
occasion, that the punishment of this fact in all things has been favorable
according unto his desire. And for the better verefieng of the same, at that
present time you saw come in place, his worthy son, accompanied with my
brothers son my cousin, that with their aid he should conclude to put in
execution his just and true desired reuengement: which has been a great
reproach and ignomy unto us all, neither was there in any of us so much force or
st^ength to withstand or disturb him: but after the king being slain, as you
all did see, they tied him to the stirrops, and dragged him through all the
field. So that now you ^hal understand, the king being dead our oat^ is free,
and we at liberty, neither stand we bound unto any other thing. And that
which we ought at this present to be agreeued at, is, for that we are out of
the grace and favor of our Lord the Emperor. Therefore one of us being his
brothers son, another his son in law, and another his brother in law, and
all the rest his dear and entire friends, for that we do well know that he
was not the occasion of this our fond offense. Let us now acknowledge our
fault, and procure to enter again into his favor and friendship, and go
altogether and discharge our selves, for that it is n^ shame unto us, to ask
pardon for our faults and offenses. Here have I declared unto you my opinion
and my will: and I promise you I am determined to do this, so that euery^ one
may herein do, as best shall please him, and as he shall see occasion. The
first that answered hereunto, was the va^^ant Tartarian, and said.

Excellent king, your counsayl^ herein does like me very well, and we ought
not to take any other counsel, but this only which thou have given us: for
that we see playnelye* that it has pleased God to punish us, for that we would
defend and maintain such evil and naughtiness, and without any farther
counsel we did subject our selves by our oaths: therefore I do determine my
self to follow thy pretended intention. So likewise this counsel seemed good
unto the rest of the Knights and Princes* repenting themselves of all that had
been past. Don Eleno, who was almost confounded for the controversy that was
betwixt him and his Cousin, with an altered and angrye voice, he presently
replied.

I do not deny, but that this which has happened, has been to our infamy as
much as may be, by the which it is known yt we have not maintained ye truth.
But for all that I will not give unto the Emperor nor unto ye rest so much
glory, but let them make an end to triumph over our baseness: for as for my
part, I will first die, and be cut all to pieces* then to go and yeeldo my
self unto them, nor to any person in the whole world. Let every one do as he
thinks best, for that the Dacian Prince will not let to be the same, which
his fortune has ordained, and therewith he arose up from the table, and made
as though he went unto his chamber, but he did not: for incontinent he called a
Lackey of his, and armed himself, and commanded him very secretly to carry
his horse out of the City, and to tarry for him there, and the lackey did as
the prince had commanded him. So when he was out of the City, he leaped upon
his horse, and carried in no place till he came unto the waters side, and by
chance he came unto the place whereas the bark was, that brought his cousin
thither, into which he entered, and his lackey put in his horse. He was no
sooner in, when that with great swiftness the bark began to make sail,
whereas we will leave him till time do serve.

Now I will return unto the Princes, who after many reasonings, determined to
go forthwith unto the Emperors tent, and went unto the chamber of Don Eleno*
to persuade him to do the like, but when they came there, they neither found
him nor his armor, for the which they were very sad and sorry, imagining
straight way what he had done. And seeing that it was labor lost to go and
seek him, they themselves determined to depart without him. And when they
came unto the scowtes of the host, it was asked them what they fought, and what
they would have? The Giaunt said unto them: Friends, go unto the Emperor, and
tell him that here are the Knights with whom he had all his late contention,
that are very desirous to speak with him. So the scoutes sent a messenger
straight way unto the Emperor. And when he had told it unto him, he commanded
that they should presently let them pass.

When the Emperor understood that they drew nigh unto the Tente, with his
mighty courage, and with his accustomed nobleness, he went out to meet
them, with his royal arms spredde abroad, and so by one and one he lovingly
embraced them all, and also desired them, that there might be no communication
of that which had past, for that it would be the occasion to disturb their
joy and mirth which they ought to use together meeting by adventure together
in strange Countries, so he cast his e^e aside to see where his cousin the
Prince Eleno was, but when he could not see him, he asked for him, and it was
told him all that had passed, and the dolorous end of Lidia, for y^ which they
were very sorrowful, but especially the knight of the Sun, for that he
loved him very much, and if the Emperor his Father had not disturbed him, he
would have gone to have sought him. Likewise the great joy and contentment
which the Giant received in seeing his cous^n Tefereo, was no less then
Tefereos to see his uncle, so that the delight of all of them apparently
appeared. In this sort they passed away the time till it was night without
feeling any pain of their passed travail. The next day in the morning the
king of Cimarra did arise, meruailouslye richlye apparelled, with roabes of
cloth of gold, and went unto the knights, giving them to understand that he
was more contented and in quiet then any other king, in that he was revenged
in such sort as you have heard. This good king never ceased in giving thanks
unto the Emperor for the great courtesy which he received at his hands, and
there they gave order that all the whole camp should return unto their own
country, for that which they came for was concluded, and that their departure
should be in such sort, yt the people should not do any harm, yt which was
straight way accomplished, and they appointed for king over that country a
valiant knight, of whom we will entreat in the third part of this history. So
all the people of the king of Cimarra without giving any occasion of anger or
harm, by the way which they went, came unto the place whereas they left all
their fleet of ships, and there they embarked themselves, and committed their
Sails unto the wind, which they found favorable and prosperous, and brought
them quickly unto Cimarra, whereas the king did detain them fifteen days,
although they were unwilling. At the end whereof they determined to depart
their way toward Grecia, and commanded to freight a very fair ship: so taking
their leave, and shipping themselves, they had a pleasant and peaceable wind,
which brought them unto the haven Pireo in Grecia, whereas they went all a
shore: and all of them took horse saving the great Gyaunt, who travailed on
foot, so they took their way toward Constantinople. And when they came
within two miles of it, nigh unto a great house of pleasure, whereas the
Empress was at that time. In the midst of the way, they saw two knights,
which were in a very great and well foughten battle. Whereas we will leave
them, for to tell you what the Morisco, King of Mauritania did, in the place
whereas we left him.

How that the two Empresses went for to recreate themselves unto a house of
pleasure, and what happened unto them in that journey. And how the King of
Mauritania found them in their pastimes, and knowing who they were, he would
have laid hold upon the Empres Briana. Cap. 27.
BEfore in the history, if you do remember, the fierce Moore Brufaldoro came
unto the place whereas a company of Ladies and damsells were, whereas he
stayed to look and behold them: and with them were sitting knights of a good
disposition, and well proportioned. At which time as we began to entreat of
them, I did not tell you who they were: but now you shall understand, that they
were the two Empresses of Constantinople and Trapisond, who were come unto that
house of pleasure for to recreate themselves, which was very nigh unto a fair
village. And the occasion of this their going forth, was the great esteemed
Queen of Lira, (of whom till now our history has made no mention, nor of her
surpassing excellencies, but has referred them till time did serve) She
being many times with the Empress Claridiana, heard her teil of some feats
of knighthoode that had passed by her, the which the Queen with great
contentment gave ear unto, imagining within her self to be of as good
disposition, and have as much strength as she, yea, and rather more: and
knowing that her strength was much, she purposed very secretlye to prove her
self, and taking this place (whether as they went to recreate themselves) to
be very fit for to perform her will, with all secrecy in the world, she
commanded that her armor (which Lirgandeo had presented unto her) should be
carried thither, which was fulfilled and done by the damosells, for that they
all had a great delight to pleasure and serve her, she was of them so
well-beloved, and her excellent virtues deserved no less. So when they were come
unto the house of pleasure, she went forth to recreate her self with two
Ladies toward a fountain somewhat out of the way, whereas the Empres and her
Ladies were set down. And for that the Empress Claridiana did understand,
(whether by her own imagination, or that Lirgandeo had advised her) that in
such place commonly does fall out some adventures, she commanded to give unto
her, her armor, which she caused to be brought unto that house: and whilst
she was arming, came the Moore Brufaldoro, thither: who seeing so fair a
company, had a great desire to know who they were, and coming unto a damsel
which was thereby, speaking with great courtesy, he said. Damsel let me
obtain. I pray you, so much favor at your hands, that you will tell me who
they be that are in this fair company. This damsel seeing that with so great
courtesy and good manners he did request her, and being a knight of so good
disposition, she said. Sir knight, they be the Empress of Grecia and her
Ladies, which are come to this place to recreate themselves: and have brought
hither for their sauegard these well proportioned knights. When the Moore
understood that there was the Empress of Grecia, there entered straight way
many things in his imagination, and many thoughts troubled his mind, till such
time, as he dermined to do that, which I will tell you.

So with a determined purpose he came unto the place where as the Empress was:
and without saying any word, he took her vy the arm, and with great
strength lift her up, till he had her on his saddle bow before him, and
tourning his horse about he took his way toward that place, from whence he
came, with purpose to imbarke himself again, in that ship in which he came
thither, and so to carry her away: but the noise and shrikes of the Ladies and
Damosells were so pitiful and loud, that there came unto them the knights
that were dispersed abroad in the forest and other places. And when they came,
and saw all that had passed, they altogether followed the Moore, so fast as
their horse could run: and in a short time they came for to take away his
booty, so that whether he would or not, he was driven to let her go, for to
defend himself from ye blows which the knights laid on him, who on the one
side and on the other, began to strike fiercely at him: but he made no more
reckoning of them, then the huge and mighty Rock does of the troublesome
waves of the seas, beating against it continually. Even so were the blows
which the Greek knights stroke upon the Pagan, who seeing himself hindered of
his purpose, drew out his sword, and stroke one of those knights such a blow
upon the shoulder, that he cut him down to the girdle, so that he fell down
dead to the ground: and not content heerewith, but began so to bestur himself,
that in a small time, he separated them all, some slain and some very sore
hurt and wounded. In this ^ime, that these knights were in their battle, the
Empress Claridiano was armed, and set upon a mighty strong horse, and came
with great ire, and said. Oh infernal Pagan, what devil was that, which made
thee so bold with those vile and wicked hands to come and take hold of the
Empress: and in saying these words, she drew out her sword, and stroke him
such a blow upon the healme, that she made him boow his head unto his breast:
but straight ways the Pagan came to himself, and firming his feet in his
stirroppes he made her answer, with a blow no less furious then that that
he had received. So there began one of the best foughten battles that ever
was between two Knights. The Empress when she saw her self clear out of
the hands of the Moore, got on the one side, and sat down upon the green
herbs and did behold the battle. All the Ladies and Damosells when they
saw her at liberty, ran unto the place whereas she was, and in small time
they had compassed her with a mild lamentation. At the same time out of the
thickest of the Forest came forth a Knight very well armed, with green
armor, all to be spotted with Lyllyes; and his sheelde of the same manner, but
in the midst thereof was painted a hand, which seemed to be in a lake of
water, holding in it a Lilly flower. And as he saw that furious battle, he
went unto one of the Ladies, and with a gracious courtesy he demanded the
occasion thereof. The effect thereof she told, and declared unto him which was
the knight that was in the Empress defense. At this time the battle was so
kindeled, that with the furious blows that were given, it had been sufficient
to have cut a rock in pieces. This strong Empress was so wrathful, that her
battle was more governed with ire then by policy, and with the great
choler that she had, she stroke the Pagan so terrible a blow, that he fell
down upon his horse neck, without any remembrance, and with the sound of
that terrible blow the horse was somewhat scarred, in such sort, that he carried
his master a while about the field. The Empres following him with her light
horse, thinking that she had made an end of the battle, when that in the
midst of her course, the Moore came to himself again, and with madness, he
fomed at the mouth, and beginning to use his accustomed cursings against
Mahomet. And recovering his sword, taking it fast in both his hands, he went
toward the Empress Claridiana, threatening her with a furious blow.

The Empress who saw the blow coming, she lift up her sheelde to receive
it therewith, the blow fell so terrible thereon, that it parted it in two
pieces, and lighted on her healm^ in such great force and fury, that it made
her to fall backwards upon the crouper of her horse without any feeling,
voyding much blood out of her visour, with which blow the horse was scarred,
and ran round about the field, the which when the Pagan saw, he followed
after the Empress, as the hawk, when you have taken of her hood, discovering
the Heron, with great fury flies at her: even so went this Moore saying. Now
will I see Empress, whether all the strength of this knight be sufficient for
to hinder me, that I carry thee not into a place, where Mahomet shall not be
able to deliver thee, nor take thee out of my hands.

Then the gentle Knight of the Lillyes, did put himself before the Empress,
and said. Stand thou proud Pagan, for first before thou do that which thou
think to do, it stands thee in hand to look to thy self, and in saying
these words, he drew out his sword, and stroke him such an overthwart blow
upon the visour of his healme, that he was ready to fall down on the other
side, and with the strength thereof, it deprived him of his sight, and after
that he stroke another blow on the other side, that the Moore was not able to
make any defense, but that he fell down upon his horse head. The Moore being
kindeled with great madness, to see two such mighty blows given him, and he
not able to make any defense. when he was come to himself, he went against his
adversary with his sword fast in both his hands, who was in the same sort
tarrying for him: and they struck both together such terrible blows, that both
of them were constrained to embrace their horse necks for not falling: but
setteling themselves again, they recovered their swords, and pressed the one
against the other, as commonly the wild Bulls do in their fight, with the
like ire these two joined together, making one of the most perilous battles
in the world, striking one another whereas they might do most harm.

It was so much without pity, and with so furious wrath, as though it had
been two Lions, and giving such notable blows, and battering of the copper and
iron with such great noise, that it did not only glowe in the ears of those
Ladies and the rest that were looking on, but the mountains thereabout were
moved with compassion and pity, to see their great cruelty one toward
another. At this time the Empress Claridiana was come to her self, and when
she remembered the great peril in the which she was, she called unto God for his
help, and tourning about her light horse with so great swiftness, that
wheresoever he did put his foot, there was no sign seen, she came unto the
place whereas the battle was. The Knight with the golden Lyllyes with a high
voice said. Most mightle and Imperial Lady, take you the Empress and carry
her away, and leave her in safety, and let me alone to punish this
discourteous Knight.

Then the Empress and all her Ladies did call her and said. Ualyaunt and
worthy Lady, provide to set us at liberty, where we may be out of danger,
that you may return in time to help this Knight that has done us so much
good. The Empres consented heereto at their requests, and so taking their
palfrayes, they went with great have unto the Village. But when the Pagan did
understand, that it was a woman, which had brought him into so great
extremity, with a great noise he said. Oh vile Mahomet, false, and of a base
kind: for thou, to do me more evil and shame, have ca^sed me to enter into
battle with a woman, who has brought me into this necessity. Oh traitor,
and fa^sifier of thy faith, come down from the Cottage whereas thou art, and I
will give thee to understand, that thou thy self with all thy might shall not
be able so much to anger me, in that thou have so despitefollye for my
dishonor and shame, put me in battle before a woman. The gentle knight with
the Lillyes to those words said.

Hold thy peace Pagan and be still, and speak not so proudly, whereas in
resp^ct thereof thou shall not be feared: for here I do certify thee, that
the Empress Claridiana has brought into subjection many better then thou art,
and made them to stoop. And for that thou shall understand how little thou art
esteemed in Greece, and how much more thou may complain thy unhappiness,
know that I am likewise a woman as she is, and am called Archisilora Queen of
Lira, and with the strength of my arms, I hope to cut off this wretched head
from thy accursed shoulders. And it was very true which was spoken, for when
she went away from the company of the Ladies, she went to arm her self, with
purpose to demand battle of the Empress Claridiana, but when she came
forth, she found them as you have already heard.

The Pagan could be no more angry and wrathful then he was, and without
speaking any word, he turned and stroke very strongly at the Queen, who with
no less fury defended her self, and returned his blows with both her hands,
that it made a marvelous noise. At this present time approached the two lights
of all knighthood, the Emperor of Grecia and his son, and with them the
Giaunt and the rest of the Princes that came with them. You shall understand
that these were the two knights, that in the high way they found in cruel
battle, and meruailing very much at the power that was in the two warriors,
they stayed to behold them, not knowing who they were. The Knight of the Sun
who had his eyes more fixed on them then the rest, did know the Pagan, as one
which had first proved his furious force, and turning unto ye Emperor his
father he told him all that which had happened unto him in the fierce battle
which he had fought before with him in France.

Then they esteemed much the knight with the Lilies, to see how well and how
valiauntly he did behave himself, not only in this subtle defense, which
against his adversary he made, but also his policy he made in offending his
enemy. So the knight of the Sun with the great desire that he had to
revenge himself on the Pagan, moved his horse toward him. At which time
there came forth of the village a Knight with white armor, all full of
Garlands of gold, made by subtle art. Likewise his sheelde was white, and
there was painted on it an Imperial head, which showed as though it had been
cut off with a cruel knife, the throat all so be rayed with blood, very
artificially wrought, and when he saw the battle, he put himself to
behold them, at such time as the valiant Greek approached unto the two
knights that were in battle for to speak unto them, and he said: Worthy
knight with the Lyllyes, for courtesies sake (if this battle be of small
importance) that thou would let me alone with this Pagan, for that I have a
just quarrel against him. This excellent Lady looking upon the knight of the
Sun as one which had never seen him, meruailing much at his fair
disposition, and replied, saying: I would be very glad sir Knight, for your
great courtesy and gentle demeanor, to leave to you the battle, if the
occasion were not of so great weight. Therefore I do desire you that you
would stand aside, for if my success fall out unfortunately, there will time
enough remain, for to execute your anger. The Moore did well understand the
demand of the Knight of the Sun, and knew him very well to be the same
that gave him the order of Knighthood, and when he saw him, he roared like a
furious Lion, saying: Oh vile and base Knight, to whom Mahomet has given more
power and strength then he has himself, come, come, and bring with thee in
company all these that be there with thee, for of all you together I do
esteem nothing at all, and in saying these words, he pressed unto the Knight
of the Sun, very fiercely and with great courage the knight of the Sun
met him in the way, and put himself before the Queen, but this excellent
Lady with great lightness returned and did recover her standing, and said
unto him.

Knight, be not so far out of measure, to give ease and help unto them that
give thee no thanks for it. But the Prince who was then burning with wrath,
retour^ed again by the left side to put himself before her, and gave the
Pagan so terrible a blow, that he made all his body to shake. The knight with
the Lillyes did put himself again before and said. In an evil hour do
thou use this great vncurtesie with one that thou do not know. The fearce
Pagan in all this time was not idle, but at such time as the Queen did cross
the way for to take her room, the Pagan stroke her so stronglye, that it
lacked but a little, that she fell not from her horse to the ground. The
knight with the Imperial head when he saw that, set his spurs to his horse,
and said.

O men of small estimation, come hither to me one of you, and do not occupy
your selves in such controversies. And with saying these and such like words,
he stroke the Queen such a blow, that he made her teeth to chatter in her
head, in such sort, that she had almost lost her feeling, but he had no
cause to boast himself very much of that blow, for that quickly she
returned his salutation with so great strength, that she gave him well to
understand her cauragious force. Now there began a rigorous battle, and
the Knight of the Sun remained alone with the Pagan: Oh wise and warrelyke
Eliza, give me to drink of that water which the nine sisters did discover,
that by the help of that sweet liquor I may make sharp my rude tongue, so
that mixing the speech of Mercury with the prowess of Mars, I may unfold
this furious battle which these four knights made, who with exceeding and
wonderful blows stroke one another, without any casing, that they made them
whether they would or no, to incline their bodies to their horse head, without
any feeling. In this sort continued these valiant and warlyke knights a
good space, till such time as the Empress Claridiana came in great have,
running with her light horse, and making a great noise, without any
consideration, but only to be re^enged on the Pagan and said.

Give room, give room, for this battle does belong unto me to make an
end thereof. And without any more speaking she put her self before the
knight of the Sun, and began to lay on the Pagan with her furious blows.
The Pagan was nothing abashed at that, but as one which had strength and
courage enough, he received them. Then the knight of the Sun with great
anger said. Tell me knight what is the cause which has moved thee to offer
such like villainy. This womanly warrior returned unto him, and straight way
she did know him to be the Knight of the Sun. Here all you true lovers
may judge the great joy that she received when she beheld before her, him
who with so great love she loved, and the great desire she had to hear of
him. So she replied with very amorous words, and said.

My dear and well-beloved Lord, seeing that fortune has brought you hither at
this instaunt, procure jointly with your reuengement to work mine against this
Pagan. Then the knight of the Sun did know that it was his Lady, wherewith
his strength increased, and also his anger, understanding that the Pagan had
used discurtesie against her, and said: How is this thou false Pagan, that thou
have ben so hardy, for to anger and disquiet such a Lady: Tarry, for here I
will give thee thy reward according unto thy deserts. And with a new strength
and valiant courage he pressed forwards. This pagan was amazed in seeing his
enemy to show more strength and better courage, which continually increased
more and more, yet for all that he showed no kind of faintness, but rather
he stroke at him such terrible blows and with so great strength, as at any
time before he had not done the like. At this time the Emperor, (which till
that time did behold all that had passed, and suffered not himself to be
known unto any, by reason that he continually had his healme on his head)
pulled off the same, that the more better to his contentment he might see and
behold this furious battle. Then the people of the Uillage which were come
forth for to see the battle, when they saw the Emperors face and knew him,
they altogether with a great shoute said. Oh happy is this day, in the which
we have seen the excellent face of our renowned Emperor, and therewith
altogether they ran to him for to kiss his hands, and he which could first
come unto him, he thought himself most happiest. For he was the best be loved
Prince amongst his subjects in all the world. Many of them with great have
went to tell the Empress, for to get a reward. The Pagan by the great
stirring and rus^ing of the people, understood that the Emperor was there, and
thought within himself, that there he could get no honor, wherefore with
great fury he lift up his sword, and griping it fast in his hand, he
stretched himself in his stirrops all yt ever he could and struck such a
terrible and furious blow upon the healme of the knight of the Sup^e that
without any feeling be fell upon his horse crupper, and when he saw him in that
trance, he set spurs to his horse, and made him to run like the wind
through the midst of all the people, that were looking on the battle, and
like as a Lion in the mountains of Libia, whose breast is wounded by the stout
hunts man, leaving his darte in him, and besprinkeling all the grass, with his
blood, which he does expel from him without any fear, and tearing in pieces
the dart, that was cause of all his harm, he gives great and horrible
roarings with his bloody mouth, and bristling up his rugged hair. So with
like fury this valiant Pagan past thorough amongst the people that were
there, so that some he threw down from their horse, and others he left very
sore hurt, and with this perilous assault he put himself into the thick
woods. The Queen which was fighting with the knight of the Imperial head, did
see very well, how that the the Moore was escaped, and with the great anger
which she had to see him run away without taking reuengement of him, she gave
so terrible a blow unto her adversary that it made him to join his head with
his breast, and left him without any remembrance, and without any more
tarrying, she went and followed the Pagan. The knight of the Sun, who at
this time was come to himself, and had fully recovered his remembrance, and
could not see his enemy, he demanded for him. And there it was told him of
his desperate running away. The Prince would have followed him, if the Emperor
had not let him. Likewise the Knight with the Imperial head came again
unto himself, and thinking to have made payment of that blow unto his
adversary, he looked round about and could not see her, and beholding all the
rest which were in that company, he saw that they were all well content and
very joyful, and full of pleasure, wherefore without any more tarrying he put
himself into the forest, leaving the Emperor and all the rest, very
desirous to know who he was, as also of the knight of the Lillyes: the which
was straight way told him by a Damsel of the Queens, at the which they all
remained much amazed, judging it to be one of the most notablest things, that
was in all the world. The Empress when she understood the good news, straight
way went forth for to see the Emperor, with so much joy and pleasure, that
she scantlye knew where she was: and when she came to cast her arms for to
embrace him she said. My Lord, I do not compare this embracing unto that,
which an discourteous Knight did give me not long since. The Emperor did receive
her with great love and gladness, and embracing her hard he said. My loving
Lady, let the delight of this, cause you to fo^get the despite of the other,
and yet by it we have lost the most excellent Lady in all the world, which is
the Queen of Lira. Then did the Emperor declare unto her all yt had past,
there in his sight, at the which the Empress greatly meruailed, and was sorry
for her departure: and with she great pleasure she received at the sight of the
Emperor, she did not look for the famous Knight of the Sun, until such
time as he came to kiss her hand: then was all-her joy wholly accomplished.
So there they declared unto the Emperor of the departing of Rosicleer and
Brandimardo, and how that they never heard any news of them.

There was no less joy between the Knight of the Sun and his spouse, for
the one received the other with great rejoicing. For by reason of the water
that he drunk at the fountain, he had clean forgotten and lost the love he
had to Lindabrides, which was the occasion of a double delight with his
well-beloved Lady. This fair Empress somewhat dissimuling the sorrow which she
had for the loss of her children, declared it unto her dear beloved spouse,
who with no less discretion, did give her the hearing, not suffering her to
know the grief that he received, but rather comforted her, and gave her to
understand by outward shows, that he was very well content of all that had
happened, which was unto her great and particular joy and pleasure. So in this
order they went talking together, till they came unto the village, whereas they
were received of all the people, with great joy and reioycings, and with
sundry pastimes, and there they dined: and in this sort they passed the rest of
the day.

The next day in the morning they went toward Constantinople, ane there was
not one who saw the Emperor and his company but received great pleasure. But
Sindera the Duchess, and Aunt unto Archisilora, was greatly grieved for her
absence. As they travailed by the way, ye knight of the Sun determined to
give the Emperor to understand of all the love that had passed between him
and the Empress Claridiana. So the Emperor when he understood it, was nothing
sorry for that which had past, but rather did determine to send and call for
the subjects and vassalles of the Empress, and so in public to marry them
together: yet at that time he did not give him to understand of the loss of
the two children,

So with this and like communication, they came unto the City, whereas they
were received, as unto their estate appertayned. And at their entering into the
Pallaice, there came forth to receive them, the Princess Tigliasa, and the
fair Oliuia, who for the coffeehouse which they received for the absence of
their Knights, would not go forth of Constantinople. What shall I say to you
of the Tartarian Zoylo, he was so out of quiet and troubled to see the
princess, that he was almost beside himself, and changed his color, and
like a man without understanding he came down from the Pallayce, making a
great noise: and with out taking any rest, he went out of the City, and with
great fury he put himself into the woods and wilderness of Grecia, leaving
the sorrowful Lady with so much care, that if the wise Lirgandeo had not
comforted her, she thought verily to have dyed at that present time, by whose
counsel she was willed to go and seek him, and to carry in company with
her two of her damosells: and he promised her so to remedy her sorrow, that
she should be fully satisfied. The which did fall out clean contrary: for that
the knowledge of man does little avail to hinder the will of the Creator of
all things. As hereafter shall be told you in the third part of this history.

Now to return unto the great pleasure which the subjects of the Emperor
received for his coming: it was in such sort, that they did no other thing but
make feasts and pastimes. In the mean time whilst they were making all these
pastimes in Constantinople, they sent to call the subjects and vassalles of
the Empress Claridiana, who came straight way without any delay: and they
which came, were the King of Pontus, and the King Simonia, and the great Duke
of Alafonte. Unto whom was declared the whole occasion wherefore they were
called. And when they knew yt they should obtain for their Lord so royal a
prince, they were meruailously well contented and received great pleasure: and
without any more tarrying they made them sure together, whereat was made great
feasts and pastimes* and there he was sworn Emperor, and they desired them,
that they would go and acknowledge their lands and countries, and gave them to
understand, that the long absence of the Empress was the occasion of many
dissentions, wherein some rebellious people did begin to show their cankered
thoughts. To the which they granted with a very good will, and they carried
with them Tefereo and his uncle. What shall I here declare unto you of the
honorable receiuings and great pastimes and sportes which were made unto them,
it were too much here to write, so the possession of all the Empire was given
unto them, whereas they determined to take their rest, till such time as fortune
caused the contrary, whereas they reigned with the most highest fame that ever
any other obtained. And here we will leave them till time serves, and begin
to declare of the high and worthy feats of the fair Archisilora, the Queen
of Lira.

How the worthy Queen Archisilora was gone to pursue the Pagan, and of that
which happened in the way of her battle. Chap. 28.
THE worthy Queen of Lyra which with great have followed after the Pagan,
striking with her spurs her light horse (who was without fault of all that
had past) yet all was in vain for to find the Moore, but her swiftnes was
like unto a furious thunder bolt, for she trauesed in such great have, that
there was no sign seen where her horse did tread: but all her labor was in
vain, for that she went clean contrary unto the way which the Pagan went,
but as the thought of this irefull Lady was for no other thing, but to procure
to seek him, she never left this her furious course, till such time as she
came unto ye sea side, whereas for all the fury she was forced to stay,
nevertheless she looked round about her on every side to see if she could
discover or find him, whom with so great desire she sought, and in looking
about her, she saw come forth from that part of the forest a damsel, who
was very fair, and saluted the Queen very courteously, who returned again
her salutation, and asked her, saying: Fair Damsel, can you tell me any
tidings of a knight yt should come this way, all in white armor. And what is
it that you would with this knight, answered the Damsel: it may be (that if
you will grant me a thing that I will ask you) that I will carry you into a
place whereas you shall see him. Here I do grant it thee said the Queen: You
shall understand, that in great have he does nauigate by sea, said the
Damsel, therefore I do desire thee (if thou will follow me) to put thy self
in a bark with me which is here by. The Queen looking toward that part
whereas the Damsel did show her, saw the Bark which was very fair and
great. The Damsel lighted from her palfraie, and put her self in the bark,
and said: Knight with the Lillyes, if thou will have that thou seek, it
behooves thee to enter into this Bark with me, that I may carry thee whereas
thou shall loose on a sudden thy great mirth and gladness, thy heart
remaining in so great captivity, that the best remedy that thou shall
conceive, shall be to desire the death. This fair lady had no regard to
demand the secrets of those words, as she which made no reckoning of
whatsoever should happen, neither did esteem it, but without any more words,
she lighted from her horse, and leading him by the bridle, she put her self
into the Bark, she was not so soon entered in, but as the piece of ordinance
which by the force of kindling the powder, casts out the pellet with great
force: with no less fury the bark shooued from the shore side. The damsel
when she saw her self at the Sea, she said: Gracious Lady, do you know me.
The queen turned about to behold her, and beholding her well, she saw that
it was the wise Lyrgandeo, at the which she found her self sore troubled,
Lyrgandeo seeing that she did know him, said: Worthy Lady, fear you nothing
in this journey, for by me thou shall be carried whereas thy fame shall be
exalted, till such time as the brave Lion does rob thy heart, and thou
remaining overcome, shall overcome one of the best knights in all the world.
And making an end of these reasons, he vanished away, she knew not how: And
although the Queen remained somewhat pacified, with that which Lyrgandeo had
said, yet for all that, she did not let to think and muse of his words, and
that very much: so straight way came to her remembrance the furious battle
of the Pagan, and likewise she considered of the fury of the knight of the
Imperial head, and seeing that she could not overcome them, she remained
very sorrowful, and lifting up her eyes unto heaven, with great ire she
blasphemed against her Gods, and blamed much the wise Lyrgandeo for his
negligence, but when she called to remembrance the words of Lyrgandeo, and
what he had said, she altered her mind and changed her thoughts, and
began a new to consider of the sharp cutting sword of the Mauritanian,
which more entered into her heart, then the wild Boares tooth in the dainty
body of the fair Adonis. In this manner this solitary Queen of Lyra did
nauigate four days, and was so pensive in thought, that she forgot and had no
remembrance to refresh her self in eating, but the wise Lyrgandeo had always
a great care that she should be served very daintely, not knowing who did
serve her. So the fifte day very early in the morning she discovered land
toward her left hand, and the Bark in great have and with very much
swiftness made her way^ thither, She went so fast, that almost she had no
time to arm her self before that the Bark came unto the shore, where she
might most at ease disimbarke her self, according unto the will of the wise
man. So when they were at the shore, she took her horse by the bridle and
went a land, and without putting her foot into the stiroppe, she leaped into
the Saddle, and guided her self into a narrow way, all garnished with trees
of diverse sorts, whereas the chirping Birds did make their accustomed songs
without fear of any man to molest them. Amongst the which trees there did
not lack the Sallowes, nourished by Alciades, nor the green Laurel, so much
esteemed of glistering Appollo, nor the sweet Myrtle tree hallowed by Venus,
nor the high Cypres, so much regarded of Cupide, nor the hard Oak, so much
desired of Mars, nor the Pine apple tree, which Jupiter does cause to
flourish. Of all the which this mighty Queen did feel and had great delight,
iudgeing it to be the habitation of the Gods, for that the Sun with his
glistering beams did pass through those green and pleasant trees, without
any let or hinderaunce of the heavens, by reason of their cleerenesse, with a
very soft^ and pittering wind, shaking all those green leaves, which did
make so sweet a noise that it seemed rather celestial then terrestrial, and
a thousand little Brooks which ran upon the enamelled ground, making
sundry fine works and devises, by their crooked runninges and tourninges, and
joining one water with another, with a very gentle meeting, not making any
great noise. This fair Lady being ravished at the sight of this celestial
habitation, had not any regard at all, whether that her horse went in the
right way or not. And travailing in this sort she went forwards till she
came into a meruaifous great and wide medowe, being of so great fayrenesse,
that I am not with my pen able to paint out the excellency thereof. Whereas
was feeding both wild and tame Hearts, adorned with their great and cragged
horns. Likewise the furious wild Boar, the simple Connies, and the envious
Bear, with the fierce Lion, altogether were feeding with so great
friendship, as to the contrary by Nature they are enemies. The Lady was in
such a dumpe to see and behold the great difference that was, and the great
love between these wild and tame beasts which were there present, that she did
not cast up her eyes to behold a very fair and sumptuous Pallaice which was
in the midst of the medowe, and upon that sudden sight she fell in a
musing and dumpe, as commonly the husband man does when he goes into the
wild fields and cragged mountains, to seek his simple sheep which he has
lost, or as one finding himself in a royal city, all garnished with rich
citizens, of exceeding good behavior, staieth at every door and corner of
the streets, musing at their strange apparel, being different from that which
he has seen before in his own country: even so was this Queen overcome in
her own conceit, and amazed in her imagination, to see so strange love,
clean contrary unto nature.

The wise Lyrgandeo does write, for that he would not put the reader in
admiration, he would not tell all which he might of this strange workmanship,
but part thereof, which is requisite to this our history. Toward that part of
the principal gate, and right before the palace there appeared twelve
Pinacles of so great and mighty height, that the pyramides of Egypt were
very low in comparison to them, in such sort, that whosoever would look on
them, was scant able with his sight to comprehend the height, and they were all
made of different colors of stone: down below under the tower there was an
arch, with a gate, which seemed to be of Diamond, and all was compassed about
with a great moat, being of so great deapth, that they thought it to reach to
the midst of the earth, and it was almost two hundredth paces broad, and
every gate had his drawn bridge, all made of boords very red, which seemed
as though they had been all bathed in blood, and on the utter parts of all
this, there was a pillar of Jasper stone, at the which there hanged a horn,
which seemed to be of a Diamond, all wrought full of precious stones of a
strange work, the which was of great valor, and garnished with chains of
gold that were made fast unto it, whereat hung a Parchment as white as the
Snow, wherein was written certain Greek Letters which were all red, and
reading of them she saw that the words were these.

At such time as the great matrone increasing with her excellency the fame of
the Greek blood, with a furious sound, that blowing of this horn he shall be
accepted with great contentment of the Egyptian (but with braiding and
reuiling at one time or other.) And giving hope of that which is certain, he
shall come to enjoy of the future time to his perpetual fame.

Lyrgandeo for to explane the mystery of this speech, put in every demand
the exposition, declaring what it was, with the title in the Greek tongue, and
for that the reader may the better understand it, he has declared them in the
vulgar tongue. So when the excellent Lady had read it, she stayed to behold
the excellency of the workmanship of the horn, and the great riches thereof,
and taking of it in her hand, she saw that round about it there were certain
letters, which being read, she found to be thus: In sounding of me the gate
shall be opened to thee. The which when she understood, without any more
carrieng, she took that rich horn and set it unto her mouth, and began to
sound it, the which sound was very thrill to be heard, she had scarce made an
end of blowing, when that the gate was open. The Queen when she saw it open
passed the draw bridge, and entered within the gate into the Palace, till she
came unto a great open Court, which was compassed about with three rows of
very fair railes, on the which there was leaning on their breasts many
knights and Damosells marvelous richly apparelled, who when they saw her
within the court, with great have they vanished away. And in the midst of
the Court there was a very fair tree, whose boughs were spread all abroad,
and it was of great riches, for that the boughs were, some of gold, and
others of very fine silver, and enamelled with great subtlety, and when she
approached to it, the better to see the riches, she saw in the body thereof a
table which was all of gold, wherein was ingraued this that follows.

Unto that Knight, to whom is granted the entering into this sumptuous
pallaice, if it be so that thou have so much prowess as to break one of the
branches of gold which is upon this tree, then have thou made an end and
fullye concluded all that which thou see here: but if thou cannest not
obtain to break it, then layeng hold upon that which is of Silver, and if
by thy prowess thou do break that, it shall be a token, that he which
shall conclude this adventure is already borne: and if it be so, that thy
sorce and strength is insufficient to do either of those, then thou shall be
thrown from it like a vile and naughty person.

When she had read this ingraued superscription, without any more tarrying,
but even on horse back as she was, she drew nigh unto the golden boughs, and
presently layd^ hold upon one of them, with so much strength that she bowed it
down unto the body of the tree, but all her labor was in vain, for that
they who should conclude this enterprise, ought to be a man and not a woman.
And while she perseuered in this her purpose, she heard a voice which said:
Woe be unto me, wherefore do you in this manner so greatly torment me, let not
the coveting of this bough overcome thee: let all this evil suffice thee which
thou have been the occasion of to me. For persuade thy self it shall not
profit thee any thing. Behold I am Alpatrafio the unfortunate Emperor of
Egypt, who for that I was murderer unto my own daughter, I do suffer here
this torment. This worthy Queen did find great alteration in her self to
hear so lamentable a voice, and letting go the branch out of her hands, she
looked about to see who it should be that spoke those doleful words, but
she could not obtain to the sight of any one: and for to prove and see if
it would again speak, she took the branch once more in her hand, and
pulled it with double fury and with so great strength, that almost she
remained hanging by it as she was on horseback, wherein she got little
honor, for that she did no more then at the first time. So she stayed to
hear what the voice would say, which uttered this speech: O greedy Knight,
why do thou contend in such insatiable covetousness, what do thou think
that this silver is not a sufficient treasure? Here I give thee to understand
that thy malice shall not have so much strength for to atchieue to the end of
that which the body of the tree has declared unto thee. Therefore get thee
hence, and let me alone with this my sorrowful adventure, for that there be
many more besides thy self which do torment me, and let this content thee,
that by thy arm I am all bathed in blood. This valiant Queen who was
attendaunt unto all that was spoken, she did perceive that the sound of the
voice came forth of the body of the tree, and not being then cer^ified who
that should be which spoke, she asked, Who art thou, that in so monstrous a
figure have requested me to have compassion? Thou shall understand, that by
proving at thy branch, I well hoped to have made an end of this inchauntment,
but this branch of gold has resisted me very much, therefore I will prove
this other which is of silver, and without tarrying to hear her answer, she
laid hold on the branch with so great fury, that she tore it off from the
tree, the branch remaining in her hands: and out of the place from whence it
was torn, there issued out a streme of blood, that all to be sprinkled the
Queens* armor, in such sort, that it never lost the color, and when she
had torn it away she heard the voice with a lamentable cry to say: O
Knight, the cause of my great affliction: O merciless man, that without
pity have thus wounded me? What did move thee so cruelly to tear off these
my sorrowful white hairs, leaving me all to be bathed in my red blood, make
an end to kill me with thy cruel swoorde, for that by death I shall finish
the suffering of these cruel torments which I pass here, and in so doing I
will take thee for pitiful: O cruel Knight, make an end of this work which
thou have begun, and give me here the death. This disquie^ed Queen
answered.

I do not determine to do any such thing, but rather if thou deseruest this
torment, suffer it contentedly, till such time as thy adventure come to
conclusion. And so without tarrying any longer to hear an answer, she went
toward a door which stood wide open on the one side of the Court, and
coming thither, immediately she saw that there was a pair of stayres, and the
steps thereof went tourning vpwardes like unto a Snaile, and with the great
desire that she had to know whether it went, she alyghted forthwith from her
horse, and went up the stayres, which brought her into a very great and large
hall, whereas she did behold on both sides much people, who altogether made a
great and sorrowful lamentation, and coming nigh unto them to see what was
the occasion of their heaviness, she saw laid along upon a black Carpet two
dead knights well proportioned and of great beauty, and going more nearer to
see if she could know them, she knew straight one of them to be the
Empress Claridiana, but the other she did not know, for that she had
never seen him, but by the lamentable words which were spoken by an Emperor
which was at the head of them, she understood that it should be the knight
of the Sun, and he which made that great lamentation was the Emperor his
Father, at the which she remained greatly amazed, and hearkening unto that
which the Emperor said, she heard that he complained on Fortune, saying: Oh
fortune that has so persecuted me: Oh my son Alfebo, flower of all
chivalry, is it possible that there was so much power and strength in the
people of Africa that they have deprived thee of thy life, and given thy body
to rest on the cold earth: With no less complaint this excellent Queen did
celebrate that of the Emperor. And if at that present she had seen, that
which afterward she did see, (as shall be told you in the third book of this
history) much more she would have complained. Then she went unto the other
side of the hall to know the occasion of that grievous complaint, she saw
likewise yt they mourned over other two knights, and plainly she did know one
of them to be Rosicleer, but the other she did not know for that it was the
king Sacridoro, whom she had never seen, for at such time as the queen came
to Grecia, he was gone to his own kingdom to take his ease, and the chief of
those which did lament and mourn over Rosicleer, she knew to be his mother the
Empress of Grecia, who with deadly grief and anguish said: Oh my son, the
cause of all this my bitter torment, thou my son art in continual rest, and
have left thy sorrowful mother in continual lamentation: Oh wounded heart,
what sorrowful and bitter days shall thou pass without any contentment: ah
my Rosicleer, wherefore w^rt thou so cruel that thou would not call me thy
sorrowful mother, that in this t^aunce she might have borne thee company. The
valiant Queen felt no less sorrow and grief to see this second company,
then at the sight of the first, but the lamentable and sorrowful words which
the Empress uttered did move her to bear her company, if that at that time
she had not seen come forth at a door which was in the hall, a Lady,
seeming to be of great authority, accompanied with two fair Nymphs, all
apparelled in russet Satin, pinked and cut, and lined with green Satin,
which colors were very pleasant, and greatly delighted the sight. And when
she came nigh unto the queen she said: Knight, whosoever thou art, and do
show thy self to be so furious, why do thou hearken and give ear unto this
lamentation: tell me out of hand, without any farther delaie who thou art,
and wherefore thou come hither, for that thou shall understand that this
place is prohibited to all knights, except he first bring with him some sign
or token of the branch of ye tree, whereas he who was murderer to his own
daughter is enchanted: so yt if it has been thy fortune to atchieue ye cutting
either of the branch of gold or silver, show it me forthwith, if not,
understand that thou shall die a terrible death. This worthy Queen who with a
sober countenance gave* ear unto the sayings of the Lady, and beholding much
her great sobriety: likewise the beauty of those which bare her company,
held up the branch of silver in her hand, and with a high voice she said:
Lady, I would not have been so bold to have approached hither, except I had
brought with me the token which you speak off: therefore I ought not to
incur the pain provided, behold is this it which you see, and therewith she
showed her branch. The Lady when she knew that to be the branch of the tree
that she spoke of, did abate her anger that she before had, and showed a merry
countenance, and taking her right hand from the shoulder of the Nymph, she
laid hold on the armed hand of the queen, and holding it very fast, she
said: Excellent Lady, many days past I was given to understand of thy great
worthiness, and that thou should give some contentment unto ye afflicted
hearts, wherefore come with me and I will show thee my habitation, for that
unto thee the sight has been granted, and not unto any other: come on Lady
and rejoice the self in the sight of that which hereafter shall come to
pass, without all doubt. And in saying these words she carried her in at the
same door whereas she came forth in great have, for that she did know the
tenderness of her heart which was moved by the lamentation she heard, and
there showed unto her great riches and very fair buildinges, but especially
she carried her into a very fair and four square Court, which had at every
corner four pillars, and upon the top of either of them an Image,
meruailously wrought, and every one of them had his title written what it did
signify, and she told her that those which she had showed her, were kings
and Princes, and famous Lords, that were there inchaunted. And how that all
that should be made frustrate by one of the best knights in all the world, who
shall bring for his device blased on his sheelde, a branch of gold,
signifieng the same which she saw in the first Court, in the which was
inchaunted the Emperor of Egypt. Likewise he shall deliver the daughter of
the said Emperor, whom he supposes he has murdered, and she was the
fairest Damsel in the whole world. And for that in the end of the third book
of this history shall be declared the rest, where you shall receive more
contentment in the reading: Lyrgandeo will now go no farther herein. And
telling unto her these and many other things, they went farther, and passed
through very many and fair halls, the which were adorned with the stories of
the notable acts of worthy knights, but in one hall, in the midst of a
Cloth, she saw the Picture of a knight of a great stature, who was nine
foot in height, and armed with Purple armor, and his sheelde of the same
color, without having any device, and his face was very fair. The Queen
could not by any means, but by sight thereof stay a while and behold his
great beauty, and felt within her heart a new and strange wrestling of love,
which turned afterward into an amorous fire. This Lady did well perceive her
new imaginations, and with a gracious smiling she took her by the hand, and
carried her out of that Chamber, (although she could not bring her out of her
new conceit) she went out so troubled, that all which the Lady showed her
afterward, she little respected, and when she thought least she found her
self out of the Pallaice, between the deep Moate, and the fair and rich
walls, even as one that had been new awaked out of his sleep, and tourning
her self unto the Lady, dissembling her new pain she said. Lady, I do
not desire here to have gotten more honor, then in that I have obtained the
knowledge and secreate of so notable a thing as this which you have discovered
unto me, and more to have achieved the desert of this branch, so that by you
it be granted that I may carrye it with me. So the Lady took the silver
branch in her hand, and made it very small, to the bigness of a s^anne in
length, and put it upon her healme, and made it so fast and firm, as though
it had been wrought in by force of workmanshippe, and made it to extend the
silver leaves on the one side and on the other with great subtilt^e, that it
was a thing to be wondered at. And when she had done this, she said.

Worthy and fair Lady, the branch is yours, for that you have won it, and
in token of thy desert thou do carry it upon thy healme, where it shall
remain till such time as by the hands of a fierce Lion it shall be thrown
down, leaving his heart wounded, and he remaining unto thee submitted. And for
to do^ thee pleasure Lady, here I do present thee these two Nymphs for to
be at thy commandment, And so taking her by the hand, without any more
communication she brought her over the bridge to the other side of the Moat,
they were not so soon over when this Lady did vanish away lyk^ the wind,
and the Bridge was drawn up, and she heard within the pallaice a celestial
music, and looking that way whereas she founded the horn, and toward
that gate wherein she had entered, she saw upon the pillar that was there a
Nymph of gold, which seemed to be very subtillye wrought. And presently
without any more tarrying she leapt upon her horse, which was brought thither
for her, likewise the two Nymphs upon two white Palfraies, which was likewise
brought for them, and so they took their way toward the sea, without any
remembrance of all that which she had seen, neither did she think of it,
till such time as she did see the perfect figure of that Knight, which she
saw in ye hal, as shall be told you hereafter. So in great have this queen
and her Nymphs trauayled till they were all embarked in their Bark, whereas
they found in the one part thereof very rich roa^es. The making and fashion of
them, and all the rest that happened shall be told you, when time serves: and
let us now return unto the rest^^ng of the kingdom of Lira, which cost the
Prince Brandimardo full dear.

How the famous Rosicle^^ and Brandimardo went to the kingdom of ^ara, and of
all that had passed in the battle they had with the Giaunts. Cap. 29.
YOu do well remember, how that the worthy Rosicleer, and that gallant and
new Lover Brandimardo, trauayled by sea, toward the kingdom of Lira, to make
battle with the Giants, that had usurped the kingdom. The time and wind was
so prosperous unto them, that in a short space they arrived, and took land in
the haven of the great city of Lira, without any contradiction. And when they
were a land, they determined to send a Page to demand safeconduct of the
Giants, giving them to understand of their coming. This gallant lover would
needs be the messenger, and therewith mounting upon a very fair horse, he
entered into the City, and stayed not till he came unto the Pallayce of the
Giants, but went asking where there abiding was. And straight way they were
given to understand thereof by a Knight, which said, that there was a strange
knight which did demand after them, and coming before them, without showing
any humility or stooping down his head, he said* Giants, there are two
knights come into the haven of Lira, to defend the right of the Queen
Archisilora, and they do send unto you to ask safeconducte, for that they may
not be disturbed by any person in these kingdoms but only your selves, who do
pretend by might to make you to acknowledge your evil and naughtiness. Then
Mandroco, who had less patience then the other, said. I do not know wherefore
these unfortunate knights will occupy themselves in profering to defend that,
which many other would have done, and yet were never able. Go thy ways, and
tell them that they make no tarying to come and receive their death.
Brandimatdo, who well beheld their fierce disposition, saw that it was no
time to spend words in wast, but to put in practice the execution of yt, which
they came for, and without any replying unto their words, he returned unto the
place whereas he left the Prince, unto whom he declared all that had past. So
without any more a do Rosicleer leaped upon his mighty horse, and they lace^
and made fast their helmes, and hanged their shieldes about their necks, and
took each of them a great spear in their hands, and put themselves into the
City, and rested not till they came into the broad place, which was right
against the Pallayce. Their coming thither was at such time as Bulfar and
Mandroco came forth of the Pallaice, all ready and prepared for the battle,
and brought in their company a great number of Knights. At that time the place
was very full of people, who desired secretly in their hearts, that the
strange Knights might win the victory, that they might be clear and at
liberty from that great subjection, in the which the Gyaunts held them: the
which they thought to be almost impossible, considering the great worthiness
and strength that was in the giants. And when they were altogether in ye place,
Mandroco with a mild voice said: Miserable knights, at such time as you offered
your persons unto ye queen Archisilora, with whom did you think to have
battle, that you gave credit, supposing your selves to have sufficient force
to execute your wills. Wherefore if you do now think your selves deceived, we
shall be here content to set you at liberty of your former promise, with
condition that you shall go and tell her, that she ought to send Knghts of
great prowess and strength, and not such as you are. Then Rosicleer said, Thou
art very much deceived Giant, in yt thou say, for we did very well know with
whom we should have battle, and were fully informed thereof, and purpose to
take the head from thy body, in satisfaction of these treasons which thou do
use. The anger and ire of the Giant was such, that without any more tarrying,
with great fury he turned about his horse, and his father did the like, ye two
Knights also did the same. And when they were right the one against the other,
at the sound of sundry instruments of wars, they ran the one against the
other, in such sort, that not one of them missed his blow, but made the
shiuers of the spears to fly in very small pieces in the air, without
receiving any grief. So they altogether returned with their swords in their
hands. Rosicleer encountered with Bulfar, for that he found him next at hand,
and pressing unto him, he stroke at him very great and heavy blows, and the
Giant rendered him the like. With no less fury pressed Brandimardo against
his enemy, making a very furious and well foughten battle. At this time, the
fierce Bulfar seeing the great resistance of his adversary, threw his sheeld
at his back, and his son Mandroco did the like, and both together they
stroke such blows at the knights, that without feeling it caused the horse of
Rosicleer to give a turn in the place, and the like happened unto
Brandimardo* Here his unhappy fortune would, that his horse should carry him
thither, whereas Bulfar was, who assailed him at his ease on yt one side, and
stroke at him with both his hands such an unmerciful blow, that lighting upon
his helm, which was near hand as hard as a Diamond he cut it jointly with his
head, and being very sore hurt this unhappy Knight fell down to the ground,
at such time as the Prince was settling himself upon his horse, and seeing
Brandimardo down, and so much blood running from his head, he did verily
believe that he was dead. Wherewith his rage was so much, that the fire came
forth at his visor, and setting spurs to his mighty horse, he made him to
move like the wind, and said with a loud voice.

O vile beasts, that so villanously have slain him, who is more worth then
both of you. Here I do swear unto you by the living God to force my power in
such sort, that only wc two blows I will send you unto hell, which is your
habitation, and therewith he came unto Mandroco, who likewise came toward him,
and stroke him such a blow upon the helm, that the strength thereof little
profited him, for by the fury of his arm he parted it in two pieces together
with the head, so that the Giant fell down dead to the ground, and by reason of
his great wayght, ye fall seemed almost to shake the earth. The Giant Bulfar
when he saw his son dead, with so desperate a blow, roaring out against his
Gods, he lift by his sword to strike the Prince: but he, who had as much
policy as prowes, spurred his horse a little forwards, and with a furious
leap he cleared himself from that blow, and finding himself on the left
side of Bulfar, he threw at him so terrible a foyne, that his harness deceived
him, and his sword entered into his body up to the hilts, and at the pulling of
his sword out, he drew out therewith his infernal soul, and he fell down
dead to the ground. Then when the people saw the good success that their
desires had, they began to cry out with mighty voices, saying: Liberty,
Liberty, and ran unto the Prince, some kissing his hands, some his skirtes
of Maile, and some his feet, in such sort they pressed on him that he could
scantly stir himself, but by reason of the great grief and sorrow which
he had for his friend Brandimardo, who could not receive any pleasure at all
in this high and mighty victory: and without any care thereof, he alighted
from his horse, and went unto him, and took off his healme, and lif^ng up his
head upon his knees, he called for a linen cloth, the which was straight
ways given him, wherewith he wiped and made clean his face which was of a
wanne color.

Then this weak knight somewhat lifting up his eyes, and seeing himself in
the arms of Rosicleer, and understanding that the battle was finished, to
the honor of his Lady and mistress, with a feeble and fainting voice he said:
Ah my Lord, and perfect friend, here may you see how contrary fortune has
been unto me, in that she would not consent that I should rejoice in ye triumph
of this victory: it does not grieve me to die, for that it is in defending the
right of her whom I best loved. There is nothing that does grieve me so much,
as that I cannot obtain the reward I looked for. Here I do desire thee my
Lord, that by you she may understand of all this my pain: and do my hearty
commendations unto that my great desired Archi. Here he could not make an end
to speak her name, but yielded up the Ghoast, his unfortunate body remaining
in the arms of the Prince, and with great weeping he turned unto the people
that were there, and said. O you knights and Gentlemen of Lyra, how dearly is
this your liberty bought, for in the recovery thereof was slain the best
knight in all Asia. Then he seeing that there was no remedy for the harm that
was done, he commanded that he should be carried unto the pallaice, and by
the agreement of all the nobles he was buried in that place whereas the kings
of Lyra were accustomed to be buried. So when Rosicleer had seen the funeral
of his friend, he would stay no longer in that kingdom, but by the consent of
all that were present, he left the government in the power of a worthy knight
and noble gentleman of the realm, and took his oath that straight way they
should surrender it to their queen and Lady. And therewith he departed out of
the City, and when he came unto the water side, and would have entered into
the ship in the which he came, he saw nigh unto it the barks wherein he was
wont to travail, and considering yt it should not be there without occasion,
without any more deliberation he entered into the same, who straight way
began to move her self with her accustomed fury, and so without tarrying in
any place, he travailed six days and six nights, in the end of yt which
the Bark brought her self a ground into a fair wide and sandy Baie, whereas
he saw upon the shore many knights which made battle against one alone
knight. The Prince seeing all that passed, with great anger he went out of the
Bark to help him, who with great courage and policy did defend himself,
whereas now we will leave them, and return unto Grecia for to make an end of
our first part. You do well remember how that the knight with the Imperial
head, when he saw himself clear of that blow which the Queen of Lyra gave
him, put himself into the forest, even unto the t^ickest of it, and did not
determine to go to the Court at Constantinople, about a certain demand which
he came to make, till such time as all ye knights and the rest of the people
were in quiet. When he thought that it was time, he went unto the Court and
asked for the Emperors palace, when he came thither, he alighted from his
horse and went up into the great hall whereas the Emperor was, with all them of
his Court, exercising courtly pastimes and pleasures, and without making any
reverence he went unto the place whereas the Emperor was, and he said: Good
and noble Emperor of Grecia, this speak I for a truth (according unto that
which I have heard reported of thee) that thou art one of those Princes that
does maintain all justice and equity. The subjects and vassalls do not alone
make this report, but all the world is full of it. And (as I understand)
although it be even against thy own person, yet thou will not let to do that
which is right, justice being demanded of thee, wherefore I doubt not but unto
me shall be granted lisence here in thy Country to put a demand unto whom
it shall think me best, certifieng thee that it shall be a just thing. The
Emperor who knew him by the device that he had on his sheeld, that it was he
which made the battle with the Queen of Lyra, with a sober countenance he
said: Knight, although my fame be not such as you have here published, yet
demanding any of this with equity (as you do certify me you will) I cannot
but grant it unto thee. And therefore here I do give thee lisence that thou
may propone all that thy pleasure is, although it be against my self. The
Knight who was very attendaunt to all that the Emperor said, and saw that
license was granted him to ask at his pleasure, he said. O mighty Prince I
would to God that my demand were not that which it is, that without it I might
inioye and comfort my self in being in your company, and the more that I do
certify my self of thy virtue, I do find my self the more troubled,
meruailing, how that in so noble a person, should remain so great
naughtiness, as that which thou did use with the Queen of Tinacria, who
comforting and refreshing thee, when thou arriuedst there in great poverty and
distress, in the end, thou did leave her very sorrowful and made a mock of
her. Look well unto it Emperor, for that thou can not make satisfaction for
so great a fault, neither will she take any of thee, except it be with sending
thy head, I will not that thou make any amends, but that for her, I do defy
thee to mortal battle, only thy person and mine together, that I may
fulfill the promise that I have made unto her: and if it so fall out that
Fortune be to me contrary, I will remain for the payment of my fullye, with my
head out from my shoulders. And with this he held his peace: and looking on
the one side and on the other, very joyful to see so goodly a company of
Knights as was at ye time with the Emperor, he expected his answer. The
Emperor who well understood his reasons, without showing any alteration in
his countenance, answered. I do not know whether my answer shall be
sufficient for to excuse the fault, which the Queen without all reason does
burden me with. For the which, valiant Knight, I would, as the Queen has told
you the little reason that I had, so she should have told you the great reason
I had to do that which I did. Here I do certefie thee that my thought does
not deserve, that she should be unto me so cruel, nor extend so far, for to
desire my death. And certainly in this, the Queen has no reason, for that the
head of Trebatio, may do her more service living, then it can do being dead:
but seeing it is her will. Here I do tell thee, that so long as I do live, I
will practice no other thing but only to pacify her, and so likewise will I
procure to keep and defend my head, and not only mine own, but also the
heads of those which at her commandment do come, thinking to take away mine:
and in this she shall understand how much I am desirous to serve her. The
battle here I do grant it unto thee, and if thou will, let it be out of
hand, and here I do promise thee Knight to procure to ke^pe my head, and
likewise to keep thine. Oh how the Moore found himself troubled, when he
heard the Emperors answer, and the little reckoning that he made of the
battle, and somewhat touched in pride, he replied and said. I know well
Emperor, that the great confidence which thou have in thy self, makes thee
to esteem little of the King of the Garamantes whom thou have in thy presence:
but I do hope and trust in Mahomet, that before one hour when we are in the
field, to make thee to lose thy confidence. And in saying these words, he went
down out of the Pallaice, and leapt up upon his horse, and went into the
field, which was right against the Pallaice, ordained for such like occasions.
The Emperor demanded for his armor, and called for that with the stars,
the same which the Queen Garrofilea gave him. So in a trice he was armed, not
without many tears of the Empress, who said. Ah my Lord I do well understand,
that of so long absence, there can grow nothing but great troubles, as does
appear by this sudden battle. The Emperor not letting her to go forwards
with her talk, but casting both his arms about her neck, and with show of
great love, he said. Thou my Lady and Empress were the occasion of all that
evil, for if it had not been only for the loss of thy sight, I vow that thy
Emperor would first have dyed the death, then merited the name to be
disloyal. And that in not fulfilling her intent, there should not only have
happened one evil, but a great number. So it was Gods will that I should escape
out of the battle, as more at large I will tell you, having more leisure. And
in this manner he departed from the Empress, leaving her very sad and
sorrowful. And the Emperor went to take his horse, carrying with him the king
of Lacedemonia, who carried his healme, and the Prince Claueryndo who carried
his sheeld, and his spear the Prince of Hungaria carried. And when they went
forth of the gates of the Pallaice, they began to sound a great number of
instruments, which endured till such time as they were entered into the field,
whereas he put on his healme, and the rest of his armor given him which those
Princes did carry. So with a gallant demeanor he put himself on the one part
of the field, awaiting a token or sign that should be given them. So it was not
long after that the Prince Bargandel did sound a Clarion the which he had in
his hand, at the sound whereof they ran one against another with great fury,
and in the midst of their course they gave such incounters with their
Spears, not missing of their blows, but it was with so great force that they
brake all to small p^eces, and without doing any harm the one unto the other
they passed along, and straight ways turned their horses about with their
swords in their hands. The Moore when he saw that the Emperor remained in
his saddle, he was ashamed, for that he did believe that only with one blow
with his Spear to make an end of all that work, his force and strength was
such: And as you do see a fierce Ly^n constraine^ by hunger to go out of her
cave, and follows her pray with great desire to fill her paunch, even so and
rather with more fury went this Pagan, and casting his sheeld at his back, he
griped his sword in both his hands, raising himself in his stirrops, he str^ke
such a blow that whether he would or not, he made the Emperor to fall down
upon his horse neck* and was so without remembrance that he made his sword
fall out of his hands and hang by ye chain, and his arms hung so loose as
though he had been dead, and his horse was so afraid that a while he went
about the field. The Moore had well thought that the Emperor had been dead,
and stood still and said. Well, I do believe Emperor that thy promise shall
be in vain, and mine shall fall out true. At that time the Pagan spoke the
truth, for that the Emperors promise did not fall out true: so straight way he
came again to himself, and saw that he was so ill int^^ated with one blow
alone, he turned and recovered his sword with great ire and wrath, he threw his
sheeld at his back, and foamed at the visour of his helm with very wrath
that he had, even as an arow driven out of a ^ow by ye hands of a Sirian, so he
pressed himself unto the More and said: Tarry thou devilish Pagan, tarry,
for here I do promise thee that by one blow alone I will take away thy life,
for that thou with one blow did deprive me of my understanding. And thus my
rude pen waxing weary, and very desirous to take his ease, as also my hand
being governed by that Nymph Caliope, causes me to make an end of this first
part, for that in the second part having refreshed my self and gotten new
courage, I may go tearing of the skies and the troublesome waves, not resting
till I come into those concauits, where as Vulcan does command the Cyclopes
hammers for to give a new advise unto this workman which never will be weary,
and that he be in a readiness jointly with fierce Mars, to assist me to
declare the new deeds and acts of knighthood, contained in the second book of
this part.

The end of the first book of the second part of the Mirror of Knighthood.
The second Book of the second part of the Mirror of Knighthood.
Of the Prince Claridiano, and how the king of Arginaria sent his brother to
the king of Taprobana, and of all that happened to the messenger with the
Prince. Chap. 1.
AT that time as the warlike Moore, in the supremacy of his triumph and power,
had blased his famous feats of wars, most worthy of memory* and causing
that active Vulcan (only for his contentment) should double the Smithly
rumor of his forge, for to animate his artificers with his rough and hasty
callings, that they might with more fury move and strike those restless
hammers, upon the labored and well beaten Anfield. At that time did the
mighty and prudent Pallas spread abroad her streamers (with a peaceable
blast, helped by the fresh Fauonio or west wind) over the great and renowned
Island of Trapobana, the heroycall son of that renowned Alfebo, or knight of
the Sun, nephew unto the magnanimous Emperor Trebatio, being in the same (as
it was told you in the first part of this history) who was nourished and
brought up under the power of the king Delfo, excelling in all beauty and
fayrenesse, so much as ever nature bestowed on any humane creature, there
lacked nothing in him but only the knowledge of Jesus Christ, for in that he
was brought up amongst Pagans he knew him not. He was so endued with virtue
and mightiness of courage, that the wise Lyrgandeo thought it best to hold
his peace and to be in quiet, referring himself unto his works, as in the
process hereof you shall understand, therefore he will say little at this
time, but only he was one that God had endued with many graces and good gifts,
that the Pagans did account him to be one of their Gods. The king Delfo did
make so much of him, that he would not at any time let him depart one minute
from him. He brought him up with great majesty until he came to fourteen
years of age, and at that time whosoever had looked on him, would have judged
him to have been of more years (according unto the high stature of his body,)
for there was no knight, although he had been a giant, that could be equal
with him, not only in his height, but also he was so well set and knit, and
double membred, conformable. At which time this great Giant usurper of ye great
Arginaria (when he saw himself so mighty a Lord) his pride so much
increased, that he was not consent with that Island which with so great peace
and quietness he did possess, but co^e^^^snesse increased so much in him,
that he likewise would be Lord and ruler over other kings and Princes, whose
countries were adjacent, wherefore he determined (...) take into his power the
Island of Trapobana, and had no sooner thought thereon, when straight ways he
would put his desire in practice, taking for his quarrel yt he had denied
their tribute which they were wont to pay him, and so without any more
counsel he commanded to call unto him a brother of his, a mighty giant
(although nothing so strong as he himself,) and when he came before him, with
a proud and terrible voice, and with a great majesty he said: Bruno, take
unto thee two galleyes, and let them be meruailously well furnished, and go
thou by force of wind, smiting the sails, and likewise by good government
that they may make the better diligence for thy nauegation, being helped with
those knottie oars, to cut by force those deep waters, not taking any rest,
till such time as thou art a land at Trapobana, or wheresoever the king Delfo
is, unto whom without any humility thou shall say from me: That seeing his
hardiness has been such, to deny me that which the Gods (if they did reign
or dwell on the earth) were bound ^o give me, if he do not now send it me with
a new confirmation of his subjection, that by the omnipotent Jupiter I do
swear, to give him such correction, that when it is heard throughout the
world, they shall all tremble and shake. This Pagan and youthful giant
without any more tarrieng prepared for this his departure. Of all this that
had past was Galtenor advertised by his learning, and having well understood the
whole secret, it moved him in great have to cause a cloud to descend out of the
air, into the which he did put himself, wherein he was carried in very short
time to the City of Trapobana, and without giving knowledge to any person he
went up into the kings Pallaice, whereas he found the king and the Prince
walking up and down in the hall, talking of matters of pleasure, who with the
good entering of Galtenor had their joy and delight doubled. The king
showing great mirth and pleasure, did ask him, saying: What is the occasion
of this your coming, my good friend, unthought or unlooked for, it cannot be
without some new and strange thing. In the mean time whilst the King was
speaking these and such like words, Galtenor had the Prince in his arms, who
received such joy to see his great beauty, fair body, and good disposition,
that ^ee was blinded therewith, and having the Prince Claridiano in his arms,
he forgot himself that he was before the king, and the king seeing him in
that trance, procured to take him out of his arms, then he like a man awaking
out of a slumber, returned unto the king and said. Most mighty Lord, the
great contentment that I do receive at the sight of this young man, has caused
me to forget to be in thy presence, and I did occupy my senses in such sort,
that I could not do that which I am bound by duty to do. O king thou may
account thy self for happy, for that thou have obtained so much favor, as to
bring up so gentle a youth, worthy to be had in as much reverence as the
mighty Jupiter, and turning unto the king he said: There comes a messenger
from Arginaria, with a message nothing profitable, therefore good king, it does
stand you in hand for to make in a readiness all your power, and to suffer the
furious war that is ordained against you. Here my Lord, I do certify
thee, that it had been the more to have been feared, if thou had found thy
self without this young man in thy company, who is the flower of all men. The
king when he heard these news could not but receive some alteration, and it
was in such sort, that he was constrained to sit down to talk with Galtenor,
and said: I swear by God my friend, seeing it is so, let your discreation
remedy that, which mine is not able to comprehend, that we fall not into the
power of so cruel an enemy. Claridiano who was very attentive unto that
which Galtenor had told unto the king, and likewise unto the answer which ye
king made, kneeled down on both his knees, and with great humility he
desired the king to grant him two things, the which he would ask, the which
the king by the counsel of Galtenor did grant, and did lift him up from the
ground imbrasing him very lovingly. The Prince Claridiano s^eing that he had
granted it him, he said. My Lord, the first thing that you shall do for
me, is, that you give unto me forthwith the order of knighthoode. and the
second is, that you do give me license to answer the messenger of Arginaria.
It grieved the King very much, for that he had granted him these two things,
for that he did well understand his intent: but seeing that he could do no
otherwise, he was content. Great pleasure received Galtenor, to see with what
good grace, Claridiano did ask these two things of the king, and for to put
away part of that coffeehouse which they should receive at the messengers
hand, he told unto them some pleasant and joyful devices. So straight way it
was accorded, that Claridiano should that night watch his armor, the which
was given him by Galtenor. They were all white, and bespangled with twinkling
stars of gold, and his shield was also all white, and in it one only
Luzero, which did occupy all ye whole shield, all garnished with fine pearls,
that it made them that did look on it, almost to lose their sight, the
brightness was so great that proceeded from them, and they were such, that no
Lord in all the world had the like. When this famous youth was armed with
them, the delight was so much, that the king Delfo received to see him so well
set and so gallant, that he could not refrain but distill some salt tears
from his eyes for very joy, and said. My brother here I do desire the
sovereign Gods, that they make me so joyful with thy good fortune, as I am now
at thy sight. The prince did watch his armor that night, and the next day
with great solemnity, he was armed Knight, and gave that day many and great
gifts. In the afternoon was ordained great Iustings and daunces of all sorts,
of very fair Ladies and damosells, which the King had commanded to come
together for the same effect. But they who did most participate of all these
pleasures and pastimes, was the heroycal young man, and his nourse, whom he
took to be his mother. So that in the Kings Pallaice, there was no other thing
but feasts and pastimes, tarrying for the Ambassador that should come: and they
of the City had care in the fortifieng of the same, as well with victuals, as
repayring the walls, and putting all the people in good order, in such sort,
that within eight days they found within the City ten thousand Knights,
meruailously well appointed, at the which Claridiano did receive great
contentment. The ninth day after that he was made knight, there was brought
news how that the messenger of Arginaria was come a land: of the which the
king being advertised, he sat himself in his royal seat abiding his
coming, being accompanied with very rich and well esteemed knights, and on
his right hand was Claridiano, and on his left hand the banished King of
Arginaria, and being all in this manner as has been told you, the
Ambassador Bruno entered into the hall, with a furious countenance, and
without humbling or making any kind of reverence, he drew nigh unto the king,
and with a wrathful voice he said: King, what devil was that which put it in
thy head, to deny that tribute that thou were wont to give unto my mighty
brother, and thou do not only deny it, but I see that thou make thy
self in a readiness to make resistaunce, for the which here I do tell thee,
that there is no punishment that can make satisfaction of thy boldness and
folly, notwithstanding if thou will clear thy self better then thy overmuch
pride does deserve, give me straight way double tribute, of that which thou
art bound to pay, but if thou do it not, by the mighty Gods I swear to
thee, that he will take of thee and thine reuengement, with such rigor, that
the mighty Gods shall tremble when they see it. All this he spoke with so
great pride and wrath, that it made them all to quake to see his furious
demeanor, save only he to whom all the honor of Knighthoode belonged, who
did little esteem his unreasonable and proud words, but with great
sobriety he answered. They do not deny any thing which they ought for to
give unto this tyrant whom thou do name for thy Brother, and although he
did loose the Island that he does now possess, yet should he loose nothing
that has been his, for that with tyranny he has usurped the same. Therefore
without any more tarrying, get thee hence and tell thy brother, that the king
of Trapobana will not only detain from him the tribute which he does not nor
never did owe him, but also with armed arm he does pretend to recover again
all that which without reason he has received and carried away, and he does
give him to understand, that he will not rest till such time as he does thrust
him out of ye Island, which with so great tyranny he does possess, and from
which he deprived my father Galtenor. So with this answer thou may return
unto him who sent thee hither, without any hope of other. The giant stood and
did behold him very much, and with a fearful countenance his eyes turned into a
sanguin color, and laughing or smiling in manner of mocking, he said: I see
without any outward proof, but only by thy foolish words, that thou art but
a young and new made knight, and as such a one I will esteem and entreat thee:
and if my coming hither were not more for a messenger, then for a warrior,
for this thy boldness which thou do show, I would use thee in such sort, yt
thy answer should little avail thee, and yet I should remain satisfied of all
ye anger which thou have caused me to have. The prince Claridiano when he heard
that with so great disdain he was rauiled, with as much anger he went toward
him, and with an altered voice he said: By all the Gods that are in heaven I
swear unto thee, if I did not consider and respect the courtesy which is due
and ought to be showed to Ambassadors, I would bereave thee of this thy
bravery, in such sort, yt when thou art before such a king as now thou art,
thou should bridle thy tongue, and ever after have in remembrance ye
punishment yt I would give thee, but not respecting thy folly, but only my
estate, I will stay my self from correcting of this thy overmuch pride. The
wrath of this Giant was so much, when he heard himself so reviled, yt he could
not by any means refrain himself, but laid hand on his sword, and went
toward the Prince Claridiano, and threatened him with a very mighty and
strong blow, striking at his head. The prince when he saw the blow coming,
retired with a light leap, which was ye occasion yt he failed of his blow,
and by reason of the great strength wherewith it was stroke, the sword fell out
of his hands, and flew along the floor of the great hall, the Prince without
drawing his sword, with a trice joined with him, entering in at his left side,
and with his fist he stroke him so strong and mighty a blow upon ye mouth that
if his hand had been armed, it had been the last which the Giant should have
received, yet for all that it did so much harm that his teeth fell out,
leaving his mouth all bloody, and with the great strength of the blow it made
him to fall backwards on his back, and with the great pain which he felt, he
scantly knew where he was. The Prince when he saw this, stayed without doing
any more harm, for yt he would not disgrace the king, but put himself on the
one side: the king did show himself very much grieved for yt he was an
Ambassador, for if it had not ben done by him which did it, who so ever else
should have done it, would hardly have escaped without punishment. And for to
appease ye messenger he arose out of his seat and did help to take up the
Gyaunt, and looking toward Claridiano, he said: Brother, I would yt this thing
had not chanced by thy hands, for that all this harm which you have done unto
Bruno, is done unto me and not unto him. The^ this valiant Prince said: Hold
your peace my Lord, for those v^^urteous messengers, and such as do digress
and go from that which they are commanded, should not alonely be entreated in
this sort, but also loose their lives, and have their tongues cut out. Bruno
did complain him very much of the grief, and seeing himself without teeth
and so dishonored, he blasphemed against his Gods, but this inuinsible Greek
made little account of any such thing, but turned himself toward Bruno and
said: Now may thou return in the devils name, and tell thy brother the
Prince of pride, that he does command to plaster and cure thy teeth, for that
from hence thou go well cured of thy great folly. Also thou shall tell him
of my part, that as I have hurt thee with the strength of my fist, so I will
use him with the sharp edge of my sword, governed with the self same arm
that unto thee has done this damage. And I do here hope in such sort to
search that proud body of his, that all the world may take an ensample by
him and his pride. Bruno who was at the point of death with the great pain he
felt, understood all that was spoken, and without making any answer, he
went out of the kings Pallaice, and returned unto his Galleyes where he was
cured, and put his Sails into the power of the wind, and in a very short
time he arrived at Arginaria, and went a shore, carrying all his face wrapped and
bound with bonds and rowles of linen cloth, and his mouth all to be
plaistred. In this sort he went and presented himself before his brother, and
said: I have given thy Embassage unto king Delfo, as thou have commanded me,
and to give me answer there arose up a new and young knight, whom I do
believe and as I have proved the same, that he has in his body all the
infernal strength, and in his fistes all the Legyons of devils that are in
hell, as it did appear by the great furye wherewith he hurt me, that he did
not only strike out my teeth, but also threw me to the ground as though I had
been a child. This proud Giant the king of Arginaria, when he heard all that
his brother had said, with a terrible blaring and noise (that he made all the
Pallaice to shake) said: O vile coward, and is it possible that with fistes
like a vile vilaine he made thee to fall, in such sort, that thou did
kiss the ground with thy mouth. Bruno answered: Brother, I do swear unto
thee by the high Jupiter, that if thou had proved as I have done the strength
of his ^istes, thou would not revile me in this sort. And here I do give
thee to understand, that he said, and bad me in his part to tell thee, that if
from me he has taken away my fore teeth, that he will not only take away
thine, but also thy double teeth and thy life. But when this Arginarian king
heard this, he arose up and went from him with so much wrath and anger, that
he seemed rather a Devil then a man: and without taking any farther counsel,
he commanded to assemble all his people together, and that they should be
called with all the speed that possible might be, and when they were come all
together, he found that there were two thousand horse men, and six thousand
foot men, and made Captain general over them two Giants and brothers, yt
were Lords of one Island, joining unto his Island, called Bisperia. And he
commanded them to imbarke themselves with great fury, and when they were all
embarked, he commanded to hoyse up anchor, and to commit their sails unto the
wind, yt which they found prosperous, and brought them unto the Island of
Trapobana, and without any impediment or disturbaunce of them of the Island,
they went a land, and raised up their tents, and pitched their camp. This
fierce king being mounted upon an Elephant, went with great care and perused
all his people, and put them in very good order: so all was apparent and known
unto them of the City. The King of Trapobana feared much his fierce and cruel
adversary, and so likewise did many of them that were in the City: but yet
that courageous youth did fear him nothing at all, nor esteemed him any thing,
but rather did desire the hour to see himself in battle with him, for to
make satisfaction with his deeds and works, of that which he was in debt unto
his Lord. At such time as the camp was pitched, and all in good order, the
radiaunt Phoebus had made an end of his journey, leaving in his absence the
sad and dark night. So when time cam^ that he began a new to take his
accustomed course, and to show his shining face, dispersing his glittering
beams over all the Island, the king of Arginaria called unto him a trumpetter,
and with a furious voice he said. Go thy ways unto the City, and in such sort
as thou think best salute the king Delfo, and tell him on my behalf, that
without any tarrying or taking farther counsel, he send me him, who did
entreat my brother Bruno so evil: and if not, I swear unto him by the high
Jupiter, that I will do so much that his body shall be made meat unto dogs.
The trumpetter when he had well understood his message, taking liberty of the
accustomed pride of his Lord, went with great arrogancy unto the City. The
Scowtes when they saw him, let enter into the Cite, and they carried him before
the King, before whom when he came, without showing any kind of humility he
said. The Gods confound thy person and state, and break down thy great pride
and power: yt dreadful king of Arginaria my Lord, does send me unto thee, yt
when thou have heard my imbassage, forth with thou send unto him that
discourteous knight and of small valor, who with his proud hand, stroke out the
teeth of his well-beloved brother Bruno, and thou must send him prisoner and
bound before his royal presence, that he may give him the punishment, that his
great boldness does deserve. When this valiant Claridiano heard the proud
words that the Ambassador brought, and with what arrogancy he delivered them,
he was altogether without patience, and having no power to refrain his wrath,
he went unto him and said. Here I do promise thee goodman brablor, to give
thee answer according as thou do bring the imbassage, and it is great reason
that we make thy body to fly at large, as thou do cause thy tongue to
run at liberty, and procure out of hand that thou may the better leap, to
call unto Mercury for to sustain thee, and without any more saying, he took
him by the cholar, and with out any power to make resistaunce, he threw him out
of a window, letting him fall upon the pauement, before the pallaice gate, that
he broke all in pieces, and this being done, without speaking any more word, he
went unto his chamber, and armed him with his armor, with the help of Galtenor
his father, for so he always esteemed him: but his wrath and anger was such,
that neither his father nor the King durst speak a word unto him, all the time
he was arming. And when he was armed, he turned his face unto the king, and
said. Worthy king and my Lord, have a good confidence in the Gods, and in thy
justice and right, that I shall be he, that shall take away from before thee,
this proud enemy of thine. And without any more tarrying he demanded for a
borne, so straight way, there was one given him of Iuorie very rich, the which
he cast about his neck, and descended the stairs out of the Pallaice, where
he found a very fair and great horse marvelous well furnished, and lightly he
lept on his back, and with a reasonable pace he rode his way toward yt camp
of his enemy. Galtenor and the good king of Trapobana followed him, being
armed with very rich armor, and commanded that all the people should be in a
readiness. So they put themselves in a place, whereas they might well see, all
that Claridiano did.

How that Claridiano went unto the camp of the King of Arginaria, and how he
demanded of him battle, and of all that succeeded in the same. Chap. 2.
AS many times the hungrye Lion does compass and search the foldes roaring
with rauenish hunger, and finding the strayed Goa^e or Heart, discovering them
from far by their horns, and with a sovereign joy does sift up his neck,
and never rest until such time, as he be musting in their blood, with great
desire to satisfy his pining hunger: even so with like desire went out of
Trapobana the Prince Claridiano, till he came in sight of his adversaries, and
carried his visour up, and putting him self in place whereas he might be heard
of his enemies, he blew his horn, to give a token that they should hearken
unto that which he would speak unto them, and then with a loud voice he said.
O ^ruell and tyrannous King, what do thou think by threatenings to show thy
fury, come forth, and take to thee thy armor, for here does tarrye and abide
thy coming, he that stroke out the feeth of thy brother Bruno, and he that not
long since did teach thy Ambassador to speak, whom thou sentest this day with
thy proud message. The dog Cerberus when he was made fast with Alcides
leash, did not show himself so furious, as did, this terrible Giant at that
present, and rising up from the place whereas he was set, he turned unto the
Image of Jupiter, unto whom he had done great sacrifices, and stretching forth
his rigorous arm, he took it from the place whereas it was set, and threw it
out of the door of the tent, in such sort that he made it to fly into the
air, more then ten fadome, with which it fell into the sea, and he said. Get
thee thither thou God of little valor that being honored of so valiant a man
as I am, thou will consent that so vile a man (after that he has angered me so
much) should put himself with so great pride before my presence. And not
content with this, but with the same fury he took a great club, and what on
the right side, and what on the left, he threw down all the Images of his
Gods that were there, and broke them all to pieces. One of the ministers that
always did assist them in their sacrifices, said with a bold courage.
Wherefore do you so evil entreat and misuse your Gods. The Giaunt stroke him
such a blow on the forhead with his fist, that he broke it all to pieces and
threw him dead to the ground and said. Get thee hence, and go and make
relation unto Jupiter, and unto the rest of the Gods, of this great
reprehension that thou have done me. And looking about, he saw all the rest of
the ministers half amazed, without speaking any word, unto whom he went with
great have, and said unto them. Uile villains, what do you tarry here, why
do you not go after the figure of that God, whom you do worship and honor,
and laying on them with his club, he killed six of them, and so he would have
done with all the rest if they had not run away. Then one of the two Giants
which were brethren, came unto the Kings tent, all armed with his strong
armor, and mounted upon a great Elephant and said. Be in quiet my Lord, and
abate this thy insufferable anger, and I will bring unto thee straight way
him, who has been the occasion of this thy disquietnesse and anger. And
without tarrying for any answer, he turned about his great and vnwieldie
beast, and went that way, whereas the Prince was: who when he saw him so well
proportioned and furnished, he had well thought that he had been the King of
Arginaria, as one which had never seen any of so mighty a stature, and there
with he put down ye visor of his helm, and took unto him, a great and knottie
spear, purposing not to spend the time in words. Then Belerofonte (for so the
Giant was named) said. Art thou that bold Knight, that with thy deeds have so
evil angered, that mighty king and Lord of Arginaria. The Prince, who-by his
reasons was certified that he was not the King, replied. I am he whom with so
furious ire thou do seek, and if it be so that the King has so much anger
against me, wherefore does he not come forth in person to take reuengement. The
Giaunt when he saw him speak with so bold a courage, with a dissembling
laughter said. O fool without all wit, have thou in so little estimation that
great Geredeon, that he for twen^^e such Knights as thou art, should arm
himself, and come forth to battle, having them which can excuse him thereof:
And seeing that thy great folly is come to this extremity, I do require thee
(that if thou will remain with thy life) that thou do leave thy armor, and
yield thy self with both thy hands bound behind thee, and go and ask
forgiveness of him, that if he will kill thee with his own hands, thou may
account thy self happy. To whom the Prince answered, Thy counsel does not
please m^, neither his honor will I receive: but rather I hope to send thee
without a tongue before that infernal King, as I sent Bruno without his teeth.
And for yt thou shall not have any more time to speak such folly and
foolishness, either return the way from whence thou came, and repent thy
self of this thou have said, or else prepare thy self to mortal battle. The
Giant when he heard that vnsauorye answer which he gave, he took up his
spear and put it on his sholder, which was made fast in the midst of the
staff Darte wise, and raised himself in his stirrops, and threw it at the
Prince with so great fary, that by the force thereof, he hoped to have concluded
that enterprise. But this new Knight seeing the spear coming, he put his
shield before him where on the sharp point stroke, and pierced it through,
till it came to his fine and strong armor, whereas it lost his force: but with
the strength wherewith it came, it bowed in such sort, that it brake in two
pieces, without hurting the knight or once moving him in the saddle. This
valiant and stout Greek, when he saw that in that sort he would have slain
him, he clasped fast his spear in his hand after the same manner, and said.
Tarry and thou shall see, whether I can better throw a dart then thou? And
therewith he threw his great spear at the Giant, that without having any
power to defend himself from that blow it pierced his shield, and bored
through his armor, and not staieng there, the sharp point passed through his
body from the one side to the other taking from him that miserable s^ule, and
the body gave a terrible fall to the ground. At all that passed, was present
the proud and strong Geredeon, who with an infernal wrath threw fire from him,
and in great have called for his armor: at which time the other giant, brother
unto Belorophonte, no less irefull and furious, whose name was Bolifo, said
with a great voice. Mighty Geredeon, and Lord, let me take this reuengement,
for yt of right it appertains more unto me, then unto thee. And here I do
promise thee (or else the Gods shall be false in doing justice, and my strong
arm without virtue) that I will take cruel reuengement of that devil: and so
without speaking more words, he went toward the place whereas this new knight
was, who without any fear with a great spear in his hand, did tarry his
coming. This Giant who was blinded with his unreasonable anger without any
reasoning, he set spurs unto his Elephant, and likewise, the new knight set
spurs to his horse, and met together in the midst of their course, so that
neither of them lost his blow: but the encounter was with so great force, that
the Giant did pearce through the sheeld of the Prince, without doing any other
harm, and the spear shiuered all to pieces, but this warlike youth with his
spear gave unto ye giant so strong an encounter, yt it perced through his
sheeld, and made him to fall backwards upon the crouper of his Elephant, yt he
made the great beast to double with his legs, and falling down he fell upon
one of the giants legs. The Prince when he saw him in ye extremity, and yt he
could not arise, he leapt from his horse with great lightness, and did help him to
take out his leg from under ye Elephant: likewise he did help him to arise
upon his feet, and said. Do not think Giant, that thou shall have any
occasion to praise thy self, in saying that by a disgrace I did subdue thee.
Therefore now do what thou can do, for to defend thy self. The Giant
without any consideration of the courtesy showed him, clasped fast his broad
sword, striking a terrible and fearful blow at the Prince, who by leaping on
the one side, caused him to loose his blow, and stepping on ye other side, he
gave him such a stroke upon the waste, that the harness broke, and his sword
hid it self in the Giants flesh, and hurt him very sore, whereat ran out very
much blood. When the Giant saw the great damage that he had done unto his body
by that blow, he thr^we his shield from him, taking fast bold of his great
sword in both his hands (and without having any power to shun from it) he
stroke the prince such a blow upon his shield, that he cut it in two pieces,
and it descended down upon his healme with so great strength and weight, that
against his will, it made him to stoop with his knees to the ground, and to
stay himself with one of his hands, because he should not fall down all
together. This devilish giant, when he saw him in that case, would have stroke
him another blow: but at such time as he would have discharged it, this
invincible Knight arose up with so great wrath, yt a thick smoke came out of
his visor, and without any more tarrying, he threw the piece of the shield that
remained from him, and with a light leap he joined with his enemy, and stroke
him so horrible and furious a blow upon his helm, that it did little profit
him the strength of the steel, but he cut it in two pieces, head and all, and
he fell down to ye ground. Oh what great disturbance and fear this
unmeasurable blow caused unto all the people, as well to those of the City,
as to those of the contrary part. But above all this, Geredeon was much amazed.
And with the great anger and wrath which he had to see the two Giants slain
before him, he thrust himself amongst all the people, with so great rumor, as
when a strong rock by force of an earthquake, when the fierce and furious
wind does take it, and tear and rent it out of the place and situation,
whereas it was wont to stand: and with the terrible and great noise and sound
thereof, not only all the shepheardes and heard men of the field be scarred
and afraid, but also the great blow does remain in the air with a great and
rumbling ecko: even with the like fury this Arginarian king rushed amongst and
through his people. Claridiano without showing any kind of trouble, did abide
his coming with so strong and courageous a heart, as does the crooked and
cragged rock abide to make defense against the force and vnbr^^eled ^urie of
ye restless Neptune. So with great have went the Giant against the new knight,
and as he came before him, he could not conjecture who or what untamed young
man that should be, for that he never at any time heard any speaking of him,
and with the like confusion he said. Knight, I know not what to say unto so
heinous a matter that by thee is committed against me, for seeing thy great
boldness which thou have had to disquiet and anger me, it does cause me to
procure to have reuengement of thee. And to the contrary I see thou art one
alone knight, and therefore I do take it for a dishonor and rebuke to lift
up my furious arm against thee. Therefore that which I desire thee, is this,
that thou do return unto the city and cause to be gathered together one
hundredth of the best knights, chosen out from amongst the rest, and see that
you come straight again, for that of you all together, I will take this my
desired reuengement. And yet for all this, I do tell thee, I shall not be
satisfied for the great anger and wrath the which I have against thee.
Whosoever had been present to have heard him speak these words would have
trembled with fear, but he in whom fear could never take place, and one
which took no care nor did not esteem his words, said: I do not know
whereupon thou do stay, if thou do mean to take reuengement of him who
has so much offended thee, especially having him before thee: but thou shall
understand, thou devilish Giant, that thy furious look, nor thy beastlye
body, neither thy monstrous members, can put me in fear, for yt being as thou
art, furnished with a cruel heart, and so great a friend unto tyranie, and here
I tell thee, yt the advantage which thou biddest me to take, I do not desire
it, neither I will not take it, but rather I will thee that thou make thy self
ready for thy defense, and procure if thou can to drive me out of the field,
and when thou have overcome me and got the victory, then may thou make thy
combat with ye other ninety and nine. And with this he did put himself a
part, shaking his sword with a marvelous good grace. When the Giant saw
this, in manner of mocking he said: Go get thee hence thou vile thing, and take
unto thee the favor and aid which I do will thee, and do not think that
thou shall obtain of me so honorable and end, to be slain of me in equal
battle. Here this new knight by any means could not suffer his outrageous
arrogancy, but said unto him: Thou cruel tyrant, subject to all pride, defend
thy self, and leave off these reuilinges and boastes. And in saying these
words the Prince pressed to the Giant, and stroke at him so strong a blow upon
one of his thighs, that his strong armor did falcifie, and he made a little
wound, out of the which issued very much blood. When this infernal monster
felt himself thus hurt, and seeing that he made little account of him, but
rather despised his words, without any more tarrying, he lift up a very
heavy mase of iron, which was great and long, and had hanging at the end
thereof five balls of steel, each of them hanged by a steel chain of great
strength. The king Delfo was meruailously troubled, when he saw the deformed
weapon which was raised in the air, making a great noise, and with great
fury ready to be discharged upon the head of this warlike knight, who when he
saw it coming, with his accustomed lightness did procure to deliver himself
from so horrible a blow, and in such sort it came, that all those five balls
fell together on the ground, at which fall by reason of the great weight of the
mase, he was constrained to fall forwards with the blow. The Prince which at
that time was not without care, but seeing him in that sort, he stepped
quickly unto him, and stroke him so mighty and great a blow upon his strong
helm, yt with ye great strength wherewith it was given, did constrain the
giant by pure force to put both his hands on the ground, but straight way he
arose again, and lift up his monstrous weapon, and stroke at him another
terrible blow, the knight would once again hau^ cleared himself from that
blow, but he could not do it, but ye one of those balls did glaunce upon the
visour of his helm, in such sort, that it made him to gi^e three or four
steps backwards, he was so amazed, wherewith he was ready to fall down, which
without all doubt he had, if that he had not labored to stay himself by
falling forwards, with his hands to the ground, the which was not so quickly
done, and he recovered, but that the Giant had his mase in the air ready to
strike him again, but having time, he cleared himself thereof, so that he
stroke that blow in vain, wherewith the prince fastened so mighty a blow at
the Giant upon his back, that he made him to fall forwards with his hands upon
ye earth, he had not so soon given him that blow, but straight way he gave him
the second upon his helm, that without feeling he made him to fall again upon
his hands, with both his knees to the ground. The Princes sword was not so
fine and strong to suffer so great strokes, but broke in pieces with those
terrible blows, which was the occasion that as then the battle was not
finished. So the Prince when he saw himself without his sword, thought it
best to withdraw himself back, and the Arginarian king when he beheld
himself so used, giving terrible rorings, he arose up, so that he made all ye
earth to shake, and when he was on ^oote he lift up the visor of his helm for
to take air: likewise he lift up his g^ea^ mase, and went toward the Prince
for to strike him, this invincible knight when he saw himself without any
weapon for to make his defense against so terrible an adversary, who had
lifted up his arms above his head with his mase in his hands al^^t for to
strike him, and for that he knew very well that the small piece of his sword
which did remain in his hand was but little available, he determined
straight ways to throw it at him, and in the throwing of it his fortune was
so good, that before thy Gyaunt could let his arms descend with that furious
blow be stroke him on the visour (which a little before he had lift up to take
the air) that it all to plaistred his face and nose, whereof he received so
much pain and grief, that he had no strength to execute his heavy blow. When
the Gyaunt felt this great harm, he let loose his hold from the mase with his
left hand, and clapped it unto his face. The new knight, who received no grief
at his extremity, but waying the necessity into which he was driven, for
lack of a weapon, but seeing the Giant occupied in feeling of his face, and
wringing his body at the grief thereof, he did procure to win from him his
mase, and giving a contrary leap, as the Ounce does when she is oppressed by
the hunter, laid ho^^^ on the mase, and pulled it, giving so strong and wily
a turn, being done with so great swiftness, that he was constrained to let it
loose out of his hand. The Giant when he saw that he had lost his mase, and
that it was in the power of his enemy, pressed unto him for to catch him
between his arms, but this new knight, who was nothing desirous of such
imbrasing, defended himself from the same by putting himself on ye one side,
and as the Giant passed by, he stroke him with that furious mase so terrible a
blow on the back, that he made him to go forwards spite of his teeth, which
made him forget to desire any more to come to wrestle. So when the Giant had
stretched himself upright, he drew out his broad and sharp sword, and with a
gallant demeanor, his sword all aloft, he pressed unto the new knight, who was
with his mase ready at his standing, abiding his coming. The new knight did
first discharge his blow, for that he might strike him a far of, and chanced
with one of the balls to hit him upon the left arm, with so strong a blow,
that the bone of the wrist he brake in pieces, which made the Giant to loose
his furious blow. Who were now able to declare the great furye and
outragiousnesse of this fierce Giant: there was never fury so fierce, nor the
swift wind of A^olus in the close and narrow caves of the mountains, as the
Giant was at that time, without having any regard unto the damage which a
little before he had received, but flourishing aloft with his great sword, he
said: O vile knight, I tell thee that there is no Gods in the heaven, no, on the
earth, or sea, that shall have any power to deliver thee from me. This warlike
knight answered: Thou discourteous and unreasonable Giant, hold thy peace, and
speak no such blasphemies, but do what thou can, and then thou shall see how
little thou art worth, and of what small estimation, and therewith he lift up
his mace and returned unto his former and furious battle. Here I do now
lack a sharp and prompt understanding, for to set forth at large, and with
sweet and delicate reasons, that it might be delightful unto the readers, the
great courage and strength which that strong warrior did show, and the great
have and speed he used against his furious enemy, laying on him with that
great mace, which always oppressed him with those great and heavy blows, in
such sort, that it hurt and wounded him very much. And here I (...) give you
to understand, that the fierceness and fury of this battle was such, that
the author durst not declare at large the great valiantness therein used, for
that he stood in doubt of his own understanding, to declare it effectually as
it passed, therefore he does omit the declaring ^hereof, but that these two
strong and stout warriors were two hours together, striking and hur^ing the
one the other, and each of them showing ye great stou^nesse, strength, and
courage of their hearts, and were ^oth kindled in so much wrath and ire, that
more by strength then by policy, they defended themselves, either of them
procuring to overcome his adversary. So at this time the fierce Giant stroke
his enemy such a terrible blow, which chanced glanceing upon his healme, and
descended down with so great a sound upon his left shoulder (that if it had
not been by ^he great virtue which his armor had, being made by ye wise
inchaunter) the hardness of the steel would little have profit^d but that he
should have cut him, with all that part of the body down to the wast,
nevertheless the strength of the blow was such, and put him to so much pain,
that the Prince felt himself to be very evil thereof, insomuch that it did
deprive him at that time of his (...), that he could not lift up the heavy
mase for to strike the king of Arginaria. His pain and grief was such, that
his adversary did perceive his weakness, which caused him to make more have
in striking of the Prince, with such furious blows, that it made this new
knight to retire from him, drawing after him that heavy mase with his right
hand. Who at this time should have seen the countenance of the king of
Arginaria, and the king Delfo would well have judged their great trouble of
minds. This warlike knight was very much troubled with that great grief,
insomuch that many times he thought to have embraced with the Gyaunt and
wrastled with him, which certainly he would have done if the grief had
continued, but he felt that the pain decreased, which was the occasion that he
went dalying with the giant, who with hasty and terrible blows followed
striking of him, but when the Prince felt himself clear of the pain, and
that he was able to lift up his arm, he took the mase in both his hands,
and settled his feet very strong on the ground, and kept in his breath, that he
might with more strength discarge his blow, detayning it till such time as the
Giants blow was stroke, which was with so great strength, that falling on ye
ground, the sword entered into the earth more then half of it, and it was the
occasion that the Prince had better time, for to execute his mighty and
determined blow, and discharging it, with two of the balls of steel which
hung at the mases end, he let drive such a blow on the Gyaunt, that he made
him to stoop with both his knees to the ground, and seeing him in that plight,
he stroke at him another blow, which was upon his helm, which gave such a
sound, as though it had been stroke upon a bell: wherewith he fell with all his
body to the ground, and stretched out his huge members, making no more moving,
and when this new knight saw that he moved not, he pulled of his healme, and
perceived that the blow was such, that it beat out his eyes and the brains
out of his head. Then the young Prince gave thanks unto the Gods, for that he
had no perfect knowledge of his descent, nor any light that he was a
christian, and taking up the mase, he laid it on his shoulder, and with great
quietness he went unto the City, and straight way there came unto him
Galtenor, and the king Delfo, with a great number more of knights, that had
been beholding the furious battle, who did imbrase him with so great joy and
love, that I am not here able to express it, and did request him that he
would go and lie down, for that they judged he should be very weary. He was
so much importunated by so many knights, that he could do no otherwise but go
take his rest, and lie down, whereas he was cured and healed of such blows as
he had received, which was black and blew, and there was ministered unto him
such ointments as did mitigate the pain^s and griefs which he had received.
So all those which came with the Giant when that they saw their Lord was dead,
they received no sorrow nor grief thereat, for they could not (...) his great
pride and evil conditions, for they did not only (...) him, but they did
desire that he might die a naughty death, and make a short and evil end. And
in this sort as you do see, the entreating of this Giant of his subjects, so
are all them that be of so great pri^e entreated in all the world: he was
scarce dead when yt all those of the kingdom of Arginaria were very joyful to
see it so come to pass, and were very desirous to yield up unto Galtenor, his
right and inheritance, and sent straight ways Ambassadors to the City*
whereas he was* promising to give him peaceable entering into the kingdom, as
unto their natural king and Lord, and justly discharging themselves of all
wherein they were found guilty. The messengers were meruailously well received
of Galtenor, and with great love, and he did accept their offer. So it fell out
that in one day, was the Giant Geredeon king and Lord of Arginaria, and in the
self same day was Galtenor with great contentment unto all the people of the
Island And when he saw himself that he was Lord of that which he so greatly
desired, he straight ways dispatched messengers for his kingdom, in giving
them to understand of all that passed, in the which they did rejoice very
much, and with exceeding great good will they received all the news which was
sent, and were as glad of the death of Geredeon, as they were of restoring of
the kingdom unto Galtenor. In few days after was Claridiano come again to
his strength, and made whole, which was so great joy and pleasure unto the
King Delfo, that unto his judgment, he needed not to desire any other thing.
So when the messengers were returned yt they sent unto Arginaria, they did
determine, for that all the country should ^e put in good order, that Galtenor
should depart for that part out of hand, who did procure to carry with him
Claridiano: but the King Delfo would not consent unto it by any means, for the
which the king Galtenor went away greatly discontented. And when he came unto
his kingdom they received him with great pomp and honor, and with great
delight to s^^ their natural Lord, and there was non^ that made any
resistaunce against the receiving of his possession: for that one son which
the Giaunt left and his brother Bruno, were gone into the Island of Vespe^a of
whom in the third part of this history shall be told unto you. And now it is
necessary to leave the King Delfo, and the King of Arginaria, with the great
delight of their victory, and to return unto the noble Emperor, whom we
lef^e with his furious and well foughten battle, in the first part of this
book, with the King of the Garamantes, who had given the Emperor so great a
blow, that he left him without f^eling. But when the Emperor was come again
unto him self, he turned about his horse with more fury then the Lio^s in the
wayne of the mother Idea, when that with a furious rage they moved against that
sorrowful Atis in y^ desert mountains of Phrigia. In such sort went this
fierce Emperor with his sword all a lofte, and stroke him such a terrible blow
upon his shield, that parting it in two pieces, jointly with his helm and
head, he fell down dead to the ground, the which did grieve the Emperor very
much, for that he could not perform that which he had promised unto him. So
when this was finished, the Emperor returned unto his pallaice, whereas he
was received with great so^^^nitie of instruments, and unarmed by the Empress,
between whom there passed many sweet and amorous spe^ches touching the
communication that they had before the battle began. And the next day openly,
they returned unto the same talk: but they were cut off by a strange
adventure which entered into the hall, as shall be declared unto you, in this
chapter following.

How a Damsel, messenger from the Queen of Tinacria, brought a letter unto
the Emperor of Grecia, and of all that passed about the same. Cap. 3.
ALthough I always purpose to separate my self in my discourses, from ye
frauds, which that most cruel Venus does many times use, accompanied with
the deceiptes of her son, yet am I constrained to speak some thing thereof,
and to leave the stout and strong Mars with his sword in his hand, tourning my
pen for to tell unto you her cruelties and disordinate customs. You do well
remember of the amorous wrath that the Queen of Tinacria had against the
Emperor of Grecia, and what in that furious rage she did ordayn, and how that
she commanded a faithful damsel of hers, to carry a letter unto the Emperor
of Grecia, who made so much have that she arrived at Constantinople, at such
time as the battle between the Emperor, and the king of the Garamantes began.
And when she saw the unhappy end of the King, she received great grief, being
informed of the occasion of all the battle, and wherefore it was made. So with
this grief, for that night she went and took her lodging, whereas she
remained till ye next day in ye morning, at such time as ye Emperor was with
the Empress, and many other Knights in great joy and pastimes, and talking of
the occasion of the battle that was ye day before. At that time entered the
queens damsel with a severe countenance, and without making any reverence, she
went unto the Emperor and said. Emperor* much more valiant and mighty, than
loyal and faithful, the unhappy queen of Tinacria, does send me unto thee
that thou may read this letter, and thereby understand the great tyranny
without all reason that thou did use against her. The Emperor with an
amorous smiling did receive it, and said, Thou art welcome, and for the letter
of the queen, the receipt thereof does give me great delight to know and
understand of her highness. And therewith he opened the letter, and reading it
found that that therein was contained that which follows.

The unhappy and unfortunate Queen of Tinacria, unto the disloyal Emperor of
Grecia, can send nor wish no sa^utation, for having no health my self, I
cannot send it unto him, that so much without love by cruelty has forgotten
me. I cannot but lament, and complain me of thee unto the Gods, considering
that without any refuge thou camst unto my kingdom, whereas thou had no
other hope but of death, and I procured to deliver thee from it, and sought it
for my self, what occasion had thou O Emperor, that thou would not
return to see me? In me thou foundest so much fidelity, that I did furnish
thee with armor and horse, that with them thou should deliver me from those,
which did seek to have me against my will: But I with my good will did yield
my self, I say my self unto him, which now does seek my death. Ah Emperor,
remember, that I saw thee deprived of all help: an unhappy day for me, for yt
in making much of thee, and giving thee joy, I bereaved my self of all, and
lost the possession of my liberty and honor: and although thou had not
esteemed, nor took any care of the sorrowful Queen of Tinacria, yet thou
should not have moved thy self to have made a mock of the perfect love
which I did show thee, and the great desire that I had to serve thee. Thou
should have had some care and grief seeing that I defended thee from all my
Nobles and Knights who sought thy death, thou having deprived so many of my
knights of their lives: thou should have had pity of the^ that had pity on
thee. O love, that so quickly did make me blind, and depriuedst me of the
knowledge which I should have had, unto my royal highness. O Emperor of
Grecia, I being blind with the love of thee, did deny my honesty, which I
ought to have kept. If thou had pretended to mock me, thou should have
put me out of all doubt, and not have suffered me, to loose so much as I have
lost for thy sake, but have procured that I might have eschewed all this harm,
whereof thou have been the occasion. Tell me, why did thou not suffer me to
execute my will, yt I might have opened my white breast with that sharp sword:
it had been better for me to have dyed then, than now, for now living, for thee
I daily dye. Remember thy self Emperor, and behold the harm that will come
heerof, and do not use so much cruelty with them, that have not deserved it
at thy hands. Have thou a care unto the pawn which thou did leave behind
thee, and let it be an occasion that thou do return to see me. Do not give
an occasion, yt my children remain motherles in ye power of them, for thou
do not know what my subjects will do. O Emperor of Grecia, I do still
tarry and look for thee, yt which hope does cause me to suffer this cruel
pain: and if thou do send my trusty messenger without it, I shall be driven
to do yt, of which thou had ben better, thou had not disturbed me at the
first. But now it shall be in this manner, that if thou do give ease unto me,
I will procure thine in such sort as possibly I may. So that Emperor, I do
tarry thy coming, or else answer of my death. And do not judge this which I
do, to be of great boldness, for that Love does command it. By her, which
without all regard, or any foresight, did yield unto thee her liberty.

When he had made an end of reading ye letter he could not have so much
sufferance with himself, but with ye tears which distilled from his eyes, he
must needs show the pain which his heart endured, for the sorrowful
complaints, which that lamentable and complaining Letter did utter. The
Damsel which brought the Letter, all the time that the Emperor was reading
of it, she never withdrewe her eyes from looking on him: and when she saw that
he had made an end of reading it, she said: Wherefore will thou give me to
understand O cruel Trebatio, that thou do receive great sorrow of that,
which when thou might have redressed thou would not, and do not make me
believe that these outward shows do proceed from thy heart. Do thou think
that it is sufficient to excuse thee from the pain that is pretended to be
given thee. Do thou not see, that when thou could give remedy (thou
would not) unto them, who now are without all hope, and tarryeth for no
other satisfaction but with thy head. O false Emperor, did thou not see that
she was not a lady to be thus mocked and deceived. Surely thou have recovered
to thy self a very good name, for the exalting of thy lygnage. Thy son whom
we honor there for a God, may well praise himself for his descent, in having
thee for his father. O false and cruel, is this the inheritance which thou
did inherit of thy most famous blood? Is this the great loyalty which thou
do show unto thy sons? O vile Greek, how do the Gods consent that so
disloyal a knight should live in the world. Is it not possible that these
sorrowful and continual complaints of Tinacria do not open your ears, and
cause you to send down punishment, for this great offense. O ungrateful
Gods, receive the sacrifice of my chastity in payment of the reuengement which
from your high heavens I hope shall be done upon this counterfeit without all
faith, and make that my blood here shed upon this stoore, may show the
singleness and clean love of Garofil^a and that with the like solem^nitie may
be broken in pieces the heart of him which was the causer of her dishonor. And
in uttering of these and such like sorrows she took forth a naked sword which
she brought ready for the same effect, and put the pomell to the ground, and
cast her breast upon the point, the which she did with so great have, that the
Emperor nor any of all yt were there present could not succor her, nor take
her from doing that fact. All that were present remained very much amazed to
see so sudden a mischaunce. The Emperor very full ^^ grief of this
success, withdrew himself into his closet, and would not consent that any one
should speak a word unto him. The courageous Empress with a royal stomach
and great discretion, dissembling her grief in the best wise she could,
commanded her body to be carried out of the pallaice, and in the Court of the
pallaice she commanned to be made a rich tomb, in the which she was buried:
there was made her proportion, which did show what chanced unto ye damsel:
and about the tomb was written an Epitaph, which did declare the occasion of
her death. All the time that this damsel was a burying, the Emperor never
came forth out of his closet, neither would he have come forth when he did,
and if it had not been by the great importance of ye Empress. Whereas now we
will leave them, for to tell you of the chances and adventures which happened
unto ye Prince Eleno, the time that he travailed in the world, the which for
that he was as noble as warlyke, and of great strength, it is not reason, that
he should pass so long without making any mention of him. You do well
remember how he went out of Numidia, with one only Page, putting himself to
sea, in that inchaunted bark of the Knight of the Sun. He was so heavy and
sorrowful for the death of his Lady and Mistress, that he was clean
changed, and appeared not to be him that he was wont, neither had he so great
wisdom to govern himself. In this manner he trauayled almost a whole year,
and never could meet with Brenio, unto whom he was commanded to give the
letter from Lydia, neither could he hear in any place whersoeuer he came,
where he might go to seek him: in which his travail, he did not let but to
meet with some adventures, the which, with great honor to his person, be
finished. Yet for all this he could have no ease of his sorrow and grief,
which brought him in such perplexity, that if he had not considered ye great
loss of his soul, many times he would have slain himself, So it happened yt
one morning very early, the bark had put her self a ground, giving him to
understand, that it was requisite there for him to go a land. The Prince who
was very desirous thereof, quickly went a shore, and after him his page, who as
you have heard, that by reason of the great have that the bark made, he could
not return a land to Numidia. His name was called Fabio, who was to his
master such company that many times he would comfort the Prince, when he was
most troubled with very comfortable words and persuasions, and did serve him
with great love and fidelity. The Prince and his Page began to travail a
foot with an easy pace through a narow and straight path, and with a
marvelous and diligent eye, he did behold that country, and it seemed unto
him, that he should know it, and that before that time he had passed by that
way: but the firm love that he had to Lidia, was the occasion that it was out
of his remembrance. So with this sorrow he trauayled, till such time as
Phoebus had passed the fourth part of his journey, when that being weary with
the long way, and the great weight of his armor, he was forced to take some
rest and ease, under the fresh and green myrtle trees, whose leaves did has
themselves in a fair and clear fountain, whereas he began a new to have in
remembrance his former pain, and complaining of Fortune, he published his
great grief, making thou of the great sorrow that he felt, and although he was
weary of complaining, and seeing himself so without all remedy, he called for
his lute, for that Fabio did always carry with him, and taking it in his
hands, only to give some ease unto his tormented heart, he began to sing these
verses following.

SInce heavens accord for to increase my care,
what hope have I for to enjoy delight?
Since Fates and Fortune do themselves prepare,
fully to work against me their worst despite.
I know no means that may yield me relief,
But only Death, which can dissolve my grief.
I muse, and may, my sorrows being such,
that my poor heart can longer life sustain,
For that (God wot) I find my grief so much,
as every day, I feel a dying pain.
But yet (alas) I live afflicted still,
And have no help to heal me of my ill.
When as I mind my pain and pleasure past
together mixed, it makes me moan my state:
And since my weal with woe is ouercast,
O Death give end to my unhappy fate.
For only death will lasting life provide,
Where living thus, I sundry deaths abide.
His Page Fabio did cause him to leave off his singing, for with the great
attention that he gave to hear his Master, he likewise heard a lamentable
sound, which seemed to be of a Lady. Likewise the Prince, when he had ended his
sweet music, did hearken to hear it: and giving a very attentive ear, that
although she did complain with a low voice, yet he might hear that the sound
of the voice, came forth of the thickest from amongst those trees: and without
any more tarrying, he left his lute with his Page, and went that way from which
he thought the voice came, and the farther he went, the better he might hear,
that weak and feeble voice. Still he went forwards, til such time as he might
see who it was that made that lamentation. And he saw that it was a very fair
Lady, that was bound unto a tree, all naked to the skin, she had all her hair
spread abroad upon her naked back. The Prince came unto her, and before that
he said any word, he did untie her, and cut the cords wherewith she was bound,
and took a gown which was there of the Ladies, and covered her delicate and
white body. The Lady was very much ashamed to see her self loose and at
liberty: and sitting down under a green Oak, the Prince asked of her who he
was, that without respect of his own honesty and honor, had left her in
that sort. This fair Lady said: Knight, thou shall understand that I am
Daughter unto a very good Knight and Gentleman, who was Lord over three
Castles of the best in all this Country. My Fathers name was Cosdros, he was
one of them that was slain by the hands of Bramarandus, whom afterward the
Emperor Trebatio slew in battle. So I remained all alone, very much made
off, and well beloved of the widdowe my mother, and we kept our selves in a
very fair castle of ours, not far from this place, whereas we did pass our
solitary lives. So I was required of love, of a Gentleman, more richer in
goods and lands, than in lineage or virtue, and I understanding his little
estimation, did always esteem him as little, and never made any reckoning of
his messages: the which was the occasion that his desire was the more stronger,
in such sort, that he seeing himself by me not esteemed, but put off, with
the great grief that he received for my love, he dyed, and at the hour of his
death, he never left naming of, Felina, the cause of all my harm. At such time
as he dyed there was a brother of his present: and hearing him to declare the
causer of his death, there kindeled in him so much anger and wrath, that he
bare unto me a perpetual hatred and did procure to have amends for the death
of his brother. So it happened on a time, that I went out of the Castle without
any mistrust, in the company of other two damsells, at which time I was stole
away by him, and other four Knights, who brought me unto this place, which
is to my great sorrow and grief, whereas they bound me in that sort as thou
have found me gentle Knight, and not content heerewith (but for my more pain
and sorrow) they left me naked, with greater desire to die then to live. This
Lady could not let but to associa^^ her tale with great lamentations, wherein
this Dacian did bear her company, and said. Of truth sorrowful Lady, fortune
has used with me great liberality, to bring me hither in this time, for to
set you at liberty from this great captivity, and to make reuengement of thy
honor: and here I do offer my self, and do give unto thee my faith of
knighthood to perform it, or to loose my life. This fair Lady was somewhat
comforted with the offer of the Knight, and gave him great thanks for the favor
which he did offer her. In this sort they passed the rest of the night that
remained, till such time as the Sun of Tona did show his glistering face,
spreading all abroad his golden beams, accompanied with ye sweet and rosalyke
Aurora, at which time they were all ready a foot for to go onwards on their
way, and straight ways they heard amongst the thickest of those trees a
still sound. The Prince being very desirous to know what it was, and coming
thither, he saw that it was his horse, the which was brought thither by the
order of the wise Lyrgandeo, from the place whereas he left him, at such time
as he did imbarke himself. The Prince received great delight at the sight of
him, and taking him by the bridle, he leaped on his back, and went to seek the
Ladies Palfraie, which was let loose amongst those thick trees, and they found
him feeding in a fair and green medowe, adorned with many fresh and sweet
flowers. So his page leapt on his back, and took the Lady behind him, and
travailed through a narow and well beaten path which brought them into a broad
way that carried them into a very great and large plain, at (...) the end
thereof there was a very fair Castle, and in the midst of the plain they
saw four knights which came toward them, and when they were nigh together,
the one of them said: Tell me knight, who made thee so bold, as for to unloose
this Lady from thee place whereas she was made fast. What is this that thou
ask, said Eleno, is it possible that thou art he, that forgetting all the
honor that thou do owe unto the order of knighthood, made fast this
Lady. The knight an^wered and said: I am he that did it, and he that will
take away thy life from thee, in recompense of thy great boldness to unloose
her. So without any more tarrying the Prince Eleno turned about his horse
toward him. When this sorrowful Lady ^awe him yt was the occasion of all her
evil, she leapt down from her Palfray, and began with a new sorrow, her
grievous lamentation. Those four knights came all against ye prince, some with
their spears, and he yt had none, came with his sword in his hand with great
fury, one of the four, who thought himself to be more valiant the^ all ye
rest, came foremost with his sword in his hand all a high, and stroke him a
mighty blow upon his helm with all his strength: but this Dacian Prince made
little account thereof: and passing by he stroke him a blow upon his shield,
and for that his blow could extend no farther, he remained with his life,
otherwise it had cost him the price thereof, for it parted his shield in two
pieces. The Knight returned, and gave him another blow, that it made the sparks
of fire to fly out of his healme. Then the Dacian full of ire, let go his
shield, and clasped fast his sword in both his hands, and stroke him so
terrible a blow upon his helm, that he cut helm and head in two pieces, and
he fell down dead to the earth. The other seeing their companion dead, all
three together set upon him: but this valiant Dacian who in such like
adventures never had any fear, did receive them with his accustomed furye,
striking on them both on the right and left hand with mortal blows. In the
mean time, this afflicted Lady, when she saw the Knight dead, which caused
her dishonor* like a furious Lioness she went toward him and said. Oh how
the gods have given thee thy payment for the dishonor, which thou have done me:
yet she said. O heavy Felina, what does this reuengement profit thy honor,
being lost, it were very great riches unto me, that by the death of him which
has robbed me of it, it might be restored me again. Oh my gods, I am in no
falt, in the loosing of my chastity, for that it was violently taken from me,
in the thick forest. There shall be none able to disturb, but that I will
execute my fury upon my self, although I do not deserve the same: and in
saying these words, she took the sword of that dead knight, and put the point
to her breast, and threw her self thereon, in such sort, that Fabio could not
succor her, although with great have he would have done it. The Dacian Knight
casting his head on the one side, and saw the harm done, he pressed forwards
with great fury and yrefull wrath, and lift up his sword, and stroke such a
blow at one of them upon his right arm, that arm and sword together fell to
the ground, and straight turned unto another, and with an overthwart blow, he
stroke him on the making fast of his helm, that head and all came to the
ground. Then he which remained, seeing the fierceness of his adversary, would
have run away. But the Dacian perceiving it, before that he could put in
execution his desire, he stroke him such a blow upon his helm, that being
parted in pieces with the head, he made him to bear company with his dead
companions. So when he had concluded this battle, he went unto the dead Lady,
and having great sorrow to see her he pulled the bloody sword out of her body,
and commanded Fabio that in the best manner he could to make a grave, and to
bury her. The Dacian did help him all that he could, and being done unto
their contentment, he put an Epitaph over her, which was in this wife.

Lucklesse Felina here interd does lie,
whom traitor false within this forest wide,
Defloured first of her virginity.
She loathing after, long a live to bide:
Upon his blade her tender breast did cast,
A bloody offering to Diana chaste.
So when he had written this Epitaph, joining this great sorrow unto that
which he had before, he leapt upon his horse, and put himself amongst a
company of troublesome trees, among the which he had not travailed long, when
he heard one playing on a shephardes Rebucke, which made a very sweet sound,
and tourning his horse that way from whence the sound came, he chanced to
come whereas he found certain Shepheardes, who by their countenaunces
appeared to be very sad, and they sat under a Walnut tree, where they
passed away the great heat of the day. These Shepherds when they saw the
Prince, arose up, and with great joy they did salute him: The Prince returned
unto them their salutations, and did alyghte from his horse, which he gave unto
Fabio his Page, that he might put him into some void Pasture, together with
his Palfraie, whereas they might feed on the green grass, in the shadow from
the heat of the Sun. The Prince sat down under the Walnut tree, and asked
of them if they had any thing to eat, the which was given him with a very
good will, being such as they had provided themselves, and he eat of it for
that he had a very good stomach, so here to take some ease, I do refer
the rest till the next Chapter.

How the Dacian Prince did meet with Brenio, to whom he gave the Letter of
Lidia, and what Brenio did answer thereunto. Chap. 4.
IN the mean time that the Prince and his Page did eat of yt which ye
shepheardes had given them, they never withdrew their eyes from the Prince, but
did very much behold him, and rejoiced to see him so well proportioned and so
fair, but yet they meruailed to see him so sad and pensive, musing what
should be the occasion of his great heaviness, and one of the shepheardes did
ask him, and said: Knight, what great heaviness is this which you seem to
have, for according unto the outward show it seems to proceed of love. Ah
my friend, answered Eleno, is it possible that thou do know any part of
those evils, for that me thinks love ought not to be remembered of them that
do dwell so far from any towns or company, as you which in these sharp
and cragged mountains do make your habitation. How do we know, answered the
shepherd: he is of such strength and subtlety, that he does not only show
his force upon us, but also he is the occasion that we do occupy our
imaginations in his delights (which is so great a torment that we cannot
receive a greater) he makes that our cattle (that do not deserve any such
harm) lack their good feeding which we should procure, the which our small
regard does appear in their weak and lean bodies, lowing more time for
hunger the^ for too much feeding or good pasture.

Ah Knight, what should I tell you of that which he has caused all us that be
here to suffer, and when we do talk of it, there is not one of us, but does
muse at the other, how he has the force and strength to bear it. The Dacian
knight said: I know well that he does pardon none, neither is there any that
does escape from his power, such is his pride and ambition: therefore it is not
much to be meruailed at, seeing that he does as well walk the fields as the
dwelling towns. But since it has pleased Fortune (the more for my pain and
grief) to meet with them that are wounded with love, I do desire you that I
may take some pleasure in your music, and in hearing some songs that you have
made to publish your true and perfect love withal. This we will do with a very
good will answered the shephearde: and for that you do seem unto us, for to
be of high estate, we will play on our instruments, to give you some comfort,
and we will publish our pains and griefs, with our own mouths: and taking the
Rebeck in his hand, which was meruailously well wrought, he began to play
upon the same very sweetly, and likewise did associate the music with these
pastoral verses.

YOu Lovers all assist my song,
and help me to declare
The slights of crafty Cupide strong,
the worker of my care.
Whose shafts and shifts be of such might,
they make one heart to guide
Two bodies: and by outward sight,
two souls in one do bide.
O union sweet by love so knit,
O life adorde to be:
If this were all the harm of it,
it could not hurtful be.
But Cupide uses such delays,
such spites for to oppress
The heart: that one may pine always,
and never find redress.
Yet if the parties firmly love,
his spite cannot prevail,
My mind therefore shall never move,
until my life do fail.
With great pain, and with a gracious countenance in his music, this
shepherd did sing his song: and when he had made an end, he said. Ah knight,
if you did know the cause of this my song, you would take as much grief and
sorrow at it, as of my pain: you shall understand that I did love a Pastora
very much, and do believe she repayed me again with the same love, and no
longer ago, but yesterdaye she was taken out of these fields, and carried
unto Tinacria, unto the Queen Garrofilea. The shepherd uttered this with so
great abundance of tears, that he could not speak a word more: so one of the
other shepheardes took the Rebecke, and began to sing as follows.

THe troubled mind afflicted is,
when changed thoughts appear,
Of pain and glory, bale and bliss,
which still disturb man's cheer.
And if that grief the goal does win,
the heart does then remain,
By this debate enclosed in,
with thought of passed pain.
Even so my heart afflicted is,
I no defense can make:
My wonted mirth I so do miss,
I no delight can take.
My heavy mind is clogd with care,
my glory overthrown:
And sorrow lotted for my shar^,
my grief so great is grown.
Yield wounded heart in sunder torn,
fith thou no gain can get,
Cease off thy suit thou art forlorn,
by thee she naught does set.
Let Death dissolve thy bitter grief,
and glory in the same:
For therein thou shall find relief,
and blaze thy Faith by Fame.
This loving shepherd when he had made an end of his song, giving a great and
sorrowful sigh, let the Rebeck fall out of his hand. The third shephearde
with a dissembling laughter, arose upon his feet and said. Oh sovereign gods,
that this Love might be seen, whom all you do account to be a God and Lord,
that you might at your ease rejoice in his simplenes, and know him that has
brought you out of all understanding and remembrance, as it does appear by
your variable resons, and ill placed words, which without any order be
uttered* so yt I promise you, if we should turn and make rehersall at night, of
all yt which you do talk on in yt day, you shall not find yt there is any
agreement therein, as by their songs gentle Knight you may know, and with what
Philosphie they would give us to understand, yt two bodies have but one heart.
And here I swear unto you, by yt might and power of Alfebo, ye restorer of
our Countries, and by the great valor of the Dacian Prince, yt in what sort
soever you will tumble and toss these variable reasons, there is no
understanding of man can cause me to believe, ye two bodies are governed by one
heart alone, at least ways I would not be he that should be without a heart.
Likewise hear the reasons of my other companion, who tumbleth together and
makes a mixture of glory and pain, and pain and glory, as though we should
mix honnie and gall together: and if I should let them contend much, they
would go about to make me believe that which never chanced: but remain you
with these your amorous thoughts, or as I might better say, with your foolish
conceits, and let me have continually my cattle well fed and governed, and in
as good plight as now they are, being so fat as the skin may hold, and not
to be as you are, that has lost all your own reason and understanding, and
therewith forget and loose the care that you should have of yours, who for
lack of looking unto, be so lean. And making an end in saying these words, he
sat himself down, and seemed to be very angry to see his companions so
without reason and understanding, and blinded with love. The which words was
the occasion, that the Prince Eleno was constrained to do that, which since
his departure out of Dacia he did not, which was, that he laughed to hear the
simplicity of this shepherd, and taking in hand to answer him, he said:
Friend, I do tell thee that thy resistaunce is great: likewise thy
understanding is very much, that being conversant daily and hearing the great
complaints and communication of so amorous sheapheards, thou art not entangled
with the same. And here I do desire thee, that thou hold thy self firm in
the same, and keep thy self still as thou art, least peradventure that which
thou do now call folly, hereafter thou will call discreation and wisdom.
Thou may now well account thy self happy, for that without all care and
sorrow, thou may revile them who does complain of so many miseries. With a
great laughter this shepherd answered and said: Now gentle Knight, I do
tell thee, that I will as little contend with thee as with thy companions, for
that it seems unto me that thou art also a vassal unto that foolish love,
and I do more esteem my liberty, thus simple as thou do see me, then all
the wisdom which thou do presume to have: it is much better for the
shepherd to have care and keep of his cattle, to guide them in good feeding,
and not every small time to call for his crowde, and singing two thousand
songs, the which the Devil cannot understand, and although they sing them,
yet I think they understand them not themselves. So one of his companions cut
off his reasons and said: Tarido, do thou not know, how at mine own
liberty, in times past I did govern my self, and mocking and jesting at them
who did publish the like complaints. Here I do desire the Gods to maintain
thee in this estate, and to keep thee y^ love do not extend his fury upon
thee, for if he do, he will make thee repent a thousand times these words
which thou have said. And here gentle Knight (without giving any attension
unto this Rusticall shephearde) ^eere I do desire you, for that I see you
bring that which is necessary, that you would play and sing, for that the
manifesting of thy sorrow in some vearse, may be an occasion to mitigate
somewhat of our pain. The Prince to show pleasure unto the shepherds, and
using his accustomed magnificence, took his Lute in his hand and played and
song these vearses following.

CAliope from Pernasse hill proceed,
and show thy sacred face with tears bedewd.
Let Gods and Nymphs prepare themselves with speed,
to hear my plaints that are by love renewd:
And with thy moanes, O mournful Muse assist
My wailing song, which does on woe consist.
And then may I at large paint out my pain,
amongst these pastors which desire the same:
And after I have ended, to complain,
against him whom justly I have cause to blame:
Except these shepherds too uncivil be,
They will with sobs assist the sighs of me.
Time wears out love, it is reported so,
and so it may, I will it not deny,
Yet I have tried long time, and this I know,
Time gives no ease unto my misery:
But rather Fortune, Time, and Love agree,
With cruel pains ceaseless to punish me.
O rare report, yet too too common found,
that Love should murder man with such despite,
Thou blinded boie which do so aimelesse wound,
and in the grief of lovers have delight:
Cease off to shoot, and though thy eyes be blind,
Let mercy now at last possess thy mind.
I never heard of any yet so praisde
for constantnesse, that might thy force gainsaie,
I cannot show the mischief thou have raisde,
nor bring one proof my passions to allay:
For by thy fury kingdoms are subdude,
And trenchant blades in peoples bloods imbrude.
Wherefore all you that hear my mournful song,
and tasted have the grief that I sustain,
Complain with me against cruel Cupids wrong,
whose slights almost my loving heart has slain:
Shun his deceipts, so subtle, false, and sly,
His poisoned baits for ever seek to fly.
With the great pain and sorrow that Eleno felt, he was not able to go
forwards with his song, for that there came to his remembrance the sudden
departure of Lidia, which constrained him to leave it of, and one of the
shepherds that was there said: Oh gentle knight, how the queen our Lady would
rejoice to hear you, for that she is likewise afflicted by love, for which
cause and for that she would at some time take ease of her sorrow and pain,
she does command us to sing our loving and amorous songs, who does solempnise
our sweet and loiung vearses, with tears distilling from her sorrowful eyes:
Then Eleno asked of them who was the occasion, that the queen, without having
any power to remedy her self should suffer such like torment. The shepherd
did declare unto him all that has been told you in the story past of the
Emperor Trebatio, and of all that passed with the Queen. Tarido, who of all
this had no care, but only to the feeding of his cattle, did break off this
conversation, in rising up to put abroad his Cattle into the green meadows,
the other shepheardes that were in company with Tarido, desired that the night
were come, for to return and to rejoice themselves in hearing the sweet and
well consorted music of the Prince, and so they made agreement to return to
ye same place, but it fell not out as they had determined, for that upon a
sudden and unawares Eleno heard a very dolorous sigh toward his left hand,
which was so terrible, heavy, and bitter, that it made him give attentive ear
to see if he could understand what it should be, and with the quiet ear that
he gave, he might discern that the occasion of all that evil was love, which
caused him to say: Oh almighty God, I suppose that this is the place where in
old time they reported to be planted the dwelling of the Goddess Venus, for
that since my coming hither to take my rest, I have heard no other thing but
lamentations, and so with making the least noise possible, he arose up and
began to go toward the place whereas he might see what it was, and there he
beheld a knight very well armed, which thou did alight from his horse,
under a fair and green Myrtle tree, his armor was all russet, and full of
bars of black steel, which showed to be a very sad, sorrowful, and
heavy enamelling* he was somewhat of a big stature of body and well
proportioned, and there seemed by his disposition to be in him great virtue,
and with sorrowful sighs he laid himself down on the green grass, and
with sad and heavy words he said.

Ah heavy and perverse fortune why do thou consent that so naughty and
evil a man as I am do live so long: Oh my Lidia, with how much reason may
thou complain of the cruel outrage that thou receiuedst at the hands of
Brenio, being nothing of him considered: O Brenio, Brenio, whereon was thy
thought and understanding* which did induce thee to commit so great evil, in
leaving all alone and without comfort, the thing, of whom thou were most
beloved in the world, giving and leaving her, unto the will of the wild and
furious beasts. It is possible indeed that they will have more compassion on
thee my Lidia, then he who had more reason to comfort and love thee. Oh cruel,
and without all faith, thou were born into this world, for thy own torment,
when with thy self thou did consent to commit so great treason. Where was
thy understanding that thou could not remember thy self, and take pity on
her, that did forsake her affinity and Country, for thee and thy love. O
Lidia, who made me to forget all the great pains and travail which thou
tookest, in wandering by land alone lamenting, and sometimes by sea sorrowing,
and all for to set at liberty him, who left thee prisoner amongst the wild
beasts. Oh happy beast is he, that chances to bury thee in his belly: and
woe be unto me traitor, without any knowledge of virtue or pity. What does it
now profit me to fill ye air with my lamentations, seeing that the harm and
evil is already past, and without all remedy or hope of comfort: and
heerewith he gave a terrible and grievous sigh, and so held his peace. Don
Eleno by those heavy and sorrowful weepings together with his reasons which
he heard, knew him to be that Brenio, whom so long time he had labored to
seek and find out with so great travail, and knew him to be the causer of the
death of his Lady and Mistress, the pain and sorrow was so extreme the which
he felt, that he was constrained without any feeling to fall down to the
ground, but yet the fury of his courageous heart would not give place that he
should so remain long, but straight ways with the great anguish that he had,
he arose up again on foot, with great desire to fight with Brenio, but
calling to remembrance all that which was commanded him, he would first
perform the same, in giving him the letter, and then when he had made an
end of reading the same, to demand of him battle* So with this thought and
determination, he went unto the place whereas Brenio was, who, when he heard
the noise, straight ways on his feet: then Eleno did salute him with a voice
somewhat heavy. And Brenio did return unto him his salutation, with no less
show of grief. Then this amorous Eleno, took forth the letter out of the
place, whereas so long time he had kept it, and taking it into his hand he
said. Is it possible that thou art ye forgetful and disloyal Brenio, the which
left Lidia, with so great pain and sorrow, all alone in the power, of the
wild beasts. Brenio when he heard him to say these words, he began to behold
him, although his eyes were all to be blubbered and weary with weepings, he
answered him and said. I will not deny thee gentle Knight, that which the high
heavens does complain of. Thou shall understand that I am the same Brenio,
whom thou have demanded for. Tell me what is your will, and what it is that
you would have. Eleno answered him. Oh ungrateful Knight without all
knowledge and understanding, what devil was that, which put in thy thought to
commit so great villainy, take here unto thee, and read this letter, the last
work of the fair and white hand of Lidia. The prince was so troubled in his
thought, and so much grieved, that it was almost the occasion, to dissolve the
soul from his body. This penitent and sorrowful Lusitanian, put forth his
hand somewhat trembling, in such sort, that being constrained, by force to
take the letter, the same force by weary means, did constrain him to sit
down, on the ground, without any farther power to the contrary: and when he
opened the letter, he knew it to be written by his Lidia: who with great
alteration of heart and mind, did read it, the which was as hereafter
follolloweth.

The Letter.
THe unfortunate Lidia, and thy mortal enemy Brenio, does send thee health,
although of her part there is no power to give it thee neither able to move her
self, for that in thy respect, she has it not, neither has she any hope
thereof. Oh Brenio, wherefore did thou consent, that so perfect and true love
which I bare to thee should be accounted vain, and would not perform the
faith which without asking in a very short time thou did grant unto me, oh
cruel Brenio, oh hard heart, is this the firm love that so fainedly thou
did profess to me, what is he that has been more unmerciful then thou
have been. There is no furious beast, Tiger, nor Lion, unto whom at their will
thou did deliver me, that with their unmerciful nails they might cruellye
entreat my flesh, but would have accompanied me with more pity, and have
helped me to lament my cruel destiny. Ah Brenio, the great pain which I
suffer will not consent to declare the unreasonable torments, troubles, and
sorrows the which for thee I have passed, so that I need not to refer it
unto them who does know it very well: but of one thing alone I will give thee
to understand, that in the end when thou did leave all alone, and at my
waking I could not find thee, my dolorous pain was so great, yt I did not
think to escape with my life. But my mishap, (which has been always unto me
contrary, and the more to increase my pain) was such, that my lamentation was
heard by a knight, who being moved with compassion, did ask of me the
occasion of all this my harm and grief, and when yt I had told him (whether
it was by motion of love, the which I had wholly given unto thee, or by the
overmuch compassion which he had of my pain) he brought me out of that
solitary place whereas thou did leave me, and carried me whereas* I made an
end of all my great pains and passions. Ah Brenio when I wrote these few
lines, my body was almost cold and without all strength, ready to yield up my
soul, which is (I know) to thee great contentment, and for that thou should
be satisfied of thy desire, I did determine to advertise thee, in giving thee
to understand of my desired death, thou being the only occasion thereof: Oh
Brenio, now are the Fa^es cutting of the third of my life asunder, and I can
give thee knowledge of no more. But yet I do desire thee by the true love
which I bare thee, yt thou will read these few lines with some sorrow: and here
of ye Gods I do desire, yt they do make thee to pass the ^ame evil which thou
have ben the occasion of unto me, till such time as it brings thee to die the
like death that for thee I now die. And if thou do desire to know any
farther of this matter, he which brings thee this can inform thee of the
whole state thereof, for that now I have no more time, neither my strength will
consent unto it.


The tears were in so great abundance which this sad and heavy knight did shed
in the time that he was a reading this dolorous letter, that he all to wet the
same, ye messenger likewise did not let to bear him company, and to solemn
his heaviness with so many more tears distilling from his eyes. The great
sorrow and lamentation was such and so much, that in a great space the one
could not speak unto the other, but afterward their pain being somewhat
appeased, Brenio began to speak and say. Oh messenger from her, with the
remembrance of whose wrong my soul is wounded, being undeservedly, of me evil
rewarded. Tell me for Gods love if thou do know where she is, show unto me
her abiding place, that I may go thither, and give a discharge of this my great
fault, in yielding my self to death: Oh cruel and without all love, answered
Don Eleno, what discharge can thou give unto her yt already through thy
cruelty is dead and buried: thou shall do much better to arise and take unto
thee thy armor, and defend thy self from him that will procure thy death, to
make satisfaction of the debt, yt she without any duty did pay. Is it
possible answered Brenio, that Lidia is dead: it is possible answered Eleno,
and she is dead, by the occasion of such a forsworn knight as thou art. This
penitent and pained knight when he understood the certainty of all this evil,
with a sudden and hasty fury stroke himself on the breast a great stroke
with his fist, and lifting his eyes unto the heavens in manner of exclamation
against his Gods, giving deep and sorrowful sighs, he threw himself to the
ground, and tumbled and wallowed from the one part unto the other, without
taking any ease, or having any power or strength to declare his inward pain
and grief the which at that time he felt, but with an inward lamentatio^,
which did torment his heart, he called continually upon Lidia, and with that
devilish fury wherein he was, he drew out his dagger, and lifting up the skirte
of his shirt of mayle, he thrust it into his body, and giving himself this
unhappy death, with calling upon Lidia, he finished his life. The Dacian knight
remained in a great confusion to see this sudden chance, and that in such
sort, that he could put no remedy therein, but with the great heaviness and
sorrow, that he received, he fell down in a sound, without any remembrance
of himself. The Page which Eleno brought with him, did then procure all
remedies that were possible for to bring him again unto his remembrance, and
labored to do it with great love, but yet for all yt he could do or procure,
there was no possibility of his recovery, til such time as Phoebus had made an
end of his journey, and that Diana had begun her government, the^ he began to
come a little to himself, and looking on the one side, and saw that Brenio lay
dead by his side, with a dolorous voice he said unto his page. Ah Fabio,
wherefore have thou procured to put remedy unto my body, and consented that it
should endure so terrible pain and evil, thou should have sufferd me to
have dyed, and not to have been the occasion that now I live dying, and having
no more power to speak, he held his peace. At this time he had great need of
the force and strength of his christian courage, for to assist him that he did
not that, which should cause him to bear company with this dead Brenio. His
Page Fabio did very much comfort him, and did procure by all means to give him
ease: but all that ever he could do did profit very little, or give any
contentment unto his pain, till such time as he heard a great noise of armed
knights, which was the occasion that he came unto himself, and for that he
would not be discovered, he put him self into the thickest of the bushes, and
with the help of Fabio; he carried Brenio, drawing him from the place where he
was, and covered him with boughs and leaves, till such time as they might have
opportunity to bury him, as hereafter you shall understand. So there he
continued all that night till the morning, with great sorrow and pain,
lamenting much his unhappy lot, in a place whereas he could not be discouerd or
heard, not for any fear that was in him, but only to have time to lament,
weep and bewail his unhappy fortune. Then at such time as the bright Apollo,
did spread abroad his golden beams, over all the fields and cragged
mountains, he did perceive that those which did lodge themselves nigh unto the
place whereas he was, did procure to depart, he let them go, without any desire
to know who they were, but rather being still, did let them pass forwards on
their way, procuring to put in execution his former intent. But first of all he
caused to unarm Brenio of his armor, the which was according unto his
passion, in color and all things, and as strong as a Diamond, and made by Art
Magic, with great lamentation he armed himself with them, and took also his
shield, which was all of a russet field, and in the midst thereof was put Cupide
with two faces, the one was very fair and bound with a cloth about his eyes,
and the other was made marvelous fierce and furious. He continued and was so
long in arming himself, that he heard a great number of Knights, which passed
along by the sides of the forest, and amongst them there was a dolorous
lamentation, which seemed to be of Ladies and Damsels, and it seemed that they
were forced and constrained against their wills, which moved the courage of
this Dacian, to desire to know what it was. And leaping upon his horse, his
Page took the horse of Brenio, which was very good, and with as little noise
as was possible, they went out of the forest into the high way, whereas they
might see all that which in the chapter following shall be told you.

How that Eleno went out of the forest to see the adventure of those Knights
which passed by the forest, and how he incountered with them, and of the
battle, that happened therevppon. Cap. 5.
AT such time as the clear Apollo had passed one part of his journey, ye
Dacian prince issued out of the forest, to see what it should be, that made all
that noise under the forest side. And there he discovered thirty Knights,
which rode before a chariot, that was drawn with four horses, and therein a
company of Ladies and damsels, apparailed with marvelous rich robes, making
great lamentation and sorrow: and in the midst amongst them, there was a very
fair Lady, who had before her two children: and before the Chariot rode a
Giant of a fierce and furious countenance mounted on a wonderful beast, and
after the same went another giant, not altogether so furious as the first, that
was mounted on a mighty horse: these made great have to travail forwards.
When this valiant Dacian saw this adventure, he was in a great confusion, for
that he found himself so lean and weak, yet for all that, the great valor
of his person, and courage of his heart, would not suffer any sluggishnesse,
but determined to set them at liberty, and to punish so great outrage, or else
to die in the demand. And with this determination he said. Let life suffer
the pain, and let not the honor be blotted with cowardnesse, and perusing
well his armor, he committed himself unto God, and issued out of the forest
with a swift pace, at such time as the Chariot with the great have that it
made, had passed by a good space, and setting spurs, unto his horse, he made
him to fly like the wind, and with a high voice he bad them tarry. At which
calling, the Giant that was hindermost looked back, and when he saw that it
was a Knight that called him, and that he came running toward him with great
swiftness, he said unto those that governed the Chariot. Go and keep on your
way, and let me alone to see what that unhappy creature would have: and he
turned about his horse, at such time as that warlike Dacian, was come nigh unto
him, the Giant said unto him: Knight what have is this that thou make. The
Dacian answered: It is to amend if I may this outrage which I suppose thou
do unto those Ladies, which thou do carry away with thee in the wagon.
The Giant smiling, and as it were, seeming to have him in derision, disdainfully
said. I do tell thee of a truth knight, that if I did not believe, that folly
does make thee to speak that which thou have uttered, thou might well take
me to be the vilest person in the world* to have so small courage, to put my
self before one alone Knight in this demand. The Dacian did well perceive that
these words proceeded of great pride and presumption, and without giving him
any answer, he drew out his sharp sword, and then without any more
tarrying, he stroke him upon his helm so great a blow, that it sounded like a
bell, and made him to decline his head down to his breast. But straight way he
had his payment for the same, for that the Giant laid hold on his great and
cutting sword, and with strange swiftness, he stroke him upon the fine and
hard helm, that he almost made him to loose his feeling. By which blow, this
courageous Eleno perceived, that it stood him in hand, not to be idle, and
having great fear, that in ye mean time while they made their battle, the
rest would go away with their pray, and then all his labor and travail should
be in vain, he let his shield hang at his back, and clasped his sword fast
with both his hands* and stroke him so furious a blow upon his helm, that the
strength thereof did little profit him; for that it was not able to make any
defense, but it was cut in pieces with the head, and the Giant fell dead to the
ground, and without any more tarying, he followed after the wagon, and did
procure to disturb them, that they should not go forwards on their way. So
all those yt went with the wagon, were alighted from their horses, ready to
imbarke themselves into a small bark which they tarried for, to carry them
unto a great and fair ship, which was there, a little farther from the shore.
This Dacian called with a loud voice, and said. Tarry, tarry, and do not
think, so much at your ease to carry away your pray, for that I hope first to
take away your lives, or else to be slain in their defense. And when they saw
and knew that it was the Knight that remained with the Giaunt, and seeing him
come in such order, they were all meruailously astonished. The other Giaunt which
was yet still upon his beast, and was not alighted, returned against him, more
furious than a Tiger, and uttering a thousand varieties, he asked where he
remained that made battle with him. Don Eleno said: Put at liberty these
Ladies which thou do carry away by force, and ask not for him: for he
wanting life, has finished all his evil deeds and works, and without
tarrying for an answer, he lift up his sword, all to be bathed with the
blood of the dead Giant, and stroke at him so terrible a blow, that he gave
him to understand very well, the strength of his mighty arm. The Giant who
felt the blow to be very strong drew out from his side, a broad and heavy
sword, and stroke at him such a blow, that almost it brought him to ye ground,
if it had not been for the great force, which he put in firming himself in his
stiroppes, which was the occasion that in a trice he settled himself again in
the saddle, and seeing himself so evil entreated he pressed toward him, and
began to lay on him so sharp and strong blows, that he made the sparks of
fire fly out of his armor, and although he was meruailously occupied in
striking of the Giant, yet did he not forget to have always an eye unto
Chariot whereas the captive Ladies were, to see if they did procure by any
means to do them harm or damage, and he saw that they went about to take
them out of the waggen, and to put them a land, for to imbarke them, which made
him to make more have in his battle, and knowing the strong enemy, that he
had before him, and enraged with that sudden sight, to see them imbarking, and
that if they should carry them to sea, then by no means he could neither
favor nor succor them, he received so great wrath, that he threw his shield
at his back and took his cutting sword in both his hands, and went unto the
Giant on his left side, and firming himself in his stirrops, he stroke him so
terrible a blow, that he made him to ^ull upon his beasts neck, without any
remembrance, and to void at his mouth and nose great abundance of blood, and
without any tarrying he spurred his horse and in great have he went toward
those knights that had those Ladies in keeping, and began to stir himself
amongst the^, in such sort, that when they remembered themselves to make
resistance, there was three of them slain, then all the rest joined themselves
together, and put back to back, and made a round circle, with their swords in
their hands to make their defense. At this time the prince Eleno had forgot the
great virtue which his horse had, but because he would not yt they should kill
him, he alighted from him, the which was the occasion that he put himself in
great travail and peril, notwithstanding with the great anger which he had,
he pressed in amongst them, and stroke and wounded them on every side, without
taking any rest, yt it was a wonder to see, and he so besturred and tossed his
cutting sword upon them that made resistaunce, yt he made them to know and
feel his great strength, although that they were chosen and valiant knights,
and they did not let to entreat him very evil, in such sort, that many times
they made him to stoop and feel the grief of their blows: notwithstanding
the courage and strength of Eleno was such, yt in a very short time he brought
twelve of them to the ground before him. The mariners which saw the great
fury that was in that one knight, in great have put of their bark from the
waters side, and with the fear which they had likewise to be there slain,
returned unto their ship, forcing their bark with the great strength of
their arms, striking in the water with their oars, and when they came to the
ship they called aloud giving and making a great noise unto the rest of the
knights that were in the ship, which was to the number of twenty, that they
should come and give aid and succor to those which were a land, for that
some of them were slain, and some very sore hurt, and other some standing
still in their defense. In the mean time this furious Dacian did so behave
himself amongst them, and in such sort, that quickly he had cleared himself
of all those, if at ye present time ye Giant which was before astonished and
beside himself, had not come whereas they were, for being come again unto
himself, and saw ye great peril wherein he was brought, I cannot nor am not
able to declare here the great and unmeasurable fury the which he had, and
it did the more increase in him when he saw so many knights slain and dead,
only by the power and strength of that one knight: his wrath was so great,
that he began to cry out against his Gods, and alighted from his beast, and
took his sword into his hand, and with a furious pace he went toward whereas
the Prince was, but when the valiant Eleno saw him, he could not but think
that he should pass great trouble with him, notwithstanding for that he saw
no other thing but death amongst those barbarous and rude people, he did
determine to sell his life very dear, and had good regard unto the blows
which the Giant should strike at him, and in the best wise he could he cleared
himself from them. In this sort went this valiant knight maintaining his
quarrel, and damnifieng his enemies when opportunity did serve, and always
had a good hope to clear himself of that battle, although that there were
come a land three and twenty other knights, against whom he made his defense at
his pleasure, for that they feared his terrible blows, and had hurt and wounded
them in many parts, although the wounds were not very great, for that he could
never fasten on them one blow to his contentment. At this time there came
another Giant a shore out of the bark, which had remained in the ship, and
with him came other twenty knights, and thirty men with hatchets and other
weapons, which made great have to come a land. At such time as this warlyke
Dacian was entangled and in battle with the other, this giant came before all
ye rest and stroke this knight behind him so terrible a blow that it made him
to bow both his knees to the ground, but his mighty courage which in such like
chances always recovered strength with great have and a valiant heart, he
put himself a foot again, and looking about him to see who it was that so
tormented him, he saw that it was a mighty and terrible Gyaunt, who with a
great clubbe was ready to give him the second blow, the Prince with good
aduisement did put himself a part from the force thereof, and made him to
spend his blow in vain, and took his sword in his hands, and pressed unto
the Giant before he could defend himself, and stroke him such a terryble blow
upon the right knee, that he cut it a sunder in the midst, and the heavy and
fierce Giant fell dead to the ground. At this time all those that came out of
the ship pressed on him for to kill him, that by reason of their thick and
mighty blows, so many together, he was constrained to fall down to the
earth, but when he saw himself in this great peril, he did procure to kill
all that ever he could of them that put themselves before him, which was the
occasion that he had space to arise up again on foot, and seeing himself in
this great danger, he began to call upon Jesus Christ, committing unto him his
soul, and besought him that he would take mercy on it, and therewith he
pressed unto his enemies, and with double force he laid on them on every
side, but all was in vain for him to make resistance, for that the company
was so great that did compass him about, striking at him as though they were
desperate men, so that this good knight was constrained to retire unto the sea
side, and to put himself into the water up to the wast, whereas he made his
back sure, that they could not come behind him, and there he made his defense
somewhat with less travail against them that did procure to offend him: the
Giant which saw so great a slaughter of men committed by one knight, with a
furious voice returned unto the people, and reviled them, calling them
cowardes, and cursing himself for that he would accompany himself with so
naughty and vile a generation, and said unto them: Enter into the water and
follow him, for it is but one knight that is before you. And therewith he put
himself into the water, then all the rest for very shame were constrained to
do the like. At this time this valiant knight saw himself in the greatest
danger that ever before that time in all his life he had been in, and made not
any reckoning to live longer, yet nevertheless he thought to sell his life
very dear, with the death of all such as he might possibly fasten one blow
upon: But at this instant came unto his mind his beloved Lidia, and he said
with a deep and profound sigh. Ah my Lidia, what great delight do I feel in
my self, here to make my end, and to set me at liberty of so great sorrow
and care, which I do suffer in not seeing thee: but therewith remembering
himself, he said. O Lord what is this, what have I said? I do find my self
at the point to be slain, and do I now call to remembrance her, that I know
is in the depth of the earth. Am not I a Christian? It is better for me to
return unto thee my God, unto whom I do commit my soul: and Lord, for thy
mercies sake, do not look upon this my weakness, but according unto thy
great mercy take pity upon me. And although he was weary, yet was not his
valiant arms at this time unoccupied, but rather with a more strength he did
procure to defend himself, working such wondrous feats, that seemed even
impossible, but unto them that saw it. And he recovered unto himself a new
courage and force, in such sort, that the water of the Sea did give
testimonial of his great prowess, for that unto more then ten of them which
did pursue him, he gave the sea for their sepulchar: and if it had not been
for the Gyaunt that did trouble him very much, he would before he had been
slain, made that very few of the rest should have remained, for to brag
themselves of their victory. But I promise you, he was in such plight, that of
very feebleness he was forced to make his strength. This wearied Eleno was in
this sort as you have heard in great weakness, and void of all humane
strength, although he lacked no courage in his heart. At which time there
arrived in great have a bark at ye shore side, in the which came one alone
Knight, armed with very rich armor, who (if you do remember) was the valiant
Rosicleer, that after he had made an end of that perilous battle at Lira,
in the which he lost the company of that good Knight Brandimardo, he full of
sorrow and grief, returned unto the sea, whereas by fortune he found his
light and inchaunted bark, which with her accustomed swiftnes did carry him,
whereas he saw was made a fearful battle, the which was this that here
before I have told you that the afflicted Prince did make. So that when
Rosileer saw that one alone Knight with so great courage did make resistance
against so many, who did molest him without all pity, it moved in him a
desire to help him, which straight way he put in ure, and leping a shore with
his accustomed courage, he went toward the place whereas they were in
battle, and having his sword fast in both his hands, he pressed in amongst
those vile people, and when he saw that he which did most trouble the Knight,
was that furious and devilish Giant, he stroke him such a blow upon his left
shoulder ye harness and body altogether he cut down to the wast, and made him
fall dead into the water where he was. Yet his fury rested not with this, but
striking about him, at four blows he brought four Knights to their end. And
as the watered herbs or flowers does recreate themselves when they are
covered with the beams of the son of Tona, in such sort did the Prince Don
Eleno rejoice at the coming of this new succor unlooked for, and therewith
recovering new strength, with one leap he sprung out of the water, and put
himself by the side of Rosicleer, and laid upon his enemies, with great and
mighty blows. The worthy Rosicleer being moved with the great outrage that
those vile people did, wrought such valiant wonders, that it was to be
meruailed at, and unhappy might he account himself, who chanced to receive a
blow at his hand. They made so great have in cutting, wounding and killing of
those vile people, that leaving some dead, and other sore wounded, others
running away to deliver themselves from the fury of their unmerciful blows,
these knights were free and at liberty of all their former peril. This valyant
Eleno would have gratified the Prince for his good sucour and aid, and went
toward him for the same effect: and when he would have spoken, he knew that
it was Rosicleer his Cousin, by the device that he had in his shield which was
Cupide painted in it, and therewith in great have he pulled off his healme,
and said.

Worthy Lord and cousin, if the device of your shield, and the great strength
of your person do not deceive me, you are Rosicleer son unto the Emperor
Trebatio, my good uncle. The Greek was very attentive unto the words that
Eleno spoke and when he saw his face discovered and his his helm off, it
seemed unto him, that he saw the proportion of his own natural face, as
though he were looking of him self in a glass, and he received great
contentment at ye sight of him, although he did very much marvel to see him
in that place, and therewith he pulled off his healme, and discovered that
severe and fair face, with great delight unto all them that did behold him,
and it was the more to be rejoiced at, for that they were the one so like the
other (that except it were for the little bearde that Rosicleer had) not
without great difficulty they could know, which was the one, and which was the
other. The two Knights could not persevere in their communication, for that they
were disturbed by the lamentable noise of those Ladies which were prisoners,
for that some of them had their hands bound, and some both hands and feet, and
they cried out for succor and help to those Knights, and for that they did
see them to prolong the time, they made ye more have in crying for their
liberty, at whose pitiful cries they were constrained to go unto them, and
to cut asunder the cords wherewith they were bound. The great joy which they
received when they saw themselves at liberty, I do refer it unto the
judgment and consideration of them, which have been themselves in captivity,
and afterward obtained like liberty. The Lady which had the two children in
her lap, seeing her self at liberty, with the great joy thereof, she changed
a new color, so that the blood that entered into her face, caused her to
appear to be very fair, and with a severe Majesty, she did surrender unto
them great thanks, for the goodness, which by them they had recovered. This
fair Lady did not let in the mean time whilst they were talking to behold
the countenance of the two knights and in her own imagination did consider,
that she saw the natural proportion and gesture of him, whom she carried
pictured in her heart: and suspecting what it should be, she gave very
attentive ear unto the words which Rosicleer uttered, remaining with as great
delight of his courtesy and discretion, as when she was whollye yielded unto
the love of his father: and for that in the end of all their talk Rosicleer
did demand of her who she was, she could not in any wise do other then tell
them, and with great courtesy she answered and said. Worthy knights, in whom
the Gods has made so great equality and likeness, you shall understand, that
I am Queen and Lady of this Island called Tinacria, who without all good
fortune was mocked by ye false Emperor of Grecia. Rosicleer, when he heard his
father so evil spoken off, could not take it in good part, yet remembering
himself that it was a woman, and that she spoke it with anger, he therefore
accordingly did frame himself to answer her, and said. High and mighty Lady,
there is no reason that I do answer you unto those words, which your troubled
heart has pronounced against him, that I am sure, and do right well know, in
your service would loose his life, and not he alone, but also all his sons
and subjects, for the great good will y^ to you we have, as it does appear in
this aid and succor which now we have made. And if you do well consider
(high and mighty Lady) the great service which the noble Knight of the Sun,
and son unto the Emperor my father, being accompanied with the Prince Don
Eleno our Cousin, who is here now present before thee. If as I say, it were
well considered, the service which they have done unto you, it were great reason
and with desert, that the error of the father should be forgiven, if he have
committed any. And if these be not sufficient to make satisfaction, take in
company with ye rest, yt which now at this present, was showed unto thee,
whereof part of it was done likewise by his son Rosicleer. And if it be so,
that still your heart be hardened with the desire to take reuengement. Behold
here Lady my head yt which I do yield into thy power, that thou may
therewith set the father at liberty, from thy fury.

The Queen had her eyes fixed on ye Prince, and without having any power to
make resistaunce against so terrible a blow: she did show very plainly and
clearly what she felt in her, and giving a great sigh which proceeded from ye
bottom of her heart, she said: Alas for me, O fortune, can this be true,
that that which I received for glory, is converted into a troublesome pain.
So she said no more, for that she was disturbed by a great noise which a
damsel made, by reason of two men, who when they saw y^ Rosicleer and Don
Eleno were occupied in talking with the queen, they went running to put
themselves into the bark of the Prince, and procured to put it from ye shore,
thinking to save their lives in rowing away with the Bark. And when Rosicleer
saw them, not having any time to put on his helm, he carried it in his hand,
and leapt out of the waggen, as light as a Heart amongst the cragged
mountains, and in a trice he was with them, yet the strength of those two men
was not sufficient to launch the bark from the shore, the which Rosicleer had
forgotten, and for covetousness that he would not loose his horse, he went to
disturb them, and leapt into the Bark: he was no sooner within it, when that
with his accustomed swiftness the bark began to move it self from the
shore, the which when these two men saw, they would have leapt into the
water, but Rosicleer caught fast hold of the one, and staide him, but the
other he could not, for that it was so quickly done. Whereas we will leave them
for to tell you of his cousin, who when he saw that the Bark so sodeinely did
depart away, I cannot here declare the great heaviness and sorrow that he
received, because he could not delight himself in his good company. The like
sorrow made the Queen (although she did procure to hide her desire) yet her
sorrow was great, and because Don Eleno was the first that did begin the
battle for to set them at liberty, they did honor and worship him as a
divine thing. And heerewith they determined to return unto the City, whereas
I will leave them with the success of the queens imprisonment, and the
occasion thereof, for that hereafter I will declare it, being now constrained
to tell you of the worthy deeds of the Mauritanian.

How when the valiant Mauritanian had slain the Tartarian Zoylo, he put on the
armor of Bramarant, for that he would not be known, and of all that happened
therein. Chap. 6.
YOU do well remember when that the furious young man Brufaldoro fled away
from the battle, not for any fear that he had, but for anger to find
himself in place whereas he could get but little honor, like a whirle wind
he crossed over all those plains, and put himself into the thickest of the
forest, travailing in vain his faultlesse horse, and never rested till he
came unto the mighty great river the which before he had passed, and there he
alighted off from his horse, and for to refresh himself he pulled off his
healme, and took water with his hands and washed his face, and drunk
thereof, refreshing himself, and as he found himself all alone, there came
unto him many thoughts, amongst all he was greatly grieved at the remembrance
of that which had past, and the more, for that a woman was the cause of all
that harm, and with great anger giving terrible sighs, he began to curse, not
alone the hour of his birth, but also the queen of Tinacria, accounting women
to be all the occasion thereof: likewise he considered the great travail and
sorrow that most knights do pass for their respects. At that time Phoebus
began to withdraw himself into his accustomed lodging, and hiding himself in
the occidentall parts, and therewith drew on the dark and tenebrous night,
which was the occasion that his pain did the more increase, and caused him to
say: Oh cruel and vile women, the causers and authors of all evil, what do
you see in your selves, that you do make so much thereof, I see that you are
good for no other thing, but to cause murders and great treasons. It is
possible that you do esteem so of your selves, and the occasion of your high
looks is, for that we men be borne of you: if you do well conside^ thereof,
for the very same occasion you should abate your great pride and pranking
iestures, for that we do plainly see and perfectly know, that from and out of
an unprofitable and pricking ^^^lke does spring and grow a fair and pleasant
rose. Also from that venomous Basiliske, do they not take a stone of (...)
innumerable value: and this believe of a certeintie, that the euyllest men does
all proceed from you: Oh wretches, when you see your opportunity, what is the
knight that can make resistaunce, but is straight overcome by you so vile and
base creatures, here I do swear to you by all the Gods, that I do not honor
you, neither will I reverence you, although that Mahomet do command me, for
that I have him in estimation as vile and base and of no value, and for the
great hatred which I do bear unto you, if I did think that my heart should
be subject unto you, I would pull it out of my body with great cruelty, to
punish my self and it for committing so great foolishness. The sighs of this
Moore were so great and terrible, that all the woods and mountains did sound
thereof. O thou outrageous and hardy Pagan, how strong and stout do thou
show thy self, thou shall quickly know and have thy payment for these thy
reuiling words, in subiecting thy self unto them, that now thou do
publish for false. O Ladies and Damsells ask reuengement of so cruel an
enemy, that with so many reasons does revile you all to naught. So with these
lamentations the which I have told you the Pagan passed away the night till
the morning, that Apollo began with his glistering beams to cover all the
earth, the which being seen by the Pagan, with a trise he arose up, and took
his horse for to prosecute his journey begun, and lifting up his eyes toward
the heavens, he did discover hanging upon a high and mighty pine apple tree
which was nigh him the armor of Bramarant, which was put there for a
remembrance, as has been told you in the first part of this history. The
armor had all lost their color, yet for all that, it did show the great
value of them, and looking about, he saw the Epitaph which the two brethren
had made there. And understanding the reason thereof, it gave him a farther
desire to take them down, without respecting the harm that might thereof
proceed, not making any reckoning of ye words that were there manifested. And
for that he might the better bring to pass his pretense, he unarmed himself,
and climbed upon the tree, and took them from the place where they were and
brought them down, and when he was below, and saw the armor to be so good, he
armed himself with them, and when he lacked no more to put on but his healme,
he heard ye voice of a knight which said: Be not so hardy thou knight as to
undo this Tropheo, erected by the Greek Princes, and look well to thy self
for thou shall die for the same. The Moore at the noise which he made, east his
head on the one side and saw that he that spoke those words was a well set and
armed knight, but for all this he did not let to make an end of arming
himself, and without setting his foot into the stirop he leapt into the
saddle, and setteling himself therein he went toward the demaunder with his
sword in his hand. You shall understand, that he which did threaten him was
the Tartarian Zoylo, who if you do remember departed in great have from the
amorous Tigliafa, and unawares entered into this wilderness, and by reason of
his weariness in making so great have in his travail, it caused him to be
very dry, and having great desire to drink, he crossed here and there in the
forest, at last there appeared before him a very ancient old man, who had
his beard and hair all white with age, who did succor him with water, and
gave him a great cup full, and with the great thirst that Zoylo had he drank
well thereof, till such time as he felt himself satisfied, and returned the
cup again unto him, and when he thought to have given thanks for his courtesy
showed, he was vanished clean out of his sight, so that he saw him no more.
For you shall understand that it was ye wise Lirgandeo, which brought ye cup
full of water from ye fountain of Merlin, who understanding by his enchantments
ye thirst Zoilo had, brought him of ye water, for so mitigate his dryness,
increasing in him a new desire to the love of Tigliafa. He had scant made an
end of drinking when that he felt in himself a new thought of love, and
repenting himself of all hatred past, being overcome by ye water, and fixed
in that new love, he determined to return again unto Constantinople, and
crave pardon of the Princess, but that cruel Atropos who had his blow ready,
would not grant unto him any time for the same, neither was the wise Lyrgandeo
able to deliver him from the death. And so it fell out, that when he would
have made his return to Constantinople, he chanced to come to that place
whereas Bramarant did kill himself, and whereas Brufaldoro did disarme
himself, and armed himself again with the armor of the Tropheo. And the
valiant Tartarian knowing the great harm that would proceed unto them which
did procure to come unto the Tropheo, he would give aduisement unto him that
was so bold to give the attempt, yt he might understand, that it would be
demanded at his hand. And so he did advise Brufaldoro in that sort as you have
heard, who without any aunswering came against him with his sword in his hand,
inuiting him to mortal battle. Zoylo who saw his determination, did procure
to defend himself and offend his enemy. Oh my Muse, that now I had so much
discreation and eloquence for to set out and declare the great harm that this
day happened in this unfortunate Forest. This valiant Tartarian when his
enemy came unto him, stroke him so terrible a blow upon the visour of his
helm that with the fury thereof he made sparkles of fire to issue out thereof
with great abundaunce, and to bow down his head upon his breast. The Pagan
did return unto him his salutation, and stroke him such a blow upon his
helm, that with the great noise thereof it made a sound in all the mountains.
Now began between them a marvelous and fearful battle, at the great noise
whereof, Fortune willing to use her extremity, for to amplify a farther
evil, caused the Princess. Tigliafa in the company of her Ladies and
Damsells to come unto that place whereas these knights were, in ^attaile, and
straight way she did know her well-beloved Tartarian and seeing him in so
dangerous a battle, she was in great anguish with her self. These Knights
thought on no other thing, but either of them procured to bring his adversary
to his end, striking at each other such terrible blows, and with so great
fury, that many times it made either of them to loose his feeling: and both
seeing the great force of one another, were meruailously incensed with anger.
This fierce Tartarian threw his shield at his back, that with more force he
might strike and hurt his enemy, and therewith gave him so strong a blow upon
his helm, that all astonished he forced him to fall upon the crupper of his
horse, who carried him a great space round about the field, without any
feeling. But when he came again unto himself, this fierce Mauritanian settling
himself in his saddle, stroke at ye Tartarian so terrible a blow, that if it
had chanced on him, it would have turned him to much grief, but with great
discretion he cleared himself thereof, in such sort, that it was stricken in
vain, and with great lightness, he returned, and stroke the Mauritanian so,
that he made him once again to fall upon the crouper of his horse all
astonyed, and there appeared by the visour of his helm, the abundaunce of
blood that issued out of his mouth, and his horse being grieved with that blow,
stooped with his forefeete to the ground, and being amazed, with great fury he
rose up and with his great kicking and flinging backwards, he did defend, that
the Tartarian could not come nigh to hurt ye Mauritanian, which was the
occasion that he could not have any time for to give him the second blow,
although he never left to follow him, to see if he could make an end of ye
enterprise, which would have made much of his part, not to have given way that
this fierce Mauritanian should have returned to himself so quickly which was
in so short time, and with so great anger, that the smoke which came from his
mouth, seemed like a mist about his helm, so that almost it could not be
seen. Then this furious devil set spurs to his horse, and blaspheming
against his Gods, having his mortal sword very fast in his hand, he ran
toward his enemy, who without any fear of his fury, went forth to receive
him, and when they met together, they discharged their blows at once, but it
fortuned that the Mauritanians blow did first fasten, with so great strength,
that for all the helm which Zoylo had was so good, it was not sufficient to
make defense, but that with the devilish fury wherewith it was discharged, it
bended, in such sort, that it brake all to pieces the scalpe of that unhappy
Tartarian, wherewith he gave a terrible fall to the ground. So when the Pagon
saw his enemy on the earth, with a loud voice he said: Now shall not thou
be he that shall disturb me, that I carry not this armor with me. This
sad and heavy Princess when she saw her sweet and well-beloved friend on
the earth, with great suspicion what was happened, began to weep bitterly.
And as a Lion who seeing before her her young Lion evil entreated of the
hunter: even so she leapt from her Palfraie and ran unto her well-beloved
Zoylo, and with great speed she pulled off the healme from that wounded head,
and with a fair linen cloth she wiped of the blood from his mortal face, and
when she was certain that it was he that cost her so dear the seeking, and
that he was without life, with furious madness she tore her attire from her
head, and all to rent her golden hair, tearing it in pieces, and returned
again and wiped that infernal face, making such sorrowful lamentation, that
whosoever had seen her would have been moved to have had compassion. Then
she took the head between her hands, and did procure without doing it any
harm to lift it up, and to put it upon her lap, and seeing for all this
that there was no moving in him, she joined her face unto the face of that
unfortunate Zoylo, and with sorrowful words she said: Oh my love, open thine
eyes and behold me, open them, I say, and look upon this thy Lady most
unfortunate, and while life remains give me some contentment, if fortune be
so favorable: Oh my Lord, strengthen thy self to look upon me, wherein I
shall receive such delight, that willinglye I will bear thee company: Ah
Zoylo and my only love, seeing that in former time my tears were not
sufficient to reclaim thee in any part, make me satisfaction for the great
travail which I have taken in seeking thee out, come now in death and inioye
this thy unfortunate lover, and dye not without seeing me, open these eyes and
behold me, give me I pray thee some comfort: Ah my Lord, I know not whether
in seeing me thou shall receive pain, or no, for that at any time thou never
delightedst in any thing that was mine, but now I will gratify thee in dying
with thee, and seeing that in thy life time I could not rejoice in thee, nor
have any company with thee, I will now in thy death seek thee, and
peradventure thou will now have more pity on me. The Princess sorrowful
lamentations and great weepings were such, that she almost sounded. But this
discomforted Lady coming to her self and saw that her love made no
appearaunce of life, she began again to wipe his face, for that it was
again all to be bathed with blood, and with her white hand she felt his eyes
and mouth and all his face and his head, till such time as she chanced to put
her hand on the mortal wound, and when she knew that there was all the
harm, she held her hand still, and looking on him whether he moved or no,
with the great fear which she had that he would die, without giving her any
comfort to speak unto her, she made a marvelous and great lamentation, and
cried out with terrible shrikes, the which did augement much heaviness and
sorrow in them which were in company with the Princess, and she said. Ah my
love, how many troubles and great travails have I passed in seeking thee, by
mountains and hills, by valleys, wild fields and high ways, watering them
with my amorous tears, always demanding for thee, and always in vain
calling thee, yet was I never desolate of the true love which I bare unto thee:
Oh how many times in calling for thee, have I been answered by the ecko, which
was unto me great dolor and grief, and now that fortune has brought me into
the same place whereas thou art, for to recreate and rejoice my self with thy
beutie, the same fortune would that it should be for the more increasing of my
dolor and grief, in finding thee in this sort, as now thou art. Oh cruel
Fortune, I have not deserved to be thus ingratefully used at thy hands: for
when I thought to be clear of all sorrow and trouble, now I find my self
most afflicted therewith. Ah my Lord, seeing that in thy life time thou gave
me so bitter and evil a life, for that thou did hate and abhor me, now in
thy death give me some comfort. Open these sweet eyes and behold me, lift up
this wounded head and give me some comfort before thou dyest. Ah Zoylo my joy,
if ever thou did bear me any love, it is now time to give me to understand
thereof, before thy soul depart from thy body, and in saying these lamentable
words, she was constrained to hold her peace, for that she saw that this
wounded Tartarian recovered some strength: who opened his eyes, and when he
saw himself in the arms of her, who at that time he so much loved, and
before by force of inchauntment he hated, he suddenly arose up, and recovering
strength he sat himself on the ground, and cast his arms about the white
neck of the Princess, and they joined their faces the one with the other,
distilling betwixt them many salt and bitter tears, in such sort, that it
would have moved the wild beasts unto compassion, and with a feeble and weak
voice this unfortunate Prince said: Ah my Lady and mistres, let me recreate
and comfort my self in inioyeng this thy mouth, the time that I shall remain
alive, and before that my soul does depart the company of this my body: give
me my Lady some comfort, do not make any excuse, although without all reason,
I have been pitilesse unto thee, in making thee to travail with great sorrow,
seeking him, yt because he would not see thee fled always in shunning thee,
and now I come to desire thee. Here must you show me in what estimation you
had me in, in giving me succor, before that I do leave thee in this
wilderness alone, with my dead body cold and wan: Oh my love give me a
thousand kisses, let me only have this delight, for the little time I have to
tarry, and afterward I desire thee, to give my body his sepulchar. This sad and
discomforted Lady answered: Ah Zoilo, what do ask of me, what would
that I should give thee, I always was thine, I have nothing of mine own, I am
all thine, it were now a strange thing to begin a new to love thee, for all
that ever I could give thee, I gave it thee long ere this, oh my love, why
do thou not understand this: alas what shall I say, I that am without all
good fortune, for now I see that thy time draws on, and that my contentment,
joy, and comfort is very short: Ah my Lord, do thou request of me to give
thy body a Sepulcher: well, I see that it is requisite to seek some to give
it unto us both. And without strength to proceed any farther in speeches, she
kissed the face of her well-beloved and so long desired Zoilo, with great sobbing
and sighs making within her self a terrible conflict, tarrying for the answer
of her well-beloved friend, who with no less pain and anguish of death said: Ah
my Lady and mistres, I do know that thou were always mine, and I thine. That
which I will now desire of thee, is, for that I was beloved of thee in my life
time, that now in my death I may be favored of thee. Oh cruel love, oh what a
wish is this, a case never the like heard of before, that I should desire the
death of her that so long time has travailed and taken pains and sorrows
with terrible weepings and sighs for my sake. Ah my mistres, how happy should
I be, that thus embracing one in the others arms we might depart together: Oh
what a happy death would it be, oh sweet Fortune, I have no other grief with
me but to leave thee behind me: Oh unhappy that I am, I never determined to
desire thy death, but now, and only for that I would not leave thy company.
The Princess being very much troubled with grief and sorrow, answered him
and said: Oh my love, therein take thou neither grief nor care, for here. I
do promise thee by the great love that I do bear unto thee, that if death
do show himself any thing contrary unto me, that I will procure it with
mine own hands, for that the Gods will not consent that I should live and
thou die, therefore I say, that if he do contrary me, I will give thee
this contentment, for that without thee I shall find here no joy nor comfort
at all for me, neither yet any ease of this my great grief, so that I shall
think it for the best to loose all my joy, and now I do find in my self
that death will be my friend. Ah my sweet love and Lord, join thy face unto
mine, let us kiss together, and let us make our departure both together. The
Prince being troubled with the anguish of his hasty death, said: Here I do
desire thee my Tigliafa, by ye firm and faithful love which thou do bear
me, not to consent that I be the occasion, that with a cruel death thou do
finish thy life, but to sustain and maintain it so long as the Gods does
permit the same, and when that I am dead (which shall be very quickly) let me
receive this favor at thy hands, that thou would vouchsafe to give a
Sepulcher unto this my body, for with great ease and comfort shall I depart,
seeing that I die in the arms of my Lady and mistres, and a great deal more
comfort shall I receive if I knew of a certainty that thou would perform
this, that I do crave and desire at thy hands: Oh my love, do not deny this
my supplication, and for that I am certified that thou will perform the same,
here I take my leave of thee, farewell, the Gods preserve thee, and take me to
their mercies. And when he said these words, he inclined his neck upon the
face of the Princess. When this sorrowful Lady saw that the soul had got
the victory and departed from the body, she kissed the mouth of the dead
body, and giving deep and dolorous sighs, she began a marvelous and
heavy lamentation, calling her self unhappy and unfortunate, and laid her
self upon the dead body, cursing her self so that it was lamentable to
^eare. All her Damosells (who did bear her company in that great sorrow)
when they saw their Lady in a sound, they took the healme of the dead
knight, and brought water in it from the River side, and in throwing of it in
her face, and all to be bathed her therewith, they brought her again unto her
remembrance, who began a new to make great lamentation, and to bewail her
ill fortune, uttering words of great dolor and grief, which proceeded from
the bottom of her heart, and said: Ah my good friend, what small benefit
have I received for all my travail and pain, the which I have suffered in
seeking of thee, and now in finding of thee it is the more for my grief, for
that I came to see thee die: Ah most unhappy that I am, where was I when I
saw descend upon thee that mortal sword? Whereon was my thought? Wherefore
did I stand still, and did not with great lightness make resistaunce against
that terrible blow? And if my strength would not have served me, yet at the
least I should have borne thee company: Ah you furious beasts, that now are
hid in your dens and deep caves, where are you now? Why do you not come
and take pity of my grief, and put remedy therein, in taking away my life,
for in so doing you shall show your selves pitiful, for that I do abhor
this dolorous life. Yet she did not forget the promise the which she made unto
her well-beloved Zoylo, which was the occasion that she did somewhat cease her
lamentation. And taking unto her self more courage then her dolorous grief
did consent unto. With the help of her Damselles, she put the dead body under
that great and mighty Pine apple tree, where the armor did hang, commanding
some of those that were with her, that they should go unto those villages that
were nigh at hand, to cause some people to come thither, that they might with as
great speed as was possible, make a very sumptuous piece of work, in the
which they should bury the dead body of Zoylo, the which was the occasion
that in Constantinople they did know of the death of this unhappy knight, and
when the Emperor and all those that were in the court did know of it, they
were meruaylous sorrowful for the same, for that he was well-beloved of them
all. That same day came likewise news to the Court of the restoring again of
the kingdom of Lyra, which cost the life of the Prince Brandimardo, which was
the occasion that they made no triumph nor rejoicing of that great victory,
but rather a double lamentation for the death of the Prince.

The Duchess did then provide for her departure, as it was determined,
leaving the Court in great heaviness The death of the Prince Zoylo was published
all about, and the occasion thereof, insomuch that it came unto the knowledge
of the Emperor Alphebo of Trapisond, which was the occasion of great grief in
the Emperor: but he did dissemble it in the best wise he could, with intent to
revenge the same. Whereas we will leave them until time shall serve: and I
will also omit at this time the great work which ye princes Tigliafa caused to
be made, for that here I will tell you what the Pagan Brufaldoro did.

How the fierce Brufaldoro, having spoken evil of women, and of them that are
lovers, was taken in the snares of love with a Lady that he met, after that
he finished the battle with Zoylo. Cap. 7.
ALl the day after that Brufaldoro had finished the battle with Zoylo, he
travailed through the thickest of the forest, being very wearye of the
troublesome journey, till such time as the dark night drew on, and what with
werines, and with the great desire he had to eat which did trouble him very
much, he was constrained to alight from his horse by the rivers side, whereas
he remained till such time as the morning came, and rising on foot for to
begin to take his journey, being half amazed in beholding the great calm and
quietness, which was in the river, and the little noise which it made, by
reason of ye great depth thereof in that part, upon a sudden in the midst of
the river he saw that the waves did increase and arise up, like as though it
had been taken with a whirlwinde or tempest, which caused the water to make a
great noise, and being very desirous to see what was the occasion of that
great and sudden change in the water, he beheld that it was a Nymph, which
appeared in his sight from under the water, who did show her self to the
breasts, in discouring them unto him, and her face was so fair, that in his
life, he had not seen the like, and the whiteness of her flesh was such, that
the snow in comparison to her, was obscure and dark. The Pagan received no
alteration at this sudden sight, but the Nymph with a marvelous sweet and
delicate voice, began to sing these few verses following.

WHo thinks himself at freedom most of all,
and least esteems of Lady Venus fire:
Let him not boast, for he may soonest fall,
and quickly feel the fury of her ire.
Her blinded son such sudden shafts lets fly,
That freest hearts are first inthrald thereby.
There is not one which may himself defend
by strength nor wit, from mighty Cupides dart:
For that unseen he does his arrows send,
and vperceiude, with pain does pearce the heart.
Bereauing wholly all delight and joy.
Leaving behind, distress and great annoye.
The wonted weal He into woe does turn
of him, that once despised has his power:
His cold affection He does cause to burn,
and turns his sweet to most detested sower.
Triumphing most with terror to torment
The man, that erst against his will was bent.
When she had made an end of her song, without any more tarrying, with a
furious force, she threw her self into the water again, from whence she came,
leaving the Pagan much amazed: but by reason that the force of his stomach was
such, he determined to let it pass, and to think no more thereof, believing
that it was some inchauntment, and having his heart at liberty, with a light
courage, without putting his foot in the stirrup, he leapt upon his light
horse, and laying the bridle upon his neck, he let him go at his own
liberty, whether he would, without governing him. So his horse brought him
into a great plain, where a far off he discovered an armed Tent pitched,
which seemed to be fair and rich, and by it upon the green grass, there lay
four great Giants, who had in the midst among them, a very fair Damsel, who
was very heavy and sorrowful, leaning her cheek upon her hand. The Pagan
being nothing afraid of the Giants, did keep his way, till such time as he
came whereas the Giants were laid, and he came so nigh, that he might see the
face of the Damsel, which seemed not to be any humane creature, by reason of
her excellent beauty, with her gold yeolow hair dispersed all upon her
back, and her Lilly white hand whereon she leaned her cheek, discovering her
fair face, with her eyes shut, which showed her well set brows, from under
which, distilled many toares which seemed to be oriental pearls, dispersed
upon her fair and white face, and sundry times giving deep and sorrowful
sighs, which declared the great pain and grief that she did suffer. The
Pagan when he saw her great beauty and fairness, upon a sudden his heart
wounded with the cruel dart of Cupide, in such sort, and with so great fury,
that nothing could give him ease thereof, but only death: wherewith he
straight remembered, that which of late he heard the Nymph to sing, and
considered within himself, how her words and threatenings chanced to fall out
true, which caused him to give a terrible sigh, whereat one of the Giants did
awake, and setting himself upon the ground, he said. How have thou been so
hardy, that thou dare to put thy self before us, and without any fear of
our great strength, thou ^ast showed signs and tokens of love. At these words
which the Giant spoke, this Lady did open her eyes, and when she saw ye Pagan,
she could not refrain her self so much to hold her peace, but that she must
needs give a sigh, whereat this fierce Moore was fully certified that she was
forced by those Giants, and with that thought he said.

Gyaunt, my deeds shall bear witness of these thy proud words: therefore,
for that the time shall not pass away, and be spent in reasonings, one thing I
do demand of thee, whether this sorrowful and weeping Lady goes with you,
of her own proper good will, or else constrained by your force and violence.
The Gyaunt with great pride put himself on foot, and in lacing and making
fast his helm, he said. My sword shall wholly and fully certify thee, of all
that which thou do demand, and in speaking these words, the one pressed
toward the other. But the Pagan for that he would not that he should kill his
horse, was constrained to put himself somewhat on the one side, and lighting
from the saddle, he left his horse alone, and laid hold upon his sword,
wherewith his enemy stroke at him a mighty and terrible blow, who with a
strange lightness caused it to be stricken in vain, in stepping on the one
side, and therewith he closed with the Giant, and threw at his breast so
terrible and strong a foyne, that his armor was not sufficient for to make
resistaunce, but that the fury thereof must be executed, and pierced him
thorough unto the back, wherewith ye Giant gave a terrible fall to the ground,
at which noise ye other three Giants did awake, and one of them put himself
quickly on foot, and without tarrying for to put on his healme, or to take his
shield, but blaspheming against his Gods, he ran against the Pagan, who abode
his coming with such like courage, as his presumption did require. The Giaunt
with both his hands, stroke at him so monstrous a blow, that if it had chanced
on him, it would have put his life in great ieopardie. But this valiant
Brufaldoro with his accustomed policy, did clear himself from the same. The
great and broad sword of ye Giant had not so soon passed down, when ye Pagan
pressed unto the Giant, before he had any leisure to lift it up again, and with
an overthwart blow, he stroke him with so great strength upon the head, that
all from the ears vpwardes, he brought unto the earth, wherewith the Gyaunt
fell down dead to the ground, whose fall was so terrible and made so great a
noise, that it seemed a mighty tower had tumbled down: whosoever at that time
had some that fair Lady, might very well^haue discovered the great joy
that her heart received to see two of those of her enimes dead before her, and
did not let to pray unto her Gods for the accomplishment of the whole victory
against ye other two which remained. And therewith the other Giant like a
furious Lion blaspheming against his cursed Gods, not tarrying to arm himself
with more armor then at that present he had, for that there they were all with
their healmes vnlased and from their heads, he took hold of a great and
heavy club that was there with both his hands, and pressed forwards with a
large pace against the Pagan, with determination to take reuengement of the
others death, but this young furious Brufaldoro did tarry and receive him with
his accustomed courage and valiantness, the fearful Gyaunt did strike at
him so terrible a blow with his club, that swinging with it in the air it made
a fearful sound, but the Pagan, who without all fear did abide the coming
of the blow, determined with himself to let it pass in vain, as he had
all the rest before, and so it fell out, that when he saw the blow descend he
stepped on the one side, in such sort, that the club fell to the ground, with
so terrible a weight and strength, that the blow made all the trees that were
nigh at hand to tremble. This terrible blow was no sooner passed to ye earth
when that this valiant Mauritanian stroke a blow at his arms, which was with
so great strength, that he cut them both off by the wristes, and his hands
being fast to ye club, they fell all to ye ground. The Giant who felt himself
wounded and lame, would have embraced with the Pagan, thinking by his great
strength to have crushed him to death, but this Mauritanian with great
valiantness did put himself before him, his sword in his hand with the point
forwards, so that the Giant (with the great pain that he felt of his wounds,
and the great anger he had in his heart,) without any consideration he pressed
himself forwards, and the Pagan followed in his determination in such sort,
that the sword entered into the Giants body up to the hard hilts, falling
down dead to the ground, with no less noise then the rest. Then ye fourth
Giant which remained, did put himself on foot, who was of a greater and huger
stature and bigness then the other which were dead, and taking in his hand a
great and mighty spear which lay on the ground by him, with a terrible and
fearful voice he said: O thou infernal devil, for that thou can not be
other, seeing thou have slain my three companions, for I tell thee that the
Gods in the heavens did tremble for fear of them. Here I do promise thee
that thou shall not depart without thy reward and punishment, neither I without
taking vengeance of thee. The valiant Moore who very well heard and
understood his words, made little account of his proud speech, but said:
Make an end thou furious devil and come unto the battle, delaie not I say,
that thou may bear these thy companions company. Then the Giant lifted up
his arm above his head, having fast in his hand that great and mighty
Spear, which was all full of knots, with the bark remaining still thereon,
and threw it at him with so great strength, that it made a marvelous sound in
the air, but this valyant Mauritanian was not without great care of the
coming thereof, but with a counter pace he put himself on the one side, with
so great policy, that the blow passed on the one side, and the Spear stuck
fast in the ground, and by reason of the great force wherewith it was thrown,
it made it to shake as though it would have flowen in a thousand pieces, and
turning round like a Snake when she does make have to go away from him that
would kill her. Then the strong and stout Mauritanian being very irefull, to
see so great villainy, he ran unto the spear, and with great strength he
pulled it out of the ground, and in throwing it again at the giant, he said: O
thou furious beast, take unto thee thy dart. It did well appear that it was not
thrown by a sluggish arm, for that by reason of the great strength striking
on his sheeld it pierced it through, yet it did not there remain, but likewise
pierced his armor and shirt of maile and never stayed till such time as it
showed it self at his back all to be bathed with blood, wherewith the Giant
fell down dead to the ground, whose fall was so terrible that it made the
earth tremble, and all the trees that were there about to shake as though they
would have fallen down* When Brufaldoro saw that the four giants were dead,
who were the keepers of that fair lady, he went toward her, who was already
on foot abiding his coming. The valiant Moore did pull of his healme, and
did discover his face, which did represent a great majesty and severity, such
as his state did require, and although he was of a great stature and bigness
of body, yet his fair face did give great delight unto all them that did
behold it, and when he came nigh unto the fair lady, he kneeled down on the
ground and said: Fair Lady, I know not whether you are discontented, or have
received a small benefit or service in this which I have done, but of this be
you assured, that my determined thought was to do you service, believing that
so fair a Lady should not with her good will keep company with so
monstrous people: she with with great courtesy did answer him and said:
Gentle knight I cannot deny but that I was constrained by force to keep
company with these proud and ill conditioned Giants, and much less can I
keep in secret the great joy which I have to find my self at liberty and
clear from them, but one thing there is which I do greatly fear, that is,
that now I falling into thy hands and power, I dread to come into a new
prison, therefore I beseech you to give me free liberty, with the seguritie
which belongs unto my honor. The Pagan who was very attentive unto the
words of the Lady, would have made her answer, but this fair lady did
disturb him, desiring him first to sit down by her, for that she was
persuaded that with the great travail which he had taken in the battle with
the Giants, it could not be but that he was weary, and therewith taking him
fast by both the hands she made him to sit down, to whom Brufaldoro said: Ah
fair Lady if I did know that my heart were as free and clear of your love,
as you are sure of me for offering you any violence, then with great reason I
might account my self happy, as well in the doing of your service, as in
giving you liberty, but I am he Lady that must ask liberty of your beauty,
desiring you not to have any doubt of me. So with deep and sorrowful sighs
this Moore did give her to understand how his troubled heart was tormented with
excessive love. The Lady when she understood and knew that she had of him so
sure a pawn, was nothing discontent with all, for that he seemed unto her to
be a knight of a very good disposition and of great value, more then any
other, and for that he should receive some contentment, she answered and said:
Sir, I am very well satisfied, that a knight in whom is comprehended so great
beauty, cannot be without the courtesy requisite in so worthy a warrior, for
the which cause I do deliberate and put all my honor into your hands, and
believe me that time shall not lack to put remedy in this your new grief and
pain, without incurring unto my self any rebuke, but to maintain and keep
my honor, as belongs unto the royal blood from whence I do descend, in ye
mean time gentle knight, I would crave one boon at your hands, which in
telling you I would not have it denied me: Oh how great was the joy that this
valyant Pagan received when he understood so good hope which she pronounced
unto him, and therewith he turned unto the Lady, and whether she would or
not, he kissed her hands, with great thanks for the grace and favor which she
showed him, and therewith reremembring the words which passed by the Nymph at
the river, he said unto himself: How is it that not long since I made a mock
and a jest of the advice the which was giuan me, and now I do see that I made
a mock and a jest of the advice which is turned into good earnest. And in
saying these words he returned unto the Lady and said: What is that fair
Lady that I should bind my self unto you to do, nay what is it, that lying
in my power to accomplish, I would not do, being wholly yours, for ye my heart
is your prisoner, and my liberty subject to your will, so yt there is no
occasion yt you should desire the grant of me, but command me to fulfill all
your will and request, but yet fair Lady, before that you do proceed to
your request, I do desire you that I may know the occasion of your keeping
company and travailing with these four furious Giants in this Country of
Grecia. This will I declare unto you with a very good will answered this fair
Lady. You shall understand that I am daughter unto the king of the Islands of
Spain, my parents had no more daughters but I alone, the which was the
occasion that I was the more made off and esteemed of them. And by reason of my
beutie, they put me into a strong tower, which was nigh the sea side, whereout
many times for my recreation I issued in company with many Ladies and
Damsells, which were with me to bear me company: so it chanced one day when
I was abroad in my accustomed recreation and sport, I was beset with this
infernal company, who carried me into their mighty and strong ship in this
order as you do see me, whereas I did no other thing but lament and bewail my
sad and heavy misfortune. So the first Gyaunt which you did kill, seeing me
make so great lame^tation, with loving and amorous words did procure to
comfort me, and did offer me, that all which was my will to be done, he would
fulfill the same, and I seeing his great courtesy, and again, that my remedy
was so far from me, upon a sudden there came a thought into my mind, which I
supposed to be very good and requisite for to redress my harm and grief,
and I desired of him to grant me a boon, this giant did grant me my request,
and the rest did promise to fulfill all that I would ask them, and my demand
was, that they should carry me unto Grecia, unto the court of the Emperor
Trebatio, and that they should for the space of twenty days defend my beauty
and fairness, making a challenge against all other. These Giants by reason of
their great pride, did think it good to accomplish my request, the which
they did grant unto me in such sort yt no other thing could disturb them.
And straight way commanded them of the ship to take the way toward Grecia,
whereas fortune has brought us, and this morning we did disimbarke our selves
at the point of a land which is here at hand, and for that they did seem
very weary and ouertrauailed by sea, they did de^ermin^ to carry me all the
rest of ye way by land, till we should come unto Constantinople, but now
whether it was my good fortune, or their great pride I know not, that would not
consent that they should come thither, but first they should here end their
days. And being in this discourse, they saw a great number of people coming
toward them, which seemed to be householde servants or such like, who came
with all their beasts laden with victuals and other necessaries, who were all
servants unto those Gyaunts, and when they came nigh the place and saw that
wonderful spectacle of their masters: even as you see the small birds how
they will hide themselves amongst the bushes, briers, and thick trees, from
the sight of any ravenous foul: even so did all these servants of those vile
Gyaunts, hide themselves in the thickest of the woods and mountains of the
Forest, fearing the like intertainment. This valiant Moore when he saw the
sudden flying of them, without having any care of them, and making little
reckoning, he took that gentle Lady in his arms and set her upon her
palfraie, and he himself without putting foot in his stirop, leapt upon his
horse back with great lightness, and took their journey toward the place
whereas ye others had left their ship, into the which he entered with great
speed very joyful of his good hap, and straight way he commanded to hoise up
their sails, and to take the way toward Mauritania, whereas we will leave
them for to tell you the great coffeehouse that the valiant knight
Claridiano had, by reason of his long tarrying in the Island of Trapobana. O
omnipotent God, I do desire thee to give me wisdom and discretion to declare
the great worthiness of this young knight, for without thy help I do not
find my self able for to set forth so many and so marvelous feats of arms
as was done by this worthy knight, as in this chapter following and in all the
rest shall be declared.

How Claridiano was very sad and sorrowful to see that he was an armed
Knight, only for to do one worthy feate of arms, and what policy he did
use for to absent himself from the king Delfo. Chap. 8.
LOng time have we forgotten to speak of that valiant Prince Claridiano,
son unto that famous Emperor Alphebo, and of the excellent Claridiana, who
in the Island of Trapobana we left somewhat troubled, which was the occasion
that his courageous heart did find it self greatly oppressed, and especially
for that his valyant deeds should be kept close and not come to light and be
spread abroad in ye world, for to show his mighty strength and worthy courage,
and the occasion of his let was, the great persuasion of the king Delfo, who
would not loose his company, putting before him for excuse his young and
tender age, procuring him to tarry and not to try himself in adventures,
till such time as he should have the full age of eighteen years. This young
knight thought the time to be very long, which was the occasion that he was
very sad and sorrowful, in such sort, that his fair and beautiful face
had lost part of his natural and lively color, and daily he did exercise
himself in no other thing but to go to the sea side, and there to set
himself upon a rock, having no other contemplation but to behold how the
water with great fury and force did strike and beat upon the said rock. So
after long time using this disport, it chanced on a day at such time as the
Sun had made an end of his journey, he saw at the foot of that Rock a
Dwarf, who with an outrageous and irefull voice said: Don Claridiano of
Grecia, what do thou think that the hardness of that Rock is sufficient
to blaze thy fame and to get unto thee honor? No of very truth, but with thy
armor, and travailing through the world thou shall obtain valor as thy
predecessors have done before thee: it had been better thou had never
been an armed Knight, if that only in one valiant deed of arms thou do
imploye thy time. Therefore I say arise up O Greek, and procure to find out
thy royal blood and generation from whence thou do proceed, and let not
thy descent lie hid, neither thy prowess unknown. He had no sooner made an
end of his speeches, but that upon a sudden he vanished clean away, and
was not any more seen. The sorrow and heaviness was very much which the
Prince then felt in himself, in hearing the words and reasons of the Dwarf,
and the more, when that he understood that he was not son unto him whom
he always thought he had been, the which caused his courage greatly to alter
within him, and made him to say: Unfortunate that I am, what do I make here
amongst those which are not of my lignage, I had thought for certainetie that
I had been with my Father and kindred, and now I do see that it is to the
contrary, and that I am kept in this Island like a weak and silly woman: O
Galtenor, seeing that it was thy pleasure that by my hands thou should be
restored unto thy kingdom, and for that effect thou have had me hitherto in
thy keeping: Why do thou now consent that my fame perish and decaie, I
remaining in this Island* O immortal Mars, to thee I do invoke, that being
by thee helped and with thy favor I may stretch forth the bright beam, which
with thy partial hand thou gave me. So uttering these and such like
complaints, he passed a few days, till that upon a certain day, following
his accustomed exercise, he saw coming toward the shore a Foyst, which was
governed with four mariners, and beholding who was therein, he saw come from
under the hatches, a very fair Damsel, who was all apparailed with mourning
apparaile, and with her two ancient Squires, who led her by the arms,
apparailed in the same manner and guise. This Ladies face was all to bedewed
with tears, and her countenance did declare and show, that she suffered
great sorrow and anguish. This valiant and worthy young knight very desirous
to know the occasion of her great lamentation, moved himself toward her,
and having saluted her, he desired her if it were her pleasure, to declare unto
him the occasion of her complaint. The Lady turning unto him who had demanded
the occasion of her sorrow, and being greatly amazed in viewing his comely
grace and gentle disposition, she said. Gentle knight, if thou do desire to
know the occasion of all my harm, bring me before that worthy young knight
who slew Geredion Bendambul, and there thou shall understand the greatest wrong
without all reason that ever was done to so noble a Damsel as I am. The Prince
taking pity of her great sorrow answered: I do not not know for what
effect and purpose you do ask after this knight, but be it what it will be,
you shall understand gentle Lady, that he who^ you do ask for is before you,
and seeing that it is so, you may be bold to declare your pleasure, and here
I do say unto you, that if it be requisite and necessary in your service, I
will venture my life without putting any excuse for to remedy this your great
sorrow and grief which you do^ show to have. And you shall understand that I
will do it without taking any leave of my Lord, the king Delfo, and there is
nothing that does so much grieve me, as that I am not armed. This sorrowful
Lady seeing her good fortune would not loose the occasion, but with a new
lamentation and complaint she kneeled down before him and kissed his hands
for the great offers which he made unto her, the Prince did take her up from
the ground with great reverence, then the Lady with amorous words said. If
that by the occasion of king Delfo (gentle knight) we shall receive any
disturbaunce: here I do desire thee by the honor which thou do owe unto
all virtue, that we make no farther delaie nor detainment, for here I do give
you to understand that there remains but a small time for the remedying of
my sorrow and grief. Well, let it be out of hand answered this valiant
Greek, and at our coming a land, the first knight that we do meet, either
with his good will or ill will shall lend me his armor, and therewith taking
that fair Lady by the hand, they put themselves into the Foist, commanding
straight way that they should return their voyage unto the Sea, so finding
the time and wind favorable, in a very short space they were passed on their
way so far that they clean lost the sight of any land.

What shall I say of the king Delfo and the Princes nurse, when they could not
hear of the Prince what was become of him, but only that he was departed
away. But if I did not put before me the great duty which I do owe, and
consider the gravity of a Prince, I might say that he did things more lyker a
mad man, then a Prince, and surely he had great reason, for he had lost the
company of the best knight in all the world: so this warlyke Greek did sail
upon the Sea with an indifferent thought, being in company with ye fair
Lady who likewise went very well content, for that with so great ease she had
found and obtained him that she sought for. But this I can certify you of
Claridiano, that he had not forgot ye words which the dwarf had told him, but
always remembering the same, it put him in great confusion, in such sort, yt he
did not remember to demand of the Damsel the occasion of her grief, who with
such diligence went to seek him. At such time as Diana did spread abroad her
golden hair over all those troublesome waters, he discovered that there came
toward them a bark, in such have, that in a small time they were come unto
them, the which bark came without any government, and he saw sitting on the
poope of ye bark a giant, who had his head and beard very white, and
apparelled with roabes of estate, who was straight ways known by Claridiano
to be Galtenor, for the which he received great joy. When the barks were
joined together Galtenor went and embraced the Prince, saying: Son do not
think to depart away in such sort, but that first I will rejoice my self
with the presence, for it shall be more profitable unto thee then thou do
think for, as well for the remedy and ease of thy thought, as for the
adorning and sauegard of thy body. To whom the Prince answered and said: I do
very well know my Lord, that from you can proceed nothing but that which is
good, as always has been the use and custom hitherto. Then the Giant said
unto him: This thou may perfectly believe, that so long as my soul is joined
and knit with my body, that it shall not exercise it self in any other thing
but in thy service. And now for that thou stand est in need of armor, here I
do bring it unto thee, for that before many days come to an end, thou shall
have need thereof. Also I do bring thee a marvelous precious sword, forged
and made by my great skill, such a one as in all the world there is not a
better. And this shall continue and endure with thee, till such time as thou
shall be in battle with the Bastard Lion, then shall it loose his virtue and
valor, for that thou shall recover another of no less price, and of a greater
fame, jointly with thy honor in the acknowledging of thy unknown parents, and
in that time thou shall loose all thy service, that ever thou have done in the
honor of Cupide, being in company with the disguised Hind, all though
altogether thou shall not loose thy great love, till such time as by the
Goddess Venus shall be thrown at thee the African lance, which shall pearce
thy heart clean through. Then did he declare unto him, how he was stolen out
from his mothers lap, certefieng him that he was son unto the mightiest
Emperor in all the world: but more light then this, he would not give him,
neither the place whereas his sister was lost, and therewith he took out from
under the hatches of the bark, a fardle which was bound up, the which he did
deliver unto the Mariners, that they should lay it up safe, and embrace him
again with great love, and put upon the finger of the heart, on his left hand,
a King, which had in it a precious Diamond, that was of so great cleernesse,
that in a dark night it gave as great a light where it was, as though a torch
were lighted. This did he straightly charge him to keep, for that it was of so
great virtue, that so long time as he had it about him there was no
inchauntment that should hurt him. This excellent young Knight would have
surrendered great thanks for his precious gifts, but at such time as he would
have given it, Galtenor was departed upon a sudden a great space from them,
who made so much have, that in a very small time he lost the sight of him.
This young knight remained with great contentment, in knowing that he did
descend from so high a generation: and likewise for the succor he received in
the armor he had brought him, the which he commanded to be very well kept
till such time as occasion should serve that he had need of them: in this
sort he passed away all the night, thinking upon the words of Galtenor. So
the next morning this young knight sitting on the poope of the Foyst, with this
fair Lady, he requested her to tell him the whole occasion of her coming to
seek for him. The which this Lady with great lamentation began to tell him,
saying. Gentle Knight you shall understand that I am daughter unto the King of
Mesapotamia, which is a province situated between the two great rivers
Euphrates and Tigris. Of long time was I of him well-beloved and made very much
on, till such time as my fathers Court was in great heaviness, for yt they
could not hear any news of a brother of mine, who was prince of that
kingdom, whose absence at this time is very grievous unto me. There came from
the other side of the river Euphrates, a prince, whose dominion was over the
Province Palestina. He was the proudest and arrogantest Knight that ever has
been seen, in such sort, that by reason of his fierceness, he was not only
feared of them, who of duty did owe it him, but also of all the Provinces that
joined with his kingdom, which extended from that river unto the main sea of
Phoenicia, the mount Libano, Gamogenia, and the high and mighty cragged rocks
and mountains Nabateos. To conclude, almost all Asia did tremble at his fury.
This knight at the great fame which was uttered of my beauty, came unto the
famous and large Province of Mesapotamia, unto the great city of Mesos,
whereas I was of him meruailously entreated and requested of love, but yet all
that ever he did or could do, did little profit him, for that by any means I
could not admit him into my service, and the occasion was, because of his
great and unmeasurable pride. So like wise came thither the Prince of Chaldaea,
a Knight of great price, and adorned with many virtues, unto whom I always
showed a better countenance, and made acceptance of his service.

Then Brandemoran (the Prince of Palestina, who was so called) when he
understood thereof was in a great confusion, and received great grief, in
such sort, that he determined no other thing, but with his mischievous heart to
persecute me: it so fell out that the Prince of Chaldea whose name was
Gelerosio being overcome and forced by love, having opportunity and place
convenient, with dolorous reasons he did discover unto me all his whole heart,
but whether it was his ill hap or my froward fortune, I know not, but at such
time as he uttered unto me his mind, it chanced that Brandemoran had his
ears attentive unto all that was spoken betwixt us, and when he heard that my
answer was such, that it caused great joy and comfort unto Gelerosio, and
unto him great pain and torment, with a mischievous heart he went unto my
Father the king, and before him he did accuse me of whooredome. When the king
my father heard it, the great ire and wrath which he received was so far out
of reason, that without taking any farther counsel, he caused me to be
apprehended, and likewise the Prince Gelerosia, and both of us to be put in
prison, but after a while when his cholar and anger waxed colder, he commanded
to call together all the nobles of his counsel and men of honor, who did
persuade with my father, that by reason of the great pride and mischievous
stomach of the Prince Brandemoran, he might do it of presumption, or else by
the great ill will which he bare unto his contrary Gelerosio, he had raised
up this slander, and that they thought it good to be put into the trial of
arms, with condition, that in the space of thirty days I should bring a
knight that would defend my honor, and by reason the valor of my cruel
enemy is so mighty, there is not one in all the kingdom that dares take in
hand to defend my cause, and I seeing that the time passed away, with a loud
voice I began to complain against fortune, and reviled Brandemoran, calling
him coward and wretch, yt against a Damsel he has raised so great treason and
falsehoode, who hearing me to revile him, he answered and said: Princess, for
that thou shall see how little I do esteem all the knights of the world, I
will give thee one whole years space, that thou thy self in thine own person
go and seek him who has the best fame in arms that may be found, and bring
him hither to defend this accusation which I have laid against thee, and so
likewise I desire the king thy Father to consent and grant unto the same, of
whom it was granted and consented, and likewise of all the knights that were
counselers of my cause, believing that it might be the occasion of some
remedy. And therewith I took leave and (...) and departed from Mesos, with
only these two Squires, committing my self into the great river Euphrates in
this Foist, and so long we sailed that we entered into the Mediterraneo sea,
whereas was given unto us knowledge of your great valor and mighty force,
which was the cause yt made us take our way toward the place of your abode,
sometimes with great torments, and sometimes with fair weather, in such sort,
that in the end we arrived whereas you were, in so good time and order, as mine
own desire could not have wished better. Here you may see and understand,
worthy knight, the extremity of my evil, and the cause of my seeking for you.
At the which relation of this sorrowful Lady, the Prince remained very
pensive, and had great pity on her, and answered, saying: Lady, I am very
much bound unto your highness, that you have taken so much travail and pain
to seek me, for that there are other a great number of more valor, that are
bound to defend your great justice and make your defense, notwithstanding, for
that it has been your pleasure to attribute unto me the honor, here I do
promise you to take upon me your justice and defense, with the small valor of
my person, until I put my life in danger for the small experience done in
your service, I looked for no other thing at your hand gentle knight, answered
the Princess, and for that thou have recovered so great fame and renown
only in doing of one great deed of arms, it is not without great reason, yt
although I have been hitherto unfortunate in all my adventures, yet now I do
find my self happy, for that I have found such a worthy knight to remedy my
evil. So upon this matter there passed betwixt those very many reasons, but
the mariners which governed the Foyst were greatly amazed, and meruailed
very much to see the great swiftness of the Foyst, and the great way that it
made, because they knew not the occasion, but the Prince did well understand
how that Galtenor who helped him was the occasion of the great swiftness. In
the end of ten days travail upon the sea, they did ariue in a Port or Haven
of the Nabateos, whereas they did determine to go a shore, and from thence to
take their way unto the place whether they should go, and with this
determination he commanded to take out two horses which they brought with them
in their Foyst, and a palfraie, and likewise the fardell which Galtenor brought
him, and commanding it to be undone, he saw that there was in it very fair
purple armor, all to be spotted with stars of gold, much after the sort of
the armor he was wont to wear, and the sheeld was of the same sort, saving
that in the purple field there was no device made, and there the Prince proved
the armor, and it was so just and fit for his body as they had been made by
measure, and being therewith armed, he seemed to be of a fair disposition unto
all them that looked on him, by reason that he was of a goodly stature and
proportion, then straight way he set the Lady upon her palfray, and he leaped
upon one of the horses, and the two squires upon the other, and in that sort
they began to travail, and commanded the Mariners to return the same way
they came, and they took their way through a narrow path which lead them
upon an high mountain, and by reason of the great quantity of huge and
mighty trees and the great company of them yt were there, they were
constrained to go one after another, for y^ otherwise they thought it
impossible to attain unto the top thereof, and the thickness of the trees
were such, yt they withstood the Sun, that it could not enter in to warm and
comfort the cold ground: in this sort they travailed with great care till such
time as the dark night approached, although the Moon did shine upon them, yet
by reason of the great thickness of trees, they thought they travailed in a
dark land, and were constrained to alight from their horses, and put
themselves apart out of the high way, and chanced nigh unto a fair fountain
which was unto them a delightful hospitality, for that it was in the spring
of the year, and there they sat down upon the green grass, wherewith the
ground was adorned, and called for some thing to eat, yt which was straight
ways given unto them, although it was not eaten with such contentment as their
hearts required, so their stomachs being satisfied, every one of them
withdrew himself into his place to take his rest, this new knight took up
his helm and sheeld, and went to rest in that part which lead toward the
mountain, and making of his sheeld a pillow he laid him down to rest,
without having care of any other thing, but only to seek out his lineall
descent from whence he came, and what he was, and therewith he fell a sleep,
but his rest endured but a small time, for that in the beginning of his rest or
first sleep he heard a very lamentable complaint, which seemed not to be
far from the place where he had chosen to take his rest, the which complained
at sundry times, and not hastily, so the break of the day drew on, and being
desirous to know what it should be ye made so great complaint and heaviness,
he arose up and laced on his healme, and threw his shield on his shoulder, and
went unto the place where the Princess Antemisea was at her rest, and said
unto her: I have heard this night a marvelous great lamentation, which has
been the occasion yt I have not had any rest at all, and therefore I do
determine to go and procure to know if I can who it is that does so
lamentably complain, and the occasion of their great grief, for that my heart
cannot suffer me to hear so great lamentation: but needs I must procure to
seek remedy for the same, if it be possible to be had. Therefore in the mean
time, I do desire your highness, to take your rest in the the thickest of
this Forest, that you may be seen of no body, for that I am sure that my
return shall be very quickly, for that this complaint does sound very nigh
unto the same place whereas I lay to take my rest all the last night. The
departing of the Prince was very grievous unto the Princes Antemisca, and she
understanding that it was in vain to say to the contrary by reason of his
determination she pretended to bear him company, and said unto him. Sir
knight, know this for a truth, that your departure is unto me very grievous,
but in that you desire me that I do remain here, I do not admit the same,
for that surely whersoeuer you go, thither will I also with you, for I am not
determined to loose your company. The Prince Claridiano could not dissemble,
but that he must needs laugh at ye speech of Antemisca, and with a pleasant
countenance he said. Lady, I will not be against your determination in any
thing, for that it shall be unto me great honor that you be in presence,
whatsoever adventure do happen unto me, for yt in beholding of you my valor
shall increase, and taking her by the hand (leaving the two Squires to keep
their horses) they went into the thickest of the wood toward the place
whereas he had heard those great sighs and complaints, but they had not gone
very far, when they heard that heavy voice, and going straight way
toward the place whereas they thought it was, the farther they went
forwards, the nearer they heard the voice, so that they might clearly
perceive that it was the voice of a woman being in some great grief, the
which the occasion that they made the more have on their way, till they found
themselves in a great plain where grew no trees, and on the other side of the
plain was there a mountain, and at the foot thereof, there seemed to be the
mouth of a great cave, out of the which issued that lamentable sound, and when
they drew nigh unto it they saw that it was very dark, and for to enter into
it they must needs descend down certain steps which were of stone very ill
wrought. At this time the Prince would have been very glad that the
Princess Antemisca had not been with him, for that he found himself greatly
troubled with her, and the^ desired her that she would remain and keep her
self secret amongst certain bushes that were there, the which she was
constrained to do, more for to give contentment unto the knight, then for any
desire she had of herself. This courageous knight when he saw himself alone
(after that he had left the Princess) with great have he put himself into
the cave, and going about from one place to another, he chanced into a great
hall, which was made in manner like unto a great court, saving the place where
the light entered, was a a lover hole, which was in the midst thereof, and
going round about the same, he chanced into a place where many bones and
skulls of dead men were, which did amaze much the Prince, and caused in him a
new desire to know what it should be. And going farther in where the light
showed most, he saw where was a woman laid along upon a bed, who was the most
deformedst person that could be seen, and by her lay a young child which
seemed to be of a year old, who was of the stature of a mean man, and on the
one side he saw a door, which was very strong and all of iron, out of the
which came forth that sorrowful voice. The Gyantesse when she saw the knight
there within, she with great have laid hold on a bow which lay at her beds
side, and straight ways bent it and nocked a sharp arrowe therein, and drew
the bow with so great strength, that almost she brought both ends together, the
knight who remained with great care, when he saw the arrow coming, cleared
himself thereof, but the arrowe had not so soon passed by him, when as like
unto the wind he went unto her, and with his close fist he stroke her such a
mighty blow upon her mouth, that without remembrance she fell down upon the
ground, and without making farther reckoning of her, he went unto the iron
door, and looked which way he might open it, and having proved ye same he
saw yt it was all in vain, by reason of the great strength thereof, so that he
was constrained to return again unto the place where the Gyan^esse was, and
in looking about him he found that she had tied at her girdle the keie of that
door, the which he took and did open it, and went in thereat, but he could
not see any thing therein, by reason of the great darkness that was there,
and for to see if any would make him answer, he asked who was there within,
that so lamentably did complain, saying: Come forth if you can and yt without
(...). And presently there was one which answered, and said. Here is one of
the most vnfortunatest Damsells in all the world, who without help cannot move
her self. Then the knight went straight way forth, and saw that there was
fire, the which he blew, and lighted a Rosin stick, that did burn very well,
and went into the place where the Damsel had answered him, and in the
farthest end of that chamber he found the damsel that did so greatly
complain, who lay a long on the ground very evil apparelled, and that which
she had was all torn in pieces, in such sort that her skin was seen in many
places, and beholding her cruel usage it moved the knight to have great
compassion, and without speaking any word, with his own hands he brake all
the yrons and chains wherewith she was bound, and took her by the hand and
brought her out of that dark room, into the great hall where it was very
light. This Damsel when she understood that he took her out to set her at
liberty, she kneeled down on her knees before him, and said: O Knight, the
comfort of my grievous pain, tell me I pray you if that foul butcherly
giant be dead or not, or how you had power to come hither into this place,
without being disturbed by him or his cruel son. The Prince answered and
said: Hitherto I have not seen any, but only I have heard thy grievous
complaints. Then the Lady with great weeping said: Worthy Knight, put
strength and courage in thy heart that thou may depart with great lightness
before these fierce devils do meet with you, for if they do meet with you,
you may be assured, that we shall not have any favor of them, but yt they
will fill their stomack^ with our flesh as they have done with many others. The
Prince replied: If it so fall out that they will taste of my flesh, they shall
find it hard and ill in the chawing, worse then any that hitherto they have
eaten, and therefore I do determine not to move my self from hence more now
then at any other times I have been accustomed to do. And in saying these
words they went out of the cave, whereas they found the Princess Antemisca,
who was coming to enter in at the door, by reason that the Knight ^arried so
long, and when she saw the nakedness of the Damsel, using her royal
clemency, she took off the black roabe that she had on her, and covered
her therewith, shedding from her christaline eyes many tears, with the great
compassion she had of that Damsel, and straight way she took her by the hand
and with great have went with her toward the place whereas she had left her
Squires, and going on their way, in the midst of the plain they heard
amongst the trees a great rumor and noise, and looking about to see what it
should be, they saw coming forth of the wood a furious monster, of so great
bigness, that he was almost equal with the high and mighty trees, and was
of a very great and boystrous making of his body and members, and as you do
see the hungry Lion who is very desirous of his pray, springs and leapeth
amongst the green herbs, complaining of his great hunger and empty belly:
in such sort came this monster, all all armed with skins of wild beasts,
which were very strong and hard, and brought in his hand a Pine aple tree,
full of knots, and when he saw the knight, and knew that he carried with him
his prisoner, he gave so terrible a shrike, that it sounded throughout all the
mountains, and lifting up his great and mighty clubbe he pressed toward
this courageous knight, who when he saw him coming, did abide him with such
courage as his valiant heart did constrain him, and having his sword in his
hand he commanded the damsells to put themselves a part on the one side. This
furious devil having his club in the air fast with both his hands he did
discharge the same at the prince, who with great lightness did clear himself
from the fury thereof, and caused it in vain to fall upon the ground, which
was with so great strength, that it made the Prince and all the ground there
aabouts to tremble like an Earthquake, but in this time the Prince did not
sleep, but seeing himself clear from ye blow, pressed unto that monster on
the one side, and stroke him such an ouer^hwart blow upon his knee in the very
joint, that he cut it clean a sunder, with so great ease as though it had been
a Glas^ie or such like, wherewith the monstrous Gyaunt fell down to the
ground, with so great strength and weight, as though it had been a mighty
tower, he was not so fallen down, but the knight put the point of his sword
into his mouth, the Giant seeing him so nigh, he took hold upon the skirt of
his shirt of maile with so great strength, yt he made him perforce to come
near him, and as he had his sword fixed in the Giants mouth, what with the
strength that the giant used to pull him toward him, and likewise ye strength
which the knight forced, it caused the sword to pass through his throat, in
such sort, that straight way he remained dead, and voyded a great stream of
blood. Oh that I were here able to declare unto you the great joy that those
Damsels received when they saw that great devil dead, and with cheerful
countenances they went and received the knight, although the great fear which
remained in that naked damsel would not let her wholly to inioye and rejoice in
her liberty, who said unto the Prince: Valiant knight and our succor, now
does it stand us in hand to make the more have before the son of this great
devil come unto us, for that he is more terrible and of more strength then his
Father is, to whom this courageous knight said: Fear not fair Lady, for
that the Gods will help and succor us, in such sort, that his great fury and
force shall little avail him. These words he spoke with a cheerful
countenance, and lifting up his helm, did show his great severity. So he
took them by the hand, and went their way toward the place where they left
their squires keeping of their horses, and at his coming thither, he straight
way mounted the two damsells upon their Palfr^ies, and he and the rest upon
their other horses, and began to travail their former journey, they had not
travailed very far, when as they heard a great rushing, which seemed to be
of many people amongst those thick trees, which caused them to stay to see
what it should be, as you shall understand in the next chapter following.

Of the battle that Claridiano had with the fierce and timorous Giant, son
unto the other Giant which he had slain, and of all that happened in the
battle. Chap. 9.
THE great noise which the valiant Knight heard, was no less then that which
Fauonio made in the Antartike sea, nigh vunto ye Tartarian coast, which is all
replenished with high and mighty trees of Pine apples, so the Prince and all
the rest stayed to see what it was that caused all that noise and rushing, and
they saw that it was a furious, fierce, and terrible Gyaunt that came from the
thickest of the wood, he was thirteen cubits of height, all full of rough
and thick hair, and he had in his hand a great and heavy club, which
seemed to be the m^st of a mighty ship, but whosoever had seen the faces
of the Damsells at that time, would have judged their alteration to be like
unto the Sun, when he is eclipsed with ye Moon at noone days, but this
invincible Claridiano made no sign of any mutation, but rather did make
himself ready unto the battle, seeing that the Giant did make toward him,
the great blaring noise which the Giant made was so terrible, that it caused
great fear in all them that heard it, saving only in him who put himself in
defense, and tarrying for the coming of the enemy, the great pride which this
Giant did use, having his club in the air coming toward the knight was much
more then that which Belona used when she sat in her armed chariot, being
governed with ^urious Dragons, over all the fields: the horse whereon the
Prince rode seeing so strange and seldom seen a monster before him, raged in
such sort, that this courageous warrior hedde not so much strength to govern
him, but that by pure force he cast himself about in the air, flying from the
presence of that ugly beast, but the valiant Prince fearing the great peril
which might happen unto those Damoselles, with great lightness leapt from his
horse leaving the saddle, and being on foot he quickly turned toward the
Gyaunt, and saw that at one blow he had broke all to pieces one of the Ladies
Squires, whereat the Prince took great grief to see so great an outrage done
and without all reason, and with an irefull voice he said: Thou furious beast
without law or reason, come to me, for I am he which has been the occasion of
thy anger, if thou have any. This infernal monster went toward Claridiano
with his club all aloft, and with great fury he did assault him: Oh almighty
God, save, keep, and deliver thy knight from this infernal fury, and do not
permit that he dye in the hands of so cruel an enemy, but first he know that
thou art his true and perfect God. This valiant Greek stood still when he saw
that terrible blow coming, till such time as he began to discharge it, at
which time with a strange lightness he made him to loose the fury thereof,
and with his sword in both his hands he stroke at the Gyaunt a mighty blow,
which chanced upon his clubbe with so great force that he cut it a sunder in
the middle, this furious devil when he saw that he had erred his blow, with
much more fury and double strength he lift up his mighty clubbe again and
discharged it at the Greek, who in the same sort as before he cleared
himself from the force thereof, making him to strike in vain that terrible
blow upon the ground, and with the great strength wherewith it was stroke, the
rest of the clubbe which remained did break in pieces, at which time the
Prince was not idle, but with great lightness he entered in to him, and with
both his hands he stroke him a terrible blow upon the wast, which made his
armor to fail, but by reason of the huge and long hair which he had upon his
body, he could not hurt his flesh, which made ye Greek very much to
marvel at it, but seeing that the Giant was discharging at him another blow,
it made him to step aside, and although the club was cut and broken, yet there
remained a great tronchon thereof in his hands. Here you might see begin so
terrible and furious battle, that it seemed that all the warryours of Mars,
were there assembled together in fight. This valiant and courageous Knight had
here great ne^de of all his force and lightness to make his defense against
his enemy, ^^re might you see the valiantness of Gyaunts and their infernal
force and fury: likewise the incomperable force of the Greekish blood of
chieualrie, here might you see the great have that the one made unto the other
in doubling of their blows, and procuring the one to hurt the other, trauaising
ground and moving from place and place, seeking whereas most advantage might
be found. In this sort they travailed for ^he space of two hours, not knowing
between them any advantage. But who should have seen there the great
lightness and prowess of this young knight, would have judged him to be one
of the best knights of all the world, for that in all the time of the
battle, and all the terrible blows which the giant did strike at him, yet he
never brake maile, nor hurt any part of his armor, and yet he hurt his
contrary in more then ten places, although they were not very great, yet
did they trouble him, and it was by reason of the great have he made in the
striking of his blows, but when the Gyaunt saw himself to be so evil
entreated, he began to puff, bluster, and blow, much like unto a bayted
Bull, and doubled his blows with so great have, that the Prince could not
have any time of advantage to hurt him, but had enough to do for to clear
and defend himself from his fury. And being in this great extremity he
heard those two Damosells which he had brought with him cry out, making a
great noise, aduertising him to t^ke heed and look unto himself, and being
very desirous to know the occasion thereof, he saw that it was that fierce
and vglye woman which he had left before in the cave without any
remembrance, and for dead, who came with her Bow bent in her hand, and shot
at him with her sharp and unmerciful arrows, the which he was constrained to
bear off with his armor, for with his shield he could little profit himself,
and by reason yt his armor was made by art of inchauntment, it did profit him
much, for so soon as the arrow did strike on it, it recoyled back again a
great way, at this present time did the knight find himself in great peril
and danger, for that he must make his defense against that infernal monster,
and likewise against that diuellysh and furious woman, who continually
assaulted him with her arrows, and then he could not profit himself of his
force and strength, but only of his great lightness, shunning the fury of
his mighthie blows, so by little and little he drew nigh unto the place
whereas the Gyauntesse was, who having spent all her arrows, she took in her
hand a mighty clubbe and came toward her furious husband to help him. This
valiant Greek found himself in great extremity, and with the great anger
which he had, it changed his eyes into sanguine color, and was determined to
clear himself of that infernal woman, and with that purpose he turned
toward her, and letting her blow to pass by, he stepped in to her on the
left side, and thrust so terrible a foine at her breast, that his sword entered
in up to the hard hiltes, and she fell down dead to the ground. The Gyaunt who
at that instaunt was not idle, stroke the Greek such a monstrous blow upon
his back, that he ouerthrewe him to the ground as dear, without any
remembrance or token of moving, the Giant seeing him in this case threw from
him his clubbe, and took the knight in his furious nails, and with the great
rage and wrath which he had he would have eaten him up at ye instaunt, but it
fell not out with him as he thought it would, for that he found the armor
which he had on was very hard, and when the Gyaunt saw that his sharp
teeth did little profit him, he began to tumble and toosse him up and down
from one place to another, and by reason that he was not expert in the lacinges
and buckeling of armor, he did nothing but tumble and toss him here and
there, to see if he could find a place where he might begin to tear him
in pieces. Whosoever should at that instaunt have seen the great affliction
of those two Damosells, might very well have judged in himself the anguish
and sorrow which they received, judging themselves to be wholly lost and
destroyed. But the Princess Antemisca, lifted up her eyes unto heaven and
said. I do see O Jupiter, that thou art very well pleased, that I do suffer
this grievous pain and sorrow. Ah Fortune, it is now great reason to leave me,
and not to persecute me any farther, and if it be so, that as yet thou have not
accomplished thy whole desire. Oh Jupiter make sharp thy cutting sword, and
therewith take away my life. Oh Mars, behold that now thy strength does fail,
if thou do permit that this Knight do perish. O what woman amongst all women
has been so unfortunate as I? Oh Gods, I do not know wherefore you do thus
persecute me, for yt I have been always obedient unto you, and now seeing that
you had given me a Knight for to be my defense, (against yt unjust cause, which
was laid against me) you should likewise have suffered me to give testimony
of my truth, and their false accusation? Oh thou chaste Goddess, be favorable
unto me, seeing that Jupiter has forgotten me, turn and take my cause upon
thee, and be favorable, for that I never offended thee. These and such like
complaints uttered this afflicted Princess, and having concluded, the Prince
was come again to himself and recovered his memory, and seeing himself in
that perplexity, he did procure by all means and policy to clear himself
out of the Giants claws, and being clear he put himself on foot, and
recovered again his sword, blaspheming against the small power of his Gods,
and was meruailously kindled with wrath and anger, the Giant likewise recovered
his mighty club, and stroke at the Prince a mighty blow, who seeing it
coming did procure to clear himself from the fury thereof, and letting it
pass, he stepped in to the Giant, and stroke at him so terrible a blow on the
wast, that it little did profit any defense that he had, but that his mighty
sword must needs cut him a sunder in the midst of his body, and he fell a
sunder, each part from ye other dead to the ground. The great pain and sorrow
which those timorous damsells received was not before so much as their joy and
contentment now was, when they saw their mortal enemy dead before the^, and
never rested in giving thanks unto their Gods, for the deliverance of their
knight from so huge and monstrous a beast. Claridiano when he had made an
end of this enterprise, he sat him down amongst those trees for to rest
himself, for that he had great need thereof, and demanded of them somewhat
to eat, which was given unto him of such as they had, and when he had eaten
and rested himself well, they began to travail their former journey, and
for that they should go up a great and mighty mountain, they determined to
ascend by little and little for the easing of their horse, and when they were
half way up the night came upon them, that they were constrained to put
themselves a part out of the high way amongst the trees, and there to rest
themselves all the whole night, so when the morning was come they followed
their former travail up the hill, it was well noone before they could get unto
the top of the mountain, whereas they did discover on the other side
marvelous great and mighty plains, adorned with trees of all sorts and
great herbs, and being weary of their long journey up the hill, they sat
down t^ take their rest, and to eat of that which they had left the day
before, and then made an end of all, so that there remained behind no more
victuals, which grieved them very much, and for that the way was somewhat
sharp and ragged, they made the more have to get to some town and there to
take their ease, but their hasty travail was all in vain, for that there was
no town nigh them by a great way, so that the war which they sustained
with hunger was more greater then the battle of the Giants, as shall be told
you in the chapter following.

Of the great travail that the Greek knight had and the Ladies for lack of
victuals, by reason of their long iourny, and how they found a Giant, with
whom the Prince had battle and slew him, and what order they had to help
themselves with victuals. Cap. 10.
AT such time as the Sun of Tona began to spread abroad his golden hair
over and amongst the green and fresh boughs of the high and mighty Pine
apples, Cedrons, and other trees, which were in that fragrant mountain,
whereas all kind of small birds ^lew round about, recreating themselves in the
beauty of the day, and with their well tuned notes, making a sweet and
heavenly melody. At that time the mighty and well esteemed knight Claridiano,
of the Spear, the unknown Prince of the Greekish Empire was on horse back
with his amorous company, and taking the way which they thought to be most
used, that they followed, the ladies were meruailously troubled for lack of
their accustomed and daily victuals, and could not hide nor dissemble their
great hunger, for the which the knight of the Spear was very much troubled
and sorrowful. So in this great extremity they passed all that day, and
travailing in and out amongst those mighty trees, yt might drew on, and
although by reason of the Moon it was very light, ye^ unto them it seemed to
be very dark, for that they were very sore troubled for lack of that which
should sustain them, and their faces did show and declare the perplexity of
their stomachs. So they sat them down upon the green and fresh herbs,
very pensive of their extreme necessity, procuring to take their rest that
night, but all was in vain, for that their corporal necessity would not
consent thereunto, but without sleeping they walked up and down all that
night, till the next day in the morning, that they turned to their accustomed
travail and journey, procuring by all means to see if they could find any
thing for the easing of their stomachs, and had their eyes always attendant
to see if they might discover any village, whereas they might satisfy their
hunger and take their rest, but all did profit the^ very little, and with this
the night came on them, and these afflicted Ladies fell to ye ground with
feebleness: Oh what sorrow was this unto the Prince ^o see the^ in this case,
being notable to help them, and parting a little from them, he lamented saying:

O Jupiter, the mightiest amongst all the Gods, thou which did set at
liberty those of Trapobana, by my power and strength by thee given, and seeing
it came down from thy imperial seat, show me now some favor, and do not
consent that I and my company do perish here with hunger and lack of
victuals: Oh Lord, do not make any delay in putting remedy in this my
necessity, except it be thy will that we be all meat to the Birds, and if it
be so that my deeds do deserve it, and thou do give thy consentment,
wherefore did thou put me in such estate, and wherefore did thou
appoint me amongst other knights, to be the defender and vpholder of
afflicted Ladies and Damosells, and if it be so that I must needs die, let me
die by the hands of the most strongest warrior in all the world, and not to
die with hunger. These and such like reasons uttered this good Greekish knight
till such time as the day drew on, and coming unto the place whereas his
company were, he found them that they were very weak and feeble, but
encouraging them in the best wise he could he caused them to take their
horses, and so did he and also Alibernio the old Squire, and travailed on
their way with so great feebleness that they thought verily that the Ladies
would die by the way. This worthy Greek was in a great confusion, yet he did
not let to go first to one and then to another, comforting them, and made them
to ride a pace, which they might do very well, for that their their horses
were not so unprovided as the masters, by reason of the goodly grass that was
there in those woods, wherewith they filled themselves every night. The Sun
had well passed two parts of her journey when they came into a great field
very plain, and in the midst of it was a little mountain, out of the which
there appeared smoke to come forth, which gave them to understand that there
should be fire in that place. Then the Prince said unto Alibernio, procure to
comfort and encourage forwards these Ladies, and come by little and little,
for that I will ride before for to see who shall be our host this night, and of
this thou shall be assured, that whosoever it is, whether he be pleased or
not, he shall give us lodging, and therewith he set spurs unto his horse, and
in great have he rode toward the mountain, and at the fury and rushing of
the horse in his running, their arose up from the ground a mighty Giant, of so
great height, that he seemed to be a great tree, and when he saw the knight he
laid hand on a mighty great club which he had by him, and with great
lightness he went toward him, and said in the Chaldaean tongue. O unhappy
trauailer, what did^^st think, that here was no body for to defend thee this
way? What was it the smell of the roasted Dear in thy nose, which caused thee
to make so great have hither. The Prince when he saw him stayed his horse and
said: Hold thy hand thou furious Giant and stay, for that I have not
procured thee any evil, but rather I do desire thee that of thine own free
will thou would give us whatsoever thy pleasure is to bestow upon us: O man
of small valor, answered the Giant, what do thou think by craft and
subtlety to advantage thy self of me: Well, for that thou shall see how
little I do esteem thee, tarry a while, for with my fists and buffets I will
beat out thy brains, without the help of my club. And in saying these words
he threw his heavy club from him, and came toward the Prince with his fist
bent for to strike him, in the like sort did this noble warrior, and for to
strike him at his ease he was constrained to raise up himself in his stirops,
otherwise he could not reach his head, but yet he lent him so terrible a blow
upon the forehad, that he drove the bone to the brains, and being therewith
amazed he fell down to the ground, and with the great force and strength that
he put to strike that blow, it lacked little that he fell not from his horse,
but incontinent he stroke him again the second blow, wherewith he made an end
to beat out his brains, and there remained dead. The Prince was greatly
amazed in beholding him, for as he lay along upon the ground he seemed to be a
great Oak blown down with the wind, the knight could not refrain himself
but that he must needs laugh, and said: Of truth I am a notable guest, for
that before I do enter into my lodging, I do pay the shot. At this instant
the Ladies came to that place, with as much joy at that present, as before they
were sad and sorrowful. When the Princes Antemisca did see the greatness of
the Giant, and the deformity of his body, she said unto the Prince: If thou
should give like payment (worthy Trapobanian) unto all them that should
receive thee for guest, I do not know, nor I cannot believe, that they would
take the pain to serve them that should come after thee. I know not what will
happen answered Claridiano, but I am sure that I have given this his payment
according unto the intertainment he gave me, and somewhat better cheap then
that Giant which was in ye mountain, who thought with his own body to have
queesed me to the death: but yet I do certefie you, that after his death, I
received greater battle, then when he was a live. Then said the Gentlewoman
that was released out of prison, if I had not feared a farther peril, with the
great joy which I received when I saw him fall down, I promise you I could
have laughed heartily, to see how he travailed to catch hold of you. Tush, all
this was nothing said Antemisca, neither did I esteem of it: but had it not
been for the great sorrow which I received, when I saw him fast in his claws
tumbling and tossing from one place to another, I promise you if the peril had
not been so great, I could not but have rejoiced joy to see how he rolled him
up and down, and by reason that the armor was very just unto his body, and
likewise very hard, it was a pleasure to see him biting at it with his teeth:
and when he saw that all his great labor was lost, he turned unto his first
office, rolling and tumbling our Knight, as though he would have rocked him a
sleep. I do promise you of my faith Ladies said Libernio, with great fear
that I had, to have received some knock or blow, I neither received pleasure
in the one, nor grief in the other. Then the Princess said unto the
Gentlewoman her companion, it shall be better for us to go and see, what
victualles, our host has prepared for us to eat, for the good hope that I
have to prove of that which he has ordained for us, has taken from me the
great care and sorrow which I had, as you may see, and in this sort as they
were they went toward their hosts house the Giant, and they saw that it was
a great barn cut out of the hard stone and wrought of the rock. And entering
therein they saw that he had put to roast a whole Dear, which was a very great
one, and seeing that which should give them comfort, every one of them fell to
work, hoping for their travail to eat part of that dear. The old Squire
turned the spit, and the Ladies made the fire, and the Prince pulled out
coals, so that there was none idle, in hope of the benefit to come: and with
the great hunger they had, and desire to eat, that when the dear was scant
hot on the spit, they thought it over roasted and half burned, likewise they
procured to see if they could find any bread. Claridiano descended into a
room, he had under the cave, whereas he found two great loves, so great in
compass as the cyrbe of a well, and two great flagons full of beer, with
great joy and pleasure the Prince came forth out of the cave, and for to give
contentment unto the Ladies, he brought it forth, and showed them what he had
found. And when the Ladies saw so good provision, they made have of the dear,
and having nothing wherewith to cut their victuals, the Prince used his sword
at that time in steed of a knife. So ye Prince and the Ladies began to cut and
to eat at their will: but Libernio by reason that he was occupied in tourning
and rosting, he could not profit himself with his hands for to eat, and when
he saw, that the dear was almost half eaten, he said. Of truth if I make
long tarrying, I shall be made Lord over the bones, and not of any flesh, if you
go forwards in eating as you do begin. Tarry a while longer said Antemisca,
and then you shall see how it will fall out, for y^ now in this time of
hunger, we do not remember any courtesy, therefore procure to catch and eat
whereas thou can or may, for thou did very well shift to hide thy self
amongst the bushes when as thou did see the Giant: to whom* Libernio, said.

I would this morning you had given us some counsel, and not now, that you are
so lively and liberal in eating. Then Claridiano said, Good old man, it shall
be better that thou do put thy jaws to work and let thy tongue be in
quiet: I will believe your highness said the old man, for that you do give
me good counsel, and therewith he took the rest of the Dear from the fire,
and began to cut and to eat with great have, such have they made that in a
small time they had bestowed all the Dear and the bread, and a great part of
the Beer, whith gave occasion unto Antemisca to say as follows. Oh how kings
and Princes be meruailously deceived, believing that with their delycate meats
and drinks they shall bring to themselves n^w and better complections, and
expel all gross humors, and maintain unto themselves a great state of
health, and to obtain thereby a better disgesture and taste, then they which
do live in poor and miserable estate, we do see that the simple pastor or
shepherd keeping of his sheep, is better content with a piece of brown bread
and an Onion, then mighty kings and Princes with all their delycate fare, and
I do certify you that the Shepherds are more fortunate then kings. It is a
vale of miseries to be a king, and great ease and security to be a Shepherd,
for that the king must foresee to put good government in his kingdom and
minister justice, and the shepherd only to his sheep: Oh what great
contentment should thou receive, Princess Antemisca, if it had pleased y^
Gods to have made thee the poorest Pastora in all the world, and not to have
put thee in so high estate, whereas thy fortune has brought thee to travail,
and to see the experience of such proofs as these be, and that thou which
do pretend, for if thou were of a base lignage, and that they had imputed
unto thee this falt, (with which without all truth I am charged) I should not
esteem more of my honor then as a Pastora, but now being daughter unto him
whom I am, I must make of it according unto my estate, therefore now I do
say that a shepheardes estate is better then to be Queen of Mesopotamia: Oh
my evil fortune and destiny, I cannot but needs I must complain and cry
out with a loud voice against thee, for that thou do not give me the
contentment that the silly Pastora has, in following her sheep and lambs,
and not so high estate and Lordship. With shedding of many tears did
Antemisca in this sort complain against fortune. Libernio who was very
attentive unto ye words of the Princess, said with a smiling ^ laughter:
Mistress, at such time as you were with your fingers pinching and pulling at
the roasted Dear, I would you had put your self in this disputation, and not
now, for when the belly is full, every one of us is a good preacher. Ah
Libernio, answered Antemisca, at that time I did not remember that which I now
feel, for if I did I should have received the self same sorrow which I now
do. Then the old man said: Well, let all pass, and let us consider of that
which is most convenient for us, and let us depart from hence out of this
place, and procure to come to some town or dwelling place, for that it cannot
be without danger to remain here with this dead Gyaunt, and that there is
more of his fraternity nigh this his habitation, and again, I would be very
loath that we should fall into so great danger as that which is past, for lack
of victuals, for peradventure we shall not meet with another host as good as
this for to satisfy our hunger, the Prince was very quiet and held his peace
at all that he heard betwixt the Princess and Libernio, and did very much
rejoice to hear the discreet reasons of Antemisca, and seeing that Libernio
his counsel was the best, he made have that the Ladies should take their
palfray, and leaped on his horse, and took the way and travailed through a
narowe path which seemed to be used by the Giant, and so with great diligence
they travailed all the rest of that day till it was night, at which time they
had won the top of that mountain, from whence they did discover marvelous
great and fair plains, the which were inhabited with very fair Cities and
towns, at which sight these trauailers received great contentment and joy, and
without any staying they made have onwards on their journey, till such time as
they came unto a castle which was in the midst of the way, half the hill
downwards, it was one a clock at midde night before they came thither, and
their horses waxed very weary, and by reason that it was night, all the gates
and doors of the Castle were shut. Then Libernio took hold of the ring of the
gate and began to knock with great fury, as though he would have beaten the
gate down, at which knocking, a man of the Castle looked out of a window, and
said. Who is yt, which calls and knocks at ye gate with so great rigor, at
this time of the night? To whom Claridiano answered. A Knight, and two fair
damosells, whom fortune has brought hither, and would if it were so your
pleasure, enter in, and take some rest, for that we do come very weary and
troubled with this our long and solitary journey. Tarry a little, answered the
man, for that I will give the Lord of this Castle to understand thereof, and
therewith he withdrew himself from the window, and went in: but he tarried not
long, when that the same man opened another window somewhat lower, and put out
thereat a light torch, and straight way there looked out an old Knight, whose
head was all graye, which said. Who be you that do say, that you have passed
the Mountains Nabateos, without any peril to your persons. To whom
Claridiano said, We are strangers, whose fortune has brought us hither, and
we do desire thee to do us to much pleasure as to receive us into your castle
this night, that we may take some rest: Friends, answered the knight of the
Castle, we are here so feared with a great devil, whose habitation is in the
height of the mountain, that not only in the night, we dare not open our
gates, but also we keep them shut all day. Who is this yt so much trouble and
vex you, said Libernio. The Knight said. A mighty great Giant, and of a
marvelous height, and formed like unto a devil. I do swear unto thee by
Jupiter said Libernio, that from this day forwards thou need not to fear
him, for that this day very much against his will we were his guests, and did
eat of that which he ordained for himself, paying first for our victuals with
two buffets, wherewith he lost his life. When the Lord of the Castle heard
this he commanded the gates to be opened, although with some fear, for that
he was not certain of that he had heard spoken. But when ye knight and his
company were within the Castle, he commanded that the gate should be shut again:
so they altogether entered into a fair and large court, and were by the Lord of
ye Castle received with great love, and when he saw yt Claridiano was of so
goodly proportion, he greatly meruailed. To whom Libernio said: Lord and
friend, from this day forwards thou shall not need to have any fear of this
thy en^mie, for that he will no more return to trouble you, for this knight
whom thou see before thee has slain him and made an end of his days, and
not this giant alone, but also those furious giants Tartaros. Oh sovereign
Gods said the old knight of the Castle, is this possible to be true which I
do hear, and that my fortune is so good to receive into my house the Knight
that has done so valiant acts. We shall quickly see whether it be true or
not, for ye every night this devil comes* giving terrible shrikes, and for
that he should quickly depart, I do command to throw him provision, out at ye
highest window of this Castle, and yet he is not content therewith by reason of
his great pride, but he is so evil inclined, that if he meet any of our
people he pardons none, but kills them. You may from hence forth cease your
fear, said Claridiano, for I promise you that he will never more trouble nor
gree^e you. So with such reasonings they went up into ye castle where they were
meruailously well received by a Gentlewoman wife unto the knight of the Castle,
whose name was Marmariton, and likewise of two sons, which he had, proper young
men. So straight way the ^able was commanded to be covered, and that they
should sit down to supper, whereas they were served very abundantly, for the
Knight of the Castle was a very rich man, none richer in all the kingdom of
Nabatea, who could not satisfy himself in beholding the great gravity and
severe countenance of the Prince, and his fair and well proportioned body. So
when they had made an end of their supper, for to pass away the time, till
they should go to take their rest, The Prince said unto the Lady which he
released out of prison: It shall be good fair Lady now that you are at
liberty and out of all danger, that you do tell us the occasion of your
imprisonment, and how it has been, if so be that the declaring does not
trouble you. The Damsel answered: Of truth my Lord, this will I do with a
very good will, and if it were but only for to give you contentment, and it
is great reason and justice, for that you did put your person in great danger
for my deliverance: You shall understand, gentle knight, that along the huge
and mighty river of Euphrates, toward the Oriental parts, there is a
mighty City called Ierosolima, the which is not far from the head of the said
river, on the other side of the river toward the Sun setting is there
another City called Sabiosa, of these and of other cities and towns there
about, my Father is king and Lord ever. The Gods who were so pleased for to
enrich me, not only of goods, but also of beauty and fairness, more then
any other in all the kingdom, or in a great part there abouts, the fame of my
great beauty was published in all places, which was the occasion that there
repaired unto my fathers Court many Lords and knights of great estimation,
amongst whom there came one young knight and a stranger, who was natural of
the kingdom of Tigliafa, and Lord of the City of Zina, and he being in love
with me and I likewise of him, and before that either of us could manifest our
love the one unto the other, there passed a long time, but only by our outward
shows, we did declare each to other the abundance of our hearts and signs of
love, the which endured many days. So it happened upon a day going to
recreate my self in a Forest there by, amongst the sweet herbs and
odoriferous flowers, hard by the river side of Euphrates, which caused in my
mind all kind of amorous thoughts, and I carrieng my yeolow gold hair, all
dispearsed behind my cares covering my back, upon a sudden amongst the
thick trees I saw a very fair Pastora, which was combing of her hair,
sitting under a fair and green Myrtl^ tree. And here my Lord I do certify
you of a truth, that in all the world has not been seen the like, she had
feeding by her a few sheep, and by her lay her shepherds hook, and her
bag hung upon the Myrtle tree, I know not what to say, but that the trees
and herbs did rejoice to see her beauty, I could not but stay and rejoice
my self in beholding so goodly a creature, with her yeolow golden hair
dispearsed all abroad, which did reach unto her feet, and for that she was set
down, her golden hair did cover all the sweet herbs there about her, and by
reason of the great heat of the Sun, she had her neckenger turned down upon
her shoulders, whereout did appear her very white and christalline neck, my
Ladies and damsells were no less amazed to see her great beauty, believing
that she should be daughter unto the Gods, and no earthly creature, but fortune
who is so mutable would not suffer me to enjoy long so beautiful and joyful a
sight, but being without fear in this sort as I have told you, upon a
sudden there came behind me ye Prince of Nicea, and before yt I could make
any means for to disturb him, in great have he took me fast by the arm, and
with a trice he lift me up and set me before him on the saddle bow of his
horse, and in great have he put himself into the thickest of the Forest, my
Gentlewomen and maidens remained giving great shrikes, but it little profited,
for that the prince of Nicea made such diligent have, that in a very short
time he entered with me into a bark in the river of Euphrates, who carried us
so far, as we came whereas he joined unto the river Tygris, whereas we went a
land, and crossed over the mountains of Libanos, whereas we were taken of that
furious Giant which was first slain, and at one terrible blow he slew the
Prince, and me he carried unto ye prison, whereas you (gentle knight) did find
me, and heerewith she held her peace, giving a great sigh, in remembering her
evil fortune, and all the rest remained which great sorrow and grief to hear
this lamentable discourse, but Claridiano was more attentive unto the report of
the fairness and beauty of the Pastora, then unto all the rest. At this time
was ye hour of the giants coming past, which made the Lord of the castle
believe the death of his cruel enemy to be true, and receiving great
contentment thereat, he declared unto them of marvelous and great feasts and
triumphs yt were preparing to be made in the city of Nabatea, at the marriage
of ye prince of Nabatea, with the Princess of the mount Libano, to the which
there were come many Lords and knights of all ye kingdom, and from most parts
of all the kingdoms heerabouts, but in especial from Phoenicia, Camogenia,
Palestina, and Siria, therefore gentle knight, let your coming be to see these
feasts, for that you shall understand that there is put for the price to him
who does best, a marvelous fair and great horse, such a one as is supposed in all y^ world not to be the like. Claridiano had a great desire to go thither,
and he told it unto the Ladies, who were not discontent therewith. So with that
determination they went to bed into very fair and well dressed chambers,
whereas they took their rest and ease for that they had great need thereof,
so they soiourned and rested themselves in this castle eight days, whereas ye
old knight Marmariton did make much of them, and gave unto the Ladies all
things that was necessary for to apparel themselves, and likewise very fair
Palfraies, also he did desire the Prince to take one of his sons to serve
him, that he might learn of him his good manners and accustomed conditions,
which were passing above all other, the Prince did accept the offer, with a
very good will, his sons name was Fidelio* whose doings were conformable and
agreeable thereunto in all fidelity and truth, he had a very good
countenance and modest disposition, and very gentle of speech, and when they
saw that it was time to depart for Nabatea, very much against ye will of
Marmariton, they took their leave and went the way toward Nabatea, and what
happened to them in the said journey, shall be declared unto you in the next
Chapter following.

How Claridiano and his company went unto the triumph of Nabatea, and of all
that happened unto them in the way. Cap. 11.
THE valiant and heroical Prince after that he had taken leave of the knight
of ye castle, with all his company they departed their way toward the city of
Nabatea, for to see ye great feasts and triumphs, for that Claridiano had a
great desire to find himself therein. So they travailed through a narow and
straight way, which brought them into a broad and common beaten way which led
them straight unto one of the gates of the city, wherein much people and many
knights travailed, and they thus travailing, saw come forth of a narowe way
which entered into that broad way, a company of Knights to the number of
twenty, who were all armed with very fair and ri^che armor, and in their
company came a Lady somewhat in years, and with her a very fair Damsel,
and very well apparailed, who brought with them six Gentlewomen to bear them
company, who were all apparailed in purple velvet, all to be spotted with
these two letters, F.F. all of gold, which did show and shine marvelous
fair: and it did appear that this ancient Lady was Lady and mistres over all
ye company, and it was true, for that she was the Duchess of the valley, and
the Damsel was her daughter, who went to the feasts and triumphs in company
of those knights, and amongst them there was one a very young man, who was
Earl of the Lake, who was very desirous to show his valiantness, this young
knight was very much in love with ye young damsel that came in their
company, his desire was to enter into the city of Nabatea, with only four
knights, who pretended and believed to do such feats of arms, yt the young
Lady should have great reason to requite him his love. Don Claridiano when he
saw the^ so well apparelled and proportioned he put himself apart to give them
way yt they might pass by: but yet he could not do it so secretly, but yt he
must needs be seen of y^ other, and for ye Claridiano was well proportioned,
and armed with purple armor, having also in his company two fair ladies, all
ye other company did much behold him, meruailing much who it should be, the like
did the Duchess and her daughter. And when they were all past by, the prince
Claridiano turned unto his former journey, it was not long after that there
came a Damsel toward him with as great have as ever she could make her
palfraie to go, and when she came nigh unto him, she did salute him very
courteously, saying: Knight of the Ladies, Don Petildo Earl of the deep Lake
does send me unto thee, to ask thee what was the occasion that thou did
apart thy self out of the way, considering they were men which did pass by,
whether thou did it for that thou would not just with them, he says yt
thou may go whether thy pleasure is, nevertheless if that there be in thee
so much valor as does appear by thy disposition, he would be very glad to
break a spear with thee in the service of his Lady. To whom the Prince said:
Fair Damsel and friend, I would be very glad to satisfy this his
request, if that I did find my self subject to love, as it does appear that
he is, therefore tell unto this knight that I have no will to just neither to
be in love. Then the Damsel said: I do well believe, that it is more thy
will to take thy ease and rest, then to take any pains, and this is ye cause
that thou will be clear from amorous delights, and so she returned with this
answer, and when she had told them, there was a great laughter amongst
them, in mocking of Claridiano, and determined amongst themselves to send the
damsel back again, to tell him, for that he was not determined to just in
the service of his Ladies, yt he would just with one of those knights, for y^
it does touch much the order of knighthoode, and is also his duty, with
condition that if he be overthrown, only to loose his armor, for that it
seems unto us to be very good, and if ye other be overcome, likewise to
loose his armor, and when the damsel had declared her message, Claridiano
answered: Fair damsel, tell those knights yt I am not determined to just,
neither with condition nor without, for if I should loose my armor, I should not
so quickly get other, and if they have such a desire to just, in Nabatea they
shall find them yt will accomplish their desire by justice: Cursed be these thy
excuses, said the damsel, which are so much to thy dishonor, how ill is ye
rich armor bestowed on thee, it is not without cause I perceive, that they are
so whole upon thy body, for thou do show that thy war is more with
words then with arms and feats of knighthood. Let it be what it will be,
said Claridiano, for I will not meddle in this just. Well, adieu knight of small
reputation, said the Damsel, happy be those Ladies that does travail with
such a keeper and defender, and therewith she returned back to her company,
but the Ladies that were with Claridiano made great laughter, for that they
were certified of the valor of their knight, what he was, but Fidelio when he
heard the excuses of his master, thought verily that he did it for fear, and
for this cause he was very heavy and sad, and the Ladies perceiving, had
thereat great pleasure and sport. So travailing forwards, they came unto a
bridge which was over the river Tygris, and on the other side there was a Tent
armed which was very rich, wherein was a knight armed which did defend that
passage, and there were set up against a tree a great number of Spears, and
when the duchess with all her knights and company entered the bridge, there
appeared unto them a knight of a gentle disposition, who with great lightness
leapt upon his horse, and sent a Squire unto them to tell them that they could
not pass that way, but first they should confess themselves to be overcome
by the best knight of all the world, but if they will stand unto the just, he
that receives the foil to loose both his horse and armor, so in a trice they
put themselves in order, at which time the Prince Claridiano came unto that
place, and when he saw that they did make ready and address themselves unto
the just, he stayed on the one side whereas he might very well at his
pleasure see them. It so fell out, that in twenty iusts all these twenty
knights were overthrown and failed, at which the Duchess received great
sorrow and grief, and sent the same damsel (which the other had sent before)
unto the Prince, and when she came unto him, she said: Knight, enemy unto
iusts and travail, my Lady, the duchess of the valley does desire thee, for
that it was not thy pleasure for her knights to show thy bounty, that now at
her request thou would make free this passage, and do that which her knights
could not. Friend said Claridiano, go and tell unto thy Lady the Duchess,
that I will procure to make the way sure for me and my company, and will her
highness likewise to bring knights that can defend her, as well as they can
with their scoffs know how to make a jest at one they know not. The damsel
said: Cursed be the reasons and excuses of so evil a knight, that neither for
Lady of estimation, nor knight of prowess, will be moved to virtue, and
heerewith she returned to give her Lady the answer. So straight way came
forth many men for to pull off the armor of those overcome Knights, the which
when Claridiano saw, he spurred forwards his horse with his spear in his
hand, ready at all assayes to the just, and went toward the Duchess saying.
Lady, now will I show unto you, whether I can better keep my whole armor, then
your Knights their broken, and therewith he called unto that Knight which kept
the passage, that he should make himself ready and come to him, and being both
set in their places, they moved their horses the one against the other with
great fury, and in the midst of their course they met together, and neither
of them did miss his blow, but met with so great force, that the spear of
the Knight of the Passage was shiuered all to pieces, and made the Prince to
incline his body upon the saddle, but ye Knight of ye Passage received ye blow
in such sort, yt neither his shield, nor his armor could make any resistance,
but yt the head of ye spear showed it self at his back, wherewith he fell
from his horse dead to ye ground. The Duchess when she saw it, received great
joy, although the folly of her Knights was a grief unto her, in such sort yt
she said. Oh what do they deserve, yt without knowing ye valor of a person
will have him in derision, for we may well consider that the Gods can bestow
their gifts on persons of small valor, at the least on them yt have small
capacity for to use it, for here you may see this knight, yt those knights
which did bear me company, deemed yt he did refuse ye just with the^ of very
cowardnesse, and yet he is ye party yt delivers them, that they might not
altogether be shamed: Oh disordinate pride, enemy to all virtue, such is it
that does remain in our estates, that altogether it does make us to forget all
goodness, yet in our subjects meaner persons we may learn that which is
requisite for our commodity and honor, and yet we do think that all which
the Gods does give us, we do deserve, and yet we find not our selves
satisfied. At which reasons of the Duchess, Claridiano was very attentive,
and thought well of her repentance, for that which her knights had done against
him, and was very well content, and had her in reputation to be very
honorable, and drawing nigh unto her he said: Fair Lady, here you do see
yt with great reason the horse and armor of these your knights is mine, and
does pertain unto me, for yt their experience was such to be lanched out of
their saddles, as also to mock and jest at travailing and venterous knights,
therefore your pleasure may be to command them to be delivered unto me* for yt
they knew not how to defend them. The Duchess was cut off from her answer by
reason of the coming of a knight with great pride that said: The horse and
armor is none of thine, first I do give thee to understand yt we will defend
them with the loss of thy life. And in saying these words he drew out his
sword, and before that the Prince could make any resistance, he cut off one of
his horse legs, and the Prince perceiving it, before his horse did fall, with
great lightness he cleared himself from ye saddle, and like unto the wind he
went against that discourteous Knight, with his sword in his hand, he stroke
him such a blow upon the head, that he cut it in two parts, and he fell dead to
the earth. The rest of the Knights which saw this, came unto him with their
swords in their hands, and for all the crying out of the Duchess and her
daughter to withdraw them, they did compass him about altogether, striking him
with terrible blows on every side: but yet they found him not so weak and
without courage as they thought, but rather with a valiant heart he made his
defense, and did entreat them in such sort, that afterward it grieved the^ to
have beg^n that enterprise, for the Prince so behaved himself, that at three
blows he brought three of them dead to the ground, and for that they were all
chosen knights, for the loss of those that were slain, they would not leave
to persevere against ye mighty warrior. The Prince when he perceived that they
did still procure to entreat him evil, with great ire and wrath he began a
new to plague them with his strong and furyous arm, in such sort, that in a
small time he made that the half of them had lost their strength for to strike
at him, the rest which remained when they saw that there they should look for
no other but death, except they made their defense better, or else procure to
kill him, yt which straight way they did put in ure. Then the Prince when he
perceived that still with great fury they did persecute him, he let slip his
sheelde and threw it on his back, and took fast hold of his sword in both
his hands, and stroke so terrible a blow at him which came first to hand,
that hitting him on the shoulder, he cut him down unto the wast and he fell
dead to the ground, then casting his sword about, with an overthwart blow he
stroke another on the throat, that he made his head to fly from his
shoulders, and in that fury he brought other two dead to the ground, the other
six which remained seeing his devilish fury began to withdraw themselves.
Then the daughter of the Duchess seeing the other knights to retire, came
unto the Prince, and with great grace and courtesy she said: Valiant knight of
the Ladies, I do desire thee for courtesies sake to cease thy fury, and let
not the force of thy strong arm proceed farther, but let this my desire and
request move thee to that which twenty knights of valor could not obtain.
This noble warrior although he was blind and overcome with anger and wrath,
yet could he not but pacify himself, seeing with what humility this fair
Gentlewoman did desire him, and without any more replying he did withdraw
himself, and leapt upon the horse of the knight of the passage, for that
Fidelio did take and brought after that ye horse of his master was slain, and
therewith he passed over the bridge, and began to take his journey forwards,
leaving all them which saw the battle, very much amazed at his great
prowess. So they travailed with great haste, because they would come unto
their lodging before night, and making have, they came unto a man's house, who
did lodge them, being in great fear, the occasion shall be told you in the
next chapter following.

How that Claridiano was assaulted with two furious Giants, and with xv.
Knights that came with them, and of the battle that he had with them all.
Cap. 12.
AT such time as the bright Apollo, would spread abroad his beams upon the
cold and moist earth, was that valiant knight Claridiano on horseback, with
all his company, for to prosecute his journey, and upon a sudden, he heard
with a great noise and rushing, that they shut the gates of the house. Then the
Prince asked what was the occasion of that great noise, and it was told him by
his host, how that it was for to keep out two great Giants, which of late
days did use all those ways and fields, doing all the harm possible, in
taking and killing all that ever they might, and they do carrye with them
fifteen Knights, for to help them to do all this evil, for which cause all
this Country stands in great fear, and dare not travail by the ways, and
understanding that many do come this way, to go see the triumphs and feasts
at Nabatea, they do use here great pride and arrogancy, carrying away with
them many prisoners, as well men as women. So when the Prince heard this, as
one that did procure no other thing, but to augment his honor, and increase
his fame, he said. Command that the gates may be open, for that I will never
account my self in the number of Knights, but that I will cause them to leave
off doing such harm, and also set them at liberty, whom they do carry
captives, and ease thee of this great fear in the which thou art. O for the
love thou do bear unto the Gods, gentle Knight, said the Host of the house,
do not put these thy tender years in peril to be slain, or carried away
prisoner by those furious beasts. To whom Claridiano answered. It will be
rather a shameful reproach unto my fame, if there should lack in me, that which
I am bound by the order of Knighthood to perform. Therefore my good Host, let
this suffice, that neither your request nor any others peticions, shall
persuade me to the contrary, but that I will go forth and procure to abate so
great pride and harm, for that in making an end of my days, in defense
against these cruel people, then have I performed that I am bound to, and have
promised to do, therefore I pray thee comnaund that the gates may be opened.
When the Host saw his determined purpose and will, he commanded the gates to
be opened. The two Ladies received great sorrow and grief, for that which the
Knight did: but much more was the grief of Fidelio, although he was thoroughly
certified of ye valor of his Lord, yet he let not but greatly to fear his
return, for yt the enterprise was very dangerous and doubtful, and would
very feign have gone with his Lord, but he would in no case consent thereunto,
but would alone go forth upon this enterprise. So this noble warrior rode forth
with the visor of his helm up, and his shield on his arm, and a mighty
cutting sword in his hand, and put himself in the midst of the high way,
and in a small time after, he saw a chariot which was drawn with six ^orses,
in the which they brought the Duchess of the Ualley, and all the company yt
remained with her, who by reason yt they were evil intreted in ye battle
before, ^hey ^ad not strength to make resistaunce, but yt they were taken
prisoners by the Giants, and bound very fast, and put into that Chariot. The
Prince at yt time did greatly rejoice, for yt he had so good opportunity for
to make satisfaction unto the Duchess and her knights of the great harm the
which by him they had received, and being ready to the battle, he put
himself in the high way, tarrying their coming.

When the Giants saw his great hardines, one of them, which by reason of his
deformed members, travailed on a mighty great horse, came forth before all
the rest, whereas this Greek was: and when he came nigh him, he said in the
Chaldean tongue. Thou Knight, what devil has caused thee to commit so great
folly, for to abide my fury, art thou so certefied of thy great valor, yt thou will see the proof thereof. Then the valiant son of the great Alphebo
answered. Neither my folly, nor yet the trust which thou say I have, has
moved me, but only this thy cruelty and evil customs which thou do use,
for that the immortal Gods are very angry, that they have endued you with so
mighty members and strength, and you thus imploye them, exercising nothing but
vileness and cruelty, and therefore they do send me, as their messenger, to
make manifest unto you their great anger and wrath, promising great punishment,
if you do not leave to follow these perverse customs which you do use, and
if it be so that you are determined not to leave this evil custom and amend
your life, here in their names I do defy you in mortal battle. The Giant
with the great pride he had, and with the anger that he received, when he heard
the speech of the Prince, the words doubled so in his mouth, that he could not
make any answer, but threw out from his mouth and nose great abundaunce of
smoke, which almost took away their sights like a mist, and spurring
forwards his great beast, who was very light, that with a trice he was with
the Prince, and before he could make any resistaunce, he stroke him so terrible
a blow with both his hands with his heavy clubbe upon his fine and hard
steeled helm that it made him to stagger, and to fall down upon his horse
neck, and his spears fell out of his hand, and his arms hanged down, as
though he had been dead and out of his nose and mouth proceeded great quantity
of blood.

His horse who was very swifte and strong, gave a spring in the air, and
turned about, carrying his master a long time about the field, sprinkeling
with blood all the way whereas he went.

The Giant did not remain content after that he had given him this blow, but
did follow him for to double it, with the which he thought to make an end of
that work: but this thought lasted not long, for that this Greek Knight was
come again to himself, and as he was setlyng himself in his saddle, he
perceived very well the great danger, wherein ^e was lodged that he thought
verily that he had been slain with that terrible blow, which he received:
there was never Serpent went out of the Lidian sea, to seek their pray, with
more ire and fury, then this Greek warrior did at this time against his
enemies to see himself so ill entreated, and that with one only blow, and
therewith drew out his s^ord, and went toward the Gyaunt saying. Tarry, tarry
thou furious beast, for here I swear unto thee by the immortal Gods, that
very quickly I mean to give thee thy payment, which thy terrible blow does
deserve. The Prince at that time was so full of wrath, that he might well have
been counted hardy, that durst at that time come to him face to face. And when
he came whereas the Giant was, he stretched himself upon his stirrops, and
stroke so terrible a blow upon the giants shoulder, which was with so great
strength, that all that quarter he cut clean away, and threw him dead to the
ground: which caused great contentment unto all those, that were in the house
beholding them. The other Giant when he saw his companion dead, with great
wrath he commanded the fifteen Knights, that altogether they should assault
that mortal enimye, who were not slack in accomplishing his commandment. Oh
unhappy people, if you had considered, how that this young Knight had lost the
reins of his patience, you would not have been so hardy to assault him, for
that strong mountains were not sufficient to make resistance against him,
neither would ye have been so bold, to give him any occasion of offense. This
worthy warrior when he saw this his shameful assault, without loosing any
part of his courage, he went and encountered them, laying about him, striking on
the right hand, and on the left hand, with so much fury, as a Lion, when he is
compassed about with expert hunters, even so be used himself. These knights
were all stout and chosen knights, and of the lineall descent of Giants, and
did not let to strike him many and furious blows, which made him many times
almost to leese his wits, which was caused by his great ire and wrath, for
it was such, that he felt in himself no increasing of force: yet for all that,
he did so imploye his blows, that ten of them, some with their heads cloven in
pieces, and other some with their arms cut off, he overthrew dead to the
ground. The other Giant was meruailously amazed to see so incredible a thing,
but puffing and blowing like to a Bull, he set hand to his mighty and great
cutting sword, and with great furye he likewise assaulted the valiant Knight on
the one side, and stroke at him such a blow, that he made him to stoop and
incline his body to his horse neck, but quickly he raised himself up again,
and with great lightness he cleared himself from the second blow, which he
saw descending upon him, and therewith he stroke two blows at two of those
five Knights which remained, so that he brought them both dead to the ground.
The Giant when he saw so much strength in one Knight, being very much kindeled
in wrath, he commanded the three Knights which remained, to withdraw
themselves a part, so that the Giaunt and the Knight made their assault
together with such terrible blows, that it was wonderful to see. The Knight
with both his hands stroke at the Giant, so that both their blows descended
together, with so great strength and noise, that it made a marvelous sound
throughout all the mountaints. The Giaunt was he which receceiued the most
harm, by reason that his armor made but small resistance against the terrible
blows of the Knight, which was the occasion that he was hurt and wounded in
many places. The Giant seeing his great resistaunce roared like a baighted Bull,
procuring withal the power he had to hurt the Prince. In this sort they
endured more then an hour without taking any rest, at which time the Giant did
feel in himself some weariness, and would with one blow make an end of this
battle, or put his life in ieopardie, and therewith he stroke with all his
force so terrible a blow at the prince, that he made him to fall upon his horse
crupper, but straight way he was settled again in his saddle, and striking his
horse with the spurs, he came unto the Giant, at such time as he had his sword
aloft, to discharge it upon the Prince, but he thrust at him a foyne at the
sight of his healme, which was very large, in such sort, yt he stroke him
betwixt both his eyes, and the sword passed through to his neck, so that the
Giant fell down dead to the ground, which was no small joy unto all the
Prisoners that were in the Chariot. The other three Knights when they saw all
things to go so ill on their parts, they let loose their horse bridles, and
with great have they procured to hide themselves in the thickest of the
forest. The Prince made no reckoning of them, but let them go, and went
straight way unto the Chariot, and lighted from his horse, and went up into it
for to unloose those prisoners which were bound, and said unto those Ladies.
Receive this service of me, not for any courtesy that I found in your Knights,
but for the great bounty and virtue, which is in the Duchess and her daughter.
The Earl of the deep lake answered and said. Of truth, gentle Knight, it
had been better that you had accepted our demand, which we asked in the
service of the Ladies: for that being subdued by your great valor, we had not
come into so great misery and trouble in the which we have seen our selves.
Sir Earl answered the prince Claridiano, my heart is so clean void of the
subjection of love, (putting apart my bounden duty toward the^) that by the
oath that I have sworn to the order of Knighthood, that it is not to be
meruailed if I did deny your demand, putting for intercessour that, which my
heart was never subject unto. Then the Duchess with a goodly grace said: Yet
I do certefie you gentle Knight, that at this time you shall not remain so
much at your own liberty, but that by me you shall be constrained to be my
guide to the City of Nabatea. With condition said the Prince, that the day of
the iusting, you do not manifest my person, unto any creature. I do accept to
be your keeper and defender. The condition answered the Duchess daughter, is
granted and accepted, but yet I must needs charge you with another request,
which I will ask of you, and it is, that in my name, and as my Knight, you
will carrye with you a Jewel of mine, and enter into the iusting at Nabatea,
with the Earl in your company. I cannot deny anything yt you do ask of me,
said Claridiano, for that you have power to command me, and therefore I do
accept, and grant unto all things that your highness shall demand. And being
in this communication, the Princesses thet remained at their Hosts, came
whereas they were, and in their company the Knight of the house, who was
almost in an ecstasy with the great joy and pleasure he had, to see the two
Giants and his company dead, and requested them instantly, that they would go
unto his Castle to take their rest: to the which they did grant, for the
necessity which did move them. Galtenor did declare unto us what should be
done unto these Giants, and said that they were Lords of the fair Islands,
enemies unto the King of the Nabateos, and as they had understanding of the
great triumphs and feasts which was proclaimed in Nabatea, three of those
Giaunts, which were all brethren, went forth to do all the harm they might,
in company with their mother who was a great inchaunter. The one of the Giants
who was more furious and of a mightier strength then the other two, would go
alone, and these two came together of whom were have told you. The Knights of
the Duchess were meruailously ill entreated in the battle which they had
with Claridiano, and it was requisite that they should remain a few days in
the castle, for to ease and comfort themselves: but the Prince his heart could
not in any wise suffer to tarry so long to ease himself, but took his leave
of ye Duchess for to depart, who did grant it unto him with a very good will,
for that she would remain in ye Castle, till such time as her knights were
better comforted and amended. So ye Prince and his company took ye way which
they thought best, whereas they travailed eight days, in which time he did
wonders in arms, punishing rapes and extremities offered, in such sort, and so
many, that his fame was exalted unto the clouds, some called him the Knight of
the Ladies, and other some the Knight with the Purple armor. And when they
understood that the time of the Triumphs drew near, they took the way
which led them straight unto the City of Nabatea: and for to go thither, they
must needs pass thorough a wood of eight miles long, in the which they
travailed til it was noone time, and therein they discovered a very fair
castle, and feeling themselves somewhat weary, they went thither for to refresh
themselves, the which chanced unto them otherwise, as in the chapter following
you shall understand.

How the Knight of the Ladies went unto the Castle, and of the great treason
which was there ordained by Art Magic, and of the success thereof. Cap. 13.
THe Greek Prince for to take some refreshing, took his way toward the
Castle, that he saw in the wood with all his company, but yet it fell not out
with them as they hoped, for that when they came thither they found the ga^es
fast shut, and for all that they gave mighty blows thereat, and called, yet
there was no body that made them any answer, and seeing this, they determined
to go round about the Castle, to see if there were any other part whereas they
might call that they might be heard, but in all parts they found it a like, for
the which the Prince was very sorrowful, and pretended to depart some other
way: and turning about with his horse, he saw a pillar, which was made of
stone, on the which was written in the Chaldean tongue, these words. Let none
be so hardy as to enter into this Castle, except he will for his boldness
die the death. The Prince when he had read this title, laughed thereat and
said. I know none that is so hardy to enter into the Castle, seeing before
his eyes the inconveniences and harm that will thereof proceed* and again,
having the gates shut, in suth sort, that unto no body they will open them,
nevertheless although the peril be great, yet if they would open the gates, I
know not whether I should fear the entry or not, and if it were but only to
know what he is yt is of so great power: and nigh unto the said pillar was
there another of the same making, at the which there hung a Bugle horn, and
thereby was written these words, which said: He which is of so great hardines,
and has confidence in his power and strength, and will enter into the height
of this castle, let him blow this horn, and the entry therein shall be in
safety, but the coming forth shall be doubtful. If I were once within said
the knight, I would procure yt my coming forth should be without trouble, and
therewith he took the horn in his hand, and before that he began to sound
it he said unto the damsells: Fair Ladies I am determined to procure the
entry of this fortress, to see what there is within, and likewise him that
does proclaim so great fear, in ye mean time I desire you to tarry for me
amongst these green trees, for that the castle is small and will quickly be
looked over, so that in short time we shall know who and what there is within,
and making an end of desiring them to tarry, he blew the horn, and made it to
sound very strongly, in such sort, that it might be heard very far. There was
no long tarrying after when yt out of a window from ye highest part of the
castle, there was let down a basket which was made very fast above with a
strong rope. The Prince did well understand that if he would go in, he must
enter in by that basket, and so without any tarrying he put himself therein,
he was not as yet scarce settled when that with great swiftnes he was drawn up,
and when he was at the highest, with a trice he left the basket and put
himself in at the window, and could see no body, neither those which did
help to pull him up in the Basket, at the which he neither meruailed nor had
any fear, but looking about he saw a pair of winding stayres, whereat he
descended, and he had not descended many steps, when as there was so great
darkness, that scarce he could discern any light: and so groping by the
walls, he did keep his going down that narrow and turning stairs, which were
very long, and of such length, that he thought he descended into the midst of
the earth. He spent a great time in descending those stairs: but in the end
he came into a very fair and large Cour^e, all compassed about with iron
grates, very fair and well wrought, and at the one of them there was a Pastora
leaning on her breast, who seemed to be of a marvelous and fair beauty: who
leaned her fair face upon her white hand, being very pensive, and distilled
from her Christalline eyes great abou^daunce of tears. When this greek knight
saw this beautiful creature, he remained in great admiration, considering with
him self, if that by adventure she should be the same Pastora, which the
princes of Ierosolima had told him of. Then this Pastora did open her fair and
christalyne eyes, looking earnestly upon the knight, and giving a grievous and
sorrowful sigh, she withdrew her self from the grate, which caused the greek
knight to have great desire to know who it should be, suspecting that by force
of some enchantment, she should be put therein, wherewith there kindled in his
heart a new Fire of love: And casting up his eyes again to see if he might see
her, he could not, but saw in the very same place, a woman, of a very great
stature, who was all armed, with a sword gyrt at her wast, and had hanging at
her neck a bow, and a gylt Quiver, this lady was of so great beauty, that
she seemed almost to excel the Pastora, so that the Prince, with ye sight
which he had before him, forgot that which was past, and fixed his eyes on her.
But in the same sort upon a sudden, she went away as the first did, leuing the
knight with no less trouble in his thought, then before he was. This knight
had not much time to bewail the absence of that Lady, for that without seeing
any body, he was stricken such a blow with so great fury upon his back, that he
was constrained to stoop with one knee to the ground. Yet with a tryse he arose
up again: and looking about him to see who it was that stroke him, he
perceived that it was a knight, which with great have ran in at a door which
was at one of the corners of the court. And with the great anger which the
Prince reseiued, to see him self in such sort so ill entreated, he followed
him with his accustomed lightness, following after that Knight in at the door.
He was not two steps in at the door, when that he fell down into a deep
cave, which was covered over in such subtyl sort, that whosoever did tread on
it, he straightway fell down into the cave, except he were advertised thereof.
And within the cave it was very dark, and no light appeared. The Knight seeing
himself so betrayed in that trappe, he feared to receive some harm in the
fall. But yet very lightly he put him self on foot, with his Sword drawn
in his hand, for to make his defense, against whatsoever should happen. But by
reason of the great darkness, he could not see any thing, neither discover
wherein he was fallen, but determined to settle himself against somewhat, if
he might find where, groping to see if he might find any other door of entry
into that dark Den.

And as the knight went groping and feeling, he found that he trod on no other
thing but dead men's bones, which caused him to stand still. And not long
after there was open a lover hole, at the which entered much clearenesse, and
gave great light into the place whereas he was: whereat appeared a very old
woman, who was so lean and so full of wrinkels, that it seemed she had nothing
but skin and bones on her, who said unto the Prince, in an evil hour thou
came hither, and so shall thy lodging be, and thine entertainment, for that
thou art now in place, that thou may look for no other thing, but to be
meat unto a furious beast. And thy surmou^ted strength shall not be able to
make any defense. The prince who was very wrath, answered, Oh false and cursed
Witch, whom ye gods confound, who has taught thee to use so great disceit, yt
with thy false and devilish understanding, thou do work so much evil against
all traueling and ve^trous knights. I hope to come forth out of this cave, in
spite of al thy mischief, and with my strong arm to break all thy bones a
sunder. All that thou do and wilt do said the old woman, I will suffer at
thy hands, only for the reuengement I will take of thee, and that very
quickly, and therewith she went from that window and shut it fast again. So
not long after at his back he heard a noise, as though they were opening of a
door little and little, whereas there appeared a little light, the Prince
procuring to go thither, saw that the bones whereon he trod were of two humane
bodies, which appeared not to be very long since their flesh was torn of with
hard and cruel teeth, but this consideration could not endure long with him,
for that he heard a great rumor, and looking what it should be, he saw that
there was coming forth of another den a mighty Serpent with wings, as great
in body as an Elephant, which had only two feet which appeared out of that
monstrous body but a span in length, and each foot had three claws of three
spans in length, she came with her mouth open of so monstrous and huge
bigness, and so deformed, that a whole armed knight might enter in thereat, and
she had on her ^^wes two tuskes, which seemed to be of two palms, as sh^rpe as
any needles, and all her body was covered with hard shells of diverse colors,
and with great fury she came forth with her wings all abroad, the Prince could
not but receive some fear in seeing so furious a beast, but seeing it was then
time and great need to have courage and to be expert and valiant for to make
his defense, he took his good cutting sword in his hand, and shrouded himself
with his hard and strong sheeld, and tarryed the coming of that ugly monster,
and when the furious beast saw that there was whereon she might imploie her
sharp teeth, she stroke with her wings, and with her claws she griped and
laid fast hold upon his hard sheeld, pretending to have swallowed whole this
courageous warrior, and fastening her sharp tusks upon his helm, which when
she found so hard, she let go her hold, and pulled at his sheeld with so great
strength yt she pulled it from his arm, but the knight stroke at her a mighty
blow upon ye head with his sword, but could not hurt her by reason of ye the
hard shells wherewith it was armed, and though he gave her no wound, yet for all
that she felt the blow in such sort, that it made her to recoyle to the ground,
and to fall upon her long tail. This oppressed Knight made great have to
strike her another blow, but he could not, for yt she stretched her self of so
great height before him. But fortune was so favorable unto him, that he might
strike her on the belly, whereas she had no defense with shells nor any other
thing but feathers, whereas he gave her a great wound: but if ye blow had been
overthwart as it was right down, he had surely slain her at that time, but
yet it was not so little, but that it was mortal, whereout issued much blood.
This great Serpent when she felt her self wounded, stroke at the Knight with
her tail so terrible a blow, that if he had not seen it coming, it had been
sufficient to have parted him in pieces, and by reason of the narrownes of that
place, they could not a part themselves the one from the other, but she leaped
in the air with so great lightness, that it seemed to be ten paces from the
ground, which was the occasion that her furious blow did not hurt him. She was
scant descended to the ground, when that with bot^ his hands he stroke her so
terrible a blow upon those hard shells, that it made her to fall with her breast
to the ground: but straight way she raised her self up again, and would have
stricken the Knight again with her unmerciful tail. The Knight for to clear
himself thereof, fell down flat on the ground, for that he had no time to
make any other defense. But that terrible blow was not so soon passed over
him, but straight ways he was on his feet, at such time as the furious beast
came toward him. Here the Prince having a great confidence in his own
strength, did so high and valiant prowess, that you may put in oblivion, all
the valiantnes that ever was done by his predecessors, and put this in
perpetual memory. For that he threw his sword out of his hand, and went unto
this monster, and embraced himself with her, and did so quease her betwixt his
mighty arms, with so much strength yt the furious beast could not profit her
self of her sharp claws, but only with her wings, she beat him on every side,
this valiant warrior would never let her loose, but still remained holding her
fast between his arms, continuing this perilous wrestling, being all imbrued
with her beastiall blood y^ issued out of the wound, which was a great help
unto him against ye furious fiend, which was the occasion yt she lost a great
part of her strength. Long time endured this great and dangerous wrestling,
and that infernal beast fast unto the noble and valiant breast of the Greek
Prince, till such time as he plainly perceived yt this monster begane to wax
faint and to loose her strength: likewise it could not be otherwise but yt the
prince waxed somewhat weary, notwithstanding he did animate himself seeing ye
great weakness of ye Serpent, which was by reason of the great quantity of
blood which came from her wound, and having opportunity he took his sword
wherewith he thrust her into the heart with so great strength yt he cloue it in
two pieces, and so this infernal monster fell down dead to the ground, and
carried the Prince with her, for that they were still fast together, and by
reason that she lacked her strength to make her defense he quickly cleared
himself out of her claws, and recovered his sword, and when he saw certainly
that he was clear from ye cruel monster, he kneeled down and gave great
thanks unto his Gods, the poison was great which this monster threw out for to
infect the knight, but by reason of the great virtue which was in the armor
that Galtenor gave him, there was nothing yt could hurt him, although he
remained very weary and unquiet, and was constrained to sit and cool and
refresh himself by a well which was full of water there hard by, whereas ye
furious beast came forth, and when he found himself somewhat refreshed he
looked about him and saw a pair of stairs, whereat he determined to go up: he
had not ascended many steps, but at the clift of a door which he found, he saw
sitting at a great table many people eating and drinking, and at the upper end
there sat the gyantesse, and next unto her by her side a mighty great and
furious Giant, such a one as he had never seen the like, and harkening what
they did say, he heard yt the giantesse said: Now has our revenger his dinner
between his claws, for that he is so quiet, although he has been a great
while in making of it ready, then ye giant asked and said: Was there any of you
which saw what armor this knight brought and what recognices he had, then one
which was there eating said: I did see what recognices he had, then the old
magical witch said unto her son, now that you certainly know he is dead, I
will tell you who it was: You shall understand yt it was the knight that slew my
two sons and thy brothers. The giant when he heard this, stroke with his hand
a great blow upon the table, saying: Oh Gods, and wherefore did you not tell me
thereof before, that I with my own hands might have taken the reuengment,
cursed be thine enchantments, for yt they are the occasion yt the mighty force
of my arms do loose the glory yt they do deserve. All this which was spoken
the knight heard, and by their reasons he knew that they were all of the
lineall desent of those giants which he slew, for to set at liberty ye
Princess of the valley, and hearing himself so vilely spoken of he could not
endure to stand there long, for his cholar did so overcome him, yt he could not
longer refrain, but set his shulder unto the door with so terrible strength,
yt he threw it down to the ground, at which fall it made a terrible noise,
which caused al them that were there to be greatly amazed, but yet their wonder
was much more to see that the knight was at liberty and clear from that ugly
beast, who they thought had been dead and devoured by her, but when they saw
him they all procured to hide themselves and to run away, so that the Giant
remained all alone in that place, and rising up from the board, stretching
himself on his feet, he said: O my Gods I do give thanks for y^ you have
delivered this vile knight from ye power of yt furious beast, that I with my
hands may take reuengment of him. And in saying these words he drew out a
mighty sword which he had hanging at his side, and went toward the prince
striking at him a terrible blow, from yt which this Greek did clear himself
with his accustomed lightness, and being past yt blow he said: Giant, go and
arm thy self, and here I will tarry for thee, by which means thou may
defend thy self, and make thy reuengement as thy heart desires, and do not
thou think that I will glory in the abating of thy courage, but with the
great valor the which my high mind does demand. The Giant when he saw
himself derided and that the knight made little account of him, was with the
great anger which he received almost beside himself, and said: Oh vile and
miserable creature, is it possible that the Gods will do me so great outrage,
as to consent that I shall take armor against thee, and that thou have so much
force, as to drive me unto that necessity. And in saying these words, he lift
up again his broad and mighty sword against the prince, who likewise cleared
himself of that blow as he did of the first. Then the Prince said unto him:
Thou deformed beast without any humane reason, do not procure by thy great
pride to spot or stain the nobility of my person, to cause me to strike thee,
without having any armor, to make thy defense. The Giant made little account
of ye counsel he gave him, but rather assalted him with more terrible blows.
But all that ever he did was in vain, for that the Prince with great
experience and lightness cleared himself from them, and tarried ye time, that
he might have opportunity to close with him, for to show him the fruits of
his fists, for at that time he had not drawn his sword. A good while they were
in this contention, till such time as those Knights which ran away (which was
to the number of ten) had time to arm themselves, and to return again into
that place whereas they were eating, who came all in a readiness with their
swords in their hands. When the Prince saw the great peril which was toward
him, he was constrained to draw out his sword for to make his defense against
that wicked company. The old Witch called with a mighty voice unto her son,
that he should enter in and arm himself, for that she suspected as a Divine,
what should happen. (O cursed heart, that is so great a friend unto cruel
reuengment: how do thou procure to heap upon thy self such shame and
reproach, seeking without all Justice to do that, which it were better for thee
to have left undone.) Full little did it profit this old Witch her great
crying out, and inchauntments, for that the Giant would not hearken unto her,
but followed his pretense unarmed as he was, against him, who although he had
been armed, his fury would little have profited him, so by reason that ye other
armed Knights did so much trouble him with their blows, it was the occasion
that the Giant did the more molest him, causing him many times with the fury of
their blows to boow his knees to the ground, the which did constrain him to
use all his power against them, striking about him on the one side and on the
other, that in a small time he overthrew five of them dead to the ground, yet
for all that the other five which remained did not let to use all the
extremity they could against the Greek, and likewise that furious Giant whom
the knight would never offer to strike with his cutting sword, but always
waiting opportunity that he might close with him, for to give him one blow
with the pomell thereof, and when time did serve, he would not loose it, but
being very nigh him, he stroke him so mighty a blow with the pomell of his
sword under his ear, that he drove it into his brains, wherewith the Giant
fell dead to ye ground. The other five knights when they saw that terrible
blow, they threw their swords unto the ground, and yielded themselves unto the
courtesy of ye Greek knight. The old Gyantesse when she saw her son dead,
and those knights yielded, with a great fury and terrible shriking she put her
self before the knight and said: O cruel Butcher, the destroyer of my
well-beloved sons, make now an end of her who does more deserve the death then
they, and do not think that thou shall obtain so much victory as to carry
me away with thee alive, and if that with thy cruel hand thou will not make
an end of her that is without all good fortune, I promise thee that I will
procure to give it my self with my own hands. And in saying these words she
went unto the place whereas he son lay dead, and laid hold on his sharp
sword, and with a trice she thrust it into her body, that none that were there
present had any time to withdraw her from doing it, which being done, her
miserable soul was scant out of ye unhappy body when yt all the Castle
began to shake, and with the noise of a terrible thunder clap it vanished
away, in such sort that all those yt were there present remained in the plain
field without any sign or token of castle to be there or any other kind of
buildings, for that you shall understand, that this Castle was made by Art of
inchauntment by that old Witch. Surely it caused great admiration to all them
that remained a live: but much more was the grief of the Ladies which tarried
for ye coming of ye Prince, when they saw yt he tarried so long, and also
afterward when they heard that great noise of thunder, at the breaking up of
that inchaunted Castle. It was no less to be wondered at, to see the huge and
mighty Serpent, and the great giant with his mother, and the five knights that
were slain, understanding that the Prince had made all that destruction. So
the five Knights which yielded themselves, gave the Prince to understand who
the Giants were, and how the old Giantesse had ordained that Castle for to take
reuengement on him, for the death of her two sons. The Greek Prince gave
thanks unto his Gods, for that they had delivered him out of that terrible
snare, and gave the Knights free liberty to depart, and go whether they
would.

Then the Prince and his company returned onwards to their journey, making
great have in their trauaylyng, that they might get out of that great Wood,
before that the night should come upon them, whereby they might get to some
town nigh at hand. And at such time as the glistering Apollo began to hide his
face, and to cover himself, according to his accustomed order, they came unto
a fair Castle, which was a little without the wood, whereas of the Lord
thereof, they were very well received: yet much more royal was their
entertainment, and far greater was his affection toward them, when he knew
of ye destruction of that inchaunted Castle, for that he had felt and known
the inconvenience of that ill neighbor.

How that the king of Nabatea had understanding of the great destruction that
the Greek Prince made in the castle, and how he commanded that the serpent
and the heads of the Giants should be set at the entry of the gate of the
Pallaice for a perpetual memory, and how that the triumph began that was
ordained, and of all that passed in the time of the feasts. Cap. 14.
THE fame of the valiant knight Claridiano, with his accustomed gentillitie was
noised throughout all those Provinces of Nabatea, publishing his heroical
acts and feats of arms, naming him to be the knight of the damsells, and
when he drew nigh unto Nabatea, there did not lack them which gave the king to
understand of all that passed. When the king heard of so mighty and valiant
deeds, and in special of that which was done in the inchaunted castle, and
of the furiousness of the serpent, he commanded straight yt men should be sent
thither, for to bring them unto his presence which straight way was
accomplished, and when the King saw, so great worthiness, he commanded that
forthwith for a perpetual memory of ye knight, they should be hanged at ye
pallaice gate, desirous to know ye knight, and to have him in his court for to
do him honor: but they which had more desire to see him, were ye Duchess of
the valley and her Daughter. Who were at that time come so the Court, and
declared the great prowess of the Prince, and thought long for the day of
the Triumphs, for as then he promised without fail to be at Nabatea, so the
day of the feasts were come, at the fame whereof, resorted thither a great
number of great valor and strength. Amongst whom was the prince of Phoenicia
with a goodly company of noble person, and the Prince of Camogenia with many
and very well proprtioned Knights. Likewise came thither the King of Arabia,
with great majesty, and with no less majesty came the king of Silicia, and
a brother of his, who were both Giants. So likewise came thither the king of
Cappadocia, all these be Provinces that does border the one with the other, and
the most part of these Princes are vassalls unto the Prince of Palestino, all
these Princes came thither for to honor that good king of Nabatea, for that he
was very well esteemed of them all: and as they came to honor the King, so
likewise they came to prove themselves, and to get fame and name, and the
praise that belongs thereunto. It was supposed of all the company the king
of Silicia would have the prowess and praise of all the rest, for that he was
a giant of very big members, although his brother was taken to be more
furious, who determined not to just, for that his brother should get the honor
and praise, but it fell out otherwise, as hereafter you shall understand. So
when the day was come all the Ladies and Damsells put themselves in places for
to behold ye feasts, and every one procured to set out her self with the
greatest bravery yt might be, and the great court full of people which came
thither for to see the feasts and triumphs. What shall I say here of the
daughter of the Duchess of the valley, who was of so great beauty yt she was
noted amongst them all. So the knights began to enter into the place of just,
and he which was the first that entered was the Prince of Camogenia, who was
mounted upon a very fair and well adorned courser, he was armed with black
armor all to be spotted full of Martines, and brought with him fifty
knights all apparelled with the same liuerey, and with great^ majesty he went
round about the place, making obedience unto all the Ladies and Damsells: after
him entered a Pagan knight, who was Lord of Siria, and armed with armor of a
Lions color, accompanied with an hundredth knights, all apparelled in velvet
of the same color, and passed round about the place, showing great courtesy
as the other did, which being done, he saw that the Prince of Camogenia was
tarying to receive him at the just, and straight way they began to sound the
instruments, giving to understand, that they must make themselves ready. These
Knights were nothing unwilling, but spurred their coursers with great fury. The
Prince of Camogenia made his encounter whole, and stroke the Pagan without
missing any point: but the pagan stroke the other in such sort that he heaued
him out of the saddle, and he fell to the ground, wherewith the Pagan Knight
remained with great pride and gladness. In the mean time that these two were
in the Just, there entered in a Knight of Phenicia, who entered in with great
pomp and pride, who when he saw that the Prince of Camogenia was overthrown,
he put himself unto the Just. Little did profit him his great pride and
arrogancy, and outward show to be a strong knight against him of Siria, for
that at the first encounter he overthrew him to the ground: in like sort did he
use other fifteen Knights of diverse Provinces. So straight way entered the
Prince of Phoenicia, who was a marvelous well proportioned knight, armed all
in white armor, wrought with excellent knots of gold, and he brought in his
company an hundred Knights, all apparailed in white satin, and riding about
the place, he showed his obedience unto the King and all the Ladies. Then he
put himself at his standing, for at that time there was not a knight to just
withal. So straight way they sounded the trumpets, at which noise the Knights
moved themselves to the Just with their horses, and made their encounter so
strong, and with so great fury, yt the strong Pagan was cast to the ground,
and the like he did to other six ventrous Knights, which entered into the
place. Straight way entered the brave King of Silicia, who was armed with
glistering armor of very fine steel, and was mounted upon a very mighty and
rich courser, and brought in his company two hundred Knights all apparailed
with rich cloth of gold, accompanied with great music of minstrelles which
was a pleasant noise to be heard, and after that he had made the accustomed
compass and courtesy in the place, he put himself at the Just. So whe^n signs
were made, they spurred their^horses, and made their encounter so strong, that
it was great grief unto him, to put himself upright again, but the prince was
carried over his horse buttocks, and carried the saddle with him betwixt his
legs, which was a great grief unto all them that did see him, for that he
was wel-beloued of them all. This arrogant giant was so encouraged, and so
furyous that in a small time he left not a knight remaining in their saddles on
horseback. And being in this great pride, there was hard a great noise and
russhing, in manner of a tumult in the place. And loking what it should be, they
saw that it was the knight of the Damsells which entered, who was armed with his
rich and strong Armor, all of Purple, full of golden Stars. And before him
came the two Damsells, which always were in his company. The Princes of
Ierosolima, carried his shield, and the Princes of Mesopotamia* his Spear.
Showing by his person the highness of his descent. Who passed by the royal
seat whereas the good King was, in whose company was his son the prince, armed
with very rich armor, also the lord of mount Libano, a very ancient knight
and of great authority. So on the other side was the princes, the daughter of
the King of Nabatea, who was the bryde, a very fair and comely gentlewoman,
and with her the Duchess of the valley and her Daughter. And behind them, was
the Earl of the deep Lake, who was still very weak of the passed battle,
and was richly apparelled with blew cloth of Gold. And as this knight passed
by, the knight arose up and showed him courtesy. The Duchess of the Ualley
could not refrain her self but that with a high voice she said unto the King.
Mighty king, this is the knight in whom the gods has put all their power and
strength, that his valor may be more then theirs. This warlike knight,
although he heard very well what the Duchess had said, passed on, and
descembled as though he had hard nothing. And when he came to the Just, he took
his shylde and his spear, and prepared himself ready to the Just. So straight
ways being in a readiness, they sowned the Trumpets, where at which great
fury, they moved their Coursers, and neither of them missed their blow at their
encounter, but by reason that the Greek had great good will to extol his fame,
he stroke the giant so mighty a blow, that he overthrew him to the ground. So
the prince passed alongest, with great magestie, without any show of disdain.
The people with a great shout said. The great mighty and royal Agilao is
overthrown to the ground, so that his mighty strength has little auailed
him. Then the prince of Fenicia, would prove his adventure with the Greek, but
with great ease he was turned to the ground. So all the rest of ye knights that
were of any estimation, made their Just, but they were all with great ease
overthrown to the ground, in less then the space of two hours. So at such
time as the bright Febus would make an end of his long journey, there apeared
to enter in to the place the brave and mighty Giant, brother unto the king of
Silicia, with a mighty great spear in his hand, whose glystering point of
Steel showed through all the field. He brought with him but one only squire,
which brought with him another spear, and without any care of courtesy due,
he put himself into the place. And ye Squire which brought his other Spear,
went unto Claridiano, and said: Knight, yonder valiant giant does send unto
thee this Spear, and wills thee that thou do procure to do the uttermost
of thy power before that the Sun does set, for that he will do the like: and
likewise he says, that he does not only defy thee in the Just, but also to
mortal battle. To whom Claridiano, said: Friend, go thy ways and tell this
giant yt sent thee, yt I do accept his demand, although it does grieve me
very much, for that without any occasion he makes this defiance in time of
so great joy and pleasure, which is done in the honor of so mighty a king,
but seeing his will is moved with so great pride, tell him yt I am ready to
make my defense, and also ye shortly he shall repent him of this enterprise,
and in saying these words he took the spear of ye squire, and put himself in
ye standing: at ye time he was very nigh ye place where the king was, who
heard ye answer which ye Greek made, for yt which he received great anger,
for yt the Giant in such sort should defy ye Knight without any occasion: but it
was no time as then to speak, but to hold his peace, and prayed unto his Gods
for to take away his great pride and arrogancy. At this time the two warriors
tarryed the sign to be made by the trumpets: which being given, these Knights
moved their coursers, with their spears in their rests, with so great ire and
desire the one to hurt the other, that they both failed in their encounter. The
Giant who was very proud, when he saw that he had erred his blow, he returned
against Claridiano, carrieng his spear upon his shoulder, and coming nigh
him, upon a sudden and with great fury he took it from his shoulder, and
before the Greek could clear him self, he struck him a mighty blow upon the
armor, so that his staff broke by reason of the finenesse of the armor, and
made the good warrior to double his body backwards upon the Horse crupper.
But when he saw the great villainy which the Giaunt used with him, his anger
increased very much, and taking his spear in the same sort, he went toward
the Giant and said. Thou furious and proud beast, what did thou think to
goare me like as thou would do a wild Boar, tarry, and I will make thee
to understand, if I can make my knottie spear to fly in the air, and
therewith he threw his spear at him with so great fury, that he stroke him on
the breast in such sort, that the spear passed through his body, and showed it
self at his back, so that this Giant fell down dead to the ground, and all
that were there present, were very much amazed at the great-strength and force
of this Knight. At this time the Sun had finished his course, having nothing
above the Horizon but his glistering beams, then the Judges of the feasts
commanded with sound of trumpets that the Iusts should cease, and make an end
of the day. So the King descended from the place where he was into the Court
with all his Knights for to receive that good warrior, and desired him that he
would go with them unto his pallaice, to ye which he could not make denial. And
when he should enter into the great gate of the Pallaice, he saw the Serpent,
and the heads of the Giants, and when the King perceived that he did behold
them, he said.

This remembrance (good knight) I commanded to be put here in thy name, for
to be a perpetual memory of thy high and mighty Chivalry. The Prince there
at would not answer making as though he did not esteem it much, for that he
had with himself no pride. And therewith they assendid up into the great hall,
where as they were maruailously well received of the Ladies and damsells. And
leaving Antemisca, and Belia, with the Bryde, and with the Queen her mother in
law, he returned and went with the King, whereas they did entreat him with
great majesty. So he remained eight days in company with the King in his
court, for to take his ease, in which time the most part of the kings, princes
and knights were departed, and the King of Silicia, with the dead body of his
brother. These eight days past this Greek prince did take his leave of the
King, for that ye time to make defense in the quarrel of the Princess draw
on, the which he had great care thereof. It grieved the king very much for his
departure, but seeing that he was constrained thereunto, he would not hinder
him, but offered him very great and rich gifts, but the prince would not
receive any. Likewise he took his leave of the Queen, and of the Duchess and
her daughter, who with great sorrow did solemnise his departure. The King
brought him unto the foot of the stayre, whereas Fidelio was tarying for him,
with a mighty and rich Horse, one of the furious that was to be found in all
the country. He was a Rone coulored, without any kind of mark, and trapped
with very rich trapping of Gold and precious stones of great price. There came
forth of the ^orse mouth two tuskes like unto an Elophant, his nosethrills
were very large and great, his head very little, his breast very broad, well
pitched and so hard, that no sword were it never so sharp, was able to enter in
thereat. So when he came unto the foot of the stayres, without letting foot
in his stirrup, he leaped upon the best Horse that ever was. The horse was
called Zefiro, for his great lightness. When he had taken his leave of all,
they departed, determining ^ot to stay in any place, till they came unto
Ierosolima, and so straight way to Mesopotamia, for yt it was all one way. Then
they followed on their journey, till they had passed all the kingedome of
Nabatea, without any adventure worth the telling. Likewise they passed all the
mount Libano, where as they found many great and fair Cities. Also they
passed over the river Jordan, leaving behind them part of Siria, travailing a
longst by part of the edge of Pallestina, which bordereth upon Arabia. And
passed through Fenicia, without any question or demand asked of them. So they
came unto ye populus river of Eufrates, and travailed a longst ye rivers side,
till such time as they were constrained to go upon a high and mighty
mountain, from whence they might discover Ierosolima. All these countries
aforesaid, they passed and travailed, in little more then two months, and at
that time there lacked little more then two months unto ye time appointed, for
Antemisca to make her defense. In all this journey there chaunsed some
adventures, but for that they were not of any great importance, I let them
pass, and make no mention of them. Although ye fame of his heroycall deeds,
was hard into Grecia. And for yt my author will not seem to be tedious, he does
let pass many, although they are worthy to be hard, and to give good example
unto all those that do wear armor, to make them hardy and courageous in
their deeds.

How the heroycall Greek was taken prisoner, by the dart of Cupide, in
beholding the beauty of a very fair Pastora, and of the great anguish and
grief that he sustained. Cap. 15.
THat adultresse Venus, the key of all liberty, not having forgotten her old
mischife and ill will, which she took upon the mountain Citareo, came to take
counsel of her son Cupide, to determine what order she might use for to
subject and bring under her amorous yoke, the stiff neck of that stout and
untamed Greek. And the better for to forge and to bring to pass to her
content, ye work which she had ordained, she showed her self very friendly and
lovingly unto ye glistering Apollo, for yt at her request he should with more
clerenesse spread abroad his bright beams over the grene feldes, nigh unto the
river Eufrates. Who being moved by the disceitfull words of Venus, did disperse
abroad his burning beams: showing forth marvelous enamelled colors, upon ye
flowred harbes, being filled with ye clear dew, such as seldom has been seen
in the feelde. And the mighty river with mild and quiet running, did pass his
accustomed journey, making a fine noise, with ye delicate breaking of his
stremes. Then this false and crafty Cupide, seeing opportunity, by ye good
disposition of ye place: and being advertised by his disceitful mother, took
his way with his accustomed lightness, unto the river where as ye mighty
Claridiano was refreshing himself under a company of very fair and grene
Mertil trees, with the rest of his company, tarying the coming of the night,
where as with out all fear, they reioysed and sported themselves, ye fair,
peasable and quiet day. And for to be more at his ease, he pulled of his strong
helm, and slacked ye buckles of his armor. And for that the damse^ls might ye
better recreate themselves, he put him self out of ye way, somewhat apart from
them, for yt he was very courteous and honest. And aparting himself, he came
into a place where as he heard the noise of a Flute, which did sound very
swetly: and for that it was very pleasant, and gave him great contentment in ye
hearing, ye better to delight himself, he drew near where as it was, in such
sort, yt he might delight himself of the song and music, without being spyde
of any. He approached so nigh, yt he might well discern who it was that made that
Flute so sweetly to sound. And he saw that it was a sheperd which lay a longst
under a grene willow tree, who being weary in playing on the Flute, laid it
down by him, and took a Rebick and began to play on it with very sweet
harmony, acco^panying it with delicate and amorous songs. At the which the
Prince receued great conte^tment, being attentive, he heard him sing as
follows.

SInce by thy sight, O Pastora so sweet,
My former freedom and my life does fail:
Repay me love, for that it is most meet,
And let not rigor in thy heart prevail.
Behold mine eyes, with floods of tears that flow,
Forced by the grief that from my heart does grow.
Make soft thy heart, and do not him disdain,
That does adore thy beauty so divine:
Pity my plaints, abate my grievous pain,
With scoffs and scorns constrain me not to pine.
Either grant grace, else flatly nay reply,
That I may know if I shall live or dye.
When he had made an end of this song, he let the Rebeck fall out of his hand,
and stretching himself on the grene grass, crossing his hands, he put them to
his mouth as a man full of passions and griefs, and began to say with a weping
voice, O my Pastora, let thy cruelty now suffice thee, it is now time that thou
helpest thy Pastor out of so long and great sorrow. Consider mistress, that
thou do entreat me very evil, for yt thou do well understand yt I am wholly
thine, and not mine own, and as thine own thou may ordain and dispose me. I
am wholly subject unto thy will, whether it be good or ill, what so ever thy
pleasure is, unto either of them I am agreeable, for yt I am wholly thine. The
Prince saw yt with this shepard was an other in his company, who when he saw yt
the other hild his peace, he took an other Rebeke which he had, and with no less
music then ye other, he began to play and sing, as follows, by ye which he
did show to be clear and at liberty of ye pains of love.

That tyrant Love shall never wound my breast,
I will not love, nor yet beloved be:
The lovers life I do in heart detest,
which now in mirth, are straight in misery.
I being free do Cupids customs scorn,
Reject his laws, disdain his wounding dart:
And let who will, be with his passions torn,
He neither can nor shall possess my heart.
This shepherd left off his song and playing all at one time, as one yt made
no reckoning nor esteemed love, but the amorous shepherd gave so terrible a
sigh yt it sounded throughout all the field. Then making a heavy sound, he
said: O happy shepherd, that love has given so much liberty unto, great is
thy good fortune, that thou may freely publish thy liberty and blame my
captivity. Let the Gods understand, and let it be published, that I am brought
unto that estate, that in my songs and sonets I do delight to utter the
sweet conversation that I have with my love. But how much more joy should I
receive, if I could sing as thou do, in seeing my self at liberty. Oh
mighty Jupiter, do not take away this excellent joy, which I do feel in
loving, like wise I do desire thee, that thou would give me strength for to
pass over my pain and grief, and therewith he took again the Rebick, and
soung this song as follows.

EXcept I love I cannot have delight,
It is a care that does to life belong:
For why, I hold that life in great despite,
That has not sower mixed with sweet among.
And though the torments which I feel be strong:
Yet had I rather thus for to remain,
Then laugh, and live, not feling lovers pain.
This Shepard was troubled in his song, and could not proceed any farther, for
that he hard a great rushing and noise amongst the bushes and trees. And loking
who it should be he saw that it was a Pastora, who was apparaled with a white
peticoate of very course cloth. She had her golden hair dyspersed abroad on
her back, behind her ears, and had in her hand a shepherds hook, very well
wrought, with the which she governed a few sheep, that she had the charge of.
Her face seemed so fair as Diana, at such time as her beams has most force.
And when the Shepard saw her, he began a new to make unto her pitiful
lamentations. But for all that the Pastora made no rekoning to give any ear
unto him, nor to his complaints, but rather with a smiling laughter, made of it
as a jest, which caused unto the Shepehard more torment. Then Cupide who was
tarying his time and opportunity, at yt time discharged his golden Arrow, with
great fury, in such sort, that the heart of the Prince, who aforetime was void
and at liberty, was now brought in subjection and made subject unto his laws
and customs. For so sone as he had seen this Pastora, he straight way
remembered the Pastora which ye Princes of Ierosolima had told him of, and also
of yt which he saw in the enchanted Castle, leaning on her breast at the Iron
grate. And remembering himself, he cast his head a side to behold her that was
ye occasion of his new harm, but for yt she was passed along with her sheep,
he could not see her. Then he began to complain against his unhappy fortune,
saying, Ah heavy heart, that in the time yt thou were a knight and at liberty,
thou did subdue and had power to overcome so many strong warriors: where
is now thy strength become, wherewith thou did overcome the^. Art not thou he
who did overcome those two mighty giants in Trapobana? Art not thou he which
with thy fury did abate ye strength and courage of ye mighty Geredion? what is
become of thy potensie, wherewith thou did bring down ye pride of ye two
Tartaros? what is become of the fury where with thy fystes thou slewest ye great
giant of the mountains Nabatea? where is thy strength wherewith thou did win
thy mighty horse Zefiro. I do see yt it is all yielded unto a poor and simple
Pastora. Oh heart, it does not grieve me, for yt thou art brought in subjection,
but only for yt thou art at ye will and power of a Pastora. It is a sign yt my
lignage is not of such valor and estimation, as I was persuaded by my friend
Galtenor. But what do I say, do I find fault in the desert of my Pastora. And
although I were of ye most highest lynage in the world, yet that fair face is
more then any human creature does deserve. And in saying these words, he fell
in a sownd to the ground. And for so much as he was absent and tarried a long
time, and ye ladies saw he came not, they went out to seek him, and found him
in ye sort as I have told you, which caused great disturbance unto them.
Notwithstanding in the best manner they could, with bowing of his finger, and
other diligences, they brought him again to his remembrance, but not in so
perfect sort, that he knew who was with him in presence. And therewith he gave a
grievous sigh, and said: Oh merciful Jupiter, show upon me thy power, and do not
permit that Cupide, may have so much might against this sorrowful knight. And
therewith a new he fell down in a sownd, as at the first. Both the princes were
greatly amassed, not knowing what it should be, which has caused so much
alteration. And therewith Fidelio ran unto the river for water, wherewith they
all to be bathed his face, that he came again to himself. The Ladies musing
between themselves, from whence should proceed this his grief. Straight way
they suspected yt he had seen that fair Pastora, which a little before they
saw pass amongst those grene trees. Antemisca who had more care of the princes
grief then the other, when she saw him somewhat come to himself, she said:
What is this worthy knight, is it now time to leave me afflicted, the time
being so nigh at hand to make my defense, and almost at ye gates of the city,
pull up your heart, and let not your valiant courage at this time faint. The
knight when he perceued yt the ladies were there, he procured to raise up his
body, and to sit down, for yt before he was laid all a long. And dissembling
in ye best wise he could, he said. I do not know what should be ye occasion of
a maruailous great grief which stroke me to the heart, yt without any power to
make resistance, it overthrew me to ye ground, in such sort as you found me. I
do well believe, said Antemisca, yt the occasion of this grief is in ye heart, and
ye eyes are in most fault. For if thou had not seen the fair Pastora, thy
heart should not have felt ye passed pain. To this Claridiano answered nothing
at all, seeing yt they understood ye occasion of his grief. But he made have to
make all things in a redines to go onwards on their journey, and being all on
horsback they hasted toward Ierosolima, where they were received with great
triumph, meet for such worthy Princes. The old king and Queen gave great
thanks unto their gods for ye return of their lost daughter. Claridiano
remained there in ye city of Ierosolima, six days, greatly against his will.
For that the new wound would not suffer him to take any rest, which caused him
to take his leave of the king and his daughter, and departed, and took the way
toward Mesopotamia, with great desire to be there. So travailing, they left
behind them the City of Damasco, and passed by the one side of Armenia the
great, and so entered into the great plain of Mesopotamia, and from thence
without taking any rest, they came within ten miles of the city of Mesos. From
which place they sent the old Squyre, which was with them, to give the king to
understand of the coming of the Princes, who with great care travailed in such
sort, that he entered into the pallas, at such time as the king was accompanied
with all his knights, not with little sorrow for the absence of his daughter,
for that the time appointed for her defense, drew on. On his one side was the
prince of Palestina, who was as merry and glad, as the King heavy and
sorrowful. But when Libernio entered into the great hall, the king knew him to
be a man of great estimation in his kingedome. And having no power to discemble
his great joy, in seeing him, he forgot his royal authority, and rose up
against him, and said: Ah my friend where have thou left my daughter
Antemisca, tell me quickly, as thou would that the Gods should favor
thee. Then Libernio with a cherefull countenance said, mighty King and
Lord* thy daughter the Princes is very well, although very weary of (...) long
and troublesome journey, and misfortunes which has happened, but yet now with
great delight, for that she does bring with her a knight for to defend her
honor. And if it be so that your highness does accept thereof, and give them
lisence, he will come hither, and defend her right. The prince of Palestina
when he hard that which was spoken, with great laughter, although not very well
content, said. And who is he that is so simple and foole-hardie, to come, and
gaine-saye my fury, the truth being on my side. Libernio said, it is he that
will make thee to acknowledge thy falsehod, and will make thee forget thy fury
and mighty strength, by using of his valiant prowes. Whereat Brandemoran was
so full of wrath, and his eyes sparkling like fire, he said: If it were not
for that I am before the royal presence of the King, I would give thee to
understand, yt thy gray hairs had not spoke with ye discretion, which thou
ought to have. Then the King said, prince pacify your courage, and be
quiet, and thou Libernio return, and tell them that they may come when their
pleasure is. And for the right of my daughter, (if she have any) he shall have
safe conduct to come and make her defense. And if it be so that they have need
of any thing, speak that they may have all furnished that is requisite. Go thy
ways and tarry not, for that I have great desire to see either my shame or
honor. For I am in such a stay, to se my self so dishonored, that I think it
better that I were dead. Ah what a goodly thing is it for a man to dye when he
is in so great troubles. So Libernio put in order his departure out of hand,
leaving the king somewhat content, and almost without suspection of any evil,
seeing that his daughter was returned to defend her right. Libernio when he had
got mourning apparel for the Princes, departed to the place whereas he left
them, declaring unto her all that her father had said, and what passed in his
presence. So therewith they procured and made have, to finishe their journey.
And they made so much have, that before it was night they came within two miles
of the city where as they rested all that night, with great desire that the
morning were come. So very early in the morning at the break of the day, they
put them selves on horseback, and went forwards on their journey. So that one
hour after the Sun had stretched forth his golden beams upon the moist
earth and fragrant flowers, this Greek knight and the Princes entered into the
city of Mesos, not resting in any place, til they came unto the kings
pallaice, whereas they alighted and went up into the great hall. Claridiano led
Antemisca by the hand, his Helm fast upon his head, and his purple Shylde on
his shoulder, but the visor of his Helm was up, so that all people might see
his fair and great visage, and all that saw him, did judge him to be of a high
lynage. Then the King was advertised of their coming, and did abide their
coming in the chamber of presence, accompanied with all his nobles and knights
of prowes. And when he saw his daughter to enter all covered with mourning
apparel, his royal highness could not show the great love he had unto his
daughter, but made shows of great sorrow, shedding many tears from his eyes,
which ran down upon his cheeks, and al to be washed his gray hairs. This
faultlesse lady did prostrate her self at her fathers f^^te, but Claridiano
remained a foot, with so great majesty, as though he had known whose son he
was. This painful and weried lady, did ask her fathers hands to kiss them,
but neither the king nor his daughter could speak any word more. They remained
so a great while, til such time as the king constraining his princely courage,
said. I know not what will fall out, for that I see before me, yt which of long
time I have desired, and yet I do not know it to be mine. The lady understood
ye words of her father, gathered stomach unto her self and said: I am
Antemisca, your well-beloved daughter, although at this time I am abhorred, I am
she who unjustly has gone wandering, paying such debts as I never made, for
that I did never let but to be ye lady I ought to be. I am she that by ye
valor of this mighty and worthy warrior, do live, and not by the compassion
that thou have had of thine own proper daughter. And I do thank my Gods, that
they have so much favored me, in giving me his mighty and strong arm, for to
defend my truth, and for to punish that evil, the which that traitor
Brandemoran, has laid and raised upon me. The brave Palestina, who was
present at the words which the Princes said, was so full of pride and ire,
that without any respect unto the kings highness, he said: Oh false
adulteress, wherefore will thou deny yt the prince of Chaldea, had thy
virginity, and that with thy consent. And what knight is he that is so hardy
and has so much courage, to say unto the contrary. The Greek did very much
behold the Palestinia^, perceuing by his words, that to be he that had
procured all this harm against Antemisca. And although his proud words did move
his patience, yet would he not make any outward show, neither answer unto
him, but rather with great severity, he turned unto the King and said: High
and mighty Lord, in this controversy there is no need of disputation,
neither farther rehearsal. But may it please your highness to command, that
the Prince of Chaldea may come in presence, and to know of him, if he be
content, to refer all his right into my hands. The King who (was considering
and beholding his mighty prowess, in the demonstration of his person)
straight ways commanded to be brought thither ye Chaldean, with sufficient
keepers with him, which was straight ways done.

And when he came in presence, the King said unto him: prince Gelerosio, my
daughter has brought hither this knight, for to defend her and thy right, (if
thou have any.) Here would I know of thee, if that thou art content to refer
all thy right and justice into his hands. The prince Gelerosio somewhat heavy,
answered the king and said, Unto the sovereign Gods and unto him, I do
commit all my right although I had rather with ye strength of mine own arms
make my defense: and tourning unto the Greek, he said. And for that gentle
Knight, thou shall be certified that thou defend the truth: Here I do swear
unto thee by the high and mighty Jupiter, that the Prince of Chaldea, did
never commit yt which with great falsehood he is accused. Then Brandemoran did
replye, and said. All that ever thou do say, I will suffer, for that I do
think before the Sun has made an end of his accustomed course, to have
satisfaction. And likewise to punish the pride of this fool, who by
ignorance or rather foolish hardienesse, comes to seek his own death.

This valiant and courageous Greek could no longer suffer his proud and
slanderous speeches, but said unto him: Jupiter has power to give the death
unto whom he pleases, and I do think that which thou do pretend unto
me, will fall upon thy self, for to punish thee for this thy false and
surmised treason which thou most dispightfully have raised, against this noble
Princes, who is guiltless of this crime.

And for that this must be concluded by arms, and not by words, se that thou
do make no tarying, but arm thy self and come forth unto the battle, and
then thou shall see how I will make thee to understand in the field, that I am
none of them of whom thou have hitherto gotten honor. I will not make thee
any answer said Brandemoran, for that I think very quickly to revenge my
self of thee, and to pluck out ye tongue which has been so bold to speak
these words unto me. And therewith he went straight out of the palace, and went
unto his lodging for to arm himself unto the battle. The Greek at his
answer was somewhat yrefull, but retourning unto the king he said, mighty
king and Lord, I do desire your highness that you would command, that your
daughter may be set in a place, where as she may well see the restoring of her
honor. The King said this shall be done with a very good will, without any
tarying. The Greek did take his leave of the King and of the Ladies that were
in the great hall. And went down the stayres where as he left his page and his
horse, and without the help of his stirrup, he leapt into the saddle, and
having his healme on, and his spear in his hand, he commanded his page to
tarry, and not to go with him. So he went straight unto the place appointed for
the battle, with so gentle a grace and good disposition, that all who did
behold him, received great contentment. There was appointed a scaffold for two
Judges, for to Judge the right of this controversy, and did appoint the place
convenient for their battle. They tarried not long, when that B^^ndemoran
entered ye place, accompanied with many knights, at which time the Judges put
themselves on their Scaffold. And being all ready and the people in quiet,
there was commanded a Trompet to be sownded, to give them to understand, that
they must prepare themselves to the battle. At which sound they moved their
cour^^^s, the one against the other, with so great swiftness, (...) yt they
flew in the Air, whereas I will leave (...) time do serve, for that at the
same present, the wind Borias did blow in my ea^e, cons^rayning me to speak
of the mighty deeds of that valiant Rosicleer. You do well remember, that
for to succor his Horse, he leapt into his bark, and was not so soon
therein, but that it sailed and made such way as the arrow which is forced out
of ye bow. And one of the two knights which entered the bark, leapt into the
Sea for fear, and the other remained, and yielded himself unto the mercy of
the Knight, which afterward did serve him for Squire, and very faithfully used
his office, who was called Argolio. Rosicleer went travailing to sea-wards, in
his Barcke, very heavy and sorrowful, for that he was departed from his cousin
so quickly. In this sort they travailed six days, and the seventh they
discovered land very far of, but the swiftness of the Barcke was such, that
in a short time it brought them to the waters side. And being a land, he saw
that it was an Island, and very fragrant, for that toward the Occident, there
appeared but little plain ground, and toward the Orient, a very high and
sharp Mountain. So when the Barcke had fyxed it self a shore, he understood,
that there he must go a land, and taking his horse, with great lightness, he
leapt into the saddle, and Argolio followed him. And they travailed into a
narrow way which led them up unto that crooked Mountain, and followed that way
till they came to the height thereof, whereas they alighted for to refresh
themselves, with that which the squire brought. And for that I have great need
of favor and help, to go forwards with this history, here I do desire the
Muses to grant it unto me, that I may with more courage, declare that which
follows in the other Chapter.

How that Rosicleer found in that Island, the son of Ali^andro, leading a
troublesome life, with his fair and well-beloved wife, who was set at liberty
by Rosicleer. Cap. 16.
AFter the noble Rosicleer had somewhat refre^hed himself, he took his horse,
and by little and little, he began to go up that fragrant hill, till such time
as night came upon them, and for the great darkness thereof, they were
constrained to stay, and not to travail any farther. But in a little plain
place that they found, they alighted, whereas they found a cave, and in it the
manner of a bed, declaring that some body had been there, so there they
remained all ye night, till ye morning. The day being come, they returned to
prosecute their new begun journey, and never rested till such time as they came
to the top of the mountain: from whence they did discover a very great and
delectable plain: and in y^ midst thereof, there was two great an high Pine
trees, toward which place they went. But they had not gone far, where they saw a
pillar, in the which was graven certain letters, which said. The glory of
Fangamadan, upon the subjection of the Prince, son unto the mighty Emperor
of the Scitas, and of the courageous Troyan: Let none be so hardy as to look
upon it, for that for so doing, he shall lose his life. Rosicleer, was in a
great confusion, not understanding what should be meant there-by, but travailing
in ye path forwards, he had sca^t passed ye place, when yt he hard a terrible
and fearful shryke of a beast, such, that his horse was scared, and began to
struggle in such sort, yt he was constrained to return again and to light on
foot, and gave him unto Argolio, and the knight did prosecute his way on foot.
Within a small while after, he heard yt they turned and gave such an other
shrike, yt it made him for to stay. And as you do see ye fearful Heart, when he
does hear the noise of the hunters, does hold up his head, devising on every
side to hear from which part the noise should come: even so did this knight,
but he could not devise nor see any creature, but went forwards on his way in
the same path, till he came unto a little mountain, whereas he found an other
pillar, such a one as the same before, in the which was written a title with
these words. He who does find himself of so great courage and strength, and
does procure to pass forwards, for to deliver the worthy Meridian, and the
mighty Troyan: understand, that in payment of his folly and hardiness, he
shall lose his life. Let there chance what will happen, said Rosicleer, for
this fear shall not cause me to stay the using of all my power and strength,
for so high a prince. And so without any staying, he went forwards. He had not
gone far, when he came to ye sight of a thing of great compassion and grief,
where as was done the greatest cruelty yt ever was hard done to any person:
which was, that in ye midst of ye plain, there was two high and mighty
trees, a little distance the one from ye other: and in the midst between them,
there was hanged a man, having each arm tied unto one of the trees, by the
wrystes, and the cords wherewith he was bound, was two long and small serpe^ts,
the which did not only serve for to tie his wrists, but also with their heads
they reached unto his neck and breasts, whereas they did byte him in such sort,
yt they made him full of holes. His feet likewise was tied unto those trees, with
other two serpents, who entreated him as ye others did. Likewise there was upon
one of those trees, a Uulter, who at sundry times descended down, and with her
sharp and hard bill, she picked his belly, and opened it unto ye guts, whereon
she fed, which was ye occasion yt this unhappy man gave this terrible shrikes,
with out resting. At the foot of those trees there was a fierce serpent with wings,
who was the keeper of ye tormented man. The which serpent was of more then.xv.
foot of length, and had but two feet, which was in ye midst of her body, and
each foot had five claws, which were great and sharp. She had on her head two
great horns and sharp, and gored with them as a Bull does, and out of her
mouth she had two great tusks, her wings showed her to be of great lightness.
And about.xxx. paces from her was an armed knight, of a large and high stature,
he lacked no armor from the head unto ye foot. He had hanging at his neck by
a string of gold, a very rich and well garnished sword, who when he saw
Rosicleer, with a hasty and large pase, he came toward him, and when he came
nigh him he said: Tell me gentle knight, what do thou seek here in this
place of great harm and danger: therefore return back again, for that
thou can not find here any other thing but death. Rosicleer in the mean
time that he was saying these words, he was beholding his face, for by reason
that he brought the visor of his Helm up, he might well perceive, and did
plainly see and perfectly know him, to be the courageous Prince, Oristedes,
and Rosicleer answered him and said: Thy words are not agreeable unto thy
person and estate, worthy Troyan, neither is it for such a knight as thou art,
to persuade me to ^ake this counsel, and to leave to show my self of what
lynage and blood I do defend, and likewise what I am bound by order of
Knighthood to do. The fear of death shall not cause me to move back one
foot. This Troyan did laugh at that which Rosicleer did say, and said, well
seeing that thou do esteem thy self of so great valor, procure to overcome
me. And in saying these words, with great lightness this Troyan leapt in with
Rosicleer, and with his strong arms, he clasped him about the middle, and
procured by casting him about to overthrow him, in such sort, that he had
almost over thrown himself, but the Prince laid such hold with his hands,
embrasing the Troyan, that betwixt them there began a terrible wrestling, each
one procuring by polisie to overthrow the other. The Troyan did force himself
by little and little to carry Rosicleer toward the place whereas the Serpent
was, but Rosicleer perseuing it, did procure to make resistance, using policies
for to clear himself from that peril. But always he found that the Troyans
strength did not increase. And by reason that the mighty strength of Rosicleer
was such, the Troyan could not by his force make any resistance, but that he
must needs be carried out of a compass that was marked, of just thirty paces
from the place where as the Serpent was. And when that he had brought him out
of that compass, not being able to make resistance, the Troyan fell to the
ground without any feeling, leaving Rosicleer somewhat discomforted. But yet he
saw that for to go forwards in his enterprise, it was requisite to join
battle with that flying Serpent. And without resting himself, he strayte
ways took a great and mighty spear, and with a valyant courage he went
toward the place whereas the Serpent was, who seeing him coming, and that he
was within the compass, she put her self on foot, and beating with her
wings, she gave two wonderful shrykes, and with great lightness like a
byrd, she came toward Rosicleer, puffing out of that terrible mouth a mighty
thick smoke like unto a mist. This valiant and courageous knight when he saw
her coming he put the great end of his spear unto ye ground, and firming it
fast with both his hands, the point forwards, he tarried her coming. This
furious Serpent without making any account of the spear, with the great desire
she had to lay hold on the knight, put her self forwards with great fury, so
that the spear chanced into one of her great and wide nosethrills, that
almost it ran up into her brains, but if he had held the point of the Spear
a little lower, he had given the most worthiest blow in all the world, but yet
for all that it did not let to make a mortal wound. This furious serpent with
the great fierceness she had she brake the spear, so that there remained in
her head more then two spans thereof, and therewith she stroke at the knight
with her nails so terrible a blow, that she overthrew him, in such sort, that
he tumbled on the ground. The beast who was troubled and astonished with that
cruel wound, and again by reason of ye great swiftness and fury she could
not take any hold of his armor, but passed forwards on, insomuch that the
knight had time to arise and put himself on foot, and finding by him the
tronchon that remained of the spear, he turned and firmed himself therewith,
procuring as he did at the first to receive the blow, which he saw coming with
great swiftness, and fortune was so favorable unto him, that he chanced with
the tronchon of her Spear upon one of his strong horns, and by reason that
his spear was strong and full of knots, it was fast upon one of them, and by
her great swiftness broke it clean from her head, wherewith she remained with
that great blow astonished and amazed with ye terrible pain. The tronchon of the
Spear was driven out of his hand, so that he was costrained to lay hand on
his sword, and to shrowde himself under his hard and steel sheeld, to make
his defenc^ against the blows that might come. This cruel Serpent being
very much troubled with the great pain of the wounds, with double fury
giving wonderful shrikes and groans she assaulted this knight. The courageous
Knight who was not without great care of his defense, did abide her coming,
and stood still, and the wounded Serpent seeing her self nigh unto the Knight,
with great beating of her wings arose up in the air, thinking thereby to gripe
fast hold with her sharp nails, and to carry him into the air, and from
thence to let him fall down to the ground to destroy him. The courage of this
Knight was very much, and likewise his judgment, for that this Serpent had not
so soon began to beat with his wings when that he suspected in what order she
would assault him, but he lifted up the point of his sword on high, and
likewise his strong shield, that she might thereof make her pray. This furious
serpent assaulted him to take her hold in such sort, that the sharp sword ran
into her belly and guts, and so the heart: but if that wound had not chanced
in the same place, at that time the Knight had been marvelous ill entreated,
for that the serpent took her hold with her long claws in the midst of his
body in such sort, that by her great strength she made his bones to crack: but
by reason of the sharpness of the sword which opened the wound wide, and
cloue her heart asunder, the Serpent fell down dead to the ground, leaving the
Greek very sore troubled and amazed. When the Knight saw that she was dead,
he gave great thanks unto God, for his aid and succor herein. So straight
way he went to see who was the Knight that was bound at the tree with the
Snakes, and coming nigh him, he knew him to be the Prince Meridian, for the
which he received great sorrow. There he remained a while thinking how he might
unloose him and set him at liberty, and coming unto the serpents, with his
Herculine hand, he laid hold on the neck of them that were at his feet, in
such sort yt he made him to loose his strength, and to forget the use of his
cruel office, leaving ye others feet and winding about his arm, that he was
constrained to procure to clear himself: but all was in vain, for that it
was so firmly fastened about him, that of necessity he must unloose it as he
would undo a company of knots, and the more he undid, the more it wound about
with such wreathings from one place unto another, that it was very strange,
that if it had not been by the great strength he used in queesing of the
serpent, he could never have cleared himself thereof, but in the end it fell
down dead to the ground. Then he laid hold of the other, having no less
trouble with it, then he had with the first, and slew it likewise, so that the
feet of this tormented Barbarian were at liberty of his great pain, who gave
meruaylous and grievous shrikes. Then that cruel Uulture which was upon one
of those trees, seeing what the knight was a doing, with great have she
descended down for to strike and wound the knight vnbewares, which was
executed with such fury, striking him with her sharp bill so terrible a
blow, at such time as he went to lay hold on the Serpents that were at the
wristes of the tormented Prince, that almost it made him to fall backwardes:
then the Greek incensed with fury ^ooke hold on his sword and would have
stroke the Uulture, but he could not for that she was ascended into the
air. Then the Knight let go his sheelde, and with his left hands he laid
hold on one of those Serpents (having always his eye to the Uulture) and by
reason the he did quease the Serpent so hard, he was constrained by the
great pain which he received to let loose his hold, and in the end he slew
it, wherewith the Barbarian Prince did hang but by his right arm, giving
great and sorrowful shrikes and groans, the Uulture would have descended to
have stroke the Knight, but for that she saw the sword put with the point
vnwards for a defense, she durst not give the enterprise, but flying round
about from one place unto another, to see if she could find any place
whereas she might enter for to strike him, without being hurt her self. In
this space he had time for to lay hold with his left hand upon the other
Serpent, and in the same sort as with the other he did kill her, wherewith
the Pagan fell down to the ground without any remembrance.

and the Uulter giving great and terrible shrikes went away and was never
seen after. This Greek did procure to cover his naked body with certain
leaves which he cut from the trees, lamentably beholding his lean face, which
did well show the great sorrow and pain that he had received. At this time
the Greek Princes Squire came whereas they were, forasmuch as the inchauntment
was ended by the death of the last serpent, and pulling from his back the
cloak which he ware, he put it on the Pagan, therewith the better to cover
himself. Also the valiant Troyan was come again unto himself, and cast his
eyes toward the place whereas the Prince was hanged, to see if he were still
in the same torment, who when he saw him not, he looked whether he was fallen
down to the ground, supposing that he had ended his life with that torment,
but when he saw ye furious monster dead, and how the Greek was contemplating
himself upon the Pagan, then with great joy he went toward them, but much
more pleasure he received when he knew him to be the son of Trebatio,
nevertheless all his mirth was mittigated when he saw the deadly force of
this Prince Meridian, and seeing him in that plight, he could not but lament
his heavy and cruel fortune. The Greek did comfort him, praying him to leave
off his sorrowful lamentation, giving him to understand that he was not dead:
Orgalio took his masters helm and ran unto the water side which was there
at hand, and brought it full of water, and when he came unto them, he threw
thereof upon the Pagans face, and being therewith refreshed he came somewhat
unto himself, and opening his eyes he saw there his friend Oristedes, and
looking about he beheld another knight, who he likewise knew to be Rosicleer,
and straight way he understood yt he was the occasion of his liberty, and with
a grievous groan he said: O renowned son of the worthy Trebatio, how God
does in all things exalt thy fame, and now seeing yt thou have succored me in
this torment, likewise I beseech thee aid and succor me in one other thing,
yt I may receive my full delight, which is, that my loving spouse may likewise
be set at liberty, who is captive in this Island. The Greek aunswerid: worthy
Prince, my power and strength is ready at your commandment, and I will employ
all my force and polefie in your service, or lose my life in it. Therefore let
us procure to depart from hence, and give me to understand the occasion of all
this your sorrow and torment: and when that my strong arm cannot satisfy your
will, my life shall remain in recompense of my large promis. So straight way
they put the Pagan upon the Squires Horse, and covered him with the same
cloak, that first he had, and took the Squyre behind him for to hold him up,
for that he was so lean, that he could not keep himself vp-right in the
saddle. And therewith they returned, and took the way wherein Rosicleer came,
and following an other path under the hills side which brought them unto a
fair Castle. And in travailing by ye way, Rosicleer did demand of Oristedes
the cause and increasing of all his sorrow, to whom he began to tell as
follows.

You shall understand, worthy Prince, that this Island belonged unto a very
great and monstrous Giant, whom the Prince slew, for to set at liberty
certain Ladies, the which he carried captive. So a son of this Giant many
days after, did procure to be revenged of the death of his father, and
followed it so hard, that in ye end he found such occasion, that he met with
the Prince, having no other defense but his sword, without any armor, for that
he was sportinge himself at the sea side, and in his company was I, and a few
other knights, the Giant with them that were with him, assalted us with so
great power and strength, that in spite of all that ever we could do to make
our defense, they brought us unto this Ilainde, wherein we were a great time
prisoners. So one morn^ng, not knowing how and which way, we found our selves
in such order as you did find us, enchanted. He did not only make this
inchauntment to be of great strength, but also he labored for no other thing,
but to make defense, yt the prince might not be set at liberty. The ordeiner
of this inchauntment, was a sister unto Fangomadan, and for to punish him with
more torment, she put him in this sort as you have seen, leaving the Princes in
the Castle, in fast prison, being kept by two sons of the Giant, and other
knights, believing that the Prince should never be delivered out of that
terrible torment, and heerewith they drew nigh unto the foot of the Castle,
whereas they unhorsed the Prince Meridian, and determined there to take their
ease and rest. Orgalio went unto their bark for to bring provision, for that
they had there great store, at whose return they did eat and refreshed
themselves, and Meridian recovered somewhat more strength, as one yt had his
stomach clean void of victuals, the like did his companion Oristedes. So
all that night they remained there, resting themselves, and communed of all
things what was best to be done in their enterprise. So they determined yt the
next day the Greek should go alone to the castle, for if the Troyan should go
with him, it would possible be the occasion yt they would not open the gates,
because they knew the Troyan. So with this determination when the morning was
come, the Greek arose up and trimmed his armor, and laced on his helm, and
put his sheeld on his shoulder, and took his leave of the knights, and took a
narow way which lead him up the hill unto the castle, he would not that his
Squire should bear him company, but commanded him to remain in the service of
ye Pagan Prince. Not long after the Troyan being moved of compassion, his heart
could not suffer but needs he must follow the Prince. And being in this
determination he laced on his helm and took his sheeld, and with great
travail for yt he was a foot, he began to follow, and took the way which
the Greek went.

How that Rosicleer entered into the castle, and of the battle he had therein,
for to bring out of prison the princess, spouse unto the Prince Meridian who
was in great torment. Cap. 17.
ROsicleer was a great while going up that little hill, yet at length, although
with great travail, one hour before that the Sun did show forth her shining
beams, he got to the top of that hill, from whence he discerned a great and
mighty broad plain, and in it there was a fair castle, wrought with very
many towers, whose battlements were of so great fairness, that with the Sun
they showed a very fair sight, on the one side the maine sea did beat on it,
whose waters striking upon ye rocks did make a marvelous noise, which was
caused by that hasty and furious wind Borias, and on that side whereas the
Prince was, it was all compassed about with a very broad and deep ditch or
moate, and had in it but one entering, and that was very narrow. The sight of
that Castle did give great contentment unto them which beheld it, by reason it
was so fair, and being so early in the morning, the windows were not open.
The Greek being all alone musing to himself, upon a sudden he heard over
the gate of the Castle a window to be open, whereat looked out a Giant of so
great height as he had not seen the like, he was in this shirt, and covered
with a night gown of black velvet, and seeing Rosicleer, he knew by his device
that he was none of them of the castle, and when he saw and was certified that
he was none of his knights, he said: Knight, what do thou seek in this
country, for as it does appear by thy strange demeanor, thou should be a
stranger. To whom the Greek answered and said: Thou say truth Giant I am a
stranger, for I never dwelt in it, but my fortune has brought me hither,
being driven by the great fury and tempests of the sea, and being a shore I
found in it a very strange adventure, which has given me occasion to come
and speak with thee, if it be thy pleasure to hear me, either within the
Castle or without it. At such time as this valiant Rosicleer was saying these
words, he had a sight of his face, his healme being up, whereat might be
seen his fair face, on whom the Giant did very much behold, and answered.

If thou do seek me I will hear thee in what sort thou will, but if thou
do ask for the King my father, thou shall understand that he is not in the
Island, but is a broad about business, forced of necessity touching his
kingdom. I would have been very glad, said Rosicleer, to have found the king
thy Father, for that I do understand, that it should be he, who did assalt and
take the Prince of the Scitas, and the worthy Troyan. And I am come to give him
to understand, how he should entertain and entreat, such knights as they are,
and not with so great pride to put them unto such sorrow and pain, and keep the
princes in prison, using them as though they were his vassailes, who had done
some cruel and heinous offense against his own person, or as rebels against
their natural Lord and Prince, but he has been the bolder, for that he does
know they are a great way from their own countries. And I do much marvel,
that such a person as thou art, wilt consent to the doing of such cruelty, for
that it does apeare, thou art sufficiently furnished with stature and strength.
And thou semest unto me, to be a very good knight, which does bind thee to
acknowledge great modesty, and not to minister or consent unto such cruelty.
But I do see that thou art void of all, and that thou have no knowledge of
the goodness whereunto thou art bound. Therefore if thou do maintain that
which thy Father does uphold and sustain in this Castle and Island, is not
evil: I will make thee to say the contrary, both of us being to gether,
therefore choose whether thou will grant me free entry into the Castle, or
whether thou will come forth where as I am. The Giant did not show any kind
of alteration in his countenance, neither did he answer with any proud
words, but rather mittigating his ire, he said. Do not believe knight, that I
am so blind and so void of knowledge, that I do not know what is good and
what is evil. Neither will I consent that thou shall speak evil of that
which my father has done, but rather I tell thee, yt I will venture my person
in his defense: therefore I bid thee to abide, and thou shall see how I am not
afraid of the peril, for it shall be more death unto me to remain alive, with
my honor blemished, then to dye in his quarrel and defense. And I will
command that the gates of the Castle shall be open, and I do warrant that so
long as our battle shall endure, thou shall not receue any harm. And if it
be so that fortune does run on thy side, then can I not assure the any
farther, for that I have a brother, who is not so great a friend unto courtesy
as I am. Cause the gates to be open, said Rosicleer, and with ye help of God I
will make my part good with all. But yet certes Giant believe me, it does greatly
grieve me to see thee maintain such evil, as it does apeare in these thy
words. And therewith he withdrew him self from the window, and called for his
apparaile, and likewise for his armor. His brother when he heard him speak
with so great alterasion, he looked out at the same wyndow, for to see who he
was that gave the occasion. This Giant looked out with a devilish semblaunce,
an seeing the knight he said. Art thou he that have defied my brother,
wherefore have thou accused my Father for a traitor, and an evil and naughti^
knight. I am he, said Rosicleer, who do pretend to revenge the wrong and
force done unto the Prince Meridian. O vile coward, said the Giant, what devil
has made thee so hardy to make an enterprise, that Mars himself durst not
give the like attempt. Oh ye Gods, how do you consent ye one poor knight
should have so much boldness, to put himself before me, with such a demand.
It grieved Rosicleer very much, to see himself to entreated, of a proud Giant,
and aunswering him he said. In truth I have defied thy brother, who seems to
have more discresion then thou have. And in ye same demand I do defy thee to
mortal battle. In the which I think to make thee know, the vileness of thy
reasons, and the baseness used in thy words. And take from that huge membred
body, thy head, with the force of this my strong arm. At which words the
Giant who first apeared, and was putting on his armor, said unto his brother:
This knight of his own virtue and bounty does come to be slain, or else
procure liberty to the Princes, and he seems to have sovereign hardiness and
strength, and there is no reason, to show thy valor in speaking so proudly and
unseemly words, but with the fury of thy untamed arm. And if the Gods do
grant unto him to have the victory over me, there shall remain time for thee
to show thy valor. And there with he made him to withdraw himself from the
window, leaving Rosicleer very well satisfied with his courtesy. So within a
little while after he heard them opening the gates of the Castle, and letting
down the draw bridge. Then the courageous Greek took the bridge and put
himself within the castle into a very fair and large court, all adorned round
about with rich windows, and on the one side a very fair Orchard,
accompanied with very sweet and odoriferous flowers, and all manner of sweet
herbs, in the which were many that were drossing those trees and herbs, and
putting them in order, some were occupied in making of fine hedges and arbours,
and others in husbanding the trees and cutting of them, others in digging of
the ground, and others in setting of herbs, who when they saw Rosicleer,
they all stayed from their work, and imputed that knight to be very unwise to
give that enterprise, and amongst them was the Giant who last of all spoke unto
Rosicleer at the window, with a mighty great club in his hand, and for the
defense of his body a simple harness, who said unto Rosicleer: Come in, come
in, thou hardy fool, for that thou shall receive the payment of thy
indiscreet and foolish boldness. The Prince without making any answer went
on forwards, and entering in at the other gate, he came into a very fair and
paued Court, the which was compassed about with three fair galleries one above
another, the Prince received great delight to see the excellent work of them.
So not long after there descended down a pair of stairs the first giant,
armed with strong armor, his sheelde on his arm, and a great broad cutting
sword in his hand, who without speaking any word assaulted him with mortal
battle. The worthy Greek was in a readiness for to make his defense with
his sword in his hand. The Giant stroke at him a terrible blow right down, but
the Greek with a light leap made him to miss his blow, and his sword fell
down upon the pauement, in such sort, that it made a great number of sparks
of fire to fly out, as soon as the blow was passed, the Greek stroke him
upon the arm, which blow was not very great, for that he could not very well
reach him unto his contentment, yet for all that it did not let to cut his
armor, flesh and all unto the hard bone, and although the Giant did feel the
wound somewhat grievous, yet did he procure to dissemble the feeling of the
pain and grief, and with the great anger he had to feel himself hurt, he
threw his sheelde from him to the ground, and took his great sword fast in
both his hands, and returned thinking to have stroke the Greek with double
force more the^ before, but he did procure to clear himself as he did at the
first, striking a blow at the Giant, thinking to have stroke him again on his
arms, but he could not reach him, but it lighted upon the Giants sword, and
the blow was such, that the force of the steely blade was not sufficient to
make resistaunce, but that the swoorde of the Greek did enter in and made a
great gappe, but the Gyauntes third blow was such, that without resistaunce it
chanced upon the Greeks sheelde, and all that ever it hit it carried to the
ground, and part of it lyghted on his healme, in such sort that Rosicleer was
constrained to stoop with his knees to the ground, but with great lyghtnesse
he arose up again, and being very wrathful that he had received such a
blow, he let loose his sheelde, and stepped to the Gyaunt with his sword in
both his hands, and stroke him upon his left shoulder, and the blow glaunced,
but if it had chanced to have stroke him full, at that blow he had made an
end of the battle, but for all that he remained very sore hurt, and his
swoorde fell to the ground, and raised many sparks of fire. The Gyaunt was
very much amazed at the power and strength of his enemy, but not in such
sort, that it should cause in him any weakness, but rather with a new
courage he returned unto his begun battle, with so great courage as
though he had received no hurt at all, at that time both of them stroke the one
at the other with great strength and power, although the Gyaunt was very much
disturbed by reason of his wounds, but yet for all that he showed great
prowess. This battle and contencion between them continued more then two
long hours, in which time there went from his wounds great abundance of
blood, so in the end, whether with werinesse of the long contempt, or with the
loss of so much blood, the Gyaunt could not keep himself on foot, but fell
down unto the ground, as one yt were dead. The prince who had thought he had
been dead, did not receue much delight, for that he was a reasonable Giant, and
of much virtue and courtesy. But yet in great have he went to pull of his
helm, and then he hard that out of the Castle they began to cry out and
said, hold thy hand evil knight, and do not make an end to kill our
natural Lord, for in doing it thou shall dye the death. And loking about him
to see who it was that spoke unto him those threatening words, he saw desending
down at a broad pair of stayres to the number of fiftene knights, who with a
great rushing and noise, being all very well armed, and seemed to be very good
knights, for that they were of a good disposition. And as he saw them coming,
with a furious courage, he encountered them and said. The name which you have
given me, I will make that hereafter you shall use it no more, or else I will
lose my life. And therewith he put himself amongst them, with so great furye,
as the cruel and hongery Wolf does amongst a company of simple sheep, and
stroke the first with so great strength, that with the fury of his arm, he
cloue his head a sunder in the midst, but yet he could not let but receue
great hurt of his person, for that he was assalted by them, who desired to
revenge the death of their Lord. The other Giant cried out against them,
reuiling them with maruailous foul words, for that one alone knight should so
long endure alive in their hands. But this miserable people did not know with
whom they made this contension, for if they had known and understood who was
before them, they would not have hilde this battle, for they did not know how
they had to do with the son of ye Emperor Trebatio, against whom the Diamant
Rocks do seem weak, as it apeared by the great strength he had in wounding
of them. For some he slew out right, and some were very sore hurt, but
notwithstanding of those which did remain, he was assalted very desperately,
but this Greek seeing still their contention, his courage the more increased,
and took his sword in both his hands, and stroke one of them so terrible a
blow upon the shoulder, that his sword passed down unto his wast: so there
remained but five of them, who altogether did strike at him such five blows,
yt it made him to stoop with both his knees to the ground, the which the
Prince did feel very much, nevertheless with great strength he arose up
again, in spite of all them that stroke him, and it was unto their harm, for
that he was not so soon up, when he stroke him that was next hand so terrible
a blow upon his helm, that he cut him down unto the stomach in two pieces,
and casting about his sword over his head, he stroke another on the neck, that
he made his head fly from his shoulders, to the ground, the other three which
remained, seeing the great slaughter that was made on their companions, and
likewise themselves to be hurt and werye, they procured to run away up the
stairs, and they thinking to fly from their death, fell into the like
danger, and rather worse, for that at the head of the stairs, they met with
the other Giant who was descending down, giving terrible shrikes, and meeting
them with his mighty cutting sword, he cut them all to pieces saying. Take
the payment yt such cowardes do deserve. So leaving them dead, he descended
down the stairs, and found this strong Rosicleer, leaning with his breast
upon the pomell of his sword, easing himself somewhat of the great travail
passed, but it endured with him but a small time, for that the Giant lift up
his broad and mighty sword, and went toward him to strike him, but the Prince
stood still tarrying his coming, and was determined to make ye battle more
by policy then by strength, fearing that the weariness which he had received
should be the occasion that his force should fail him and his courage abate,
if that peradventure he should have to do with more then he had at that
present before him. So when the Giant came whereas the Prince was, he
discharged his mighty stroke for to wound the Greek, but he with a light leap
cleared himself from the fury of that blow, and closing with him in great
have, he stroke him upon one of his legs, that his harness deceived him, and
he wounded him unto the bone, but for all that the giant did not leave to lay
upon him very thick blows, as one that was very expert in that exercise. It
was great delight to see how the Greek did clear himself with great
lightness from his blows without feeling any weariness. The Gyaunt with the
great fury that he had, made great have in striking at the Prince, which was
the occasion that he waxed weary, and was very sore vexed and troubled, and
when the Greek perceived his faint and troubled stomach, he entered in and out
with him with great lightness, procuring for to hurt the Giant, and did it
with great ease, although the Giant did not let likewise with great has^ to
strike mighty and terrible blows at him. This Prince procured still to see if
he could find time, that alonely with one blow he might make an end of the
battle without any peril to himself, notwithstanding he did not let to
wound him where he might, in many places the Giant was all imbrued with blood
which issued out of the wounds he had, and although they were not great, yet
they were troublesome. This battle endured a long time, for which cause, and
the great loss of blood, this Gyaunt began to wax feeble and weak. When
the Greek perceived this, and seeing that he did not make his assault with so
great have as before, and although he was weary with striking so many blows,
which brought him almost to an end, yet now again with great have he stroke
the Giant many and terryble blows, then the Giant seeing himself so ill
entreated, and knowing his end to be at hand, he cried out making a great
noise, which range through the air, blaspheming against his Gods, and called
all his Pages and household servant, and said: O you lost creatures why do
you not come and help me? At whose noise and calling there came together above
thirty servant, some with clubbes and staves, and some with stones, and
compassed him round about, throwing stones at him so thick, that he could
not approach unto them, for they durst not come nigh unto him, the stones rayned
more thicker upon the Greek; then ye froson hail stones does in the month of
March, thrown down by force out of obscure and tempestuous clouds, and
although his armor were very strong, yet for all that he did not let to
receive great trouble by reason of those thick blows. The Greek went
toward them for to hurt them, but they ran in at the doors to save
themselves, as commonly they who does bait a Bull with darts in a trenched
place, after they have gored him, they hide themselves in corners to save them
from the fury of his horns, and tourning himself they straight way torment
him behind: in this sort did his servant entreat this Greek, till such
time that he was constrained by his ire to go against them, shaking off his
sword, then as before they ran away. So the Greek returned whereas the
Gyaunt was, who was so weary, that he could not remove out of the place where
he had left him, who clearing himself from one terrible blow which the
furyous Giant stroke at him, presently returned the like blow, which lighted
upon his left shoulder, that he opened the hard harness and the flesh unto
the bone. This blow was not so soon given him, when that with great have he
stroke him with both his hands on his breast, and by reason that he was weak
and weary, he needed not much strength to overthrow him to the ground, who
received on his back a terrible fall. The Greek likewise with the great
strength that he put to overthrow him, fell to the ground, but it fell out
better with him then he thought, for that falling, he rolled a good way from
the place whereas the Giant fell, and straight way with a trice he arose up
again, and found himself all to be compassed again with the servants, who
battered at him with staves and stones, as many times a wall is battered with
Artillery. Some of them would have run and embrased themselves with him,
thinking that he had not been so nimble as he was, but when they saw him on
foot, they retired back again with great fear. At this time the Gyaunt
began to arise, although it was with great trouble, but the Greek who was
very angry to see himself so entreated with boys and servants, with a trice
he was with the Giant, and before that he could put himself on foot, he
stroke him so terrible a blow with both his hands upon the head, that he cut it
in two pieces, and he fell dead to the ground. These servants when they saw
that their Lord was slain, they all ran away making a great noise. This
worthy Greek when he saw that the fierce giant was dead, and that he was
clear from that conflict, he went toward that place whereas he left the
first Giant, and when he came unto him he pulled off his healme, at which time
he heard one which from (...) windows made a great noise and said: O cruel
knight, let this suffice thee, cease thy fury, with the great harm which thou
have done, and do not show thy wrath upon that Giant, who has no power for to
make his defense, and if that his valor is not sufficient for to abate thy
ire, let this sorrowful infant move thee to compassion, whom thou have caused
to suffer great pain and grief: The Prince looked up and procured to see who
it was that spoke unto him, and he perceived that it was a maid of a
marvelous great disposition of body and very fair of face, and weeping,
unto whom he said: Fair Gentlewoman, the cause of my cruelty has been for to
disturb the great cruelty which you have used with the sons of the Emperor
Alicandro within this Castle, and touching this knight, you may believe me,
that his death will be as much grief unto me as unto you, for the great
courtesy which I have seen in him. At that time the Giant was somewhat come to
himself, for by reason that the air had catched him, he had some
remembrance, of the which the Prince was very glad, and turning unto the
Lady he said. Fair Gentlewoman, if there be any servants in this castle,
command them to put this knight into some place that he may be cured of his
wounds, and therewith he heard great knocking at ye gate, and for to see who
it was, he left the Gyaunt and went thither, and asking who was there that with
such have did call, he did understand by his words that it was Orislides the
Troyan, who could not come thither any sooner, for that ^ee went a foot. To
whom the Greek did open the gate with great rejoicing, and shutting the gat^
again they (...) (...) the Count. When the Troyan saw^ ^o great ^^aughter
which was done there, he straight way vn^erstoode that the knight was not come
thither for nothing. This Gentlewoman was with her brother, and did greatly
weep* and bewa^le his unhappy misfortune, who altho^gh he was som^what come
to his remembrance, (...) to arise upon his (...). The Prince commanded that
with great discretion, ^e s^old ^e taken up by (...) of (...)* and so carried
unto his chamber, whereas without causing him for to rec^iue grief, he s^uld be
unarmed, yt which was done with great diligence, and he was cured by the hands
of his sister who made great lamentati^n (...) him, whom Brand^fidel (for so
was the Gyaunt called) did comfort with ^^^ye sweet and amorous words, the
which caused the Prince to have a great affection toward him, and it was with
great reason, for that the giant was adorned with very much virtue. Oristides
seeing all things in so good order, left ye Prince who was seeking of the
Princess, and took a horse of the Giants, and a palfray, and returned to
fetch Meridian. So after that Brandafidel was ^^red, the Prince demanded in
great have for the Princess, and the Giants sister was constrained to go with
him to bring him whereas she was. So they entered into a fair large hal, which
led them into a parler, whereas was an old giantesse of a maruailous good
proportion, who made great lamentation, for that it was told her of all that
had passed in the Castle, who had in her company more then thirty Ladies and
Gentlewomen, which did comfort her: to whom the sister of the Giant said, Lady,
this Knight, to whom the Gods has given so much power, does demand the
Princess of the Scitas our prisoner, for whose cause, all this harm and evil
happened unto us. This Lady with a grievous sigh beholding the Prince said. O
cruel murderer of my well-beloved sons, and faithful servant: make an end
to execute thy cruelty, showing the same and like upon this unfortunate
Queen; whose power has profited her very little. This good Greek being
tender hearted, when he heard so great lamentation he said: Queen, do not
marvel, for those which do offend God, do hope of no other thing, but
punishment for their sins, and so those that live with pride, cannot let but
to be paid with the like. I do desire thee to command the Princess to be
given unto me, whom thou have in prison, for that she does not deserve to be
entreated amongst you as a prisoner, but as a Lady. The Queen without giving
him any answer, threw unto him two keys which she had tied at her girdle, and
afterward said unto him: Under these thou shall find that which thou seek,
and enjoy the glory which thou have got by this occasion, til such time as he
does come, who with his mighty arm, will revenge the great wrong, which thy
good fortune has brought to pass. The Greek took ye keys, and being led by
that Gentlewoman (who would never leave him) they went out of that parler, and
went up a pair of stairs, which brought them unto another hall of no less
bigness then the first, and with the keye she opened a door, and said: Enter
O Knight, which have as much cruelty as prowess and strength, and there thou
shall find her whom thou seek. Fair Gentlewoman said Rosicleer, I do not
determine to enter, but that your highness shall go before. This Princess
giving a grievous sigh entered in first, and brought him into a fair chamber,
and then opened another door, wherein they entered into another hall, very well
garnished with many and fair windows, which was toward the Sea: at one of
the which, there sat the Princess, who was combing of her fair hair, and
with her there was a Damsel, the which held the glass in her hands before
her. When Rosicleer saw her, he received great pleasure and delyght, and for
that the Princess should know him, he pulled off his healme, and straight
way she knew him, and with great alteration she arose up against him, and
said. Oh Greek Prince, the flower of all Knighthoode in the world, has
Fortune so much favored me, that all my griefs and sorrows be finished, and
likewise those of the prince my spouse, to whom ye Prince answered with great
rejoicing and said. Most mighty Princess, God of his bou^tifull mercy, has
delivered thee from so great care and trouble: wherefore know that you are
clear of all thraldom for this present. The sister of the Giant, when she
heard that the Knight was one of the Greek Princes, whose valor was blazed
throughout all the world, her pain and grief was so much the more, having
before her so worthy an adversary, greatly fearing the coming of her father,
lest there should happen unto him some inconvenience. So Rosicleer and the
Princesses went out of that chamber, and the fair Giantesse followed them, the
Princess had great desire to see Meridian, but it was not long after, that in
the case as before was told you he came. I cannot here declare ^he great
delight which the two received when they saw themselves together. Wherefore I
do leave the consideration thereof unto them, that firmly and truly do love,
and has been absent with like succession of troubles and sorrow. The Greek
was not forgetful, to command that the Prince Meridian, should be put into a
fair bed, and when he had ordained that which was necessary for all things,
he asked for somewhat to eat, the which straight way was done, and the Tables
laid in the chamber, where, Meridian lay, and all them of the Castle, were
very much amazed, at the liberty of Meridian, far much more then of all that
which happened before in the Castle.

The Greek Prince with amorous words and sweet persuasions, caused the Queen
and her Daughter to sit down at the Table to eat, being somewhat comforted,
for that they knew how that Brandafidel was without danger of death, for
that of them and of all the rest that were in the Castle, he was very well
beloved for his great virtue.

How the King Fangomadan came without knowing of any thing that had happened in
the Castle, and how he found the entry closed, and of the battle that was
between him and Rosicleer. Cap. 18.
EXceeding was the sorrow and care the Queen and her daughter passed that
night, always looking for the coming of the king Fangomadan, the Princess
likewise was not with out some fear, mistrusting some other inconvenience. The
Greek alone was he, that took no care of those matters. The next day
following, when they were at dinner, there came unto them, one of ye servants
that were in the Castle, and said unto the Prince. Famous Knight, the King
Fangomadan is at the Castle gate, show unto us thy pleasure what we do. There
was not one that were there present but lost their colors at those words,
saving only the Greek and the Troyan, who rising up from the table, they
commanded that the draw bridge should be let down, and Argolio to bring them
their armor, which with a trice was brought unto them, and they armed them
selves. The Greek Prince looked out at one of the windows which was over the
gate of the Castle, to see how (...) people he brought with him, and he saw
that he had with him but twenty Knights, and certain foot men. And the King
was mounted upon a mighty Elephant, who seeing that the bridge was not let
down, neither the gates open, he began to tell out aloud, making a marvelous
noise, and commanded his people to knock very hard at the ring of the gate.

The Greek Prince, although his monstrous greatness did seem to him
terrible, yet he esteemed no more his fury, then as though he had been very
humble and mild, neither forced (...) any thing of his great pride, but with
a high voice he said. What a knocking make thou there, thou monstrous
Gyaunt? What haste have thou to revenge thy anger upon the ring of the gate,
thou must understand that thou can not enter in here, but thou must make thy
conquest of the entry with the force of thy strong arm. The Giant being
greatly amazed of that he heard, ca^t up his eyes to see who he was that was so
bold, and without courtesy spoke unto him those words, and he saw that he was
a well set knight, of him unknown, and said unto him: What is this that thou
say, am not I king of this Island and over all this land? Thou were (said
Rosicleer) but now for thy great pride and foolish hardiness thou have lost
it, and it is now in my power: Where be my sons that kept it, said the Giant,
what is become of them? The Grake said, one of them is slain by the strength
of my arm, and the other yielded, fulfilling that which he does owe unto the
order of knighthoode, as it becomes a good knight. Oh immortal Gods, said
the king, is it possible to be true that I do bear, that so vile a wretch as
thou art should be the occasion of so much harm? O thou traitor and false
knight, command the gates to be opened, for that thy great strength shall
little avail thee, if they be opened unto me. And if thou do not command
them to be open, I will so use the matter, that neither the deapth of the
meat, nor towers of the castle, shall be able to make any resistance against
me for thy defense. And with the great madness which he had, he drew out his
great and broad cutting sword, and with both his hands be stroke at the gate,
as though he would cut it in pieces, but all his labor was in vain, for that
the gates were very strong, and therewith the Prince Rosicleer determined to
descend down into the Court, and commanded the Troyan that in the mean time
that the battle endured, that he should have great care of the keeping of the
gate, and took his healme of Argolio and laced it on, and also a strong and
well steeled sheeld, and when he came unto the gate, he saw that the king was a
foot, and beating at the gate with all his strength, to whom the Prince said.

Tarry a while and I will open the gate unto thee, make not so much have. And
in saying these words he opened a wicket, the Gyaunt when he saw it, with an
earnest furye he thrust himself in thereat. The worthy Prince seeing him so
hasty, with both his hands he thrust at him, and made him to recoyle back a
good way, and said. Keep thee back thou furious beast, for here thou have no
entering without my lycense. To whom the Giant said: What do thou think or
pretend to do? To make battle with thee said ye prince, therefore if thou will enter into the battle, thou must come in alone. I am very well content
said the King, the which he spoke with a great deal more meekness, than his
great pride did give him license, or could suffer, and all to see him within
the castle: for that he was persuaded with himself, that if he were once
within, there were not in all the world one Knight that could overcome him,
neither make any resistaunce against his power. So Rosicleer commanded that
the gate might be open, whereat the Giaunt entered, and also his great Elephant.
When the King was entered, the Troyan had great care and diligence to shut the
gate again, whom when the King knew, the more was his grief: but with the great
anger that he had, he made no stay, till such time as he came into the great
Court, and there he mounted upon his furious and great beast, and Argolio
brought unto his Lord his horse, and without profiting himself of the stirrup,
he leped into the saddle. So when he was on horse back, he laid hand on his
sword, and the Giant on his great cutting fauchon, and either of them assaulted
the other, with mortal blows. Here it is requisite and necessary to leave these
two warriors in their battle till time shall serve, and I will tell you of the
Emperor of Trapisond, the great and mighty Alfebo, who as you have heard,
when he understood how y^ proud Brufaldoro without all fear of his Epitaph,
had armed himself with the armor of Bramarant, he was straight taken in two
extremities, ye one for to accomplish yt which he had promised, and the other
for yt he would not leave his Imperial Empire, but calling to remembrance, how
yt the Empres had a great delight in hunting, one morning betimes before that
they did arise, he said. My Lady and Empres, it is not unknown unto you, the
duty we owe unto our noble courages, and how much we are bound by our high
estates, to maintain our foregotten honor, yt which with great loss of our
blood and sweatings of our bodies we have obtained. And this is of a
certainty, that he is more to be commended, yt does sustain that which he
has gotten, then he which now does win it, although ye fortune does favor him:
for many times when a man is in ye top of his highness, he gra^teth things, yt
although he be in the best of his quietness and rest, taking his case, yet he is
bound to accomplish and perform his promise. It is well known that ye armor of
Brama^ant was put for a Tropheo or memory, upon a high and mighty Pine tree,
with an Epitaph written, in the which my brother did promise and give his word,
to make defense, against whosoever would take them away, and I likewise did
make the same promise. It is come now unto my knowledge, that a Moore with his
bold courage, has not only made little account of that which we have
promised, but also with the force of his arm, he has slain my very great
friend Zoylo the Prince of Tartaria, for the which I am bound to seek out
this Moore, for that I cannot say against the will of my brother: this is my
pretense, (my good Lady and Empres) and I would be very glad that it might be
with your good will. The Empress who was very attentive unto ye words which ye
Emperor Alfebo had spoken, she said. My Lord and Emperor, from the first time
that I heard these news which you now speak off, I did imagine that which now
I have heard, and I cannot deny that in seeing my self without you, it will
be welneere my death, for that the heart with the which I do sustain my life
will be absent: but for all that, considering that it is a thing that does
concern your honor, I will rather suffer the death in your absence, then
disturb you in that, which you are so much bound to fulfill. Therefore you may
ordain your departure when your pleasure is, and I do desire you, that your
return may be with as much brevity as may be, and carrye with you in your
company the King Bramidoro.

The Emperor finding the answer of the Empress so much to his contentment,
he embraced and kissed her with great love, and straight he arose and procured
to put in order his departure. And arming himself with the armor of Meridia,
and mounted upon his great horse, he commanded to call the King, for to make
himself ready to bear him company, at the which he received great delight:
and being in a readiness, there was brought unto him an Elephant, upon the
which he mounted. And so taking his leave of his vassailes and subjects, the
Emperor gave them great charge to have respect of obedience unto their
natural Lady. Then the Emperor and Bramidoro departed from the City, and
took with them in their company but one young gentleman, who was son unto
the Duke gf Alafonte, whose name was called Victorando, and he was of a very
good disposition: so they travailed six days, without finding any adventure
worth the telling, but the seventh day they chanced into a great Forest, full
of marvelous mighty and thick Trees, and by reason that the way was very
narrow and not much used, they strayed and lost their right way, and unawares
they were so enclosed amongst ye trees and bushes that they could not by any
means find, where they had lost their way. So all the rest of the day, they
did no other thing but ride here and there in the Forest amongst the trees,
but it was great ease unto them, for that the wilderness was very plain ground
although full of trees. The night came so upon them, that they were constrained
to alight from their horses, and amongst those trees, did eat of such victuals
as Victora^do had brought with him: and the Emperor and the King did pass ye
time in such communication as they thought best to their co^tentment. In this
order they passed the time till sleep came upon them, whereas they rested
till next morning, the which being come, the Emperor mounted upon his horse,
and the King upon his Elephant, and they returned to seek the way, and going
this way and that way, to see if they could happen on the way which should carry
them out of that Forest, they ha^^^ed to come unto a little mountain all of
hard stone, in the which was a great cave, and thither they went, and
alighting from their horses, they entered into the cave, and found that on the
one part it was fall of ^aye, and upon the walls was hanged many quarters of
ve^^on, and of other wild beasts, and found no other thing at all. and
therewith they returned out again, and went unto the top of that rock over
the cave, and looked about them on every side to see if there were any person
thereabouts, but they could see no body. Then the King Bramidoro said, it shall
be good seeing that we have flesh to see if there be any fire, that we may roast
thereof for to eat, for that I promise you I am so hungry, that if they tarry
long, they shall see that there has been in their lodging those, that have had
good will to eat. Then the Emperor laughed and said, I do promise you of
truth that I do find my self with no less desire to eat then you, and your
counsel does like me well, and me think that our fortune should be the better
if we could find bread. The king said, I care not, for that I have seen
flesh, and therewith I do think to fill my stomach, and for any other thing,
we shall see what is to be found therein. Well let us go in said ye Emperor,
for I fear me, that we shall be made to pay the shot. Therefore let us be
well advised and look unto your selves. Let me have my body and stomach
satisfied, said the king, which now with hunger is somewhat troubled, and
afterward at the paying of ye reckoning they shall see what money I have, and
alighting again from their horse, they entered into the cave, and seeking if
there were any fire, they found some raked up in ye ashes, at yt which the king
received great joy, so straight way they made a fire with wood, yt they found
there, and put to roast half a dear, which they thought to be ye fairest
amongst all ye rest yt were there, and looking about they found in another hole
which was in ye wall of the cave good store of bread, although it was somewhat
brown, and took thereof yt which they thought sufficient. And when their
venison was roasted, they took it out of the ca^e, and sat down under certain
trees, which were hard by a little river thereby, and did eat so sauerly and
with so good a taste, as though they had been furnished with their accustomed
dainties in their Pallaices, but they always had a care unto the maine
chance, to see if their host did come. Victorando who also was eating of the
veniso^, with a very good grace he said: I do believe that our host will not
like of our overmuch diligence heerin, when he shall find lacking some of his
flesh, I believe they will demand the more of us for our shot: One for one
said ye king, my stomach being satisfied, then will I hear them all, and let
them demand for their reckoning what they please: I am afraid said the
Emperor yt it must be paid with sists, for yt we have been so bold to eat
their victuals without lisence. Yet in one thing I do comfort my self said the
king, for I have nothing to loose, and again I am in company with ye power of
the best knight in the world, and in saying this they held their peace, for yt
they heard a rushing amongst ye bushes, which made them to leave of their
talk, and to put themselves in a readiness, whatsoever should happen, so they
arose up and laced on their helmes, and beholding what it should be ye caused
yt great noise, they saw yt it were two great giants as big as two mighty
Pine trees, who without seeing their guests went into their cave, ye one of them
brought upon his back a mighty great heart, and the other a great bristled
Bore, and when they found fire in the cave and the lack of their flesh, they
gave great shrikes and returned out of their cave. Then the king with laughing
said: In good faith I do believe yt they come to demand of us the reckoning
and to pay ye shot. And being in this speech ye giants came forth of the cave
and put themselves in place whereas they might see the^, and like beasts,
without saying any word each of them assaulted his contrary. The valiant king
drew out his broad cutting sword, and went forth to receive him in the way yt
was coming toward him, the Emperor did ye like with his precious sword in
his hand, the Giants both together discharged their heavy and mighty blows,
the Emperor with his accustomed discreation caused the Giant to loose his
blow, and therewith entered into him with great lightness, and stroke him under
ye side with the point of his sword, and by reason of his ill armor, it
appeared on ye other part of his body, causing him to fall dead to ye ground,
and looking aside for his companion the king, he saw yt at one blow he cut of
ye giants leg, who with no less noise then the other fell to the ground, but
when they saw this resistance to be so quickly finished, yt king laughing said:
In good faith, seeing it has pleased God to help us so quickly to pay our
reckoning, I do not mean to depart but to carry with us some provision, and
therewith commanded Victorando to take that venison which they brought, and the
bread which remained, and to carry it with him, so they returned their way, not
knowing whether they went, for yt the more they travailed the more they put
themselves into ye forest, till night drew on, at which time they found
themselves amongst a company of thick trees, there they were constrained to
alight and lodge themselves under those thick trees, and commanded to take out
of yt which they brought for their supper, which being done they took their
rest till the next morning, which appeared unto them very fair and clear, and
at such time as the Sun had spread abroad his beams upon those high and
mighty trees they returned unto their unknown way, till at ye last they
chanced into a narow path, not much used, the which they followed, the
Emperor rode before, and the king next, and Victorando came after them, and in
this order they travailed a good while without mistrusting of any thing yt
should happen, and trauaillng in this sort, upon a sudden (without knowing ye
occasion) Cornerino started, and rose up with his fore feet, and gave a turn
in ye air backward, likewise the heavy Elephant stretched out his long and
broad snout, and began to make a hoarse noise, the horse of Victorando being
afraid, had almost thrown his master under feet, wherewith the Emperor and
the king looked round about them on every side, to see who or what it was that
caused so much fear, but they saw nothing, and it was the occasion that they
were somewhat troubled. Then the king said, what a devil should this be that
has caused so great alteration in our horses, has here passed by any fiend,
or does there any devil remain lodged amongst these bushes, well let it be
what it shall be, for with the favor of God, if I do meet him I will give
him his payment, for scarring of our horses, for that I do not fear him, and
I thank God I never feared neither devil nor man. These words he spoke with
great courage and majesty. The Emperor in hearing him speak these words, he
could not refrain himself but he must needs laugh. So straight way they came
out of ye thickest of that wood, and came unto a river side which was very
deep, and was known by the Emperor to be that which ran thorough all the
Forests and wildernesses of Grecia, and travailing along by the river,
within a little while their horses began again to stagger and to be afraid,
and looking about them to see if they could perceive what it should be yt made
their beasts so afraid, straight way they might see a terrible monster which
did cross over the forest, of a very great and strange making, who was as
great as a Giant, and was so broad that he was almost four square, his face
was three spannes long, and had but one eye, and that was in his forehead, and
all his body was covered with very long hair, and in his breast there was as
though it had been a glass, out of the which there was a great shining light,
this monster directed his way toward certain houses which were in the
forest, but by reason of the straggling and the great noise which the horses
made, he cast his head aside, and when he saw them, with a devilish fury he
came toward them, and had in his hand in steed of a clubbe a mighty great
and knotted Pine tree. This valiant Greek who was never dismayed at the sight
of any such monster, when he saw so deformed a beast coming toward him, he
cheered up his horse, and pricked him with his spurs, and giving a great
shout he drew out his mighty cutting sword and did abide the fury of the
monster, who came roaring like a Bull, and discharged his great club upon the
Greek, who with a light leap caused by pricking of his horse, he cleared
himself of that blow, that his club fell down to the ground, and as well as he
could he cheered his horse again, and entered in with the monster on the one
side, and gave him so terrible an encounter, that he made him to fall flat to
the ground, and by reason that the strength of the monster was terrible, it
could not be but that the horse must receive some harm, and in passing by he
tumbled upon the monster, that he was forced to fall with his master to the
ground, but when the Emperor perceived that his horse must needs fall, with
great lightness he left the saddle, leaping on the one side, and saved
himself from the danger that might happen, the horse when he saw himself
embraced with the monster, was so scarred and amazed, yt with great lightness
he rose up and ran from him as an a^^ow out of a vow. The Emperor looked to
see where the king was, and he saw him beholding the terrible battle, and
also how Victorando was on foot thrown down by his horse with the great fear
he had, but this looking about of ye Emperor was quickly forgotten, for that
the monster arose and came against him again with his great tree aloft, ready
to discharge it upon him, but he determined to let it slip by, as before, and
therewith to enter in with him and to strike him, and so he did, for the blow
was not so soon past as he stepped in, and stroke a full blow at his thigh,
but he made but a small wound, by reason of the hardness of hair yt made
great defense, which caused the Emperor to marvel much thereat. This
devilish monster when he saw his own blood, in a mad rage he laid about him
with his great club, procuring with his terrible and thick blows to destroy
the Emperor. The great have which the monster made to strike the Emperor was
such, that he was constrained to use all his policy and lightness for to
clear himself from those terrible blows, he stroke them so fast, and never
lost any time of dauntage when that he might hurt him, but still continually
stroke and cut him on those hairie legs, that he made more then six wounds,
in such sort, that the ground whereas they were was covered with the blood of
the monster, the monster seeing himself so troubled, and only with one
knight, he began to double his blows in so great have, that the Emperor was
not able to clear himself from the^, but that needs he must receive one of
them, and if it had not been but that the Emperor did ward it with the edge of
his sword and with his st^^^ye sheelde, it had fallen out worse with him then
it did, but it was not so little but that it ouerthrewe him to the ground, as
one that had been dead, but so much of the club as touched the edge of his
sword was cut a sunder, the king Bramidoro when he saw the Greek so fallen
down to the ground, he pressed with his Elephant toward the monster, for to
revenge that terrible blow, who when he saw him come toward him, like unto a
whirle wind he made toward the houses that were thereby, and in great have he
threw himself into a cave, throwing down after him a great rock which did
shut up the entry, the which was done with so great lightness, that the king
had no power to strike him, and blessing himself to see so sudden and so
strange a thing, he returned unto the place whereas the emperor was, whom he
found come unto himself again and on foot, and was mounting on horse back,
and when he saw the king coming, he said: Have you seen so ugly a thing as
that is so quickly overthrown, with that little blow which I gave him, and
overthrown as one would overthrow a bird to the ground. Do you account that
a little blow said ye king, then do not I know what is a great and a mighty
blow. Then the Emperor said: where is that devilish monster become, tell me
if you can, or if you have seen him go away: he has thrown himself into
hell said the king, for hard by yonder houses he put himself into a cave
whereas I could not follow him, and of truth I do tell you, if I could enter in
where he entered, I would not, for yt I think he is amongst and in company
with the devils, and therewith the Emperor was mounted a horse back, and was
so furious and so full of cholar, that rocks and mountains were not
sufficient to make resistaunce against his strength, and so with a trice he
rode unto the place whereas the monster entered in, and without any foresight
he alighted from his horse, and procured to take away that great stone that
was at the mouth of the cave, the which he did without any difficultnesse, but
yet for all that he could not find which way he might enter in thereat, but
like unto a Lion with great anger, fretting and chafing, he went round about
that rock to see if he could find any entry, at the last he found a great
clift in the rock, and looking in thereat, he saw that great monster, whereas
he lay all along on the floor, and seeing him he said: Oh traitor and a
destroier by the high ways, oh thou infernal devil, the strong and fast
shutting in this rock shall little avail thee, and think that thou shall not
lie long there at thine ease. So he began with his hands to prove if he could
tear that rock to make way where he might enter, and put so much strength
unto it, and again with his rage, that he tore a great part of it away, in
such sort that the king was very much amazed at the great force and strength
yt he showed, and when he had done this, he looked again at the monster and
said: Oh evil and devilish creature, what do thou think (although thou
art in hell) to escape my hands, and going from thence he went round about the
rock again, to see if he could find where with less difficultnesse he might
enter, but he could not find any, in the mean time by reason that there was
no noise, the monster had thought that the Emperor had been gone, and came
unto the clift of the rock to see if he could hear or see him. The Emperor
who returned unto that same place again, and saw the monster in such sort at
the clift that he might strike him with his sword, with great have and good
diligence he cast at him so terrible a thrust in at the cleft, which chanced
upon his unarmed head, that it passed through down to his threat, in such sort
yt the great monster fell down dead to the ground. The Emperor did well know
that he had wounded the monster, but he believed it was not with so great
strength as to overthrow him, for that the cleft was very narowe whereas he
thrust the foine, and for to see what succeeded of that blow, he kneeled down
and looked in, and saw the monster lie all along on the floor stark dead,
the Emperor seeing him in that sort, said: What did this devil think that he
should not pay me yt villainous blow which he gave me. When the King heard
him say these words he alighted from his Elephant to see what had happened,
and he saw him lie all along dead upon the ground, and of his strange and
great stature he very much meruailed, then with a great and loud voice he
said: O God how much has it pleased thy divine majesty to furnish this good
knight with all strength and prowess, more then any in all the world. It
could not choose but that this good Emperor was very weary of this his great
travail, the which was the occasion that he did withdraw himself and sat
down in the shadow under a great Pine tree, and had Victorando to give him of
that which he brought to eat, the which was done with a trice. Likewise he
brought him fresh water from the River, wherewith he did (...) himself very
much. So when the Emperor had satisfied himself of that which was needful,
he arose up, and went toward those houses to behold them, and he saw that
they were all wrought with black stone. Likewise he saw upon the said Pine
tree, under which he sat, an Epitaph written, and when he had read it, he knew
it to be the place where as Bramarant did kill himself, and how that was the
Epitaph which his brother had put there, for a remembrance of the Moors
armor, at all the which when he saw, he found in himself a great confusion.

Of the battle which Claridiano had with the Prince of Palestina, and how he
had the victory, giving liberty unto Antimisca, and unto all the rest. Cap.
19.
WHen this mighty Emperor understood that to be the place and the house which
the princess Tigliafa had made, without any more tarrying, finding the door
open he entered in thereat, till he came into a very fair court, in the midst
whereof stood a stage, wrought and laid upon four pillars, which were
likewise of black stone, which from the foot to the top went in proportion
less and less, and upon it there was a tomb, the which was covered all with
black cloth, and upon the tomb was there an armed knight all save the head,
the which seemed to be broken and torn in many places. The Emperor procuring
to know who it should be, he saw that it was Zoilo the Tartarian, at which
sight he could not let to receive great sorrow to see his friend dead, and
being in this wise he saw a door opened on the one side of the Court, out of
the which came forth ye unfortunate Princess of Tigliafa all in mourning
apparel, and her face covered with a black Lawne, and after her came six
Gentlewomen in the same manner, who never stayed till they came unto the
scaffolde. The Princess stayed not but went up the stairs (without seeing who
was within the court,) but with great sighs and tears, with her countenance
very heavy* ^^dde, and sorrowful, in such lamentable wise that it would have
moved any heart to have had compassion, who began to speak certain words
which in their places shall be rehearsed, for yt I am now constrained to
declare of the battle that was begun between the light of all knighthood
and the furious Palestinian. You have heard how that these two knights were in
a readynesse unto the battle, and how that with their Spears in their rests
the one ran against the other, and in the midst of their course they met
the one with the other, neither of them missing his blow, but it was with so
great fury and strength, that their knotted Spears flewe all to sheeuers in
the air, and they passed the one by ye other without moving, or any hurt
done, and retourning their horses, the Palestinian began first to strike at
this noble warryour, giving him terrible blows upon his strong and steely
helm, with so great fury, that he made abundaunce of sparks to fly out
thereat. Here the Prince understood and felt the great and mighty strength
of the Moore, but quickly he gave him his payment, with a more furious blow
then he received, in such sort that he made all the members of the
Palestinian to tremble and shake, and his teeth to chatter in his head, this
blow made this barbarous Prince very much amazed, but by reason that he was
of great valor he returned and lyfted up his sword, and began with the
like fury to lay upon his enemy, in such sort that the battle began to
be very terrible, and with great strength and have, they stroke the one the
other, in such sort, that those which were looking on many times lost their
sight with the great brightness and flame of fire that flewe out of their
armor and steely helmes. This battle betwixt them continued a great while
without knowing any advantage, or who was the better of them, the which
caused either of them to have the more fury and anger. The Palestinian seeing
the great resistaunce of his enemy, roaring like a baited Bull, threw his
sheelde at his back, and took his sword in both his hands, and stroke so
terrible a blow upon the fine Magical armor of the Prince, that he made
him to fall forwards, and lean his forehead upon the horse ears, causing his
eyes to d^sell in his head, and straight way upon the same he struck him
another blow upon the back, which did make a sound through all the Castle.
The Prince recovered himself again, and seeing him with his Sword alofte for
to discharge the third blow, he procured to clear himself from the same and
from the fury wherewith it did descend, the which he did with great
lyghtnesse in spurring his horse, he had not so soon passed the blow when
that he returned his horse very swiftlye and joined with the Pagan, having
his sword alofte, discharging it upon his healme with so great fury, that
he made him to fall backwardes upon his horse crouper clean without any
remembrance, their horses at that terrible blow were meruaylously scarred, in
such sort, that they were separated the one from the other a great space,
which was the occasion that the Pagan had time to remember himself, and to
settle himself again in his saddle, and to recover his sword again, which
was fallen out of his hand and hung by the chain at his wrist. The Prince
with double fury and force pricked his horse and joined with the Pagan, and
stroke him a mighty blow upon his healme, which glanced and fell upon his
left shoulder, putting him to so great pain, that it made him to shrink and
double his body forwards down to his horse neck, the Pagan straight way was
upright again, and stroke at his adversary so terrible a blow, that he
nothing advanced himself of that which was past, wherewith the Prince firming
himself in his stirops, stroke at the Pagan a mighty blow, at such time as
his horse somewhat started, which was the occasion that he could not have his
full thereof, but with the point of his sword he hit him on the Beauer of his
healme, that many sparkles flewe out and so descended unto his breast, till it
came and lighted upon his horse head, cutting it in two pieces that he fell
dead to the ground, so that the Pagan remained on foot without a horse, and by
reason that he was a valiant knight, he cleared himself from his dead horse
with a trice and said. Uillaine, do not thou think that the killing of my
horse shall avail thee any thing, but that with the strength of my arm I
will tear thee in pieces. I do swear unto thee by the warlike Mars, said
Claridiano, that it does gree^e me of that which is done, and that I should
receive more contentment to see thy head in the sort that thy horses head is,
and understand, that I am not accustomed to show my valiantness against a
beast, and because thou shall not account me for a villain but change my
name, tarry a while and I will alight from my horse. And saying these words
with great lightness he left the saddle and put himself on foot, and
therewith the one pressed to the other with great fury, that the battle
began a new, and with more rigor then before, for that ye one stroke the other
in such great have that it was a wonder to see. And being both inflamed and
overcome with anger, they could not use any policy, but all was by force and
strength, being so terrible, that each one feared the worthiness of his
enemy. This they continued a great time, till in the end it was perceived the
advantage that the Prince had in striking his adversary, and the great
lightness which he used in entering in to the Pagan, and clearing himself
again still continuing his terrible assaults and mighty thick blows,
notwithstanding the Palestinian in this time was not idle nor void of ^are, but
valiantly did make his defense against his enemy, and did such deeds as it
was strange and worthy of great honor. So in this contention they endured
more then two hours, in which time these knights had no patience to loose,
for that they were clean void thereof. But oh miserable Pagan, what does
profit thee thy fury, strength, and lightness, for that thou do deal
with the worthy Claridiano, when as no strength nor force is to be compared
unto his. The Greek seeing that with one alone knight the battle endured so
long, being more kindeled in ire and wrath, he took fast hold of his sword
in his hand, and stroke the Pagan with such surmounted fury and strength
upon the healme, that he cloue it and the head in two pieces that he fell dead
to the ground, when the king saw that terrible blow, he received great
contentment thereat. Likewise the Prince of Chaldaea and the fair Antemisca,
who with great have went to embrase him, and almost beside themselves with joy
to be clear from their captivity. Then Claridiano asked of the^ if there were
any more to be done to give them free liberty, the king newlye embraced him
with the great delight which he had and said. Oh the ^ustainer of all the
glory and honor of Mesapotamia, what service may I do unto the Gods to
gratify this goodness which they have used with me, that in the end of so
many travails and troubles I do recover my liberty by the hands of him which
is taken here on earth for one of the Gods. The Prince Claridiano answered
and said: Sovereign king, the Gods did consent unto thy justice and right, for
that they could help thee, Jupiter being so upright would do justice, and in
especial in a thing so apparaunt as this was, and therefore thou may
attribute the same unto him, and gratify him, and likewise the great virtue of
Antemisca. And with these and such like reasons they went toward the
Pallaice, and lead the fair Antemisca by the hand, who was very joyful, and
straight way they unarmed Claridiano, and gave him Suckets and conserues, for
to comfort him of the great travail and trouble which he had passed, and
served him with so great majesty as though they had known him to be the son
of high and mighty parents.

Antemisca thanking him for all that he had done for them, said: O flower of
knighthood, and defender of my royal fame and honesty, what power is
sufficient to make satisfaction of so great a benefit, and in especial where
all power does lack. Fair Lady, said Claridiano, your great virtue and
honesty caused me to have the more power and force, for to frustrate this
false accusation laid against you, and now being at liberty (noble Lady) let
not these angers and wrongs past be any occasion of disturbance, but rather
permit that the body of this unhappy king may be buried according unto his
estate, and in so doing thou shall show ye great virtue which does remain in
thee, to frustrate al injuries past. This I do desire you to consent unto, in
that you are bound unto it by your high estate, and not for any desert, dew
unto such a poor knight as I am. Poor, said Antemisca, here I do swear
unto you by that which I owe unto all virtue due unto mine own person, that I
do determine in serving of you to do as much as in the service of Jupiter,
for yt I take thee to be one of the Gods, as it has appeared by the great
valor which I have seen showed by thee. And whatsoever your pleasure is to
command to be d^o^ unto this dead body (although he does not deserve it) it
shall be wholly accomplished, and straight way it was put in ure. This valiant
knight remained there certain days whereas he was served with great majesty,
in which time the two lovers we^e married, whereas was made marvelous great
(...) and triumphs, the which for avoiding tediousness I do on it and will
make no mention thereof, and for that this valiant knight was prisoner to the
Pastora he neither received contentment nor joy in his heart in so long
^arrying, which was the occasion yt Claridiano took his leave for to depart of
y^ Princess of Chaldea* which was clean contrary ^^to the goodwill of
Antemisca, for that she loved him mer^ailous^y for his great virtue, and with
many tears she took her leau^ of him, giving him certain presents and gifts
necessary for his travail, so he departed taking his journey, only with
Fidelio, his squire, toward the plains of Ierosolima, and p^s^ed by Armenia
the great, whereas happened unto him many and strange adventures.

How that Claridiano travailed by Armenia, and of the strange adventures which
happened him in that country. Cap. 20.
THE valiant Greek Claridiano travailed through Armenia the great, with no
company but his Squire, although his thought was not solitary, but always
represented in his heart the cause of all his grief and sorrow. So in this
sort he travailed a while till it chanced one morning at such time as the Sun
began his accustomed journey, that he must pass a great and mighty river over
a bridge, and at the end thereof there was a fortress wrought after the
fashion of a Bulwark, for that below at the beginning it was very big,
having in the midst of it a great tower, with a lover hole, and upon the same
was put a standard, which with the wind was moved from the one side to the
other. The Prince following his journey over the bridge, without any
impediment would have passed forwards on his way, but by any means he could
not, by reason of a great, broad, and deep ditch, which was made on the other
side, beginning from the River, and making a compass like a whoope, which
environed all the whole fortress, and came again and joined unto the said
River, on the one side, so that the fortress remained in the middiest, and
there was no other way to take, but that they must needs pass through the
fortress. So when the Prince came unto a very strong gate of iron, he took
the King in his hand and gave three great blows, at the noise whereof there
was a window opened, whereat there appeared a Gentlewoman of a middle age, who
seemed to have her eyes swollen with weepings, who said.

Knight, what is it that thou do seek here in this infernal Castle, if
thou will have passage seek it by some other way, and it shall be better for
thee, for in procuring to pass this way thou shall get no other thing but
death, but and if thou will not turn back by reason of the good opinion which
thou have in thy great valor and strength, take and ^ound that horn which
hangs there upon that pillar on the right hand, which being heard, the entry
shall be freely given unto thee, but the going out is impossible. And in
saying those words she shut the window in great have and went in. The Prince
cast about his horse toward the right hand whereas he saw a pillar of the
height of a man, and thereat hanged a rich horn, and by it a peech of parchment
rolled up, and laying hand upon the horn he could not move it, although he did
strive mightily to do it, and understanding ye first he must undo the
Parchment and read that which was written in it, he took it and vnrowled it,
and saw that it constained that which follows.

At this present reigns a King in Arabia, and although he be a Pagan, yet
he is adorned with noble and virtuous customs, and had only one daughter
that was very fair, humble, and chaste, and was beloved of the Duke of Fedra,
vassal unto the same king, the Dukes name was Velegrato, a young man, with a
severe and grave countenance, who deserved better the government then any
other Pagan, he was very well esteemed in all the Kingdom, almost equally
with the king, for the which there ingendered in the kings heart a secreat
rancour and hatred. This Duke did love the Princess who was called Damelis,
and it was the Gods will that she should repaie him with the same love, ^o
that both their hearts being wounded with love, the one to the other, the
fire kindled daily more and more, in such sort, that neither the one nor the
other had any imagination but only to love, and not knowing how to manifest
their griefs, they endured sundry great passions. Then love which
continually seeks occasions, did on a time set before this duke a
Gentlewoman, which thing seemed to be wrought by the order of ye Goddess
Venus. Oh what great fear this knight had for to discover unto her all his
heart: but in the end, by the great industry of this Gentlewoman, there was
order given that these two lovers should meet together. Here I will not
detain them that shall read this, in telling of the great delight which both
of them received to see themselves together, but such it was that she was made
a Lady. This fair Damelis, for that she could not at her ease enjoy her
Velegrato, she did determine to leave her own natural country and father, and
with this intention, one night being with her lover, she cast her arms about
his neck and said. Oh my sweet and well-beloved friend, seeing that the
sovereign Gods have been to me so grateful, that I do deserve to have a
lover, let me not find in thee ingratitude, for that I cannot pass my time,
except continually I enjoy thy fight, and do not muse my Lord at this that I
do say, for that the overmuch love that I have to you, does constrayne me to
make it manifest, and this believe of a certainty, that if thy sight be absent
from me, if will be the occasion, that my heart shall lack his vital
recreation. And you do well know how that the King my father does bear you no
good will, which will be the occasion, that we cannot enjoy the one the other,
as my heart desires: for the which, I have determined (if you do think well
thereof) to leave both my father and Country, and to go and live with you
alone in a strange Country. And if you do deny me this, very quickly you
shall see your well-beloved Lady without life: but I do believe you will not
deny me this thing, the which I do so much desire, and in whom does consist
so much virtue, and therewith shedding a few tears from her eyes, she held her
peace. The Duke being half amassed, answered and said: Oh my love and sweet
Mistress, wherefore have you any doubt that I will not fulfill and accomplish
your desire in all things, therefore out of hand put all things in order, that
your will is to have done: for what more benefit and contentment can I
receive, then to enjoy you continually, in such sort, that neither of us may
depart the one from the other: and if it so fall out, that Fortune will be so
contrary against us, that we be spied, and we be taken, and suffer death
together, what more glory can there be unto me, then to die with th^^* Therefore
do not trouble your self my sweet Lady and Mistress, but give me time that
I may go into my Country, and to give order in such sort that your whole will
may be accomplished, and in the mean time make your self in a readiness for
your departure: and so with this conclusion they took their leave the one of
the other, and the Duke went into his Country, giving order for to accomplish
his determined thought. So when that all thing was put in good order, the Duke
with as much secrecy as might be, re^ourned unto the place whereas Damelis
was, very well armed, aduertising her, how he was come for to carry her away,
who was in a readiness for to accomplish her desire, and had in her company
the Gentlewoman her secretary that was called Floria, and so in great secret
and without making any noise, they departed out of the Kings Pallaice her
father, and went unto the place whereas the Duke was tarrying their coming,
who when he saw them without any more tarrying, he mounted her upon an ambling
Palfray, and her gentlewoman upon another, and took the way toward
Mesapotamia with all have possible. They used such diligence, that without
being perceived, they went out of the kingdom, and came to a place whereas
the Duke had left cer^aine d^msells and squires, for to bear Damelis company,
whom they found all in a readiness for to take their journey, and for that
they were mistrustfull they would not tarry there, but passed through
Mesapotamia till they came unto Armenia, whereas without any misfortune they
came unto the river Derraus, unto a place whereas the deep and clear waters
do strike continually upon a mighty Rock, upon the which was an old and
ancient building, and in some parts it was very strong, and in other parts
by reason of the antiquity it was fallen down.

And for to enter into it, they must of force go up certain stayres, and
being aloft, they thought it a convenient place for their dwelling, whereas
they might without all fear of being found, live peaceably, enjoying the one
y^ others love, and not far from that place there was a small village, from
whence they might make their provision of all that was nessarie, for the
maintaining of their bodies. Great joy and pleasure these two lovers received,
when they found themselves in such a place whereas they might take their ease,
and enjoy their loves. The Duke delighted in no other thing, but to go a
hunting with his Squires and Pages, leaving his sweet Damelis, accompanied
with her damosells in that strong house, aduising them always not to open the
gates, except they should answer unto a watch word, and many times for her
contentment* Damelis would go and meet with the Duke at the gates. So in this
order they lived together four years: but in the end, Time who never rests
in one degree, did take from them their rest, giving them double travail and
sorrow. For that when the King her father found her missing, the sorrow and
grief was so much that he received, that he kept his chamber a long time, and
would not come forth of it, and if it had not been for special business,
necessary for his kingdom, he would (as I say) never have come forth: and
although he was occupied very much therein, yet could he not forget his great
grief, calling many times upon his well-beloved daughter. All this four years
he passed the time in great heaviness, which every day increased more his
sorrow and grief. Of all which sorrow, a great Magitian whose name was
Demofronte, by his learning came to the knowledge off, and straight way by his
science he made a chariot to be brought, that was governed by two flying
Dragons, and put himself therein, who in a very short space, was carried
whereas this sorrowful King dwelt, and he chanced to come at such time as he
was alone in his chamber with his accustomed sorrow, and lamenting the loss
of his Daughter: and without being seen of any person, he entered whereas this
afflicted King was, and said.

King, leave off this sorrow and great lamentation, and prepare thy self to
seek some other remedy: and if thou will do that which I will tell thee, I
will not delay but bring thee into the place whereas thy daughter is, with this
condition, that thou shall not give her nor hers any punishment, for that she
has not offended in any other thing, but in lack of acknowledging her duty.

The King being greatly troubled when he saw him, arose from the chair wherein
he was set, and said. If I might see my Daughter, I could not but use the
clemency of a father. This word only does suffice me said Demofionte, and
without speaking any more words, using of his learning and Art, he put the
King into his Chariot governed by those ^liing Dragons, and in a small time he
was carried, and put in to the place whereas his daughter was, at such time as
the Duke was about his accustomed hunting. This Magitian called at the gate,
and gave the watch word that the Duke was accustomed to give, and when Damelis
heard it, she her self went unto the gate and did open it: and when she went
to embrace him, thinking it to be her lover, she saw that it was her father,
and with a sudden alteration she gave a great shrike and returned and put her
self within the house. The King her father somewhat angry did follow her
saying, It does little avail thee Damelis to run away, for that thou shall dye
in my power, paying me with thy death, the great dishonor which my royal
crown has received. So he fofollowed her till he came unto the chamber
whereas her damosells were, amongst whom this fearful Lady did hide her
self, who seeing her to enter in that sort, they arose to see what was the
occasion of so great change and trouble. Floria, straight way did know the
King, who had a wrathful countenance, and she fearing the harm which should
happen unto her Lady put her self over her and gave terrible and loud shrikes.
The King as one kindeled in great wrath forgetting that which he had promised
unto the Magitian, laid hand on his sword, saying: It does not profit thee
Damelis to fly from the death, for thy desert is such, yt thou can not
escape it, for here my own arm shall be the killer of mine own flesh. Then
Damelis answered and said: Ah my Lord and father, will you be now as cruel
unto me, as you were wont to be pitiful, appease your wrath, and withdraw
your unmerciful sword, and harken unto this which I will say, in discharging
my self in that you charge me with all: You shall understand my Lord and
father, that I was overcome and constrained by love for to love, forgetting thy
fatherly love, and my duty, yet for all that having power to accomplish the
same, it was not unto your dishonor, for that therewith I do live honorably
with my husband. Then the king said, oh false traitor and without faith, hold
thy peace, what reason have thou to make this excuse, having committed so great
an error. And in saying this he lift up his sword for to strike her, the
four damsells yt were there, with terrible shrikes they threw themselves upon
that unhappy Damelis, offering their bodies unto ye fury of that cut^ing
sword, for to set at liberty their Lady and mistress. The king who saw them
in this sort make her defense, with his left hand he pulled them off from her,
some by the hair of ye head, and some by the shoulders, for to make way that
he might execute his determined purpose, and none to make any resistaunce
against him. Floria when she saw the King determined to kill his daughter, like
unto a Lioness she hung about his neck and said: Oh mad dog, what
determination is this that thou do bring for to do evil unto ye most chaste
and loyal Lady in all the world, is it a new thing for love to use such like
deeds: unto thy self may be attributed the occasion of all this evil, and
thou art in the fault thereof, for that thou were so malicious and so full of
mischief, that she durst not give thee to understand of her sudden love. The
words and tears of Floria did little profit with the king, but rather like a
wild Boar in the wilderness, being compassed with a company of dogs does
shake himself: even so the king did shake his members, and threw Floria from
him, and with double wrath he did procure to execute his fury, out the
damsells with terrible shrikes, sometimes one and sometimes another did
disturb him, till such time as with his cruel hand between the Damosells,
he thrust in the point of his sharp sword, and with the force of his wretched
arm he thrust it, till it passed through her breast, and came forth at her
back. (The wise Democrites when that he received the greatest contentment in
his heart, would weep to think upon the great unquietness and coffeehouse
that should follow: even so this unhappy Damelis, when she was most at quiet
and delight with her prosperous life, then fortune did turn it unto her
sudden death.) At this time the Magitian came into the chamber, and when he
saw the king contrary unto that which he promised him, had done ye wilful act,
he began to blaspheme against himself, for that he had been the occasion of
all that evil, and with an yrefull voice he said. O cruel murderer that in
this sort have deceived me, I will give thee thy payment according unto thy
deserts, in placing thy cruel body, whereas thou shall continually lament this
thy daughters death, leaving a live the fame of her with thy lame^tation. And
in saying these words he drew a book out of his bosom, and reading on it, he
made a great cloud to appear in the skies very black, which was brought by
terrible and hasty winds, the which came with a very great tempest and
storm: and when the skies waxed clear, then was there seen here this
fortress, where in this cruel King of Arabia is enchanted, and this
sorrowful Velegrato and his Damsells: and he that is desirous to see how and
in what sort, let him blow this horn, and straight way the gates shall be
open, but here I do advertise him, that the going out will be doubtful.

And heerewith be made an end of this lamentable History: the rest you shall
understand in the chapter that follows.

How that Claridiano after he had read the history in the parchment, blew the
horn, wherewith the gates were opened: and how resistaunce was made at the
entry, and of all that passed about the same. Cap. 21.
THe Greek with great strength did blow the inchaunted horn, in such sort,
that all along the river the sound was hard. At the very same instaunt they
began to open the gate with so great noise as when they opened ye hundred gates
of the Temple of Appollo, at the sight of the courageous Troyan. So when this
val^ant Claridiano saw the gate open, he looked in thereat to see if he could
see any thing, and he saw that it was very dark, and for to enter in thereat,
he saw that it was requisite to leave his horse, and with great lightness he
left the saddle, and delivered him unto Fidelio for to keep him, and without
any care whatsoever should happen, he shrouded himself with his shield, and his
sword in his hand, he thrust himself into that darkness, and when he was
ten paces within, without seeing of any, he received a blow, the thing yt
stroke him howling like unto a Wolf which is all night alone in the wilderness,
and with the blow which he received, it was so furious, that it made him almost
recoyle so far back, as he had entered, which caused in ye Prince a great
deal more courage, and as a man beside himself, he began to lay about him,
striking on the one side, and on the other, not knowing where he did strike,
and in this sort he went forwards his way through that great darkness, till
such time as he saw light, and going farther in, he came into a great court,
in the which he could see but one little door, toward the which he went, but
he could not come nigh it, for that he was disturbed by a furious beast which
arose out of the court, and went toward the door, whether ye Prince went with
great swiftness. This courageous Greek did not let to feel some alteration,
to see a beast so deformed. It was of body bigger the^ an Elephant, and was all
covered with hard party colored shells and scales: the tail was very long,
and somewhat big, and it had four feet, and each of them had two long claws
with very sharp nails: the neck was a yearde long, and it had the face of a
woman, and out of her head, proceeded two mighty great and huge horns very
sharp. Her speech was very perfect and clear, and made answer in any
language that was spoken unto her. She would make battle with none, but it
should proceed of questions and aunsweres, and as Galtenor does affirm and
say, that the inchaunted Merlin was shut up in that beast. This furious beast
when she saw that the Prince went toward that little door she put her self
before him, and disturbed his going: this courageous Knight shrouded under his
shield, did abide her coming. Then the beast said. Stay thy self and stand
still Claridiano, and do not trouble thy self so much, for a thing, that for
all the dominions and Empires of thy father thou would not have begun,
neither have given the enterprise. Let me first know what did move thee to
enter into this infernal house, whether thou were moved by thy great courage
and strength, or pretense to set at liberty those that are here detained, or
for to know somewhat of thy lineage. The Greek meruailed very much when he
heard himself named, and of the great reasons which the beast spoke unto
him. To whom he said: All that thou have said and spoken of I would be
very glad to atchieue and go forwards with, for that thereof I should
get unto my self great honor, notwithstanding if thou do know any thing
of my lineage, I do desire thee to tell me. This furyous beast said: Desires
and prayings can do very little with me, neither move me, except it come of
mine own good will for to tell thee: but for that I do know after that I have
told thee, it shall profit thee very little by the knowledge thereof, for that
if thou do move battle with me, thou shall remain broken all to pieces,
therefore for this cause I will tell thee.

Give me herein my desire said this courageous knight, and for the rest, let
each one as it behooves him procure to defend himself. Then the beast with a
smiling laughter, and as one that did make a jest of all that which was spoken,
said: Although it will profit thee very little in giving to understand
thereof, yet will I tell thee thy generation.

Thou art son and nephew to the two mightiest Emperors in all the world, and
the most adorned with all virtues. Thy mother is the most worthiest Matrone
that ever has been, and none like, but she which was kept for thee, if thou
had not entered into this Fortress. Thus in few words, I have told thee of
thy descent, and from whence thou do proceed if thou will understand it: and
more I do say unto thee, that thou art not worthy to account thy self of
such a lineage, for that they be Christians, and thou art a Pagan, therefore
ask me no more, for I have told thee enough. And now seeing I have
accomplished thy will and desire, have a respect what thou will do with thine
own person, for if thou will return without making any battle with me, thou
must of two things choose to do one of them, which is to return back again
that way which thou came, or else to declare unto me the resolution of a
question, which I will demand of thee. The courageous Greek said, For the one,
which is to return back again ye way which I came, thou shall understand
that I will not grant unto, and touching the second, say on whatsoever it be
thy pleasure that I shall declare, and I will make thee answer thereof if I
can and when I cannot with my tongue, here is my sword that does know how to
make relation of questions, be they never so obscure and hard.

Thy sword Claridiano, said the beast, will do as all other have done
heertofore, that have taken upon them ye same enterprise, their masters
remaining dead, in recompense of their bold hardiness. Leave off these
reasons said Claridiano, and demand what thy pleasure is, or else suffer me to
go forwards on my journey, and if of necessity for to make an end hereof, I
must have battle with thee, come on let us begin without any more tarrying.
Have thou so much have said the beast, I do promise thee that quickly thou
shall see thy self in that perplexity, that thou shall repent thy speed.
Tell me Claridiano, what beast is that when it is first borne that goes on
four feet, and afterward on two, and in ye end on three. If thou declare unto
me my question, I am content to let thee pass and to follow thy journey. This
question did put this valiant warrior in great thought in himself, his eyes
^ixed on the ground, searching all his memory and understanding, but yet he
could not happen to know what thing it should be that was demanded, and
lifting up his eyes he said: I do not know with my small understanding what
to answer thee, therefore my sword shall accomplish that which in my wit does
lack. And in saying these words he embraced his sheeld, and firming his sword
in his hand, he began his terrible and timorous battle. The furious beast
hissing like unto a Snake, did withdraw himself somewhat backwards, and with
great violence did stretch out her long neck, and bearing her head somewhat
low, she pretended with her horns to make her encounter, the Prince stood
still till that the beast drew somewhat nigher him, and would not at that time
abide the furiousness of the blow, but rather clearing himself from it by
stepping on the one side, with a light leap toward the left hand, and passing
this furious beast by missing her blow, he stroke an overthwart blow at her
with so great fury and force, which lighted upon the midst of her tail
(that although she carried it very low for her most advantage, for that
therewith she did most offend and defend) yet for all that the Princes fortune
was such, that the blow chanced between two scales, and with a trice it was
cut a sunder in the midst: Oh how furious and outragyous was this deformed
beast when she felt her self so sore wounded, and turning her self as the
wind against ye Prince before he could make his defense, that needs he must
receive upon his strong armor a blow with those long and sharp horns, the
blow was given him with so great force, that it overthrew him to the ground,
and seeing him in this sort, with a devilish rage and ire she ran toward
him procuring to claspe him betwixt her sharp claws, and by reason of her
great fury and rage, she had not so much time, but passed by and could not
fasten any hold on him. The Greek was meruailously troubled at that mighty
blow which he received, the beast with double fury returned unto ye knight
to strike him as she did before, the Greek did abide his coming, with his
sword very firm in his hand, and at such time as the beast would strike her
blow, bearing her head very low. The Prince at that present was not idle,
but discharged his mighty blow with great strength, and stroke the beast
betwixt both the horns, but by reason of the great hardness his sword could
not enter, yet he made her to decline her head to the ground spite of her
teeth. This furious beast seeing that she had missed her blow, iourned that
which remained of her tail and stroke him in the midst of his body a
terrible blow, in such sort that if she had had the rest, she had parted him a
sunder with the furiousness thereof, but for all that it made him fall to the
ground, he was not so soon fallen down, when that the monster stroke him
with her sharp horns very strongly, yet for all that there was no sign made
on his armor by reason of the great hardness, but all the harm was by the
strength of the blow, his body was somewhat bruised. Oh holy God, and with
what ire was this Greek brought in subjection, at that time if a mighty and
hard mountain had been before him, he would have torn it in pieces. Now was
there no resistaunce to be made against his mighty cutting sword, he threw
his sheeld from him to the ground, and took his swoorde fast in both his
hands, and abode the coming of this beast, who returned to strike him
again, very much meruailing to see how little her blows did profit her. The
knight stood still very firmly in his place, and when the beast put down
her head, he discharged his blow on her, and chanced upon the one side of
her head, that her hard skull and strong skin was insufficient to withstand
the sharpness of his swoorde, but that it cut the flesh and carried away one
of her horns, wherewith this beast remained very sore hurt and wounded, who
feeling her self in that perplexity, she withdrew her self back and said.

O Claridiano and Pagan dog, do not trust too much much in thy great
strength, neither in that thou have done me so much harm, for I will do so
much that thou shall not return unto Grecia, thy natural Country, and less
shall thou inioye the Pastora, for that as yet thou have not proved of my
sharp claws and nails, nor of their fury. The Prince answered and said:
Devil make thy defense by all the means thou can, and all shall be little
enough. And in saying these words he firmed his sword in his hand, then this
furious monster began to make a new noise in hissing, and approached toward
the Prince, making as though she would strike him with her horn that
remained, and when she came nigh him, upon a sudden she turned her tail
with so great lightness, that the Prince could not make his defense, and
stroke him upon the helm in such sort that she overthrew him to the ground
almost without any remembrance, the Prince was not so soon fallen but this
monster leapt unto him with her hard and sharp nails, and griped his hard
harnes, thinking with them to tear him all to pieces, but she did him no more
harm but only wearied him, in tumbling him up and down, yet this invincible
Knight was not without great care to provide for himself and did not loose one
jot of his strength and courage, but rather with a double stomach and furious
courage procured to clear himself out of the beasts nails, and with the
great strength and policy that he used, in spite of the monster he cleared
himself, and being at liberty, with great lightness he arose on his feet,
he was not so soon up when the beast stroke him with his one horn which
remained, in such sort that he was constrained to fall down again to the
ground, the beast procured to catch him again in her claws, but she could
not, for that the Prince with great lightness rose up again, and having his
sword in his hand he tarried her coming, the beast made a show as though he
would strike at the Prince with his horn, but when she saw him with his
sword aloft, she raised her self up on her hinder feet, and fell upon the
Prince, embracing him with her nails about his back scratching and pinching
his armor, but it did little profit him by reason of the great hardness.
The Prince seeing himself so bewrapt with this monster, with great strength
and policy brought his swoorde down under the beast, and thrust the point
into her bellye up to the hard hil^es. The furious monster when she felt her
self so sore wounded, queased the Prince so hard between her claws, that
he thought verily she would have broken all his bones in his body, and if it
should have endured long in this order, it had not been possible to have
escaped the death, but that mortal wound did so trouble the beast, and was so
grievous unto her, that she was constrained to let him loose, and to withdraw
her self back, for to put some remedy therein, and said unto the Prince: Oh
thou Infidel without all faith, thou have slain me, but tarry yet there
does remain in me courage for to make thee that thou shall not go aduauncing
of thy self, and bearing her head very low she pressed unto the Prince,
thinking to take him with her horn and to overthrow him, with pretense to get
him again betwixt her claws and nails, and although she was dying yet not to
leave him till she had torn him all too pieces. This courageous knight did
abide her coming, and perceiving her deceit, when he thought that she would
strike him he stepped on the one side, and in the passing the Prince stroke
her so mighty a blow upon the neck, that it cut the lame a sunder, so that
that horrible and wonderful monster fell down dead to the ground. The Knight
with the long travail and wrestling remained very wearye, in such sort, that
he was constrained to sit down to ease himself upon a bank that was there
made against a wall, giving great thanks unto his Gods for the victory which
they had given him. A good while after when that he had somewha^ eased himself
of his former travail, his courageous heart would not suffer him to remain
long there, but straight ways he arose up and went toward the little door
which was in the wall, and when he came to it he saw that it was made all of
very (...) and in the key hole thereof was a keie, with the (...) upon it. The
knight entered in thereat, and saw that it was very dark, and it seemed unto
him that it should be a very great hall, and therein he heard very fearful
howlings, yet for all this the valiant Greek did not loose any of his
accustomed courage, but entered in farther, and took off his gantlet from his
left hand, whereon he wore a marvelous great and fin^ Diamond, the which he
had in a ring, that gave so much light that he might plainly see all that was
in the hall, the which was very great and wide, and upon the walls were
painted the figures of many fiends and devils, and on the one side of the hall
he saw a tomb all covered with black, and upon it there lay a man with a
pale color, who at certain times gave a marvelous and grievous sigh, caused
by the burning flames that proceeded from under the tomb, being such, that it
seemed his body should be converted therewith into burning coals, the flame
was so stinking that it made ye Prince somewhat to retire himself from the
place where he saw that horrible spectacle. He which lay upon the tomb,
casting his eyes a side, saw the Prince, and knowing him to be an humane
creature, with an afflicted voice he said: Who art thou sir knight, that art
come unto so sorrowful a dwelling, for that thou can see nothing in it but
great torments. Then the knight said, but tell me who art thou that with so
much grief do demand of me that which I stand in doubt to tell thee. I am
a king of Arabia (answered he) which without all consideration, with my cruel
hand did pearce through the white breast of my well-beloved daughter, woe be to
me, for that she at once did pay her offense by death, but I a miserable
wretch with many torments do live dying. When this worthy knight was about to
answer him, he saw come forth from under the tomb a damsel, who had a very
yeolow and wanne color, and by her face it seemed yt she should be very sore
afflicted, and with a sorrowful voice she said. O Claridiano unfortunate, what
do thou seek in this infernal lodging, whereas cannot be given thee any
other pleasure but mortal torments, for yt thou were so bold as to kill my
keeper of ye door, and there is but one thing that can clear thee from it,
and this cannot be told thee by any other but by me, and yet I will not tell
thee except thou do grant me one thing that I will ask of thee. The Prince
who was greatly amazed of all that he had seen, and very much beholding the
countenance of the damsel that was very lean and feeble, answered and
said: The Gods who are governors of my liberty will do their pleasures, but
in that touching the grant of thy request, I never to Lady nor Gentlewoman
denied any thing that they would demand of me, being a thing that I could put
remedy in, but with all my power and strength I was ready to fulfill the
same, therefore demand what thy pleasure is, for that I am ready in all
things that touches thy remedy. Then she said, Claridiano look well and
have a respect unto yt which thou do promise, and see yt thou do perform
thy promise, for thou shall understand that thou fulfilling the same do give
liberty unto thy self and unto me. Gentlewoman, ask what thy pleasure is
said y^ knight: that which I demand said the damsel is, yt thou give me
the ring which thou have upon thy finger, for thou shall understand that in it
is my remedy. In demanding of that said the Prince, thou do rather procure
my harm, and therefore it does not behoue me to give it thee. To whom she said:
O evil and false knight that do not perform that which thou have promised,
see that thou do accomplish the same, or else to the contrary thou shall
live dying. Oh false Magitian and cursed witch said Claridiano, do thou
think by thy deceitful threatenings to deceive me? It is not thy enchantments
neither thy fained words yt shall get the ring from my finger. The^ she said,
thou shall see how little thy great strength shall profit and avail thee
against me, if thou will tarry a while, and therewith upon a sudden she laid
hold upon his hand with so great strength, that it lacked but little of
pulling the ring from his finger, but this politic Greek helped his left hand
with his right, with so great strength, that he put away that Magitian yt she
could not pull it off. This false inchanter did still stand in this contention
to get the ring from him, and contended in such sort that he forgot the respect
that he should have unto Ladies and Gentlewomen, and stroke her with his right
hand that was armed such a buffet upon the cheek, that her fantastical body
gave a great fall unto the ground, she was not so soon fallen, when that with
a timorous noise she threw her self into that doleful Sepulcher, making a
terrible and wonderful howling within, and this unhappy king bare her
company with his grievous lamentations, of the which the Prince had great
compassion, and it seemed unto him that he heard a voice which came forth of
the tomb, which did offer to talk unto him, and that he might understand his
reasons he drew nigh unto the tomb, and heard that he said these words: Oh
knight borne in Grecia, and nursed and brought up in Trapobana, if thou will go
out of this place and make an end of my continual torments, procure to give
three blows upon this my Sepulchar, with the which thou shall deliver thy
self and me likewise, and all those that are here put in this infernal
lodging. This invincible young man said: There is so little truth in this
house, that I stand in doubt whether I may believe thy words or not,
notwithstanding tell me who thou art, then shall I know whether I may give
credit unto thy words. Then he said: I am that unhappy Merlin, borne in
Gallia, and deceived by her who would have deceived thee, therefore thou ^^ist
believe me, for that I do tell thee the truth, and if thou do as I do tell
thee there will come unto both us great profit. Tell me Merlin, said the
Prince, how do thou know that I was borne in Grecia, and brought up in
Trapobana, if thou do know I pray thee tell me who was my father, and of what
Empire or kingdom he is Lord. To whom Merlin said: Trebatio is thy
grandfather, and thy father is the great Alfebo, and the excellent Claridiano
is thy mother, from whom Galtenor did steal thee, in company with thy
sister, the most fairest creature in all the world. And in saying these words
he held his peace, and with dolorous groans he began to curse himself, and it
was so grievous that the Prince withdrewe himself because he would not hear
it, and without any more tarrying he embraced his sheeld and laid hand upon
his good sword, and with great violence he went unto the Sepulcher, and as he
would have stroke thereat, there appeared before him a giant, the which the
Prince took to be ye giant that he slew in the mountain Nabateos, who stroke
the Prince upon ye breast with both his hands yt he made him to recoile back a
great way, whether he would or not: notwithstanding with great discreation he
kept himself upright, and with wonderful lightness, accompanied with no less
anger, he threw his sheeld at his back, and took his sword in both his hands,
and went to strike the giant a mortal blow, at which time there appeared before
him a whole legio^ of devils, with flesh hooks in their hands, with the which
they did torment him. The valiant Greek with great wrath and double force put
himself amongst them, striking on every side such terrible blows, that in
spite of them he came unto the tomb, and with great lightness he stroke on it
two blows, but he had no time to strike the third, for that this devilish
company did put him from it we their terrible assaults and striking of him. Oh
in what great travail and perplexity this knight found himself amongst this
wicked and devilish generation, for to defend himself, that they might not
drive him from the Tomb, and took great courage, and stretching forth his
mighty and strong arm, he so flour^^hed about him and kept such a stir
amongst them, that he might strike the third blow upon the Tomb, which was
with so great noise and rumbling, that he was constrained to fall to the
ground without any remembrance, he lay not long in this trance, but
coming again to his remembrance, he found himself by the rivers side, and
nigh unto him was his horse and his Squire with him, without seeing any
fortress or ditch, nor any sign thereof, but the most they saw was two
great lumpes very dark which flewe in the air, giving very grievous
shrikes, and beholding well what it should be, they saw that one was the
unhappy Merlin, and with him a legion of Devils, that went tormenting him,
and the other was a Chariot, carried by two Dragons, and before it was that
furious beast which he slew, and he saw that there was in the Chariot
certain Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen deprived of their understanding.
Likewise he saw a man with a whip in his hand, who did govern the Dragons and
that furious monster, who with a loud voice said. Nephew unto Trebatio, do not
thou think that thy strength is sufficient, for to set at liberty, and to
clear out of pain this unnatural and cruel King, and in saying these words,
he whipped forwards those terrible Dragons, and with a trice they vanished out
of the Princes sight, leaving him somewhat troubled, and not without great
reason.

How Claridiano being overcome with the love of the Pastora, did put himself
in shepherds apparaile, the better to comfort himself with her delycate
presence, and of all that happened therein. Chap. 22.
THe Prince remained meruailously amazed of all that had past, and with some
grief, for that he saw that all his labor and travail was to little effect.
His squire did not look for his return so quickly, but laid him down upon
the grass and fell a sleep. The Prince with his foot awaked him, who so soon
as he had opened his eyes, he looked as one that had been scarred. The warlike
Greek demanded his horse, and mounting on him, he took his way toward
Ierosolima, and continuallye had in his imagination the names of his
grandfather, father and mother, with intent to go toward Greece, with all have
possible. So he travailed in a great confusion whether it should be true or
not, whith they told him, that ye two Emperors should be his grandfather and
father. Likewise he had grief to see himself subject unto Cupide. So with
these and such like thoughts, he came unto Ierosolima, whereas he was
meruailously well received of the King and Queen, likewise of the Princess
the Kings daughter, who did him great honor. The Princess straight way
understood wherefore he came thither, and who was the occasion thereof: and when
she knew that he was in his chamber in quiet, in the company of two of her
Gentlewomen she went to visit him. The Greek received great contentment at her
coming, and the Princess with amorous and sweet words procured to know of
him, if that were true which she had in her thought, in such sort that
Claridiano did discover unto her, all his whole heart and pretense, saying:
that he was determined in shepherds apparaile, to go and see that Pastora,
the causer of all his grief. The Princess when she saw that all was true she
had conceived, she had not so much discretion as to declare unto him the grief
of her heart, but with a dissembling sigh she said. Oh love, what great falsehood
is in thee: and without saying any more she remained very pensive, with her
eyes looking downwards to the ground, and dissembling her grief, she did offer
unto him, all favor and diligence, such as her royal estate was able to give,
which was not a little, for that she was Lady of all that river and lands
thereabouts, the Greek did give her great thanks for her gentle offer, and
with this determination, the Princess returned unto her chamber, whereas with
many troublesome and grievous thoughts, she passed away the night. So when the
morning was come, she was not unmindful of that which she had promised, but
commanded to be made shepherds apparaile very rich, and commanded to call
unto her the head governor of all the cattle of her father the King, whom she
commanded that the shepherd which she would give unto him, should be well
looked unto, and served in such sort, as though it were her Fathers own
royal person.

The shepheardes apparaile was quicklye made, and the Princess one night
turning into the chamber of the Greek, asked of him, if he had determined any
other thing then that which he had told her, to whom he said, that he was
still in that determination. Then the Princess said, that all which he had
commanded was in a readiness, and in that order as his pleasure was. The
Greek gave her great thanks, with such amorous words as her love did deserve,
and the Greek did straight way apparaile himself in that shepherds
apparaile.

The Princess when she saw him in that order, with a sorrowful countenance
she said: Knight, I cannot judge what will come of this: but yet I am sure,
that thou go captive only to one, and thou do leave captive more than a
thousand, who are in no fault of all this thy grief. Oh happy Pastora, whose
beauty has so much force, to subject and bring down him, whom the Tartarian
Giaunts could not conquer. Oh Gods, why do not I leave to be a Princess,
for to be a Pastora by the River of Euphrates, seeing that my highness has
not so much power to atchieue that, which the baseness of this Pastora has
brought into subjection. The great desire which this new shepherd had to see
his: Pastora, was the occasion that he would not make any answer unto the
Princess, but rather dissembled and made as though he had heard nothing. And
straight way he put in ure his departure, and taking a man with him to be his
guide, he took his leave of the Princess, and did commend Fidelio unto her
keeping.

So he departed out of the City without any tarrieng, till he came unto the
principal house of the Kings cattle, whereas he was received of all the
shepheardes that were there present, who showed him great courtesy, and the
baseness of the apparayle wherewith he was clad, was not sufficient to take
away the jealousy that they had in him to be of some noble blood, as appeared
by his person, stature and grave countenance: and although they had not been
commanded by the Princess to respect him, yet they could not but do all
reverence and courtesy unto him. This new shepherd, after that he had given
them thanks for the entertainment which they gave him, he went forth all
alone ranging the fields, and in his hand a shepherds crook. Also he carried
with him a little lute, which he used at times for to ease and recreate
himself.

This new shepherd never took any rest till such time as he came unto the
clear running river. Where under a great and mighty Myrtle tree, he laid
himself down, and remembering his well-beloved Pastora, he lifted up his eyes
toward the heavens, and giving a great sigh, he said. Oh Venus, seeing that it
is thy pleasure, that this thy new vassaile should take his first sitting place
under a Myrtle tree, so much of thee esteemed and made of, let thy sweet voice
so occupy the ears of thy son Cupid, that he may understand how that in his
blindness he had little respect unto the highness of my person in causing me to
place my affection so baselye. Oh Gods, is it possible that any base attempt
should come unto light, but with the authority that belongs unto your
highness: upon you I do call, and unto you I do offer this my wounded
breast, that you make sacrifice thereof, for this my boldness, if therein I
have offended, and therewith he leaned his back unto the Myrtle tree, and took
his Lute, and began to play as sweetly as ever did Orpheus, when with his lute
he made the infernal furyes to sleep. Claridiano with his lute did not only
bring the furies, but also the Queen Proserpina, and the ancient Pluto, he
brought into a great perplexity. So likewise at times he uttered his sweet
voice that they which did hear it, did judge it to be some celestial thing,
and not terrenal, and by reason that his songs did proceed from his heart, it
did in double wise seem the better. This new shephearde thought no body had
heard him: but there were other two shepherds, who were very attentive and
heard, that he sung this song which hereafter follows.

O Yielded heart, how free and void of care
were thou of late from this oppressing pain?
What lucklesse fate allotted thee this share?
that hopeless thou do void of help remain:
Yea, so past hope, that might may naught avail,
The burning flames of Cupides coals to quail.
But fie (fond fool) thou do complain of ease,
and faultlesse Fortune thou beginst to blame:
Venus her self does seek thy heart to please,
in that she mooues thee love so rare a Dame,
Oh Pastora if I enjoy thy sight,
My very death will bring to me delight.
Disdain not then beloved for to be
of him, that needs thy beauty must adore
So long as Fates afford my life to me,
which ended once, I can lament no more:
And then will chance a joyful death to me,
If so I hap to die by hand of thee.
And when he had made an end of his song, he held his peace, for that his weary
voice could not give him any more time, but he let his lute fall out of his
hands, and crossing his fingers the one with the other, he was very pensive,
till such time as he heard a shepherds voice accompanied with a Rebecke,
sweetly sounding, whom he heard sing this song as follows.

WIthin this vale there does a Pastor dwell,
that brings up a Pastora full brave,
Which from her breast does love all times expel,
she no regard of lovers pains will have.
Nature her like, as yet did never form,
Venus her self is dashed at her view:
Her breast like snow thrown down by Hiems storm,
her heart stone hard for all her gallant hiew.
Great is his grief that unto her is thrall,
and hard his hap that sues to win her grace,
Against him she uses greatest hate of all,
for as I said, love has in her no place.
Cupide himself within his snare is caught,
yet void of help for all her subtle shifts:
His words his wyles, his wrath, avail him naught,
she scorns his darts, and all his double drifts.
And thus she shuns the thing that sundry seek,
and scapes vnscorcht, where others burned be:
Her beauty shows her humble, mild and meek,
but yet her heart is stainde with cruelty.
This new shepherd was very attentive unto that gracious song of the other
shepherd, and when he heard that he held his peace, he would have returned
and sung again, but he was disturbed by hearing a noise of people. This gentle
shepherd when he heard it, arose up upon his feet, and went out from under
the shadow of the Tree farther into the Sun, and saw that it was a
shephearde and a Pastora, which were coming into the place whereas he was,
and when they came unto him, they did salute him very courteously. So they sat
down altogether, and put the new shepherd in the midst, very much meruayling
at his gracious countenance: and with a very good grace and gentle
disposition, the Pastora began first to speak, and said: Your sweet Music
(brother shepherd) did awake me and my brother Coridon out of our sleep and we
do rather choose to lose our natural rest, then thy conversation, accompanied
with thy delicate song. We do not know, whether that the fair beauty of
Cayserlinga a Pastora, brought up by this delightful river, has been the
occasion thereof, or any other grief, which does reign in thy heart: but if
it be so gentle shepherd, that your eyes have not beheld nor seen ye beauty
of our Pastora, do you procure not to see her, that your heart be not taken
captive with the sight of her: for you shall understand, yt there is nothing to
be hoped for at her hands but death, her disdain is such This sorrowful
brother of mine, one day did sing before her with his Rebecke, and remained so
imprisoned with her, as ever was shepherd with Pastora. And if it be thy
Fortune to abide long time in these parts, thou shall know the great power
that her face and countenance has, and the great crueltye that she uses.
Thou shall see no other thing along all this river, but shepheardes who have
forgot to govern and feed their sheep, sitting under trees wounded with her
great beauty and fayrenesse, and having more care to make their Rebeckes
fair and trim, then to call together their cattle, and to deliver them from
the ravening Wolves. And by reason that she does know that her beauty is so
great, she is so proud, that she does make them all equal in her
estimation, although not all equal in suffering. I do promise thee of a truth
(gallant shephearde) that this River does seem to be no other thing, but the
habitation of Venus and Cupide. Coridon did cut off the words of Galismena, and
said.

Ah sister Galismena, the little account that thou do make of love, does
cause thee to speak of that, which thy sorrowful brother does feel. What
do thou think Galismena, that of this my contentious passion, I shall reap
any other benefitte, but that I have put my love upon the most excellentest
Pastora, that ever Nature did form. Tell me I pray thee Pastora, what
shephearde have you belonging unto this River of Euphrates, unto whom she
does extend her thought more then unto me. Hold thy peace Coridon said
Galismena, do not exalt Cayserlinga so much: for in her respect thou do
not only put from thee all other Pastoras, but thou do likewise disable all
shepherds along this River. Truth it is although that Cayserlinga does
deserve much: yet for that she is a woman, she does not deserve so much, as the
worst Shephearde in all this our habitation, for that this only is
sufficient, that he is a man.

Then said Coridon with great anger: I would it were not thy self, but some
other that should speak such words, for yt I promise thee with ye force of my
arm, I would make him to know, that his words were not true, but very false.
Then Claridiano did interrupt their communication, and said. Gentle shepherds,
let these your contentions cease, for that there comes nothing of them but
anger and falling out: but I do desire you that you would show unto me this
Pastora, for that her fame does give me a desire to see her. Here by the
river of Euphrates said Coridon, in an arbor which is made of very fair and
green sallowes, gallantlye wrought, there every morning she does comb her
yeolow golden hair, thither may thou go very earlye in the morning, whereas
thou may recreate thy self of that new sight. And in the mean tune before
that thou do depart, we do desire thee to tell us thy name, and what
countriman thou art. This new shepherd answered and said, My name is
Filipensio, and am naturally of Siria, and of the plains of Caniphia, a
kingdom of Chaldea, and the great desire of these green fields and fresh
feeding which is here growing about this clear river, has brought me hither,
for to feed a little Cattle, the which the Gods has made me Lord and
governor of. Ah shepherd said Coridon, (with a dolorous sigh) do thou come
to feed thy sheep in fresh and green meadows, and do not know that in
seeing that Pastora, thou shall feed love within thy delicate and tender
breast.

So with this, and other such like pleasant communication, they passed all
that night till the next morning, and when it was time for to depart, they
took their way to the accustomed abiding of the beautiful Pastora, and they
met in the way many shepheardes, who complained very much against the fury of
love. So under a great Sallowe Tree, they saw two shepherds, the one did
complain of love very grievously, and lay all along upon the ground, and
the other was playing upon a Rebecke, and sung very sweetelye, wherewith
Filipensio did stay* and heard that he sung as follows.

Strange is my grief, yet count I it a gain:
and great my smart, but small I it esteem:
In that for her I suffer all this pain,
whose beauty rare celestial I do deem.
The pangs I feel oppress my fainting heart,
the hope I have reuiues the same again,
Tormenting love afflicts me still with smart,
yet for her sake I force not to be slain.
My cause is good, whereby my care is great,
both cause and care I unto thee replye:
And though with rigor still thou me entreat,
yet will I joy that I for thee must dye
And giving a dolorous sigh, he ended his song. The shepherd Filipensio and
his company went forwards on their way, and passed the time in amorous and
sweet communications, not staying in any place, till they came whereas this
Pastora had her abiding, and there they put themselves amongst a company of
thick trees, under one of the which, they saw where was a shepherd of a
marvelous disposition, so that Filipensio did very much behold him, and
thought in his imagination by the demeanor of that shepherd, that he should
not seem to be of the lignage of shepherds, and turning unto Coridon, he
asked him what he was. They all safe themselves down under a high and mighty
sallow tree, nigh unto the place whereas the other shepherd was at his rest,
and Coridon aunswering unto that which was asked him, said. This is a shepherd
of Babylonia, who for to feed his cattle, in the company of other well
proportioned shepherds came ^ether, and with the sight of that Pastora he felt
himself full of passions and griefs, by the sight of her beutie. The
companion of this, who is called Tarsides, was he which did most follow and
importunate the Pastora: but she, who is the honestest in all the world, not
only with sharp and bitter words did put him from it, but also with public
disdain and hatred: for the which a^ one hated and not set by, he did
determine to leave this valley, reporting that his departure would shorten his
days. Alphesiueo, for so is this shepherd called, as one that was more
stronglyer wounded with love, determined to remain and to persevere in his
suit. At this time, Alphesiueo did awake, and took an instrument in his hand
which he had, and began to play on it very sweetly, singing these verses
following.

THe drops of rain in time the Marble pierce,
Submission makes the Lions heart relent:
But Love thy cruel torments are so fierce,
That mischiefs new thou daily do invent.
For she, whose sight my heart in sunder rent.
Regards neither of my faith, nor grief,
Nor yet yields death, which is my sole relief.
This song he sung so dolefully, that it gave plainly to understand his
grievous pain: and by his words that he was not of the lignage of shepherds.
At this time the son of Tona did begin to appear out of his golden Horizon,
and to show himself upon the face of the earth, glistering with his beams
upon the clear waters of Euphrates, likewise Fauonius and Zephyrus did very
sweetly and softlye blow upon the gr^en leaves, and made a delicate harmony,
at such time as the most fairest Cayserlinga, accompanied with high thoughts,
and with her sheep that she had in charge, for her recreation came forth, and
a great company of shepheardes following her, who were as full of sorrows and
thoughts for her love, as she clean void and without regard of them, and when
she had left her sheep in a green place feeding, she went and sat down in a
place not very far from thence, where Filipensio and his company were, and
when she was set down, she pulled off a knit caul from her head, where in was
wrapped her hair, letting it fall and dispearse it self all abroad her back,
and taking out from her white and christalline breast a comb, she began to
kembe her hair, her hands and fingers seeming to be of white yuorie. All this
did this unknown Filipensio behold, and was in that perplexity, that he did
occupy his understanding on no other thing, but in beholding of her. The
discreet Pastora Galismena did well perceive it, for that he was in a dumpe
and said never a word. Then she with her hands stroke him upon the breast to
call him to remembrance, and said: Gentle shepherd, hearken and give
attentive ear unto the sweet verses, which the amorous shepherds will sing,
and let not this new sight so trouble thee. And therewith Coridon took his
Rebecke, and began to play very sweetly, and song these verses as follows.

Fair Pastora cease off delay,
with speed declare the certainty,
Whether thou will my love repay*
if not, then know that I must die.
I Wish for life that I might thee adore,
and largely show the love to thee I bear:
And if that thou offended seem therefore,
with speed by speech let it to me appear.
Which done, then know that for a certainty,
thy sentence given I am preparde to die:
Thou well do see, or plainly may perceive.
that long time since I had thee in regard:
Frame not thy lips thy lover to deceive,
with scoffs and scorns return not thy reward:
Which if thou do, I never will replye,
But meekely yield, as ready pressed to dye.
And heerewith he made an end of his sorrowful and grievous song: and then
another Shepherd began to sing with a meruaylous and sweet voice, those verses
following.

Reward not him that loves thee, with disdain:
Least Love at length, repay the like again.
EXtend not force against the yielded wight,
shun not his sight that seeks thee to serve,
Thy willer well reward not with despite,
forget him not that favor does deserve,
Neither triumph in his tormenting pain:
Least as thou meatst, Love measure thee again.
Redress my pains O Pastora full fair*
the heavens, my heart, thy sight may them perceive.
Let not my hope be dashed with despair:
for then thou will my corpse of life bereave.
Offend not Love by laughing at my pain,
Least like for like, he render thee again.
With great grief this sorrowful Menalcas made an end of his song, and after
him there were other shepherds that sung many songs full of sweet and amorous
vearses, yt which for yt I will not seem tedious, I do let pass: but ye last
shepherd of all, called Alphesiueo, sung these verses following.

WHat needs threats against him that is a thrall
O rural Nymph? (whose rigor does excel)
Ponder my fault, and thou shall find it small,
Yea naught but this, that I do love thee well.
Hard breasts they say do tender hearts enclose,
I know it true, and find it to my smart.
Ah Pastora, thy self art none of those,
thy breasts are soft, but stony is thy heart*
The shepheardes did well vnderstand^, for that always Alphesiueo was the last
of all the company that did sing, that the Music was whollye ended.

But yet the slower of all shepheardes had not used his amorous exercise, but
so soon as Alphesineo had made an end of his song, Filipensio took his Lute
and plaide so sweeltly on it, that all the shepheardes of the river were
amazed, not knowing who it should be that newly was come to wrestle with
Cupide, and when they heard him play, they all resorted unto that place where
he was, and put themselves round about him for to hear the better, Caiserlinga
had straight way in her ears that new and unaccustomed music, who turning
her self unto Galismena said: Me thinks that to be a new shepherd that does
begin to play. It is truth said the Pastora, for that yester night somewhat a
part whereas he was we heard him play, and the better for to rejoice our
selves of his sweet melody, my brother and I went unto ye place where he was
taking his rest, but if at his music you have admiration, you will much more
marvel at his gentle disposition and grave countenance, I neither know nor
can declare it unto you fair Pastora, but the Gods have used in his body and
proportion all their knowledge and power. Whereat the fair Pastora arose up,
and taking Galismena by the hand, she said: Come sister and let us go and
recreate our selves at his music and fair countenance, and so they both
together went whereas this new Shepherd was, the other shepherds when they
saw her come, they all arose and put themselves a part, and gave her place,
with so great reverence as unto a divine creature. This new shepherd at that
time had need of all his force to uphold him, and not to leave his begun
music, the which when he saw the Pastora was much increased in delicate
sweetness, and they being in this conversation, there chanced so high matters
as well in Tinacria as in Grecia, that I am constrained to leave the pleasures
of Venus, and turn unto the furious force of Mars.

How that Polifebo because his mother the Queen of Tinacria would not give him
the order of knighthoode went secretly from the court, and of all that happened
in his journey. Chap. 23.
THE valiant Eleno we left in Tinacria with great joy to have set at
liberty so excellent a Queen, and with no less sorrow for the sudden
departure of his cousin, who did no more but put Brenio in his Sepulcher, in
such sort as in the third part of this history shall be told you. So
straight way he entered into a Bark, the which in short time was put into
the maine and wide sea, whereas they were suddenly taken with a storm, and by
the force thereof they were driven upon the coast of France, where he was
constrained to take land, and taking a narow and straight path which he saw,
he followed the same, which brought him into the wilderness of Ardenia, nigh
unto the fountain Disamore, who seeing the cleerenesse of the water, alighted
from his inchaunted horse, and washed his hands and refreshed his face with
that water, and drunk thereof till such time as he had satisfied his desire,
and when he had drunk and well refreshed himself, he sat down upon an old
root of a tree that had been cut down, and felt within his breast an
alteration of new desires, as shall be told you hereafter, and for that I am
constrained to return unto Tinacria, I do leave him in this order. Poliphebo
seeing himself a man of sixteen years of age with so stout an heart and
manly a courage, requested his mother that she would command the order of
knighthood to be given him, the which the Queen did refuse very much to do,
as one which thought that if he were once made knight, that he would absent
himself, seeking whereas he might exercise his strength for to get him fame.
This young Prince did continually importunate the Queen, and every day his
desire did increase more and more, the occasion was, for that he did see so
great knighthoode at that time used in Tinacria, and all for the love and
sight of the fair Princess his sister, so that the knights did not occupy
themselves in any other exercise but in iustes and tourneyes. The Queen did
continually persuade her son with gentle and loving words to tarry and not
to take the order upon him till such time as he came to more years, laying
before him the great inconveniences which might happen for lack of his full
growth and strength, but this delaying of the Queen did cause the Prince to be
very sad and pensive, and also caused that all the feasts and sportes that
the knights did daily use, waxed altogether cold, in seeing the Prince to be
in that heavy case, and upon a day as he was imagining with himself, seeing
the small comfort and good will which he received in his mother for the
fulfilling of his desire, he determined in great secret as soon as was
possible to depart the court, the which he straight ways put in ure, and
took out of the armourie very secretly an exceeding good armor, the which
was all russet, and enameled with black, and imbroudered round about with
graven work all guilt: also he took out a sheelde of the same making, saving
that it was not graued as his armor was, and commanded a young Gentleman that
was son unto Rubio, of a good disposition and hardy, that he should keep
themselves, and gave him to understand of all his determined pretense, and
although it did grieve this young man very much, yet for all that, seeing the
great friendship which he used with him in uttering his secret unto him
before any other, without replying to the contrary, he very diligently took
the armor and hid it, till he found convenient time to put it into a ship^
very secretly. So likewise he put into the said Ship two of the best horses
which the Prince had, and forthwith he gave his Lord understanding how that
all things were then in a readiness and in good order. The Prince dissembling
with the accustomed heaviness he used, withdrew himself into his chamber
till such time as the night came, which when it was come, he made himself
ready with his apparaile, and when that all the people of the Court were at
their rest and a sleep, he alone with his page, who was named Macedonio, went
out of the pallaice, and went unto the sea side. His page did call the
mariners of the ship, who straight way brought unto them their boat, in the
which they entered, and went straight a board the ship, and being therein for
that the wind was very fair, he commanded to way their ankers, and to
spread their sails, and to take their way toward Grecia, and as he commanded
all was done, and in a short time they found themselves ingulfed into the sea,
far from the land. This excellent Prince went very much to his contentment:
but when the Queen understood of his departure, the lamentation which she made
was very much, and commanded to go unto the sea side, to know if there were
any ship that departed that night, and it was told them that there was a
ship of Grecia, which that night haled up their ankers, and hoised sail, and
went to sea: so straight way they understood that the Prince was gone in her.
I cannot here declare the great grief and sorrow which the Queen felt in
her sorrowful heart, for the absence of the Prince, which she always
suspected and feared. But when ye absence of Poliphebo was knowwen in Tinacria,
all feasts and sports ceased, for that you shall understand, of all his
vassailes he was very well beloved. The Queen did procure to dissemble all her
grief, for the great sorrow which her vassailes had, showing her self more
joyful in her face, more then any contentment she had in her heart, giving
them to understand, that he had done it, for that which he did owe unto his
high lineage, and the great allygation he had to procure his honor and fame:
and that he had done that, which she and all them should have desired, and
that they should not be sorrowful for that, which hereafter would be the
occasion of great joy and pleasure. With these and such like resons, she did
quiet all her vassailes and kingdom, and caused them to return unto their
accustomed pastime and sports. So Poliphebo sailed forwards on his journey,
through the deep sea, with great delight to see how he had fulfilled his
desire. And he sailed three days with a very fair and prosperous wind, and
the fourth day in the evening it was very calm, and no wind at all, so that
the Mariners went to take their rest, some on the poope, and some in the
foreships, for to ease their wearied bodies. The prince who sat upon ye poope
of ye ship, asked for his lute of his page, the which straight way was given
him, and when he had it in his hands, he played and sung so sweetly, that it
seemed to be a heavenly melody. And being in this sweet music, he heard a
very lamentable cry as it were of a woman, and leaving his music, he gave
attentive ear to hearken what she said, and he heard the voice say: It will
little profitte thee thou cruel tyrant, this thy bold hardiness, for thou
do well know, that I am of a lignage, that will revenge it of thee to thy
cost. Then he heard another voice which said: Now I have thee in my power,
there is no humane power able to deliver thee from me* Poliphebo could hear no
more by reason that the bark wherein they were, passed by in so great have.
This heroycall Prince by the words he heard, understood that she was carried
by force away, and putting the lute away, he began to fall into a great
thought, and was very heavy and sorrowful, for that he had not received the
order of Knighthoode, for to give the enterprise of this adventure: but yet his
stout stomach could not suffer, that such compulsion and vyolence should pass
without being punished. And returning unto his Page Masedonio, which was a
sleep, he struck him with his foot and awaked him, saying: What, did not
thou hear the great lamentation, and sorrowful complaint, which a Lady made
(as it seemed) in a small bark that is passed by, and is gone forwards along
the sea, (to the which Masedonio answered nothing, for that he was still a
sleep,) what counsel do thou give me, that I may do in so great outrage
which is done before mine eyes, that I may receive no shame thereof. Thou art
bound unto nothing, said Masedonio, for that thou have not received the order
of knighthoode, and thou do well understand that without it thou cann^st
not put forth thy hand to make defense against any knight.

Then Poliphebo said, He is not a Knight which does set his force against a
woman, and does break the law and oath made unto Knighthoode. Therefore bring
me forth my armor, and call the mariners, that they may launch their boat,
into the sea: for by the omnipotent Jupiter I do swear, that I will not be
called the son of my father, if I do suffer such force to be done before me,
and not procure with all my strength to amend and correct the same. Masedonio
would have replied unto him, but the furious countenance of the Prince would
not give him leave, no not once to look upon him. So he brought forth his
armor, and armed him self therewith. In the mean time the mariners had
lanched the boat into the sea, wherein he leaped with a hasty fury, and
carried with him four mariners for to row the bark^, and he commanded for
to take the way toward the other that passed by. All that remained in the ship
greatly meruailed at his hardiness. This Prince of Tinacria caused the
mariners to make great have with their oars, for that they would not loose
the way which they had. So they travailed all that night, till such time as the
clear Phoebus with his glittering beams gave unto them such light, that they
might discover and see the other bark, although somewhat a far off. The
Tinacrian had great contentment thereat, hoping that very quickly they should
overtake them, but it did little profit them: for if that he did make have to
over take them, they were not idle, but did make as much have to go from them.
So in this contention they travailed til two parts of the day was spent, at
which time they saw come after them a galley which was governed with eighteen
oars on a side, and it made so great way, that with a trice they were with
them, and he saw that there was in her a Knight all armed with black armor,
and was of a gentle disposition and well proportioned body, who made great
have unto the mariners to row forwards. And as they passed by, the Tinacrian
said unto the^ with a loud voice: Knight I do request thee, that you wilt take
me into your Galley, that being in her, I may the better accomplish my desire.
The Knight of the gally passed by, without making any answer, but rather
showed yt he made little account of him, but made have unto them that did row.
The Tinacrian seeing the little account he made of him, with the great anger
and fury he received, he took an oar in one ^and, and another in the other,
and with so great fury and strength he stroke the water, that he made the
slothful bark to fly, and labored so much with his oars, that with a trice
they were equal with the galley, and leaving the oars, with a light leap he
put himself into the galley, and had his healme on, and his sheeld at his
shoulder, and being within he said. Now thou shall do by force that, which
before I using great courtesy, thou would not do. Those that were at the
oars, meruailyng at the great boldness of the Knight, did cease their
exercise and work of rowing. The black Knight being full of anger, as he
which was one of the best in all the world, drew out his sword, and went
toward that bold Knight. This furious Tinacrian seeing himself without the
order of knighthood, would not lay hands on his sword, but laid hold of one of
those long and heavy oars, and went and stroke at the black Knight, who did
defend it and said: What do thou pretend to do, thou fool and without wit,
what do thou think with staves as a country clown or villain to make
battle with me? I can do no otherwise said the Tinacrian, and it is thy
small courtesy which does make me to do this: for thou shall understand that I
am a Donzel, and as yet have no license to strike a knight, but if thou
would do so much, as give me the order of knighthood, I will afterward make
thee to know, that thou did great villanye in not aunswering me.

Oh Gods said the black knight, is it possible that you consent that a boy
should have such boldness: now I do well perceive that you do begin to use me as
you were wont, neglecting my oblations, and paying with so great ingratitude
one good thing which you have done for me, in giving me such a Lady for my
wife, it does appear that you have repented your selves, for that you do not
alonelye procure to take her from me, but also to rob me of my honor. I will
deem you^ ^^ith and laws, or else recover my Lady and mistress, and punish
this fool in spite of your power: Come on thou unfortunate youth and receive
the order of knighthood, that thou do ask of me, come and receive it by the
hands of him which will quickly take it away from thee again and also thy
life. Give it me once said the Tinacrian, and afterward come what shall, and
therewith he came unto him without any fear, and this brave knight did give
him the order of knighthoode, of him so much desired, and when that he had
given it unto him, without saying ever a word he laid hand on his sword, at
such time as the Tinacrian was well advised of the harm coming, and being
both with their swords aloft, they made their encounter with a devilish fury,
the black knight did strike the russet knight first, and stroke him so furious
a blow that he made him to decline his head to his breast, and forced him to
recoile backwards two or three steps, so that he lost the blow he had ready
to discharge upon him, but he came quickly again to himself, and lifting up
his sword he stroke the Pagan so mighty a blow upon his healme, that he made
all the teeth in his head to chatter, the knight with the black armor did
very much marvel at that mighty blow, but yet it caused not in him any
trouble, but rather with great lightness he setteled himself upright again,
so then betwixt them began a marvelous terririble and well foughten battle,
that whosoever did behold it, it caused them to have great fear, the blows
were so terrible that were between them, and the great noise which they made,
procuring either of them to hurt his* enemy with as much policy and strength
as might be, but yet for all that, it did pro^it little to any of them both,
for that either of them had to do with a strong adversary. The ire of the
black knight was such, yt out of his Beauer proceeded great quant^tie of
thick smoke, to see that one alone young knight did so strongly defend
himself, and with so great fury offend his enemy, this new knight had no
less wrath to see that the first with whom he made his trial should entreat
him so evil, iudgeing himself to be weak and of little valor, not knowing
that he dealt with the flower of all knighthoode amongst the Pagans, and with
like fury he thickened his blows, in such sort, that many times he was
amazed. In this sort they endured all that day, and when they saw that the
dark and tenebrous night came upon them, they did procure with more courage
and strength for to finish their battle. This strong and stout knight with
the black armor, puffing and blowing like a bull, lifting up his sword with
both his hands, did discharge it upon the new knight, who did receive that
blow upon his sheeld, and cutting it in two parts, the sword descended upon
his healme with so great furye, that he made him to bow his knees to the
ground, and was feign to help himself with his left hand because he should
not fall, when the black knight saw him in that order he would have laid
hold on his healme for to have pulled it off from his head, but this new
warrior was not so far from himself, but that he put for his defense the
point of his sword unto his breast, with so great strength, that he made him to
recoile back, and for lack of sight he put his foot under the end of an
Oar, that without any remedy to save himself he fell upon his back, but
with great lightness he arose again, in which space the new knight had time
to settle himself, and to take his sword in both his hands and stroke him such
a blow, that being constrained by the great force thereof to retire back two
steps, he had fallen down if he had not laid hold upon one of the banks of
the Gallie, by the which he did sustain himself, and therewith this new
knight entered in with him, and with his hands he stroke him on the breast,
that perforce be made him to fall down, and in ye fall of the Moore he reached
forth his arm and laid hold upon his shirt of maile, and caused him by force
to fall down with him, and when he saw himself in that sort, he threw his
sheeld from him, and very strongly he threw his arms over his neck and held
him fast, here the new knight was constrained to do the like, so that
between them began a mighty and terrible wrestling, tumbling and wallowing
up and down the gallie, breaking their banks and oars, that it was strange
to see. They endured long in this contention without knowing any advantage
either of the one part or of the other, in such sort, yt for very weariness
they were constrained to leave ye wrestling, and arose up again, and betook
the^ selves again unto their swords, at yt time the night was very dark, but
the black knight with a loud voice called for lights, which presently we^
brought them by ye mariners, in the mean time these knights did somewhat
breath themselves, although it was not much* So when ye lights were brought,
they returned unto their late contention with new force and strength: Oh Gods
of little valor, said the Pagan, I cannot believe to the contrary but that
this is Mars yt does contend in battle with me, and for the great envy yt he
has at me, he goes about to dishonor me. Let it be who it may be of all you,
for y^ I will hear give you to understand that you have brought up one yt will
make you know yt he is of more force and strength then all you together, and
with these thoughts he thickened his blows with great desperatnesse, and
although (...) this last assault they were more then two hours in their
battle, yet neither of them did faint, but with new force both together they
lift up their swords, and discharged the^ together the one upon the others
helm with so great strength, yt both of them together fell down upon the
hatches of the gallie without any remembrance, and those which did look upon
them did believe verily that they were both dead, by reason of the great
abundance of blood which came forth of the beauers of their helmes, but quickly
it was perceived yt there was life in them, then was there an agreement made
betwixt the mariners of the gallie and the bark, that they should take
Poliphebo into his Bark, and either of them to prosecute his journey, and not
to tarry till such time as they came to themselves, suspecting yt the
contention would not be ended without ye death of one of them, which would be
great pity. So straight way they put their device in ure, Macedonio with the
help of the mariners got his Lord into their bark, and they of the gally
straight way began to follow their voyage, striking the water with their long
oars with great violence, and so either of them departed and followed his
voyage.

How the worthy Tinacrian did prosecute his voyage, and chanced whereas he
found the Queen of Mauritania evil entreated of a giant, and of the battle
he had with him. Chap. 24.
IN the order as you have heard they carried the new knight without any
remembrance, and when he came unto himself and found himself in ye order,
with a loud voice he said: Oh Gods, is it possible to be true that I am
overcome in the first encounter and assault of my knighthood, and that you have
consented thereunto, here I do curse the day in which I began to honor you,
seeing that my sacrifices does so little profit me. Then Macedonio did (...) of
his sayings and said: My Lord, thou were not overcome, neither had thy
contrary so much power, for yt he was rather more worse entreated then you, in
such sort, that I know not whether he be alive or dead. This new knight turned
his head, and looked on him with so much wrath and anger, yt Macedonio durst
not look him in the face, and with great ire he said: Oh traitor, was it so,
and why did thou consent to bring me from thence, till such time as fortune
had been favorable unto me: Oh vile creature, thou do not show thy self to
be ye son of noble parents, in doing so bace a deed, I know not how I have
patience, yt I throw thee not into the sea, for this great dishonor which thou
have done unto me: Ah heavy knight of Tinacria and of little valor, I know
not how thou can name thy self to be ye son of ye most mightiest knight in
the world, for yt thou have made so ill a proof of thy self in thy first
assalt: Oh Gods how have you suffered so vilanous an act, it is not possible but
ye knight with who^ I had combat is of more power then all you, descend into
this bark and I will make you to know ye same, here I do deny al your powers,
and I do determine to honor ye God my father does, who will not reward me so ill
as you do, and I do acknowledge and confess him to be the true God, and you
all full of mockings, liberal in promising, and slow in giving, from this day
forwards be assured yt I will not ask you of any thing, neither will I accept
any thing from your vile hands. These and such like words said this new
knight, and was in such anger, that neither Page nor Mariners durst speak
unto him, but to give him contentment they rowed a pace toward ye bark whereas
that dolorous woman went. So in this ^ort they travailed all the rest of the
night that remained, till such time as the day began to be clear, and
straight way they discried land, to which place with great have they rowed,
till such time as the bark was a ground, so this angry young knight presently
leapt a shore, and Masedonio carried his healme, but he took neither spear
nor sheeld with him, the Mariners folfowed him and carried such victuals as
they had, and they found no used way, but one narow path, the which they kept,
and it brought them unto a mighty great and deep river, whereas he sat down
and did refresh himself, and washed his hands and face, and called for to eat
of that which they had brought, and when he had eaten, without any more
tarrying he began to travail along the river side: he had not travailed long
when y^ they met with a poor country man, with a great hatchet in his hand,
he was going to cut fire wood from those high and mighty trees: of whom they
asked what country and land it was, and he told them yt it was the land of
Almania, but yet sir knight thou must pardon me, for yt I do request thee to
return again and proceed no farther this way if thou do esteem thy life,
for in going on this way there is nothing to be had but death, for yt the Lord
of this river is a furious giant, and is called Marmoraton, and the rivers name
is Ospriz, this giant is ye most furious in all the world, and is of such might
yt our Emperor does fear him, he has also two sons who are no less furious
then he is, although they are now very sad for certain news which were brought
them, how yt a brother of his who was Lord of an Island in Spain called Corsa,
was destroyed, and all his people slain by sword, and none left alive by force
of cruel war: and in part of reuengement of all this harm done, no longer
then yesterdaye, he brought hither a Lady prisoner, and they say that she was
the occasion of the death of them all as I have told you, and straight way
when he came a shore, with a devilish cruelty, he did all to bewhip and beat
her, that it was very pitiful to behold, swearing that every day he would so
torment her, till such time as her life and body did make their separation, and
he has all his Castle compassed round about, with mighty strong and armed
Knights, and with them his two sons, who does keep watch and ward for to
defend the Castle: for that they say, that the King of Mauritania does follow
and pursue them in a galley, for to clear and set at liberty this Lady. This
new Knight was very attentive unto the words which the countriman told him, and
although he spoke in the Tuscan tongue, yet he did understand him, for that he
was brought up to understand and speak all languages, and thought verily,
that he with whom he had battle in the galley, was the King of Mruritania,
and thinking thereon, it caused him to be more furious in his heart, for that
as you have heard, he had the experience of his force and strength, and
thought by him he was overcome, and without saying any word, he followed on
his way, and did determine, that if fortune did so favor him to rescue and set
at liberty this Lady, not for to let her pass, till such time, as the King
did come in her demand, (and if it were he with whom he had the battle) he
would not deliver her but with mortal battle. So travailing with this
thought, the night came on, and it was so dark, that he was constrained to
se^ke some place to take his rest, and laying himself down under a mighty
Pine tree, he passed that night, speaking a thousand blasphemies against the
Gods.

Artemidoro declaring the acts and deeds of this Knight, says, that he was the
most furious in all the world, and a very friend to aid and succor all those,
that could do little for themselves: and if he chanced at any time to begin
an enterprise that he could not well compass, with double force he would
prosecute it. In such sort, that many times he made resistaunce against
enchantments, for yt he had more strength and force, than ever Knight or Giant
had, at any time before, and did surmount very much his brethren and Cousins.
He made no reckoning of love in his youth, by which he was judged to be the
Emperors son, as in the third part of this book shall be told you. So
when ye morning was come, this young Mars was not slothful, but arose up and
followed his journey, and his Page followed him with his helm: he had not
travailed scarce half a mile, when that he heard a pitiful lamentation of a
woman, who by reason of her great weeping, her voice was very hoarce. So he
stayed to hear from whence that lamentable noise should come, and went toward
that place whereas it was, and saw a far off a high pillar of stone, out of the
which, there came forth a spoute of very fair and clear water, and thereat
was bound a woman all naked, her back fastened to the pillar, and her arms
backward embracing the pillar, and there her hands fast bound. Her skin was so
fair and white, that if it had not been that he heard her lamentation, he
would have judged her to have been an image made artificially of Alabaster
joined unto the pillar. This warlike young Knight laced on his helm, and came
unto the place whereas she was: and when he saw her, he thought verily that it
was the Queen of Mauritania of whom the country man told him, and by reason
of the coldness of the dark night, and with her great lamentation and
weepings, she was so full of sorrow and affliction, that she could scarce
speak. Likewise the Knights heart so yerned at the sight of that unhappy
Lady, that almost he could not look on her for weeping: but with a sorrowful
sigh he said. O cruel hands, is it possible, that there should remain in you
so much mischief, that whereas there is ^o great beauty and fairness, you
should use such baseness and villainy, she does more deserve to be beloved and
served, then to be in this sort so evil entreated.

This Knight did very much, and with great sorrow behold her white skin and
back, all to be spotted with her red blood. And taking a cloak from one of the
mariners, he threw it upon her, for to cover her body, and took her in his
arms and commanded Macedonio for to unloose her. This unhappy Lady never felt
nor knew what was done unto her, till such time as she was unbound out of those
bands, and in the Knights arms: and giving a terrible sigh, she thought that
she had been in the arms of that furious Giaunt, saying. Oh Brufaldoro my Lord
and husband. The Knight hearing those words, was fully certified, that it was
he with whom he had had battle: and so it was true as has been told you.
This new Knight would have answered her, but he was disturbed by hearing of a
great noise of a horse, which seemed to be in the wood amongst the trees, and
for to see what it should be, he left the Lady lieng along upon the ground,
in the keeping of his Page and the mariners, and went toward that place,
whereas he heard that rushing noise, and saw yt it was a mighty great and
monstrous Giant mounted upon a great beast, the which was Marmoraton, who
returned to see if the Lady were alive, for to torment her a new. And when he
came unto the pillar, and saw not the Lady, with an irefull look he cast his
eyes, looking about on every side, and at last he saw the Knight, who was
coming toward him with a reasonable and quiet pace, and how that the Lady
was untied, making her sorrowful complaint. And seeing them in this order,
with great fury upon his terrible beast he came toward them, and when he was
nigh them, he staid and did behold the great proportion and gentle disposition
of the Knight, hnd asked him saying. Art thou by fortune the King of Mauritania
that traitorously has slain in the field my brother and his children. I am
not he that thou do ask for said the Tinacrian, but rather I do give thee to
understand, that he is the Knight that I d^e most hate, and I am a knight that
at the sorrowful complaynt of this Lady am come hither, and seeing her to be
a very fair woman, and without any deserte to be thus so evil entreated, it
moves me to put my person in adventure against them, that will seem farther
to misuse her. In the mean time whiles the Knight was saying these words, the
Giant was beholding him very preciselye, and knit his brows with the great
anger he received to hear these words, and with great fury he spurred his
monstrous beast, that he made him give so mighty a leap, that he reached unto
the place whereas the knight was, and it lacked little, that he had not fallen
upon this new knight, who with great lightness did apart himself from him,
and drew out his sword, and would have stroke him: but the beast passed by
with so great fury that he could not reach him. The Giant straight way returned
his great beast, and with his broad ^auchon in his hand he came against the
Prince, and would have stroke at him. This invincible Tinacrian did abide his
coming, and at the discharging of the Giaunts blow, he stepped on the one
side toward his left hand, and stroke an overthwart blow with so great
strength upon his knee, that by reason his armor was not very good, he cut it
a sunder, so that leg and all fell down to the ground, and the monstrous
Giant fell on the other side likewise to the earth, and with great roaring
began to blaspheme against the heavens for this his sudden mishap. There was a
man that came with the Giant, who when he saw all that had passed, with great
fear returned the way from whence he came. The Prince when he saw that with so
great ease he was clear of the Giant, with a loud voice he said. Oh God whom
the Christians do worship, I do give thee thanks, and I do acknowledge that
all this my good success does proceed from thee, and here I do promise and
vow, that once coming unto my father, to accomplysh and perform all that I
am bound to do, for to be a true Christian. The great beast whereon the
Gyaunt latelye rode, did very well please and gave great contentment unto the
Knight, for that he was of a big stature, and of a very good hair, because
the half part forwards was was of the color of a Wolf, and the other half
was all black, saving that here and there it was spotted with little white
spots. His feet were cloven, so that he needed not at any time to be shooed,
his neck was somewhat long, and a little head, with great cares hanging down
like a hound, his pace was with great majesty, and he doubled his neck that
his mouth touched his breast, there came forth of his mouth two great tusks,
and he did exceed all beasts in the world in lightness, and did run with a
very good grace. The young knight received so great delight in him, that he
did determine to take and keep him for himself, and not to use any other
horse so long as this beast would endure, and without the help of stirop or
any other thing he leapt into the saddle, and commanded his Page and the
Mariners, that in the thickest of the forest they should abide his coming,
and to have great care of that Lady, and not to remove from thence till such
time as they did hear the sound of his horn, and when he had advertised the^
what they should do, he took the narrow path by which the Giant came, in the
which he had not travailed long, when that upon a sudden (not knowing what it
should be) there came a damsel and put her self before him, who brought unto
him a sheeld very rich, in the which was painted a tree, the one half was of
silver and had a branch broken which hung down, out of the which ran
streams of red blood, and the other ha^^e was of gold, and by it a knight who
did contend to break one of the branches, and on the sheeld were certain
letters which said: Contention often times does overcome fortune. Then the
damsel said: Poliphebo, they which do wish and desire all good unto thee,
does send thee this sheeld with the device which thou do see, and
understand, that thou have thereof great need, and I desire thee to note well
^he device which it has, for that in the time as ye brave bastard Lion with
his surmounted contention shall overcome all enchantments, in tearing the golden
branch, although it is not ordained for him. The son of Garrofilea shall
loose all his liberty. And in saying these words she put the sheeld about his
neck, and without any more tarrying* she vanished away, without being any
more seek, at the which this new knight was very much amazed and troubled,
and considering the devise which the shield had, he did imagine to what end it
should apply, and likewise of the words which the damosel had said. And being
troubled with these thoughts and such like, he prosecuted his way: and when he
came forth of that narrow and straight way, he came into a great plain, in
the which he saw a Castle, situated upon a rock, and a mile from that place
there was another Castle, which seemed to be very strong. And in the Castle
that was in the plain, there was a great noise, and straight way there issued
out a company of Knights, and amongst them a valyant Giaunt, who with great
pride came toward the Knight, and when they came nigh, and saw that he was
mounted upon the giaunts beast, with great anger and fury they assaulted him,
and they were to the number of twenty Knights. This courageous young Knight
was nothing troubled to see them, but rather did abide their coming with his
sword in his hand, and with as much courage, as though he had had as many more
in his company to help him. And when they had made their encounter upon him,
yet he remained as firm in the saddle, as a strong and hard Rock: but yet at
their passing by, he stroke one of them such a blow upon the shoulder, that
cutting it in two pieces, he overthrew him to the ground. At that time
approached the Giant, who by reason of his deformity in bigness, his horse
could not travail so fast as the others did. He brought in his hand a strong
spear, wherewith he made his encounter against the young Knight, that he made
him to lean on the one side in the saddle: but with a trice he settled himself
again, and throwing his shield at his back, he took his sword strongly in
both his hands, and stroke his beast with the spurs, who with a light leap
was with his enemy, and discharged his blow upon the Giants shield with so
great fury, that he cut it in two pieces, and it descended from thence upon
his hard and steely healme with so great strength, that he made him to fall
upon his Horse neck without any remembrance, and returned with his sword,
thinking to give him the second blow, which by no means he could, for that
the Knights did so assault him on every side: but it did little profit them
all that ever they did or could do, for returning against them with his light
beast, he entreated them in such sort, that when the astonished Giant came unto
himself, there were fifteen of his Knights overthrown to the ground. Oh how
angry and wrathful was this Giant when he saw so great slaughter, who with a
furious rage drew out his fawchon, and with both his hands he stroke him such a
blow upon his fine and hard helm, that he did deprive him of his
understanding. His furious beast being scarred with that terrible blow, began
to run about the field, in such sort, that if the knight had not quickly come
to himself, he had carried him into the Castle: but remembering himself, he
rayned the bridle of the beast, and came against his enemy with such fury, and
with his sword all aloft, he stroke him such a blow upon his helm, that
cleaving it in pieces with the head down to the shoulders, he fell down dead
to the ground. The rest of the Knights which remained, when they saw that
terrible blow would have run away: but suddenly they saw come forth out of the
other Castle, as many more knights, as came at the first, and with the like
pride and fury as the others did, they assauted Poliphebo, who seeing that new
assault, and that there came another Giant in their company, he made himself
ready for his defense, and procured to do his best to deliver himself from
them, and taking a spear which was one of the dead knights, and being shrouded
under his shield, he went forth to mteee the Giant, who when he saw him come,
addressed himself. They made their incou^ter very strongly upon their sheelds,
and the Giant did no more but break his spear in small pieces, but he never
moved the Tinacrian in his saddle, who made his encounter so stronglye, and
stroke him with so great fury upon his sheelde, that by reason of the great
sharpness of his spear it rested not there, but pearceing it thorough and
also his armor, it appeared behind him at his back, in such sort, that he
overthrew him dead to the ground.

Oh marvelous and valiant deeds done by one Knight, that in one day, by
three blows, he ouerthrewe and slew three great and strong Giants. The
knights that came forth of the Castle, when they saw that mighty deed, with
great showtes and shrikes they compassed him round about, striking upon him
many a furious blow, and although they thought that of the last battail^ he
remained very weary, they were greatly deceived, for that he began with
greater wrath to strike and wound them then at the first. In such sort he
behaved himself amongst them, overthrowing and wounding on every side, that in
short time they left him at his liberty, and the like he would have done, if
there had been as many more before him, his anger and fury was such, the rest
which remained, being about the number of six knights, put themselves unto
flight. The Tinacrian would not follow them, neither made he any reckoning of
them, but entered into the Castle, and did alight from his great beast, and
went into a broad Court, whereas were all the Giauntes household servant,
and when they saw him, they began to run away, and to hide themselves, as
from their sudden death. The knight did call them again, and bad them be in
quiet, and not to fear, for that he would not hurt them, if they would show
him where the prisoners were in the castle. Then one of them said: Prisoners
there are, but what shall it profit to show thee the place, when thou can
not deliver them, for that there be such keepers to keep them. Let it be what
it will be said the Knight, for once thou shalt show me where they are. As
for their keepers they have but small defense, neither have you any occasion to
fear, for that this day they have made account and paid all the evils and
harms yt they have done. The man when he heard this, without any replying
took a bundle of keys, and came out of the kitchen into the Court, whereas he
opened a door, and entered therein, they descended down a pair of stairs
into a deep dungeon, whereas they heard a very sorrowful and lamentable
noise. The knight spoke with a loud voice and said. Who is it that lies so
lamenting within this dark dungeon. To whom was answered with a very
dolorous voice: Here lies the most grievous and afflicted knight that may be
found in all the world, and in his company other Knights, brought unto this
place by forcible vyolence, why I do not know, for that we have not seen one
another, by reason of the great and terrible darkness that is here. Well said
the Prince, come forth, if hereafter you can defend and keep your selves from
other prisons, so it is, for of this, from this day forwards you are clear:
and in saying these words, he ascended up the stairs, and after him the man
which opened the door. Then the prisoners in great have came up the stairs,
and coming forth whereas the Knight was, they all fell down on their knees,
giving thanks unto God for that he had given them liberty: and afterward they
kissed the Knights hands, desiring God to increase his powers and honor, who
with a very good grace gave them such answer, that they were all very well
content. Amongst them there was one prisoner of a very goodly disposition and
fair face, and of a double stature, more then the others, who with a severe
countenance and well placed words, did surrender unto the Knight great
thanks for that good turn which he received at his hands: he spoke to him in
the Tuscane tongue. It seemed unto the Prince that he should be a person of
estimation, and asked of him his name, and what countriman he was? To whom the
prisoner said: My name (sir knight) is Florisarte, son unto the Duke of
Bauiera, brother unto the good Emperor Ladislao of Almania, who was taken
prisoner villainously by these evil Giants. The Tinacrian received great
contentment, for yt he had done so great service unto so mighty a Knight and
Lord, and with a merry countenance he took him by the hand, and went up a
pair of stairs, and after him went all those that were delivered out of
prison, which were to the number of forty knights, and of squires, pages and
other servants, to the number of an hundred. So when they were above in a great
hall, the knight commanded that there should be brought them somewhat to eat,
for that they had great need thereof. This new knight was walking up and down
with Florisarte of Bauiera in yt hal, and went unto a window which opened
toward that place whereas he left his company, and blewe his horn with so
great strength that they heard it, and knew the sound: and being thereof very
glad and joyful, they arose up, and went unto the Castle. In the way* whereas
they went, they saw the Knights that were slain and the Giants, and were very
much amazed at so great slaughter, and went forwards, till they came unto the
Castle, whereas they found ye prince, who was very glad and rejoiced much of
that which was done, and commanded straight way that the Lady should be very
well looked unto, and healed of her harm received.

How Poliphebo did prosecute his journey for to go into Grecia, and how in the
way he met by adventure with certain Clownes forcing of a Lady, and would
have slain her, and of all that happened of that Lady. Cap. 25.
THe space of three days was Poliphebo in the Castle of the giant, in which
time he did procure all kind of remedies yt was possible, to bring the Queen
again unto her health, and to be healed of her evil. So with the great care
be had, and the good diligence which was used, she recovered her health, and
receiving ye castle for his own, he put good order therein for their
government. The fourth day he determined to depart, and to prosecute his
journey, and to carry in his company ye queen Espinela, and the gentle knight
Florisarte. His pretense was, to pass through all Almania and Hungaria, till
he came into Grecia, for to see his father, and make himself known unto him,
and did procure to do such deeds, yt with great honor he might name himself
to be son unto so noble a father. The occasion why he did carry y^ queen
Espinela with him, was, for yt he understood, that ye king of Mauritania would
come to seek her: and to perform his promise, not to deliver her without
mortal battle, he would not loose her company. And so leaving ye castle in the
keeping of a knight of Almaine, and in ye name of ye Emperor Ladislao, he took
his iourny toward Espira, whereas at that time ye Emperor kept his parliament,
and commanded ye mariners to return unto their bark, and he in company with
the Queen and Florisarte, and his Page Macedonio took their journey as
aforesaid. When ye queen saw the knights determination, and understood his
pretense, with sorrowful tears she called for her king: but all her sorrows
and grief did little avail, for yt the knight would not by any means change
his pretense: and by reason of ye great sorrow, grief and heavy cheer of the
queen, it was ye occasion yt all travailing and venterous knights, which saw
her, did procure battle with the new knight, for to set her at liberty. So
they travailed viii. days, wherein they passed ye Alps, and went through all
ye dukedom of Bauiera, by Minique and Aspruch, and being overtaken by the
night, they were constrained to take their rest, by a very fair and clear
fountain, whereas they did alight and refresh themselves, likewise they did eat
of such meat as they had. And when they had satisfied themselves, every one
prepared himself to take his rest, and being weary of their iourny, they fell al
a sleep, saving only Poliphebo, who was awake, having in remembrance such
things, as ministered him most care: and being in this thought, he heard a
certain lamentation, which seemed to be a far off, and the better to hear
what it was, he arose up on his feet, and being very attentive, he plainly
heard and perceived that it was a woman, and as a knight yt always did procure
to help and succor those which could do little, he laced on his helm, and threw
his shield at his neck, and with a reasonable pace he went toward ye place
whereas he heard ye lamentation, and the more he went, the plainer he heard the
lamentatio^, he had not gone far when yt he saw two clownes had bound a Lady
all naked unto a tree, and one of them had a sharp knife in his hand ready to
murder her. The prince seeing them, with a loud voice said. Oh vile villains,
hold your hands, for if you do not, it shall cost you your lives. And with
these words, he lay^^ hand on his sword, and with great lightness he ran where
those villains were, these miserable clownes with two forches which they had
in their hands did abide his coming, and stroke with them upon his hard sheeld
each of them a blow, but this knight with other two blows did overthrow them
dead to the ground, and went unto the Gentlewoman, and cut the cords wherewith
she was bound, and did help to cover her with her own clothes. This heavy
Gentlewoman though she did see her self free from the villains and at
liberty, yet did she not let to persevere in her sorrowful lamentation, and
said: Ah knight, the defender of my corporal death, whereby living I do pass a
thousand deaths, I say that my sorrow and evil was such, yt with more reason I
may bewail the life which thou have given me, then the death which I am
delivered from. And in saying these words she all to tare and rent her golden
hair which she had. This pitiful knight did procure to disturb her from
doing to her self such violence, in offering unto her all his power and
strength for to remedy her evil, if it were possible to be remedied. This
sorrowful lady said: If thou were such a knight, that with they great valor
and strength could set at liberty my heart from sorrow, as thou have
delivered my body from death, I would declare unto thee the greatest mishap
that ever happened unto woman, and thereby thou should understand whether I
have reason rather to desire the death, then to live, therefore gentle knight,
I do desire thee to sit down and to hearken unto me with attentive ear, for
that my justice will move and constrain thee to take my defense as thine own,
and so they sat down under a great Pine tree which was hard by whereas she was
bound, and with great abundance of tears she said.

After the loss of the Princess Graualesa, they took out of the monestarie
of Basilea, the Princess Dondelaria, and amongst all them that were chosen to
be at her service and commandment, I was taken for one, for yt I was daughter
unto parents, of whom they made great reckoning, and again, for yt I was very
diligent in my service, and my father is ye Earl of Bura, so it fell out (yt
it had been better to ye contrary) There came to the court the daughter of ye
Earl of Tirol, who was of a marvelous and extreme beauty, who was at her
entry accompanied with many worthy Knights, for that all did respect the
Earl very much, because he was a very noble man. At the great fame and
report of this daughter of the Earl of Tirol, for that she was of so
excellent beauty, came many young Knights out of diverse countries to see her,
amongst whom came two brethren, jolly young gentlemen, and sons unto the
Earl of Olanda, and a cousin of theirs, a valiant Knight, son unto the Duke
of Brabant. There was no great friendship betwixt these two brethren as it
appeared, because they were of different condition the one from the other, and
likewise great difference in their persons: for that the eldest had a very
fierce countenance, and ill favored, and of great pride: and the youngest of
a severe and gentle countenance, and very humble of person, and was well
beloved of all them in the Court. Both of them set their eyes upon Clarentina,
daughter unto the Earl of Tirol, and for a farther evil, that false Cupide
would not, but that she should likewise set her eyes on one of them, bringing
her heart into captivity with the love of Pinorante, the youngest of the two
brethren. Firidefonte who was the eldest having understanding thereof, (being
governed by his great pride) and seeing the small account that Clarentina made
of him, the devil straight ways put into his head, (with the great ieelousie
that he had) for to kill his brother: but many days after, he went
meruailously troubled, with great alterations in his thought, about the doing
of ye wicked deed, sometimes overcome by brotherly love to leave that
enterprise, and at other times counseled by his own cholar to the contrary.
And in this sort he continued a long time, till in the end, Clarentina did
utter more at large her good will unto his brother, and upon a time he saw them
talking together, which was the occasion to confirm in him that damnable
intent. Wherefore upon a night as Pinorante was walking on the back side of the
Court, his evil brother did kill him with great cruelty, and leaving him upon
the ground, he returned unto his lodging, and it was never known, who was the
murderer of him, and for that the fraternall blood could not let but to wound
very much his heart, considering the evil fact which he had done, he straight
way repented himself thereof, which was afterward a farther evil, and
for so much as the devil was lodged in his heart, this his evil pretense did
not rest with the death of his brother, but gathered in his thought to do a
fact far worser, and the occasion was, for that Clarentina made so great
lamentation for the death of that unhappy Pinaronte, and this was the
presumption that he would use, ordained by the devil, and it so fell out, that
I was wounded by that false Cupide with the love of Firidefonte, not having
any respect unto the ill fauorednesse of his face, and being constrained by
the greeuousnes of my wound, I gave him clearly to understand thereof, which was
the occasion yt he was the bolder to do that which he did, and seeing me so
captive in love of him, he was in no doubt to discover unto me his whole heart,
all the which he told me, being in place where boldly he might speak. And he
said: Ah Clarentina my very friend, I have had great desire to have had this
opportunity for to talk with thee, and to discover my whole heart. Thou have
well seen this unhappy and cruel death of my unfortunate brother, thou shall
understand that Clarentina was the occasion of his death, but and if thou will
do that which now I will desire thee, I do here swear unto thee by the high
and mighty God, yt there shall none be Lady of my heart but alonely thy
beauty, then I (unhappy and without all good fortune) being wholly yielded and
so overcome with his love, did offer my self to do all that which his
pleasure was to command me. Then this traitor with dissembling words
said: I always had this good opinion in you my love, that you would
accomplish my request. Well, thou shall now understand that I do pretend to
accuse Clarentina for the murder of my brother, and the better to bring to
pass my desire, I will say that thou art witness thereunto, and do know
the certainty thereof. Then I thinking to obtain that which so long time I
had desired, did promise him to do it, as by the proof it should plainly
appear. And with this conclusion he departed from me, and went and gave his
cousin Rodelando to understand of it, who is one of the strongest and
valyauntest knights in all this Country, and Rodelando believing that it
should be true, did offer himself to be the second in the defense in helping
of his cousin, and so both of them went and made their accusation before the
Emperor, the Emperor commanded me to be called before him, for to declare
what I did know therein, and did accomplish and perform all that I had
promised. Then this faultlesse Lady seeing her self so falsely accused, did
weep very grievously, desiring the Emperor to appoint a time that she might
seek one for to make answer in her defense, and for to prove that it was
all false that was laid against her. So it was agreed, that in the space of
two months she should bring a knight that should defend her honor, and if
so be that she could not, that then she should be condemned according unto
the law, that is, to burn her quick, and in the mean time that she should
be put into a tower, and there well and strongly kept, not forbidding any,
whosoever he were, natural or stranger, but that he might lawfully make
battle in her defense. So likewise they commanded that I should be put in
another tower, that if it were so that I should be found a liar, that I should
be punished with her provided death. So I when I understood it was in a great
fear, and went priuelye unto the lodging of Firidefonte, of whom I was very
well received, and faining that he would send me into his Country, he put all
things in order for my journey, and gave me these two villains whom thou have
slain to be my keepers, who brought me hither, and brought me unto the point as
you found me. And as I do believe it came determined from thence, for that his
evil pretense should not be discovered. Here you may understand sir knight,
wherefore I said that it had been better to have let me ben slain then to live
with so great grief. And now that I have told you all the matter, and the
truth, here I do desire you, that if there be in you any bounty, (as it does
appear and show by your presence) that thou will take upon thy own charge
this battle and defense, for that I would (seeing that I have been the
occasion of all this evil and trouble happened unto this guiltless Lady, in
giving false evidence) be the means whereby she might receive remedy for the
same. This Tinacrian was very much amazed to hear of such an entangled and
false forged matter: and for that he was one that did procure to aid and help
the afflicted, he did very freely offer himself, to procure to make her
defense. At this instant the dawning of the day appeared, and the Prince took
the Gentlewoman, and went whereas the Knight of Bauier was, and did awake him,
and gave him to understand, of all that the Gentlewoman had told him, who
incontinent did offer himself to be the second in the battle for her defense.
When the Queen was all in a readiness to travail on their journey and all
the rest, they made great have, and took the way which led them unto Espira,
and carried the Gentlewoman with her face covered, that she might not be
known. So when they came with in a mile of the City of Espira, they must
needs pass a great and mighty broad river, whereas they left Candisea in a
dayrie house, giving great charge that she should be well looked unto, and the
Queen and all the rest passed the River in a bark, and never staid till they
entered into the city, and had their helmes on, and their shields at their
backs. This strong and stout Tinacrian rode mounted upon his temerous beast,
with so great and goodly a demeanor, that all which did behold him, greatly
meruailed what knight it should be, of so great and comely stature, and when
they saw the devise of the tree and broken branch on his shield, they
straight ways know that he was the Knight that had slain the Gyaunts, for
that they had heard the news there of in the Court, which was the occasion
that much people, did follow him to behold his face, if he did put off his helm,
to see if they could know him. So these two knights and the Queen (with all
the people that followed him) came unto the Emperors pallaice, whereas the
Prince did alight, and taking the Queen in his arms, he took her from her
Palfraie and lead her by the right hand, so with a very gentle and comely
grace they went up into a royal hall, and Macedonio remained below and kept
their horses. When they entered they found the Emperor accompanied with all
his nobility, and the knight was known unto the^ al by the device of his
sheeld, and therefore al people did approach to know wherefore his coming was,
and greatly meruailed at his big stature and gentle disposition, and they all
kept silence to hear what the knight of the Branch would say, who when he
was before the Emperor made a show of his high lignage from whence he did
descend, in making of his dutiful reverence. The Emperor having knowledge of
his person by ye report which he had heard, did return his salutation in
equal manner, and when the Emperor would have spoken, the valiant knight of
the branch did disturb him and said.

High and mighty Lord, the fame which I have heard of your great virtue has
encouraged me to come into thy kingdom, with intent to yield my self into
your service, if that your highness be content therewith, which if you will not
permit, yet at least to suffer me according to equity, to show the strength
of my arm upon certain thy subjects, at the which I do desire thee not to
receive any displeasure, for yt thou art accounted to be very right and just,
for such is the fame that is reported of thee through the world, and I
understanding yt thou wilt rejoice in all yt which is true, and also for that
the truth might be justified, as it is reason, although the one part has
showed with witness and words his matter to be of truth yet for all that at
all times they ought not to be believed, but that the contrary party must
likewise be heard, for that thereby rightly may be showed and declared the
equity of justice, I do not speak this for that your highness has
determined any thing without hearing of both parties, but for that it is
brought unto another trial, and referred by your majesty to the trial of
arms, to justify the right of either part, and named a space, in the which
that faultlesse Gentlewoman, daughter unto the Duke of Tirol, should seek one
for to defend her honor and right, being falsely accused for a murderer,
partly for this thing also am I come before thy high presence, to make them
understand their wicked pretense and false accusation which they have raised on
her without desert, and if they be here present, let them mark what I say,
and if not, let your highness command that they may be advertised hereof, for
that I will make them to know that it is great falsehoode and treason in that
they have accused Clarentina.

These two cosins were there present and heard very well his words, and
Rodelando without any respect unto the emperor, taking his cousin Firidefonte
by the hand, stepped forth with a furious countenance and said: Here thou have
before thee they whom thou do demand for, behold us well, and let not thy
youthful courage deceive thee, giving enterprise upon that, of which the
sons of the Emperor Trebatio would make doubtful, therefore look what thou
do determine, and give us our answer, and that quicklye. The Knight of the
Branch in the mean time that Rodelando was saying these words, did very
much behold and view him, and it seemed unto him that he was a Knight of
great valor, but yet for all that his strong members did not dismaie him, but
with a grave speech and severe countenance he answered: If thou have so much
haste to know my determination, here I do say that in the accusation that
thou have put against Clarentina, thou do lie like a false Knight, and that
thy cousin like a cruel murderer does deserve the death for killing of his
own Brother, committed by his own hands, who was more worthy in all
respects then he is. Then Firidefonte with great fury answered and said.

O vile ribalde, how can I suffer so great evil, to be charged with that
which that naughty woman has committed and caused to be done, if thou were
not before the Emperor it should cost th^e full dear, and out of hand thou
should have thy payment for this great lie, but yet I do comfort my self,
for that very quickly I will be revenged on thee. I cannot declare the great
anger which the knight of the Branch received, for that he turned up the
white of his eyes, and all his face waxed wanne and black, and trembling with
very anger moving his pace he said. I do promise thee thou traitor, that I
will make thee with thy own mouth confess this great treason which thou have
committed, and if it were not but that I am before so high an Emperor, here
in this place without going any farther, with my fists like a vile traitor I
would make thee to confess it. Here Firidefonte had no patience to hear
these things spoken to his face, but like a tiger he leapt unto him and wrapped
his cloak about his arm and drew out his sword, and went against the knight
of the Branch. This worthy warrior thereat made no kind of moving, but did
abide his coming, making an outward show of the great valor of his heart,
Firidefonte did strike at him with his sword, but the knight of the Branch
stepped on the one side, and made him to loose his blow, so that his sword
stroke on the ground, and like unto the wind he closed with him, and stroke
him with his hands on the breast with so great fury and strength, that without
having any power to save himself, he gave a great fall backwards to the
ground, Rodelando seeing that on the best side entered to him, and did embrace
him, and held him very strongly between his arms. Then this gentle knight
drew out his swoorde, and having his arm aloft he stroke a blow, the which
chanced upon a young man called Polio, of Velduque, son unto the Duke of
Velduque, and that cruel sword did light upon his head, and cutting it in two
parts, the young man fell down dead to the ground. Now was it not requisite
that the Tinacrian should remain in the arms of Rodelando, but with great
strength he did ruste him self, and threw him from him. At yt time the whole
Court was in a tumult for the death of Polio, and every one drew out his
sword and did very sore assalt the knight of ye Branch, but he with his
sword made such a slaughter amongst them, that they did very well feel and
understand the valiantness of his heart, and the great noise and crieng out of
the Emperor, neither his imperial presence was sufficient to appease them. At
this time the Emperors guard came into the hall, who were commanded that with
their halberts they should endeavor to part them, then the Emperor went to lay
hand on Firidefonte, the beginner of all this tumult, but he putting himself
in defense went forth of the hall, so likewise did Rodelando, ye Emperor
seeing that, laid hand on the Bauiero, who with great humility did obey his
Lord, he would have done yt like unto Poliphebo, but he put the point of his
sword before him and said: Keep your highness back, for that I am none of
them that so lightly will be taken prisoner, take and put in prison thy own
vassalles, such as has had little respect unto thy presence, and let not them
which are not of thy kingdom pay for this thy anger. The emperor very angry
said: If my vassalls are in the fault, they shall have their punishment, and
thou also if thou do deserve it, therefore yield thy self to prison, if not,
understand that it will be to thy cost. I know not what will fall out herein,
said the Tinacrian, but with my good will neither you nor all yours shall triumph
of my imprisonment, and before that this does come to pass, I will make more
then one thousand of them that do pretend to take me prisoner loose their
lives. Then the Emperor with a loud voice commanded to fake him, at which
words all the whole guard together pressed at him, but this valiant knight did
determine that in spite of them all he would clear and set himself at
liberty, there did he begin to do wonderful feats of arms, breaking and
cutting a sunder those sharp Halberts, and killing and wounding that it was
terrible to behold. All the people feeling and seeing the effect of his
rigorous arm, did give him way and let him go till he came to the stayres,
there they began to assault him a new with very much people, and amongst
them some armed knights. The Knight when he saw that he could not pass in
quiet, he was clean without any patience, and not fearing death but
forgetting policy, he firmed himself, and throwing his shield at his back,
he took his sword in both his hands, and laid about him on every side, and
like unto a furious Lion he pressed amongst the people, cutting, killing and
wounding, for to have way to descend ye stairs. At that time was the Knight in
great peril, for that those which were before him, did persecute him with the
sharp points of their halberds, and likewise those which were behind him did
the like: in such sort, that the Knight being on the stairs, could not
turn himself at his pleasure: but yet all that ever they did, did little
avail or profit them, for that with the great fury which he had, he pressed
upon them that were before him, and what with killing and wounding, he forced
them to give him way to descend down ye stairs, where he found many people
fallen down with the great have they had to fly from him. And when he saw
that he could not pass by reason of the people, he gave a great leap, and
with wonderful lightness he passed over the people that were fallen, and went
unto the place whereas Macedonio did abide his coming, with his great beast,
and with strange lightness he lept upon his back, and rode into the great court,
whereas he was assaulted of very much people, for that the Emperor at the
windows cried out upon them to take him. The knight of the branch, when he
found himself mounted upon his great and light beast, then he feared nothing,
and pricking him with the spurs, encouraging him with a showte, he passed
down the street, and never stayed, till he came unto the rivers side, and
passed in the bark unto the other side, and determined not to depart from
thence, till such time as he had seen an end of that which touched the justice
of Clarentina, and also to recover again his Lady the queen, who with great
affliction, as a woman all alone, put her self out of the prease of Knights,
and abode in a corner of the great Hall, to keep her self from harm. The
people of the Emperor, which followed the Knight of the Branch, when they saw
him pass with his great beast so swiftly, they returned back again whereas
the Emperor was, whom they found very much amazed at the great prowess of
this knight. The Earl of Maguntia who likewise followed the knight, at his
returning again he found Macedonio, and took him and carried him before the
Emperor and said: This is Page unto that devil, who to our cost and spite of
our teeth is gone away. The Emperor did behold him and saw that he was of a
good disposition and had a fair face, he asked of him and said: Tell me my
friend, how do thou call thy Lord, is he by fortune some devil, for that
according as he has showed himself unto us, it cannot be but that he is some
infernal creature. This young Gentleman with great deliberation said: My Lord
is a humane creature and son unto a humane man, and more mightier then your
highness, for you shall understand that he is son unto the Emperor Trebatio,
Emperor of Grecia, and his mother is the queen Garrofilea Queen of Tinacria,
and your highness shall understand that he is a knight that will reward (and
that very well) all the harm and grief which is done unto him, with
whatsoever knight he be in all the world, the Lady which he brought with him
is of high estate, for you shall understand that she is a great Lady and a
queen. The Emperor when he heard this, he looked about for her, and saw her
in a corner of the hall very sore afflicted, and commanded that she should
be carried with great honor and reverence whereas ye Empres was, and with
great anger he returned unto Macedonio and said: I will see how far the power
will, extend of this devil, for that he shall not have thee, neither his
Lady, till such time as I have him in my power. All that the Emperor said was
heard by a brother of Clarentinas, who was called Laurentino, that came unto
the court that present day, and being very much moved, he said: Your highness
does very ill in entreating my sister so evil, is this the reward for the
great service which I and my father have done for you, to procure for to
destroy and kill him, who respecting our honor, does put his person in
adventure to deliver my sister from that false accusation laid against her,
and the other which came in his company thou have put in prison, and not
content heerewith, but do keep in thy power from him a Lady and his Page,
it should suffice thee to know who they are, and the highness of their
lineage, and not in such sort to do them wrong, my Lord, moderate your self
and do justice, for that hitherto you have been a friend in doing justice and
right, and do not blemish this day with thy great pride the high fame which
in so many years thou have gotten. The Emperor who was blind and overcome
with anger, and very wrathful he said: Get thee hence in an evil hour unto
thy lodging, for that thy sister shall neither win nor loose for thy speech.
This valiant young man did answer: For that you are my Emperor and Lord you
may entreat me in this order, but if that reason did now govern your breast,
you would do more justice then by your outward show you do mean to do,
therefore now I do say, let them take heed who is in the fault, for that
with my person and goods I do determine to make my defense, and to aid and
succor him, who for my sister does put his life in adventure. And in saying
these words he departed out of the great hall, leaving the Emperor full of
cholar and wrath, who commanded to bury the dead bodies, and Polio with great
honor. His death was very sore lamented of many, for that he was well beloved
of all ye court. Then they gave the Emperor to understand how that the knight
whom he had in prison was son unto the Duke of Bauiera, for the which he
received great grief, for that he was son unto one of the mightyest Lords
that was in all Almaine, his power was so great, that he and the power of
Laurentino were able to maintain wars against the Emperor. So considering
all things, the Emperor in his own person went and took the Knight out of
prison, of whom he understood all that happened in the Castle of the Rock,
and likewise the truth of the treason of Firidefonte, and being in this
communication, they heard in the Court a great rumor, and going to see what
was the occasion thereof, they saw that there was brought two dead Knights
upon two horses, and had on either of them a marvelous great and cruel
wound^, which was as it appeared the occasion of their deaths, whereas we will
leave them, for that the fury of this Tinacrian does compel me to declare the
end of this conflict, as in the Chapter following you shall understand.

How the Tinacrian was tarrying to see if any would come forth against him,
for that which was past, and how that Rodelando and his cousin made battle
with him, and how he overcame them both. Chap. 26.
Even as the furious Faunus in the mountains of Tartarie, does cover his great
and brutall members with the branches of ye mighty Pine trees, working
policies to get his pray, for yt he cannot find whereon to execute his anger,
for to satisfy his capital enemy, hunger: even so and rather more furious
was this Tinacrian, abiding the coming of Macedonio, or any other yt
peradventure might follow him, he blasphemed against the Gods and looked up
unto the heavens, and said: So long as I believe in them, there will nothing
prosper with me, nor in any thing will my honor increase. And being in this
speech he saw coming ye way which he came, two well proportioned knights,
mounted upon two mighty horses, who when the came unto the waters side, in
great have they called for the bark, and looking round about them to see if
they could epsy their enemy, they saw him on the other side of the river,
unto whom with a loud voice they called, and did defy him to mortal battle,
the knight of the branch when he heard them call, he made himself ready, and
entering into the bark he said: Tarry there and I will come over to see if you
do seek me or not, and therewith he made great have with the bark, and when he
came nigh unto the shore he mounted upon his mighty beast, and with a light
leap he was a land. Then one of those knights with an high voice said: Now sir
traitor, thou shall pay ye great offense which thou did unto me before ye
Emperor, for thou shall understand yt I am Rodelando, and this other is my
cousin Firidefonte. When ye Tinacrian heard this, without tarrying for any more
words, he set hand unto his sword and said: Oh traitors, how your faults has
brought you to receive ye payment for your treason at my hands, and now in
place where your tresons shall not profit you, and in saying these words he
stroke Rodelando such a blow yt he made him to fall backwards upon the horse
crouper. Then Firidefonte entered in to him on the one side, and stroke the
Tinacrian such a blow upon the helm that it made a sound as though he had
stroke upon a bell, and made him decline his head unto his breast, but quickly
he settled himself again, and lift up his rigorous arm and stroke him such a
blow upon his shulder, yt it made him to shrink in his body with the great
pain he felt: at ye time Rodelando was come unto himself and settled again,
very much troubled at ye great valor of ye knight, and throwing his shield
unto ye ground he stroke the knight such a blow on the one side of his helm,
yt he made him to decline his head upon his beasts neck, who being scarred with
ye blow, gave a great leap from the^, which did not a little vantage the
Tinacrian, for yt Firidefonte came to discharge his blow upon him, and by
reason yt the beast did leap on the one side, he could not execute that blow:
in which time without receiving any other blow, the prince settled himself again
in his saddle, and found nigh unto him Firidefonte, who followed to strike him,
to whom he gave such an overthwart blow upon his b^uer, yt with the sparkles of
fire which flewe out thereof, he singed his brows and eye lids, and made him
to fall backwards upon his horse crouper without any remembrance, and therewith
Rodelando pressed unto the Tinacrian, whereas began a great and perilous
battle, this Tinacrian with great lightness entered in and out with his
enemies, without receiving any harm, and stroke them with so great fury, yt
they wist not what to do, and it could not be chosen but yt he must needs
receive some harm, for yt he dealt with two of the best knights in all Almaine.
In this sort they endured two hours and he had brought these two knights into
great weariness, and all their bodies were covered with blood, and feeling
themselves so troubled, Firidefonte hallowed with a loud voice, At which call
there came forth out of a little grove ten armed knights with their speres on
their rests, and made their way against the Tinacrian, who seeing them coming,
was nothing afraid, but pricking his great beast with the spurs he put
himself betwixt the two cousins, which was the occasion that these ten Knights
could not execute there furious blows. The Tinacrian did throw his shield at
his back, and took his sword fast in both his hands, and firmed himself in
his stirrops, and stroke Feridefonte, such a blow upon the helm, that
although it had been of a fine Diamond, he had broken it all to pieces, for the
fury of his blow was such, that he cloue the hea^me and head of that furious
Firidefonte down to the breast, so that he fell down dead to ye ground, and
having done this he found himself compassed about with all the other
knights, upon whom he began to strike marvelous great and furious blows, in
such sort, that in a small time he brought six of them to the ground,
Rodelando having opportunity, with both his hands stroke him so terrible a
blow, that he made him with his beauer to touch the ears of his beast, the^
all the rest laid upon him, but they did no more harm then if they had stroke
upon an Anfield, but when the Tinacrian was come unto himself finding Rodelando
by him, who without all pity laid upon him, he tu^ned his sword about his
head, and stroke him such a blow upon his left arm, his sword being governed
by the force of his worthy hand, yt he brake the steely armor, and cut flesh
and bone with so great fury, that the head with the right shoulder blade was
divided from the body, and he fell down dead to the ground.

Then all the rest which remained, when they saw so great slaughter, trusting
more unto the lightness of their Horses, then unto the strength of their
arms, determined to fly. But the Knight of the Branch perceiving it, and
having a very light beast, put himself betwixt them and their way, saying: If
you will not receive the death, stay, and do that which I will tell you, and
I will let you go at liberty: and they seeing yt if they did it not with a
good will, they should do it spite of their hearts, they did strayghte way
consent, unto whatsoever he would command, and returning them all, he did
command them to take the bodies of Feridefonte and Rodelando, and to put them
upon two horses, and that from him they should carrye them unto the Emperor,
and tell him all that which he should say unto them. So they did accomplish
his commandment, and they came unto the Court, at such time as the night
began to appear.

These were the two dead bodies which the Emperor saw brought into the Court,
at such time as they had little care of any such matter: So they that brought
these dead bodies, went up into the great hall, and when they were before the
Emperor, they said: High and mighty Emperor, the Knight of the Branch does
send unto your highness, two furious Knights, Rodelando and Fe^^^efonte, in
this sort as you do see them, desiring your ^^ghnesse to send unto him, his
Lady and his Page, and likewise to clear and deliver out of prison his
companion, and that fair Clarentina, for that it is very apparaunt that she
was falsely accused, as he, and the Dukes son of Bauiero, do well know, of
whom your Highness may very well certefie your self. Likewise if there be
any Knight in all your Court, that will stand in contention, and defend the
contrary, being one, or ten, that he alone with his person will defend it.
And if so be that your highness will not do this right and Justice, he is
determined to do unto you all the harm and damage that he may. And to
conclude, in defense of this right, he does defy thy Imperial Crown and all
thy royal estate: and the better to satisfy thy mind, he will deliver unto
thee Candisea, for that of her thou shall understand all the whole truth of the
matter, with condition that she receive no hurt nor harm unto her person, for
that she has repented her self of the fact done.

The Emperor, who was very attentive, and hearkened unto the Embassage sent
with so great pride, was in a maze, and greatly meruailed in such sort that he
could not speak, but when he came unto himself, he said. Oh God, and what may
this be, that there is so much power and strength in this one Knight, that
within my kingdom, yea, within my pallaice, he does these acts without fear,
and with this ire he took Florisarte, by the hand and entered into his
chamber whereas betwixt them there was very much a do, with hold and keep. So
when he was well advertised who the knight and the Lady were, he was fully
determined to set at liberty Clarentina, and Macedonio, and to send them unto
the Knight, jointly with the Lady, and that Florisarte should bear them
company, till such time as they had delivered them unto the Knight, and that
they should of his part request him to remain in the Court, for that therewith
he should receive great contentment: so according unto the Emperors
commandment Florisarte went, and in his company Laurentino, who when he saw
his sister clear of so great evil was very ioyfufull. So they stayed not in
any place, till such time as they came unto the passage, whereas they found
that invincible knight, who when he saw them, he was right joyful and received
marvelous delight, and much more when they told him that Clarentina was at
her liberty: and when he heard the message of the Emperor in requesting him
to remain in his Court, he surrendered unto him great thanks for the same, and
sent to request him to pardon and forgive Candisea. There Florisarte and
Laurentino did promise him on their parts to importunate the Emperor
thereunto, and heerewith they took their leave the one of the other, the
Tinacrian did pass over the river, and the rest returned unto the City with
the knights answer, the which (...) unto the Emperor, and when he saw that
he (...) not tarry and remain with him, he was very sorrowful. Laurentino
when he saw the Emperors sorrow said: High and mighty Lord, he was by us very
much persuaded, who does kiss your highness hands, and said that he could
not in any wise stay longer, for that he had other great matters in charge,
which needs must be accomplished: and does most heartely request your
highness, to make reckoning of him as of your own, where, and in whatsoever
your highness will or shall command him, and for a recompense of the same, he
does request your highness for to pardon and forgive Candisea all her fault
and offense, for that she was blinded by love, and again her fault does
deserve pardon, for that she sought remedy, against that false accusation.
Likewise we do pray and desire your highness of our part to perform the
same. The Emperor did straight grant unto all their request, and as the ire
and wrath did loose their superiority over him, he showed himself to be very
sorrowful, to have lost out of his court so valiant a Knight. Then Laurentino
did importunate his sister for to ask license of the Emperor for to return
unto Tirol, the which was granted them: so they carried in their company the
Bauiero, and passing through Augusta, they came unto Minique, whereas they
remained a time with great feasts and triumphs. And when they saw that it was
time to depart, they took their way to Espruch, a City of the Earldom of
Tirol: and passing over the Alps, they were taken prisoners by a mighty
Giaunt, and twenty armed knights upon such a sudden, that they could not make
any defense: but all their company were slain* and the rest prisoners, as the
two knights. Florisarte and Laurentino, and the Lady his sister. The Giant and
his company took their way through the mountains, toward the land of
Esguizaros: but the third day of their captivity and imprisonment, they saw
coming down by the Rivers side, a knight armed with very rich armor, his
stature was such, that he seemed to be a very good Knight, and in his company
he had two very fair Ladies. This Knight came all ready to the battle, his
shield in good order, and his spear in his hand, put upon his right thigh with
a very good grace and demeanor. But before I do tell you who this Knight is,
I must first show you of all that happened unto the Tinacrian, after that he
departed from the Emperor.

How the Emperor Alphebo would have persuaded the Princess Tigliafa to leave
that lamentable life, and how she refused to do it, and went from them, and
how the two Knights departed, and of all that happened unto them in their
igurney. Cap. 27.
THis valiant Tinacrian travailed so fast over the Mountains, that in a short
space he left them behind him. So likewise he did thorough Hungaria and
Samaria, and passed thorough Thracia, Misia, Dardenia, and Macedonia, and came
unto the principal part of all Grecia unto Constantinople. This Tinacrian
chanced upon many adventures in this his journey, as recompencing of griefs,
and rightening of wrongs, and setting at liberty of compulsions, as well unto
knights as unto Ladies and Gentlewomen: but in especial against Giaunts in
battle, killing and destroying. In such sort, that the fame of the Knight of
the Branch was in all parts, and especially amongst the Knights of Grecia:
insomuch, that they did not talk of any acts and deeds past of Emperors and
Princes, but all was of this valiant Tinacrian. Likewise ye fame of the Purple
Knight was there amongst them, which was no less, then that of the Tinacrian.
And if it be so, that I do tell you no more of this good Tinacrian, it is not
for ye Artemidoro has not declared it: but considering the great antiquity of
the time, it was because he yt did write this, could not read it, therefore he
does declare that which he could read. This History says, that when this
Tinacrian came within a mile of Constantinople, the night came upon them, and
he did determine to pass it away in a thick Orcharde that was there nigh the
high way, and hanged his shield upon the bough of a tree: and by reason of
the weariness of his journey, he slept as one that was without all care. The
Lady put her self farther into the orchard, and in this sort, they passed away
the night, till the morning came. At which time there chanced an adventure,
which for to declare in order, I must return unto the Knight of the Sun,
whereas we left him, and as you have heard, he was beholding the ceremonies
of the Princes Tigliafa, which she used over the body of Zoylo, upon her knees
with a sorrowful lamentation. The Knight of the Sun the better to understand
what she said, pulled off his helm, and then he heard that she said as
follows.

I do not know wherefore I do loose so much time in this sorrowful
lamentation, for that it is not sufficient for to deliver me from the sorrow
and grief, which continuallye I am afflicted with. Uery heavy I am for thee
my Zoylo, and being without thy company, I knew not how I live. It were better
for me at once to end my sorrow, procuring with my own hands, to go and bear
thee company. Oh sorrowful Lady, how do thou live without thy well-beloved?
How do thou sustain thy self, without thy life? That day in the which thou
did lose him, that day it had happened well unto thee, if thou had lost
thine own life: but in the end will come an end, that thou shall go to seek
him, in giving thy self cruel death.

And with this she made an end of her lamentation, for that lifting up her
eyes, she saw how the two knights were very attentive unto that which she said.
And giving a terrible and grievous sigh, she arose up in great have, and
entered into the chamber whereas she came forth, and with great wrath she
shut the door, making within the chamber, marvelous lamentations. The
Emperor Alphebo went thither, to see if he could open the door, but he found
it very fast shut, as one who had the Fortress made by the wise Lyrgandeo and
so likewise did he bring that monster for to keep her, that she might be
troubled of no body. The Emperor Alphebo seeing that his calling was in vain,
departed and went out with his company, and mounting upon their Beasts they did
prosecute their journey. So all the rest of the day almost they trauayled in
the same Forest, And when it was toward night, they found themselves in the
broad and beaten way of Pyreo, which went unto Constantinople, of the which
they were very joyful: and he did determine to go unto the Emperor his
father for to kiss his hands, and so they directed their way unto
Constantinople. They had not ridden long, when that they heard a great noise
of hunters which followed their game, and they came toward the place where as
they were, for that the night drew on: and they understood by some of the
huntsmen, that the Emperor was in that hunt, who for his recreation at that
time came forth, and had in his company the Empress, and the fair Oliuia, who
was very sorrowful for the absence of Rosicleer. When the Emperor Alphebo knew
that they were there, he went unto their tents, and there did not lack them
which did advertise the Emperor and the Empress, who with much joy went out
to receive him, as he would have entered. And when Alphebo was before her, he
fell down upon his knees: then the Empress with tears of great joy did embrace
him, and spoke words of maternall love. Then was he received of the fair
Oliuia, and of all the Princes and Ladies that were there. Likewise they
received and gave great intertainment unto the King of Sardenia, for that he
was well-beloved of them al, from the time that he made battle with the Giant
in the Imperial Pallaice. And being in this pleasure the Emperor came with as
much speed as he could, and there began a new the welcomming of Alphebo and
the king, with so much joy and pleasure unto al, that I cannot express it. So
there they passed that night till the morning, and when all things was put in
order, they heard divine service, and went to breakfast, with pretense to
return again unto their hunting. So when they were a taking up of the
tables, they heard a great rumor of Servant, and of the running and coursing
of horses. The Emperor Alphebo arose from the Table, and putting on his helm,
he went out of the Tent, whereas he found in a readiness his horse, and with
great lightness he mounted on him, and rode toward the place from whence ye
noise came, and upon a sudden he saw come riding two knights, and after them
followed one knight of a marvelous disposition, with Purple armor all to be
spotted with stars of gold, likewise his sheeld was purple, upon the which
was put for the device a knight who seemed to have the same device, his eyes
shut by reason that certain Sun beams did strike on them, the which seemed
to proceed out of the face of another knight. This Purple knight brought his
sword in his hand all naked, in manner as though he would strike ye other two
which ran away. The Emperor Alfebo did reprehend the two knights for their
running away, and put himself before them. At this instant we must leave the
Emperor and his knights, for to return unto the Pastor Claridiano, whom we
left with his sweet music, and his Lute in his hand, compassed round about
with a company of shepherds, having her before him, whose beauty did make
him to disguise himself in that base apparel, and she was set upon the
green grass, whereas she might with good attention hear the delicate
sweetness of this new shepherds music. Also all the rest of the shepherds
had no small admiration as well thereat, as at the sweet melody he used in
singing, and at sundrie-times he sent forth deep sighs, so that it made all
the shepherds hearts to melt, and the very birds which did fly in the
forest did stay and were astonished at his sweet music. So when he was
weary of playing and singing, the amorous sight of the Pastora did grant him
no farther lisence, but that with a few tears he cast down his humbled eyes,
and began to wring his hands. The Pastora did very much behold him, and it
seemed unto her that in all her life she had not seen so much fairness in a
man imagining with her self that he was some worthy knight. So straight way
she took Galismena by the hand, and arose up from the place whereas she was
set, and did ^ooke upon the shepherd, giving him to understand, that her sight
should be unto him more at commandment, then to all the rest of ye
shepherds there a long the river, and with great majesty she turned her back,
as though she had perfectly known whose daughter she had been, leaving all them
in a great confusion at the first, who did separate themselves every one to
his way, for when they saw that they could have no longer sight of that fair
Pastora, ^hey all departed, and none remained but Filepensio, Coridon, and
Alphesiuio. This Filepensio was brought into that perplexity, (that although
he had the vauntage of all the campanie in bravery and stomach) yet he could
not persuade himself to the contrary, but he waxed so lean and feeble, in
such sort, that it appeared in his face his great affliction. Coridon which did
well perceive his grief, and wringing both his hands, he said: Ah fair and
gentle shepherd, very apparent thou do give to understand thy sorrow and
grief, and likewise by my sonets thou do understand my pain. This is the
Pastora that has all these valleys full of the amorous fire of love, and
look in how so much Nature has endued her with beauty and fairness: even
so great a majesty has she accompanied with her cruelty, that there is no
shepherd that can suffer it. This is the Pastora for whom the name of this
flowred field is lost, whether as all Shepherds does resort to keep and
feed their sheep, but once having a sight of her, then all their care is
lost, their sheep goes a straie, and they give place unto cruel love to
enter into their hearts, and there he does satisfy his cruel appetite, in
such sort, that all their delight is to paint and set forth their amorous
songs, believing thereby to abate the cruelty of her stony heart, and yet
there is no more show of remorse, then is in the hard rock beaten with a
mighty storm of hail.

Ah Filepensio, I see now that thou art a new lover, and yet by beholding thee
thou seem to be an old lover. This new shepherd would have made him
answer, but he was cut off by a heavy noise which he heard amongst the
trees, which seemed to be of the Pastora, and crying out with more vehemency,
he heard that it were shrikes of the Pastora, and Galismena, which being heard
by the shepherds, with great alteration they ran that way whereas the noise
was, and by reason that in lightness and love this new shepherd did exceed
all the rest, he was the first that came unto the place, and saw that there
was a Giant, and with him a well proportioned knight, who had fast hold of the
Pastora, and with the point of his sword pricked the hands of Galismena to make
her let go her hold, for that she embraced the Pastora in her arms with
great strength. At that time came Filepensio, and with a great noise he said.

Thou vile knight and false traitor, I charge thee stand still, and not lay
hands upon the delicate Pastora, and taking his shepheardes crook in his
hand, which was both knottie and hard, with the same hardiness as though he
had been armed with complet armor, he pressed toward them. The knight with
great anger for that which the shephearde had said, drew out his sword,
pretending with one blow to return those words of the shepherd, but he that
knew very well how to use himself, stepped on the one side and made him to
strike his blow in vain, at which time the shepherd entered in to him by the
one side, and stroke him so terrible a blow with his crook upon the left
shoulder, that he overthrew him to the ground without any remembrance. The
Giant being greatly amazed at the power of the shepherd, believing that the
knight had been slain, with a great shrike let go the Pastora, and set spurs
unto his horse, thinking to ouerrun him, but it chanced not with him as he
thought, for that the shepherd was not idle, but had recovered the sword of
the overthrown knight, and having it in his hand with great discreation he did
a part himself from the furye of the horse, and in passing by stroke him on
the hinder legs with so great strength that he cut them both a sunder, and he
fell down with his master to the ground, but in such sort, that the Gyaunt
might well clear himself from his horse without receiving any harm at all,
and being on foot he presentlye laid hand upon his great and broad
Fauchon, and being void of all patience, with a devilish fury he discharged
his blow at the unarmed head of Filepensio, but the Shephearde did not
determine with himself for to abide the coming of that unmeasurable blow,
but with great lightness he put himself on the one side, so that he stroke
his blow in vain, and because his Pastora should see the great strength and
force of his arms, he took the sword fast in his hand and firmed himself
on the ground and stroke the Gyaunt on the wast on his left side, that although
his armor had been made of hard and fine Diamonds, it had not been able to
have made resistance against the fury of that great and mighty blow, which
was in such sort, that the Gyaunt was cut a sunder in the midst, so that the
one half fell on the one side and the other on the other side. All the
Shepherds that were there present were very much amazed, and likewise the
Pastoras, to see how the new shephearde at two blows had overthrown two
such knights as they were. The Pastora when she saw her self clear from
that peril, went unto Filipensio for to embrace him, and with amorous words
she said. What reward can I ^oore Pastora give, for to make satisfaction and
gratify the great good which at this present you have done me: surely I have
no other thing but to put my self into your hands, that with me you may do
your pleasure, having a respect unto my honor. Oh happy Pastora, that has
deserved by thy beauty that such a shepherd should yield himself unto
thee. Who could declare the great contentment that Filipensio received when he
saw himself embraced with the thing that in all the world he best loved, and
with that contentment he said.

Oh Goddess of all beauty and fairness, wherewith can I gratify the God
Pan, for the great force and strength which he gave me at this present? What
sacrifice can I make, to pay this benefit and joy that I do feel, in
having this my shepherds body embraced and compassed about, with these
delicate arms. This great force and strength I may attribute unto you my
sweet Pastora, for that by your fair sight my small strength did the more
augment, which was the occasion that I deserve so great favor. Fair Pastora,
I desire no other thing of you, but only to accept this which I have done in
part of a recompense of the great service which this shepherd does desire to
do unto me. At this time the knight that was without remembrance was come
unto himself again, and put himself on foot, the which when Filepensio
saw, he ceased his communication, and ran unto him with a wrathful fury,
and before that he could well settle himself, he laid hold upon his healme
with so great strength, that he pulled it from his head, breaking all the
buckles and lacings, and when they saw the knight without his healme, he was
known of all the shepherds to be the shepherd called Tarsides. Then
Alphesiuio went unto Filepensio, and requested that he would mittigate his ire,
the which this new shepherd did at his request, leaving to execute a terrible
blow which he had all aloft for to strike him. What shall I say unto you of
this Knight, when he saw himself overcome of one alone shepherd, believing
yt twenty Knights had not been able to have done it, but looking about to see
where his companion was, and saw him dead with so terrible a blow, he could
not but with great sorrow say: Oh ye Gods come down all together and do
obedyence unto this Pastora, for that she does better deserve it then all you,
whose beauty has so much force, that it encouraged one shepherd to do that
which a thousand knights durst not have given the enterprise off. Oh God Pan
how has thy power extended this day far beyond the power of all other
Gods, that thou did permit thus to be slain so mighty a king. Ah
Cayserlinga, no Pastora, but a Goddess, that only do not bring in
subjection the shepheardes, but also the high and mighty kings. Thou shall
understand Pastora, that amongst them which does bear thee company is the
Prince of Britania in disguised apparayle, and I am that unhappy prince of
Polismago, and he most unfortunate whom this shepherd has slain, was the
King of Silycia, against whom the Gods has showed themselves contrary. All
this he said with great tears which came from his heart, accompanied with
terrible sighs. The Pastora without any show of pity she had of that
Knight, arose from the place whereas she was, and with a gracious countenance
she cast her eyes upon Filipensio, she went unto her sheep, and in her company
the Pastora Galismena and Coridon, and Filipensio and Alphesiuio remained with
the sorrowful Prince, comforting him with many good persuasions, but all did
profit little, for that without saying any word with a terrible sigh he arose
up, and took his horse and put himself in amongst the thickest of the trees,
with pretense to do that which in the next chapter shall be told you.

How the Prince of Polismago returned and took prisoner the Pastora
Cayserlynga, and how that Filipensio followed after him till such time as he
took her out of his power. Cap. 28.
AFter the departure of the Prince, the three shepherds remained under those
high Pine trees, till such time as the dark night came upon them, and there
did determine to pass the night away with music and amorous songs, and in
this conversation Filipensio received great pleasure, but they heard upon a
sudden a great noise, which seemed to be of a woman, and likewise a rumor of
the running of horses. These shepherds speedely arose up and went to see what
it was, and they found Galismena who cried out unto the Gods, and when she saw
Filipensio she said: Ah good shepherd minne and give succor, for that the
Pastora is carried away prisoner by the Prince of Polismago against her will.
O that I were able to signify unto you here ye great anger of Filepensio, it
was so much that almost he was beside himself, but when Galismena saw him in
that trance, she called unto him with a loud voice and said: Ah gentle
shepherd is it now time to lack courage, do thou not see the great peril
which may happen unto Cayserlinga, and all by thy detracting of time. These
high words was the occasion that the shepherd came unto himself again, and
like unto an arrow out of a bow he followed the way after them, till such time
as he came into a broad high way, whereas he did discover the new foot steps
of his horse, by which he knew that he was rode that way, and with great
lightness he did prosecute his journey, til such time as he came to
Ierosolima, and when he saw the small remedy that he had to go forwards, for
that he was on foot, he determined to enter into the city, and looked back
to see if any of the shepheardes did follow him, and he saw none but Coridon
that did follow him, and tarrying for him he said: Ah shepherd what shall we
do without our delight, follow me if it be thy pleasure, and let us procure to
restore again our loss, which is our Pastora. For here I do swear unto
thee by the Omnipotent Jupiter, never to return unto the river of Euphrates,
without the fair Pastora, and without any more tarrying they entered into
Ierosolima, not staying till they came unto the Pallaice, and the first that he
met with was with Fidelio, whom he commanded to go and declare unto the
Princess of his coming, who did very much marvel when that Fidelio did
tell her, for that he returned in so short time, and she went out of her
chamber and did receive him with great joy and pleasure, saying: What quick
return is this that you have made, valiant and excellent knight: Uerie heavy
and sorrowful said the Prince, for that good Lady you shall understand, my
Pastora is robbed and carried away from me, and I am not able to make any
defense. And being cut off by the great abundaunce of tears that proceeded
from his dolorous heart, he could not speak a word more. And without any
tarrieng he deprived himself of his shepherds apparel, and put on his own
garments, and with a trice he was armed, and returning unto Coridon he said:
Friend Coridon this is mine accustomed wearing, for that which hitherto thou
have seen me wear, was lent me, yt I might the better rejoice my self with
the sight of my love, and now seeing that fortune has frowned on me, here I
swear unto thee not to take any rest til such time as I set her at liberty.
The shepherd merua^^ed to see y^ which he did see, and said unto the knight:
Ah Filipensio how do thou pretend to leave the body without a soul, do
thou not believe that Coridon can remain alive only with his body, for that
my soul is absented and gone after my Pastora. With many tears the shepherd
said these words. The Prince seeing that the detracting of time was perilous,
took his leave of the Princess, and found his horse in a readiness, and with
great lightness he mounted upon him, so likewise his Squire and Coridon
mounted upon very good horses, which ye Princess commanded to be given them,
and with great have they departed out of the city, and took their journey
into a broad high way, and at such time as the Sun had covered all the earth,
they met with a laboring man who was coming from his accustomed work in the
field, of whom thy asked news of their Pastora, but he could tell them none,
but he said, that about midnight he heard certain lamentations made by a
woman, but he knew not the occasion wherefore. So straight way he thought what
it might be, which was the occasion that they made the more have in travailing,
with great fear least they should loose her: So all that day they trauayled,
and rode through Damasco, and left the river of Euphrates, this knight
travailed with great sorrow for the small news that he heard of his Pastora,
and the anger was very great of the Prince, for that he was so careless, in
such sort, that neither Coridon nor Fidelio durst speak a word unto him, and
diverse times lifting up his eyes unto heaven, with an heavy voice he said: Oh
high and mighty God Jupiter, how is it possible that I having done my duty
unto thy Deity in all respects, and almost using a quotidian sacrifice, thou
do yet suffer thy power to be contrary unto me in this, give me now some
light to hap on that way by which that traitor and disloyal knight does
carry the Goddess of all shepheardes, that I may deliver her, that she be
not scorned nor ill entreated of that false knight: Oh Diana, chaste Goddess,
hide thy breast, and send some keeper of thine to defend her, let that
revenger Camilia be her guard, and with her Bow send a sharp arrowe to pass
through the heart of him that does all this evil. In this sort with great
anger the Prince travailed, and the third day of his journey, somewhat early
in the morning he saw upon a rock a very fair and great castle which
seemed to be very strong. The Prince determined to go thither, he had not
travailed long when he came into another great and broad way, in the which
there was a man which came toward them, and when he drew nigh, they asked of
him if he could tell any news of the Pastora. The man lift up his eyes and
seeing the proportion of him that demanded the question, he said: For thy
profit sir knight, for that thou seem unto me to be of estimation, I will
not tell thee thy demand. The valiant knight with more humility then his
passionate heart would abide, desired him to give him to understand if he knew
any thing of her. The man said: Sir knight, I know not wherefore you will
know of that thing, that by seeking of remedy for her delivery, will procure
thy self death. Notwithstanding seeing that with so great courtesy you do
request me, I will tell you, although it were better for you not to know it,
nevertheless you shall understand that yesternight a knight brought her unto
yonder Castle which you see before you, and put her under so strong keeping,
that there is no power able to deliver her, except the power of the high Gods.
The contentment was great that the Prince received when he heard news of her,
the which he so much desired, and giving great thanks unto the man, he went
toward the Castle, and when he came thither, he found the draw bridge down,
and the gate open, and no guard there to keep it. And without all fear, he
entered in at the gate, and left Coridon and Fidelio without. And being within,
he came into a very great and broad Court, the which was paued with very fair
and well wrought stones, and the walls were full of windows with iron grates
very fair, but he saw no body: and discovering a broad and well made pair of
stairs, he alighted from his horse, and went up, and being half way up, there
was a door open, and looking in thereat, he saw it was a great Hall, and that
very dark, saving at the farther end thereof, there was a little lover hole,
which gave a small light, where by he perceived a little door, which seemed to
be at the foot of a pair of winding stairs, at which door the knight entered
and went up the stairs. And when he came aloft, he entered into very great and
broad chambers all furnished with beds, and it seemed to be a place for the
household servant, and going from thence he entered into a very fair hall, in
the which was a well wrought window, and looking out thereat he saw that it
was over the gate of that ill kept Castle, by which he entered, and looking for
Coridon and Fidelio, he could not see them, but believed that they had put
themselves apart in some place because they would not be seen. Then this
valiant knight looking down again to the gate, saw a mighty great Giant of
a huge stature, who called with a great loud voice and said: Run quickly
and seek out that bold knight, who without any lisence entered into the
Castle, and put him into the most cruellest prison in all the house. These
words caused little fear in the knight, but rather going from the window he
went out of the hall, where was a pair of stayres, and as he began to
descend down by them, he saw coming up thereat in great have five armed
knights, and after them eight clownes, who seeing him to be the knight they
sought, with their swords drawn very rigorously they did assault him. This
valyant warrior drew out his sword, and stroke two of them two such terrible
blows, yt he made their heads to tumble down the stayres, and in the fall of
them they chanced to hit two of the clownes, that they made them to fall
backwards upon the stayres, but his fury stayed not in this, but he stroke
another knight such a blow, that he ouerthrewe him dead the same way, the
other two knights which remained seeing that slaughter so quickly done, they
put themselves the one on the one side of the stayres, and the other on the
other, and having their sheeldes before them they laid on the Knight with
great and thick blows, but by reason of the desire which the knight had to
see his Pastora, and being very much troubled therewith, he determined with
speed to clear himself of those two knights, and therewith he stroke at
each of them a mighty blow and sent them with the rest down the stayres, the
like did he unto four of the clownes that were so hardy as to assault him,
the other with a great noise ran down the stayres, this valyant knight
hasted down the stayres after them till he came into a great court, whereas he
found the Giant unarmed, with a sheelde on his arm, and a great broad fauchen
in his hand. The knight made show unto him that he would not fight nor strike
him, but put his sword up into his sheath, and said: Hold thy hand Gyaunt and
strike not, but put on thy armor for to make thy defense, for this understand
of a truth, that I will not draw out my sword so long as thou art unarmed. The
Giaunt when he saw how little he did esteem him, stood still and did
behold him, and noted the great riches of his armor, and by the device of
his sheelde he knew him to be the knight that won the prise and honor in
the iustes at Nabatea, for you shall understand that all these Gyauntes were
of the kingdom of Cilicia, and the king thereof if you remember was the first
with whom the knight did just, which in that triumph was overthrown, when
that to revenge that quarrel came forth a brother of his, who by the strength
of the arm of this knight was slain, and the Gyaunt which he slew by the
river of Euphrates was the king of Cilicia himself (the occasion of his
coming and who all the rest were shall more at large appear in the process
of the history.) When the Gyaunt knew him, with a devilish countenance he
said: Tell me knight, by fortune art thou that famous warrior, who in the
iustes of Nabatea (as has been told me) carried away all the honor and
praise, and ouerthrewe the king of Cilicia, to whom the Gods did show
themselves enemies, and the same which likewise slew his brother, if there be
any courtesy in thee I desire thee to tell me.

This valiant Prince answered and said: I do not know to what end thou do
ask it of me, but let it be for what it shall be, thou shall understand that I
am the same that thou did speak off. And for that thou shall be the better
certefied of this, thou shall understand that I am he, who in shepherds
apparaile, only with my shepheardes crook, at one blow brought that traitor
the Prince of Polismago to the ground without remembrance, and likewise with
another blow with the sword of the said Prince, I slew the King of Cilicia: and
am the same who will do the like with thee, if thou do not deliver unto me
that fair Pastora, who was brought hither by force, by that naughty Prince of
Polismago. The Giant was very sorrowful for that which he heard, and showed
by his countenance to be very wrathful. At that time there descended down the
stairs another Giant, who with a furious voice said unto the first Gyaunt:
Brother put thy self apart on the one side, and let me take reuengement of
this vile Knight, that is before thee: and without speaking any more words, he
lift up his great and heavy fawchon, and stroke a mighty blow at the Knight,
but this pollitike Knight stepped with great lightness on ye one side, which
was the occasion that his blow fell down upon ye pauement in vain: this
terrible blow was no sooner down, when the Knight closed with him, and stroke
him with his sword so mighty a blow upon the right arm, that he cut it clean
a sunder, and it fell down to the ground, sword and al. The Giant when he saw
himself so wounded, gave a terrible shrike, and threw his shield from him, and
would have taken the sword in his other hand: but the Prince would not suffer
it, but stroke him another blow on the same arm, and even as he did by the
other, he cut it a sunder by the elbow: so that he was lame of both his arms.
Yet for all this, the giant did not loose his fury, but roaring like a Lion,
he opened the stumpes of his arms which did remain, thinking with them to
embrace the Knight, and by his great force to overthrow him. As he he
labored to enter in, the Knight put the point of his sword before him, in such
sort, that what with the strength and fury of the Giant, and the force that
he put thereunto, the sword passed through his body, that he fell down dead to
the ground.

At this time, there descended down the stairs in great have a Knight of a
mighty proportion, whom Claridiano knew to be the Prince of Polismago. This
Greek Knight received great delyght at the sight of him. Then the Prince of
Polismago said: Thou perverse dog, come and take reuengeme, for the grief
and wrong which thou do publish here to have received: for I am the Prince
whom thou do seek for: and in saying these words, he did assault him with
terrible blows. Then Claridiano did return unto him ye like, but not in so
terrible a sort as he might, for the great compassion that he had of him,
considering that the pangs of love cause a man to do that sometimes, which
afterward he does repent himself off. So here betwixt them began a mighty
and well foughten battle, the one striking the other, on all parts, great and
terrible blows. In this sort they endured a while without knowing any
aduauauntage betwixt them, the occasion was, for that the Greek would not
use the rigor of all his strength. And being in this controversy, the Greek
lift up his eyes, and saw at a window the fair Pastora, who was beholding
them in their battle: at which sight he received so great pleasure and
delyght, that the strength of his arms did fail him, and he had no more power
to lift them up. When the Pagan saw that, he did assault him with more
courage: the Greek had no power, but only to bear off the blows, and
recoyled till such time as he came right under the window: which made the Pagan
to think that he was overcome, and that he had got the victory. At that time
the other Giant was very well armed, and went unto the Pastora, and took her
by the hair of ye head, and pulled her from the window, and said: Apart thy
self from that place, thou which art the cause of all this evil, for that
thou shall not content thy self in seeing him, who does procure thy liberty,
although it be impossible: and I do swear unto thee by my Gods, that the great
damage which thy niceness has caused, thy head shall pay for. Oh how
wrathful this Greek was, when he saw the Giant entreat her so evil, for a
giving a terrible shrike he lift up his right arm with his sword, and stroke
at the Pagan so mighty a blow upon his healme (so that if it had not been
inchaunted) he had cut it in two pieces, and put the head in great peril, but
yet he escaped not but he sell down to the ground without any remembrance,
and there ran out of his mouth great abundance of blood. When Claridiano saw
him in this plight, he made no more reckoning of him, but with a furyous have
he went to go up the stayres, at such time as ye Giant came down with great
violence, but when the son of Gran Alfebo saw him he returned and did abide
his coming in the court, and said: Make an end thou great beast, and descend
down that I may give thee thy payment for thy boldness which thou have used
against the goddess of Pastoras. The Giant with the great fury which he had
understood not what the knight had said, and therefore he made him no
answer, and if that he would have done it, yet his great wrath would not
consent unto it, but with his Fauchon all aloft he went toward the Greek,
assalting him with mortal battle. The like did this strong knight, making
betwixt them a terrible battle, and striking the one the other where they
thought to do most hurt. Who had then seen the great lightness of the Greek
in besturring himself, would have well judged that the worst part should not
be his, for that he so handled his enemy in breaking of his harness in many
places, and wounding him, in such sort, that he was all to be bathed in blood,
yet for all that the great anger which he had, neither the rigorous battle
could cause him to withdraw the casting up of his eyes unto the place whereas
he saw his well-beloved Pastora, and he beheld her making her great lamentation
for that which the Giant had done unto her, which was the occasion that he had
a greater desire to give him (who was the occasion of her tears) his payment.
At this time the Prince Polismago was come again unto himself, and arose
upon his feet, and saw the cruel battle which was between the Giant and
the Knight, and how that the knight almost overcome the Giant, he did
determine to forget that which he was bound unto being a Prince, and
recovering his sword which hung by the wrist band, he went and joined with the
Gyaunt, so that both of them together did assalt him, which did nothing grieve
the Gyaunt for that he was somewhat weary. The villainy which he saw them use
did increase his wrath, and double his strength in such sort, that it fell out
worse for them being both together then before, for that the vileness of their
assaulting made him to double his blows, striking now mightily at the one, and
then as terribly on the other, with very great power and strength, procuring to
indamage the^ And for that he dealt with two such valiant knights, it stood him
in hand to use all kind of policy: but yet he could not so at liberty
defend himself, but that the giant watched his time, and stroke him so furious
a blow upon his steely helm, that he made him to boow with both his knees to
the ground The Prince of Polismago seeing him at that point, doubled his blows
upon him very terribly: but in spite of them, he arose up again with more fury
then a baighted bull, and with his sword fast in his hand, he pressed to the
Giant, and stroke him so mortal a blow upon his shoulder, that he cloue him
down to the waste, cutting harness and bones, and with great facility
ouerthrewe him dead to the ground. He had not so soon given that wonderful
blow, but he returned another at the Pagan, upon his inchaunted healme, that
he made it sound like unto a Bell. The which blow was so mighty that it
overthrew him down to the ground, throwing out at his Beauer very great
abundance of blood

Who could here declare the great joy which the Pastora received when she
saw her enemies in that plight, I I cannot judge which had the greater joy,
the knight in that he had set her at liberty, or the Pastora so see her self
at liberty. So when the knight saw the Pagan on the ground without
remembrance, he made no more tarrying, but went up the stairs, and stayed not
till he came whereas the Pastora was. And when he saw her, he fell down upon
his knees, and lift up his beuer, which was the occasion that the Pastora did
know him, and not suffering him to speak, with an excellent grace she said. Ah
Filipensio how much am I bound unto the Gods, that have delivered me from two
so great dangers, and set me at liberty from the troubles thereof. Where have
thou left thy shepherds apparaile? Who has changed them, for this fair and
strong armor, where have thou left thy shepherds crook. Ah Filipensio, give
me to understand of thy high estate, yt my small understanding be not the
occasion that I fall in some error. The valyant Knight being subject to her
beauty, said unto her: I am yours fair Pastora, whether I be a shepherd or
a Knight, your beauty has brought me in subection, and it is great glory unto
me to be yielded unto you.

Then the fair Pastora at these words took him fast by both the hands, and
not giving him place to any more resoning, she said. I will now see, whether
you are as valyant in deeds as in words, seeing that fortune has brought us
hither: and here I do ask of thee two things to be granted unto me, and it
is the first that ever I asked of any person in all the world. The amorous
Prince answered. Ah my sweet Mistress, is it possible that I have deserved
to receive at your hands so much favor, in that you do ask of me any thing,
wherein I may or can do you service, and knowing that I am yours, you need not
to ask but command me as your own, for that I am bound to whatsoever you
will. The fair Pastora said. Well gentle knight, seeing that thou do show thy
self to be so subject and bound to do me pleasure, the first thing that I do
request thee to grant me, is, that thou carry me unto Grecia unto the Emperors
court, and there for the space of one month to make my defense, and affirm,
that my beauty does surmount all others in the world. Now may thou go and
set at liberty Coridon and thy servant, who are both in prison. The Greek
had great contentment of that which the Pastora did ask of him: and for to
perform that which she had commanded, he went and sought throughout all the
Castle, to see if he could find any that could give any knowledge where his
company was, and coming unto a door he heard a great noise of much people,
ye Prince knocked at the door and bad them open it, and promised to do them
no harm if they would open the door. So straight way it was open, whereas he
demanded for Coridon and his Squire, they were straight way brought unto him
by one of them which opened the door, and in the mean time it was told him
who the Giants were, you shall understand that they were nephews unto the king
of Cilicia, and unto the Prince of Polismago, who being in love with the
Pastora, and being of her cast off, he went and told it unto the king of
Cilicia, then they consented together to do all that you have heard, and had
gone through with their intent if it had not been for the valor of the Prince
Claridiano. So when Coridon came before the Pastora he could not refrain from
weeping, with the great joy which he received at ye sight of her, and the
Pastora was no less joyful. Then Claridiano remembered the Prince Polismago,
and commanded Fidelio to see whether he were alive or dead, who went, and when
he came unto him, he pulled off his helm and saw that he was dead, for the
which it greatly grieved the knight, but ye fear was so great of Cayserlinga
for remaining in the castle, that she made great have to the Prince to depart
from thence. The which he was constrained to do for to give her contentment,
and commanded to make ready their horses and likewise a palfray which they
found in the castle. So the next day in ye morning they took their way
toward Grecia, passing thorough all the kingdom of Media, and the kingdom of
Prisopoli, and all the way that he travailed he left behind great fame of
wonderful adventures which happened. They travailed in a skirt of Armenia,
whereas chanced unto him that which in the next chapter shall be told you.

How Claridiano by chance had battle with his own father, which being known
unto Galtenor, and fearing the great harm that would come thereof, he
remedied the same. Chap. 29.
BY a Mountain of Armenia very much inhabited, this warrelike knight
travailed in company with his fair Pastora, with so great delight and
pleasure, that I cannot here signify it unto you, and with Coridon they had
good pastime, for that he was very pleasant, who again seeing that he might
so at quiet and familiarly talk with the Pastora, was almost in an ecstasy for
joy. So the second day that they travailed by that mountain, by reason that
it was so fragrant, they lost their way, in such sort, that when they
remembered themselves, they were entered into the thickest of the wilderness,
and procured to find the way again, which by no means they could, for that
they were so far entered into the thicket. So with great trouble they
travailed till mid day, at which time they heard a noise of the running of
water, the which they followed, and it was the occasion yt they brought
themselves out of ye thick wood, and came into a mighty great plain, through
the midst of the which there passed a deep river. There they looked about them
to see if they could discover any town, village, or dwelling places, but they
could see no other thing but high and mighty Pine trees, the which grieved
much the Pastora, and much more the Greek, for that the Pastora should be so
sorrowful, and again, for that they had no victuals to comfort her. So they
stayed a while not knowing which way they might take to bring themselves out of
ye distress, but upon a sudden they espied toward their right hand a man
who travailed a foot, being somewhat far off from them, that they could not
discern what he should be. So in great have they went toward him, and
coming nigh him, they saw that it was an old man, who had his head and beard
very white, by reason of his great age, and the better for to travail, he
had a staff whereon he might leave, showing that he travailed with great
pain, in that he moved himself so heavily. Then came unto the Princes
remembrance the question that the furious beast did ask him in the enchanted
castle of the king of Arabia. So when they came unto the old man, they saluted
him, the old man returned their salutation with a faint and weary voice. The
Prince asked him what adventure had brought him into that solitary place. This
old man for to make him answer, was constrained to sit down upon the ground
and said: Gentle knight, I know not what to say, nor what I shall tell you,
but only my destiny has brought me into this misfortune, being mocked with
great falsehood by a Page yt I brought with me, who left me all alone and on
foot in this solitary wilderness. These two days have I not eaten any
thing, but only drunk of ye water of Euphrates, with the which I have borne
out my hunger, the head of which river is not far from hence. And here I do
desire thee gentle knight, if thou have any pity of this my weary age, for
to succor me, in carrying me upon thy horse, or upon the horse of any of thy
servants. The Prince taking great pity on the old man, said: Fear not good
Father of this thy misfortune, for seeing ye fortune has brought us hither, I
will not leave thee alone in this solitarye place. The Prince leaped from his
horse and took the old man in his arms, and put him in the saddle, and
helped to settle him well, that by reason of his weakness he might not fall,
and that he being well set he himself might ye better without all fear leap
up behind him. This false old man seeing himself master of the horse, stroke
him with his heels, in so great have, yt he made the horse to fly: Oh how the
knight was amazed at this act, although he believed that he did it to make him
go a little on foot, but when he saw that his mocking proceeded forwards on,
he returned that way which his Squire came, calling out unto him to bring his
horse on the which he travailed, who in great have accomplished his demand.
When the knight was on horseback, he began to call unto the old man for to
tarry. The which the old man did till such time as he came nigh him, and with
a great laughter he said. Pitiful knight, what do thou think to recover thy
horse, and to give me my payment for that I have mocked thee? Would thou so
quickly loose the name to be pitiful. I do not mean to loose it said the
Knight, neither did I give thee my horse for to carry thee alone, but both of
us, for it is a horse which can do it very well. I shall be counted for a
more fool then thou said the old man, having now opportunity to go whether
I list all alone, and being in thy company I shall be constrained to go
whether thy pleasure is. The Prince hearing these words went by little and
little toward the old man, but he with a quick course did apart himself
from him, making with his mouth and eyes a thousand g^stures, for to make him
to be angry. The Prince being astonished said: Thou false old villain, more
worse then the stinking Fox, tarry thou mocker of knights, and do not think
that the lightness of thy horse shall deliver thee out of my hands. The old
man showed as though he esteemed little his words and threatenings, but ran with
the horse from one place unto another, making a thousand gestures and faces
with his mouth and eyes, which was even death unto ye Prince, who said: Oh Gods
is it possible that you do permit that this naughty old man should thus
scorn me with his iestures. Coridon and the Pastora came behind, and had
great pastime to see how the knight was mocked and beguiled of an old man, who
seemed as though he could not move himself with age. With the great anger and
rage that the prince had to see himself so mocked, he pricked his horse with
the spurs for to overtake the old man, who was a good way^ off from him, and
made his horse to run so swift a course, that it seemed he flew, and the old
man with the like light course came running toward and against the Prince, and
coming nigh unto him he said. What is this my son, wherefore is all this
fury, for thou do well know that I came not for to cause in you any
anger. The Prince hearing this stayed his horse and did behold him, and knew
him very perfectly to be the king of Arginaria, and with great haste he
alyghted from his horse, and the old man did the like, and with great
contentment they lovingly embraced one another. Then the knight said.

Is it possible loving father that you do thus misuse him that has no other
desire but to serve you, I do promise you that before I let you go out of
mine arms, to make you promise me to bring me out of this solitary place, in
recompense of this trouble and anger which you have caused me to have. I came
for no other thing said Galtenor, for knowing the great travail which may
happen in this place, and again, ye grief which thou have for ye trouble of a
fair Pastora, which thou bring in thy company, and knowing the great love
which bear unto her I did ordain my coming hither, and determined first to
give thee this intertainment, for that afterward I might of thee with more joy
be received. At this time drew near the Pastora and Coridon, and Fidelio, and
seeing them embracing one an other they made the more have on their way, very
much meruailing to see a crook back and lean old man to be turned unto a
great and fair Giant, with a goodly long white beard, apparailed with rich
apparel. The Prince turning unto the Pastora, said: Fair Pastora, this noble
king who is here present is king of the Island Arginaria, my Lord and father,
who understanding by his art the great necessity in the which we are, is come
to put remedy therein. The king of Arginaria with an amorous heart and
steadfast eyes without moving them, he did behold the Pastora, remembering
himself at that time of the young child that he lost by the river of
Euphrates, and straight way he knew her to be the same, of the which he did
not a little rejoice, but seeing that it was convenient at that time to hold
his peace, he did dissemble it, and kept the great joy which he received for
the finding of her in his heart, and retourning unto the Prince, he said: I do
not now much marvel fair knight, that thy heart is subject to so fair a
creature, and I do think my labor very well bestowed, because that by my
coming hither shall be taken away a great part of your trouble, which without
all doubt you should have had, and being in this manner talking, there appeared
before them a horse laden with victuals, and straight way they took order
that they might eat, for that they had great need thereof. Likewise there was
raised a very fair and rich tent for to ease themselves, and they knew not
which way nor how it was made, and there they rested all that night, for that
the king would not that they should so soon depart from him, because he
would for a time recreate himself in their conversation, and told them of some
things that should happen unto them. So when the morning was come the Tent was
taken away, and they began to travail by a very straight and narrow path.
The King of Arginaria did lead them the way, and commanded them to follow
him, who would set them out of that wilderness, and bring them unto the sea
of Hyrcania, whereas they shall find all things necessary for their new begun
voyage, and bad them that they should have very great care, for being once
in Grecia, there shall be joined together the nails and paws of two of the
most furious Lions that be in all the world, the one bringing the other in so
great affliction, that the better of them both cannot be judged, neither
acknowledge any vauntage till such time as with their outrageous fury be
taken away the locks which be upon their crowned heads, and shall at that
instant in a moment be set at liberty by the robber of his first joy, making
restitution of that which a long time has been usurped, remaining one of them
without grief of the young Hind, that he brings with him. When all this
shall come to pass I will return my son and see you. And in saying these
words he vanished away, not seeing any other thing but the horse which was
laden with their victuals, which caused them to remain amazed at his sudden
departure, and yet very much comforted in that he had seen him: So they
travailed all that day by a narow path. When night was come, without knowing
by whom, the Tent was armed again that they might rest themselves therein,
when they were within and had commanded their horses to be put in, the door of
the tent did shut of it self with so great strength, that they could not open
it, although they did make a proof, for that Galtenor had so made it, because
of a great number of wild beasts which were in those parts, and in the
night time raungeth abroad for to seek their prays. So they passed that
night with great rest and ease, till the morning that the Tent door did open,
the Tent was taken up and put upon the horse, and all the rest, took their
journey presentlye following still that narowe path till it was noone, at which
time they came unto the sea side, and hard by the place whereas they arrived,
they saw at an Anchor a Bark meruailously well cauked and trimmed, made after
the manner of a Serpent, with mighty wings and a long tail. The Prince when
he saw the Bark made after that sort, straight way he understood that that
was the Bark which the king of Arginaria had spoken of, and without any more
tarrying he commanded his horse to be put in and all the rest, and he took
the Pastora in his arms and put her into the Bark, they were no sooner
within, but that with great swiftness she began to move her self, in such
sort that in a small time they were far from the shore. Thus they travailed
with great contentment for the space of six days, and the seventh day very
earlye in the morning they were at the shore very nigh Constantinople,
whereas with great joy and pleasure they went a land, and mounting upon
their horses they entered into a very geeene and delightful Forest, which
stood in their way, and within a while they heard a great noise of hunters,
and toward that way the Prince and his company went, and in the way they
travailed, they rode by a fountain, in the which there was to the number of
eight knights very well armed, and they were refreshing of themselves. The
Prince for that they passed by somewhat out of the way did not salute them,
but passing on his way with the fair Pastora, who followed him, using betwixt
themselves very sweet and amorous conversation. The eight knights when they
saw them so pass by, they found themselves agreeued for the small reckoning
he made of them, but in especial one of them who was more proud and
presumptuous then the rest, without speaking any word at all, laced on his
healme, and cast his sheelde at his neck, and being ready he mounted upon
his horse, and took his Spear in his hand, which stood hard by leaning
against a free, and with a very reasonable pace he followed after him, and
when he was nigh unto the Prince, he said: Knight, with more pride and better
adorned with rich armor, then with good manners or courtesy, you must just
with me, for that making thee to kiss the ground, constrained by my terrible
encounter, thou shall learn in another place to use courtesy. The heroycall
Prince with his accustomed meekness, answered. If my salutation gentle
knight, was not as it becomes a traueling knight, the distaunce of the way
was the occasion thereof: and this being true which I have said, then have you
no reason to blame me. Thou have less reason said the Knight of the fountain,
for to excuse thy self from the just, which I do ask of thee, therefore
take thy choice of the field, and procure to settle and firm thy self well in
the saddle. The Greek seeing his pride, asked of Coridon his sheeld, and a
spear which they brought with them: and having it in his hand, he saw that the
field was all purple very smooth, and a knight made in it, armed with purple
armor, striking another Knight, armed likewise in purple armor overthwart the
eyes, and it was all full of stars of gold. The Prince was meruailously
amazed and troubled at the great cleerenesse thereof, so that he was
constrained to hide his eyes with his own hands: but the calling out of the
Knight of the fountain did cause him to change his purpose, and called for
his spear, and with a furious course, he went forth unto the encounter. The
Knight of the fountain did break his spear, not making the Prince to move
any more then he had stroke upon a hard Rock: but the Princes encounter was
such, that he overthrew him to the ground, and with the fall he brake his arm
in two parts, who having no power to move himself, and with the great pain
and grief he felt, made a pitiful complaint. The Greek seeing him in that
case said: Knight, it had been better thou had remained without any
salutation quietlye, then now quarrelling thereupon, thou have thy arm broken,
and remainest unable to help thy self, and without saying any other thing, he
did depart, determining to prosecute his former journey. So within a while
after, he heard a great noise of calling, and looking about to see who called
him, he saw that it was the rest of the Knights, which followed with great
speed. There he determined to stay their coming, and made himself ready
unto the battle, if they would demand it of him. These seven knights came
with great ire, to see the other knight in that perplexity, (and forgetting
the custom of Grecia, of long time observed and kept amongst the Knights) they
all seven together with their spears on their rests, they made their
encounter upon him, and stroke the Greek with their firmed blows, some on the
sides, and some on the breast with great fury: yet the Prince remained more
firm the^ an Anfield of iron. They all brake their spears on him, but at
their passing by, he stroke one of them such a blow upon the healme, that he
overthrew him dead to the ground. The rest which remained, returned unto him
with their swords in their hand, laying upon him very terribly like knights
that were both valiant and courageous: but the Prince moved his horse amongst
them, with so great lightness and strength, that quickly his power and force
was known unto them, he did so torment them with his mighty blows. And the
more they did grieve him, the worse it was for them: for having lost all
patience, he threw his shield at his back, and did assault them with such
fury, that in a short time he remained with only two of them in the field, who
seeing the other of their companions dead, procured to save their lives,
tourning their backs unto the Greek, and pricking their horse with the spurs,
they put themselves into a broad way.

This furious Knight followed after them, procuring to overtake them, and to
make that not one of them shall bear news of the success of the battle:
but by reason they had some vauntage of the way, and again their horses were
very good, for all the have that he could make, he could not overtake them,
till such time as they came whereas were many tents armed in the field, and at
that place there was a knight ye stepped before him to defend the other two which
ran away, who were armed with very strong and strange armor. Who, if you do
remember was the Emperor Alphebo, and our Knight was his son, who with his
sword in his hand all bloody, followed the other two knights. The Emperor
Alphebo seeing them come running from ye one alone Knight, called unto them and
said: Tell me wherefore do you run away you cowards and dishonourers of the
Greekish genealogy, of whom are you afraid, of one alone Knight? Sovereign
Lord said one of the Knights, he that does follow us, is no Knight, but a
devil, and thy surmounted strength is needful to make resistaunce against
his. So at that time the Prince approached as I have told you, and likewise the
Emperor Alphebo, who did very much behold his goodly stature and
disposition: the Prince did likewise behold the Emperor, and the straungenesie
of his armor. The Emperor was the first that began to speak and said: Tell
me knight, what has my Knights, done unto you, to cause you to use and
entreat them so straightly. Then the Prince who had lost all patience, said.
Procure to make their reuengement, and do not ask me the cause of their
cowardnesse. For that it is very apparaunt, that they themselves are in fault
of their ill entreating. This good Emperor, as one that made little reckoning
of his words, very meekely said. If they are in the fault it lyketh me very
well, therefore I do desire to know the occasion if it be thy pleasure to tell
me, that I may altogether lay the fault upon them. The Prince with a high voice
said. By the Gods I do swear unto thee, that it is true that I have told
thee. The Emperor when he heard him name those false Gods, without any more
tarrying drew out his sword and said. Defend thy self Pagan, for it shall
cost thee thy life, for laying hands upon Christians, who are more worth then
thou art. Now do I not desire to know the occasion, for that they are
Christians and thou art a Moore. And I say, that they are in no fault. So
there they assaulted one another, with most terrible and mortal battle.

Oh Nymphs borne in the Hill of Helicon, and whose habitation is in the
Mountain Olympus, and ye Ladies of the sacred Cabolino, unto all you I do
invoke to ground in me wisdom and understanding, as you did into him, who
did make the Greek dedicated upon the great deeds of that mighty Achilles,
for that I may perticularly declare the furious and well fought baitaile of
these two invincible knights, without knowing to be the father and the son, who
having their swords in the air, they both together discharged the one upon the
others helm, in such sort, that either of them were constrained spite of their
hearts to make obedience, as unto such high and mighty Princes as they were
ought to be done, and both together and at one time they returned their swords
about their heads, striking one another such blows upon their beauers, that
they made a great number of sparks of fire to fly in the air, which was the
occasion that it took away somewhat the sight of their eyes. Oh how yrefull
was this nephew of Trebatio, and being overcome therewith, his strong and
mighty blows were incorportable, and taking his sword in both his hands, with
that wrath and great lightness, he stroke the Emperor such a blow upon the
healme, that the sound thereof made an Echo throughout all the mountains and
plains, and he fell backwardes upon the crouper of his horse Cornerino, who
being scarred with the noise of the blow, ran round about the fields with
his master. The Emperor came straight way again to himself, and considering
the strong blow which he had received, he said: Jesus help me, and likewise
with his sword in both his hands, he stroke him upon the helm, that in
spite of our knight he fell backwards upon ye crouper of his horse, who being
scarred with the blow, flinging and kicking, he did apart and carry his
master from his enemy. And coming again unto himself, he did acknowledge
his strong adversary which he had before him, and likewise he did consider,
how that he called for succor upon ye name of Jesus.

But his fury was so much that without any farther consideration, blaspheming
and denying his Gods, he set spurs unto his horse and returned unto the
Emperor who came toward him, where was joined such a battle as never in
Grecia had been seen the like, either causing other by their disordinate blows
many times to be without remembrance, sometimes inclining their heads unto
their breasts, and at other time upon their horse crouper, in such sort, that
there was enough to do between them for to settle themselves upright in their
saddles, all their faces under their healmes being berayed with blood, and
often giving grievous groans. At this time was all ire and wrath wholly kindled,
and all patience lost, policy and experience was forgotten, so that they made
their battle as men without wit or reason, procuring each of them to bring
his enemy to death, and either of them accounting himself of small prowess
and valor, that one alone knight should endure so long before them, and he who
was the most grieved heereat was the strong Prince, not knowing that he dealt
with his Father the mighty Alfebo, for neither furious knights nor fierce
Giants could at any^ time bring him unto that extremity as at this time he
was, so with this ire and wrath they endured two hours with their mighty
blow, being then present the Emperor Trebatio, and the two Princes of
Rodamonte and Rodefo, and the king of Macedonia, and the great Duke of Atenas,
and Magecia, and the Earl of Acaya, all the which were in a great admiration
to see the great resistaunce that the Emperor Alfebo had found, who at that
time did stretch up himself upon his stirops, discharging his sword upon the
head of our Prince, the blow was so terrible that the air was filled with
sparks and flames of fire, and made an eckoe to sound in the hidden caves, and
Claridiano fell backwardes upon the crouper of his horse without any
remembrance, and his arms hanging down as though he had been dead, and
voyded at his mouth great abundance of blood. The fair Pastora very much
meruailed to see this rigorous battle, who sat with her face covered
beholding the same, the like did Fidelio, and it was unto them a great grief
to see how how the Emperor did mightily assault him, procuring to kill him. At
this time the knight was come to his remembrance and setteled himself again
in his saddle, and with an high voice he said. Oh Gods of small valor, cursed
be serui^^ that I have done unto you, because you do so ill reward me, who
has so much honored you. Now do I well understand that your power is very
small: for that you have deceived me, this being the first christian Knight
that I have been in battle with, in all my life. I do believe that you did
all run away, when you heard this knight name ye name of Jesus. Here I do
renounce all your deity and potencie, for it is all as nothing, and again I
do call you vile, and of small estimation and power. And in saying these
words, he ran against the Emperor with so great furye, that he made the
ground to tremble under him, and when he came nigh unto the Emperor, he stroke
him an overthwart blow with so great strength and might, that he made him to
fall forwards upon his horse cares without any remembrance, in such sort that
it seemed he had been dead, for that there proceeded out of his healme so much
blood. And by the great strength of that blow, his horse was constrained to
stoop with his forefeete. This mighty Prince with double fury turned with his
sword to strike him the second blow, but it was in such sort, that the reins
of his horse bridle was fast in the buckle of his armor, and was constrained
by the force he put to strike his blow to pull the bridle, which made ye horse
to rise up before, standing upon his hinder feet, which was very perilous
unto the Knight: and being in that sort, he lost the strength of his blow for
to succor himself, and to govern his horse. In which time the Emperor came
again to his former senses, and settled himself in his saddle, who seeing the
great peril in the which he was brought, did marvel much thereat, and being
full of wrath, like unto a Lion he recovered his sword, and set spurs unto
his horse, and made him to move like unto the wind, throwing out at his
beauer a thick smoke with very anger, and gave his assault with so great fury,
that the knight could not but somewhat to fear him, and making his defense with
his shield, he did abide the coming of the blow, which cutting the air did
descend upon his shield with so great strength, that in spite of the force of
his arm it chanced upon his helm, in such sort, that it made him perforce
decline his head and all his body unto the pommell of his saddle, and his
teeth to chatter in his head, but he remained in that order, but a small time,
and roaring like a Bull, exclaiming against* Fortune, he lift up his sword and
gave him the like payment. At this time the battle began a new to be very
terrible, increasing double their fury, and likewise augmenting their blows,
in such sort, that with the least blow that was stricken, it seemed to have cut
the other all to pieces, which made all them that did behold the battle very
much to marvel. At this time there appeared to come forth out of the
Forest, a Knight, all armed in white armor, edged and wrought about with an
excellent work of fine gold, his healme on his head, and his shield at his
neck, and gyrte with a very^ rich sword, and of so gentle a disposition, that
there was none equal unto him, and seeing the battle betwixt the two
Knights, he did stand and behold them: and straight ways he knew the Emperor,
but he could not judge who ye other should be, but greatly meruailed at their
strength, and with the great desire he had to know who it was, he demanded of
an old Knight that stood by him, the occasion of their controversy, and who
the Knights were. The old Knight, for that he seemed to be a Knighte of high
estate, said. The name of one of them, I can tell thee, the which is the
knight with the strange and rich armor, who is the excellent and mighty
Emperor Alphebo of Trapisond, but the Knight with the Sun, here is not one
that does know him. This Knight began the controversy first, with certain
knights of Grecia, who killing of some of them, and other some, very sore
wounded, and following other two which ran away, the Emperor put himself
before him, for to know the occasion of his great furye, and that Knight did
answer him with great pride and arrogancy, which was the occasion of this
their controversy: and it is more then six hours, since they have been
martring one another flesh without all pity, and this is all which I can tell
you, of that which you have demanded of me. The Knight with the white armor
was very much amazed, when he knew that the controversy endured so long, and
could not judge who it should be, of so great power and strength, that was able
to resist the fury of the mighty Alphebo.

In all this time these two valiant warriors were not idle, but still their
battle went forwards, in such sort, that either of them did doubt of the
victory, finding their adversary so mighty and strong* So in this extremity
they endured more then six hours not resting one moment, but still plagning
the due the other, making of their bodies even Anfields, which continually: are
beaten on with hammers, and as the travail was great, and could not be chosen
but that they must (...) be weary, and show some kind of faintness: upon a
sudden both at one time did withdraw themselves to take some rest, either of
them very much meruailing at the great power and strength of his adversary.
This invincible Emperor could not by any means judge who the Knight should be
that had brought him into that extremity, for until that day was there never
knight that ever before that time did the like, and being full of ire and wrath
he said.

What is now become of thee Alphebo? Where is now thy great valor, that has
been so much spoken of in all the worl^? What is become of thy surmounted
strength, wherewith thou dids^ quail the power of Lindaraza, and that with
which thou did break those inchaunted helmes? What is become of thy terrible
ire, wherewith thou did subdue mountains, new in sunder Diamond armor,
and brought all thing under thy subjection, now I see that all is forgotten,
and nothing worth, for that one alone knight and a Pagan, has brought thee
in^o this extremity. O holy God, to thee I invoke, and desire thee to help
me; and do not permit that my fame be robbed and taken away by a Pagan and an
enemy unto our Christian law. These and such like reasons pronounced this
^holarick Mars, and neither more nor less, the mighty and strong Prince,
casting up his eyes, and looking unto the heuens, and reprehending his Gods, he
said, Why are you so contrary unto me, for that as yet I never had victory,
but it has been by the strength of mine own arms. What recompense have I
received for all yt I have done? as yet I never had any favor at your hands,
for my own power hethertoo has been valuable unto me, and not yours, for that
I do believe is nothing as it does appear very plainly, in the little favor
that you show me against this furious Christian. What are you angry, that I am
come into this Country: and are any of you come down to take reuengement of
me therefore? Well, seeing it is so, let it be Jupiter, or Mars, or whosoever
it be of you, be it a God or a Devil, first before I receive the death, I will
make you to call for aid of all the rest of the Gods: and if it be a devil, to
call likewie for aid of the rest of the devils. And without any more
tarrying, he returned again unto the battail^ the like did the Emperor, and
made their assault with so great fury, that they onely^punc; which did behold
them were not a little amazed, but also the heaven and earth did marvel at
their force, and the Echo was weary in answering of their terrible blows, so
that there was almost no hope of remedy in their controversy, for that each
one feared his adversary, and there was not any advantage of either part.
This conflict continued so long between them, that they were almost out of
breath, at ye time bath together they lyfted up their Herculia^ arms, and
having them aloft they joined together with such fury that their horses met, and
stroke their heads the one against the other, in such sort, that although they
were both good, yet they fell down to the ground with their Knights: but they
were not so soon fallen, as they were straight on foot again, without
receiving any harm, and there began betwixt them a new contention. There was
showed the great lyghtnesse of the Prince, and likewise that of the Emperor
was apparent, in that either of them did so valiauntly defend himself from his
contrary, although at that time their strong arms were more governed with ire
and wrath, then with policy or experience, which was the occasion that the
battle was the more perilous and terrible. This mighty Alphebo thought
much, that in the presence of the Emperor his Father the battle should so
long endure, and that with one alone knight, and not being his brother. The
like did the Prince consider of that, by reason that the great reverence and
respect that the people had, he knew that there should be present the Emperor
of Grecia, who took him for his graundfather, as the fury of Merlin had told
him. All these considerations did cause betwixt the two warriors the more
wrath, yet for all that, they which did behold them could judge no advantage
of either part, at the which they greatly meruailed, but in especially above
all the rest the king of Sardenia was most amazed, who from the beginning of
their controversy was beholding of them, and saw in what great peril and
danger both of them were, and the great resistaunce which the unknown knight
made against the Emperor Alphebo, wherefore he returned unto the Emperor of
Grecia, and with a light voice he said: O holy God, is it possible that this
knight does resist so long against him, that a Porter of hell within a rock
hidden, could not make his defense against. The Emperor of Grecia would have
made him answer, but that he was disturbed by a mighty and terrible blow
which he saw given his son upon his healme, that it made him to boowe both
his knees to the ground, and by reason that the sword did lay no hold on the
hard steel, it descended down upon his left shoulder, and cutting a sunder
all the buckles and lacing of his healme, he made it to fly from his head,
discovering that fair and magnanimous countenance, adorned with great
majesty. The Knight when he saw him in that sort, would have stroke him
again, but yet this warlyke Mars although he saw himself in that great
perplexity, he wanted nothing of the accustomed courage which he was used to
have at other times in such like necessities, but with a light leap he cleared
himself from that blow, and (...) his contrary another with so great fury,
that he (...) and put one of his hands to the ground to stay (...) that he
might not fall, and with an incredible (...) hold on his healme, and pulled at
it with so (...) he pulled it from his head, and did discover (...) and fair
face, so that all they who did (...) to he the very ^igure of the (...). This
valiant young knight seeing (...) unto the Emperor, caught (...) like did the
Emperor unto him, (...) a dangerous and p^rilious wrestling, (...) upon a
sudden all the heaven (...) and thick cloud, which fell (...) for a space,
that they (...) but it ^^^ished (...) who before were (...) now put a part the
one from the (...) betwixt the^ was there an old^ (...) stature and gentle
dispositiost, adorned with gar^ents of great estate, the which were wrought
with (...), and pearl, that never Emperor nor king had (...), and upon his
head he had a crown of gold of such marvelous ma^^ing, that no humane tongue
is able to declare the riches thereof, and on the one side of him there was a
mighty Giant, adorned in the same manner and guise. And Claridiano did
straight ways know them, who kneeling down before them he said: Excellent
king Delfo my Lord, what sudden coming is this, in leaving your majesty's
kingdom. The king went toward him with his arms abroad, and said: Ah my
son, wherefore should my coming be but to recreate and rejoice my self in
seeing of thee, and to disturb this cruel battle that thou have with him
whom thou ought to honor and reverence, as it is thy duty. Then Galtenor
did cause them to hold their pe^ce, for that with a l^^de voice he began to
speak unto the Emperor Trebatio, and said.

Sovereign Emperor, long time past without any knowledge unto thee I came
into thy Empire, and my coming was the occasion of great heaviness and
sorrow unto the Empress Claridiana, whom I do see there armed with that
white armor. The Emperor when he heard that would not stay any more
reasonings, but went toward her, who pulling off her healme likewise came
toward him to kiss his hands, so there the one embraced and received the
other with great love. The king Galtenor did cut of their talk and addressed
his words unto the Empress Claridiana, and said: Sovereign Lady, do you
remember when that you did contemplate your self upon the beauty of your
children which you were delivered off, begotten by the Emperor Alphebo, at
which time a wall did open, whereat did enter a Serpent, who at two mouthfulls
did bury them in his bowels. You shall understand, Empress and Lady, that I
was the Serpent, being compelled and constrained by great necessity of the
strong arm of your mighty son, to do that which at that time I did, and I
did bring them up in the majesty as unto such persons was necessary and
dutiful. In the end of six years, when I determined to make an end of my
journey, resting our selves by the rivers side of Euphrates, I lost the maiden
child, where all the time past unto this present, she has been publishing
abroad her extreme beauty, till such time as the valor of her brother did
bring her from thence, who is the same that is talking with ye king Delfo of
Trapobana, and know this of a certainty Lady, that it is thy son
Claridiano of the Spear. Thou did give him that name by reason of a Spear
that he has on his breast from his birth, and that fair Pastora who^ you do
see there, is your proper daughter, and I am he that did rob and take them from
you, and here I do make restitution of them again, so that I do deserve
pardon of all the sorrow and grief which I have been the occasion of, only
with this present which I do present you withal. And likewise of you Emperor
of Trabisond, I do desire the same pardon, and jointly therewith to forget the
anger that you have against your own son. Great was the joy and contentment
of the Empress, being almost beside her self, to see that she had recovered
her two children, which she thought had been lost long ago, and going to
embrace Claridiano, she found him upon his knees, asking pardon of his Father
of all that before had passed. What shall I here say of the good Trebatio,
who when he knew that the Pastora was his nephew (and that his desire was of a
daughter, and never had any) with his arms al abroad he went unto her, who
understanding their communication, did alight from her Palfraie, at which time
the Emperor came and took her in his arms, almost weeping for joy, and with
very amorous words he did embrace her, and received so great contentment of
their recovery as ever he did in all his life for any thing.

How the Emperor did very much rejoice himself with his nephews, but in
especial with the Pastora, and of the great tempest which came upon them at
supper time, and of all that happened afterward. Chap. 30.
WIth this great joy and pleasure which I have told you they returned unto
Constantinople, the Emperor Trebatio carried with him the Pastora, and would
not one moment a part himself from her, and the Empress went talking with
Claridiano. The Emperor Alphebo was not a little joyful, who went in the
company of the king Delfo,, and Galtenor went beside the Empress, who knew
not how to give him sufficient thanks for his coming. And at that instaunt
being all present, they alighted at the Pallaice, and the Emperor Trebatio
carried the Pastora unto her graundmother, committing her unto her custody for
to make much of her. And he took the king of Trapobana by the hand, and
rendered unto him very much courtesy, and therewith entered into a fair
hall, whereas they found the Tables covered, and sat down to supper, whereas
they were with great joy and pleasure, such as never was seen the like in the
Court. The Emperor and the two Kings were set together, then the Emperor
Alphebo and the Empresses, and by them Claridiano and the Pastora, who was
beheld of all them that were there present, much meruailing at her great
beauty. Coridon did serve them at ye table, very much delighted with that he
had seen. The Supper endured so long, that Diana did extend her beams: at
this time they took up the tables, and Galtenor with a loud voice said: One
of the high glories of my Esclarisido, son Claridiano, shall appear in this
great City, before the day do come. He had no sooner made an end of these
words, when that the heavens began to wax dark with a very thick cloud,
and it came with great thunderings and lightenings, and with so terrible a
noise, as though the earth would have sunk, and the longer it endured, the
more was the fury thereof: in such sort, that they all fell upon their knees,
and with great humility, they desired god to deliver them from the fury of
that great tempest. So with this sudden chance, they passed away the night
till ye morning, and although the tempest in some part ceased, yet the heavens
remained all cloudie. When the morning was come, there appeared before the
pallaice nigh unto ye enchantment of Lindabrides, a very strange adventure,
which made them all to marvel, and straight way they gave the Emperor to
understand thereof, who went out of the Pallayce with all his Knights, with
great desire to know what it was, so likewise went forth his sons and
nephews. And when they came into the Court, they saw that there was fi^ed
four pillars, every one of a very fine Rubie, upon the which was placed a
Sepulchar of Crystal, and within the sepulch^r there seemed to be a very
fair Lady, her breast pierced thorough with a sword, and upon the S^pulcher
there ^aye a man all a long, with his face looking up to the heavens, and
apparailed with robes of estate, with a Crown of gold upon his head.

And under the Sepulcher was there spread abroad a great Carpet a cloth of
gold, and upon it two pillowes of the same, and upon them lay a knight armed
with very rich armor, and his sword lay at his feet, his eyes were shut,
and out of them distilled very great tears, at every pillar there was a
Gentlewoman which seemed to be without any remembrance, although they wept
very bitterly, and nigh unto the Sepulcher there ^aie a terrible great beast,
of the very same making of that which Claridiano slew, for to set at liberty
the king of Arabia Lapetra. (This was the spectacle yt Claridiano saw coming
in the air.) The Sepulcher was compassed round about with a strong wall, with
four gates for to enter in thereat, the gates were after the manner and
color of fine Diamonds: near unto the gate which was over against the
Pallaice, was there a Marble pillar, at the which hung a Bugle horn, and an
Epitaph written with red Letters, the which the Prince Rodolpho did read with
a high voice, that all that were there might hear him, and it said as
follows. At such time as the cruelty of the king of Arabia, Lepetra shall be
at liberiie, and the valor of that worthy Claridiano known, then they which
has not ben wounded with love, shall know both the reason and the rage of love,
for the which cause I do advise him that does not know what love is, not to
prove this adventure if he will not fall into great misfortune, for that cause
he must pass by pure force, all the force that Claridiano made plain. And
this shall endure till such time as the bastard Lion, son unto the Imperial
lion, be borne of the ravening Ounce. Then he who has love in his breast, and
passed through that unhappy Lady, daughter unto the king of Arabia, shall see
the great rage without reason of love. The Emperor when he heard that it were
things which touched his nephew, said: Oh excellent adventure of my Claridiano,
this day is showed unto us his great valor, Galtenor told unto those knights
all that had passed in ye adventure until that day, which caused in them great
admiration, and more, at the making of that strange beast who they did behold
very atentiuely, and with this they passed away all that day, and the Pastora
did change her accustomed apparel into robes of silk, and cloth of gold,
showing ye great estate and beauty in all points which was in her. All the
whole court received great pleasure, saving only the Princess Oliuia, who for
the absence of her Rosicleer, all things did seem contrary unto her, far
different from the iudgemente^ of all other. So the time drew on for to go to
rest. Then Galtenor took Claridiano by the hand and lead him a part on the one
side of the hall, and said unto him: I will carry thee with me into a place,
whereas thy heart a new shall be wounded, and shall forget the love which
before thou have had, and therewith he commanded him to arm himself in great
secret, ye success of the same shall be told you hereafter. The next day in
the morning, when they were all ready to go to hear service with the
Emperor, there entered into the hall a knight of a great stature and
proportion of his members, and was armed with very rich armor, his face and
his hands were unarmed, and showed by his demeanor a great majesty and
severe countenance, he was of his face somewhat brown of color, but the
proportion thereof was very well favored, and his beard began to bud, he
brought after him three squires and Pages, the one of them brought his Spear
which was big and short, and the other brought his healme, and the third
brought his sheeld with an Imperial device, and straight way it was known
wherefore his coming was, and although conformable to reason we have not
spoken any thing of the fair matrone the queen of Lyra, who with prosperous
weather and great pleasure did nauigate by the sea, helped by the fury of
Borias, which with a fresh wind did continually fill those stiff sails, and
cutting the seas with that sharp steme, leaving behind them the token of their
great and swift way, by the froth of the water, and in short time discovering
land, they took port upon the shore of Almaine, whereas this fair Lady went a
land, and with her two Nymphs took their journey toward the Court of
Almaine. So she travailed two days, and nothing chanced worth the telling.

The third day entering in amongst the thick and craggie mountains, she
lost her way amongst a company of high and thick Pine trees, amongst the
which she gave a thousand turns, not knowing which way to take to bring her
self out thereof. So with this sorrow and grief she passed all that day till
night came upon them, at such time as they had found a very narow and not much
used way, which lead them up to a high and mighty steep mountain, in which
place they determined to rest themselves, til such time as Phoebus should make
her return, passing away the night in very goo^ communication with her
Gentlewomen, and did sup with that which they continually were provided off. So
when the break of the day was come, the Queen did very well peruse her
armor, and put her self on horsbacke, and for that the way seemed to be
somewhat dangerous, she put on her helm and carried her Spear in her hand,
and with great travail they followed that way, when they had well near spent
the third part of the day, and had made an end of the going up that mountain,
being upon the top thereof, they looked about them on all parts, and
toward the right hand on the foot of that high mountain they saw a
company of armed men, and by reason that they were so far of, they could not
discern what it should be. So straight way they descended down the mountain,
and when they came at the foot thereof, they looked round about to see if they
could discover that which they had seen from the top of the same, and saw
that there were to the number of twenty knights very well armed, and amongst
them a Giant, who brought with them two knights prisoners, armed with very
rich armor, all saving their heads, and with them a Lady who was as sad and
sorrowful, as fair and beautiful, and with her certain Gentlewomen which
did bear her company. These were the unhappy Earl of Tirol, and his sister,
and Don Florisarte of Bauiera, who as I have told you were taken prisoners in
the way going toward Esprich, whom this valiant matrone did see coming down
the Mountain, and when this worthy Gentlewoman did see this great force and
wrong done, she was very desirous to know ye occasion what should move them to
do that outrage, or else to procure to set them at liberty, and hasting on
her way, larging her pace more then she did before, she in a short space came
and ouertooke them, and by reason that the Queen made great have, and the
noise of her coming was great, the Gyaunt was constrained to look back, to
see what it was that caused so great a noise, and when he saw that it was a
knight that came after him, he determined to stay and abide his coming. And
when she was come nigh him, this courageous Lady with a manly voice said: Tell
me Gyaunt what evil has these prisoners committed, that so without all reason
thou do carrye them so manakled and bound. The Gyaunt did stay and behold
her with great frowning, and answered her with a wrathful voice and said.
What honor and prowess is it to thee, for that thou art so desirous to know,
and with so great pride do ask the question? No other thing said this
unknown Gentlewoman, but to make friendship where none is, and again if of
thee they do receive any grief or wrong, to amend the same, for that I do
know that the condition of all Gyaunts, is nothing, but procuring to do all
wrong, therefore determine to tell me, or make thy self ready to thy defense.
The fury of the Giant was very great when that he heard these words, in such
sort, that it seemed fire flew out of his eyes, and with that fury he spurred
forwards his horse. The like did that worthy matrone, at that time they set
spurs to their horses, and with a swift course they made their encounter, and
stroke their Spears upon their steely sheelds, the Spear of the Giant made
his stay upon the finenesse of the inchaunted sheelde, but this Lady did not
only pearce through his armor, but also through his breast and body,
overthrowing him dead with great fury to ye ground, whereas he gave a terrible
fall that he made the earth to tremble, and the Queen passed a long so
quietlye as though she had done nothing, and with great lightness she turned
about her horse, with her naked sword in her hand, and saw that the Gyaunt lay
a long on the ground dead. When the Knights of the Gyaunt saw that furious
encounter, and that their principal refuge was dead, without any more tarrying,
they altogether did assault her, and this worthy matron put her self against
them, who was with them incountred on all sides round about, but yet they did
not move her from her saddle little nor much: but she returned against them in
such sort, that she with her mighty blows, made their harness and read
blood (...) round about the field. These Knights were all chosen Knights, and
did trouble her very much, making her sundry times to loose the sight of her
eyes, yt which did bring her very much in cholar, in such sort that she threw
her shield at her back, and taking her sword in both her hands, she bestarred
her self on the one side and on the other, about their heads, and wounding of
knights, overthrowing of them to the ground dead, in such sort, that when she
remembered her self, there was no more but five of ye Knights left alive, who
when they saw so great slaughter in so short time, they determined the
separation of the controversy, and to put more confidence in their horse
feet, than in their own defense and putting it in ure, they ran away. This
Lady made no reckoning to follow them, but went straight way and did unloose
the Prisoners. Unto whom Don Florisarte of Bauiera did give thanks for all the
rest, desiring him that he would declare unto them his name for that they might
know unto whom they were bound, for that great benefit done unto them. The
Lady did answer them with great courtesy and said: Gentle Knights, my name
is of so small valor, that I cannot be known by it: but that which I may do
to give you contentment, is to pull off my healme, and in seeing my face, you
shall see if that at any time you have heard any mention of me: and in saying
these words, she her self did unlace and took off her helm, And look with
what beauty the Radiaunt Sun does show himself upon a sudden when all
his beams has been hidden with a dark cloud: even so, and rather more, did
this excellent and beautiful face show it self, after that she had pulled off
her healme, the which before did cou^r the same.

The Knights when they saw her great beauty, they very much meruailed, and
believed that in the proportion of his great beauty, it should be Poliphebo of
Tinacria. Then Don Florisarte said: Your excellent and beautiful face, and
your high and mighty deeds, gentle Knight, d^eth make us believe two things:
the one, that thou were borne to remedy and aid those that can do little:
the other, we do believe that thou art brother, or some kinsman, unto that
^aire Poliphebo Prince of Tinacria, son unto the Emperor Trebatio, who now
is called the Knight of the Branch, by reason of a gold Branch that he
carries on his shield for his device, as you do upon your healme: and here I
do desire you, to tell us whether you are his brother or not, for that we are
much bound unto him, and there they declared unto her, all yt was done for
them, as before you have heard. The which was the occasion, that there kindeled
in ye queen, a great desire to know him, and informing her self how that he
was gone toward Grecia, she did determine to follow him, to see if she might
meet with him, to prove her self on him.

And being in this thought she made answer unto that they demanded, and
said: This Knight whom you do speak off, I do not know him, neither have I
seen him at any time, but have heard news of his heroycall deeds of arms:
and I am very glad that you have taken this service as a deed done by him.
Then the fair Clarentina said. Ah flower of all Knighthoode, wherefore will
you thus hide your self from them, who are so much bound unto your service. I
know not unto whom I should attribute it, but unto my unhappy and ill fortune,
for that I do well see that thou art Poliphebo, the flower of all those that
do wear armor: do not deny me, being so well known. Gentle Lady said the
Queen, by that which I owe unto my highness, I protest unto you, that I am
not the party that you do speak off: and here I do swear unto you, that I
am a woman as you are, and I am called Archisilora Queen of Lyra: and this
Prince whom you have in so great price, I never saw. Then Clarentina did
believe that which the queen had said, and in beholding her, she did plainly
perceive by the delicateness of her face that she was a woman. There the
Qu^ene of Lira did take her leave of them, and returned the way from whence she
came, and came into a village in the county of Tirol, whereas she did take her
rest all that night. When the morning was come, and she in a readiness to
travail, she took her way toward Hungary, with determination, not to make
any stay, till she came into Grecia, whether as she came in the end of her
great travail, without any other adventure happening, and always having in
remembrance the Knight of the Branch. So one day very early in the morning at
the break of the day, she entered into a very fair forest, very nigh unto
Constantinople, and at such time as the Sun would extend his golden beams,
she saw lying under a tree, a very big and well made knight, who was a sl^epe,
and his shield did hang upon a tree, and thereon she saw the devise of the
knight of the Branch, the which b^eing well marked by the Queen, she
understood, that he which lay there a sleep, was the owner of that shield and
the Knight whom she sought for. And nigh unto the shield was his spear, set up
against a tree: and looking about her to see if he had any company, she saw
within a small distaunce from him a Lady likewise a sleep, and by her a Page,
and therewith she was fully certified, that he was the same Knight that she
looked for. So there she was a good while, beholding his gentle disposition
and stature, and grave countenance, till such time as she did determine to do
that, which in the chapter following shall be told you.

How the Knight Poliphebo and the Queen of Lira had cruel battle, and of
all that happened therein. Cap. 31.
AFter that this fair Matron had with great deliberation beheld this warlike
Tinacrian upon the green grass a sleep, she determined with the great end
of her spear, to touch him upon his armed breast, yt which was no sooner
done, but he awaked and started with the sudden calling of him out of his
sleep: but opening his eyes, and seeing before him that big and well set
Knight, with a trice he arose upon his feet, and in great have he laced on his
healme, and took his shield from the place whereas it hung, he did well show in
the great have he made in besturring himself, the great liveliness of his
courage. The Queen when she saw him all in a readiness to the battle, with
a gracious laughter said. I would never have thought that there had been so
great an oversight in a knight and especially of such fame, that so without
all fear of a great number that cannot abide them, but procure all evil
possible against them, that without all care in the high way does put himself
to sleep. The Tinacrian answered, and said: There was not in me so great
oversight, as in you care, to venture your self, whereas you shall receive
little profit of the same. And does it seem unto thee, that I was ouerseene
therein? Possibly thou will judge the contrary, if thou will prove the
strength of my arm. It cannot but be very much, if it be conformable unto thy
oversight, said this fair Lady, and believe me that it would grieve me to
make any proof, if there be in thee so great virtue, as thy fame does bear
the report. Therefore take to thee thy horse, and let either of us procure to
make his defense, and here I do advise thee, that I am none of the Knights
that hethertoo thou have proved in Grecia. In the mean time that she was saying
these words, the Tinacrian did very much behold her, and although he was very
angry at the words which she had spoken* yet he said. Well seeing it is so,
that thy follye does so much constrain thee to make a controversy without any
occasion, tarry, and thou shall see, how I was wont to punish such foolish
people as thou art, and so in great have he called for his horse, which was
straight way brought unto him by Macedonio, and without putting foot into the
stirroppe, he leaped into the saddle, and took his spear in his hand, and
without replying any other thing, that valiant Tinacrian presently withdrew
himself back, and took of the field that part which was needful for him.
The like did the Queen, and at one time returned their light horses, and in
great have they stroke their horses with the spurs, without all pity, and with
extreme fury, they made the encounter upon their sheelds, that their spears
shiuered all to pieces, and passed along with their course without any stay of
their bodies, or moving in their saddles, and turned about their horse with
great lightness with their swords in their hands. The Queen stroke the first
blow at the Prince, that she made the sparks to fly out of his helm, and
the Prince to decline his head to the saddle bow, who with great lightness did
settle himself again in the saddle, and did clear himself from the second
blow, which was ready to be discharged upon him: and putting himself on the
one side, he stroke her such a blow upon the helm, that it made a great sounds
throughout all the fields and craggie mountains, and she fell backwards upon
the horse crouper with her head: but very quickly she arose up again, and
settled her self, and with great ire she laid fast hold upon her sword, to
strike her enemy, whom she did not find idle, but rather began to assault her
with blows of mortal battle. Such blows was stroke betwixt them, that with
the least they thought either of them to make an end of that controversy. At
this time, there came that way a Knight, who was armed with very rich armor.
This was that strong and mighty Brufaldoro, who if you do remember, with ye
mighty and strong blow given by the Tinacrian, remained all along the floor
in his galley without remembrance. And when he came unto himself, with his
accustomed bravery, he would follow that way which the bark went: but calling
to remembrance the great travail and sorrow in the which his Lady was, love
did there constrain him to follow his own journey. And when he came thither,
he understood that Poliphebo had set her at liberty, and carried her with him,
toward the Almaine Court: and by the way that he travailed, he met with people
which did tell him of all that had happened, and all signs and tokens of the
Knight that carried away his Lady, and by them he did understand that he was
his enemy: then he left his own armor, and armed himself with that which
was Bramarants, and followed that way which was told him he went. The fame was
such, that this Tinacrian left behind him, that wheresoever he came, or
wheresoever he went, he always had news which way he travailed, until that
time, that he came and found him in battle with that worthy Queen, where he
staid to behold a battle so well fought. At length he knew him very well to
be the Knight that brought him into so great extremity: and looking about him
on them that were beholding the battle, amongst the rest he knew his loving
wife: and although his joy was very great in seeing of her, yet the wrath and
ire that he had against the Knight was so much, that without saying any word
unto the Queen his wife, he went toward them that were in battle, and with
his sword drawn in his hand, he put himself before the Queen and said. I
do desire thee gentle Knight that thou would rest and take thine ease, and
let me alone with my strong arm take reuengement of this knight, usurper of my
loving wife, and a robber of my fame and honor, and without any other
detainment, he went against him for to strike at him mortal blows. But then
that worthy Gentlewoman with great anger said.

Stand away Knight, and let me make an end of that I have begun, and offer no
wrong unto them that do know how to make their their demand unto thy cost:
and therewith she put her self before him. But this furious Pagan with the
great desire he had to make his reuengement turned and put himself before the
Queen striking at the Tinacrian mighty and strong blows, who did not much
marvel neither at the one nor at the other, but assaulted the Pagan with a
marvelous mighty blow. The Queen at that time did put her self before him
again, and upon her was executed that blow upon the left shoulder, which did
grieve her very much, as it appeared by her outward countenance. At this time
the Pagan put himself again foremost: then this furious Lady with her sword
all aloft, said. Keep thy self back, thou vile Knight, and of base lineage,
and let me make an end of this that I have begun, before that the potencye of
my arm, do overthrow thy great pride. Stand thou back said the Pagan, for it
is my right to take vengeance on this evil Knight, for that he does carry my
Lady robbed from me. In these words which was spoken, the Tinacrian did know
the other to be ye king of Mauritania, who brought him in so great extremity
at the beginning of his Knighthood, for the which he was very full of ire and
wrath, insomuch that a thick smoke came forth at his beauer. At this time came
unto that place Don Claridiano of the spear, the light of all Knighthood, who
was armed with his purple armor, and as I have told you, he departed out of
the Emperors pallaice in great secret. And when he saw the great contention
that was betwixt those knights, being very desirous to know the occasion, he
put himself between them, and desired them to leave off that battle. The
furious Pagan answered: thou knight, put not thy self to understand any matter
before thou art called: for if thou do, possibly thou shall bear part of
that, which this unfortunate knight does owe me. Then Claridiano said: I know
not wherein he should be indebted unto thee, but rather I do understand that
thou art he that has least reason, for that the other knight of the branch,
was the first that begun this battle. First he did to me the grief, said the
Pagan, before the other. For that I gave unto him the order of knighthood, and
after that I had given it him, he did defy me in mortal battle: and not
content heerwith, he has robbed me of my Lady which thou do see yonder. To
these words the Tinacrian answered and said. Thou lie like an evil knight,
for yt I have not robbed her, but I have delivered her from that place, from
whence thou with all thy power were not sufficient to deliver her: and for thy
falsehood, thou shall not carry her away without mortal battle. This furious
pagan when he heard himself so ill spoken off, like a Lion he went against him:
but that stout Dame did put her self before him, and said. Stand back then
Pagan and importunate devil, for first thou shall have to do with me, or else
thou shall let me make an end of my pretense. This brave Tinacrian like a
furious Lion, said unto ye Greek Prince: Courteous knight, I pray you to stand
back somewhat and let me alone with them both, for that I do esteem both of
the^ but a little. And with loud voice he said: Come, come against me thou
Pagan king, and of little valor, and take in company with thee that other
arrogant fool as thou art, for that of both you together I do mean to set an
agreement with ye strength and force of my indomable arm. Then Claridiano
said, it shall not be so, but first procure to clear thy self of him with the
branch, and I will set thee at liberty of the pagan. And therewith he drew out
his sword, and stroke him such a blow, yt he made him to tremble and remain as
one amazed: and seeing him in ye case, he stroke him another blow upon the
beuer, that he made the pagan to grype fast about his horse neck to keep
himself from falling. But this Moore came quickly again to himself, and with
a furious courage he stroke him upon the left sholder such a blow that it made
the Greek to shrink in his body, and to stoop down to his saddle bow, with
ye great grief that he fell, and giving a terrible groan, he lift up his
sword, and stroke the pagan a blow upon ye helm, that the sparks of fire flewe
into the air, and almost without remembrance, he fell down upon his horse
crupper. The pagan coming again unto him self, puffed out at his beuer a
thick smoke, and threw his sheeld at his back, and stroke the Greek so
terrible a blow, that without all remembrance, he fell forwards upon his
horses ears, who carried him a while up and down ye field: but presently he
came again unto himself, and seeing yt he was so ill entreated, he took his
sword in both his hands, and set spurs to his horse side, that he made him to
run like unto the wind, so that he was straight with the Pagan, and stroke him
such a blow, that it seemed a whole tower had fallen upon him, and having no
power to the contrary, he fell upon his horse neck without any feeling: who
being scarred with that terrible blow, with a swift course carried his master
from his enemy. In all this time was not the Tinacrian nor that fair dame
idle: but when they saw the battle begun betwixt the two Knights, with great
fury they returned unto their battle, and for that the Tinacrian was full of
anger, he threw his sheeld at his back, and stroke at the Queen so mighty a
blow and with so great fury yt he made her to fall down upon the buttock of
her horse without any remembrance, who carried her a while round about the
field. The Queen came quickly again unto her self, so wrathful, that she
had no other thought, but to take reuengement on her enemy, and throwing her
shield to the ground, she took her sword in both her hands, and stroke her
horse with the spurs, that she made him run like unto the wind, and with a
trice she was with the Tinacrian, and stroke him so upon the healme that with
the fire which slew out thereat, he lost his sight, and this valiant young
Knight fell backwardes upon his horse crupper without any feelyng, who carried
him up and down the field, which when the Lady saw, she would have finished the
battle, with another rigorous blow. At this time it so fell out that the
horse of that valiant African with his master, did likewise run about the
field, the which was the occasion, that the Greek might behold all that
passed, and with a trice he was with them and said. Withdraw thy self for that
it is not the part of heroycall Knights to pursue and follow them that are
without remembrance. The Lady who was very angry, gave the Greek for answer,
a furious blow, but straight way she was paid again with ye like: where betwixt
them began a new battle. In the mean time the Tinacrian and the Pagan were
come again unto themselves, and settled in their saddles, and either of them
looked about for his adversary, whom they beheld in mortal battle. And they
two being together, which did hate each other deadly, made no reckoning of
their late enemies, but assalted one another very furiously and strongly. All
this was great profit unto the Queen of Lira, for that the Tinacrian was so
mighty and furious, that she should have been in great peril. I cannot tell
you who was more furious of these two warriors, but I can say this, that
Claridiano was very sore wounded and overcome, as hereafter shall be told
you, in such sort, that no medicine might avail to help him. Thus they
endured four hours without taking any rest, fighting more fiercely then at
the beginning. And being in this controversy, toward the parts next the sea
side, they saw coming Rosicleer, and that stout Troyan, and the Prince
Meridian, who seeing the battle, did stay to behold them. Rosicleer knew
straight ways the armor of Bramarant, who seeing them in the power of
another, was very full of wrath, and without any more tarrying, he put himself
in the midst among them, and with a furious voice he said. Tell me knight, who
made thee so bold to take this armor, from the place whereas I put them for a
Tropheo and remembrance. The Pagan answered him and said: Superbious and
proud knight, art thou by fortune one of those Greek Princes, who with great
threatenings do defend this armor. I am one of them said Rosicleer, and he
that will take away thy life for thy boldness, and therewith he drew out his
sword for to assault him: but the Tinacrian did put himself before him and
said with great courtesy as unto his elder brother. Knight and prince of
Grecia, let not your highness do me so much wrong, to hinder me from being
revenged on this Knight, let me alone with him, for that I have so much hope
in ye strength of my arm, to give a good account of him. Therefore I do
desire thee to stand a little a side. Rosicleer would have answered him, but
upon a sudden he saw coming from the part of Pireo, a Knight; armed with
russet armor, garnished with stripes and bars of gold, his shield was
likewise Russet and there was painted on it, the God Cupide with two faces.

This was that valiant Eleno prince of Dacia, who seeing the controversy
betwixt those three knights, passed forwards on his way, saying unto Rosicleer
without looking upon his armor and device: Knight thou do wrong to disturb
them them that first began the battle. But Rosicleer with ye great anger and
wrath he had to see that armor in a strangers power, did not behold the device
of his Cousin, and so being both blind, without any consideration, they
assaulted one another in mortal battle. This Dacian was not slothful in
drawing out of his sword, and to return his salutation. At such time as from
that part of Grecia, there appeared a great number of Knights. But now my pen
waxes werye, and my afflicted spirits does constrain me to make an end of the
second part of this history: for that with a new courage, I may have time to
translate the third part, which is full of prowess and valiant deeds.
Beginning from the battle whereas we left Rosicleer, in the Island whereas he
set Meridian at liberty from a furious Giant, as has been told you. And in
the second of Don Eleno of Dacia, and by what adventure he came into this
place, whereas he shall end this his new begun battle. Therefore I do request
thee gentle Reader, that if in these two books thou have received any
contentment to desire thee Muses to aid, help and succor me, and not to
leave me, that I may bring unto light ^he deeds and glorious end of these
Princes and Knights, with the love of Claridiano, and Rosaluira. O Calliope
with thy aid and help, I will not stay my hand, till such time as I have
declared all the whole deeds and policy used in these their feats of arms,
for that by all reason I am bound to conclude the same.

FINIS.
THe cruel battle that past between the Knight of the sun, and ye fierce
Giant Bramarant, in which bickering, the Giant perceiving that he must needs
have the worst, murdered himself. Cap, 1. fol. 1. a. The worthy knight
Rosicleer finding Bramarant giving up the ghost, after he was dead, did intombe
his corpse near unto a Pine apple tree, wherein he did ingraue an Epitaph.
Cap. 2. fol. 4. b. Prince Rosicleer travailing on his way, having already
taken leave of the Princesses Ladies, did chance upon a certain adventure, and
of the success he had therein. Cap. 3. fol. 1^. a The great sorrow that the
knight of the Sun received* in thinking of his own disloyalty, and that
which happened unto him. Cap. 4. fol. 23. b How the Grecian knight persuaded
his uncle the Prince of Dacia, to accompany him, and leave that sorrowful and
desolate life, and of that which after happened to him. Cap. 5. fol. 26. b. Of
the terrible battle yt this Grecian Prince had with the Giant, and of all the
adventures that chanced in the said battle. Cap. 6. fol. 32. a. How the
knight Eleno had battle with Tefereo the giants cousin, and the success that
was therein, and how the Prince Eleno by a strange adventure was separated
from his cousin and Tefereo. Chap. 7. fol. 37. a. By what adventure ^loramont
was delivered from the peril he was in, and how the Princess Claridiana was
delivered of child, and how she was comforted in all her trouble by the wise
Artemidoro. Chap ^. fol. 44. a How that when the king of Hungary was taking
his leave to depart, there came a Giant, having a cruel and furious
countenance, who defied the Emperor and his sons, and of all that chanced
therein. Chap. 9. fol. 49. a How the king of Tire gave an as^alt to rob the
ship where Rosicleer was, and how the same king was come. Ca. 10. fo. 53. b How
the king of Sardenia was baptized, and how a Lady demanded a promise of the
Emperor, which he granted, for the which all the court was very sad. Chap.
11. fol. 58. b. How ye Emperor undid a scrowle of parchment, and therein read
the cause why a certain dead Lady was slain with cruel tyranny, and of the
great sorrow he received for the same. Cap. 12. fo. 65. b How ye Emperor
Trebatio did land at the Island Citarea, and of all that happened there. Chap.
13. fo. 71. a. How the Lady Lidia talked with her knight Brenio, demanding
the cause of his discontinent, and of other accidents. Chap. 14. fol. 74. a.
How the Emperor when he was recovered of the werinesse which he received at
the sea, travailed in the same Island where he was cast a land, and how he met
with certain knights, with who^ he had battle. Chap 1^. fol. 81. b. How the
two children of the great Alphebo were stolen away by the Gyaunt Galtenor, and
what succeeded of ye same. Chap 16. fo 87. a. Of the great pain that the
Prince sustained for the absence of his cousin, and how he had battle with a
certain knight that was afflicted with love, and of all that chanced therein
Chap. 17. fo. 90. b. How the Prince met in Paris with the knight of the Images,
and of the battle he had with him, and how they overcame the three knights
that did accuse the Princess, and of all that happened besides. Chap. 18. fol.
99. a. Of all that happened unto the far Lidia, and to the Prince Eleno,
after they departed the mountain where as they met. Chap. 19. fol. 105. (...),
and of that which passed in ye battle which he had with ye Earl of Modique.
Chap. 20. fol. 111. a. How the queen being in love with the Emperor, and
seeing that he would give her no remedy, would have slain her self, and how
the Emperor was constrained to consent unto her will. Cap. 21 fol. 123. b. How
the Emperor went into ye field against the Pagan Bramarandus, and of all that
happned in the battle between them. Chap. 22. fol 125. a. How the fair
Queen Garrofilea made great lamentation for the departure of ye Emperor, and
how at their last being together, she remained with child by him. Chap. 23.
fol. 130. a How the knight of the Sun would have tarried for Tefereo in ye
place where as he appointed him, and how he lost his way in a thick mountain,
and of all that happened after that. Chap. 24. fo. 132. b. How the Greek
Emperor did disimbarke himself at the City of Cimarra, and what happened
unto him there. Chap. 25. fo. 139. a. How Eleno before he would go into the
field, would see the Sepulcher of Lidia, and what chanced in the battle
appointed with the Emperor, his kinsemen and friends. Chap. 26. fol. 146. a.
How the two Empresses went to recreate themselves unto a house of pleasure, and
how the king of Mauritania found them in their pastimes, and knowing who they
were, would have laid hold upon the Empress Briana. Chap. 27. fol 151. How the
worthy Queen Archisilora went to pursue the Pagan, and what happened to her
in the way. cap. 28. fo. 158. b How the famous Rosicleer and Brandimardo went
to the kingdom of Lyra, and of all which passed in the battle fol* 164. b.
The end of the Table of the first book.
The Table of the second book.
OF the Prince Claridiano, and how the king of Arginaria sent to ye king of
Trapobana, and of all that happened to the messenger. Chap. 1. fol. 169. How
Claridiano went unto the camp of the king of Arginaria, and demanded of him
battle, and of all that succeeded in the same. Chap. 2. fol. 174. b. How a
Damsel messenger from the queen of Tinacria, and came brought a Letter unto
the Emperor of Grecia, and of all that passed about the same. Chap. 3. fol.
^81. a. How the Dacian Prince did meet with Brenio, to whom he gave the
Letter of Lidia, and of Brenios death. Chap. 4. fo. 186. b How Eleno went out
of the forest to see the adventure of those knights which passed by, and of
the battle he had with them. Chap. 5. fol 193* a. How when the valiant
Mauritanian had slain the Tartarian Zoylo, he put on the armor of Bramarant
for that he would not be known, and of all that happened therein. Chap. 6.
fo. 199. a. How the fierce Brufaldoro having spoken evil of women, and of all
lovers, was taken in the snares of love with a Lady that he met after he had
finished the battle with Zoylo Chap 7. fo. 202. b. How Claridiano was very
sad to see that he was an armed knight, only for one worthy feate of
arms, and how he departed from the king Delfo. Chap. 8. fol. 209. a. Of the
battle that Claridiano had with the fierce and timorous Gyaunt, son unto
the other Gyaunt which he had slain, and of all that happened in the same.
Chap 9. fo. 217. a. Of the great travail that the Greek knight and the Ladies
had for lack of victualles by reason of their long journey, and how they found
a Giant whom the Prince si^e, and what order they had to help themselves to
victuals* cap. 10. fol. 219. How Claridiano and his company went unto the
triumph of Nabatca, and of all that happened unto them by ye way. Chap. 11. fol.
225. b, How Claridiano was assaulted with two furious giants and fifteen
knights that came with them, and of the battle that he had with them all.
Chap. 12. fol. 229. a. How the knight and the Ladies went unto a Castle, and
of the great treason that was there ordained by art Magic, Chap. 13. fol. 232
b. How the king of Nabatea had understanding what the Greek Prince had done in
the Castle, and how he commanded that the Serpent and the heads of the Gyaunts
should be set at the entrye of the gate of the Palace: and how the triumph
began, and of all that passed in the time of the feasts, Chapter. 14. fol.
238. a. How the heroycall Greek was wounded with the part of Cupid, in
beholding the beauty of a very fair Pastora, and of the great grief that he
sustained. Chap. 15. fol. 241. b. How Rosicleer found in an Island the son of
Alicandro, leading a troublesome life, with his fair and well-beloved wife,
whom he set at liberty* Chap 16. fol. 247. How Rosicleer entered into the
Castle, and of the battle he had therein, for to bring out of prison the
Prince^ spouse unto the Prince Meridian, being there kept. Chap. 17. fol. 251.
b. How the king Fangomadan came with out knowing of any thing that happened in
the Castle, and found the entrye closed, and of the battle that was
between him and Rosicleer. Chap. 18. fol. 256. b. Of the battle which
Claridiano ha^ with the Prince of Palestina, and how he had the victory,
giving liberty unto Antemisca, and the rest. Chap. 19. fo. 258. b. How
Claridiano trauayled by Armenia, and of the strange adventures that happened
in that Country. Chap. 20. fol. 266. b. How Claridiano after he had read the
history in the parchment, blew the horn, and the gatts were opened, and how
resistaunce was made at the entry, and of all that passed about the same. Cap.
21. fol. 26^. a. How Claridiano being overcome with the love of the Pastora
disguised himself in shepherds apparel, the beteer to enjoy her sight, and of
all that happened therein. Chap. 22. fo. 281. a. How Poliphebo because his
mother would not give him the order of knighthoode, went secretly from the
court, and of all that happened to him. Chap. 23. fol. 287. a. How the worthy
Tinacrian prosecuted his voyage, and chanced whereas he found the Queen of
Mauritania evil entreated of a Giant, and of the battle he had with him.
Chap. 24. fol. 292. a. How Poliphebo prosecuted his journey for to go into
Grecia, and how in the way he met by adventure with certain Clownes forcing
of a Lady, and would have slain her, and what happened roaching that Lady.
Chap. 25. fol. 295. (...) if any would come forth against him* and how
Rodelando and his cousin made battle with him, and how he overcame them both.
Chap. 26. fol. 301. b. How the emperor Alphebo would have persuaded ye
Princess Tigliafa to leave that lamentable life, which she refused to do, and
how the two knights departed, and of all that happened in their journey. Chap.
27. fol. 305. b. How the Prince of Polismago took the Pastora captive, and how
Filipensio (...). Chap. 2^. fol. 311. b. How Claridiano fought with his own
father, and how Galtenor knowing the ^arme that would come thereof remedied it.
Chap. 29. fol. 317. a How the Emperor Trebatio was rejoiced with his nephew
the Pastora, and of a great tempest, with other accidents. Chap. 50. fol. 326.
b. How Poliphebo and the queen of Lira had cruel battle, and what happened
therein. Chap. 31. fol 330. b.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Thomas East, dwelling between Paul's Wharfe and
Baynardes Castle. 1583.


