A WIFE NOW The Widow OF SIR THOMAS OVERBVRYE.

Being A most exquisite and singular Poem of the choice of a Wife.

WHEREUNTO ARE ADDED many witty Characters, and conceited News, written by
himself and other learned Gentlemen his friends.

Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori,
Coelo musa beat.
Hor: car: lib. 3. LONDON Printed for Lawrence Lisle, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head. 1614.

THE PRINTER TO the Reader.
THY ignorance may challenge liberty enough, not to relish the deep Art of
Poetry: because opinion makes thee obstinate; and rude tradition has taught
thee nothing but an abuse of knowledge. For when thou read a quaffing
fellows barbarism, a worthy-written style in Tragedies, and a collusiue
flourish only fronted with the name of excellent; thou ouer-lookst them all
with the usual contempt or aspersion of frivolous, and fantastic labors,
putting no difference betwixt the horse pictured on a signe-post, and the
curious limbd Pegasus: But the age gives one comfort in extremity, that as
there is a Lizard which assailes; so is there one, which wonders at the
majesty of man: sure I am if any shall neglect, nay not commend the worth of
this so generally approved Poem; he may (if it proceeds from nice critiscisme)
be well excluded as a churlish retainer to the Muses; (if from a direct plain
dealing) he must be degraded for insufficiency. For had such a volume been
extant among the ancient Romans, though they wanted our easy conseruations of
wit, by printing; yet would they rather, and more easily, have committed the
sense hereof to brass, and cedar leaves, then let such an Author, baue lost
his due eternity. If to converse with a creature so amiable, here described,
be thought more then difficult, let then the contemplation of it be admirable,
which has expressed the soul in so compact aforme of body. The surplusage,
that now exceeds the last edition, was (that I may be honestly impartial) in
some things only to be challenged by the first author, but others now added,
(little inferior to the residue) being in nature answerable, and first
transcribed by Gentlemen of the same quality, I have upon good inducements,
made public with warrantie of their and my own credit. Not doubting therefore
to be doubly discharged, both by the verdict of conscience and the welldeserued
thanks of all judicious Readers, I bid you every one farewell, May 16. 1614.

A MORNING-SACRIFICE to the Author.
THe only curse or blessing that betides
To men, (made doubtful) by their beauteous brides,
Could never (being apparent) satisfy
The full enioyer, with satietie
Of confidence, to call them good, or bad,
So much; as this good work (which chiefly had
A fair creation, to create anew
The soul of some, and to confirm some few)
Has rescued shameless judgment from the suit
Of mere opinion, and speaks absolute.
This widow book then, wife to ravished skill,
Married and made by the most maiden quill
Of one, not lost to her, though she to him,
Has leave to live thus single; richly trim,
Yet never to be challenged; being so chaste
In purity, and not to be embraced
Without the reverence of her wedlocks love;
Which when thou seem unwilling to approve,
Scorn a complete fair woman; and so grudge
Because thou have no liberty to judge.
Nor, let thy glorious confidence presume,
To make this Lady plyant, through perfume
Ospowdred phrase, and robes, or complement;
For though on pilgrimage thy learning went
In quest of such a wonder, yet thy pains
Were lost, although thy labri'ng suit obtaines:
For woman (in the abstract) has no more
Then has the wife, the widow, maiden, whore,
And altogether; therefore thou have none,
Except thy labors purchase such a one:
Which (to have said) they all agreed in Eve
Is all enough; if jealous man beleene.
By I. S. Lincolniensis Gentleman.

Brief Panegyrickes to the Authors praise.
To the Book.
Exposed to all thou will less worthy seem
I fear: wives common, all men disesteeme;
Yet some things have a differing fate: some fret
We doubt in wares which are in corners set:
Hid medalls rust, which being vsd grow bright;
The day more friendeth virtue then the night
Thou though more common, then may seem more good
I only wish thou may be understood.
G. R.

TO make a Wife of wit, or mere Philosophy,
And deck her up with flowers of sweetest poesy,
Is no hard task, but such a one of flesh to find
Would weary all the wits and bodies of mankind:
Since worse must serve the turn, then men must be content
To take such as they find, not such as they invent.
T. B.

WEll have thou said that woman should be such;
And were they that, had but a third as much
I would be married too: but that I know
Not what she is, but should be thou do show:
So let me praise thy work, and let my life
Be single, or thy widow be my wife.
X. Z.

Of the choice of a Wife.
IF I were to choose a woman,
As who knows but I may marry,
I would trust the eye of no man
Nor a tongue that may miscarry:
For in way of love and glory
Each tongue best tells his own story.
First to make my choice the bolder
I would have her child to such
Whose free virtuous lives are older
Then antiquity can touch,
For it is seldom seen that blood
Gives a beauty great and good.
Yet an ancient stock may bring
Branches I confess of worth,
Like rich mantles shadowing
Those descents that brought them forth,
Yet such hills though gilded show
Soonest feel the age of snow.
Therefore to prevent such care
That repentance soon may bring,
Like Merchants I would choose my ware,
Useful good, not glittering.
He that weds for state or face
Buys a horse to loose a race.
Yet I would have her fair as any,
But her own not kissed away:
I would have her free to many
Look on all like equal day,
But descending to the Sea
Make her set with none but me.
If she be not tall it is better,
For that word, A goodly woman,
Prints it self in such a letter
That it leaves vnstudied no man;
I would have my mistress grow
Only tall to answer no.
Yet I would not have her loose
So much breeding as to fling
Vnbecomming scorn on those
That must worship every thing.
Let her fear loose looks to scatter,
And loose men will fear to flatter.
Children I would have her bear
More for love of name then bed,
So each child I have is heir
To another maidenhead;
For she that in the act's afraid
Every night's another maid.
Such a one as when she is wood
Blushes not for ill thoughts past,
But so innocently good
That her dreams are ever chaste;
For that maid that thinks a sin
Has betrayed the fort she is in.
In my visitation still
I would have her seatter fears,
How this man, and that was ill;
After protestations tears;
And who vows a constant life
Crowns a meritorious wife.
When the Priest first gives our hands,
I would have her think but thus:
In what high and holy bands
Heaven, like twins, has planted us,
That like Aarons rod together
Both may bud, grow green, and wither.
FINIS.
THE METHOD.
FIrst of Marriage, and the effect thereof, children. Then of his contrary,
Lust; then for his choice. First, his opinion negatiuely, what should not be:
the first causes in it, that is, neither Beauty, Birth, nor Portion. Then
affirmatively, what should be, of which kind there are four: Goodness,
Knowledge, Discretion, and as a second thing Beauty. The first only is
absolutely good, the other being built upon the first do likewise become so.
Then the application of that woman by love to himself, which makes her a wife.
And lastly the only condition of a wife, Fitness.

A Wife.
EAch Woman is a brief of Womankind,
And does in little even as much contain;
As, in one Day and Night, all life we find,
Of either, More, is but the same again,
God framed Her so, that to Her husband, She,
As Eve, should all the world of Women be.
So framed he Both, that neither power he gave,
Use of themselves, but by exchange, to make:
Whence in their Face the Fair no pleasure have,
But by refl^xe of what thence other take:
Our Lips in their own Kiss no pleasure find,
Toward their proper Face, our Eyes are blind.
So God in Eve did perfect Man, begun,
Till then, in vain much of himself he had,
In Adam God created only one,
Eve, and the world to come in Eve he made;
We are two halfes, whiles each from other straies,
Both barren are; Joined both their like can raise.
At first both Sexes were in Man combin'de,
Man, a Shee-man did in his body breed;
Adam was Eues, Eve mother of Mankind,
Eve from Liue-flesh, Man did from Dust proceed,
One thus made two, Marriage does reunite,
And makes them both but one Hermaphrodite.
Man did but the well-being of his life
From woman take, her Being she from Man,
And therefore Eve created was a Wife,
And at the end of all, her Sex began:
Marriage their object is; their Being then,
And now Perfection, they receive from Men.
Marriage, to all, whose joys two parties be,
And doubled are by boing parted so,
Wherein the very act is chastity,
Whereby two Souls into one Body go,
It makes two one, whiles here they living be,
And after death in their Posterity.
God to each Man a private woman gave,
That in that Center his desires might stint,
That he a comfort like himself might have,
And that on her his like he might imprint.
Double is Woman's use, part of their end
Does on this Age, part on the next depend.
We are but part of Time, yet cannot die,
Till we the world a fresh supply have lent,
Children are Bodies sole Eternity;
Nature is Gods, Art is Man's instrument.
Now all Man's Art but only dead things makes,
But here in Man in things of life partakes.
For wandering Lust; I know it is infinite,
It still begins, and adds not more to more,
The guilt is everlasting, the delight,
This instant does not feel of that before.
The taste of it is only in the Sense,
The operation, in the Conscience.
Woman is not Lusts bounds, but Womankind.
One is Loves number, who from that does fall,
Has lost his hold, and no new roast shall find,
Vice has no mean, but not to be at all;
A wife is that Enough, Lust cannot find,
For Lust is still with want, or too-much pinde.
Bate Lust the Sin, my share is even with his,
For Not to Lust, and to Enjoy is one:
And More or Less past, equal Nothing is,
I still have one, Lust one at once alone:
And though the woman often changed be,
Yet He Is the same without variety.
Marriage our Lust (as twere with fuel fire)
Does, with a medicine of the same, allay;
And not forbid, but rectify desire.
My self I cannot choose, my wife I may:
And, in the choice of Her, it much does lie,
To mend my self in my Posterity.
O rather let me Love, then be in Love,
So let me choose as Wife and Friend to find.
Let me forget her Sex when I approve.
Beasts likeness lies in shape, but ours in mind:
Our souls no Sexes have, their Love is clean,
No Sex, both in the better part are Men.
But Physic for our lust their Bodies be,
But matter fit to show our Love upon,
But only Shells for our posterity,
Their souls were given lest man should be alone;
For, but the Souls interpreters, words be,
Without which Bodies are no Company.
That goodly frame we see of Flesh and blood,
Their Fashion is, not weight, it is I say
But their Laye-part, but well digested food;
It Is but twixt Dust, and Dust, Life's middle way:
The worth of it is nothing that is seen,
But only that it holds a Soul within.
And all the carnal Beauty of my wife,
Is but skin-deep, but to two Senses known;
Short even of Pictures, shorter lived then Life,
And yet the love suruiues that is built thereon:
For our Imagination is too high,
For Bodies when they meet to satisfy.
All Shapes, all Colors are alike in Night,
Nor does our Touch distinguish foul or fair:
But Man's imagination, and his sight;
And those, but the first week, by Custom are
Both made alike, which diffred at first view;
Nor can that diffrence, Absence much renew.
Nor can that Beauty lying in the Face,
But merely by imagination be
Enjoyed by us in an inferior place.
Nor can that Beauty by enjoying we
Make ours become, so our desire grows tame:
We changed are, but it remains the same.
Birth, less then beauty, shall my reason blind,
Her birth goes to my Children, not to me.
Rather had I that active gentry find,
Virtue, then passive from her Auncestrie;
Rather in her alive one virtue see,
Then all the rest dead in her Pedigree.
In the Degrees, high rather be she placed,
Of Nature then of Art and Policy.
Gentry is but a relic of Time-past,
And Love does only but the present see;
Things were first made then words: She were the same,
With, or without, that title or that name.
As for (the odds of Sexes) Portion;
Nor will I shun it, nor my aim it make.
Birth, Beauty, Weal^h, are nothing worth alone,
All these I would for good Additions take,
Not for Good Parts; those two are ill combind,
Whom any third thing from themselves has joined.
Rather then these, the object of my Love
Let it be Good, when these with virtue go,
They (in themselves indiffrent,) virtues prove.
For Good (like Fire) turns all things to be so.
Gods Image in Her Soul, o let me place
My Love upon, not Adams in Her Face.
Good, is a fairer attribute then White,
It Is the Mind's beauty keeps the other sweet:
That Is not still one, nor mortal with the light,
Nor glass, nor painting can it counterfeit,
She Is truly fair, whose beauty is unseen
Like heaven fair sight-ward, but more fair within.
By Good, I would have Holy understood,
So God She cannot love, but also me,
The law requires our words, and deeds be good,
Religion even the Thoughts does sanctify:
And she is more a Maid which rauish't is,
Then She which only does but wish amiss.
Lust only by Religion is withstood,
Lusts object is alive, his strength within,
Morality resists but in cold blood,
Respect of Credit fears shame not sin.
But no place dark enough for such offense
She finds, that is watch't by her own Conscience.
Then may I trust Her Body with her Mind,
And, thereupon secure, need never know
The pangs of Jealousy: and Love does find
More pain to doubt her false, then know her so;
For Patience is of evils that are known,
The certain Remedy; but Doubt has none.
And be that Thought once stirred 'twill never die,
Nor will the grief more mild by Custom prove;
Nor yet amendment can it satisfy,
The anguish more or less is as our Love:
This misery does Jealousy ensue,
That we may prove Her false, but cannot True.
Suspicion may the will of Lust restrain,
But Good preuents from having such a will,
A Wife that is Good, does Chaste and more contain,
For Chaste is but an Abstinence from ill:
And in a Wife that is Bad, although the best
Of qualities; yet in a Good the least.
To bar the means is Care, not Jealousy.
Some lawful things to be avoided are,
When, they occasion of unlawful be.
Lest ere it hurts is best descride afar.
Lust is a sin of two; he that is sure
Of either part, may be of both secure.
Give me next Good, an understanding Wife,
By Nature wise, not learned by much Art,
Some knowledge on Her side will all my life
More scope of Conversation impart,
Besides, Her inborne virtue fortify.
They are most firmly good, that best know why.
A passive understanding to conceive,
And Judgment to discern, I wish to find,
Beyond that, all as hazardous I leave,
Learning and pregnant wit in Womankind,
What it finds malleable makes frail,
And does not add more ballaste, but more sail.
Books are a part of Man's prerogative,
In formal Inck they Thoughts and Voices hold,
That we to them our solitude may give,
And make Time-present travail that of old.
Our Life, Fame p^eceth longer at the end,
And Books it farther backward do extend.
Domesticke Charge does best that Sex befit,
Contiguous buisnes, so to fix the Mind,
That Leisure space for Fancies not admit:
Their Leisure it is corrupts Womankind,
Else being placed from many vices free,
They had to heaven a shorter cut then we.
As good, and knowing, let her be Discreet.
That to the others weight, does Fashion bring,
Discretion does consider what is Fit,
Goodness but what is lawful, but the Thing
Not Circumstances; Learning is and wit,
In Men but curious folly without it.
To keep their Name when it is in others hands
Discretion asks, their Credit is by far
More frail then They, on likelyhoods it stands,
And hard to be disprou'd Lust's slanders are.
Their Carriage, not their Chastity alone,
Must keep their Name chaste from suspicion.
Women's Behavior is a surer bar
Then is their No: That fairly does deny
Without denying, thereby kept they are
Safe even from Hope; in part to blame is she,
Which has without consent bin only tried;
He comes too near, that comes to be denide.
Now since a Woman we to Marie are,
A Soul, and Body, not a Soul alone;
When one is Good, then be the other Fair,
Beauty is Health and Beauty both in one,
Be She so fair as change can yield no gain,
So fair, as She most Women else contain.
At least so Fair let me imagine Her,
That thought to me is Truth; Opinion
Cannot in matter of opinion err;
With no Eyes shall I see her but mine own,
And as my Fancy Her conceiues to be,
Even such my Senses both, do Feel, and See.
The Face we may the seat of Beauty call,
In it the relish of the rest does lie,
Nay even a figure of the Mind withal:
And of the Face the Life moves in the Eye;
No things else being two so like we see,
So like, that they two but in Number be.
Beauty in decent shape, and Colors lies,
Colors the matter are, and shape the Soul;
The Soul which from no single part does rise,
But from the just proportion of the whole,
And is a mere spiritual harmony,
Of every part united in the Eye.
Love is a kind of Superstition,
Which fears the Idol which it-selfe has framed,
Lust a Desire, which rather from his own
Temper, then from the object is enflamed;
Beauty is Loves object, Woman Lust's, to gain
Love, Love Desires, Lust only to obtain.
No circumstance does Beauty beautify,
Like graceful Fashion, native Gomelinesse,
Nay even gets pardon for Deformity;
Art cannot it beget, but may increase,
When Nature had fixed Beauty perfect made,
Something she left for Motion to add.
But let that Fashion more to Modesty
Tend, then Assurance; Modesty does set
The face in his just place, from Passions free,
It Is both the Minds, and Bodies Beauty met;
But Modesty; no virtue can we see;
That is the Faces only Chastity.
Where goodness fails, twixt ill and ill that stands:
Whence it is that women though they weaker be,
And their desires more strong, yet on their hands
The Chastity of men does often lie:
Lust would more common be then any one,
Could it like other sins be done alone.
All these good parts a Perfect woman make,
Add Love to me, they make a Perfect Wife,
Without Her Love, Her Beauty should I take
As that of Pictures, dead, That gives it life:
Till then Her Beauty like the Sun does shine
A like to all; That makes it only mine.
And of that Love, let Reason Father be,
And Passion Mother; let it from the one
His Being take, the other his Degree;
Self love (which second Loves are built upon,)
Will make me (if not Her) her Love respect;
No Man but favors his own worths effect.
As Good, and wise, so be She Fit for me,
That is, To will, and Not to will the same,
My Wife is my Adopted-Selfe, and She
As Me, so what I love, to Love must frame.
For when by Marriage both in one concur,
Woman converts to Man, not Man to her.
FINIS
The Authors Epitaph.
THe Span of my days measured, here I rest,
That is my body; but my soul his guest
Is hence ascended, whither, neither Time,
Nor Faith, nor Hope, but only love can claim;
Where being now enlightened, She does know
The Truth of all men argue of below:
Only this dust does here in Pawn remain,
That when the world dissolues she come again.
CHARACTERS, OR VVitty Descriptions of the properties of sundry Persons.
A good Woman.
A Good Woman is a comfort, like a Man. She lacks of him nothing but heat.
Thence is her sweetness of disposition, which meets his stoutnes more
pleasantly; so wool meets iron easier then iron, and turns resisting into
embracing. Her greatest learning is religion, and her thoughts are on her own
Sex, or on men, without casting the difference. Dishonestie never comes nearer
than her ears, and then wonder stops it out, and saues virtue the labor. She
leaves the neat youth telling his lushious tales, and puts back the
Seruingmans putting forward with a frown: yet her kindness is free enough to
be seen; for it has no guilt about it: and her mirth is clear, that you may
look through it, into virtue, but not beyond. She has not behavior at a
certain, but makes it to her occasion. She has so much knowledge as to love
it, and if she have it not at home; she will fetch it; for this sometimes in a
pleasant discontent she dares chide her Sex, though she use it never the
worse. She is much within, and frames outward things to her mind, not her
mind to them. She wears good clothes, but never better; for she finds no
degree beyond Decency. She has a content of her own, and so seeks not a
husband, but finds him. She is indeed most, but not much to description, for
she is direct and one, and has not the variety of ill. Now she is given
fresh and alive to a husband, and she does nothing more than love him, for
she takes him to that purpose. So his good becomes the business of her
actions, and she does her self kindness upon him. After his, her chiefest
virtue is a good husband. For She is He.

A very very Woman.
A Very very Woman, is a dow-bakt man, or a She meant well toward man, but
fell the two bows short strength and understanding. Her virtue is the hedge of
Modesty, that keeps a man from clyming over into her faults. She simpers as
if she had no teeth, but lips, and she deuides her eyes and keeps half for
her self, and gives the other to her near Youth. Being set down she casts
her face into a platform, which dureth the meal, and is taken away with the
voyder. Her draught reaches to good manners, not to thirst, and it is a part
of their mystery not to profess hunger; but Nature takes her in private and
stretches her upon meat. She is Mariageable and Fourteen at once; and after
she does not live but tarry. She reads over her face every morning, and
sometime blots out pale, and writes red. She thinks she is fair, though many
times her opinion goes alone, and she loves her glass and the knight of the
Sun for lying. She is hid away all but her face, and that is hanged about
with toys and devices, like the sign of a Tavern to draw Strangers. If she
show more, she preuents desire, and by too free-giuing, leaves no Gift. She
may escape from the Seruingman, but not from the chambermaide. She commits
with her ears for certain, after that she may go for a Maid, but she has
been lain with in her understanding. Her Philosophy is a seming neglect of
those, that be too good for her. She Is a younger brother for her portion, but
not for her portion of wit, that comes from her in a treble, which is still too
big for it; yet her Vanity seldom matcheth her, with one of her own degree,
for then she will beget another creature a beggar, and commonly if she marry
better, she marries worse. She gets much by the simplicity of her Suitor, and
for a jest, laughes at him without one. Thus she dresses a husband for her
self, and after takes him for his patience, and the land adjoining, ye may
see it, in a Seruingmans fresh naperie, and his leg steps into an unknown
stocking. I need not speak of his garters, the tassell shows it self. If
she love she love, she loves not the man but the beast of him. She is
Salomons cruel creature, and a man's walking consumption: every caudle she
gives him, is a purge. Her chief commendation is, she brings a man to
repentance.

Her next part.
Her lightness gets her to swim at top of the Table, where her wry little
singer, bewrayes caruing; her neighbors at the latter end, know they are
welcome, and for that purpose she quenches her thirst. She travels to and
among, and so becomes a woman of good entertainment, for all the folly in the
country, comes in clean linen to visit her; she breaks to them her grief
in sugar cakes, and receives from their mouths in exchange, many stories that
conclude to no purpose. Her eldest Son is like her howsoever, and that
dispraiseth him best: her utmost drift, is to turn him fool, which commonly
she obtaines at the years of discretion. She takes a journey sometimes to her
neeces house, but never thinks beyond London. Her Devotion is good clothes,
they carry her to Church, express their stuff and fashion, and are silent; if
she be more devout, she lifts up a certain number of eyes, in stead of
prayers, and takes the Sermon and measures out a nap by it, just as long. She
sends Religion before to Sixty, where she never ouertakes it, or drives it
before her again. Her most necessary instruments, are a waiting-Gentlewoman,
and a chamber-maide, she wears her Gentlewoman still, but most often leaves
the other in her chamber window. She has a little Kennell in her lap, and she
smells the sweeter for it. The utmost reach of her Providence, is the fatness
of a Capon, and her greatest envy, is the next Gentlewomans better gown. Her
most commendable skill, is to make her husbands fustian bear her velvet. This
she does many times over, and then is delivered to old age and a chair, where
every body leaves her.

A Dissembler
IS an essence needing a double definition, for he is not that he appears.
Unto the eye he is pleasing, unto the ear not harsh, but unto the
understanding intricate, and full of windings: he is the prima materia, and his
intents give him form: he dies his means and his meaning into two colors, he
baits craft with humility, and his countenance is the picture of the present
dispositions. He winnes not by battry, but undermining, and his rack is
soothing. He allures, is not allured by his affections, for they are the
brokers of his observation. He knows passion only by sufferance, and
resists by obeying. He makes his time an accomptant to his memory, and of
the humors of men weaues a net for occasion; the inquisitor must look through
his judgment, for to the eye only he is not visible.

A Courtier
TO all men's thinking is a man, and to most men the finest: all things else are
defined by the understanding, but this by the senses; but his surest mark is,
that he is to be found only about Princes. He smells; and puts away much
of his judgment about the situation of his clothes. He knows no man that is
not generally known. His wit, like the Marigold, opens with the Sun, and
therefore he rises not before ten of the clock. He puts more confidence in
his words than meaning, and more in his pronuntiation than his words. Occasion
is his Cupid, and he has but one receipt of making love. He follows nothing
but inconstancy, admires nothing but beauty, honors nothing but fortune.
Loves nothing. The sustenance of his discourse is news, and his censure like a
shot depends upon the charging. He is not, if he be out of Court, but
fish-like breathes destruction, if out of his own element. Neither his motion,
or aspect are regular, but he mooues by the upper Spheres, and is the
reflection of higher substances. If you find him not here, you shall in
Paul's, with a pick-tooth in his hat, a cape cloak, and a long stocking.

A golden Ass
IS a young thing, whose Father went to the Devil; he is followed like a salt
bitch, and lymb'd by him that gets up first; his disposition is cut, and knaves
rent him like tenter-hookes: he is as blind as his mother, and swallows
flatterers for friends. He is high in his own imagination, but that
imagination is a stone, that is raised by violence, descends naturally; when
he goes, he looks who looks, if he finds not good store of vaylers, he comes
home stiff and seere until he be new oyled and watered by his husbandmen.
Wheresoever he eats, he has an officer to warn men not to talk out of his
e^^ment, and his own is exceeding sensible, because it is sensual; but he
cannot exchange a piece of reason, though he can a piece of gold. He is
naught plucked, for his feathers are his beauty, and more then his beauty, they
are his discretion, his countenance, his All. He is now at an end, for he has
had the wolf of vaineglory, which he fed until himself became the food.

A Flatterer
IS the shadow of a fool. He is a good wood-man, for he singleth out none but
the wealthy. His carriage is ever of the color of his patient; and for his sake
he will halt or wear a wry neck. He dispraiseh nothing but poverty, and
small drink, and praises his grace of making water. He sells himself with
reckoning his great Friends, and teaches the present how to win his praises by
reciting the others gifts: he is ready for all employments, but especially
before dinner, for his courage and his stomach go together. He will play any
part upon his countenance, and where he cannot be admitted for a counselor,
he will serve as fool. He frequents the court of wards and ordinaries, and
fits these guests of Togae virilis, with wives or whores. He enters young men
into acquaintance and debt books. In a word, he is the impression of the last
term, and will be so, until the coming of a new term or termer.

Anignorant glory-hunter
IS an insecta animalia; for he is the maggot of opinion, his behavuiour is
another thing from himself, and is glewed, and but set on. He entertaines men
with repetitions, and returns them their own words. He is ignorant of
nothing, no not of those things, where ignorance is the lesser shame. He gets
the names of good wits, and vtters them for his companions. He confesses
vices that he is guiltless of, if they be in fashion; and dares not salute a
man in old clothes, or out of fashion. There is not a public assembly without
him, and he will take any pains for an acquaintance there. In any show he
will be one, though he be but a whistler or a torch-bearer; and bears down
strangers with the story of his actions. He handles nothing that is not rare,
and defends his wardrope, diet, and all customs, with entitling their
beginnings from Princes, great Soldiers, and strange Nations. He dares speak
more than he understands, and adventures his words without the relief of any
seconds. He relates battles and skirmishes, as from an eye witness, when his
eyes theeuishly beguiled a ballad of them. In a word, to make sure of
admiration, he will not let himself understand himself, but hopes fame and
opinion, will be the Readers of his Riddles.

A Tymist
IS a noune Adjective of the present tense. He has no more of a conscience
then Fear, and his religion is not his but the Princes. He reuerenceth a
Courtiers Servants servant. Is first his own Slave, and then whosoever looks
big; when he gives he curses, and when he sells he worships. He reads the
statutes in his chamber, and wears the Bible in the streets; he never
praises any but before themselves or friends; and mislikes no great man's
actions during his life. His new-yeares gifts are ready at Allhalomas, and the
suit he meant to mediate before them. He pleases the children of great men, and
promises to adopt them; and his courtesy extends it self even to the stable.
He strains to talk wisely, and his modesty would serve a Bride. He is
gravity from the head to the foot, but not from the head to the heart; you may
find what place he affects, for he creepes as near it as may be, and as
passionately courts it; if at any time his hopes are effected, he swells
with them; and they burst out too good for the vessel. In a word, he danceth
to the tune of Fortune, and studies for nothing but to keep time.

An Amorist
IS a creature blasted or planet-stroken, and is the dog that leads blind
Cupid; when he is at the best, his fashion exceeds the worth of his weight. He
is never without verses, and musk comfects: and sighs to the hazard of his
buttons; his eyes are all white, either to wear the livery of his Mistres
complexion, or to keep Cupid from hitting the black. He fights with passion,
and loses much of his blood by his weapon; dreams, thence his palenes. His
arms are carelessly used, as if their best use were nothing but embracements.
He is untrust and vnbuttoned, vngartred, not out of carelesnes, but care; his
farthest end being but going to bed. Sometimes he wraps his petition in neatnes,
but it goes not alone, for then he makes some other quality moralize his
affection, and his trimnes is the grace of that grace. Her favor lifts him up
as the Sun moisture; when she disfavors, unable to hold that happiness, it
falls down in tears; his fingers are his Orators, and he expresses much of
himself upon some instrument. He answers not, or not to the purpose; and no
marvel, for he is not at home. He scocheth time with dancing with his Mistres,
taking up of her glove, and wearing her feather; he is confinde to her color,
and dares not pass out of the circuit of her memory. His imagination is a
fool, and it goes in a pied-coat of red and white; shortly he is translated
out of a man into folly; his imagination is the glass of lust, and himself
the traitor to his own disceretion.

An affected Traveler
IS a speaking fashion; he has taken pains to be ridiculous, and has seen
more then he has perceived. His attire speaks French or Italian, and his gate
cries Behold me. He censures all things by countenances, and shrugs, and
speaks his own language with shame and lisping: he will choke rather than
confess Beer good drink: and his pick-tooth is a maine part of his
behavior. He chooses rather to be counted a Spy, then not a Politician: and
maintains his reputation by naming great men familiarly. He chooses rather to
tell lies then not wonders, and talks with men singly; his discourse sounds
big but means nothing: and his boy is bound to admire him howsoever. He comes
still from great personages, but goes with mean. He takes occasion to show
lewells given him in regard of his virtue, that were bought in S. Martins, and
not long after, having with a Mountebaneks method, pronounced them worth
thousands, empawneth them for a few shillings. Upon festival days he goes to
Court, and salutes without re-saluting: at night in an Ordinary he confesses
the business in hand, and seems as conversant with all intents and plots, as
if he begot them. His extraordinary account of men is, first to tell them the
ends of all matters of consequence, and then to borrow money of them; he
offers courtesies, to show them, rather then himself humble. He disdaines all
things above his reach, and prefers all Countries before his own. He
imputes his wants and poverty to the ignorance of the time, not his own
unworthiness: and concludes his discourse with a half period, or a word, and
leaves the rest to imagination. In a word, his religion is fashion, and both
body and soul are governed by same, he loves most voices above truth.

A Wiseman
IS the truth of the true definition of man, that is, a reasonable creature.
His disposition alters, alters not. He hides himself with the attire of the
vulgar; and in indifferent things is content to be governed by them. He looks
according to nature, so goes his behavior. His mind enioyes a continual
smoothness, so comes it, that his consideration is always at home. He
endures the faults of all men silently, except his friends, and to them he is
the mirror of their actions; by this means his peace comes not from
fortune, but himself. He is cunning in men, not to surprise but keep his
own, and beats off their ill affected humors, no otherwise then if they were
flies. He chooses not friends by the subsidy book, and is not luxurious
after acquaintance. He maintains the strength of his body, not by delicacies,
but temperance; and his mind by giving it pre-eminence over his body. He
understands things not by their form, but qualities; and his comparisons
intend not to excuse, but to provoke him higher. He is not subject to
casualties, for fortune has nothing to do with the mind, except those
drowned in the body: but he has divided his soul, from the case of his soul,
whose weakness he assists no otherwise than commiseratiuely, not that it is
his, but that it is. He is thus, and will be thus: and lives subject neither
to time nor his frailties; the servant of virtue, and by virtue the friend of
the highest.

A noble Spirit
Has surueyed and fortified his disposition, and converts all occurrents into
experience, between which experience and his reason, there is a marriage; the
issue are his actions. He circuits his intents, and sees the end before he
shoot. Men are the instruments of his Art, and there is no man without his use:
occasion encites him, none enticeth him; and he mooues by affection, not for
affection; he loves glory, skornes shame, and governs and obeys with one
countenance; for it comes from one consideration. He calls not the variety of
the world chances, for his meditation has travailed over them; and his eye
mounted upon his understanding sees them as things underneath. He couers not
his body with delicacies, nor excuses these delicacies by his body, but
teaches it, since it is not able to defend it is own imbecilitie to show or
suffer. He licenseth not his weakness, to wear fate, but knowing reason to be
no idle gift of nature, he is the Steeres-man of his own destiny. Truth is
his Goddess, and he takes pains to get her, not to look like her. He knows
the condition of the world, that he must act one thing by another, and then
another. To these he carries his desires, not his desires him; and sticks not
fast by the way (for that contentment is repentance) but knowing the circle of
all courses, of all intents, of all things, to have but one center or period,
without all distraction he hastes thither and ends there, as his true and
natural element. He does not contemn fortune, but not confess her. He is no
Gamster of the world (which only complain and praise her) but being only
sensible of the honesty of actions, contemnes a particular profit as the
excrement or skum. Unto the society of men he is a Sun, whose clearenesse
directs their steps in a regular motion: when he is more particular, he is the
wise-mans friend, the example of the indifferent, the medicine of the vicious.
Thus time goes not from him, but with him: and he feels age more by the
strength of his soul, than the weakness of his body: thus feels he not
pain, but esteems all such things as friends that desire to file off his
fetters, and help him out of prison.

An old Man
IS a thing that has been a man in his days. Old men are to be known
blindfolded: for their talk is as terrible as their resemblance. They praise
their own times as vehemently, as if they would sell them. They become
wrinckled with frowning and facing youth: they admire their own customs, even
to the eating of red herring, and going wet-shod. They call the thombe under
the girdle gravity, and because they can hardly smell at all, their posies are
under their girdles. They count it an ornament of speech, to close the period
with a cough; and it is venerable, they say, to spend time in wyping their
driueled beards. Their discourse is unanswerable, by reason of their
obstinacy: and their speech is much, though little to the purpose. Truths and
lies pass with an equal affirmation, for their memories several is worn
into one receptacle, and so they come out with one sense. They teach their
servants their duties with as much scorn and tyranny, as some people teach
their dogs to fetch. Their envy is one of their diseases. They put off and on
their clothes, with that certainty, as if they knew, their heads would not
direct them, and therefore custom should. They take a pride in halting and
going stiffely, and therefore their staves are carved and tipped; they trust
their attire with much of their gravity; and they dare not go without a gown
in summer. Their hats are brushed to draw men's eyes off from their faces; but
of all, their Pomanders are worn to most purpose, for their putri fied breath
ought not to want either a smell to defend, or a dog to excuse.

A Country Gentleman
IS a thing out of whose corruption, the generation of a Justice of peace is
produced. He speaks statutes and husbandry well enough, to make his
neighbors think him a wiseman; he is well skilled in Arithmetike or rates;
and has eloquence enough to save his twopence. His conversation amongst his
Tenants is desperate; but amongst his equals full of doubt. His travel is
seldom farther then the next market town, and his inquisition is about the
price of corn: when he trauelleth he will go ten mile out of the way, to a
Cosens house of his to save charges; and rewards the Seruanrs by taking them by
the hand when he departs. Nothing under a Sub-poena can draw him to London,
and when he is there, he sticks fast upon every object, casts his eyes away
upon gazing, and becomes the prey of every cutpurse. When he comes home those
wonders serve him for his holliday talk. If he goes to Court, it is in yellow
stockings, and if he be in winter, in a slight taffetie cloak, and pumpes and
pantastles. He is chaynd, that wooes the usher fo his coming into the
presence, where he becomes troublesome with the ill managing of his rapier,
and the wearing of his girdle of one fashion and the hangers of another; by
this time he has learned to kiss his hand, and make a leg both together, and
the names of Lords and Counselors; he has thus much toward entertainment and
curtefie, but of the last he makes more use; for by the recital of my Lord,
he coniures his poor countrymen. But this is not his element, but he must
home again, being like a Dor, that ends his flight in a dunghill.

A fine Gentleman
IS the Cynamon tree, whose bark is more worth then his body. He has read
the book of good manners, and by this time each of his limbs may read it. He
allows of no judge, but the eye; painting, boulstring and bombasting are his
Orators: by these also he proves his industry: for he has purchased legs,
hair, beauty, and straightness, more then nature left him. He unlocks
maidenheads with his language, and speaks Ephues not so gracefully as
heartily. His discourse makes not his behavior, but he buys it at Court, as
countrymen their clothes in Burchin lane. He is somewhat like the Salamander,
and lives in the flame of love, which pains he expresses comically: and
nothing grieves him so much, as the want of a Poet to make an issue in his
love; yet he sighs sweetly, and speaks lamentably: for his breath is
perfumed, and his words are wind. He is best in season at Christmas; for the
Boores head and Reueller come together; his hopes are laden in his quality,
and lest fiddlers should take him unprovided, he wears pumpes in his pocket,
and lest he should take fiddlers unprovided, he whistles his own galliard. He
is a calender of ten years, and marriage rusts him. Afterward he maintains
himself an implement of household by caruing and vshering. For all this he is
judicial only in Tailors and Barbers, but his opinion is ever ready and ever
idle. If you will know more of his Arts, the Brokers shop is the witness of his
valor, where lies wounded, dead, rent and out of fashion many a spruce suite
overthrown by his fantastikenes.

An elder Brother.
IS a creature borne to the best advantage of things without him; that has the
start at the beginning, but loy^ers it away before the ending. He looks like
his land, as heavily, and durtily, as slubbornely. He dares do any thing but
fight: and fears nothing but his Fathers life and minority. The first thing
he makes known is his estate; and the lodestone that draws him is the upper
end of the table. He wooeth by a particular, and his strongest argument is the
ioynture. His observation is all about the fashion, and he commends Partlets
for a rare devise. He speaks no language, but smells of dogs or hawks; and
his ambition flies Iustice-hight. He loves to be commended, and he will go
into the kitchen, but heel have it. He loves glory, but is so lazy as he is
content with flattery. He speaks most of the precedencie of age, and protests
fortune the greatest virtue. He summoneth the old servants, and tells what
strange acts he will do, when he reigns. He verily believes houskeepers the
best commonwealths men; and therefore studies baking, brewing, greasing, and
such, as the lyms of goodness. He judges it no small sign of wisdom to
talk much, his tongue therefore goes continually his errand, but never speeds.
If his understanding were not honester than his will, no man should keep a
good conceit by him; for he thinks it no theft, to sell all he can to
opinion. His pedigree and his fathers seale-ring, are the stilts of his crazed
disposition. He had rather keep company with the dregs of men, than not to be
the best man. His insinuation is the inviting men to his house; and he thinks
it a great modesty, to comprehend his cheer under a piece of mutton and a
rabbet; if by this time he be not known, he will go home again, for he can
no more abide to have himself concealed, then his land; yet he is as you see
good for nothing, except to make a stallion to maintain the race.

A Welchman
IS the Oyster, that the pearl is in, for a man may be picked out of him. He
has the abilities of the mind in potentia, and actu nothing but boldness. His
clothes are in fashion before his body; and he accounts boldness the
chiefest virtue. Above all men he loves a Herrald, and speaks pedigrees
naturally. He accounts none well descended, that call him not Cosen: and
prefers Owen Glendower before any of the nine Worthies. The first note of his
familiarity is the confession of his valor; and so he preuents quarrels. He
voucheth Welsh a pure, an unconquered language; and courts Ladies with the
story of their Chronicle. To conclude, he is precious in his own conceit, and
upon S. David's day without comparison.

A Pedant
HE treads in rule, and one hand skans verses, and the other holds his scepter.
He dares not think a thought, that the Nominative case gouernes not the verb;
and he never had meaning in his life, for he traveled only for words. His
ambition is Criticisme, and his example is Tully. He values phrases, and
elects them by the found, and the eight parts of speech are his servants. To be
brief, he is a Hetaroclue, for he wants the plural number, having only the
single quality of words.

A Seruingman
IS a Creature which though he be not drunk, yet is not his own man. He tells
without asking, who ownes him, by the superscription of his livery. His life is
for ease and leisure much about gentleman-like. His wealth enough to suffice
nature, and sufficient to make him happy, if he were sure of it; for he has
little and wants nothing, he values himself higher or lower, as his Master is.
He hates or loves the men, as his Master does the Master. He is commonly proud
of his Masters horses, or his Christmas; he sleeps when he is sleepie, is of
his religion, only the clock of his stomach is set to go an hour after
his. He seldom breaks his own clothes. He never drinks but double, for he
must be pledged: not commonly without some short sentence nothing to the
purpose: and seldom abstaines till he come to a thirst. His discretion is to
be careful for his Masters credit, and his sufficiency to marshall dishes at
a table, and to carue well. His neatness consists much in his hair and
outward linen. His courting language, visible bawdy jests; and against his
matter fail, he is always ready furnished with a song. His inheritance is the
chamber-maide, but often purchases his Masters daughter, by reason of
opportunity, or for want of a better; he always cuckolds himself, and never
marries but his own widow. His Master being appeased, he becomes a retayner,
and entailes himself and his posterity upon his heirs males for ever.

An Host
IS the kernel of a sign: or the sign is the shell, and mine Host is the
snaile. He consists of double beer and fellowship, and his vices are the
bawdes of his thirst. He entertaines humbly, and gives his guests power,
as well of himself as house. He answers all men's expectations to his power,
save in the reckoning: and has gotten the trick of greatness, to lay all
mislikes upon his servants. His wife is the Cumenseede of his dove house: and
to be a good guest is a warrant for her liberty. He traffiques for guests by
men's friends, friends friend, and is sensible only of his purse. In a word, he
is none of his own: for he neither eats, drinks or thinks but at other men's
charges and appointments.

An Ostler
IS a thing that scrubbeth unreasonably his horse, reasonably himself. He
consists of Travelers, though he be none himself. His highest ambition is to
be Host, and the invention of his sign is his greatest wit: for the
expressing whereof he sends away the painters forwant of understanding. He has
certain charms for a horse mouth, that he shall not eat his hay: and behind
your back, he will cozen your horse to his face. His curry-combe is one of
his best parts, for he expresses much by the gingling: and his mane-combe is
a Spinners card turned out of service. He puffes and blows over your horse,
to the hazard of a double judge: and leaves much of the dressing to the
proverb of Muli mut uo scabient, one horse rubs another. He comes to him that
calls loudest not first; he takes a broken head patiently, but the knave he
feels not. His utmost honesty is goodfellowship, and he speaks Northern,
what countryman soever. He has a pension of Ale from the next Smith and
Sadler for intelligence. He loves to see you ride, and holds your stirrup in
expectation.

NEWS, FROM ANY WHENCE: OR Old Truths under a supposall of Novelty.
Occasioned by diverse Essays and private passages of wit between sundry
Gentlemen upon that subject.
News from Court.
IT is thought here, that there are as great miseries beyond happiness, as a
this side it, as being in love. That truth is every man's by assenting. That
time makes every thing aged, and yet it self was never but a minute old. That
next sleep, the greatest deuourer of time is business: the greatest stretcher
of it, Passion; the truest measure of it, Contemplation. To be saved, always
is the best plot: and virtue always cleeres her way as she goes. Vice is ever
behind-hand with it self; that wit and a woman are two frail things, and both
the frailer by concurring. That the means of begetting a man has more
encreast mankind then the end. That the madness of love is to be sick of one
part, and cured by another. The madness of jealousy, that it is so diligent, and
yet hopes to loose his labor. That all women for the bodily part, are but the
same meaning put in diverse words; that the difference in the sense is their
understanding. That the wisdom of Action is Discretion, the knowledge of
contemplation is truth, the knowledge of action is men. That the first
considers what should be, the latter makes use of what is. That every man is
weak in his own humors. That every man a little beyond himself is a fool.
That affectation is the more ridiculous part of folly, then ignorance. That the
matter of greatness is comparison. That God made one world of Substances; man
has made another of Art and Opinion. That money is nothing but a thing which
Art has turned up trumpe. That custom is the soul of circumstances. That
custom has so far prevailed, that truth is now the greatest news.

T. O.

Answer to the Court news.
THat Happiness and Misery are Antipodes. That Goodness is not Felicity, but
the rode thither. That man's strength is but a vicisitude of falling and rising.
That only to refrain ill, is to be ill still. That the plot of salvation was
laid before the plot of Paradise. That enjoying is the preparatiue to
contemning. That he that seeks opinion beyond merit, goes just so far back.
That no man can obtain his desires; nor the world has not to fill his
measure. That to study men is more profitable than books. That men's loves are
their afflictions. That titles of honor are tartles to still ambition. That to
be a King is fames butt, and fears quiver. That the souls of women and lovers
are wrapped up in the portmanque of their senses. That imagination is the end of
man. That wit is the web, and wisdom the woose of the cloth, so that women's
souls were never made up. That envy knows what it will not confess. That
Goodness is like the art prospectiue, one point center, begetting infinite
rays. That man, woman, and the devil, are the three degrees of comparison.
That this news holds number but not weight, by which couple all things receive
form.

A. S.

Country News.
THat there is most here, for it gathers in going. That reputation is measured
by the acre. That poverty is the greatest dishonestie. That the pity of (alas
poor soul) is for the most part mistaken. That roast beef is the best smell.
That a Justice of peace is the last relic of Idolatry. That the allegory of
Justice drawn blind, is turned the wrong way. That not to live to heavenly, is
accounted great wrong. That wisdom descends in a race. That we love names
better than persons. That to hold in knights-seruice is a slipperie tenure.
That a Papist is a new word for a traitor. That the duty of religion is lent
not pai'd. That the reward is lost in the want of humility. That the Puritan
persecution is as a cloud that can hide the glory of the light, but not the
day. That the emulation of English and Scots to be the Kings countrymen,
thrust the honor on the Welsh. That a Courtier never attaines his self
knowledge but by report. That his best (...) is a hearne dog. That many great
men are (...) they know not their own Fathers. That love is the (...) worm.
That a woman is the effect of her own first same. That to remember, to know,
and to understand, are three degrees not understood. That country ambition is
(...), for there is nothing above a man. That fighting i^ a Seruingmans valor,
martyrdom their Masters. That to live long is to fill up the days we live.
That the ^^ale of some men's religion reflects from their friends. That the
pleasure of vice is indulgence of the present, for it endures but the acting.
That the properreward of goodness is from within, the external is policy.
That good and ill is the cross and pile in the game of life. That the soul is
the lamp of the body, reason of the soul, religion of reason, faith of
religion, Christ of faith. That circumstances are the atomies of policy,
censure the being, action the life, but success the ornament. That authority
presses down with weight and is thought violence: policy trips up the heels
and is called dexterity. That this life is a throng in a narrow passage, he
that is first out finds ease, he in the middle worst, hemb'd in with troubles,
the hindmost that drives both our before him, though not suffering wrong, has
his part in doing it. That God requires of our debts a reckoning, not payment.
That heaven is the easiest purchase, for we are the richer for the disbursing.
That liberality should have no object but the poor, if our minds were rich.
That the mystery of greatness is to keep the inferior ignorant of it. That
all this is no news to a better wit.

That the City cares not what the Country thinks.

Sr. T. R.

News from the very Country.
THat it is a fripery of Courtiers, Merchants, and others, which have been in
fashion, and are very near worn out. That Justices of peace have the felling
of underwoods, but the Lords have the great falls. That Jesuits are like
Apricocks, heretofore here and there one succored in a great man's house and
cost dear, now you may have them for nothing in every cottage. That every
great vice is a Pike in a pond that deuoures virtues and less vices. That it
is wholsomest getting a stomach, by walking on your own ground: and the
thriftiest laying of it at another table. That debtors are in London close
prisoners, and here have the liberty of the house. That Atheists in
affliction, like blind beggars, are forced to ask though they know not of
whom. That there are (God be thanked) not two such acres in all the country, as
the Exchange and Westminster Hall. That only Christmas Lords know their ends.
That w^omen are not so tender fruit, but that they do as well and bear as
well upon beds, as plashed against walls. That our carts are never worse
employed, than when they are waited on by coaches. That sentences in Authors
like hairs in an horsetaile, concur in one root of beauty and strength, but
being plucked out one by one, serve only for springes and snares. That both
want and abundance equally advance a rectified man from the world, as cotton
and stones are both good casting for an hawke. That I am sure there is none of
the forbidden fruit left, because we do not all eat thereof. That our best
three pilde mischief comes from beyond the sea, and rides post through the
country, but his errand is to Court: That next to no wife and children, your
own wife and children are best pastime, another wife and your children worse,
your wife and another children worst. That Statesmen hunt their fortunes, and
are often at default: Favorites course her and are ever in view. That
intemperance is not so unwholesome here; for none ever saw Sparrow sick of
the pox. That here is no treachery nor fidelity, but it is because here are no
secrets. That Court motions are up and down, our^ circular: theirs like squibs
cannot stay at the highest, nor return to the place which they rose from, but
vanish and we are out in the way, Ours like mill-wheels busy without changing
place; they have peremptory fortunes, we vicissitudes.

I. D.

Answer to the very Country News.
IT is thought here, that man is the cool of time, and made dresser of his
own fatting. That the fine Senses are Cinque ports for temptation, the
traffic sin, the Lieutenant Satan, the custom tribute, souls. That the
Citizens of the high Court grow rich by simplicity: but those of London by
simple craft. That life, death and time, do with short cudgels dance the
Matachiue. That those which dwell under the Zona Torrida, are troubled with
more damps, than those of Frigida. That Policy and Superstition has of late
her masque rent from her face, and she is found with a wry mouth and a stinking
breath, and those that courted her hotly, hate her now in the same degree, or
beyond. That nature too much loving her own, becomes unnatural and foolish.
That the soul in some is like an egg, hatched by a young pullet, who often
rigging from her nest, makes hot and cold beget rottenness, which her wanton
youth will not believe, till the fair shell being broken, the stink appears
to profit others, but cannot her. That those are the wise ones, that hold the
superficies of virtue, to support her contrary and all-sufficient. That
clemency within and without is the nurse of rebellion. That thought of the
future is retired into the country, and time present dwells at Court. That I
living near the churchyard, where many are buried of the pest, yet my
infection comes from Spain, and it is feared it will disperse further into
the kingdom.

A. S.

News to the University.
A Mere Scholar, is but a live book. Action does express knowledge, better
then words; so much of the soul is lost, as the body cannot utter. To teach
should rather be an effect, then the purpose of learning. Age decaies nature,
perfects Art: therefore the glory of youth, is strength of the gray head,
wisdom; yet most condemn the follies of their own infancy, run after
those of the worlds, and in reverence of antiquity will bear an old error
against a new truth. Logic is the Heraldry of Arts, the array of judgment;
none it self, nor any science without it: where it and learning meet not, must
be either a skillful ignorance, or a wild knowledge. Understanding cannot
conclude out of mood and figure. Discretion conteines Rhetorique; the next way
to learn good words, is to learn sense; the newest Philosophy is soundest,
the eldest Divinity: Astronomy begins in nature, ends in magic. There is no
honesty of the body without health, which no man has had since Adam.
Intemperance that was the first mother of sickness, is now the daughter.
Nothing dies but qualities. No kind in the world can perish without ruin of
the whole. All parts help one another (like States) for particular interest.
So in arts which are but translations of nature. There is no sound position in
any one, which, imagine false, there may not from it be drawn strong
conclusions, to disprove all the rest. Where one truth is granted, it may be by
direct means brought to confirm any other controverted. The soul and body of
the first man, were made fit to be immortal together, we cannot live to the
one, but we must dye to the other. A man and a Christian are two creatures. Our
perfection in this world is virtue, in the next knowledge, when we shall read
the glory of God in his own face.

News from Sea.
THat the best pleasure is to have no object of pleasure, and uniformity is a
better prospect then variety. That putting to Sea is change of life but not of
condition: where risings and falls calmes and crossegales are yours in order
and by turn, forewinds but by chance. That it is the worst wind to have no
wind, and that your smooth-faced Courtiers deading your course by a calm,
gives greater impediment, then an open adversaries crosse-gale. That leuitie is
a virtue, for many are held up by it That its nothing so intricate and infinite
to rig a ship as a woman, and the more either is fraught, the apter to leake.
That to pumpe the one and shreeue the other, is alike noisome. That small
faults habituated are as dangerous as little leakes unfound, and that to punish
and not prevent, is to labor in the pumpe, and leave the leake open. That it
is best stricking sail before a storm, and necessariest in it. That a little
time in our life is best, as the shortest cut to our haven is the happiest
voyage. That to him that has no Haven no wind, is friendly, and yet it is
better to have no Haven, then some kind of one. That expedition is every where
to be bribed but at Sea. That gain works this miracle to make men walk upon
the water, and that the sound of commodity drownes the noise of a storm,
especially of an absent one. That I have once in my life out gone night at Sea,
but never darkness: and that I shall never wonder to see a hard world, because
I have lived to see the Sun a bankerout, being ready to starve for cold in
his perpetual presence. That a man's companions are (like ships) to be kept in
distance, for falling foul one of another, only with my friend I will close.
That the fairest field for a running head is the Sea, where he may run
himself out of breath, and his humor out of him. That I could carry you much
further, and yet leave more before then behind, and all will be but via Nauis,
without print or tracke, for so is moral instruction to youths watrish humor.
That though a ship under sail be a good sight, yet it is a better to see her
moored in the Haven. That I care not what become of this frail Barcke of my
flesh, so I save the passenger. And here I cast anchor.

W. S.

Foreign News of the year 1604.
From France.
IT is delivered from France that the choice of friends there is as of their
wines, those that being new, are hard and harsh, prove best; the most pleasing
are least lasting. That an enemy fierce at the first on set is as a torrent
tumbling down a mountain; a while it bears all before it, have but that
whiles patience you may pass it dry-foot. That a penetrating judgment may
enter into a man's mind by his bodies gate; if this appear affected, apish,
and unstable; a wonder if that be settled. That vainglory, new fashions and
the French disease are upon terms of quitting their Countries allegance to be
made free Denisons of England. That the wounds of ancient enmities have their
scars which cannot be so well closed to the sight but they will lie open to
the memory. That a Princes pleasurable vices vshered by authority and waited
on by conuinence, sooner punish themselves by the subjects imitation, then they
can be reformed by remonstrance or correction, so apt are ill examples to
rebound on them that give them. That Kings hear truth oftener for the tellers
then their own advantage.

From Spain.
THat the shortest cut to the riches of the Indies is by their contempt. That
who is feared of most, fears most. That it more vexes the proud that men
despise them, then that they not fear them. That greatness is fruitful
enough, when other helps fail, to beget on it self destruction. That it is a
gross flattering of tired cruelty to honest it with the title of clemency.
That to eat much at other men's cost and little at his own is the wholsomest and
most nourishing diet both in Court and country. That those are aptest to
dominere over others who by suffering indignities have learned to offer them.
That ambition like a seeled Dove flies up to fall down, it minds not whence
it came but whither it will. That even Gally-slaues setting light by their
captivity, find freedom in bondage. That to be slow in military businesses
is to be so courteous as to give the way to an enemy. That lightning and
greatness more fear then hurt.

From Rome.
THat the venereall (called venial) sin is to pass in the rank of Cardinal
virtues, and that those should be held henceforth his Holiness beneficial
friends that sin upon hope of pardon. That where vice is a state-commoditie, he
is an offender that often offends not. That Jews and Curtezans there, are as
beasts that men feed to feed on. That for an Englishman to abide at Rome is not
so dangerous as report makes it, since it skills not where we live so we take
heed how we live. That greatness comes not down by the way it went up, there
being often found a small distance between the highest and the lowest fortunes.
That tackt authority is often less at home then abroad regarded, while things
that seem, are (commonly) more a far off then near hand feared.

From Venice.
THat the most profitable bancke is the true use of a man's self, while such as
grow moldy in idleness make their houses their toombes and dye before their
death. That many dangerous spirits lie buried in their wants, which had they
means to their minds would dare as much as those that with their better
fortunes ouer-top them. That professed Curtezans if they be any way good, it is
because they are openly bad. That frugalitie is the richest treasure of an
Estate, where men feed for hunger, clothe for cold and modesty, and spend for
honor, charity, and safety.

From Germany.
THat the infectious vice of drunken goodfellowship is like to stick by that
Nation as long as the multitude of offenders benums the sense of offending, and
that a common blot is held no stayne. That discretions must be taken by weight
not tail: who does otherwise, shall both prove his own too light and fall
short of his reckoning. That fear and a nice forecast of every slight danger
seldom gives either faithful or fruitful counsel. That the Empire of
Germany is not more great then that over a man's self.

From the Low Countries.
THat one of the surest grounds of a man's liberty is, not to give another
power over it. That the most dangerous plunge whereto to put thine enemy is
desperation* while forcing him to set light by his own life, thou make him
master of thine. That neglected danger lights soonest and heauiest. That they
are wisest who in the likelihood of good, provide for ill. That since pity
dwells at the next door to misery, he lives most at ease that is neighboured
with envy. That the evil fortune of the wars as well as the good is variable.

News from my Lodging.
THat the best prospect is to look inward. That it is quieter sleeping in a
good conscience then a whole skin. That a soul in a fat body lies soft, and
is loath to rise. That he must rise betimes who would cosen the devil. That
Flattery is increased from a pillow under the elbow, to a bed under the whole
body. That Policy is the vnsleeping night of reason. That he who sleeps in
the cradle of security, sins soundly without starting. That guilt is the flea
of the conscience. That no man is thoroughly awaked but by affliction. That a
hanged chamber in private is nothing so convenient as a hanged Traitor in
public. That the religion of Papistry, is like a curtain made to keep out
the light. That the life of most women is walking in their sleep, and they
talk their dreams. That chambering is counted a ciuiler quality, then
playing at tables in the Hall, though Seruingmen use both. That the best
bedfellow for all times in the year is a good bed without a fellow. That he
who tumbles in a calm bed, has his tempest within. That he who will rise,
must first lie down, and take humility in his way. That sleep is deaths
picture drawn to life, or the twilight of life and death. That in sleep we
kindly shake death by the hand, but when we are awaked we will not know him.
That often sleeping are so many trials to die, that at last we may do it
perfectly. That few dare write the true news of their chamber, and that I have
none secret enough to tempt a strangers curiosity, or a servants discovery.
God give you good morrow.

B. R.

News of my morning work.
THat to be good is the way to be most alone or the best accompanied. That
the way to heaven is mistaken for the most melancholy walk. That most fear
the worlds opinion more then Gods displeasure. That a Court friend seldom goes
further then the first degree of charity. That the devil is the perfectest
Courtier. That innocence was first cozen to man, now guiltiness has the
nearest alliance. That sleep is deaths ledger Ambassador. That time can never
be spent: we pass by it and cannot return. That none can be sure of more
time then an instant. That sin makes work for repentance or the devil. That
patience has more power then afflictions. That every ones memory is divided
into two parts: the part loosing all is the sea, the keeping part is land. That
honesty in the Court lives in persecution like Protestants in Spain. That
predestination and constancy are alike uncertain to be judged of. That reason
makes love the Seruingman. That virtues favor is better then a Kings favorite.
That being sick begins a suit to God, being well possesses it. That health is
the coach which caries to heaven, sickness the post-horse. That worldly delights
to one in extreme sickness is like a hiecandle to a blind man. That absence
does sharpen love, presence strengthens it, that the one brings fuel, the
other blows till it burns clear, that love often breaks friendship, that
ever increases love. That constancy in women and love in men is alike rare.
That Art is truths iugler. That falsehood plays a larger part in the world
then truth. That blind zeal and lame knowledge are alike apt to ill. That
fortune is humblest where most contemned. That no porter but resolution keeps
fear out of minds. That the face of goodness without a body is the worst
wickedness. That weomens fortunes aspire but by others powers. That a man with
a female wit is the worst Hermaphrodite. That a man not worthy being a friend,
wrongs himself by being an acquaintance. That the worst part of ignorance is
making good and ill seem alike. That all this is news only to fools.

Mr^^. B.

News from the lower end of the Table.
IT is said among the folks here, that if a man dye in his infancy, he has
only broke his fast in this world: If in his youth, he has left us at
dinner. That it is bedtime with a man at therescore and ten; and he that lives
to a hundred years has walked a mile after supper. That the humble-minded man
makes the lowest curtsie. That grace before meat is our election before we
were; grace after, our salvation when we are gone. The soul that halts between
two opinions, falls between two stools. That a fool at the upper end of the
table is the bread before the salt. He that hates to be reproved sits in his
own light. Hunger is the cheapest sauce and nature the cheapest guest. The
sensible man and the silent woman are the best discoursers. Repentance without
amendment is but the shifting of a foul trencher: He that tells a lie to save
his credit, wipes his mouth with his sleeue to spare his napkin. The tongue of
aiester is the fiddle that the bearts of the company dance to. The tongue of a
fool carues a piece of his heart to every man sits next him. A silent man is a
covered mess. The contented man only is his own caruer. He that has many
friends eats too much salt with his meat. That wit without discretion cuts
other men meat and his own fingers. That the soul of a choleric man sits
ever by the fire side. That patience is the larde to the lean meat of
adversity. The Epicure puts his money into his belly, and the miser his belly
into his purse. That the best company makes the upper end of the table, and
not the saltseller. The supersluitie of a man's possessions is the broken meat
that should remain to the poor. That the envious keeps his knife in his hand
and swallows his meat whole. A rich fool among the wise is a gilt empty bowl
among the thirsty. Ignorance is an insensible hunger. The water of life is the
best wine. He that robs me of my invention bids himself welcome to another
man's table, and I will bid him welcome when he is gone. The vainglorious man
pisseth more then he drinks. That no man can drink a health out of the cup
of blessing. To surfeit upon wit is more dangerous then to want it. He that is
overcome of any passion is dry drunk. It Is easier to fill the belly of faith,
then the eye of reason. The rich glutton is better fed then taught. That faith
is the elbow for a heavy soul to lean on. He that sins that he may repent,
surfets that he may take physic. He that rises without thanksgiving, goes
away and pays not for his ordinary. He that begins to repent when he is old,
never washed his hands till night. That this life is but one day of three
meals, or one meal of three courses, childhood, youth, and old age. That to
sup well is to live well, and that is the way to sleep well. That no man goes to
bed till he dies, nor wakes till he is dead. And therefore

Good night to you here and good morrow hereafter. J. C.

Nowes from the Bed.
THat the bed is the best rendevou of mankind, and the most necessary ornament
of a chamber. That Soldiers are good antiquaries in keeping the old fashion,
for the first bed was the bare ground. That a man's pillow is his best
counselor. That Adam lay in state when the heaven was his canopie. That the
naked truth is Eve, and Eve lay without sheets. That they were either very
innocent, very ignorant, or very impudent, they were not ashamed the heavens
should see them lie without a couerlet. That it is likely Eve studied
Astronomy, which makes the posterity of her sex ever since to lie on their
backs. That the circumference of the bed is nothing so wide as the unequal of
the heavens, yet it contains a whole world. That the five senses are the
greatest sleepers. That a slothful man is but a reasonable Dormouse. That the
soul ever wakes to watch the body. That a Jealous man sleeps dog-sleep. That
sleep makes no difference between a wiseman and a fool. That for all times
sleep is the best bedfellow. That the devil and mischief ever wake. That love
is a dream. That the preposterous hopes of ambitious men are like pleasing
dreams, farthest off when awake. That the bed pays Venus more custom then
all the world beside. That if dreams and wishes had been all true, there had
not been since Popery one maid to make a Nun of. That the secure man sleeps
soundly and is hardly to be wak't. That the charitable man dreams of building
Churches, but starts to think the ungodly Courtier will pull them down again.
That great sleepers were never dangerous in a state. That there is a natural
reason why popish Priests choose the bed to confess their women upon, for they
hold it necessary that humiliation should follow shrift. That if the bed
should speak all it knows, it would put many to the blush. That it is fit the
bed should know more then paper.

R. S.

FINIS

