Sir Thomas Ouerburie

HIS WIFE,

With NEW ELEGIES upon his (now known) untimely death.

Whereunto are annexed, new News and Characters, written by him self and
other learned Gentlemen.

Editio Septima.

LONDON,

Printed by Edward Griffin for Laurence L'isle, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Tigers head in Paul's Churchyard. 16 11.

To the Reader.
THE general acceptance of this matchless Poem the Wife, (written by SIR
Thomas Ouerbury) is sufficiently approved by many, the worth whereof if any
other, out of malice, shall neglect to commend, he may well (if it proceed,
from nice Criticisme) be excluded as a Churlish Retainer to the MUSES: if from
direct plain dealing, he shall be degraded for insufficiency. For had such a
Poem been extant among the ancient Romans, although they wanted our easy
conseruations of wit by printing, they would have committed it to brasie lest
iniurions time might deprive it of due eternity; If to co^uerse with a
Creature so amiable as is here described, be thought difficult; let the
contemplation thereof be held admirable. To which are added many Elegies of his
untimely death, and Characters and News written by himself and others his
friends. Howsoever, they are now exposed, not only to the Judicious, but to all
that carry the least scruple of mother wit about them.

Licet toto nunc Helicone frui -- Mar.

Lau: L'isle.
Elegies of several Authors, on the untimely death of SIR Thomas Ouerburie
poisoned in the Tower.
Upon the untimely death of Sir Thomas Ouerburie.
It Would ease our Sorrows, it would release our Tears,
Could we but hear those high celestial Spheres,
Once tune their Motions to a doleful strain
In sympathy of what we Mortals plain.
Or see their fair Intelligences change
Or face or habit, when black Deeds, so strange,
As might force pity from the heart of Hell
Are hatched by Monsters, which among us dwell,
The Stars me thinks, like Men inclined to sleep,
Should through their crystal casements scarcely peep,
Or at least view us but with half an eye,
For fear their chaster Influence might descry
Some murdering hand, oaded in guiltless blood,
Blending vile juices to destroy the good.
The Sun should wed his Beams to endless Night,
And in dull darkness canopie his Light,
When from the rank stews of adulterous Breasts,
Where every base unhallowed Project rests,
Is belcht, as in defiance of his shine,
A steame, might make even Death it self to pine.
But these things happen still; but never more clear,
Nor with more luster did these Lamps appear:
Mercury capers with a winged heel,
As if he did no touch of sorrow feel,
And yet he sees a true Mercurian killd,
Whose birth his Mansion with much honor filld.
But let me not mistake those Powers above,
Nor tax injuriously those Courts of Jove;
Surely, they joy to see these Acts reueald,
Which in blind silence have bin long conceald;
And Virtue now triumphant; whilst we mourn
To think that ere she was foul Uices scorn:
Or that poor Ouer-buries blood was made
A sacrifice to Malice and dark shade.
Weston thy Hand that Couvre-feu Bell did sway,
Which did his life to endless sleep convey.
But rest thou where thou art; I Will seek no glory
By the relation of so sad a story.
If any more were privy to the Deed,
And for the Crime must be adiudg'd to bleed,
To Heaven I pray, with heau'd-vp Hands and Eyes,
That as their Bodies fall, their Souls may rise.
And as those equally turn to one Dust,
So these alike may shine among the Just.
And there make up one glorious constellation,
Who suffered here in such a differing fashion.
D. T.
To the Memory of that generally bewailed Gentleman, Sr. Thomas Ouerburie.
But that we are bound in Christian piety
To wish Gods will be done; and Destiny
(In all that happs to Men, or Good, or Ill)
Suffered, or sent, by that implored Will;
Me thinks, t'obserue how Virtue draws faint Breath,
Subject to slanders, Hate, and violent Death,
Wise men kept low, others advanced to State,
Right checked by wrong, and Ill men fortunate;
These moved Effects, from an unmoved Cause,
Might shake the firmest Faith; Heavens fixed Laws
Might casual seem, and each irregular Sense
Spurn at just Order, blame Gods Providence.
But what is Man, t'expostulate the Intents
Of his high Will, or judge of strange Events?
The rising Sun to mortal sight reueales
This Earthly Globe; but yet the Stars conceales;
So may the Sense discover Natural Things;
Divine, above the reach of Humane wings.
Then not the Fate, but Fates bad Instrument
Do I accuse, in each sad Accident:
Good men must fall, Rapes, Incests, Murders come;
But woe and curses follow them by whom:
God Authors all men's Actions, not their sin,
For that proceeds from deu'lish Forms within.
Thou then that sufferd'st by those Forms so vile,
From whom those wicked Instruments did file
Thy drossie part, to make thy Fame shine clear,
And Shrine thy Soul in Heavens all glorious Sphere;
Who being good, naught les to thee befell,
Though it appeared disguised in shape of Hell;
Vanish thy Blood and Nerves; true Life alone
In Virtue lives, and true Religion,
In both which thou art deathles: O behold,
(If thou can look so low as Earths base Moulde)
How dreadful Justice (larewith lingering Foot)
Now comes like Whirle-winde? how it shakes the Root
Of lofty Cedars; makes the stately Brow
Bend to the Foot? how all men see that now
The Breath of Infamy does move their Sails;
Whiles thy dear name by Loves more hearty gales
Shall still keep Winge, until thy Fames extent
Fill every part of this vast Continent.
Then you the Sire of this thus murdered Son;
Repine not at his Fate; since he has won
More Honor in his Sufferance; and his Death
Succeeded by his Virtues endless Breath.
For him, and to his Life and Deaths Example,
Love might erect a Statue; Zeal, a Temple:
On his true worth the Muses might be slain
To dye his Honors Web in purest Grain.
C. B.
Upon the untimely Death of the Author of this ingenious Poem, Sr. THO:
OVERBVRY Knight, poisoned in the Tower.
SO many Moons so many times gone round,
And rose from Hell, and Darkness, under ground,
And yet till now, this darkened deed of Hell
Not brought to light? o tardie Heaven! yet tell
If Murder lays him down to sleep with Lust
Or no? reveal, as thou art Truth, and Just,
The Secrets of this unjust secure Act,
And what our fears make us suspect, compact
With greater deeds of Mischief, for alone
We think not This, and do suspect yet One,
To which compared, This, but a falling Star,
That a bright Firmament of Fire: Thy Care
We see takes meaner things: It times the World
The Signs at random thorough the Zodiac hurld,
The Stars wild wanderings, and the glib-quick Hinges
Which turn both Poles; and all the violent changes
It ouer-lookes, which trouble th'endlesse course
Of the high Firmament: by thy blessed Force
Do hoary winter frosts make forests bare,
And straight to Groves again their shades repair,
By Thee does Autums, Lyons-flaming Maine
Ripen the fruits: and the full year sustain
Her burdned powers: o being still the same,
Ruling so much, and under whom the frame
Of this vast world weighd, all his Orbs do guide,
Why are thy Cares of Men no more applide?
Or if: why seem thou sleeping to the Good,
And guarding to the Ill? as if the brood
Of best things still must Chance take in Command
And not thy Providence: and Her blind Hand
Thy Benefits erroniously disburse,
Which so let fall, never fall but to the worse?
Whence so, great crimes commit the Greater sort,
And boldest acts of shame blaze in the Court,
Where Buffones Worship in their rise of State
Those filthy Scarrabs, whom they Serve, and Hate.
Sure things mere backward, there; Honor disgracst,
And Virtue laid by Fraud, and Poison, waste:
The Adult'rer up like Haman, and so Sainted:
And Femals modesty (as Femals) painted,
Lost in all real worth: what shall we say?
Things so far out of frame, as if the day
Were come wherein another Phaeton
Stolen into Phoebus waine, had all misse-won
A clean contrary way: o powerful God,
Right all amiss, and set the wonted period
Of Goodness in his place again: This deed
Be Usher to bring forth the Mask, and Weed
Where under, blacker things lie hid perhap,
And yet have Hope to make a safe escape.
Of This, make known, why such an Instrument
As Weston, a poor Seruing-man, should rent
The frame of this sad-good-mans life: did he
Stand with this Court-bred learned OVERBVRIE,
In strife for an Ambasdorship? no, no,
His Orb held no such light: what did he owe
The Prophet malice for composing this,
This Cynossura in a neat Poesis,
How Good, and Great men ought, and All, to choose
A chaste, fit, noble Wife, and the abuse
Of Strumpets friendly shadowing in the same,
Was this his fault? or does there lie a flame
Yet in the embers not vnrak't, for which
He di'de so falsely? Heaven we do beseech
Unlock this secret, and bring all to view,
That Law may purge the blood, Lust made untrue.
W. S.
An Elegy consecrated to the memory of the truly worthy and learned Sir
Thomas Ouerburie KNIGHT.
HAd not thy wrong, like to a wound ill cured
Broke forth in death; I had not been assured
Of grief enough to finish what write.
These lines, as those which do in cold blood fight
Had come but faintly on; for, ever, he
That shrines a name within an Elegy
(Unless some nearer cause do him inspire)
Kindles his bright flame at the Funeral fire.
Since passion (after, lessning her extent)
Is then more strong, and so more eloquent.
How powerful is the hand of Murder now!
Was It not enough to see his dear life bow
Beneath her hate? but crushing that fair frame,
Attempt the like on his unspotted Fame?
O base revenge! more then inhumane fact!
Which (as the Romans sometime would enact
No doom for Patricide, supposing none
Could ever so offend) the upright Throne
Of Justice salues not: leaving that intent
Without a Name, without a punishment.
Yet through thy wounded Fame, as through these
Glasses which multiply the Species,
We see thy virtues more; and they become;
So many Statues sleeping on thy Tomb.
Wherein, confinement new thou shall endure,
But so; as when to make a Pearl more pure
We give it to a Dove, in whose womb pent
Some time, we have it forth most orient.
Such is thy luster now, that venomd Spite
With her black Soul dares not behold thy light,
But banning it, a course begins to run
With those that curse the rising of the Sun.
The poison, that works upwards now, shall strive
To be thy fair Fames true Preservative.
And witchcraft that can mask the upper Shine
With no one clowd shall blind a raye of thine.
And as the Hebrews in an obscure pit
Their holy fire hid, not extinguished it,
And after times, that broke their bondage chain
Found it, to fire their sacrifice again:
So lay thy worth somewhile, but being found,
The Muses altars plentifully crowned
With sweet perfumes, by it new kindled be
And offer all to thy dear memory.
Nor have we lost thee long: thou art not gone,
Nor can descend into Oblivion.
But twice the Sun went round since thy Soul fled,
And only that time men shall term thee dead.
Hereafter (raised to life) thou still shall have
An Antidote against the silent grave.
W.B. Int. Temp.
Upon the untimely Death of Sr. Thomas Ouerbury.
IF for to live be but a misery,
If by death good men gain eternity,
It Was friendly done in robbing thee of life,
To celebrate thy nuptials with thy wife;
So that his will no other aimeintended,
But by exchange thy life should be amended:
Yet were to compass his insatiate Lust,
He this last friendship tendered to thy trust
Whiles he dishonored and defamed may die,
Justice and Fame, shall crown thy memory.
B. G. medij Temp.
In obitum intempestiuum and lachrimabilem Illustrissimi Equitis aurati TH:
OVERBVRI magnae spei and expectationis Viri.
HOw ever windy mischief raise up high,
Dark thickning clouds, to pour upon us all
A tempost of foul rumors, which descry
Thy hard mishap and strange distastrous fall,
As if thy wounds were bleeding from that hand,
Which rather should have raisd thee up to stand.
Yet shall thou here survive in pitying fame,
In thy sweet Wife, in these most acute lines,
In well reputed Characters of name,
And virtues tomb, which all thy honor shrines,
In spite of envy, or the proudest hair,
That thus has set opinion at debate.
But for mine own part, since it falls out so,
That death has had her will; I now compare
It to awanton hand, which at a throw
To break a box of precious balm did dare:
With whose perfume, although it was thus spilld,
The house and comers by were better filld.
Cap: Th: Gainsford.
Encomiasticke Uerses on this excellent Poem the Wife.
Lo here the matchles pattern of a Wife,
Deciphered in form of Good and Bad:
The Bad commends the Good as Dark does Light,
Or as a loathed Bed a Single life;
The Good, with Wisdom and Discretion clad,
With Modesty, and fair demeanor dight,
Whose Reason does her Will to Love inuit.
Reason begot, and Passion bred her love,
Self-will She shunned, Fitnes the Marriage made;
Fitnes does cherish Love, Self-will Debate.
Lo thus; and in this Monument of proof
A perfect Wife, a Work nor Time can fade,
Nor loose respect betray to mortal Fate.
This, none can equal; Best, but imitate.
R.C.
On Sir Thomas Ouerburies Poem the Wife.
I Am glad yet ere I die, I have found occasion
Honest and just; without the worlds persuasion
Or flattery or briberie to commend
A woman for her goodness; and God send
I may find many more: I wish them well,
They are pretty things to play with: when Eve fell
She took a care that all the Wo-men-kinde
That were to follow her, should be as blind
As she was wilful; and till this good Wife,
This piece of virtue, that nere took her life
From a frail mothers labor: Those stand still
As marginalls to point us to our ill
Came to the world, as other creatures do
That know no God but will; we learnt to woe,
And if she were but fair and could but kiss,
Twenty to one we could not choose amiss;
And as we judge of trees if straight and tall
That may be found, yet never till the fall
Find how the rain has drilled them; So till now
We only knew we must love; but not how.
But here we have example, and so rare,
That if we hold but common sense and care,
And steer by this card; he that goes awry,
I Will boldly say at his nativity,
That man was sealed a fool: yet all this good
Given as it is, not clothed in flesh and blood
Some may auerre and strongly it was mere meant
In way of practice, but not president;
Either will make us happy men; for he
That marries any way this my sterie,
Or any parcel of that benefit,
Though he take hold of nothing but the wit,
Has got himself a partner for his life,
More then a woman, better then a wife.
I. F.
Eiusdem in Eadem.
AS from a man the first frail woman came,
The first that ever made us know our shame,
And find the curse of labor; so again,
Goodness and understanding found a man
To take this shame away; and from him sprung
A piece of excellence without a Tongue
Because it should not wrong us; yet the life
Makes it appear a woman and a wife.
And this is she, if ever woman shall
Do good hereafter; borne to bless our fall.
J. F.
On Sir Thomas Ouerburies Poem the Wife.
WEre every beauty, every several grace,
Which is in Women, in one Woman's face,
Some courtly Gallants might, I think, come to her,
Which would not wed her, though they seemed to woe her.
Settled Affections follow not the Eye;
Reason and Judgment, must their course descrie.
Pigmalions Image made of Marble stone,
Was liked of all; beloved of him alone.
But here is a Dame grown husbandlesse of late,
Which not a Man but wishes were his Mate.
So fair without, so free from spot within,
That Earth seems here to stand exempt from sin,
Juno vouchsafe, and Hymen, when I wed,
I may behold this Widow in my Bed.
D. T.
On the Wife.
BEauty affords contentment to the Eye,
Riches are means to cure a weak estate,
Honor illustrates what it comes nie:
To marry thus men count it happy Fate.
Virtue they think does in these Emblems shroud
But trial shows they are gulled with a Cloud.
These are but complements; the inward worth,
The outward carriage, gesture, wit, and grace,
Is that alone which sets a Woman forth:
And in this Woman, these have each a place.
Were all wives such, This age would happy be,
But happier that of our Posterity.
D. T.
To the Wife.
Exposed to all, thou will less worthy seem
I fear: Wives common, all men disesteems;
Yet somethings have a differing Fate: some fret,
We doubt in wares which are in corners set:
Hid Medalls rust, which being used grow bright;
The day more friendeth virtue then the night.
Thou though more common, then may seem more good,
I only wish thou may be understood.
G. R.
On the Wife.
Well have thou said, that women should be such;
And were they that, had but a third as much
I would be married too, but that I know
Not what she is, but should be thou do show:
So let me praise thy work, and let my life
Be single, or thy Widow be my Wife.
X. Z.
On the Wife.
THis perfect Creature, to the Eastern use
Lived, whilst a wife retired from common show:
Not that her Lover feared, the least abuse,
But with the wisest, knew it fitter so:
Since, fallen a widow, and a zealous one,
She would have sacrifizde her self again,
But importuned to life, is now alone,
Loved, wooed, admired, by all wise single men,
Which, to th'adultrous rest, that dare begin
There used temptations, were a mortal sin.
TO make a Wife of Wit, or mere Philosophy,
And deck her up with flowers of sweetest poesy,
Is no hard task: but such an one of flesh to find,
Would weary all the wits and bodies of mankind:
Since worse must serve the turn, then men must be content
To take such as they find, not such as they invent.
T. B.
To the clean contrary wife.
Look here: and chide those Spirits, which maintain
Their Empire, with so strong command in you,
That all good eyes, which do your follies view,
Pity, what you for them, must once sustain:
O from those Evils, which free Souls disdain
To be acquainted with, (and but pursue
Worst Minds) from them (as hateful, as untrue,)
By reading this, for Fames fair sake refrain:
Who would let feed upon her birth, the brood
Of lightness, Indiscretion, and the shame
Of foul Incontinence, when the base blood
Is careless only of an Honored Name,
Be all that gentle are, more high improou'd,
For loose Dames are but flattered, never Loved.
W: Stra:
To the Wife.
WEep on kind Soul; and though thou co^mest in view,
Put on Woes habit, Melancholies hew.
A Widows beauty makes the louelier show,
When floods of sorrow do her cheeks oreflow.
The fair Achieuements soft Affection bears
Are bleeding Hearts, Eyes euer-dropping Tears.
The Turtle tells thee, Thou should always groan,
And wail thy Mate with selitarie moan.
Add then sweet Soul no bounds to thy Laments,
It Is fit sad plaints should follow sad events.
Yet have a care his name be not reneal'd:
Grief merits most, where it is most concealed
Of the choice of a Wife.
IF I were to choose a Woman,
As who knows but I may marry:
I would trust the eye of no man,
Nor a tongue that may miscarry:
For in way of Love and Glory
Each Tongue best tells his own story.
First, to make my choice the bolder,
I would have her child to such
Whose free virtuous lives are older
Then Antiquity can touch:
For it is seeldome seen, that Blood
Gives a Beauty great and good.
Yet an ancient stock may bring
Branches I confess of worth,
Like rich-mantles shadowing
Those descents that brought them forth.
Yet such Hills though gilded show
Soonest feel the Age of snow.
Therefore to prevent such care
That repentance soon may bring,
Like Merchants I would choose my ware.
Useful good, not glittering.
He that weds for state or face,
Buys a Horse to lose a Race.
Yet I would have her fair as any,
But her own not kissed away:
I would have her free to many,
Look on all like equal day;
But descending to the Sea,
Make her set with none but me.
If she be not tall it is better;
For that word, A goodly Woman,
Prints it self in such a letter,
That it leaves vnstudied no man:
I would have my Mistress grow
Only tall, to answer No.
Yet I would not have her lose
So much breeding, as to fling
Vnbecomming scorn on those
That must worship every thing.
Let her fear loose looks to scatter,
And loose men will fear to flatter.
Children I would have her bear.
More for love of name then bed:
So each child I have is heir
To another maydenhead;
For she that in the act's afraids.
Every nigh'ts another maid.
Such a one, as when she is wooed
Blushes not for ill thoughts past;
But so innocently good,
That her dreams are ever chaste;
For that Maid that thinks a sin,
Has betraide the Fort she is in.
In my visitation still,
I would have her scatter fears,
How this man, and that was ill,
After protestations tears:
And who vows a constant life,
Crowns a meritorious Wife.
When the Priest first gives our hands,
I would have her think but thus;
In what high and holy bands
Heaven, like twins, has planted us,
That like Aarons rod together,
Both may bud, grow green, and wither.
FINIS.
THE LIVELY PORTRAICTURE OF SIR THOMAS OVERBURY.


THE METHOD.
FIrst of Marriage, and the effect thereof, Children. Then of his contrary,
Lust; then for his choice. First, his opinion negatiuely, what should not be:
the first causes in it, that is, neither Beauty, Birth, nor Portion. Then
affirmatively, what should be, of which kind there are four: Goodness,
Knowledge, Discretion, and as a second thing, Beauty. The first only is
absolutely good: the other being built upon the first do likewise become so.
Then the application of that woman by love to himself, which makes her a wife.
And lastly, the only condition of a wife, Fitness.

A WIFE.
EAch Woman is a brief of Woman-kinde,
And does in little even as much contain,
As, in one Day and Night, all life we find,
Of either, More, is but the fame again:
God framed Her so, that to her Husband, She,
As Eve, should all the World of Women be.
So framed he Both, that neither power he gave,
Use of themselves, but by exchange, to make:
Whence in their Face the Fair no pleasure have,
But' by reflex of what thence other take.
Our Lips in their own Kiss no pleasure find:
Toward their proper Face, our Eyes are blind.
So God in Eve did perfect Man begun;
Till then, in vain much of himself he had:
In Adam God created only one,
Eve, and the world to come, in Eve he made.
We are two halfes: whiles each from other straies,
Both barren are; Joined both their like can raise
At first both Sexes were in Man combin'de,
man, a Shee-man did in his body breed;
Adam was Eues, Eve Mother of Mankind,
Eve From Liue-flesh, Man did from Dust proceed.
One thus made two, Marriage does reunite,
And makes them both but on Hermaphrodite.
Man did but the well-being of his life
From Woman take, her Being she from Man,
And therefore Eve created was a Wife,
And at the end of all, her Sex began:
Marriage their object is; their Being then,
And now Perfection, they receive from Men.
Marriage, to all, whose joys two parties be,
And doubled are by being parted so,
Wherein the very act is Chastity,
Whereby two Souls into one Body go.
Which makes two one while here they living be,
And after death in their Posterity.
God to each Man a private Woman gave,
That in that Center his desires might stint,
That he a comfort like himself might have,
And that on her his like he might imprint.
Double is Woman's use, part of their end
Does on this Age, part on the next depend.
We fill but part of Time, and cannot dye,
Till we the world a fresh supply have lent,
Children are Bodies sole Eternity;
Nature is Gods, Art is Man's instrument.
Now all Man's Art but only dead things makes,
But herein Man in things of life partakes.
For wandering Lust; I know it is infinite,
It still begins, and adds not more to more.
The guilt is everlasting, the delight,
This instant does not feel of that before.
The taste of it is only in the Sense,
The operation, in the Conscience.
Woman is not Lusts bounds, but Woman-kinde,
One is Loves number: who from that does fall,
Has lost his hold, and no new rest shall find,
Uice has no mean, but not to be at all;
A Wife is that enough, Lust cannot find,
For Lust is still with want, or too much, pinde.
Bate lust the Sin, my share is even with his,
For Not to lust, and to Enjoy is one:
And more or less past, equal Nothing is,
I still have one, Lust one at once, alone:
And though the Woman often changed be,
Yet He Is the same without variety.
Marriage our lust (as 'twere with fuel fire)
Does, with a medicine of the same, allay;
And not forbid, but rectify desire.
My self I cannot choose, my wife I may:
And in the choice of Her, it much does lie,
To mend my self in my Posterity.
O rather let me Love, then be in love;
So let me choose as Wife and Friend to find,
Let me forget her Sex when I approve,
Beasts likeness lies in shape, but ours in mind.
Our Souls no Sexes have, their Love is clean,
No Sex, both in the better part are Men.
But Physic for our lust their Bodies be,
But matter fit to show our Love upon.
But only Shells for our posterity,
Their souls were given lest man should be alone:
For, but the Souls Interpreters, words be,
Without which Bodies are no Company.
That goodly frame we see of flesh and blood,
Their fashion is, not weight, it is I say
But their Laye-part, but well digested food;
It Is but twixt Dust, and Dust, Lives middle way:
The worth of it is nothing that is seen,
But only that it holds a Soul within.
And all the carnal Beauty of my Wife,
Is but skin-deepe, but to two senses known;
Short even of Pictures, shorter lived then Life,
And yet the love suruiues that is built thereon:
For our Imagination is too high,
For Bodies when they meet to satisfy.
All Shapes, all Colors are alike in Night,
Nor does our Touch distinguish foul or fair:
But man's imagination, and his sight;
And those, but the first week, by Custom are
Both made alike, which diffred at first view;
Nor can that difference, Absence much renew.
Nor can that Beauty lying in the Face,
But merely by imagination be
Enjoyed by us in an inferior place.
Nor can that Beauty by enjoying we
Make ours become, so our desire grows tame:
We changed are, but it remains the same.
Birth, less then Beauty, shall my Reason blind,
Her Birth goes to my Children, not to me.
Rather had I that active Gentry find,
Virtue, then passive from her Ancestry;
Rather in her alive, one virtue see,
Then all the rest dead in her Pedigree.
In the Degrees, high rather be she placed,
Of Nature then of Art and Policy:
Gentry is but a relic of Time-past,
And Love does only but the present see;
Things were first made, then words: she were the same,
With, or without, that title, or that name.
As for (the oddes^ Sexes) Portion;
Nor will I shun it, nor my aim it make;
Birth, Beauty, Wealth, are nothing worth alone,
All these I would for good additions take,
Not for Good Parts; those two are ill combined,
Who^ any third thing from themselves has joined.
Rather then these, the object of my Love,
Let it be Good; when these with virtue go,
They (in themselves indifferent,) virtues prove,
For Good (like fire) turns all things to be so.
Gods Image, in Her Soul, o let me place
My Love upon; not Adams in Her Face.
Good, is a fairer attribute then White,
It Is the minds beauty keeps the other sweet:
That Is not still one, nor mortal with the light,
Nor glass, nor painting can it counterfeit,
Nor does it raise desires, which ever tend
At once, to their perfection, and their end.
By Good I would have Holy understood,
So God she cannot love, but also me,
The law requires our words and deeds be good,
Religion even the Thoughts does sanctify:
And she is more a Maid that ravished is,
Then She which only does but wish amiss.
Lust only by Religion is withstood,
Lusts object is alive, his strength within,
Morality resists but in cold blood,
Respect of Credit fears shame not sin.
But no place dark enough for such offense
She finds, that is watched by her own Conscience.
Then may I trust her Body with her Mind,
And, thereupon secure, need never know
The pangs of Jealousy: and Love does find
More paineto doubt her false, then know her so:
For Patience is of evils that are known,
The certain Remedy; but Doubt has none.
And be that thought once stirred, twill never dye,
Nor will the grief more mild by custom prove:
Nor yet Amendment can it satisfy,
The Anguish more or less, is as our Love:
This misery does Jealousy ensue,
That we may prove her false, but cannot True.
Suspicion may the will of Lust restrain.
But Good preuents from having such a will,
A Wife that is Good, does Chaste and more contain,
For Chaste is but an Abstinence from ill:
And in a Wife that is Bad; although the best
Of qualities; yet in a Good the least.
To bar the means is Care, not Jealousy.
Some lawful things to be avoided are,
When, they occasion of unlawful be,
Lust ere it hurts, is best descride a far:
Lust is a finne of two; he that is sure
Of either part, may be of both secure.
Give me next Good, an understanding Wife,
By Nature wise, not Learned by much Art,
Some Knowledge on Her side will all my life
More scope of conversation impart,
Besides, Her inborne virtue fortify,
They are most firmly good, that best know Why.
A passive understanding to conceive,
And Judgment to discern, I wish to find:
Beyond that, all as hazardous I leave,
Learning and pregnant wit in Woman-kinde,
What it finds malleable makes frail,
And does not add more Ballast, but more Sail.
Domesticke Charge does best that Sex befit,
Contiguous business, so to fix the Mind,
That Leisure space for Fancies not admit:
Their Leisure it is corrupts Woman-kinde,
Else being placed from many vices free,
They had to Heaven a shorter cut then we.
Books are a part of Man's prerogative,
In formal Ink they Thoughts and Uoices hold,
That we to them our solitude may give,
And make Time-present travel that of old.
Our Life, Fame peeceth longer at the end,
And Books it farther backward do extend.
As good, and knowing, let her be Discreet,
That to the others weight, does Fashion bring,
Discretion does consider what is Fit,
Goodness but what is lawful, but the Thing
Not Circumstances; Learning is and wit,
In Men but curious folly without it.
To keep their Name when it is in others hands
Discretion asks, their Credit is by far
More frail then They, on likely-hoods it stands,
And hard to be disproou'd, Lust's slanders are.
Their Carriage, not their Chastity alone,
Must keep their Name chaste from suspicion.
Women's Behavior is a surer bar
Then is their No: That fairly does deny
Without denying, thereby kept they are
Safe even from Hope; in part to blame is she,
Which has without consent bin only tried;
He comes too near, that comes to be denide.
Now since a Woman we to Marry are,
A Soul and Body, not a Soul alone;
When one is Good, then be the other Fair,
Beauty is Health, and Beauty both in one,
Be she so fair as change can yield no gain,
So fair, as She most Women else contain.
So Fair at least let me imagine Her,
That thought to me is Truth: Opinion
Cannot in matter of opinion err;
With no Eyes shall I see her but mine own.
And as my Fancy Her conceiues to be.
Even such my Senses both, do Feel and See.
The Face we may the seat of of Beauty call,
In it the relish of the rest does lie,
Nay even a figure of the Mind withal:
And of the Face the Life moves in the Eye;
No things else being two so like we see,
So like, that they two but in number be.
Beauty in decent shape, and Colors lies,
Colors the matter are, and shape the Soul;
The Soul which from no single part does rise,
But from the just proportion of the whole,
And is a mere spirituall-harmonie,
Of every part united in the Eye.
Love is a kind of Superstition,
Which fears the Idol which it self has framed;
Lust a Desire, which rather from his own
Temper, then from the object is inflamed;
Beauty is Loves object, Women Lust's, to gain
Love, Love Desires, Lust only to obtain.
No circumstance does Beauty beautify,
Like graceful fashion, native Comeliness,
Nay even gets pardon for Deformity;
Art cannot it beget, but may increase,
When Nature had fixed Beauty perfect made,
Something she left for Motion to add.
But let that Fashion more to Modesty
Tend, then Assurance; Modesty does set
The face in her just place, from Passions free,
It Is both the Minds, and Bodies Beauty met;
But Modesty; no virtue can we see;
That is the Faces only Chastity.
Where goodness fails, twixt ill and ill that stands:
Whence it is that women though they weaker be,
And their desires more strong, yet on their hands
The Chastity of men does often lie:
Lust would more common be then any one,
Could it as other sins be done alone.
All these good parts a Perfect woman make,
Add Love to me, they make a Perfect Wife,
Without her Love Her Beauty should I take,
As that of Pictures, dead, That gives it life;
Till then Her Beauty like the Sun does shine
Alike to all; That makes it only mine.
And of that Love, let Reason Father be,
And Passion Mothor; let it from the one
His Being take, the other his Degree;
Self-love (which second Loves are built upon)
Will make me (if not Her) her Love respect;
No Man but favors his own worths effect.
As Good, and wise, so be she Fit for me,
That is, To will, and Not to will the same,
My Wife is my Adopted-selfe, and she
As Me, so what I love, to Love must frame.
For when in Marriage both in one concur,
Woman conuerts to Man, not Man to her.
FINIS.
The Authors Epitaph, written by himself.
THe Span of my days measured, here I rest,
That is, my body; but my soul, his guest
Is hence ascended, whither, nestber Time,
Nor Faith, nor Hope, but only love can clime;
Where being now enlightened, She does know
The Truth of all men argue of below:
Only this dust does here in Pawn remain,
That when the world dissolues she come again.
Characters, OR Witty descriptions of the properties of sundry Persons.
A good Woman.
A Good Woman is a comfort, like a man. She lacks of him nothing but heat.
Thence is her sweetness of disposition, which meets his stoutnes more
pleasingly; so wool meets iron easier then iron, and turns resisting into
embracing. Her greatest learning is religion, and her thoughts are on her own
Sex, or on men, without casting the difference. Dishonestie never comes nearer
than her ears, and then wonder stops it out, and saues virtue the labor. She
leaves then eat youth, telling his lushious tales, and puts back the
Seruingmans putting forward with a frown: yet her kindness is free enough to be
seen; for it has no guilt about it: and her mirth is clear, that you may
look through it, into virtue, but not beyond. She has not behavior at a
certain, but makes it to her occasion. She has so much knowledge as to love
it, and if she have it not at home, she will fetch it; for this sometimes in a
pleasant discontent she dares chide her Sex, though she use it never the
worse. She is much within, and frames outward things to her mind, not her
mind to them. She wears good clothes, but never better; for she finds no
degree beyond Decency. She has a content of her own, and so seeks not an
husband, but finds him. She is indeed most, but not much to description, for
she is direct and one, and has not the variety of ill. Now she is given
fresh and alive to a husband, and she does nothing more then love him, for she
takes him to that purpose. So his good becomes the business of her actions,
and she does her self kindness upon him. After his, her chiefest virtue is a
good husband. For She is He.

A very Woman.
A Very Woman, is a dow-bakt man, or a She meant well toward man, but fell two
bows short, strength and understanding. Her virtue is the hedge, Modesty,
that keeps a man from climing over into her faults. She simpers as if she had
no teeth, but lips, and she diuides her eyes and keeps half for her self, and
gives the other to her near Youth. Being set down she casts her face into a
platform, which dureth the meal, and is taken away with the voider. Her
draught reaches to good manners, not to thirst, and it is a part of their
mystery not to profess hunger; but Nature takes her in private and stretches
her upon meat. She is Marigeable and Fourteen at once; and after she does not
live but tarry. She reads over her face every morning, and sometimes blots
out pale, and writes red. She thinks she is fair, though many times her
opinion goes alone, and she loves her glass, and the knight of the Sun for
lying. She is hid away all but her face, and that is hanged about with toys
and devices, like the sign of a Tavern, to draw Strangers. If she show more
she preuents desire, and by too free giving, leaves no Gift. She may escape
from the Seruing-man, but not from the Chamber-maide. She commits with her
ears for certain: after that she may go for a Maid, but she has been lien
with in her understanding. Her Philosophy, is a seeming neglect of those, that
be too good for her. She Is a younger brother for her portion, but not for her
portion of wit, that comes from her in a treble, which is still too big for it;
yet her Vanity seldom matcheth her, with one of her own degree, for then she
will beget another creature a beggar: and commonly, if she marry better, she
marries worse. She gets much by the simplicity of her Suitor, and for a jest,
laughes at him without one. Thus she dresses a Husband for her self, and after
takes him for his patience, and the land adjoining, ye may see it, in a
Seruingmans fresh Naperie, and his Leg steps into an unknown stocking. I need
not speak of his Garters, the tassell shows it self. If she love, she loves
not the Man, but the beast of him. She is Salomons cruel creature, and a man's
walking-consumption: every caudle she gives him, is a purge. Her chief
commendation is, she brings a man to repentance.

Her next part.
Her lightness gets her to swim at top of the table, where her wrie little
finger bewraies caruing; her neighbors at the latter end know they are welcome,
and for that purpose she quenches her thirst. She travels to and among, and
so becomes a woman of good entertainment, for all the folly in the country,
comes in clean Linen to visit her: she breaks to them her grief in Sugar
cakes, and receives from their mouths in exchange, many stories that conclude
to no purpose. Her eldest Son is like her howsoever, and that dispraiseth him
best: her utmost drift is to turn him Fool, which commonly she obtaines at
the years of discretion, She takes a journey sometimes to her Neeces house,
but never thinks beyond London. Her Devotion is good clothes, they carry her
to Church, express their stuff and fashion, and are silent, if she be more
devout, she lifts up a certain number of eyes, in stead of prayers, and takes
the Sermon, and measures out a nap by it, just as long. She sends Religion
before to Sixty, where she never ouertakes it, or drives it before her again.
Her most necessary instruments, are a waiting Gentlewoman, and a
Chamber-maide; she wears her Gentlewoman still, but most often leaves the
other in her Chamber-window. She has a little Kennel in her lap, and she
smells the sweeter for it. The utmost reach of her Providence, is the fatness
of a Capon, and her greatest envy, is the next Gentlewomans better gown. Her
most commendable skill, is to make her Husbands fustian bear her Veluer. This
she does many times over, and then is delivered to old Age, and a Chair, where
every body leaves her.

A Dissembler,
IS an essence needing a double definition, for he is not that he appears.
Unto the eye he is pleasing, unto the ear not harsh, but unto the
understanding intricate, and full of windings: he is the prima materia, and his
intents give him form: he dies his means and his meaning into two colors,
he baits craft with humility, and his countenance is the picture of the
present disposition. He winnes not by battery, but undermining, and his rack
is soothing. He allures, is not allured by his affections, for they are the
brokers of his observation. He knows passion only by sufferance, and
resists by obeying. He makes his time an accomptant to his memory, and of
the humors of men weaues a net for occasion: the Inquisitor must look through
his judgment, for to the eye only he is no^ visible.

A Courtier,
TO all men's thinking is a man, and to most men the finest: all things else are
defined by the understanding, but this by the senses; but his surest mark is,
that he is to be found only about Princes. He smells; and puts away much
of his judgment about the situation of his clothes. He knows no man that is
not generally known. His wit, like the Marigold, opens with the Sun, and
therefore he rises not before ten of the clock. He puts more confidence in
his words than meaning, and more in his pronuntiation than his words. Occasion
is his Cupid, and he has but one receipt of making love. He follows nothing
but inconstancy, admires nothing but beauty, honors nothing but fortune.
Loves nothing. The sustenance of his discourse is News, and his censure like a
shot depe^ds upon the charging. He is not, if he be out of Court, but fish-like
breathes destruction, if out of his own element. Neither his motion, or aspect
are regular, but he moves by the upper Spheres, and is the reflection of higher
substances.

If you find him not here, you shall in Paul's, with a picke-tooth in his
Hat, a cape cloak, and a long stocking.

A Golden Ass,
IS a young thing, whose Father went to the Devil; he is followed like a salt
bitch, and limbed by him that gets up first; his disposition is cut, and knaves
rent him like Tenter-hookes: he is as blind as his mother, and swallows
flatterers for friends. He is high in his own imagination; but that
imagination, as a stone, that is raised by violence, descends naturally: when
he goes, he looks who looks: if he finds not good store of vailers, he comes
home stiff and seer, until he be new oyled and watered by his husbandmen.
Wheresoever be eats he has an officer, to warn men not to talk out of his
element, and his own is exceeding sensible, because it is sensual; but he
cannot exchange a piece of reason, though he can a piece of gold. He is naught
plucked, for his feathers are his beauty, and more then his beauty, they are
his discretion, his countenance, his All. He is now at an end, for he has had
the Wolf of vainglory, which he fed, until himself became the food.

A Flatterer,
IS the shadow of a Fool. He is a good wood-man, for he singleth out none but
the wealthy. His carriage is ever of the color of his patient; and for his
sake he will halt or wear a wry neck. He dispraiseth nothing but poverty, and
small drink, and praises his grace of making water. He sells himself,
with reckoning his great Friends, and teaches the present, how to win his
praise by reciting the others gifts: he is ready for all imploiments, but
especially before Dinner, for his courage and his stomach go together. He
will play any upon his countenance, and where he cannot be admitted for a
counselor, he will serve as a fool. He frequents the court of wards and
ordinaries, and fits these guests of Togae virilis, with wives or whoores. He
enters young men into acquaintance and debt books. In a word, he is the
impression of the last term, and will be so, until the coming of a new term
or termer.

An ignorant Glorie-hunter,
IS an insectum animal; for he is the maggot of opinion, his behavior is
anothing from himself, and is glewed, and but set on. He entertaines men with
repetitions, and returns them their own words. He is ignorant of nothing, no
not of those things, where ignorance is the lesser shame. He gets the names of
good wits, and vtters them for his companions. He confesses vices that he is
guiltless of, if they be in fashion; and dares not salute a man in old cloths,
or out of fashion. There is not a public assembly without him, and he will
take any pains for an acquaintance there. In any show he will be one, though
he be but a whistler, or a torch bearer; and bears down strangers with the
story of his actions. He handles nothing that is not rare, and defends his
wardrobe, diet, and all customs, with entitling their beginnings from Princes,
great Soldiers and strange Nations. He dares speak more then he understands,
and adventures his words without the relief of any seconds. He relates
battles and skirmishes, as from an eye witness, when his eyes theeuishly
beguiled a ballad of them. In a word, to make sure of admiration, he will not
let himself understand himself, but hopes, fame and opinion will be the
Readers of his Riddles.

A Timist,
IS a noune adjective of the present tense. He has no more of a conscience
then Fear, and his religion is not his but the Princes. He reuerenceth a
Courtiers Servants servant. Is first his own Slave, and then whosoever looks
big; when he gives he curses, and when he fells he worships. He reads the
statutes in his chamber, and wears the Bible in the streets: he never
praises any but before themselves or friends: and mislikes no great man's
actions during his life. His new years gifts are ready at Alhalomas, and the
suit he meant to mediate before them. He pleases the children of great men,
and promises to adopt them; and his courtesy extends it self even to the
stable. He strains to talk wisely, and his modesty would serve a Bride. He
is gravity from the head to the foot; but not from the head to the heart; you
may find what place he affects, for he creepes as near it as may be, and as
passionately courts it; if at any time his hopes are effected, he swells with
them; and they burst out too good for the vessel. In a word, he danceth to the
tune of fortune, and studies for nothing but to keep time.

An Amorist,
IS a certain blasted or planet-stroken, and is the dog that leads blind
Cupid; when he is at the best, his fashion exceedes the worth of his weight. He
is never without verses, and musk confects; and sighs to the hazard of his
buttons; his eyes are all white, either to wear the livery of his Mistress
complexion, or to keep Cupid from hitting the black. He fights with passion,
and loses much of his blood hy his weapon; dreams, thence his palenes. His
arms are carefuly used, as it their best use were nothing but embracements. He
is untrust, vnbuttoned, and vngartered, not out of carelessness, but care; his
farthest end being but going to bed. Sometimes he wraps his petition in
neatness, but is goes not alone; for then he makes some other quality
moralize his affection, and his trimnesse is the grace of that grace. Her
favor lifts him up, as the Sun moisture; when she disfavors, unable to hold
that happiness, it falls down in tears; his fingers are his Orators, and he
expresses much of himself upon some instrument. He answers not, or not to
the purpose; and no marvel, for he is not at home. He scotcheth time with
dancing with his Mistress, taking up of her glove, and wearing her feather; he
is confinde to her color, and dares not pass out of the circuit of her
memory. His imagination is a fool, and it goes in a pide-coat of red and
white; shortly, he is translated out of a man into folly; his imagination is
the glass of lust, and himself the traitor to his own discretion.

An Affectate Traveler
IS a speaking fashion; he has taken pains to be ridiculous; and has seen
more then he has perceived. His attire speaks French or Italian, and his gate
cries, Behold me. He censures all things by countenances, and shrugs, and
speaks his own language with shame and lisping: he will choke rather then
confess Beer good drink: and his pick-tooth is a maine part of his
behavior. He chooses rather to be counted a Spy, then not a Politician: and
maintains his reputation by naming greatmen familiarly. He chooses rather to
tell lies, then not wonders, and talks with men singly: his discourse sonnds
big, but means nothing: and his Boy is bound to admire him howsoever. He comes
still from great Personages, but goes with mean. He takes occasion to show
Jewels given him in regard of his virtue, that were bought in S. Martins: and
not long after, having with a Mountebanks method, pronounced them worth
thousands, enpawneth them for a few shillings. Upon festival days he goes to
Court, and salutes without resaluting: at night in an Ordinary he canvasseth
the business in hand, and seems as conversant with all intents and plots, as
if he begot them. His extraordinary account of men is, first to tell them the
ends of all matters of consequence, and then to borrow money of them; he
offers courtefies, to show them, rather then himself humble. He disdaines
all things above his reach, and prefers all Countries before his own. He
imputes his wants and poverty to the ignorance of the time, not his own
unworthiness: and concludes his discourse with half a period, or a word, and
leaves the rest to imagination. In a word, his religion is fashion, and both
body and soul are governed by fame, he loves most voices above truth.

A Wise man
IS the truth of the true definition of man, that is, a reasonable creature.
His disposition alters, alters not. He hides himself with the attire of the
vulgar; and in indifferent things is content to be governed by them. He looks
according to nature, so goes his behavior. His mind enioyes a continual
smoothness: so comes it, that his consideration is always at home. He
endures the faults of all men silently, except his friends, and to them he is
the mirror of their actions; by this means his peace comes not from
fortune, but himself. He is cunning in men, not to surprise but keep his
own, and bears off their ill affected hurnours, no otherwise then if they were
flies. He chooses not friends by the subsidy-booke, and is not luxurious after
acquaintance. He maintains the strength of his body, not by delicacies, but
temperance; and his mind by giving it pre-eminence over his body. He
understands things not by their form, but qualities; and his comparisons
intend not to excuse, but to provoke him higher. He is not subject to
casualties, for Fortune has nothing to do with the mind, except those drowned
in the body: but he has divided his soul, from the case of his soul, whose
weakness he assists no otherwise then commiseratiuely, not that it is his,
but that it is. He is thus, and will be thus: and lives subject neither to
Time nor his frailties; the feruant of virtue, and by virtue, the friend of the
highest.

A Noble Spirit
Has surueyed and fortified his disposition, and conuerts all occurrents into
experience, between which experience and his reason, there is marriage; the
issue are his actions. He circuits his intents, and sees the end before he
shoot. Men are the instruments of his Art, and there is no man without his use:
occasion incites him, none enticeth him; and he mooues by affection, not for
affection; he loves glory, scorns shame, and governs and obeys with one
countenance; for it comes from one consideration. He calls not the variety of
the world chances, for his meditation has traveled over them; and his eye
mounted upon his understanding, sees them as things underneath. He couers not
his body with delicacies, nor excuses these delicacies by his body, but
teaches it, since it is not able to defend its own imbecility, to show or
suffer. He licenceth not his weakness, to wear Fate, but knowing reason to
be no idle gift of Nature, he is the Sreeres-man of his own destiny. Truth
is his Goddess, and he takes pains to get her, not to look like her. He
knows the condition of the world, that he must act one thing like another, and
then another. To these he carries his desires, and not his desires him; and
sticks not fast by the way (for that contentment is repentance) but knowing
the circle of all courses, of all intents, of all things, to have but one
center or period, without all distraction, he hastes thither and ends there,
as his true and natural element. He does not contemn Fortune, but not
confess her. He is no Gamester of the world (which only complain and praise
her) but being only sensible of the honesty of actions, contemnes a particular
profit as the excrement or scum. Unto the society of men he is a Sun, whose
cleerenesse directs their steps in a regular motion: when he is more
particular, he is the wise man's friend, the example of the indifferent, the
medicine of the vicious. Thus time goes not from him, but with him: and he
feels age more by the strength of his soul, than the weakness of his body:
thus feels he no pain, but esteems all such things as friends, that desire
to file off his fetters, and help him out of prison.

An Old Man
IS a thing that has been a man in his days. Old men are to be known
blind-folded: for their talk is as terrible as their resemblance. They praise
their own times as vehemently, as if they would sell them. They become
wrinckled with frowning and facing youth; they admire their old customs, even
to the eating of red herring, and going wetshod. They call the thumb under the
girdle, Gravity; and because they can hardly smell at all, their Posies are
under their girdles. They count it an Ornament of speech, to close the period
with a cough; and it is venerable, they say, to spend time in wiping their
driueled beards. Their discourse is unanswerable, by reason of their obstinacy:
their speech is much, though little to the purpose. Trueths and lies pass with
an equal affirmation, for their memories several is won into one
receptacle, and so they come out with one sense. They teach their servants
their duties with as much scorn and tyranny, as some people teach their dogs
to fetch. Their envy is one of their diseases. They put off and on their
clothes, with that certainty, as if they knew, their heads would not direct
them, and therefore Custom should. They take a pride in halting and going
stiffely, and therefore their staves are carved and tipped: they trust their
attire with much of their gravity; and they dare not go without a gown in
Summer. Their hats are brushed to draw men's eyes off from their faces; but of
all, their Pomandars are worn to most purpose, for their putrified breath
ought not to want either a smell to defend, or a dog to excuse.

A Country Gentleman
IS a thing, out of whose corruption the generation of a Justice of peace is
produced. He speaks statutes and husbandry well enough, to make his
neighbors think him a wise man; he is well skilled in Arithmeticke or rates:
and has eloquence enough to save his two pence. His conversation amongst his
Tenants is desperate; but amongst his equals full of doubt. His travel is
seldom farther then the next market town, and his inquisition is about the
price of Corn: when he trauelleth, he will go ten mile out of the way to a
Couzens house of his to save charges; and rewards the Servants by taking them
by the hand when he departs. Nothing under a Sub-poena can draw him to London:
and when he is there, he sticks fast upon every object, casts his eyes away
upon gazing, and becomes the prey of every Cutpurse. When he comes home,
those wonders serve him for his Holy Day talk. If he go to Court, it is in
yellow stockings; and if it be in Winter, in a slight taffetie cloak, and
pumps and pantofles. He is chaind, that wooes the usher for his coming into
the presence, where he becoms troublesome with the ill managing of his Rapier,
and the wearing of his girdle of one fashion, and the hangers of another; by
this time he has learned to kiss his hand, and make a Leg both together, and
the names of Lords and Counselors; he has thus much toward entertainment
and courtesy, but of the last he makes more use; for by the recital of my
Lord, he coniures his poor countrymen. But this is not his element, he must
home again, being like a Dor, that ends his flight in a dunghill.

A Fine Gentleman
IS the Cynamon tree, whose bark is more worth then his body. He has read
the Book of good manners, and by this time each of his limbs may read it. He
allows of no judge, but the eye; painting, boulstring, and bombasting are his
Orators: by these also he proves his industry: for he has purchased legs,
hair, beauty, and straightness, more then nature left him. He vnlockes
maiden-heads with his language, and speaks Euphues, not so gracefully as
heartily. His discourse makes not his behavior, but he buies it at Court, as
Country men their clothes in Birchinlane. He is somewhat like the
Salamander, and lives in the flame of love, which pains he expresses
comically: and nothing grieves him so much, as the want of a Poet to make an
issue in his love; yet he sighs sweetly, and speaks lamentably: for his breath
is perfumed, and his words are wind. He is best in season at Christmas; for
the Boares head and Reueller come together; his hopes are laden in his quality:
and left Fiddlers should take him unprovided, he wears pumps in his pocket:
and lest he should take Fiddlers unprovided, he whistles his own Galliard. He
is a Calender of ten years, and marriage rusts him. Afterward he mainetaines
himself an implement of household by caruing and vshering. For all this, he is
judicial only in Taylours and Barbers, but his opinion is ever ready, and
ever idle. If you will know more of his acts, the Brokers shop is the
witness of his valor, where lies wounded, dead, rent, and out of fashion,
many a spruce Suit, overthrown by his fantasticknesse.

An Elder Brother
IS a creature borne to the best advantage of things without him, that has the
start at the beginning, but loyters it away before the ending. He looks like
his Land, as heavily, and durtily, as stubbornly. He dares do any thing but
fight; and fears nothing but his fathers life and minority. The first thing
he makes known is his estate; and the Loadstone that draws him is the upper
end of the Table. He wooeth by a particular, and his strongest argument is the
ioynture. His observation is all about the fashion, and he commends Partlets
for a rare devise. He speaks no language, but smells of dogs or hawks; and his
ambition flies Iustice-height. He loves to be commended, and he will go into
the Kitchen, but heel have it. He loves glory, but is so lazy, as he is
content with flattery. He speaks most of the precedence of age, and protests
fortune the greatest virtue. He summoneth the old servants, and tells what
strange acts he will do when he reigns. He verily believes housekeepers the
best commonwealths men; and therefore studies baking, brewing, greasing, and
such, as the limbs of goodness. He judges it no small sign of wisdom to
talk much; his tongue therefore goes continually his errand, but never speeds.
If his understanding were not honester then his will, no man should keep good
conceit by him; for he thinks it no theft, to fell all he can to opinion. His
pedigree and his fathers sealering, are the stilts of his crazed disposition.
He had rather keep company with the dregs of men, then not to be the best man.
His insinuation is the inuiting of men to his house; and he thinks it a great
modesty to comprehend his cheer under a piece of Mutton and a Rubet: if he by
this time be not known, he will go home again: for he can no more abide to
have himself concealed, then his land; yet he is as you see good for nothing,
except to make a stallion to maintain the race.

A Braggadochio Welchman
IS the Oyster, that the Pearl is in, for a man may be picked out of him. He
has the abilities of the mind in Potentia, and actu nothing but boldness.
His clothes are in fashion before his body; and he accounts boldness the
chiefest virtue. Above all men he loves an Herrald, and speaks pedigrees
naturally. He accounts none well descended, that call him not Cousen; and
preferres Owen Glendower before any of the nine Worthies. The first note of his
familiarity is the confession of his valor; and so he preuents quarrels. He
vouchech Welsh, a pure and unconquered language, and courts Ladies with the
story of their Chronicle. To conclude, he is precious in his own conceit, and
upon S. Dauies day without comparison.

A Pedant
HE treads in a rule, and one hand scannes verses, and the other holds his
Scepter. He dares not think a thought that the nominative case gouerns not the
Verb; and he never had meaning in his life, for he traveled only for words.
His ambition is Criticisme, and his example Tully. He values phrases, and
elects them by the sound, and the eight parts of speech are his Servants. To be
brief, he is a Hetoroclite, for he wants the plural number, having only the
single quality of words.

A Seruing-man
IS a creature, which though he be not drunk, yet is not his own man. He
tells without asking who ownes him, by the superscription of his Livery. His
life is, for ease and leisure, much about Gentleman-like. His wealth enough to
suffice Nature, and sufficient to make him happy, if he were sure of it; for he
has little, and wants nothing, he values himself higher or lower, as his
Master is. He hates or loves the Men, as his Master does the Master. He is
commonly proud of his Masters horses, or his Christmas; he sleeps when he is
sleepy, is of his religion, only the clock of his stomach is set to go an hour
after his. He seldom breaks his own clothes. He never drinks but double,
for he must be pledged; nor commonly without some short sentence nothing to
the purpose: and seldom abstaines till he come to a thirst. His discretion is
to be careful for his Masters credit, and his sufficiency to marshall dishes
at a Table, and to carue well. His neatness consists much in his hair and
outward linen. His courting language, visible bawdy jests; and against his
matter fail, he is always ready furnished with a song. His inheritance is the
Chamber-mayd, but often purchases his Masters daughter, by reason of
opportunity, or for want of a better: he always cuckolds himself, and never
marries but his own widow. His Master being appeased, he becomes a Retainer,
and entailes himself and his posterity upon his heire-males for ever.

An Host
IS the kernel of a Sign: or the Sign is the shell, and mine Host is the
Snaile. He consists of double-beere and followship, and his vices are the bawds
of his thirst. He enterraines humbly, and gives his Guests power, as well of
himself as house. He answers all men's expections to his power, save in the
reckoning: and has gotten the trick of greatness, to lay all mislikes upon
his servants. His wife is the Cummin-seed of his Doue-house; and to be a good
Guest, is a warrant for her liberty. He traffiques for Guests by men's friends,
friends-friend, and is sensible only of his purse. In a word, he is none of
his own: for he neither eats, drinks, or thinks, but at other men's charges
and appoyntments.

An Ostler
IS a thing that scrubbeth vireasonably his horse, reasonably himself. He
consists of Travelers, though he be none himself. His highest ambition is to
be Host, and the invention of his sign is his greatest wit: for the expressing
whereof he sends away the Painters for want of understanding. He has certain
charms for a horse mouth, that he should not eat his hay: and behind your
back, he will cozen your horse to his face. His curry-combe is one of his
best parts, for he expresses much by the gingling: and his mane-combe is a
spinners card turned out of service. He puffes and blows over your horse, to
the hazard of a double Judge: and leaves much of the dressing to the proverb of
Muli mutuo scabient, One horse rubs another. He comes to him that calls
lowdest, not first; he takes a broken head patiently, but the knave he feels
not. His utmost honesty is good fellowship, and he speaks Notherne, what
country man soever. He has a pension of Ale from the next smith and Sadler for
intelligence. He loves to see you ride, and holds your stirrup in expectation.

A good Wife
IS a man's best mooueable, a scien incorporate with the stock, bringing
sweetfruit; one that to her husband is more then a friend, less then trouble:
an equal with him in the yoke. Calamities and troubles she shares alike,
nothing pleases her that does not him. She is relative in all; and he
without her, but half himself. She is his absent hands, eyes, ears, and
mouth: his present and absent All. She frames her nature unto his howsoever:
the Hyacinth follows not the Sun more willingly. Stubbornenesse and
obstinacy, are herbs that grow not in her garden. She leaves tatling, to the
gossips of the town, and is more seen then heard: Her household is her charge,
her care to that, makes her seldom non resident. Her pride is but to be
cleanly, and her thrift not to be prodigal. By her discretion she has
children, notwantons; a Husband without her, is a misery in man's apparel:
none but she has an aged husband, to whom she is both a staff and a chair.
To conclude, she is both wise and religious, which makes her all this.

A Melancholy man
IS a straier from the drove: one that nature made sociable, because she made
him man, and a crazed disposition has altered. Impleasing to all, as all to
him; straggling thoughts are his content, they make him dream waking, there is
his pleasure. His imagination is never idle, it keeps his mind in a continu
all motion, as the poise the clock: he winds up his thoughts often, and as
often vnwindes them; Penelopes web thriues faster. Hel'e seldom be found
without the shade of some grove, in whose bottom a river dwells. He carries a
cloud in his face, never fair weather: his outside is framed to his inside, in
that he keeps a Decorum, both unseemly. Speak to him, he hears with his
eyes, ears follow his mind, and that is not at leisure. He thinks business,
but never does any: he is all contemplation, no actio^. He hewes and fashions
his thoughts, as if he meant them to some purpose, but they prove unprofitable,
as a piece of wrought timber to no use. His Spirits and the Sun are enemies;
the Sun bright and warm, his humor black and cold: variety of foolish
apparitions people his head, they suffer him not to breath, according to the
necessities of nature; which makes him sup up a draught of as much air at
once, as would serve at thrice. He denies nature her due in sleep, and
ouer-paies her with watchfulness: nothing pleases him long, but that which
pleases his own fantasies: they are the consuming evils, and evil
consumptions, that consume him alive. Lastly, he is a man only in show, but
comes short of the better part; a whole reasonable soul, which is man's chief
pre-eminence, and sole mark from creatures sensible.

A Sailor
IS a pitched piece of reason calkt and tackled, and only studied to dispute
with tempests. He is part of his own Provision, for he lives euerpickled. A
fore-winde is the substance of his Creed; and fresh water the burden of his
prayers. He is naturally ambitious, for he is ever climing: out of which as
naturally he fears; for he is ever flying: time and he are every where, ever
contending who shall ariue first: he is well winded, for he tires the day, and
out-runne darkness. His life is like a Hawks, the best part mewed; and if he
live till three coats, is a Master. He sees Gods wonders in the deep: but so
as rather they appear his play-fellowes, then stirrers of his zeal: nothing
but hunger and hard rocks can convert him, and then but his upper deck
neither; for his hold neither fears nor hopes. His sleeps are but repreeuals
of his dangers, and when he awakes, it is but next stage to dying. His wisdom is
the coldest part about him, for it ever points to the North: and it lies
lowest, which makes his valor every tide oreflow it. In a storm it is
disputable, whether the noise be more his, or the Elements, and which will
first leave scolding; on which side of the ship he may be saved best, whether
his faith be starre-bord faith, or lar-bord: or the helm at that time not all
his hope of heaven: his keel is the Emblem of his conscience, till it be split
he never repents, then no farther then the land allows him, and his language
is a new confusion: and all his thoughts new nations: his body and his ship
are both one burden, nor is it known who stowes most wine, or rowles most,
only the ship is guided, he has no stern: a barnacle and he are bred together
both of one nature, and it is feared one reason: upon any but a wooden horse he
cannot ride, and if the wind blow against him he dare not: he swarues up to
his seat as to a sail yard, and cannot sit unless he bear a flag staff: if
ever he be broken to the saddle, it is but a voyage still, for he mistakes the
bridle for a bowlin, and is ever turning his horse tail: he can pray, but it is
by rote, not faith, and when he would he dares not, for his brackish belief
has made that ominous. A rock or a quick sand pluck him before he be ripe,
else he is gathered to his friends at Wapping.

A Soldier
IS the husbandman of valor, his sword is his plough, which honor and
aqua-vitae, two fiery mettald iades, are ever drawing. A younger brother best
becomes Arms; an elder, the thanks for them; every heat makes him a harvest:
and discontents abroad are his Sowers: he is actiuely his Princes, but
passiuely his angers servant. He is often a desirer of learning, which once
arrived at, proves his strongest armor: he is a lover at all points; and a
true defender of the faith of women: more wealth then makes him seem a
handsome foe, lightly he couets not, less is below him: he never truly wants,
but in much having, for then his ease and letcherie afflict him: the word
Peace, though in prayer, makes him start, and God he best considers by his
power: hunger and cold rank in the same file with him, and hold him to a man:
his honor else, and the desire of doing things beyond him, would blow him
greater then the sons of Anack. His religion is, commonly, as his cause is
(doubtful) and that the best devotion keeps best quarter: he seldom sees gray
hairs, some none at all, for where the sword fails, there the flesh gives
fire: in charity, he goes beyond the Clergy, for he loves his greatest enemy
best, much drinking. He seems a full Student, for he is a great desirer of
controversies, he argues sharply, and carries his conclusion in his scabbard;
in the first resining of mankind this was the gold, his actions are his ammell.
His alay (for else you cannot work him perfectly) continual duties, heavy
and weary marches, lodgings as full of need as cold diseases. No time to
argue, but to execute. Line him with these, and link him to his squadrons, and
he appears a most rich chain for Princes.

A Tailor
IS a creature made up of shreds, that were pared off from Adam, when he was
rough cast. The end of his Being differs from that of others, and is not to
serve God, but to cover sin. Other men's pride is his best Patron, and their
negligence, a maine passage to his profit. He is a thing of more then ordinary
judgment: For by virtue of that, he buieth land, builds houses and raises
the low set roof of his cross legged Fortune. His actions are strong
incounters, and for their notoriousnesse always upon Record. It is neither
Amadic de Gaul, nor the Knight of the Sun, that is able to resist them. A
ten groates fee sets them on foot, and a brace of Officers brings them
to execution. He handles the Spanish Pike, to the hazard of many poor
Egyptian vermins; and in show of his valor, scorneth a greater Gantlet, then
will cover the top of his middle-finger. Of all weapons he most affects the
long Bill, and this he will manage to the great prejudice of a Customers
estate. His spirit notwithstanding is not so much as to make you think him
man; like a true mongrell, he neither bites nor barks, but when your back is
toward him. His heart is a lump of congealed snow: Prometheus was a sleep
while it was making. He differs altogether from God; for with him the best
pieces are still marked out for damnation, and without hope of recovery shall be
cast down into hell. He is partly an Alchimist; for he extracteth his own
apparel out of other men's clothes; and when occasion serves, making a Brokers
shop his Alembike, can turn your silks into gold, and having furnished his
necessities, after a month or two, if he be urged unto it, reduce them again
to their proper substance. He is in part likewise an Arithmetician, cunning
enough in Multiplication and addition, but cannot abide substraction: Summa
totalis, is the Language of his Canaan; and vsque ad vltimum quadrantem, the
period of all his Charity. For any skill in Geometry, I dare not commend him;
For he could never yet find out the dimensions of his own conscience:
Notwithstanding he has many bottoms, it seems this is always bottomless.
He is double yarded, and yet his femall complains of want of measure. And so,
with a Libera nos a malo; I leave you promising to amend whatsoever is a miss,
at his next setting.

A Puritan
IS a diseased piece of Apocripha: bind him to the Bible, and he corrupts the
whole text: Ignorance, and fat feed, are his Founders; his Nurses, Railing,
Rabbis, and round breeches: his life is but a borrowed blast of wind; For
between two religions, as between two doors, he is ever whistling. Truly
whose child he is, is yet unknown; For willingly his faith allows no Father:
only thus far his pedigree is found, Bragger and he flourisht about a time
first; his fiery zeal keeps him continual costiue, which withers him into
his own translation, and till he eat a Schooleman, he is hidebound; he ever
prays against Non Residents, but is himself the greatest discontinuer, for
he never keeps near his text: any thing that the Law allows, but Marriage,
and March-beere, he murmures at; what it disallowes, and holds dangerous,
makes him a discipline. Where the gate stands open, he is ever seeking a
style: and where his Learning ought to climb, he creepes through; give him
advice, you run into Traditions, and urge a modest course, he cries out
Councels. His greatest care is, to contemn obedience, his last care to serve
God, handsomely and clenly; He is now become so cross a kind of teaching,
that should the Church enjoin clean shirts, he were lousy: more sense then
single prayers is not his; nor more in those, then still the same petitions:
from which he either fears a learned Faith, or doubts God understands not at
first hearing. Show him a Ring, he runs back like a Bear; and hates square
dealing as allied to caps, a pair of Organs blow him out o'th Parish, and are
the only glister pipes to cool him. Where the meat is best, there he confutes
most, for his arguing is but the efficacy of his eating: good bits he holds
breeds good positions, and the Pope he best concludes against, in Plum-broth.
He is often drunk, but not as we are, temporally, nor can his sleep then cure
him, for the fumes of his ambition make his very soul reele, and that small
Beer that should alay him (silence) keeps him more surfeited, and makes his
heat break out in private houses: women and Lawyers are his best Disciples,
the one next fruit, longs for forbidden Doctrine, the other to maintain
forbidden titles, both which he sowes amongst them. Honest he dare not be, for
that loves order: yet if he can be brought to Ceremony, and made but master of
it, he is converted.

A Whore
IS a hie way to the Devil, he that looks upon her with desire, begins his
voyage: he that stays to talk with her, mends his pace, and who enioies her
is at his iourneis end: Her body is the tilted Lees of pleasure, dashed over
with a little decking to hold color: taste her, she is dead, and falls upon the
palate; the sins of other women show in Landscip, far off and full of shadow;
hers in Statue, near hand, and bigger in the life: she pricks betimes, for
her stock is a white thorn, which cut and grafted on, she grows a Medler:
Her trade is opposite to any other, for she sets up without credit, and too
much custom breaks her; The money that she gets is like a traitors, given only
to corrupt her, and what she gets, serves but to pay diseases. She is ever
moo'rd in sin, and ever mending, and after thirty, she is the Chirurgians
creature; shame and Repentance are two strangers to her, and only in an
hospital acquainted: she lives a Reprobate, like Caine, still branded, finding
no habitation but her fears, and flies the face of Justice like a Fellon. The
first year of her trade she is an Eyesse scratches and cries to draw on more,
affection: the second Soar: the third a Ramage whore: the fourth and fifth,
she is an intermewer, preies for her self, and ruffles all she reaches; from
thence to ten she bears the name of white whore, for then her blood
forsakes her with salt Rheumes, and now she has mewd three coats; Now she
grows weary and diseased together, favors her wing, checkes little, but lies
for it, bathes for her health, and scoures to keep her cool, yet still she
takes in stones, she fires her self else: the next remove is Haggard, still
more cunning; and if my art deceive me not, more crazie. All cares and cures
are doubled now upon her, and line her perch, or now she mews her pounces, at
all these years she flies at fools and kills too: the next is Bussard Bawd,
and there I leave her.

A very Whore
IS a woman. She enquires out all the great meetings, which are medicines for
her itching. She kisseth open mouthed, and spits in the palms of her hands to
make them moist. Her eyes are like free-booters living upon the spoil of
stragglers; and she baits her desires with a million of postitute
countenances, and entisements; In the light she listneth to Parlies: but in the
dark she understands signs best. She will sell her smock for Cuffes, and so
her shoes be fine, she cares not though her stockings want feet. Hers modesty
is curiosity, and her smell is one of her best ornaments. She passes not a
span breadth. And to have done, she is the Cook and the meat dressing, her
self all day, to be tasted with the better appetite at night.

A mere Common Lawyer
IS the best shadow to make a discreet one show the fairer. He is a Materia
prima informed by reports, actuated by Statutes, and has his Motion by the
favorable Intelligence of the Court. His Law is always furnished with a
Commission to arraigne his Conscience: but upon judgment given he usually sets
it at large. He thinks no language worth knowing but his Barragouin. Only for
that point he has been a long time at wars with Priscian for a Northern
Province. He imagines that by superexcellencie his profession only is learning,
and that its a profanation of the temple to his Themis dedicated, if any of
the liberal Arts be there admitted to offer strange incense to Her. For indeed
he is all for money. Seven or eight years squires him out, some of his Nation
less standing: and ever since the Night of his Call, he forgot much what he
was at dinner. The next morning his man (in Actu or potentia) enioies his
pickadels. His Landresse is then shrewdly troubled in fitting him a Ruff; His
perpetual badge. His love letters of the last year of his Gentlemanship are
stuffed with Discontinuances, Remitters, and Uncore prists: but now being enabled
to speak in proper person, he talks of a French hood, insteede of a
Iointure, wages his law, and ioines issue. Then he begins to stick his letters
in his ground Chamber window; that so the superscription may make his
Squire-ship transparent. His Heraldry gives him place before the Minister,
because the Law was before the Gospel. Next termne he walks his hoopsleeue
gown to the Hall; there it proclaims him. He feeds fat in the Reading, and
till it chances to his turn, dislikes no house order so much, as that the month
is so contracted to a fortnight, Among his country neighbors, he arrogates
as much honor for being Reader of an Inn of Chancery, as if it had been of his
own house. For they, poor souls, take Law and Conscience, Court and Chancery
for all one. He learnd to frame his Cases from putting Riddles and imitating
Merlins Prophesies, and so set all the Cross row together by the ears. Yet
his whole Law is not able to decide Lucians one old controversy twixt Tau and
Sigma. He accounts no man of his Cap and coat idle, but who trots not the
Circuit. He affects no life or quality for it self, but for gain; and that
at least, to the stating him in a Justice of peaceship, which is the first
quickening soul superadded to the elementary and inanimate form of his new
Title. His terms are his wives vacations. Yet she then may usurp diverse
Court-daies, and has her Returns in Mensem, for writs of entry; often
shorter. His vacations are her Termers. But in Assise time (the circuit being
long) he may have a trial at home against him by Nisi Prius. No way to heaven,
he thinks, so wife, as through West-minster Hall; and his Clerks commonly
through it visit both heaven and hell. Yet then he often forgets his iourneis
end, although he look on the Star Chamber. Neither is he wholly destitute
of the Arts. Grammar he has, enough to make terminations of those words which
his authority has endenizon'd. Rhetorike some; but so little, that its
thought a concealment. Logike enough to wrangle. Arithmetike enough for the
Ordinals of his yecre-bookes, and numberrolls: but he goes not to
Multiplication; there is a Statute against it. So much Geometry, that he can
advice in a Perambulatione facienda; or a Rationalibus diuisis. In Astronomy
and Astrology he is so far seen, that by the Dominicall latter, he knows the
Holy Days, and finds by Calculation that Michaelmas Term will be long and
dirty. Marry, he knows so much in Music, that he affects only the most and
cunningest Discords; rarely a perfect Concord, especially song, except in fine.
His skill in Perspectiue endeauours much to deceive the eye of the Law, and
gives many false colors. He is specially practiced in Necromancie, (such a
kind as is out of the Statute of Primo) by raising many dead Questions. What
sufficiency he has in Criticisme, the foul Copies of his Special Pleas will
tell you.

Many of the same coat, which are much to be honored, partake of diverse of
his indifferent qualities, but so, that Discretion, Virtue, and sometimes other
good learning, concurring and distinguishing Ornaments to them, make them as a
foil, to set their worth on.

A Mere Scholar.
A Mere Sholler is an intelligible Ass: Or a silly fellow in black, that
speaks Sentences more familiarly then Sense. The Antiquity of his University
is his Creed, and the excellency of his College (though but for a match at
Football) an Article of his faith: he speaks Latin better then his
Mother Tongue; and is a stranger in no part of the World, but his own
Country: he does usually tell great stories of himself to small purpose, for
they are commonly ridiculous, be they true or false: his Ambition is, that he
either is, or shall be a Graduate: but if ever he get a Fellowship, he has
then no fellow. Inspite of all Logic he dare swear and mainetaine it, that a
Cuckold and a Towns-man are Termini Conuertibiles, though his Mothers husband
be an Alderman: he was never begotten (as it seems) without much wrangling;
for his whole life is spent in Pro and Contrae his tongue goes always before
his wit, like a Gentleman-usher, but somewhat faster. That he is a complete
Gallant in all points, Cap a pea; witness his horsemanship, and the wearing of
his weapons: he is commonly long-winded, able to speak more with ease, then
any man can endure to hear with patience. University jests are his universal
discourse, and his news the demeanor of the Proctors: his Phrase, the apparel
of his mind, is made up of diverse shreds like a Cushion, and when it goes
plainest't has a Rash outside, and Fustian linings. The current of his speech
is closed with an Ergo; and what ever be the question, the truth is on his
side. It Is a wrong to his reputation to be ignorant of any thing; and yet he
knows not that he knows nothing: he gives directions for husbandry from
Virgils Georgicks; for Cattle from his Bucolicks; for Warlike Stratagems, from
his AEneides, or Caesar's Commentaries: he orders all things by the Book, is
skillful in all trades, and thriues in none: he is led more by his ears then
his understanding, taking the sound of words for their true sense: and does
therefore confidently believe, that Erra Pater was the Father of heretics,
Rodolphus Agricola, a substantial Farmer; and will not stick to auerre, that
Systema's Logic does excel Keckermans: his ill luck is not so much in being
a fool, as in being put to such pains to express it to the world: for what
in others is natural, in him (with much ado) is artificial: his poverty is
his happiness, for it makes some men believe, that he is none of fortunes
favorites. That learning which he has, was in Nonage put in backward like a
Glister, and it is now like Ware mislayd in a Pedlers pack; a has it, but
knows not where it is. In a word, he is the Index of a man, and the
Title Page of a Scholar, or a Puritan in morality, much in profession,
nothing in practice.

A Tinker
IS a mooueable: for he has no abiding place; by his motion he gathers heat,
thence his chollericke nature. He seems to be very devout, for his life is a
continual Pilgrimage, and sometimes in humility goes barefoot, therein making
necessity a virtue. His house is as ancient as Tubal-Caines, and so is a
runnagate by antiquity: yet he proves himself a Gallant, for he carries all
his wealth upon his back; or a Philosopher, for he bears all his substance
about him. From his Art was Music first invented, and therefore is he
always furnished with a song: to which his hammer keeping tune, proves that he
was the first founder of the Kettle-drumme. Note that where the best Ale is,
there stands his music most upon crotchets. The companion of his travels is
some soul sunne-burnt Queen, that since the terrible Statute recanted
Gypsisme, and is turned Pedleresse. So marches he all over England with his bag
and baggage. His conversation is unreprovable; for he is ever mending. He
ob^erues truly the Statutes, and therefore he had rather steal then beg, in
which he is vnremooueably constant in spite of whips or imprisonment: and so
strong an enemy to idleness, that in mending one hole, he had rather make
three then want work; and when he has done, he throws the Wallet of his
faults behind him. He embraces naturally ancient customs, conuersing in
open fields, and lowly Cottages. If he visit Cities or Towns, it is but to
deal upon the imperfections of our weaker vessels. His tongue is very voluble,
which with Canting proves him a Linguist. He is entertained in every place,
but enters no further then the door, to avoid suspicion. Some would take him
to be a Coward; but believe it, he is a Lad of mettle, his valor is commonly
three or four yards long, fastened to a pike in the end for flying off. He is
very provident, for he will fight but with one at once, and then also he had
rather submit then be counted obstinate. To conclude, if he escape Tiburne and
Banbury, he dies a beggar.

An Apparatour
IS a Chick of the Egg Abuse, hatched by the warmth of authority: he is a bird
of rapine, and begins to prey, and feather together. He croakes like a Raven
against the death of rich men, and so gets a Legacy vnbequeat'd: his happiness
is in the multitude of children, for their increase is his wealth; and to that
end, he himself yearly adds one. He is a cunning hunter, vncouping his
intelligencing hounds, under hedges, in thickets, and cornfieldsd, who follow
the chase to City-Suburbs, where often his game is at covert: his quiver hangs
by his side, stuffed with silver arrows, which he shoots against Church-gates,
and private men's doors, to the hazard of their purses and credit. There went
but a pair of sheeres, between him and the Pursiuant of Hell, for they both
delight in sin, grow richer by it, and are by justice appointed to punish it:
only the Devil is more cunning, for he pickes a Living out of others gains.
His living lies in his eyes, which (like spirits) he sends through chinckes,
and key-holes, to survey the places of darkness; for which purpose, he
studieth the optics, but can discover no color but black, for the pure white
of chastity dazleth his eyes. He is a Catholic, for he is every where; and
with a Politic, for he transformes himself into all shapes. He travels on
foot to avoid idleness, and loves the Church entirely, because it is the place
of his edification. He accounts not all sins mortal; for fornication with
him is a venial sin, and to take bribes a matter of charity: he is
collector for burnings, and losses ar Sea, and in casting account, can readily
subtract the lesser from the greater sum. Thus lives he in a golden age, till
death by a process, summons him to appear.

An Almanacke-maker
IS the worst part of an Astronomer: a creature compact of figures, characters,
and ciphers: out of which he scores the fortune of a year, not so profitably,
as doubtfully. He is tenant by custom to the Planets, of whom he holds the 12.
Houses by lease parol: to them he pays yearly rent, his study, and time; yet
lets them out again (with all his heart) for 40.s. per annum. His life is
merely contemplative: for his practice, it is worth nothing, at least not
worthy of credit; and (if by chance) he purchase any, he loses it again at
the years end, for time brings truth to light. Ptolomy and Ticho-Barche are
his Patrons, whose volumes he understands not, but admires; and the rather
because they are Strangers, and so easier to be credited, then controlled. His
life is upright, for he is always looking upward; yet dares believe nothing
above Primium mobile, for it is out of the reach of his Jacobs Staff. His
charity extends no further then to Mountebanks and Sow-gelders, to whom he
bequeathes the seasons of the year, to kill or torture by. The verses in his
Book have a worse pace then ever had Rochester Hackney: for his Prose, it is
dappled with Inke-borne terms, and may serve for an Almanacke: but for his
judging at the uncertainty of weather, any old Shepherd shall make a Dunce of
him. He would be thought the Devils Intelligencer for stolen goods: if ever he
steal out of that quality, as a fly turns to a Maggot, so the corruption of
the cunning-man is the generation of an Empiricke: his works fly soorth in
small volumes yet not all, for many ride post to Chaundlers and Tobacco shops
in Folio. To be brief, he falls three degrees short of his promises; yet is he
the Key to unlock Terms, and Law-dayes, a dumb Mercury to point out
highways, and a Bayliffe of all Marts and Faires in England. The rest of him
you shall know next year; for what he will be then, he himself knows not.

An Hypocrite
IS a gilded Pill, composed of two virtuous ingredients, Natural dishonesty,
and Artificial dissimulation. Simple Fruit, Plant or Drug, he is none, but a
deformed mixture, bred betwixt Evil Nature and false Art, by a monstrous
generation; and may well be put into the reckoning of those creatures that God
never made. In Church or commonwealth, (For in both these this Mongrell-weed
will shoot) it is hard to say whether he be Physic or a Disease: for he is
both, in diures respects.

As he is gilt with an out side of Seeming purity, or as he offreth himself to
you to be taken down in a cup or taste of Golden zeal and Simplicity, you may
call him physic. Nay, and never let potion give Patient good stool, if being
truly tasted and rellisht, he be not as loathsome to the stomach of any
honest man.

He is also Physic, in being as commodious for use, as he is odious in taste,
if the Body of the company into which he is taken, can make true use of him.
For the malice of his nature makes him so Informer-like-dangerous, in taking
advantage, of any thing done or said: yea, even to the ruin of his makers, if
he may have Benefit; that such a creature in a society makes men as careful
of their speeches and actions, as the sight of a known Cutpurse in a throng,
makes them watchful over their purses and pockets: he is also in this respect
profitable Physic, that his conversation being once truly tasted and
discovered, the hateful foulness of it will make those that are not fully
like him, to purge all such Diseases as are rank in him, out of their own
lives; as the sight of some Citizens on horseback, makes a judicious man
amend his own faults in horsemanship. If none of these uses can be made of
him, let him not long offend the stomach of your company; your best way is to
spue him out. That he is a Disease in the body where he lives, were as
strange a thing to doubt, as whether there be knavery in Horse-coursers. For,
if amongst Sheep, the rot; amongst Dogs, the mange; amongst Horses, the
glaunders; amongst Men and Women, the Northern itch, and the French Ache be
diseases; an Hypocrite cannot but be the like in all States and Societies that
breed him. If he be a Clergy Hypocrite, then all manner of vice is for the
most part so proper to him, as he will grudge any man the practice of it but
himself; like that grave Burgess, who being desired to lend his clothes to
represent a part in a Comedy, answered; No, by his leave, he would have no body
play the fool in his clothes but himself. Hence are his so austere
reprehensions of drinking healths, lascivious talk, usury and unconscionable
dealing; when as himself hating the profane mixture of malt and water, will by
his good will let nothing come within him, but the purity of the Grape, when he
can get it of another cost: But this must not be done neither, without a
preface of seeming lothnesse, turning up the eyes, moving the head, laying hand
on the breast, and protesting that he would not do it, but to strengthen his
body, being even consumed with dissembled zeal, and tedious and thankelesse
babbling to God and his Auditors, And for the other vices, do but venture the
making your self private with him, or trusting of him, and if you come off
without a savor of the air which his soul is infected with, you hane great
fortune. The fardle of all this ware that is in him, you shall commonly see
carried upon the back of these two beasts, that live within him, Ignorance and
imperiousness: and they may well serve to carry other vices, for of themselves
they are insuppportable. His Ignorance acquites him of all science, humane or
divine, and of all Language, but his mothers; holding nothing pure, holy, or
sincere, but the senseless collections of his own crazed brain, the zealous
fumes of his inflamed spirit, and the endless labors of his eternal tongue; the
motions whereof, when matter and words fail, (as they often do) inust be
patched up, to accomplish his four hours in a day at the least, with long
and seruent hummes. Any thing else, either for language or matter he cannot
abide, but thus censureth: Latin, the language of the Beast; Greek, the
tongue wherein the Heathen Poets wrote their fictions; Hebrew the speech of the
Jews, that crucified Christ: Controversies do not edify, Logique and
Philosophy, are the subtilties of Satan, to deceive the Simple, Humane stories
prefane, and not sauouring of the Spirit; In a word, all decent and sensible
form of Speech and persuasion (though in his own tongue) vain Ostentation.
And all this, is the burden of his Ignorance: saving that sometimes Idleness
will put in also, to bear a part of the baggage.

His other Beast Imperiousness, is yet more proudly laden, it carries a
burden, that no cords of Authority, Spiritual, nor Temporal should bind,
if it might have the full swinge: No Pilate, no Prince should command him: Nay,
he will command them, and at his pleasure censure them, if they will not suffer
their ears to be fettered with the long chains of his tedious collations,
their purses to be emptied with the inundations of his insatiable humor, and
their judgments to be blinded with the muffler of his zealous Ignorance. For
this does he familiarly insult over his Maintainer that breeds him, his
Patron that feeds him, and in time over all them that will suffer him to set
a foot within their doors, or put a finger in their purses. All this, and
much more is in him, that abhorring Degrees and Vniuer sities, as relics of
Superstition, has leapt from a Shopbord, or a Cloke-bag, to a Deske, or
Pulpit, and that like a Sea god in a Pageant, has the roten laths of his
culpable life, and palpable ignorance, covered over with the painted cloth of a
pure gown, and a nightcap; and with a false Trumpet of Fained-zeale, draws
after him some poor Nymphs and Madmen, that delight more to resort to dark
Caves and secret places, then to open and public assemblies. The
Lay-Hypocrite, is to the other a Champion, Disciple and Subject; and will not
acknowledge the Tithe of the Subjection, to any Miter, no, not to any Scepter,
that he will do to the hook and crook of his zeale-blinde Shepherd. No
Jesuits demand more blind and absolute obedience from their vassals; no
Magistrates of the Canting society, more flauish subjection from the members
of that traveling state, then the Clerk Hypocrites expect from these lay
Pupils. Nay, they must not only be obeyed, fed, and defended, but admired
too: and that their Lay followers do as sincerely, as a shirtlesse fellow with
a Cudgel under his arm does a face-wringing Ballet-singer; a Water-bearer on
the floor of a Playhouse, a wide-mouth'de Poet, that speaks nothing but
bladders and bumbast. Otherwise, for life and profession, nature and Art,
inward and outword, they agree in all, like Canters and Gypsies: they are all
zeal, no knowledge; All purity, no humanity; all simplicity, no honesty:
and if you never trust them they will never deceive you.

A Maquerela, in plain English, a Bawd
IS an old Char-cole, that has been burnt her self, and therefore is able to
kindle a whole green Coppice. The burden of her song is like that of Friar
Bacons Head; Time is, Time was, and Time is past: in repeating which, she makes
a wicked brazen face, and weeps in the Cup, to alay the heat of her
Aqua-vitae. Her teeth are fallen out; mary her Nose, and chin, intend very
shortly to be friends, and meet about it. Her years are sixty and odd: that
she accounts her best time of trading; for a Bawd is like a Medlar, she is not
ripe, till the be rotten. Her envy is like that of the Devil; To have all
fair women like her; and because it is impossible they should catch it being
so young, she hurries them to it by diseases. Her Park is a villainous barren
ground; and all the Dear in it are Rascal: yet poor Cottagers in the
Country (that know her but by hear say) think well of her; for what she
incloses to day, she makes Common to morrow. Her goods and her self are all
removed in one sort, only she makes bold to take the upper hand of them, and
to be Carted before them; the thought of which, makes her thee cannot endure a
posset, because it puts her in mind of a Basin. She sits continually at a
rackt Rent; especially, if her Landlord bear office in the Parish: for her
moueables in the house; (besides her quick cattle) they are not worth an
Inuentory, only her beds are most commonly in print: she can easily turn a
sempstresse, into a waiting gentle woman, but her Warde-robe is most
infectious, for it brings them to the Falling Sickness: she has only this one
show of Temperance, that let a Gentleman send for ten pottles of wine in her
house, he shall have but ten quarts; and if he want it that way, let him pay
for it, and take it out in stewde prunes. The Justices Clarke stands many times
her very good friend: and works her peace with the Justice of Quorum. Nothing
ioies her so much as the coming over of Strangers, nor daunts her so much as
the approach of Shroue-tuesday. In fine, not to foul more paper with so foul
a subject, he that has past under her, has past the Equinoctial; He that
has escaped her, has escaped worse then the Calenture.

A Chamber-Maide,
SHe is her Mistresses she Secretary, and keeps the box of her teeth, her
hair, and her painting, very private. Her industry is vp-stares, and
downestaires like a drawer: and by her dry hand you may know she is a sore
starcher. If she lie at her Masters beds feet she is quit of the
Greene-sicknesse fore ever; For she has terrible dreams when she is awake,
as if she were troubled with the night Mare. She has a good liking to dwellith
Country, but she holds London, the goodliest Forest in England, to shelter a
great Belly. She reads Greenes works over and over, but is so carried away
with the Myrrour of Knighthood, she is many times resolud to run out of her
self, and become a Lady Errant. If she catch a clap, she diuides it so
equally between the Master and the Seruingman, as if she had cut out the
getting of it by a Thread: only the knave Sumner makes her bowl booty, and
ouer-reach the Master. The pedant of the house, though he promise her Marriage,
cannot grow further inward with her, she has paid for her credulity often,
and now grows weary. She likes the form of our marriage very well, in that a
woman is not tied to answer to any Articles concerning question of her
virginity: Her mind, her body, and Clothes, are parcels loosely tackt
together, and for want of good utterance, she perpetually laughes out her
meaning. Her Mistress and she help to make away Time, to the idlest purpose
that can be, either for love or money. In brief, these Chambermaides are like
Lotteries: you may draw twenty, ere one worth any thing.

A Precisian.
TO speak no otherwise of this varnisht Rottenness then in truth and verity
he is, I must define him to be a demure Creature, full of orall Sanctity, and
mental impiety; a fair object to the eye, but stark naught for the
understanding: or else a violent thing, much given to contradiction. He will be
sure to be in opposition with the Papist, though it be sometimes accompanied
with an absurdity; like the Ilanders near adjoining unto China, who salute by
putting off their shoes, because the men of China do it by their hats. If at
any time he fast, it is upon Sunday, and he is sure to feast upon Friday. He
can better afford you ten lies, then one oath, and dare commit any sin
gilded with a pretense of sanctity. He will not stick to commit fornieation
or Adultery, so it be done in the fear of God, and for the propagation of the
godly; and can find in his heart to lie with any whore, save the whore of
Babylon. To steal he holds it lawful, so it be from the wicked and
Egyptians. He had rather see Antichrist, then a picture in the Church window:
and chooses sooner to be half hanged, then see a leg at the name of JESUS,
or one stand at the Creed. He conceiues his prayer in the kitchen, rather then
in the Church, and is of so good discourse, that he dares challenge the
Almighty, to talk with him ex tempore. He thinks every Organist is in the
state of damnation, and had rather hear one of Robert Wisdoms psalms, then
the best Hymn a Cherubin can sing. He will not break wind without an
Apology, or asking forgiveness, nor kiss a Gentlewoman for fear of lusting
after her. He has nicknamde all the Prophets and Apostles with his Sons, and
begers nothing but Virtues for Daughters. Finally, he is so sure of his
salvation, that he will not change places in heaven, with the Virgin Marie,
without boot.

An Innes of Court man.
HE is distinguished from a Scholar by a pair of silk stockings, and a
Beauer Hat, which makes him contemn a Scholar as much as a Scholar does a
Scholemaster. By that he has heard one mooting, and seen two plays, he
thinks as basely of the University, as a young Sophister does of the
Grammer-schoole. He talks of the University, with that state, as if he were
her Chancellor; finds fault with alterations, and the fall of Discipline, with
an It was not so when I was a Student; although that was within this half
year. He will talk ends of Latin, though it be false, with as great
confidence, as ever Cicero could pronounce an Oration, though his best authors
for it, be Tauerns and Ordinaries. He is as far behind a Courtier in his
fashion, as a scholar is behind him: and the best grace in his behavior, is
to forget his acquaintance.

He laughes at every man whose Band sits not well, or that has not a fair
shoo-ty, and he is ashamed to be seen in any man's company that wears not his
clothes well. His very essence he places in his outside, and his chiefest
prayer is, that his revenues may hold out for Taffata cloakes in the Summer,
and velvet in the winter. For his recreation, he had rather go to a Citizens
Wife, then a Bawdyhouse, only to save charges: and he holds Fee-taile to be
absolutely the best Tenure. To his acquaintance he offers two quarts of wine,
for one he gives. You shall never see him melancholy, but when he wants a
new Suite, or fears a Seriant: At which times only, he betakes himself to
Ploydon. By that he has read Littleton, he can call Solon, Licurgus, and
Justinian, fools, and dares compare his Law to a Lord Chiefe-iustices.

A mere Fellow of an House.
HE is one whose Hopes commonly exceed his Fortunes, and whose mind soars
above his purse. If he has read Tacitus, Guicchardine, or GalloBelgicus, he
contemnes the late LordTreasurer, for all the State-policie he had; and
laughes to think what a fool he could make of Solomon, if he were now alive.
He never wears new clothes, but against a commencement or a good time, and
is commonly a degree behind the fashion. He has sworn to see London once a
year, though all his business be to see a play, walk a turn in Paul's, and
observe the fashion. He thinks it a discredit to be out of debt, which he
never likely cleeres, without resignation money. He will not leave his part he
has in the privilege over young Gentlemen, in going bare to him, for the
Empire of Germany; He prays as heartily for a Sealing, as a Cormorant does for
a dear year: yet commonly he spends that revenue before he receives it.

At meals, he sits in as great state over his Penny-Commons, as ever Vitellius
did at his greatest Banquet: and takes great delight in comparing his fare to
my Lord Mayors.

If he be a leader of a Faction, he thinks himself greater then ever Caesar
was, or the Turk at this day is. And he had rather loose an Inheritance then
an Office, when he stands for it.

If he be to travel, he is longer furnishing himself for a sieve miles
journey, then a ship is rigging for a seven years voyage. He is never more
troubled, then when he is to maintain talk with a Gentlewoman: wherein he
commits more absurdities, then a clown in eating of an egg.

He thinks himself as fine when he is in a clean Band, and a new pair of
shoes, as any Courtier does, when he is first in a New-fashion.

Lastly, he is one that respects no man in the University, and is respected
by no man out of it.

A worthy Commander in the Wars.
IS one that accounts learning the nourishment of military virtue, and lays
that as his first foundation. He never bloudies his sword but in hear of
battle; and had rather save one of his own Soldiers, then kill ten of his
enemies. He accounts it an idle, vaineglorious, and suspected bounty, to be
full of good words; his rewarding therefore of the deseruer arriues so timely,
that his liberality can never be said to be gouty handed. He holds it next his
Creed, that no Coward can be an honest man, and dare die in it. He does not
think his body yields a more spreading shadow after a victory then before; and
when he looks upon his enemies dead body, it is with a kind of noble
heaviness, not insultation; he is so honorably merciful to women in
surprisall, that only, that makes him an excellent Courtier. He knows the
hazards of battles, not the pomp of Ceremonies, are Soldiers best Theaters,
and strives to gain reputation not by the multitude, but by the greatness of his
actions. He is the first in giving the charge, and the last in retiring his
foot. Equal toil he endures with the Common Soldier, from his example they
all take fire as one Torch lights many. He understands in war, there is no
mean to err twice; the first, and least fault being sufficient to ruin an
Army: faults therefore he pardons none, they that are presidents of disorder or
mutiny, repair it by being examples of his Justice. Besiege him never so
strictly, so long as the air is not cut from him, his heart faints not. He
has learned as well to make use of a victory as to get it, and in pursuing his
enemy like a whirlewinde carries all before him; being assured if ever a man
will benefit himself upon his foe, then is the time, when they have lost
force, wisdom, courage and reputation. The goodness of his cause is the
special motive to his valor; never is he known to slight the weakest enemy
that comes armed against him in the hand of Justice. Hasty and overmuch heat he
accounts the Step-dame to all great actions, that will not suffer them to
thrive; if he cannot overcome his enemy by force, he does it by Time. If ever
he shake hands with war, he can die more calmely then most Courtiers, for
his continual dangers have been as it were so many meditations of death; he
thinks not out of his own calling, when he accounts life a continual
warfare, and his prayers then best become him when armed Cap a pea. He vtters
them like the great Hebrew General, on horseback. He casts a smiling
contempt upon Calumny, it meets him as if Glass should encounter Adamant. He
thinks war is never to be given ore, but on one of these three conditions:
an assured peace, absolute victory, or an honest death. Lastly, when peace
folds him up, his filuer head should lean near the golden Scepter, and die in
his Princes bosom.

A vainglorious Coward in Command,
IS one that has bought his place, or come to it by some Noble-mans letrer,
he loves a life dead pays, yet wishes they may rather happen in his Company
by the scuruy, then by a battle. View him at a muster, and he goes with such
noise, as if his body were the wheelebarrow that carried his judgment rumbling
to drill his Soldiers. No man can worse define between Pride and noble
Courtesy: he that salutes him not as far a Pistol carries level, gives him
the disgust or affront, choose you whether. He trains by the book, and reckons
so many postures of the Pike and Musket, as if he were counting at Noddy. When
he comes at first upon a Camisado, he looks like the four winds in
painting, as if he would blow away the enemy; but at the very first onset
suffers fear and trembling to dress themselves in his face apparently. He
scorns any man should take place before him: yet at the entering of a breach, he
has been so humble minded, as to let his Lieutenant lead his Troops for him.
He is so sure armed for taking hurt, that he seldom does any: and while he is
putting on his Arms, he is thinking what sum he can make to satisfy his
ransom. He will rail openly against all the great Commanders of the adverse
party, yet in his own conscience allows them for better men: such is the
nature of his fear, that contrary (...) all other filthy qualities, it make
him thinks better of another man then himself. The first part of him that is
set a running, is his Eyesight: when that is once struck with terror, all the
Costiue Physic in the world cannot stay him; if ever he do any thing beyond
his own heart, it is for a Knighthood, and he is the first kneeles for it without
bidding.

A Pyrate,
Truly defined, is a bold Traitor, for he fortifies a castle against the
King. Give him Sea-roome in never so small a vessel; and like a witch in a
sieue, you would think he were going to make merry with the Devil. Of all
callings his is the most desperate, for he will not leave off his theeuing
though he be in a narrow prison, and look every day (by tempest or fight) for
execution. He is one plague the Devil has added, to make the Sea more
terrible then a storm; and his heart is so hardened in that rugged element,
that he cannot repent, though he view his grave (before him) continually
open: he has so little his own, that the house he sleeps in is stolen; all
the necessities of life he filches, but one: he cannot steal a sound sleep,
for his troubled conscience: He is very gentle to those under him, yet his rule
is the horriblest tyranny in the world: for he gives license to all rape,
murder, and cruelty in his own example: what he gets, is small use to him,
only lives by it, (somewhat the longer) to do a little more service to his
belly; for he throws away his treasure upon the shore in riot, as if he cast
it into the Sea. He is a cruel Hawke that flies at all but his own kind: and
as a Whale never comes a shore, but when she is wounded; so he, very seldom,
but for his necessities. He is the Merchants book, that serves only to reckon
up his losses; a perpetual plague to noble traffic, the Hurican of the Sea,
and the Earthquake of the Exchange. Yet for all this give him but his pardon,
and forgive him restitution, he may live to know the inside of a Church, and
die on this side Wapping.

An ordinary Fencer
IS a fellow, that beside shauing of Cudgels, has a good insight into the
world, for he has long been beaten to it. Flesh and blood he is like other
men; but surely Nature meant him Stock Fish: his and a Dancingschoole are
inseparable adjuncts; and are bound, though both stink of sweat most
abominably, neither shall complain of annoiance: three large bauins set up his
trade, which a bench; which (in the vacation of the afternoon) he uses for his
day bed; for a sirkin to piss in, he shall be allowed that, by those make
Allom: when he comes on the Stage, at his Prize, he makes a leg seven
several ways, and scrambles for money, as if he had been borne at the Bathe
in Somersetshire: at his challenge he shows his metal; for contrary to
all rules of Physic, he dare bleed, though it be in the dogdaies: he teaches
Devilish play in's School, but when he fights himself, he does it in the
fear of a good Christian. He compounds quarrels among his Scholars, and when
he has brought the business to a good vpshot, he makes the reckoning. His
wounds are seldom above skin deep; for an inward bruise, Lambe-stones and
sweetbreads are his only Sperma Ceti, which he eats at night, next his heart
fasting: strange Schoolmasters they are, that every day set a man as far
backward as he went forward; and throwing him into a strange posture, teach him
to thresh satisfaction out of injury. One sign of a good nature is, that he
is still open breasted to his friends, for his foil, and his doubler, wear
not above two buttons: and resolute he is, for he so much scorns to take
blows, that he never wears Cuffes: and he lives better contented with a
little, then other men; for if he have two eyes in's head, he thinks Nature
has ouerdone him. The Lord Majors triumph makes him a man, for that is his best
time to flourish. Lastly, these Fencers are such things, that care not if all
the world were ignorant of more Letters then only to read their Patent.

A Puny-clarke.
HE is taken from Grammar-schoole half codled, and can hardly shake off his
dreams of breeching in a twelue-month. He is a Farmers son, and his Fathers
utmost ambition is to make him an Attorney. He does itch toward a Poet, and
greeses his breeches extremely with feeding without a napkin. He studies false
dice to cheat Costermongers, and is most chargeable to the butler of some Inn
of Chancerie, for pissing in their green pots. He eats Ginger bread at a
Playhouse; and is so saucie, that he venters fairly for a broken pate at the
banqueting house, and has it. He would never come to have any wit, but for a
long vacation, for that makes him bethink him how he shall shift another day.
He prays hotly against fasting; and so he may sup well on friday nights, he
cares not though his Master be a Puritan. He practices to make the words in his
Declaration spread, as a Sewer does the dishes at a Niggards table; a Clarke of
a swooping Dash, is as commendable as a Flanders horse of a large tail. Though
you be never so much delaid, you must not call his master knave; that makes him
go beyond himself and write a challenge in Court hand; for it may be his own
another day. These are some certain of his liberal faculties: but in the
Term time, his Clog is a Buckrom bag. Lastly, which is great pity, he never
comes to his full growth, with bearing on his shoulder the sinful burden of
his Master at several Courts in Westminster.

A Foote-man,
LEt him be never so well made, yet his Legs are not matches, for he is still
setting the best foot forward. He will never be a staid man, for he has had a
running head of his own, ever since his childhood. His mother (which, out of
question, was a light heel'd wench) knew it, yet let him run his race, thinking
age would reclaim him from his wild courses. He is very long winded; and,
without doubt, but that he hates naturally to serve on horsbacke, he had
proved an excellent trumpet. He has one happiness above all the rest of the
Seruingmen, for when he most ouer-reaches his Master, he is best thought of. He
lives more by his own heat then the warmth of clothes; and the waiting woman
has the greatest fancy to him when he is in his close trouses. Gardes he
wears none; which makes him live more upright then any gross gartered
Gentlemanvsher. It Is impossible to draw his picture to the life, cause a man
must take it as he is running, only this; Horses are usually let blood on S.
Steuens day: on S. Patrickes he takes rest, and is drencht for all the year
after.

A noble and retired Housekeeper,
IS one whose bounty is limited by reason, not astentation: and to make it
last, he deals it discreetly, as we sow the furrow, not by the sack, but by
the handful. His word and his meaning never shake hands and part, but always
go together. He can suruay good, and love it, and loves to do it himself,
for it own sake, not for thanks. He knows there is no such miferie as to
out-liue good name; not no such folly as to put it in practice. His mind is
so secure, that thunder rocks him asleep, which breaks other men's flumbers.
Nobility lightens in his eyes; and in his face and gesture is paintted, The
God of Hospitality. His great houfes bear in their front more durance, then
state; unless this add the greater state to them, that they promise to
outlast much of our new fantastical building. His heart never grows old, no
more then his memory: whether at his book, or on horseback, he passes his
time in such noble exercise, a man cannot say, any time is lost by him: nor
has he only years, to approve he has lived till he be old, but virtues. His
thoughts have a high aim, though their dwelling be in the Vale of an humble
heart; whence, as by an Engine (that raises water to fall, that it may rise the
higher) he is heightened in his humility. The Adamant serves not for all Seas,
but his does; for he has, as it were, put a gird about the whole world, and
sounded all her quicksands. He has this hand over Fortune, that her injuries,
how violent or sudden soever, they do not daunt him; for whether his time call
him to live or die, he can do both nobly: if to fall, his descent is breast to
breast with virtue; and even then, like the Sun near his Set, he shows
unto the world his clearest countenance.

An Intruder into favor
IS one that builds his reputation on others infamy: for slander is most
commonly his morning prayer. His passions are guided by Pride, and followed by
Injustice. An inflexible anger against some poor suitor, he falsely calls a
Courageous constancy, and thinks the best part of gravity to consist in a
ruffled forehead. He is the most slauishly submisse, though envious to those
are in better place then himself; and knows the Art of w^^^^^^ well, that
(for shrowding dishonestie under a fair pretext) he seems to preserve mud in
Crystal. Like a man of a kind nature, he is first good to himself; in the
next file, to his French Tailor, that gives him all his perfection: for indeed,
like an Estridge, or Bird of Paradise, his feathers are more worth then his
body. If ever he do good deed (which is very seldom) his own mouth is the
Chronicle of it, least it should die forgotten. His whole body goes all upon
screwes, and his face is the vice that moves them. If his Patron be given to
music, he opens his chops, and sings, or with a wrie neck falls to tuning
his instrument: if that fail he takes the height of his Lord with a Hawking
pole. He follows the man's fortune, not the man: seeking thereby to increase
his own. He pretends, he is most undeservedly envied, and cries out,
remembering the game, Chesse, that a Pawn before a King is most plaide on.
Debts he owes none, but shrewd turns, and those he paies ere he besued. He is
a flattering Glass to conceal age, and wrinkles. He is Mountains Monkie,
that climbing a tree, and skipping from bough to bough, gives you back his
face; but comne once to the top, he holds his nose up into the wind, and
shows you his tail: yet all this gay glitter shows on him, as if the Sun
shone in a puddle; for he is a small wine that will not last, and when he is
falling, he goes of himself faster then misery can drive him.

A fair and happy Milke-mayd,
IS a Country Wench, that is so far from making her self beautiful by Art,
that one look of hers is able to put all face Physic out of countenance, She
knows a fair look is but a dumb Orator to commend virtue, therefore minds
it not. All her excellencies stand in her so silently, as if they had stolen
upon her without her knowledge. The lining of her apparel (which is her self)
is far better then outsides of Tissew: for though she be not arraied in the
spoil of the Silke-worme, she is decked in innocence, a far better wearing. She
does not, with lying long a bed, spoil both her complexion and Conditions;
nature has taught her too Immoderate sleep is rust to the soul: she rises
therefore with Chaunticleare, her Dames Cock, and at night makes the Lamb her
Courfew. In milking a Cow, and strayning the Teates through her fingers, it
seems that so sweet a Milkepresse makes the Milk the whiter, or sweeter; for
never came Almond Glove or Aromatique Ointment on her Palm to taint it. The
golden ears of corn fall and kiss her feet when she reapes them, as if they
wished to be bound and led prisoners by the same hand felled them. Her breath is
her own, which sents all the year long of June, like a new made Hay-cocke.
She makes her hand hard with labor, and her heart soft with pity: and when
winter euenings fall early (sitting at her merry wheel) she sings a defiance
to the giddy wheel of Fortune. She does all things with so sweet a grace, it
seems ignorance will not suffer her to do ill, being her mind is to do
well. She bestows her years wages at next fair; and in choosing her
Garments, counts no bravery in the world like decency. The Garden and Bee-hiue
are all her Physic and Chyrurgery, and she lives the longer for it. She dare
go alone, and unfold sheep in the night, and fears no manner of ill, because
she means none: yet to say truth, she is never alone, for she is still
accompanied with old songs, honest thoughts, and prayers, but short ones; yet
they have their efficacy, in that they are not pauled with ensuing idle
cogitations. Lastly, her dreams are so chaste, that she dare tell them: only
a Frydaies dream is all her superstition: that she conceales for fear of
anger. Thus lives she, and all her care is, she may dye in the Spring time, to
have store of flowers stuck upon her winding sheet.

An Arrant Horse-courser
Has the trick to blow up Horseflesh, as a Butcher does Veale, which shall
wash out again in twice riding twixt Waltham and London. The Trade of
Spurre-making had decayed long since, but for this ungodly tyre-man. He is
cursed all over the four ancient Highways of England; none but the blind men
that sell switches in the Road are beholding to him. His Stable is filled with so
many Diseases, one would think most part about Smithfield were an Hospital
for Horses, or a slaughterhouse for the common hunt. Let him furnish you with
a Hackney, it is as much as if the Kings Warrant ouer-tooke you within ten miles
to stay your journey. And though a man cannot say, he cozens you directly; yet
any Ostler within ten miles, should he be brought upon his Booke-oath, will
affirm he has laid a bait for you. Resolve when you first stretch your self
in the stirrops, you are put as it were upon some Usurer, that will never bear
with you past his day. He were good to make one that had the Colic alight
often, and (if example will cause him) make urine; let him only for that say,
Gr'amercy Horse. For his sale of horses, he has false couers for all manner of
Diseases, only comes short of one thing (which he despaires not utterly to
bring to perfection) to make a Horse go on a wodden leg and two crutches.
For powding his ears with Quicksiluer, and giving him suppositories of live
Eeles he is expert. All the while you are a cheapning he fears you will not
bite; but he laughs in his sleeue when he has cozened you in earnest. French
men are his best Chapmen, he keeps amblers for them on purpose, and knows he
can deceive them very easily. He is so constant to his Trade, that while he is
awake, he tires any man he talks with, and when he is asleep he dreams very
fearfully of the pauing of Smithfield, for he knows it would founder his
occupation.

A Roaring Boy
HIs life is a mere counterfeit Patent: which nevertheless, makes many a
Country Justice tremble. Don Quixotes water Milles are still Scotch Bagpipes
to him. He sendes Challenges by word of mouth: for he protests (as he is a
Gentleman and a brother of the Sword) he can neither write nor read. He has
run through diverse parcels of Land and great houses, beside both the Counters.
If any private Quarrel happen among our great Conrtiers, he proclaims the
business, that's the word, the business; as if all the united forces of the
Romish-Catholickes were making up for Germany. He cheats young Guls that are
newly come to Town; and when the Keeper of the Ordinary blames him for it,
he answers him in his own Profession, that a Woodcocke must be plucked ere he
be dressed. He is a Superuisor to Brothels, and in them is a more unlawful
reformer of vice, then Prentises on Shroue-tuesday. He loves his Friend, as a
Counselor at Law loves the velvet Breeches he was first made Barrester in,
he will be sure to wear him threadbare ere he forsake him. He sleeps with a
Tobacco-pipe in's mouth; and his first prayer in the morning is, he may
remember whom he fell our with over night. Soldier he is none for he cannot
distinguish 'tweene Onion seed and Gunpowdir: if he have worn it in his
hollow tooth for the Toothache, and so come to the knowledge of it, that is all.
The Tenure by which he holds his means, is an estate at Will; and that is
borrowing Landlords have but but four Quarter-dayes; but he three hundred and
odd. He keeps very good Company; yet is a man of no reckaning: and when he
goes not drunk to bed, he is very sick next morning, He commonly dies like
Anacreon, with a Grape in's throat; or Hercules, with fire in's marrow. And I
have heard of some (that have escaped hanging) begged for Anatomies, only to
deter men from taking Tobacco.

Adrunken Dutchman resident in England
IS but Quarter Master with his Wife. He stinkes of Butter, asif he were
noynted all over for the Itch. Let him come over never so lean, and plant him
but one Month near the Brew-houses in S. Catherines, and he will be puffed up
to your hand like a bloate Herring, Of all places of pleasure, he loves a
Common Garden, and (with the Swine of the Parish) had need be ringed for
rooting. Next to these he affects Lotteries naturally; and bequeathes the best
prize in his Will aforehand; when his hopes fall, he is blanke. They swarm in
great Tenements like flies: six House-holds will live in a Garret. He was
wont (only to make us fools) to buy the Fox skin for three pence, and sell
the tail for a shilling. Now his new Trade of brewing Strong Water makes a
number of mud men. He loves a Welch-man extremely for his Diet and Orthography;
that is, for plurality of consonants and cheese. Like a Horse, he is only
guided by the mouth: when he is drunk, you may thrust your hand into him like
an Eele skin, and strip him his inslde outward. He hoordes up fair gold,
and pretends it is to seethe in his Wives broth for a consumption, and loves the
memory of King; Henry the 8. most especially for his old Soueraigns. He says
we are unwise to lament the decay of Timber in England: for all manner of
buildings or Fortification whatsoever, he desires no other thing in the world,
then Barrels and Hoppoles. To conclude, the only two plagues he trembles at,
is small Beer, and the Spanish Inquisition,

A Phantastique. An Improuident young Gallant.
THere is a confederacy between him and his Clothes, to be made a puppy: view
him well, and you will say his Gentry sits as ill upon him, as if he had boght it
with his pe^ny. He has more places to send money to, then the Devil has to
send his Spirits: and to furnish each Mistress, would make him run beside
his wits, if he had any to lose. He accounts bashfulnesse the wicked'st thing
in the world; and therefore studies Impudence. If all men were of his mind, al
honesty would be out of fashion: he withers his Clothes on the Stage, as a
Sale-man is forced to do his suits in Birchin-lane; and when the Play is done,
if you mark his rising, it is with a kind of walking Epilogue between the two
candles, to know if his Suite may pass for current: he studies by the
discretion of his Barber, to frizle like a Baboone: three such would keep three
the nimblest Barbers in the town, from ever having leisure to wear
net-Garters: for when they have to do with him they have many Irons i'th'fire.
He is traveled, but to little purpose; only went over for a squirt, and came
back again yet neure the more mended in his conditions, cause he carried
himself along with him: a Scholar he pretends himself, and faies he has
sweat for it: but the truth is, he knows Cornelius, far better then Tacitus:
his ordinary sports are Cock-fights; but the most frequent, horse races, from
whence he comes home dry foundred. Thus when his purse has cast her calfe,
he goes down into the Country, where he is brought to milk and white cheese
like the Switzers.

A Button-maker of Amsterdam,
IS one that is fled over from his Conscience; and left his wife and children
upon the Parish. For his knowledge, he is merely a Horne-booke without a
Christ-crosse before it, and his zeal consists much in hanging his Bible in a
Dutch button: he cozens men in the purity of his clothes: and it was his only
joy when he was on this side, to be in Prison: he cries out, it is impossible
for any man to be damned, that lives in his Religion, and his equivocation is
true: so long as a man lives in it, he cannot; but if he die in it, there is the
question. Of all Feasts in the year, he accounts S. Georges Feast the
prophanest, because of St. Georges Cross, yet sometimes he does sacrifice to
his own belly; provided, that heeput off the Wake of his own nativity, or
wedding, till Good Friday. If there be a great feast in the Town, though most
of the wicked (as he calls them) be there, he will be sure to be a guest, and
to out-eat six of the fattest Burgers: he thinks, though he may not pray with
a Jew, he may eat with a Jew: he winkes when he prays, and thinks he knows
the way so now to heaven, that he can find it blindefold. Latin he accounts,
the language of the Beast with seven heads; and when he speaks of his own
Country, cries, he is fled out of Babel. Lastly, his devotion is Obstinacy,
the only solace of his heart, Contradiction, and his maine end Hypocrisy.

A Distaster of the Time
IS a Winter Grasshopper all the year long that looks back upon Harvest, with a
lean pair of cheeks, never sets forward to meet it: his malice suckes up
the greatest part of his own venom, and therewith impoisoneth himself: and
this sickness rises rather of Selfe-opinion, or ouer-great expectation; so in
the conceit of his own ouer-worthinesse, like a Coistrell, he strives to fill
himself with wind, and flies against it. Any man's advancement is the most
capital offense that can be to his malice: yet this envy, like Phalaris Bull,
makes that a torment, first for himself, he prepared for others: he is a
Day-bed for the Devil to slumber on; his blood is of a yellowish color: like
those that have bin bitten by Vipers: and his gaul flows as thick in him as
oil, in a poisoned stomach. He infects all society, as thunder sowres wine:
war or peace, dearth or plenty, make him equaly discontented. And where he
finds no cause to tax the State, he descends to rail against the rate of
salt butter. His wishes are whirlewindes; which breathed forth, return into
himself, and make him a most giddy and tottering vessel. When he is awake,
and goes abroad, he does but walk in his sleep, for his visitation is
directed to none: his business is nothing. He is often dumbe-madde, and goes
fettered in his own entrails. Religion is commonly his pretense of
discontent, though he can be of all religions; therefore truly of none. Thus by
vnnaturallising himself, some would think him a very dangerous fellow to the
State, but he is not greatly to be feared: for this deiection of his, is only
like a rogue that goes on his knees and elbowes in the mire, to further his
begging.

A mere Fellow of a House
EXamines all men's carriage but his own; and is so kind natured to himself,
he finds fault with all men's but his own. He wears his apparel much after
the fashion; his means will not suffer him come to nigh: they afford him
Mock-veluet or Satinisco; but not without the Colleges next leases
acquaintance: his inside is of the self same fashion, not rich: but as it
reflects from the glass of selfe-liking, there Croesus is Irus to him. He is a
Pedant in show, though his title be Tutor; and his Pupils, in broader phrase,
are Scholeboyes. On these he spends the false gallop of his tongue; and with
senseless discourse towes them along, not out of ignorance. He shows them the
rind, conceales the sap: by this means he keeps them the longer, himself
the better. He has learned to cough, and spit, and blow his nose at every
period, to recover his memory: and studies chiefly to set his eyes and beard
to a new form of learning. His Religion lies in wait for the inclination of
his Patron; neither ebbes nor flows, but just standing water, between
protestant and Puritan. His dreams are of plurality of Benefices and
non-residency; and when he rises, acts a long Grace to his looking glass.
Against he comes to be some great man's Chaplain, he has a habit of
boldness, though a very Coward. He speaks Swords, Fights, Ergo's: his pase
on foot is a measure; on horseback, a gallop: for his legs are his own,
though horse and spurs are borrowed. He has less use then possession of
Books. He is not so proud, but he will call the meanest Author by his name;
nor so vnskill'd in the Heraldrie of a Study, but he knows each man's place.
So ends that fellowship, and begins an other.

A mere Petifogger
IS one of Sampsons Foxes: He sets men together by the ears, more shamefully
then Pillories; and in a long Vacation his sport is to go a Fishing with the
Penal Statutes. He cannot err before Judgment, and then you see it, only
Writs of error are the Tariers that keep his Client undoing somewhat the
longer. He is a Vestrie man in his Parish, and easily sets his neighbors at
variance with the Vickar, when his wicked counsel on both sides is like
weapons put into men's hands by a Fencer, whereby they get blows, he money. His
honesty and learning bring him to Vnder-Shrif-Ship; which having thrice run
through, he does not fear the Lieutenant a'th' Shire: nay more, he fears
not God. Cowardice holds him a good Common-wealthes-man; his pen is the plough,
and parchment the Soil, whence he reapes both Coin and Curses. He is an
Earthquake, that willingly will let no ground lie in quiet. Broken titles make
him whole; to have half in the County break their Bonds, were the only
liberty of conscience: He would wish (though he be a Brownist) no neighbor of
his should pay his tithes duly, if such Suits held continual Plea at
Westminster. He cannot away with the reverend Service in our Church, because it
ends with The peace of God. He loves blows extremely, and has his
Chyrurgions bill of all rates, from head to foot, to incense the fury: he
would not give away his yearly beatings for a good piece of money. He makes
his Will in form of a Law-case, full of quiddits, that his Friends after his
death (if for nothing else) yet, for the vexation of Law, may have cause to
remember him. And if he thought the Ghosts of men did walk again (as they
report in time of Popery) sure he would hide some single money in
WestminsterHall, that his spirit might haunt there. Only with this, I will
pitch him over the Bar, and leave him; That his fingers itch after a Bribe,
ever since his first practicing of Court-hand.

An Ingrosser of Corn.
THere is no Vermin in the Land like him; he slanders both Heaven and Earth
with pretended Dearths, when there is no cause of scarsitie. His whording in a
dear year, is like Erisicthons Bowels, in Ovid: Quodque vrbibus esse, quodque
satis poterat populo, non sufficit vni. He prays daily for more enclosures,
and knows no reason in his Religion, why we should call our forefathers
days, The time of ignorance, but only because they sold Wheat for twelve
pence a bushel. He wishes that Danske were at the Moloccos; and had rather be
certain of some foreign invasion, then of the setting up of the Stilyard.
When his Barnes and Garners are full(if it be a time of dearth) he will buy
half a bushel in the Market to serve his Household: and winnowes his Corn in
the night, lest, as the chafe thrown upon the water, showed plenty in Egypt;
so his (carried by the wind) should proclaim his abundance. No painting
pleases him so well, as Pharaohs dream of the seven lean Kine, that ate up
the fat ones; that he has in his Parlour, which he will describe to you like a
motion, and his comment ends with a smothered prayer for the like scarsitie.
He cannot away with Tobacco; for he is persuaded (and not much amiss) that
it is a sparer of Breadcorne which he could find in's heart to transport without
License: but weighing the penalty, he grows mealy-mouthed, and dares not.
Sweet smells he cannot abide; wishes that the pure air were generally
corrupted: nay, that the Spring had lost her fragrancie for ever, or we our
superfluous sense of Smelling (as he terms it) that his corn might not be
found mustie. The Poor he accounts the Justices intelligencers, and cannot
abide them: he complains of our negligence of discovering new parts of the
World, only to rid them from our Clymate. His Son, by a certain kind of
instinct, he binds Prentise to a Tailor, who all the term of his Indenture
has a dear year in's belly, and rauins bread extremely: when he comes to be
a Freeman (if it be a Dearth) he marries him to a Bakers daughter.

A Devilish Usurer
IS sowed as Cummin or Hemp-seede, with curses; and he thinks he thriues the
better. He is better read in the Penal Statutes, then the Bible; and his
evil Angel persuades him, he shall sooner be saved by them. He can be no
man's friend; for all men he has most interest in, he vndo's: and a double
dealer he is certainly; for by his good will he ever takes the forfeit. He
puts his money to the unnatural Act of generation; and his Scriuener is the
superuisor Bawd to it. Good Deeds he loves none, but Sealed and Delivered; nor
does he wish any thing to thrive in the Country, but Bee-hiues; for they make
him wax rich. He hates all but Law-Latine; yet thinks he might be drawn to
love a Scholar, could he reduce the year to a shorter compass, that his
vse-money might come in the faster: he seems to be the son of a Iailor, for all
his estate is most heauic and cruel bonds. He does not give, but fell days of
Payment; and those at the rate of a man's undoing: he does only fear, the day
of Judgment should fall sooner, then the payment of some great sum of money due
to him: he remoues his lodging when a Subsidy comes; and if he be found out,
and pay it, he grumbles Treason; but it is in such a deformed silence, as
Witches raise their Spirits in. Gravity he pretends in all things, but in
his private Whore; for he will not in a hundredth pound take one light
sixe-pence; and it seems he was at Tilburie Camp, for you must not tell him
of a Spaniard. He is a man of no conscience; for (like the lakes-farmer that
swounded with going into Bucklersburie) he falls into a cold sweat, if he but
look into the Chauncerie: thinks in his Religion, we are in the right for
every thing, if that were abolisht: he hides his money, as if he thought to
find it again at last day, and then begin's old trade with it. His clothes
plead prescription; and whether they or his body are more rotten, is a
question: yet should he live to be hanged in them, this good they would do
him, The very Hangman would pity his case. The Table he keeps is able to
starve twenty tall men; his servants have not their living, but their dying
from him, and that is of Hunger. A spare Diet he commends in all men, but
himself: he comes to Cathedralls only for love of the singing Boys, because
they look hungry. He likes our Religion best, because it is best cheap; yet
would feign allow of Purgatory, 'cause 'twas of his Trade, and brought in so
much money: his heart goes with the same snaphance his purse does, it is seldom
open to any man: friendship he accounts but a word without any signification;
nay, he loves all the world so little, that, and it were possible, he would
make himself his own Executor: for certain, he is made Administrator to his
own good name, while he is in perfect memory, for that dies long before him;
but he is so far from being at the charge of a Funeral for it, that he lets
it stink above ground. In conclusion, for Neighborhood, you were better dwell
by a contentious Lawyer. And for his death, it is rather Surfeit, the Pox, or
Despair; for seldom such as he dye of Gods making, as honest men should do.

A Water-Man
IS one that has learnt to speak well of himself; for always he names
himself, The first man. If he had betane himself to some richer Trade, he
could not have chos'd but done well: for in this (though it be a mean one) he
is still plying it, and putting himself forward. He is evermore telling
strange news; most commonly lies. If he be a Sculler, ask him if he be
married, he will equivocate and swear he is a single man. Little trust is to be
given to him, for he thinks that day he does best when he fetches most men
over. His daily labor teaches him the Art of dissembling; for like a fellow
that rides to the Pillorie, he goes not that way he looks: he keeps such a
bawling at Westminster, that if the Lawyers were not acquainted with it, an
order would be taken with him. When he is upon the water, he is Fare-companie:
when he comes ashore, he mutinies; and contrary to all other trades, is most
surely to Gentlemen, when they tender payment. The Play Houses only keep him
sober; and as it does many other Gallants, makes him an afternoones man. London
Bridge is the most terriblest eyesore to him that can be. And to conclude,
nothing but a great Press, makes him fly from the River; nor any thing; but a
great Frost, can teach him any good manners.

A Reverend Judge
IS one that desires to have his greatness, only measured by his goodness: his
care is to appear such to the people, as he would have them be; and to be
himself such as he appears; for virtue cannot seem one thing, and be
another: he knows that the hill of greatness yields a most delighifull
prospect, but with all that it is most subject to lightning, and thunder: and
that the people, as in ancient Tragedies, sit and censure the actions of those
are in authority: he squares his own therefore, that they may far be above
their pity: he wishes fewer Laws, so they were better observed: and for
those are Mulctuarie, he understands their institution not to be like briers or
springes, to catch every thing they lay hold of; but like Sea-marks (on our
dangerous Goodwin) to avoid the shipwreck of ignorant passengers: he hates to
wrong any man; neither hope, nor despair of preferment can draw him to such an
exigent: he thinks himself then most honorably seated, when he gives mercy
the upper hand: he rather strives to purchase good name then land; and of all
rich stuffes forbidden by the Statute, loathes to have his followers wear their
clothes cut out of bribes and extortions. If his Prince call him to higher
place, there he delivers his mind plainly, and freely; knowing for truth,
there is no place wherein dissembling ought to have less credit, then in a
Princes Council. Thus honor keeps peace with him to the grave, and does not(as
with many) there forsake him, and go back with the Heralds: but fairly sits
ore him, and broods out of his memory, many right excellent Commonwealths men.

A virtuous Widow
IS the Palm Tree, that thriues not after the supplanting of her husband. For
her Childrens sake she first marries, for she married that she might have
children, and for their sakes she marries no more. She is like the purest
gold, only imploide for Princes meddals, she neurer receives but one man's
impression; the large iointure moves her not, titles of honor cannot sway her.
To change her name, were (she thinks) to commit a sin should make her ashamed
of her husbands calling; she thinks she has traueld all the world in one man;
the rest of her time therefore she directs to heaven. Her maine superstition is,
she thinks her husbands ghost would walk, should she not perform his Will:
she would do it, were there no Prerogative Court. She gives much to pious
uses, without any hope to merit by them: and as one Diamond fashions another;
so is she wrought into works of Charity, with the dust or ashes of her
husband. She lives to see her self full of time; being so necessary for
earth, God calls her not to heaven, till she be very aged: and even then,
though her natural strength fail her, she stands like an ancient Piramid;
which the less it grows to man's eye, the nearer it reaches to heaven: this
latter Chastity of Hers, is more grave and reverend, then that ere she was
married; for in it is neither hope, nor longing, nor fear, nor jealousy. She
ought to be a mirror for our youngest Dames, to dress themselves by, when she
is fullest of wrinkles. No calamity can now come near her, for in suffering
the loss of her husband, she accounts all the rest trifles: she has laid his
dead body in the worthiest monument that can be: She has buried it in her
own heart. To conclude, she is a Relic, that without any superstition in the
world; though she will not be kissed, yet may be reuerenc't.

An ordinary Widow
IS like the Heralds Hearse-cloath; she serves to many funerals, with a very
little altering the color. The end of her Husband begins in tears; and the
end of her tears begins in a Husband. She uses to Cunning women to know how
many Husbands she shall have, and never marries without the consent of six
midwiues. Her chiefest pride is in the multitude of her Suitors; and by them
she gains: for one serves to draw on another, and with one at last she shootes
out another, as Boys do Pellets in Elderne Gunnes. She commends to them a
single life, as Horsecourses do their Iades, to put them away. Her fancy is to
one of the biggest of the Guard, but Knighthood makes her draw in a weaker Bow.
Her servants, or kinsfolk, are the Trumperers that summon any to this combat:
by them she gains much credit, but loses it again in the old Proverb: Fama
est mendax. If she live to be thrice married, she seldom fails to cozen her
second Husbands Creditors. A Church man she dare not venture upon; for she
has heard widows complain of dilapidations: nor a Soldier, though he have
Candlerents in the City, for his estate may be subject to fire: very seldom a
Lawier, without he show his exceeding great practice, and can make her case the
better: but a Knight with the old rent may do much, for a great coming in, is
all in all with a Widow: ever provided, that most part of her Plate and Jewels
(before the wedding) lie concealde with her Scriuener. Thus like a too ripe
Apple, she falls of her self: but he that has her, is Lord but of a filthy
purchase, for the title is cracked. Lastly, while she is a Widow, observe ever,
she is no Morning woman the evening a good fire and sack may make her listen
to a Husband: and if ever she be made sure, it is upon a full stomach to bedward.

A Quacksaluer
IS a Mountebanke of a larger bill then a Tailor; if he can but come by names
enough of Diseases, to stuff it with, it is all the skill he studies for. He
took his first being from a Cunning woman, and stole this black Art from her,
while he made her Seacoale fire. All the diseases ever sin brought upon man,
does he pretend to be Curer of; when the truth is, his maine cunning, is
Corne-cutting. A great plague makes him; what with railing against such, as
leave their cures for fear of infection, and in friendly breaking Cakebread,
with the Fish-wiues at Funerals, he vtters a most abominable deal of musty
Carduus-water, and the Conduits cry out, All the learned Doctors may cast
their Caps at him. He parts stakes with some Apothecary, in the Suburbs, at
whose house he lies: and though he be never so familiar with his wife; the
Apothecary dare not (for the richest Horn in his shop) displease him. All the
Mid-wiues in the town are his intelligencers; but nurses and young Merchants
Wines (that would fain conceive with child) these are his Idolaters. He is a
more unjust Bone-setter, then a Dice-maker; has put out more eyes then the
small Pox; made more deaf then the Cataracts of Nilus; lamed more then the
Gout; shrunk more sinews, then one that makes Bow-stringes; and killed more
idly, then Tobacco. A Magistrate that had any way so noble a spirit, as but to
love a good horse well, would not suffer him to be a Farrier. His discourse is
vomit; and his ignorance, the strongest purgation in the world: to one that
would be speedily cured, he has more delays, and doubles, then a Hare, or a
Law suite: he seeks to set us at variance with nature, and rather then he
shall want diseases he will beget them. His especial practice (as I said before)
is upon women; labors to make their minds sick, ere their bodies feel it,
and then there is work for the Dog-leach. He pretends the cure of madmen; and
sure he gets most by them, for no man in his perfect wit would meddle with
him. Lastly, he is such a Iuggler with Vrinals, so dangerously unskillful, that
if ever the City will have recourse to him for diseases that need purgation,
let them employ him in scouring Moore-ditch.

A Canting Rogue.
It Is not unlikely but he was begot by some intelligencer under a hedge; for
his mind is wholly given to travel. He is not troubled with making of
Iointures: he can divorce himself without the sea of a Proctor, nor fears he
the cruelty of overseers of his Will. He leaves his children all the world to
Cant in, and all the people to their fathers. His Language is a Constant
tongue; the Northern speech differs from the south, Welsh from the Cornish:
but Canting is general, nor ever could be altered by conquest of the Saxon,
Dane, or Norman. He will not beg out of his limit though he starve; nor break
his oath if he swear by his Solomon, though you hang him: and he pays his
custom as truly to his Graund Rogue, astribute is paid to the great Turk.
The March Sun breeds agues in others, but he adores it like the Indians;
for then begins his progress after a hard winter. Ostlers cannot endure him,
for he is of the infantry, and serves best on foot. He offends not the
Statute against the excess of apparel, for he will go naked, and counts it
a voluntary penance. Forty of them lie in a Barn together, yet are never sued
upon the statute of Inmates. If he were learned, no man could make a better
description of England; for he has traueld it over and over. Lastly, he
bragges, that his great houses are repaired to his hands; when Churches go to
ruin: and those are prisons.

A French Cook
HE learnt his trade in a Town of Garrison near famish't, where he practiced
to make a little go far; some derive it from more antiquity, and say Adam
(when he picked fallets) was of his occupation. He does not feed the belly, but
the Palate: and though his command lie in the kitchen (which is but an
inferior place) yet shall you find him a very saucy companion. Ever since the
wars in Naples, he has so minc't (the ancient and bountiful allowance) as
if his nation should keep a perpetual diet. The Seruingmen call him the last
relic of Popery, that makes men fast against their Conscience. He can be
truly said to be no man's fellow but his Masters: for the rest of his servants
are starued by him. He is the prime cause why Noblemen build their Houses so
great, for the smalnesse of the Kitchen, makes the house the bigger: and the
Lord calls him his Alchymist that can extract gold out of herbs, roots,
mushroomes or anything: that which he dresses we may rather call a drinking,
then a meal: yet is he so full of variety, that he brags, and truly, that
he gives you but a taste of what he can do: he dare not for his life come
among the Butchers; for sure they would quarter and bake him after the English
fashion; he is such an enemy to Beef and Mutton. To conclude, he were only
fit to make a funeral feast, where men should eat their victuals in mourning.

A Sexton
IS an ill willer to humane nature. Of all Proverbs, he cannot endure to hear
that which says, We ought to live by the quick, not by the dead. He could
willingly all his life time be confinde to the Churchyard; at least within
five foot on it: for at every Church style, commonly there is an Alehouse; Where
let him be found never so idle pated, he is still a grave drunkard. He
breaks his fast heartiliest while he is making a grave, and says the opening
of the ground makes him hungry. Though one would take him to be a slouen, yet
he loves clean linen extremely, and for that reason takes an order that
fine holland sheers be not made worms meat. Like a nation called the Cusani,
he weeps when any are borne, and laughes when they die: the reason; he gets by
Burials not Christnings: he will hold argument in a Tavern over Sack, till
the Dial and himself be both at a stadd: he never observes any time but
Sermon time, and there he sleeps by the hourglasse. The rope-maker pays him a
pension, and he paies tribute to the Physician; for the Physician makes work
for the Sexton; as the Rope-maker for the Hangman. Lastly, he wishes the Dog
days would last all year long: and a great plague is his year of lubile.

A Jesuit
IS a larger Spoone for a Traitor to feed with the Devil, then any other
Order: vnclaspse him, and he is a gray Wolf, with a golden Star in the
forehead: so superstitiously he follows the Pope, that he forsakes Christ,
in not giving Caesar his due. His vows seem heavenly; but in meddling with
State-businesse, he seems to mix heaven and earth together. His best Elements,
are Confession and Penance: by the first, he finds out men's inclinations; and
by the latter, heaps wealth to his Seminary. He sprang from Ignanatius Loiola,
a Spanish Soldier; and though he were found out long since the invention of
the Canon, it is thought he has not done less mischief. He is a false Key to
open Princes Cabinets, and pry into their Counsels; and where the Popes
excommunication thunders, he holds it no more sin the decrowning of Kings,
then our Puritanes do the suppression of Bishops. His order is full of all
irregularity and disobedience; ambitious above all measure; for of late days,
in Portugal and the Indies, he rejected the name of Jesuit, and would be
called Disciple. In Rome, and other countries that give him freedom, he
wears a Mask upon his heart; in England he shifts it, and puts it upon his
face. No place in our Climate hides him so securely as a Ladies Chamber; the
modesty of the Purseuant has only forborne the bed, and so mist him. There is
no Disease in Christendom, that may so properly be called The Kings Evil. To
conclude, would you know him beyond Sea? In his Seminary, he is a Fox; but in
the Inquisition, a Lion Rampant.

An excellent Actor.
Whatsoever is commendable in the grave Orator, is most exquisitly perfect in
him; for by a full and significant action of body, he charms our attention:
sit in a full Theater, and you will think you see so many lines drawn from
the circumference of so many ears, whiles the Actor is the Center. He does not
strive to make nature monstrous, she is often seen in the same Scaene with
him, but neither on Stilts nor Crutches; and for his voice it is not lower then
the prompter, nor louder then the Foil and Targer. By his action he fortifies
moral precepts with example; for what we see him personate, we think truly
done before us: a man of a deep thought might apprehend, the Ghosts of our
ancient Heroes walked again, and take him(at feueral times)for many of them.
He is much affected to painting, and it is a question whether that make him an
excellent Player, or his playing an exquisite Painter. He adds grace to the
Poets labors: for what in the Poet is but ditty, in him is both ditty and
music. He entertaines us in the best leisure of our life, that is between
meals, the most unfit time, either for study or bodily exercise: the flight of
Hawks, and chase of wild beasts, either of them are delights noble: but some
think this sport of men the worthier, despite all calumny. All men have been
of his occupation: and indeed, what he does fainedly, that do others
essentially: this day one plays a Monarch, the next a private person. Here
one Acts a Tyrant, on the morrow an Exile: A Parasite this man too night,
tomorrow a Precisian, and so of diverse others. I observe, of all men living, a
worthy Actor in one kind is the strongest motive of affection on that can be:
for when he dies, we cannot be persuaded any man can do his parts like him.
But to conclude, I value a worthy Actor by the corruption on of some few of the
quality, as I would do gold in the oar; I should not mind the dross, but the
purity of the metal.

A Franklin.
HIs outside is an ancient Yeoman of England, though his inside may give arms
(with the best Gentleman) and never fee the Herald. There is no truer seruaht
in the house then himself. Though he be Master, he says not to his servants,
go to field, but let us go; and with his own eye, does both fatten his
flock, and set forward all manner of husbandry. He is taught by nature to be
contented with a little; his own fold yields him both food and raiment: he is
pleased with any nourishment God sends, whilst curious gluttony ransacks, as
it were, Noah's Arc for food, only to feed the riot of one meal. He is nere
known to go to Law; understanding, to be Law-bound among men, is like to be
hide-bound among his beasts; they thrive not under it: and that such men sleep
as unquietly, as if their pillowes were stuffed with Lawyers pen-knifes. When he
builds, no poor Tenants cottage hinders his prospect, they are indeed his
Almes-houses, though there be painted on them no such superscription. He never
fits vplate but when he hunts the Badger, the vowed foe of his Lambs: nor uses
he any cruelty, but when he hunts the Hare, nor subtlety but when he sets
snares for the Snite, or pit-falls for the Blackbird; nor oppression, but when
in the month of July, he goes to the next river, and sheares his sheep. He
allows of honest pastime, and thinks not the bones of the dead any thing
bruifed, or the worse for it, though the Country Lasses dance in the
Churchyard after Euen-song. Rock Monday, and the Wake in Summer, shrouings,
the wakefull ketches on Christmas Eve, the Hoky, or Seed-cake, these he yearly
keeps, yet holds them no relics of Popery. He is not so inquisitiue after
news derived from the privy closet, when the finding an eiery of Hawks in
his own ground, or the foaling of a Colt come of a good strain, are tidings
more pleasant, more profitable. He is Lord paramount within himself, though
he hold by never so mean a Tenure; and dies the more contentedly (though he
leave his heir young) in regard he leaves him not liable to a covetous
Guardian. Lastly, to end him; he cares not when his end comes; he needs not
fear his Audit, for his Quietus is in heaven.

A Rimer
IS a fellow whose face is hatched all over with impudence, and should he be
hanged or pilloried it is armed for it. He is a Iuggler with words, yet
practices the Art of most uncleanly conueyance. He does boggle very often; and
because himself winkes at it, thinks it is not perceived: the maine thing that
ever he did, was the tune he sang to. There is nothing in the earth so
pitiful, no not an Ape-carrier, he is not worth thinking of, and therefore I
must leave him as nature left him, a Dunghill not well aid together.

The Character of a happy life.
By Sr. H. W.
HOw happy is he borne or taught,
That serves not another will;
Whose Armor is his honest thought,
And silly Truth his highest skill.
Whose passions not his Masters are,
Whose soul is still prepared for death:
Untied unto the world with care
Of Princely love, or vnlgar breath.
Who has his life from rumors freed.
Whose conscience is his strong retreit:
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
Nor ruin make accusers great.
Who enuieth none whom chance does raise,
Or vice: who never understood,
How deepest wounds are given with praise,
Not rules of state, but rules of good.
Who GOD does late and early pray,
More of his grace, then gifts to lend;
Who entertaines the harmless day,
With a well chosen Book or Friend.
This man is free from servile bands,
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall;
Lord of himself, though not of Lands:
And having nothing, he has All.
Certain Edicts from a Parliament in Eutopia; Written by the Lady Southwell.
INprimis, He that has no other worth to commend him then a good Suite of
Apparel, shall not dare to woe a Lady in his own behalf, but shall be
allowed to carry the Hieroglyphike of his friends affection.

Item, that no foul faced Lady shall rail on her that is fairer, because she
is fairer; nor seek by black calumniation to darken her fame, unless she
be her corriuall.

Item, that no man may entitle himself by the matchles name of a Friend, that
loves upon condition, unless he be a Schoolmasters.

Item, that no Lady, which modestly keeps her house for want of good clothes
to visit her Gossips shall profess contempt of the worlds vanity, unless she
see no hope of the tides returning.

Item, that no Bankerupt Knight, that to set up shop again, becomes Parasite
or Buffone to some great Lord, shall ever after swear by his honor; but by
his Knighthood he may.

Item, that no Lady that uses to paint, shall find fault with her painter
that has not counterfeted her picture fair enough, unless she will
acknowledge her self to be the better counterfetter.

Item, that no man whose vain love has been rejected by a virtuous Lady,
shall report that he has refused and cast her off, unless he will take the
base lying fellow by the next assailant, so rejected, without any further
quarrel.

Item, that no Lady shall court her looking glass, past one hour in a day,
unless she profess to be an Inginer.

Item, that no Quarter waiter shall feed on cheese three quarters of a year to
feast on satin one quarter, without Galens advice, and the Apothecaries bill
to be written by a Tailor.

Item, that wench that is ouer-enamored of her self, and thinks all other so
too, shall be bound to carry a burden of Birdlime on her back, and spinne at
a Barne-doore to catch fools.

Item, he that swears when he loses his money at dice, shall challenge his
damnation by the way of purchase.

Item, no Lady that silently simpereth for want of wit shall be called modest.

Item, no fellow that begins to argue with a woman, and wants wit to encounter
her, shall think he has redeemed his credit by putting her to silence with
some lascivious discourse,unless he wear white for William, and green for
Summer.

Item, no woman that remains constant for want of assault shall be called
chaste.

Item, he that professes virtuous love to a woman, and gives ground when his
vanity is rejected, shall have his bells cut off and fly for a haggard.

Item, she that respects the good opinion of others, before the Being of
good in her self, shall not refuse the name of Hypocrite; and she that
emploies all her time in working trappings for her self, the name of spider:
and she that sets the first quest of enquiry amongst her gossips for new
fashions, shall not refuse a stitcher for her second husband.

Item, He that has reported a Lady to be virtuous, for the which he professes
to love her, yet under hand commenceth a base suit, and is disdained; shall not
on this blow which his own vice has given him, out of policy rail suddenly
on her, for fear he be noted for a vicious fool: but to his friend in private
he may say that his judgment was blinded by her cunning disguise, and that he
finds her wavering in goodness, and in time he shall openly profess to rail
on her; but with such a modesty forsooth, as if he were loath to bring his
judgment into question; nor would he do it, but that he preferres truth even
out of his own reach.

NEVVES FROM ANY WHENCE. OR, OLD TRVTH, UNDER A SVPposall of Novelty.
Occasioned by diverse Essays, and private passages of Wit, between sundry
Gentlemen upon that subject.
News from Court.
IT is thought here, that there are as great miseries beyond happiness, as a
this side it, as being in love. That truth is every man's by assenting. That
time makes every thing aged, and yet it self was never but a minute old. That,
next sleep, the greatest deuourer of time is business: the greatest stretcher
of it, Passion, the truest measure of it, Contemplation. To be saved, always
is the best plot: and virtue always cleeres her way as she goes. Vice is ever
behind-hand with it self. That Wit and a woman are two frail things, and both
the frailer by concurring. That the means of begetting a man, has more
increast mankind then the end. That the madness of Love is to be sick of one
part, and cured by another. The madness of Jealousy, that it is so diligent,
and yet it hopes to lose his labor. That all Women for the bodily part, are but
the same meaning put in diverse words. That the difference in the sense is their
understanding. That the wisdom of Action is Discretion; the knowledge of
contemplation is truth: the knowledge of action is men. That the first
considers what should be, the latter makes use of what is. That every man is
weak in his own humors. That every man a little beyond himself is a fool.
That affectation is the more ridiculous part of folly then ignorance. That the
matter of greatness is comparison. That God made one world of Substances; Man
has made another of Art and Opinion. That Money is nothing but a thing which
Art has turned up trumpe. That custom is the soul of circumstances. That
custom has so far prevailed, that Truth is now the greatest news.

Sr. T. Over.
Answer to the Court News.
THat Happiness and Miscrie are Antipodes. That Goodness is not Felicity,
but the rode thither. That Man's strength is but a vicissitude of falling and
rising. That only to refrain ill, is to be ill still. That the plot of
Salvation was laid before the plot of Paradise. That enjoying is the
preparatiue to contemning. That he that seeks opinion beyond merit, goes
just so far back. That no man can obtain his desires; nor in the world has
not to his measure. That to study, men are more profitable then books. That
men's loves are their afflictions. That Titles of Honor, are rattles to still
ambition. That to be a King, is Fames Butte, and fears Quiver. That the souls
of Women and Lovers, are wrapped in the portmanque of their senses. That
imagination is the end of man. That wit is the web, and wisdom the woofe of
the cloth; so that women's souls were never made up. That envy knows what it
will not confess. That Goodness is like the Art Prospectiue: one point
Center, begetting infinite rays. That Man, Woman, and the Devil, are the
three degrees of comparison. That this News holds number, but not weight, by
which couple all things receive form.

Country News.
THat there is most here, for it gathers in going. That reputation is measured
by the Acre. That Poverty is the greatest dishonestie. That the pity of,
Alas poor soul, is for the most part mistaken. That Roast beef is the best
smell. That a justice of peace is the best relic of Idolatry. That the
Allegory of Justice drawn blind, is turned the wrong way. That not to live to
heavenly is accounted great wrong. That wisdom descends in a race. That we
love Names better then persons That to hold in Knights service, is a flipperie
service. That a Papist is a new word for a Traitor. That the duty of Religion
is lent, not paid. That the reward is lost in the want of humility. That the
Puritan persecution is as a cloud that can hide the glory of the light, but
not the day. That the emulation of the English and Scots to be the Kings
Contrymen, thrust the honor on the Welsh. That a Courtier never attaynes
his selfe-knowledge, but by report. That his best Emblem is a hearne dog.
That many great men are so proud, that they know not their own Fathers. That
Love is the tailworme. That a woman is the effect of her own first fame. That
to remember, to know, and to understand, are 3. degrees not understood. That
Country ambition is no vice, for there is nothing above a man. That fighting
is a Seruing-mans valor: Martyrdom their Masters. That to live long, is to
fill up the days we live That the zeal of some men's Religion reflects from
their Friends. That the pleasure of vice is indulgence of the present, for it
endures but the acting. That the proper reward of goodness is from within the
external is policy. That good and ill is the cross and pile in the aim of
life. That the Soul is the lamp of the body, Reason, of the Soul, Religion
of Reason, Faith of Religion, Christ of Faith. That circumstances are the
Atomies of policy, Censure the being, Action the life, but success the
Ornament. That Authority presses down with weight, and is thought violence:
policy trips up the heels, and is called the dexterity. That this life is a
throng in a narrow passage, he that is first out, finds case, he in the
middle worst hemmed in with troubles, the hindmost that drives both out before
him, though not suffering wrong, has his part in doing it. That God requires
of our debts, a reckoning, not payment: That heaven is the easiest purchase,
for we are the richer for the disbursing. That liberality should have no
object but the poor, if our minds were rich. That the mystery of greatness,
is to keep the inferior ignorant of it. That all this is no News to a better
wit. That the City cares not what the Country thinks.

Sr. T. R.
News from the very Country.
THat it is a Fripery of Courtiers, Merchants, and others, which have been in
fashion, and are very near worn out. That Justices of Peace have the felling
of underwoods, but the Lords have the great falls. The Jesuits are like
Apricockes, heretofore, here and there one succored in a great man's house,
and cost dear; now you may have them for nothing in every cottage. That every
great Vice is a Pike in a Pond, that deuoures virtues, and less vices. That it
is wholsomest getting a stomach by walking on your own ground: and the
thriftiest laying of it at another Table. That debtors are in London close
prisoners, and here have the liberty of the house. That Atheists in
affliction, like blind beggars, are forced to ask, though they know not of
whom. That there are (God be thanked) not two such Acres in all the Country,
as the Exchange and Westminster Hall. That only Christmas Lords know their
ends. That Women are not so tender fruit, but that they do as well, and bear
as well upon Beds, as plashed against walls. That our Cares are never worse
employed, then when they are waited on by Coaches. That Sentences in Authors,
like hairs in horse tail, concur in one root of beauty and strength, but
being plucked out one by one, serve only for Springes and Snares. That both want
and abundance, equally advance a rectified man from the world, as cotton and
stones are both good casting for an Hawke. That I am sure there is none of the
forbiddenfruit left, because we do not all eat thereof. That our best three
pilde mischief comes from beyond the sea, and rides post through the country,
but his errand is to Court. That next to no wife and children, your own are
the best pastime, another wife and your children worse, your wife and another
children worst. That Statesmen hunt their fortunes, and are often at default:
Favorites course her, and are ever in view. That intemperance is not so
unwholesome here; for none ever saw Sparrow sick of the pox. That here is no
treachery nor fidelity, but it is because here are no secrets. That Court
motions are up and down; ours circular: theirs like squibs cannot stay at the
highest, nor return to the place which they rose from, but vanish and wear
out in the way: Ours like Mil-wheels, busy without changing place; they have
peremptory fortunes; we vicissitudes.

I. D.
Answer to the very Country News.
IT is a thought, that man is the Cook of time, and made dresser of his own
fatting. That the five Senses are Cinque Ports for temptation, the traffic
sin, the Lieutenant Satan, the custome-tribute, souls. That the Citizens of
the high Court grow rich by simplicity; but those of London, by simple craft.
That life, death, and time, do with short cudgells dance the Matachine. That
those which dwell under the Zona Torrida, are troubled with more damps, then
those of Frigida. That Policy and Superstition has of late her masque renr
from her face, and she is found with a wry mouth and a stinking breath, and
those that courted her hotly, hate her now in the same degree, or beyond. That
Nature too much loving her own, becomes unnatural and foolish. That the soul
in some is like an egg, hatched by a young Pullet, who often rigging from her
nest, makes hot and cold beget rottenness, which her wanton youth will not
believe, till the fair shell being broken, the stink appears to profit
others, but cannot her. That those are the wise ones, that hold the superficies
of virtue, to support her contrary, all-sufficient. That clemency within and
without is the nurse of rebellion. That thought of the future is retired into
the Country, and time present dwells at Court. That I living near the
Churchyard, where many are buried of the Pest, yet my infection comes from
Spain, and it is feared it will disperse further into the Kingdom.

A.S.
News to the University.
A Mere Scholar is but a live book, Action does express knowledge better
then words; so much of the soul is lost as the body cannot utter. To teach,
should rather be an effect, then the purpose of learning. Age decaies nature,
perfects Art: therefore the glory of youth, is strength; of the gray head,
wisdom; yet most condemn the follies of their own infancy, run after
those of the worlds, and in reverence of antiquity will bear an old error
against a new truth. Logic is the Heraldrie of Arts, the array of Judgment,
none it self, nor any Science without it: where it and learning meet not,
must be either a skilful ignorance, or a wild knowledge. Understanding cannot
conclude out of mood and figure. Discretion conteines Rhetherique; the next
way to learn good words, is to learn sense; the newest Philosophy, is
foundest, the eldest Divinity: Astronomy begins in Nature, ends in Magic.
There is no honesty of the body without health, which no man has had since
Adam. Intemperance that was the first mother of sickness, is now the daughter.
Nothing dies but qualities. No kind in the world can perish without ruin of
the whole. All parts help one another (like States) for particular interest:
So in Arts which are but translations of nature; there is no sound position in
any one, which, imagine false, there may not from it be drawn strong
conclusions, to disprove all the rest. Where one truth is granted, it may be
by direct means brought to confirm any other controuerted. The soul and
body of the first man, were made fit to be immortal together, we cannot live
to the one, but we must dye to the other. A man and a Christian are two
creatures. Our perfection in this World is virtue; in the next knowledge, when
we shall read the glory of God in his own face.

News from Sea.
THat the best pleasure is to have no object of pleasure, and uniformity is a
better prospect then variety. That putting to Sea, is change of life, but not
of condition; where risings and falls, Calmes, and crosse-gales are yours, in
order and turn; fore-windes but by chance. That it is the worst wind to have
no wind, and that your smooth faced Courtier, deading your course by a calm,
gives greater impediment, then an open enemies crossegale. That leuitie is a
vettue, for many are held up by it. That it is nothing so intricate and
infinite, to rigge a Ship as a woman, and the more either is fraught, the apter
to leake. That to pumpe the one, and shreeue the other, is alike noisome. That
small faults habituated, are as dangerous as little leakes unfound; and that to
punish and not prevent, is to labor in the pumpe, and leave the leake open.
That it is best striking Sail before a storm, and necessariest in it. That a
little time in our life is best, as the shortest cut to our Haven is the
happiest voyage. That to him that has no Haven, no wind is friendly; and yet
it is better to have no Haven, then some kind of one. That expedition is every
where to be bribed but at Sea. That gain works this miracle, to make men
walk upon the water; and that the sound of Commodity drowns the noise of a
Storm, especially of an absent one. That I have once in my life out-gone night
at Sea, but never darkness; and that I shall never wonder to see a hard world,
because I have lived to see the Sun a bankrupt, being ready to starve for
cold in his perpetual presence. That a man's companions are (like ships) to be
kept in distance, for falling foul one of another; only with my friend I will
close. That the fairest field for a running head is the Sea, where he may run
himself out of breath, and his humor out of him. That I could carry you much
further, and yet leave more before then behind, and all will be but via Nauis,
without print or tracke, for so is moral instruction to youths watrish humor.
That though a Ship under Sail be a good sight, yet it is better to see her
moored in the Haven. That I care not what become of this frail Bark of my
flesh, so I save the Passenger. And here I cast Anchor.

W. S.
Foreign News of the year 1616.
From France.
IT is delivered from France, that the choice of friends there is as of their
Wines: those that being new, are hard and harsh, prove best; the most pleasing
are least lasting. That an enemy fierce at the first onset, is as a torrent
tumbling down a Mountain; a while it bears all before it: have but that
whiles patience, you may pass it dry-foot. That a penetrating judgment may
enter into a man's mind by his bodies gate; if this appear affected, apish,
and unstable; a wonder if that be settled.

That vainglory, new fashions, and the French disease, are upon terms of
quitting their Countries Allegiance, to be made free Denisons of England. That
the wounds of an ancient enmity have their scarres, which cannot be so well
closed to the sight, but they will lie open to the memory. That a Princes
pleasurable vices, vshered by authority, and waited on by conniuence, sooner
punish themselves by the subjects imitation, then they can be reformed by
remonstrance or correction; so apt are all ill examples to rebound on them that
give them. That Kings hear truth oftener for the tellers, then their own
advantage.

From Spain.
THat the shortest out to the riches of the Indies, is by their contempt. That
who is feared of most, fears most. That it more vexes the proud, that men
despise them, then that they not fear them. That greatness is fruitful enough,
when other helps fail, to beget on it self destruction. That it is a gross
flattering of tired cruelty, to honest it with the title of clemency. That to
eat much at other men's cost, and little at his own, is the wholesomest and
most nourishing diet, both in Court and Country. That those are aptest to
domineere over others, who by suffering indignities have learned to offer them.
That ambition like a silly Dove flies up to fall down, it minds not whence
it came, but whither it will. That enen Galley-slaues, setting light by their
captivity, find freedom in bondage. That to be slow in military businesses,
is to be so courteous, as to give the way to an enemy. That Lightning and
greatness more fear then hurt.

From Rome.
THat the Venereall (called venial) sin is to pass in the rank of Cardinal
virtues; and that those should be held henceforth his Holiness beneficial
friends, that sin upon hope of pardon. That where vice is a Statecommoditie,
he is an offender that often offends not. That Jews and Curtezans there, are
as beasts that men feed, to feed on. That for an Englishman to abide at Rome,
is not so dangerous as report makes it; since it skills not where we live, so
we take heed how we live. That greatness comes not down by the way it went
up, there being often found a small distance between the highest and the
lowest Fortunes. That rackt authority is often less at home then abroad
regarded, while things that seem, are (commonly) more a far off then at hand
feared.

From Venice.
THat the most profitable Bank, is the true use of a man's self, whiles such
as grow moldy in idleness, make their houses their Tombs, and die before their
death. That many dangerous spirits lie buried in their wants, which had they
means to their minds, would dare as much as those that with their better
Fortunes ouertop them. That professed Curtezans, if they be any way good, it
is because they are openly badde. That frugalitie is the richest treasure of an
estate, where men feed for hunger, cloth for cold and modesty, and spend for
Honor, Charity, and Safety.

From Germany.
THat the infectious vice of Drunken-good-fellowship, is like to stick by that
Nation as long as the multitude of Offenders so benums the sense of offending,
as that a common blot is held no stain. That discretions must be taken by
weight, not by tale: who does otherwise, shall both prove his own too light,
and fall short of his reckoning. That fear and a nice forecast of every
slight danger, seldom gives either faithful or fruitful counsel. That the
Empire of Germany, is not more great then that over a man's self.

From the Low Countries.
THat one of the sureft grounds of a man's liberty is, not to give another
power over it. That the most dangerous plunge whereto to put thine enemy, is
desperation, while forcing him to set light by his own life, thou make him
master of thine. That neglected danger lights soonest and heauiest. That they
are wisest, who in the likelihood of good, provide for ill. That since pity
dwells at the next door to misery, he lives most at ease that is neighboured
with envy. That the evil fortune of the wars, as well as the good, is
variable.

News from my Lodging.
THat the best prospect is to look inward. That it is quieter sleeping in a
good conscience then a whole skin. That a soul in a fat body lies soft, and is
loath to rise. That he must rise betimes who would cosen the Devil. That
Flattery is increased, from a pillow under the elbow, to a bed under the whole
body. That Policy is the vnsleeping night of reason. That he who sleeps in
the cradle of security, sins soundly without starting. That guilt is the
Flea of the conscience. That no man is thoroughly awaked, but by affliction.
That a hanged Chamber in private, is nothing so convenient as a hanged Traitor
in public. That the religion of Papistrie, is like a curtain, made to keep
out the light. That the life of most Women is walking in their sleep, and they
talk their dreams. That Chambering is counted a ciuiller quality, then
playing at tables in the Hall, though seruing-men use both That the best
bedfellow for all times in the year, is a good bed without a fellow. That he
who tumbles in a calm bed, has his tempest within. That he who will rise, must
first lie down and take humility in his way. That sleep is deaths picture
drawn to life, or the twilight of life and death. That in sleep we kindly
shake death by the hand; but when we are awaked, we will not know him. That
often sleepings are so many trials to die, that at last we may do it perfectly.
That few dare write the true news of their Chamber: and that I have none
secret enough to tempt a strangers curiosity, or a Servants discovery.

God give you good morrow.
B. R.
News of my Morning work.
THat to be good, the way is to be most alone, or the best accompanied. That
the way to heaven is mistaken for the most Melancholywalke. That the most fear
the worlds opinion, more then Gods displeasure. That a Court-friend seldom
goes further then the first degree of Charity. That the Devil is the
perfectest Courtier. That innocence was first cozen to man, now guiltiness
has the nearest alliance. That sleep is deaths Ledger Ambassador. That time
can never be spent: we pass by it and cannot return. That none can be sure
of more time then an instant. That sin makes work for repentance or the
Devil. That patience has more power then afflictions. That every ones memory
is divided into two parts: the part loosing all is the Sea, the keeping part is
Land. That honesty in the Court lives in persecution, like Protestanss in
Spain. That Predestination and constancy are alike uncertain to beiudged of.
That reason makes love the Seruing-man. That virtues favor is better then a a
Kings favorite. That being sick begins a suit to God, being well possesses it.
That health is the Coach which carries to Heaven, sickness the posthorse.
That worldly delights to one in extreme sickness, is like a high candle to a
blind man. That absence does sharpen love, presence strengthens it, that the
one brings fuel, the other blows till it burns clear: that love often
breaks friendship, that ever increases love. That constancy of women, and
love in men, is alike rare. That Arts is truths lugler. That falsehood plays a
larger part in the world then truth. That blind zeal and lame knowledge are
alike apt to ill. That fortune is humblest where most contemned. That no porter
but resolution keeps fear our of minds. That the face of goodness without a
body is the worst wickedness. That women's fortunes aspire but by others
powers. That a man with a female wit is the worst Hermaphrodite. That a man not
worthy being a friend, wrongs himself by being in acquaintence. That the
worst part of ignorance, is making good and ill seem alike. That all this is
news only to fools.

Mris. B.
News from the lower end of the Table.
IT is said among the folks here, that if a man die in his infancy, he has
only broke his fast in this world: If in his youth, he has left us at
dinner. That it is bedtime with a man at three score and ten; and he that
lives to a hundred years, has walked a mile after supper. That the
humble-minded man makes the lowest curtsie. That grace before meat, is our
election before we were: grace after meatour salvation when we are gone. The
soul halts between two opinons, falls between two stools. That a fool at
the upper end of the table, is the bread before the salt. He that hates to be
reproved, sits in his own light. Hunger is the cheapest sauce, and nature the
cheapest guest. The sensible man and the silent woman are the best discoursers.
Repentance without amendment, is but the shifting of a foul trencher. He that
tells a lie to save his credit, wipes his mouth with his sleeue to spare his
napkin. The tongue of a icster is the fiddle that the hearts of the company
dance to. The tongue of a fool carues a peace of his heart to every man that
sits next him. A silent man is a covered mess. The contented man only is his
own caruer. He that has many friends eats too much salt with his meat. That
wit without discretion cuts other men meat and his own fingers. That the
soul of a chollericke man sits ever by the fire side. That patience is the
lard of the lean meat of adversity. The Epicure puts his money into his belly,
and the Miser his belly into his purse. That the best company makes the upper
end of the table, and not the saltseller. The superfluity of a man's
possessions, is the broken meat that should remain to the poor. That the
envious keeps his knife in his hand, and swallows his meat whole. A rich
fool among the wife is a gilt empty bowl amongst the thirsty. Ignorance is an
insensible hunger. The water of life is the best wine. He that robs me of my
invention, bids himself welcome to another man's table, and I will bid him
welcome when he is gone. The vainglorious man pisseth more then he drinks.
That no man can drink an health out of the cup of blessing. To surfeit upon
wit, is more dangerous then to want it. He that is ouercom of any passion is dry
dru^k. It Is easier to fill the belly of faith, then the eye of reason. The rich
glutton is better fed then taught. That faith is the elbow for a heavy soul to
lean on, He that sins that he may repent, surfets that he may take physic.
He that rises without thanksgiving, goes away and owes for his ordinary. He
that begins to repent when he is old, never washed his hands till night. That
this life is but one day of three meals, or one meal of three courses:
childe-hood, youth, and old age. That to sup well, is to live well: and that is
the way to sleep well. That no man goes to bed till he dies, nor wakes till he
is dead. And therefore

Good night to you here, and good morrow hereafter,

I. C.
News from the Church.
IT is thought here, that the world was made for man, and not man for the
world, and that therefore they take a cross course that lie down there. That
those that will not rise, their souls must, and carry their bodies to
Judgment. That we have spent one inheritance already, and are prodigal of
this. That there is no hope beyond mercy, and that this is that time; the next
is of Justice. That Christ when he went away, left good seed in his Church;
and when he comes again, he shall find Christians, but not faith. That the
Devil has got upon us, the same way that he did at the first, by drawing
shadows over substances, as he did the body over the soul. That Protestants
wear the name of Christ for a Charm, as Papists do the Cross. That States
use it, the Clergy live by it, the People follow it, more by a stream, then one
by one. That all are religious rather then some. That every one looks to
another, but not to himself. That they go so by throngs to Heaven, that it is
to be feared they take the broader way. That the Church is in the world, like
a Ship in the Sea; the Elect in the Church, like Jonas amongst the Mariners.
That to mend this, is to cheat the Devil, to turn man the right side
outward, and set the soul foremost again. That the soul may be too rank
too, if we look not to it: and so a Puritan often times meets a Papist in
superstition another way. That to bind from and to indifferent things, is
equal, though it be thought otherwise. That some, out of a good meaning have
fallen this way into a vice. That these faults are more subtle; and therefore
less perceived, and less to be blamed; but as dangerous as the other, if they
take heed. That the rule is in all things, the body and the soul must go
together, but the better before. That we have contended so long about the body
of Religion, that some men thought it was dead. That so, Atheists are come into
the Church, and that it will be as hard to cast them out as Devils. That those,
which have thus broken the peace of Jerusalem, are obliged to satisfaction; and
those which first gave them cause of amendment. That they are a good medicine
one for another, and both a good Composition. That a pure Bishop is the best
government, if the pride on both sides would let them know it. That all
Controversies for the most part, leave the truth in the middle, and are
factious at both ends. That the Church has this good by them, they cleanse the
way for others, but not for themselves. That sincerity, in the cause of truth,
is more worth then learning. That too much, and too little knowledge, have made
the world mad. That we have a shorter cut to it, and a surer way then Drake had
over the world, if we could find it out. That every man is a brief of the
whole; and as he is so, he is greater then a King. That every King is a brief
of his Land, and he has a Pattern of the government of it always abour him.
That as the honor that he gives unto his Nobles and Counselors is a charge;
so is that which God gives him. That as he requires an account, so he must
give. That he is the Image of God in his Kingdom, as man is in the World. That
therefore the Subjects owe him obedience, as the Creatures do Man. That those
that will not obey, are neither good Subjects, nor good men. That to obey well,
is as great a thing as to govern, and more men's duties. That those that think
not so, know not the Christians part, which is to suffer. That though States
be naught, if they profess Religion, they may deliver many men safe to
Heaven, though they go not themselves, and so they are like bad Ministers.
That this is Gods use of both, and of the world too, to convey his Elect to
their place. That the outward face of the Church has but the same use, and the
Elect are the Church themselves. That they are the Temple of the holy Ghost,
and therefore ought to pluck down their Idols, and set up God there. That the
Idolles of these times, are Covetousness, Pride, Gluttony, Wantonness,
Heresies, and such like admiration and serving of our selves. That we must make
all time an occasion of amendment, because the Devil makes it an occasion to
tempt. That he is a Spirit, and therefore is cunninger then we. Thar there is
no way to resist him, but by the Spirit of God, which is his Master. That this
is the gift of God, which he gives to all that are his. That it is increased
by the word, and held by humility and prayer. That Faith is the effect of it,
and works the assurance.

That thus the understanding and will, which is the whole soul of man, is made
up again, and sanctifies the body. That so we are the members of Christ. That
our Head is in Heaven, as a Pawn, that where he is, we shall be. That there
is no opinion but knowledge; for it is the Science of souls, and God the
Teacher.

I. R.
News from the Bed.
THat the bed is the best Rendevou of mankind, and the most necessary
ornament of a Chamber.

That Soldiers are good antiquaries in keeping the old fashion, for the first
bed was the bare ground.

That a man's pillow is his best Counselor.

That Adam lay in state, when the heaven was his canopie.

That the naked truth is, Adam and Eve lay without sheets.

That they were either very innocent, very ignorant, or very impudent, they
were not ashamed the heavens should see them lie without a couerlet

That it is likely Eve studied Astronomy, which makes the posterity of her
Sex ever since to lie on their backs.

That the circumference of the bed, is nothing so wide as the conuex of the
heavens, yet it contains a whole world.

That the five Senses are the greatest sleepers.

That a slothful man is but a reasonable Dormouse.

That the Soul ever wakes to watch the body.

That a Jealous man sleeps dog-sleep.

That sleep makes no difference between a wife man and a fool.

That for all times sleep is the best bedfellow.

That the devil and mischief ever wake.

That Love is a dream.

That the preposterous hopes of ambitious men are like pleasing dreams,
farthest off when awake.

That the bed pays Venus more custom then all the world beside.

That if dreams and wishes had been all true, there had not been since
Popery, one Maid to make a Nun of.

That the secure man sleeps soundly, and is hardly to be awak't.

That the charitable man dreams of building Churches, but starts to think the
ungodly Courtier will pull them down again.

That great sleepers were never dangerous in a state.

That there is a natural reason, why popish Priests choose the bed to confess
their women upon, for they hold it necessary, that humiliation should follow
shrift.

That if the bed should speak all it knows, it would put many to the blush.

That it is fit the bed should know more then paper.

R. S.
News from Shipbord.
THat Repentance without amendment, is like continual pumping, without mending
the leake.

That he that lives without Religion, sails without a compass.

That the wantonness of a peaceful Commonwealth, is like the playing of the
Porpesse before a storm.

That the fool is Sea sick in a Calm, but the Wisemans stomach endures all
weathers.

That passions in a fool are Ord'nance broken loose in a storm, that alter
their property of offending others and ruin himself.

That good Fortunes are a soft quicksand, adversity a rock; both equally
dangerous.

That Virtue in poverty is a ready rigged Ship that lies wind bound.

That good fashion in a man is like the Pilot in a Ship, that does most with
least force.

That a Fools tongue is like the buy of an Ankor, you shall find his heart
by it wheresoever it lies.

Wisdom makes use of the crosses of this world, asskilfull Pylots of Rocks for
Sea-marks to sail by.

H. R.
News from the Chimney corner.
THat wit is Brushwood, Judgment Timber: the one gives the greatest flame, the
other yields the durablest heat, and both meeting makes the best fire.

That Bawdes and Atturneyes are Andyrons that hold up their Clyents till they
burn each other to Ashes: they receive warmth by these; these by them their
destruction.

That a Wise-rich-man is like the back or stock of the Chimney, and his
wealth the fire, it receives not for it own need, but to reflect the heat to
other good.

That Housekeeping in England is fallen from a great fire in a hot summers day,
to boughs in the Chimney all winter long.

That man's reason in matter of faith is Fire, in the first degree of his ascent
flame, next smoke, and then nothing.

A young fellow fallen in love with a Whore, is said to be fallen asleep in the
Chimney corner.

He that leaves his friend for his wench, forsakes his bed to sit up and watch
a coal.

That the covetous rich man only freezes before the fire.

That Choler is an ill guest that pisses in the Chimney for want of a
Chamber Pot.

That chaste Beauty is like the bellows, whose breath is cold, yet makes
others burn.

That he that expounds the Scriptures upon the warrant of his own spirit
only, lays the brands together without tongs, and is sure (at least) to burn
his own fingers.

That the Lover keeps a great fire in's house all the year long.

That devotion, like fire in frostie weather, burns hottest in affliction.

That such Friars as fly the world for the trouble of it, lie in bed all day
in winter to spare firewood.

That a covetous man is a dog in a wheel, that toils to roast meat for other
men's eating.

The Pagans worshipping the Sun are said to hold their hands to the Gloworme
in stead of a coal for heat.

That a Wisemans heart is like a broad hearth, that keeps the coals (his
passions) from burning the house.

That good deeds in this life, are coals raked up in embers, to make a fire
next day.

FINIS.

