THE DESCRIPTION AND USE OF THE double Horizontall Dyall.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, AND HOPEFVL GENTLEMAN Sr. WILLIAM HOWARD KNIGHT OF THE
BATH, AND SON TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS LORD, THOMAS EARL OF
ARVNDEL AND SVRREY, EARL MARSHAL OF ENGLAND, etc.

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER. MDCXXXII.

The description, and use of the double Horizontall dial.
THere are upon the Plate two several Dyals. That which is outermost, is an
ordinary dyal, divided into hours and quarters, and every quarter into three
parts which are five minutes apeece: so that the whole hour is understood to
contain 60. minutes. And for this Dyall the shadow of the upper oblique, or
slanting edge of the style, or cock, does serve.

The other dyal, which is within, is the projection of the upper Hemisphaere,
upon the plain of the Horizon: the Horizon it self is understood to be the
innermost circle of the limb: and is divided on both sides from the points of
East and West into degrees, noted with 10.20.30. etc. as far as need
requires: And the center of the Instrument is the Zenith, or Vertical point.

Within the Horizon the middle straight line pointing North and South, upon
which the style stands is the Meridian, or twelve a clock line: and the
other short arching lines on both sides of it, are the hour lines,
distinguished accordingly by their figures: and are divided into quarters by
the smaller lines drawn between them: every quarter containing 15. minutes.

The two arches which cross the hour lines, meeting on both sides in the
points of intersection of the six a clock lines with the horizon, are the two
semicircles of the Ecliptic or annual circle of the sun: the upper of which
arches serves for the Summer half year; and the lower for the winter half
year: and are therefore divided into 365. days: which are also distinguished
into twelve months with longer lines, having their names set down: and into
tenths and fifts with shorter lines: and the rest of the days with pricks as
may plainly be seen in the dyall.

And this is for the ready finding out of the place of the Sun every day: and
also for the showing of the Suns yearly motion because by this motion the
sun goes round about the heavens in the compass of a year, making the four
parts, or seasons thereof, namely the Spring in that quarter of the Ecliptic
which begins at the intersection on the East side of the dyall, and is
therefore called the Vernall intersection. Then the Summer in that quarter of
the Ecliptic. which begins at the intersection with the Meridian in the
highest point next the Zenith. After that Autumn in that quarter of the
Ecliptic which begins at the intersection on the West side of the dyall, and
is therefore called the Autumnall intersection: and lastly the Winter in that
quarter of the Ecleptic, which begins at the intersection with the Meridian
in the lowest point next the Horizon.

But besides this yearly motion, the Sun has a diurnall or daily motion,
whereby it makes day and night, with all the diversities and inaequalities
thereof: which is expressed by those other circles drawn cross the hour
lines; the midlemost whereof, being grosser then the rest meeting with the
Ecliptic in the points of the Vernall, and Autumnall intersections, is the
Aequinoctiall: and the rest on both sides of it are called the parallels, or
diurnall arches of the sun, the two outermost whereof are the Tropicks,
because in the^ the sun has his furthest digression or Declination from the
Aequinoctiall, which is degrees 23.: and thence begins again to return
toward the Equinoctial. The upper of the two Tropics in this our Northern
hemisphere is the Tropic of Cancer and the sun being in it, is highest into
the North, making the longest day of Summer: And the lower next the horizon is
the Tropic of Capricorn; and the sun being in it is lowest into the South,
making the shortest day of winter.

Between the two Tropics and the Equinoctial, infinite such parallel circles
are understood to be contained: for the Sun, in what point soever of the
Ecliptic it is carried, describes by his lation a circle parallel to the
Equinoctial: yet those parallels which are in the instrument, though drawn
but to every second degree of declination, may be sufficient to direct the eye
in magining and tracing out through every day of the whole year in the
Ecliptic, a proper circle which may be the diurnall arch of the sun for that
day. For upon the right estimation of that imaginary parallel does the manyfold
use of this instrument especially rely: because the true place of the sun all
that day is in some part or point of that circle. Wherefore for the better
conceiving and bearing in mind thereof, every fifth parallel is herein made a
little grosser then the rest.

For this inner dyall serves the shadow of the upright edge of the style;
which I therefore call the upright shadow.

And thus by the eye and view only to behold and comprehend the course of the
sun, throughout the whole year both for his annual and diurnall motion, may
be the first use of this instrument.

II use. To find the declination of the sun every day.
Look the day of the month proposed in the Ecliptic, and mark how many
degrees the prick showing that day, is distant from the Aequinoctiall, either
on the Summer or winter side. viz. North or South.

Example 1. What will the declination of the sun be upon the eleventh day of
August? Look the eleventh day of August, and you shall find it in the sixth
circle above the Aequinoctiall: Now because each parallel stands (as has bin
said before) for two degrees, the sun shall that day decline Northwards 12.
degrees.

Example 2. What declination has the Sun upon the 24. day of March? Look the
24. day of March, and you shall find it between the second and third northern
parallels, as it were an half and one fifth part of that distance from the
second: Reckon therefore 4. degrees for the two circles, and one degree for the
half space: So shall the Suns declination be five degrees, and about one
fifth part of a degree northward that same day.

Example 3. What declination has the Sun upon the 13. day of November? Look
the 13. day of November. and you shall find it below the Aequinoctial ten
parallels, and about one quarter which is 20. degrees and an half southward.
So much is the declination. And according to these examples judge of all the
rest.

III. Use. To find the diurnall arch, or circle of the suns course every day.
The sun every day by his motion (as has bin said) describes a circle
parallel to the Equinoctial, which is either one of the circles in the dial,
or some-where between two of them. First therefore seek the day of the month;
and if it fall upon one of those parallels; that is the circle of the Suns
course that same day: But if it fall between any two of the parallels, imagine
in your in inde, and estimate with your eye, another parallel through that
point between those two parallels keeping still the same distance from each of
them

As in the first of the three former examples, The circle of the Suns course
upon the 11. of August, shall be the very sixth circle above the Equinoctial
toward the center.

In example 2. The circle of the suns course upon the 24. of March shall be
an imaginary circle between the lecond and third parallels, still keeping an
half of that space, and one fifth part more of the rest, from the second.

In example 3. The circle of the Suns course upon the 13. of November: shall be
an imaginary circle between the tenth and eleventh parallels below the
Equinoctial, still keeping one quarter of that space from the tenth.

IIII. Use. To find the rising and setting of the sun every day.
Seek out (as was last showed) the imaginary circle or parallel of the suns
course for that day, and mark the point where it meets with the horizon,
both on the East and West sides, for that is the very point of the Suns
rising, and setting that same day, and the hour lines which are on both sides
or it, by proportioning the distance reasonably, according to 15. minutes for
the quarter of the hour, will show the hour of the Suns rising on the East
side, and the Suns setting on the West side.

V. use. To know the reason and manner of the Intreasing and decreasing of the
days and nights throughout the whole year:
When the Sun is in the Equinoctial, it rises and sets at 6. a clock,
for in the instrument the intersection of the Equinoctial, and the Ecliptic
with the Horizon is in the six a clock circle on both sides. But if the sun
be out of the Equinoctial declining toward the North, the intersections of the
parallel of the sun with the horizon is before six in the morning, and after
6. in the evening: and the diurnal arch greater then 12. hours; and so much
more great, the greater the northern declination is. Again, if the sun be
declining toward the South, the intersections of the parallel of the Sun,
with the horizon* is after six in the morning and before six in the evening:
and the diurnal arch lesser then 12. hours; and by so much lesser, the greater
the southern declination is.

And in those places of the Ecliptic in which the Sun most speedily changes
his declination, the length also of the day is most altered: and where the
Ecliptic goes most parallel to the Equinoctial changing the declination, but
little altered. As for example, when the sun is near unto the Aequinoctiall
on both sides, the days increase and also decrease suddenly and apace;
because in those places the Ecliptic inclines to the Equinoctial in a manner
like a straight line, making sensible declination. Again when the sun is
near his greatest declination, as in the height of Summer, and the depth of
winter, the days keep for a good time, as it were, at one stay, because in
these places the Ectiptic is in a manner parallel to the Equinoctial, the
length of the day also is but little scarce altering the declination: And
because in those two times of the year, the Sun stands as it were still at
one declination, they are called the summer solstice, and winter solstice. And
in the mean space the nearer every place is to the Equinoctial, the greater is
the diversity of days.

Wherefore we may hereby plainly see that the common received opinion, that in
every month the days do aequally increase, is erroueous.

Also we may see that in parallels aequally distant from the Aequinoctiall, the
day on the one side is aequall to the night on the other side.

VI. Use. To find how far the sun rises, and sets from the true East
and west points, which is called the suns. Amplitude ortive; and occasive.
Seek out (as was showed in III. use) the imaginary circle, or parallel of the
suns course, and the points of that circle in the horizon, on the East and West
sides cutteth the degree of the Amplitude ortive, and occasive.

VII. Use. To find the length of every day and night.
Double the hour of the Suns setting, and you shall have the length of the
day; and double the hour of the Suns rising, and you shall have the length
of the night.

VIII. Use. To find the true place of the sun upon the dial, that is, the
point of the instrument which answers to the place of the sun in the
heavens at any time. which is the very ground of all the questions following.
If the dyall be fixed upon a post: Look what a clock it is by the outward
dyall, that is, look what hour and part of hour the shadow of the slanting
edge of the style shows in the outward limb. Then behold the shadow of the
upright edge, and mark what point thereof is upon that very hour, and part in
the inner dyall among the parallels, that point is the true place of the Sun at
the same instant.

If the dyall be not fixed, and you have a Meridian line noted in any window
where the Sun shines: place the Meridian of your dyall upon the Meridian line
given, so that the top of the style may point into the North and so the dial
is as it were fixed, wherefore by the former rule you may find the place of the
sun upon it.

If the dyall be not fixed, neither you have a Meridian line but you know the
true hour of the day exactly: hold the dyal even and parallel to the horizon,
moving it til the slanting edge of the style cast his shadow justly upon the
time or hour given: for then the dyall is truly placed, as upon a post. Seek
therefore what point of the upright shadow falls upon that very hour, and
there is the place of the Sun.

But if your dyall be loose, and you know neither the Meridian nor the time of
the day. Frist, by the day of the month in the Ecliptic find the suns
parallel, or diurnall arch for that day, then holding the dyall level to the
horizon, move it every way until the slanting shadow of the style in the
outward limb, and the upright shadow in the suns diurnall arch, both show the
very same hour and minut, for that very point of the suns parallel, which
the upright shadow cutteth, is the true place of the Sun on the dyal at that
present.

But note that by reason of the thicknes of the style, and the bluntness of
the angle of the upright edg, the Sun cannot come unto that edge for some
space before and after noone. And so during the time that the sunn shines not
on that upright edge, the place of the Sun in the dyall cannot be found.
Wherefore they that make this kind of double dyall, are to be careful to file
the upright edge of the style as thin and sharp as possible may be.

That which has here bin taught concerning the finding out the suns true
place in the dyal, ought perfectly to be understood, that it may be readily,
and dexterously practiced, for upon the true performance thereof depends all
that follows.

IX. Use. To find the hour of the day.
If the dyall be fastened upon a post: the hour by the outward dyall, or limb
is known of every one: and the upright shadow in the suns parallel, or diurnal
arch will also show the very same hour.

But if the dyall be loose, either hold it or set it parallel to the horizo^,
with the style pointing into the North and move it gently every way until the
hour showed in both dyals exactly agrees, or which is all one, find out the
true place of the sun upon the dyall, as was taught in the former question,
for that point among the hour lines shows the hour of the day.

X. Use. To find out the Meridian, and other points of the compass.
First you must seek the true hour of the day (by the last question) for in
that situation the Meridian of the dyall stands directly North and South: and
the East points into the East, and the west into the west, and the rest of
the points may be given by allowing degr: 11. unto every point of the compass.

XI. Use. To find out the Azumith of the sun, that is the distance of the
Vertical circle, in which the sun is at that present, from the Meridian.
Set your dyall upon any plain or flat which is parallel to the horizon, with
the Meridian pointing directly North and South, as was last showed: then follow
with your eye the upright shadow in a straight line, till it cutteth the
horizon: for the degree in which the point of intersection is, shall show how
far the suns Azumith is distant from the East and west points, and the
complement thereof unto 90. shall give the distance thereof from the Meridian.

XII Use. To find out the Declination of any Wall upon which the sun shines,
that it, how far that wall swerveth from the North or South, either Eastward
or Westward.
Take a board having one straight edg, and a line stricke^ perpe^dicular upon
it; apply the straight edg unto the wall at what time the sun shines upon it,
holding the board parallel to the horizon: Set the dyal thereon, and move it
gently every way, until the same hour and minute be showed in both dyals: and
so let it stand: then if the dyal have one of the sides parallel to the
Meridian, strike a line along that side upon the board, crossing the
perpendicular, or else with a bodkin make a point upon the board, at each end
of the Meridian, and taking away the instrument from the board, and the board
from the wall, lay a ruler to those two points, and draw a line crossing the
perpendicular: for the angle which that line makes with the perpendicular, is
the angle of the declination of the wall. And if it be a right angle, the wall
is exactly East or west: But if that line be parallel to the perpendicular, the
wall is direct North or South without any declination at all,

You may also find out the declination of a wall, if the dyall be fixed on a
post not very far from that wall; in this manner. Your board being applied to
the wall, as was showed, hang up a thread with a plummet, so that the shadow of
the thread may upon the board cross the perpendicular line: make two pricks in
the shadow and runn instantly to the dyall and look the horizontall distance
of the suns Azumith, or upright shadow from the Meridian. Then through the
two pricks draw a line crossing the perpendicular: and upon the point of the
intersection, make a circle aequal to the horizon of your instrument, in which
circle you shall from the line through the two pricks measure the horizontall
distance of the upright shadow, or Azumith from the Meridian, that way toward
which the Meridian is: draw a line out of the center, to the end of that arch
measured: and the angle which this last line makes with the perpendicular,
shall be aequall to the declination of the wall.

XIII. Use. How to place the dyall upon a post without any other direction but
it self.
Set the dyall upon the post, with the style into the North, as nere as you can
guess: then move it this way and that way, till the same hour and minute be
showed, both in the outward and inward dyals, by the several shadows, as has
bin already taught, for then the dyal stands in its truest situation;
wherefore let it be nailed down in that very place.

XIIII. Use. To find the height of the Sun at high noone every day.
Seek out the diurnal arch or parallel of the suns course, for that day (by
use III.) and with a pair of compasses setting one foot in the center, and the
other in the point of intersectio^ of that parllel with the Meridian, apply
that same distance, unto the samidiameter divided, for that measure shall
therein show the degree of the suns altitude above the horizon that day at
high noone.

XV. Use. To find the height of the sun at any hour or time of the day.
Seek out the diurnall arch, or parallel of the suns course for that day:
and mark what point of it is in the very hour and minute proposed. And with a
pair of compasses, setting one foot in the center, and the other in that point
of the parallel, apply the same distance unto the semidiameter divided: for
that measure shall show the degree of the suns altitude above the horizon at
that time.

And by this means you may find the height of the sun above the horizon at
every hour through out the whole year for the making of rings and cylinders
and other instruments which are used to show the hour of the day.

XVI. Use The height of the sun being given to find out the hour, or what
it is a clock.
This is the converse of the former; seek therefore in the semidiameter
divided the height of the sun given. And with a pair of compasses setting
one foot in the center and the other at that height, apply the same distance,
unto the diurnall arch, or parallel of the sun for that day: for that point
of the diurnall arch, upon which that same distance shall light, is the true
place of the sun upon the dyal; and shows among the hour lines, the true
time of the day.

XVII. Use. Considerations for the use of the instrument in the night.
In such questions as concern the night, or the time before sun rising, and
after sun setting, the instrument represents the lower hemisphere, wherein
the southern pole is elevated. And therefore the parallels which are above the
Aequinoctiall toward the center, shall be for the southern, or winter
parallels: and those beneath the Aequinoctiall, for the Northern or Summer
parallels; and the East shall be accounted for West, and the west for East;
altogether contrary to that which was before, when the instrument represented
the upper hemisphaere.

XVIII. Use. To find how many degrees the sun is under the horizon at any
time of the night.
Seek the declination of the sun for the day proposed (by use II.) And at the
same declination on the contrary side imagine a parallel for the Sun that
night: and mark what point of it is in the very hour and minute proposed: And
with a pair of compasses, setting one foot in the center, and the other in
that point of the parallel, apply that same distance unto the semidiameter
divided: for that measure shall show the degree of the suns depression below
the horizon at that time.

XIX. Use. To find out the length of the Crepusculum, or twylight, every day.
Seek the declination of the sun for the day proposed (by use II.) And at the
same declination on the contrary side imagine a parallel for the sun that
night. And with a pair of compasses setting one foot in the center, and the
other at 72. degrees upon the semidiameter divided, apply that same distance,
unto the suns nocturnall parallel: for that point of the parallel, upon which
that same distance shall light, shows among the hour lines, the beginning of
the twilight in the morning, or the end of the twilight in the evening.

XX. Use. If the day of the month be not known, to find it out by the dyall.
For the working of this question, either the dyall must be fixed rightly on a
post, or else you must have a true Meridian line drawn in some window where
the sun shines, wherefore supposing the dyall to be justly set either upon the
post, or upon the Meridian, Look what a clock is it by the outward dyal, and
observe what point of the upright shadow falls upon the very same minute in
the inner dyall, and through that same point imagine a parallel circle for the
suns course; that imaginary circle in the Ecliptic shall cut the day of the
month.

These Isntrumental dyalls are made in brass by Elias Allen dwelling over
against St. Clements Church without Temple-barre.

FINIS.

