A TRVE HISTORY OF THE MEMORABLE SIEGE OF Ostend, and what passed on either
side, from the beginning of the Siege, unto the yielding up of the Town.

Containing the Assaults, Alarums, Defenses, Inventions of war, Mines,
Counter-mines and Retrenchments, Combats of Galleys, and Sea Fights, with the
portrait of the Town: And also what passed in the I Will of Cadsant, and at the
siege of Sluice, after the coming of Count Maurice.

Translated out of French into English, By Edward Grimeston.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward Blount. 1604.

To the right Honorable the Earl of Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
Charles Mountioie Anagramma One: A most Rich Iuel.
YOur good Lordship knows, that in no times of Peace, Peace is so fixed, but
the variety to which all things worldly are subject, may give necessary, and
vndelayd occasion to the Theorie of wars, if not their practice; if neither,
yet the knowledge of both, being by long and renowned experience so
substantially turned into the powers of your mind; the unequal subject of this
resolute and deadly siege, cannot but add one welcome form to your discourse,
and find some of your emptiest minutes fit to vouchsafe it acceptance. The
bloodlesse and quiet transformation it receives from my tributorie labors;
wanting so much life of the death and actual excitations it naturally
presented, I knew must want as much of the Honor and fire it should confer to
the Protection and spirit of a Soldier: but I know withal, the lost lives of
so many resolute and Honorable Commanders, having a little restitution made
them in this willing remembrance, will find no less cherishing and strength
of propagation in your living disposition: to whose true Nobility and
generally loved virtues, I thrice humbly submit these and whatsoever worthier
causes of your grave consideration the unworthy work compriseth.

Your Lordships always to be commanded, Edw: Grimeston.

The Author to the Reader.
THis latter age has brought forth memorable exploits of war: and Fla^ders
(without straiing from our subject) to her loss, has not seen the least,
being vexed with continual troubles since the year 1566. The sieges of
Harlem, Mastricke, Andwerp, and other towns, have been goodly, according unto
the Etimology which some give unto the word. Bellum, quod minime bellum, and it
seems that the industry of men instructed by the inventions of former ages,
and pricked forward by religion, and other violent causes and colors, has
added what she could, and as it were made the uttermost trial of her forces. I
leave it unto the reader to make a comparison betwixt this siege of Ostend, and
the rest, but without doubt it exceedes them all in length of time: the
importance thereof cannot be told, being the most memorable occurrant of our
age. The opinion I have that this small work (recommended by truth it self,
and as free from passion, as void of affectation) should be pleasing unto
many, is the cause I have set it forth, to represent (as in a table) the most
remarkable things that have happened on either side at this siege. Many being
interessed in the cause (as they say) will desire to see it, and spirits pricked
forward by curiosity would not loose their parts. In the year 1599. the
Flemings being molested with the continual courses of them of Ostend, caused
certain forts to be made about the town, to bridle them. It is above three
years since this fiege began, which was the fifth of July in the year 1601. we
may think that the importance of the place, has (during this time) furnished
both the one and the other withal devises possible, for the well assayling and
defending of the Town. The discourse which is brief, frees me from giving any
censure: and the Law which I have prescribed my self, opposes: Some not
improperly, call Ostend an Academie and an excellent School, for Governors,
Captains, Soldiers, Ingeneurs, Physicians, Surgions, Pilots and Mariners: and
they find it by experience, that every one of these persons which has
continued but three months in Ostend, is become excellent in his art and
vocation. A Soldier when he comes forth speaks like a Master in
fortifications, of Ramperes, Bulworkes, Spurs, Counterscarfes, Rauelins,
Trauerses, Parapets, half Moons, Reduites or Block houses and such like, I
will allege one example among many, to show the valor of the Soldiers of
Ostend: In the year 1603. the Archdukes men having surprised the Castle of
Wastendonck, the inhabitants resolved to retrench themselves against it,
setting their Garrison to work, who were scholars newly from this Academie,
these good workmen made proof in three hours what they could do, to the
great amazement of the Spaniardes, who said they could not be men, seeing the
Canon did not force them to retire a foot, or else that every one had a new
life in his cofers. As for Physicians and Surgians, Mounsieur Moerbeke of
Haigh, is held for a Phoenix, Alexander Courtmans of Andwerp is very famous,
and all such as have practiced in Ostend, have purchased a prerogative above
the rest. The like is of all men that have bin employed there, finally this
little book is good for Soldiers, who shall learn therein many excellent
points of their profession, tried at the cost of other men, and ready to be put
in practice: neither shall it be unprofitable to any, seeing that we live in
this perverse age toward the dissolution of the world threatened of all sides
with wars, like unto a poor traveler, which sees the Heaven ouercast
threatening a storm in the midst of a plain Champion. As for delight: If any
one seek to please his taste, the variety of the discourse will minister
sufficient matter: My intention in writing these simple remembrances, free from
all other affection, was only to serve the public: If my labor may be as
friendly accepted, and be pleasing to all good men, and to those whose
judgments are not obscured nor transported with passion, neither that have
coniured against the truth: I have attained to my desire, and think my pains
well employed. Farewell.

A. V.

A description, and the names of the Forts of the Town of Ostend.
1. Sand-hill. 2. False-bray. 3. Schottenbruch or the Scottish fort. 4.
Becc-af, here was the Church of the old Town, whereof the steeple only
stands. 5. The menteur or liar. 6. The new haven, the which is not yet
finished. 7. Moises table. 8. 9. Flamenburch, upon the West of the new Haven
where they have planted a Battery to shoot against the Archdukes men, when
as they go to their battery which is toward the Saulcisses. 10. The Bulworke
upon the Northwest with a Blockhouse, upon the Haven, by the which the ships
do now enter. 11. The North Bulworke, with a battery thereon. 12. The East
gate. 13. The Rauelin at the East gate. 14. The Bulworke of Pekell. 15. A
Battery upon the Bulworke of Pekel, in the which there are 9. demie Culuerins,
to shoot at the Archdukes approches which he makes upon the new Haven. 16.
Battery upon the Counter-scarfe before the colke or gulf. 17. The Bulworke of
Spain. 18. A gate with a bridge at the Bulworke of Spain to go up into the
Country. 19. A passage through the Counter-scarfe, by the which they go into
the colke or gulf. 20. The East Rauelin. 21. The Spanish half Moon,
fortified without with a corredor or gallery. 22. Becc-af, or the folly of the
East. 23. The half Moon of Slimmer. 24. A Blockehouse abandoned. 25. A half
Moon in the high Country. 26. A Bulworke upon the South-East. 27. A Rauelin
upon the South-East. 28. A point against the South-square. 29. A Bulworke upon
the South, 30. A Rauelin upon the South. 31. The South Rauelin has been cut
off in this place to stop the enemies approach there. 32. A hafe Moon in the
ditch of the Counter-scarfe. 33. Little squares called claptmus at the end of
the half Moon upon the Polder. 34. The bridge of the South-west Bulworke to
go over the Counter-scarfe into the Polder. 35. The South-west Bulworke. 36.
The half Moon of the Polder. 37. The South-west Rauelin. 38. A gate at the
South-west of the Town. 39. The West Bulworke. 40. The West Rauelin. 41. The
Porke-espike. 42. The Helmont. 43. The West Haven with the trenches, 44. A
bridge to go unto Sand-hill. 45. The old Sluice. 46. A bridge to pass into
the old Town. 47. The place where the blue Sluice was. 48. Many lodgings
whether the soldiers retired. 49. Many Blindes or couerings to receive the
enemies shot which came from their battery upon the West.
A description of the Chariot or Pompees bridge, invented to give an assault to
the Halfe-Moone of the Spaniards at Ostend, as it appears in the plot of the
town.
A. The Bridge being let down. B. The Mast against the which the Bridge was
raised, being 150. foot high. C. The upper part of the Bridge, made of great
Roapes and Cables of Musket proof. D. The nether part of the Bridge made
likewise of Roapes of Musket proof. E. A Post like unto the beam of a Wagon,
to draw the Bridge up, and to let it down. F. Foure-score horses to draw this
Chariot. G. Wheels eight foot broad, and 14. or 15. high, the which are
exceeding strong, and did cost 300. Ducats a piece. H. Here Musketeers should
be placed to shoot at them of the Town, and to keep them from cutting of the
Roape.
The Archduke after he had done what he could to take Ostend, or to annoy the
besieged, by the invention of an Italian Ingeneur named Pompee, he caused a
Chariot to be made, or a Bridge called Helwagen or Loywagen, or Pompees
Chariot, by the inuentors name, to go unto the assault at the Spanish
Halfe-moone, the which was made and held by them of the town: the Bridge is
100. paces long and 16. broad: on the which ten may march in front, it has
four Wheels every one 8. foot broad, and 14. or 15. high: at the end of the
Chariot there is a tree or mast 150. foot high, by means whereof the bridge
is drawn up and let down with poollies. Their desseigne was to fasten Anchors
on either side of the Halfe-moone, against the which 80. horses should draw the
bridge, as it is set down in the Figure. They of the Town having intelligence
thereof, made a high Palyssadoe with trauerses of masts like unto Gibets, to
receive the upper part of the bridge, being let down: the besieged seeing this
bridge approach near unto the Halfe-moone, they brake one of the Wheels with
a Canon-shot, so as it was of no effect, which made the^ of the town call it
the Cowards-bridge.



The History of the siege of Ostend, from the beginning unto this present day.
OStend is a Sea Town in the county of Flanders, Description and situation of
Ostend.
one of the most famous Forts of Christendom, situated amongst downs, three
miles from Newport, and four hours journey from Bruges, upon a river called
Yperlehe, the which increased by others, casts an arm into the Sea by the west
Sluice, the which has sometimes bin a good Port, but now it is cut of by the
enemy by means of a Trenche, and made altogether unprofitable by them of
Ostend, with two dikes or causies upon the side of Polder rampart, to take away
all commodity and advantage from the enemy.

The Town with the Ramparts about it contain half an hours journey. Before
the siege it was reasonably well built. For the situation, the inhabitants
maintained themselves with fishing. Before the wars they were about three
thousand, but since the greatest part are retired to Camuehr in Zeland, so as
there remains not above one hundred and fifty households.

The port whereof we have spoken, The Port.
stretches to the North Norwest of the town, the greatest depth is toward
the Norwest drawing to the sea. It flows and ebbes every six hours, as in
other havens of Flanders, and it remains almost dry at every ebb, neither is
it good but at half flood, and for vessels which draw not much water.

Besides this Port, A new Gollet.
within these few years, the Sea of it self has opened a new gollet or Port,
above a hundred foot broad, entering into the land when the tides are lowest,
the depth of two Pikes, and before at the entry a good half fadam, growing
every day more deeper, so as it is likely in time to be one of the best ports
of Flanders. A new Port.
Since the siege they have made a new Port or Haven betwixt these two, whereof
shall be spoken more at large hereafter.

The fortification of this place began during the wars of the Lowe-countries,
A discourse of the estate of the town since the wars and fortification
thereof.
in the year 1572. It was first enclosed with gates and Palissadoes against
the incursions of the enemy, and six years after being better fortified by
the confederate Provinces, it has continued almost alone in all the county of
Flanders faithful to her party, and has courageously withstood all the
enemies attempts, and resisted their enterprises. The Duke of Parma in the
year 1583. returning with his victorious troops from the prise of Dunkerke
and Nieuport, and having besieged it, after five days was forced to raise his
siege.

Two years after, La Motte governor of Graueling, surprised the old Town
upon the Seashore, being then only fortified with a simple rampart and a
pallisadoe, thinking to fortify it speedily, and so to keep it, but he was
chased away with great loss, leaving upon the place above forty men of
command, with all his munition.

Since it has been fortified, and first of all the East-downes, (the which by
reason of their height and neernesse might much annoy the Town) have been
made somewhat plainer, and the Sea besides her ordinary course brought round
about the town when it flows, above 1200. paces to the South, and at
Spring-tides it runs a league into the country toward the West, and causes
much broken land there abouts, especially toward the West Sand-downes, whereas
the enemy must camp, and whereas his only passage lies to go unto the Town.

The fortification comprehended all the Polder, Those of Ostend abandon the
Polder.
(so they call a meadow or field won from the sea or river) but finding it
unfit to be fortified, and requiring a great guard, a part of it was left out.
They have likewise furnished their ditches with causies and dikes, so as
whereas they were wont to be dry at every tide, they are now full of water.

The chief fortifications have been made since the coming of the Archduke
Albert in the year 1596. and at the time when Calais and Hulst were taken, and
lastly in the year 1600. the ramparts were made higher, the Bulwarks
enlarged, and all reduced to a fit and equal proportion. Besides this
fortification, those of the town have need to ramper themselves with dikes
and causeys against the sea, the which they fear more then the enemy.

This place imports greatly, that it should greatly avail the Archduke,
Importance of Ostend.
and that the loss thereof should much prejudice the confederate Provinces:
for (omitting to speak of the commodity of the haven) the Archduke by means
thereof is forced to entertain war in his own country, and to have a
little extraordinary army continually in pay, to the ruin thereof. Flanders
particularly, (the which in time of peace was reputed for a third part of the
seventeen Provinces,) is as it were abandoned to the soldier, and before the
siege, the greatest part of the champion country to redeem themselves from
spoil and pillage, have been forced to pay a tribute or contribution to them
of Ostende.

The Flemings feeling this thorn in their foot, to bridle and restrain their
ordinary roades, have built many forts there abouts, Forts built about Ostend.
and placed guardes upon the approches, especially in the year 1599. by the
advice of a corporal fugitive, who had been long in garrison in the Town, and
knew all their courses.

About the Town from the West to the East, they reckon 17. forts, the farthest
of be, Nieudamme, Leffing, Snaskerk, Altemburg, Plassenthale, Stalhille,
Nieuuegen, Nieu munster, and Blanckenberg, in some of them country men do
dwell; the nearest be, Albertus, Isabella, Grossendurst, Claire or the stone S.
John with his blockhouse, Colombie with his blockhouse and Bredene, whereunto
has been added an eighteenth fort upon the East downs: Bredene is the
greatest, in the which there was the last winter a whole regiment in garrison.
Isabella is the strongest and nearest unto the Town, the which by means of a
trench ioynes unto Grossendurst, and both of them are commonly guarded by six
ensigns: and so is Claire with her blockhouse. In Albertus there are two
ensigns, and one in Colombie: the entertainment of which forts in the
beginning did cost the states of Flanders ninty thousand Flemish crowns a
month, Expenses in garding these forts.
and for all that they could not hinder the desce^t of an army, as experience
has verified and oftentimes the mutinies of garrisons, have brought no less
oppression and ruin to the Country then the incursions of the enemy. Cause of
the siege.
Which has been the cause why they have often made suite to have it beseeged
straightly, among the rest after the taking of Calais in the year 1596.
offering to pay extraordinarily 300000. crowns within three months. The
Archduke seemed then to be resolute, and received a good sum of money, but he
did nothing but show himself with his army before the Town, and having
viewed it he suddenly retired.

After all this they promised again unto the Archduke, (besides the ordinary
contribution of 90000. crowns a month for the entertainment of the forts,) to
give him 600000. crowns, that is a 100000. crowns when he should bring his
army within view of the Town. a 100000. crowns when he had planted his Canon
against it, a 100000. crowns when he had made a breach, and the other 300000.
crowns when he had taken the Town, and in truth they delivered this sum
and more as shall appear hereafter. They prevailed so in the counsel of the
States (having practiced the Brabancons,) as a resolution was taken according
to their desires, Diversity of opinions in counsel upon the siege of Ostend.
(although there were great opposition,) saying there was no reason to hazard
an army at the siege of a place so much to be feared.

As for the Archduke he was fully resolved to the siege, for that (besides the
hope he had to carry the place) he thought by this means to force the
confederate Provinces, to draw their army from the siege of Reynberg, and with
this money to pacify his soldiers, and amongst the rest those of Isabella
fort, which had been long time mutined, and had intelligence with them of
Ostend, the which did much trouble the Flemings.

Then followed the seege, the Archduke came to Altemburg, Ostend besieged.
and the fifth of July 1601. he sent Cont Frederick de Berge first Marshall of
the Camp before Ostend with four regiments of foot, who encamped upon the
East downs, from whence the next day he began to shoot with four double
Canons.

Within the Town there were 21. Ensigns of diverse regiments, and one of the
inhabitants, under the command of La North, who provided for their defense
most of them sending away their wives and children, into Zeland.

The 6. day Don Augustine de Mexia Governor of the Castle of Andwerp, came
before the Town with five other regiments, who encamped upon the West very
near the Town, betwixt the forts of Albert and Isabella. They of the Town
that day and the three following discharged many a Canon shot at them, and in
the end forced them to retire and to lodge upon the West downs, they say there
were above 400. hurt men carried to Neuport.

The mutines of Isabella fort were pacified with promises and fair words, so
as they went forth willingly to receive their pay at Winoxberge, to the number
of five hundred men.

The 10. and 11. of July, the enemy caused the chiefest forces of his camp to
pass to the West-downes, leaving upon the East about a 1000. men under the
commond of Monsieur de Guson, who made a new fort upon the downs with deep
ditches about it.

The enemy approached daily upon the West, and fortified himself, planting
twelve pieces of Canon upon the plainest of the downs; he made also another
battery upon the Sea side, whereby they took from them of the Town that old
Port or Haven, so as ever sense they have used the Nieu-port, The old haven
cut off by the enemy.
or Channel which they had made expressly, whereby all great barks or ships
with flat bottomes entered,

Prince Maurice having intelligence of the siege of Ostend, his excellency
sent presently the ninth of July from the camp Sir Francis Vere General of
the English with twelve companies of his own nation and Grave Maurice sendes
to Ostend.
Colonel Vchtenbruch with seven ensigns of low Country soldiers and some
others, to the number of thirty four companies, all which arrived happily and
entered the Town by the North Port the fifteen of July.

The besieged expected daily four thousand English men out of England.
Succors from England.
The 23. of July there arrived 1500. in red Cassackes, the which were presentlye
divided among the twelve first companies.

General Vere being arrived fortified himself presently in a certain high
place without the Town, where the enemy could not annoy him.

The 13. they made a sally, A Sallie.
wherein the Archduke (according to the advice which came from Bruges) lost
600. men. Don Augustine de Mexia had a Musket shot in the hand, and a master of
the camp a Spaniard named Don Ierosme Monroy was slain there: they of the
Town lost about thirty.

The 18. of July General Vere cast up earth on the side of the Polder toward
the West downs, and the enemy did the like right against him. Then he
fortified himself at Cowe-bridge, the which his Excellency had caused to be
broken the year before: And the 25. he caused the place to be viewed, and put
some Soldiers into it: at the same instant the Arche-dukes men issued forth in
great numbers out of their approches and trenches, every one carrying a Faggot
or Bauin upon his head, and passed on running at the mercy of the Musket shot
from the Town, to make a passage through the marish, and to seize upon a high
place which lies betwixt Cowe-fort and Grossendurst, where in the night they
planted three Canons: and there they lost many men.

The 26. of July, the Archdukes men played all day upon this new fortification,
and at night came to the assault in three sundry places, they forced it and
chased away them of the Town, the which was easy to do being but forty men.

The 27. A Sailie.
of July they within the Town made a sallie and won the enemies trenches,
whom they chased even unto the Sand-downes: the Canon of the Town playing in
the mean time to great effect upon the Arche-dukes troops. A Spanish prisoner
said that there were 600. of their men hurt and slain at this service, and
amongst others, Don Diego Idiagues a Spanish Captain, son unto the King of
Spaines Secretary, was slain.

The 29. of July the Archdukes army was supplied with ten Ensigns of new
soldiers or Besognes, of the new troops that were come from Italy, the same
day the tide ouer-flowed all the enemies approches, even unto the West-downes
of sand.

The same day the enemy sunck a Bark in the which were 18. men, whereof there
were but six saved, the which did so amaze the Mariners, as they were driven
to great want in Ostend, until the coming of John de Duvenuorde the Admiral,
who took so good an order as they might easily enter by the North-port and
the gollet, and discharge their munition, victuales and merchandise in the
Dikes toward the East-port, so as they have abundance of all things since
that time.

The 31. of July Cont Frederick with a regiment of Germans began to make his
trenches round about La pierre S. Iean, going on to this new fortification
which they had won, the which they did cover with a new wing toward the
Norwest, and united it to their first works upon the West Side of the Town:
The enemies trenches.
so as the enemies trenches are continued from the west-downes below beyond
the Fort of La pierre S. Iean. Upon this wing the enemy has built a little
corpse de guard, against the which General Vere made a retrenchment upon the
West of his chief rampart, from whence the Soldiers entertained one another
with their Musket shot, but it was razed two days after.

The same day the Polder rampart was put in defense upon the North-east toward
the Town, and upon the South-west it was raised in manner of a plat-forme to
plant Canon thereon, and six double Cannons were brought from Zeland, whereof
four were planted upon Sand-hill, and the other two upon the West Boulwarke,
whether most of their ordinance was brought, for that they expected some great
attempt of the enemy there.

Don Catris commanded upon the West at the Sanddownes, who desired extremely to
do some exploit about the Porke epicke along the little Tummel-dike, and at
the first opportunity when the tide should be gone to cast himself by the haven
into the old Town.

The 3. of August, the Archdukes men made a trench under the fort of S. Claire
on the South side.

The 4. day they advanced their approches on the same side within Musket shot
of the trenche, which General Vere had made upon the West side of Polder.

The 6. of August, those that were camped upon the West downs, approached
fifty yardes nearer unto the Town.

The 9. they began to shoot from Cow-fort, whilst the fortification of Polder
was a finishing.

The same day the Archdukes men shot 2200. 2200. canon shot in one day
against the Town.
Canon shot from their battery of the side of S. Claires Forte, without making
of any reasonable breach, they only hurt and slew some poor miserable
creatures, and spoiled some private houses, but it did nothing counteruaile
their great expense of Poulder and shot, neither had they any thing advanced
their principal desseigne.

The defenses of Sand-hill Bulwark, Wester Bulwark, and Helmont were beaten
down, but they were so well repaired in three or four days, as in a whole
Month the enemy could not much indomage them.

The eleventh of August, a servant to Sir Horatio Vere Liuetenant general of
the English was slain, and a piece of the Towne-Towre beaten down.

The Archdukes men stood every night in arms to the number of three or four
thousand, The Archdukes men stand upon their guard
to receive them of the Town, who they thought would sallie out upon them.

The same day at night came a Fleet of 15. Ships from Zeland.
vessels from Zeland with munition and victuals, the which were afterward
unladen in the Town. The same day a piece of the Tower of the old Town was
beaten down, and two prisoners were brought into the Town, whereof the one
was borne at Bruges, and the other at Namur, who among other things said that
the mutins of Isabella fort, had been drawn forth with good words, and were
gone to Winoxberge about 500. men; moreover they said that the Archduke had
caused all the fugitives to be put in to prison, for that some of them had
bragged to know the means how to take the town, but the small likelihood
there was in their proposition, did show sufficiently that it was but to win
themselves credit.

The 12. Of the Governors lodging, beaten down with the Canon, and not by him
abandoned.
of August a small Tower of the Governors lodging was beaten quite down and
although it were pierced through with many a shot, yet did he not abandon it.

The same day many of the inhabitants both men and women returned out of
Zeland, who had fled for fear in the beginning of the siege.

The 13. of August, arrived 17. or 18. ships, the which entered into the Town
by the Gollet on the East side about midnight, upon whom the enemy played
fiercely with his Canon, and one boy only was slain, this happened because it
was moon light, for when the night or dark they pass safely, without
discovery of the enemy, whose nearest trenches on that side were a thousand or
eleven hundred paces of.

The enemy did also much indamage the ships that lay within the Town, behind
the new Church, and slew a Mariner and some soudiers.

The Archdukes men which where in guard at Katzen-heubten, the which is a kind
of Caualier or platform, played continually with their Muskets into the Town,
they hurt a Sargent of Captain Anthonies company in the leg, and slew the
Sargent of Captain Kolue.

Those of the Town took two pieces of great Canon, the which were upon Wester
Boulwarke, and planted them in the false Braie at the foot of Sandhill, for
that they served them to no use whereas they were before, by reason that the
enemy was come so near the Town, and had fortified their approches too well
on that side.

The same day, three men thinking to fly unto the enemy, Fugitives taken.
two of them were taken and put into Yrons; the enemy shot with four pieces,
from their nearest trench on the South side, and with others from the East and
West, but their greatest effect was to ruin some houses: from the first
beginning unto this day, they did not hurt above 18. persons of the Town and
some soldiers, the which was little in regard of the multitude of bullets
which passed through all parts of the Town, Bullets of 40. pound shot into
the town.
whereof the greatest part waied above 40. pounds a piece.

The 14. of August, there entered by the Gollet 7. or 8. ships laden with
munition and victuals: the enemy ceased not to shoot day and night, breaking
all the couerings of the houses, the which they complained most of, and
sometimes they hurt a Towns-man or a soldier.

The same day, about eight of the clock in the morning General Vere was hurt
with a piece of a Canon General vere hurt.
which split, for the which the enemy made great signs of joy and triumph,
discharging many Canon shot, so as they hurt six or eight persons, but not one
of them died.

After dinner a Canonier was slain upon Sandhill, with a Musket shot in the
head, the which came from Keiheubter, this was the seventh Canonier which had
been slain, besides there were five soldiers struck with one Canon shot in
the ships, whereof some dyed, the rest were maimed.

The same day the Townsmen pierced their Counterscarfe, to lodge the ships
within their ditches, that they might be more covered.

The 15. there was great shooting on either side, and there were 19. or 20.
slain of those which helped to unlade the ships, from morning to morning, day
and night there was nothing hard but the thundering of Canons and hissing of
Muskets on either part.

The English men made the green market place within the Town hollow, fitting
themselves with cabbines and lodgings in the earth, and they made hollow
another void place upon the South-west, yet there were still some of them hurt.
Those of the Town say also that they did often see them draw dead men out of
the enemies trenches, the which their Canon had slain.

The 16. of August the Archdukes men in the night made a half Moon at their
nearest retrenchment toward the West-downes, and so carried it along the
Sand-downes, unto their nearest approches, the which stretch from the Downs
unto the Polder, and there made a battery of three Canons, fifty yardes
nearer then they had yet made any, from whence they began at the break of day
to shoot against the Bulwark of Sand-hill, the which (after they had
discharged some thousands of shot) seemed to be a wall of Iron, and they might
hear the Bullets strike one against another. They made much sand fly into the
air, but they could make no reasonable breach: the Townsmen prepared to
undermine a little dike which went near unto the enemies trenches upon the
West side of the Downs.

The Archduke caused many houses of Stone to be built in the Fort called
Albertus by his name, seeing that the siege in all show would be long.

The same day the Sea swelled so high as the approches and defenses coming
from the Westdownes, toward the Town, yea and those beyond toward the South,
were all covered with water, so as the Soldiers were forced to recover the
nearest sand downs: the water was half a league about the Town from the
East to the West downs. The Archdukes men forced to retire by the tide.
The English-mens trenches were in like sort full of water, being forced to
save themselves upon the highest ground. The Townes-men likewise expected this,
believing (as it fell out afterward) that it would make the enemy retire.

The 17. of August the Archdukes men advanced their trenches from the West
toward the Porke espike nearer then they had done, so did they upon the South
toward the trenches of the English, laboring there in such sort as if they
would have planted all their batteries, and lodged themselves as near in a
manner as it was possible. 35000. canon shot against the town.
They had about the Town 50. great pieces of brass, and by that day they had
discharged 35000. Canon shot, and yet could never make breach, and those places
whereas the enemy (the tide being gone) might pass on dry foot were made
stronger then before the siege.

The same day one of the enemies soldiers fled away and came into the Town,
discovering unto them the enemies estate, and that they prepared to shoot
balls of wild fire into the Town, having a deseigne to assault the West
rauelin the which is under Helmont.

That day the enemy shot arrows with letters into the English quarter,
Letters shot into town with arrows.
promising ten stiuers a day to such as would serve him, the which they of the
Town did interpret, as if they had spent all their inventions and devises. The
tide did rise higher that day then before, The tide amazeth the towns men.
and did drown the plain country a league round about, and did overthrow
40. or 45. yardes of the East dike, which extends to the North, from the East
Port unto the old Town, the which did more amaze the besieged, then the
Archdukes power.

The eighteen of August the enemy approached within 20. or 24. yardes of the
West rauelin: at night there arrived a fleet of ten or eleven sail with
soldiers and all sorts of provision and victual, coming from England, and
some from Zeland, whereof some barks entered the Town by night without any
harm.

The 19. of August the Archdukes men planted by night two pieces of Canon in
their nearest trenches, the which they of the Town dismounted the night
following, and brake them in pieces with their Canon.

The same day the enemies camp on the East side was fortified with three
regiments, the which marched in view of the Town, with many Wagons and much
baggage: some said these were the troops which had been sent to the relief
of Berke upon the Rhin, but without any effect, the Cont of Buckquoy came with
them. This day as the former, the Canon played furiously on either side, and
some inhabitants and soldiers were hurt within the Town.

The enemy had begun to mine, but this invention succeeded not, they thought
the earth was not fit for it.

They turned a battery of seven or eight pieces against the West rauelin, the
which did usually shoot against the Sand-hill, finding they had prevailed
little: with an artificial bullet they fiered the commissarie of the victuals
lodging, the which was covered with straw, but it was soon relieved, and the
fire quenched.

In the night some soldiers issued forth, who passing along the nearest
trenches, slew four soldiers of the enemies, and brought away one prisoner,
who said that the enemy labored in a mine whether no man went, for that the
Colonel Don Catris had made a cabin from whence he never departed; right
against it in the nearest trenches to the Town, and that they had an intent to
give the Town an alarm upon the East, and to give an assault upon the West
part.

The 20. of August the enemy in the night advanced six yardes nearer to the
half Moon, unto a certain dike right against the Porke epike.

Those of the Town imagined that the Archduke would join all his batteries
together vopn his nearest trenches in the West dikes, without leaving any in
the rest,

The same day arrived 2000. 2000. English come into the Town.
Englishmen well appointed into the Town. The besieged shot furiously day and
night upon the dike, where the enemies were lodged to drive them away, fearing
that they would mine.

The 21. day, 50. or 60. soldiers made a Sallie out of the Town upon the
enemy, being lodged upon this dike, they slew some, but in the end by reason
of the great numbers that came to succor them, they were forced to retire.

The same day the enemies discharged all their artillarie, they of the Town
seeing therewith a great number of men upon the Downs, thought that the Duke
was there in person.

The 23. 20. Ensigns of French and other nations.
there arrived 50. or 60. sail from Zeland, and in them 20. Ensigns of
French, Walons, Scottish and Prisons.

The 24. of August they made a Sallie of 700. men, the which retired without
any great exploite.

The 25. some soldiers which had been two nights in Flanders, returned to the
Town and brought with them three prisoners, whereof the one was a
Cheese-monger of Bruges, the second of Procter of Dixmude, and the third a
pesant, whom they had taken upon the way betwixt Dixmude and Bruges, who said
there was small store of money in the army, Prisoners brought into the Town.
and that the Merchants of Bruges were out of hope to see the Town taken, the
siege whereof had all ready (in their opinions) cost as much as all Flanders
might be worth.

They said also that the Archduke (to defend himself against the sudden
sallies of them of the town) The Archdukes invention.
had caused to be laid at the nearest retrenchment, long plankes full of great
nails the points upward, to run into their feet that should assail him:
And for that it rained that day there was little shooting on either side, but
toward night the whether growing clear they began in good earnest, yet the
enemy short no Bullets above nine, ten, or twelve pound weight.

The 26. of August, four corporals marching with a woman which had a child in
her arms, were all slain with one shot.

They of the Town finding that the enemy approached to come in the end to an
assault, prepared (amongst other things to receive them) a great number of
plankes, Invention for an assault.
to every one of which they did fasten twelve Muskets, the which by means of
an instrument of white Latten with a train of Poulder should discharge all at
once.

The 27. of August, the great Barks or Shipes of War in which there were
some Captains, entered the Gollet with full sails, the enemy shooting hard, but
he hurt no man.

The same day they of Ostend did write that having dug and cut a certain
piece of ground near unto the half Moon upon the West part, they had made a
new Gollet or mouth, so as there is a great Water the which makes a separation
betwixt the Town and the enemy, and takes from them all means to come to the
assault.

The 28. the Archdukes men began again to shoot into the Town fiery
Bullets and flints in their great Canon.

In the night the enemy repaired their trenches and began then at the half
Moon, which had been abandoned, but they lodged not in the Town at this time.

The 29. of August, eight hundreed men of the troops of the Lord of
Chastillion came into the Town.

The Archdukes men raised up a little plat-forme on the East side of the
downs declining toward the South, to plant two or three Canons thereon, (as
a prisoner said) to shoot at the ships that went in and out.

They shoot also furiously at a little sluice which is in the Counterscarfe,
along the Porke-espike, so as they of the Town were resolved to stop it up,
but in the end they found the Canon could not hit it being placed so high.

The same day entered into the Town with their coullors flying, the rest of the
soldiers who the 23. day by reason of a tempest were forced to return into
Zeland: there were three prisoners also brought into the Town.

There came an advise from Callis, that the enemies began to faint, and yet
notwithstanding the Archduke kept the Flemings still in hope, and said that he
would undermine the Town, the which is impossible by reason of the Dike we
have spoken of before.

This day an English fugitive was taken again and presently hanged. There came
also 60. or 70. sail out of Zeland laden with munition and victuals.

The 30. day, about 25. of these ships entered by night into the gollet, and
without any danger passed into the Towne-ditch. There came also another fleet
of 16. or 17. sail laden with munition and victuals.

The enemies had near unto their fortifications on the East part four great
barks, from whence a canon shot pierced through one of the Town Galleis: they
would gladly with those have taken some ship in the Fleet, but they durst not
venture them.

The last of August in the night, a Fleet of about 32. sail laden with
munition and victuals, entered the Town without any loss, except one Bark
laden with Bauins, the which was shot betwixt wind and water. They may safely
harbor two hundred ships in the new Port, which striking their Mastes, cannot
be seen nor hurt by the enemy.

One of the enemies camp flying into the Town, said that the soldiers were
not well paid, and yet the Archduke was resolute to have the Town,
whatsoever it cost him, and that there were yet about 20000. men in his army.

An English Captain who was also Sargent Mayor, going the round with Colonel
Horatio Vere, was slain with a Canon shot.

As for the form of the siege and Archdukes camp it was as follows. The
form of the siege and of the Archdukes camp.


The Archduke has made his trenches on the West part toward the Palissadoes
of the half Moon, the which the water has since pierced through and
ouer-flowne.

There are besides six or eight trenches one after another upon the
west-downes some higher then others, all well made with Sand and Fagots, and
further into the country upon the side of the West-downes, his trenches
stretch unto Cow-bridge, the which is above 300. yardes, along the which there
are diverse Bulwarks planted with Canon: these trenches are betwixt the Town
and the trenches of the English, and the two Fortes called Grossendurst and
Isabella. The South end of his long trenches, ends at the channel which goes to
Grossendurst and Isabella, and from thence to Bruges, and so through the
country.

At the end of these trenches which go from the South about a 100. yardes
toward the West, betwixt Grossendurst and the English trenches, they have
built a Forte high and thick, on the which they have planted three Canons.

Upon the Southe near the channel and causey of Ipre, they have another
trenche, the which stretches from this channel to the South South-east, and
so returns to the East to a large and deep Marish, which has been made by
succession of time, and so goes into the Sea: There they have likewise two or
three Canons which play upon the town on the South side.

Upon the South and South-west of this trench they have another trenche of a
150. yardes long; the which going toward the Fort of La Pierre, along the
which there is a low ground, that is sometimes full of water, by the which the
boats that bring them victuals must pass.

Just upon the West they have brought great stoare of Sand and bows, within a
stones cast of the ditches and counterscarfe. Upon the East they have fortified
upon the downs, and have made a platform of sand and Bows at the foot of
the Downs, on the which they have placed some pieces, the which they have done
upon the shore to annoy the ships that went in and out of the gollet or
mouth, which pieces were before upon the downs.

The first of September, a Captain came to Midlebourgh with five prisoners, to
present them to his Excellency: they said the enemy did not shoot so
furiously as he had done, and that the breach near the half Moon was five
yardes wide and deep enough, without any annoyance to the Town: and yet the
enemy had made no means to stop it, but had only gathered together a great
quantity of Bows, yet by the opinion of the besieged, they might easily have
done it, for that at a low water it is not above four foot deep. They have
also planted their gabions along their trenches the which is upon the Seaside,
and goes right against the old Port or Haven: and for fear that they should be
overthrown or carried away with the Sea, they have tied them together with
strong Cables and chains of Iron to plant a battery there of Field-peeces to
command the North-hauen.

The 8. of September a Gentleman of Don Catris train yielded himself into the
Town, whom his master the day before had struck on the head in
Albertus-forte, and left for dead: he said that Don Catris (who had the
command of the army) had an intent to give an assault to the West-rauelin, the
which is above that breach whereof we have spoken, with many engines and
Ladders of Iron. It was then our Ladies birthday, who would not have been
pleased with so bloody a sacrifice, and the slaughter of so many men.

But when we shall consider the preparations which they of the Town had made
to receive them, we can never be sufficiently amazed at the enemies blindness,
who without any likelihood of good success, hazard the poor Soldiers, and
lead them without pity to the slaughter, the which may justly be called the
rage of furious beasts, that run without all reason or consideration to their
deaths, and in steed of victory reap nothing but dishonor. The usual
means to take a place besieged, has been by Mines, Sap, or Breach, and
when that could not prevail, to cut of their victuals and to famish them,
wherein the Spaniards have yet prevailed nothing.

And to the end the reader may more easily conceive what the enemy had done to
come to the assault, he must understand that he had approached as near upon
the West side as was possible, else he must win the half Moon, the which is
before Sand-hill, but betwixt him and it is the Port, the which is sometimes
full of water, and sometimes dry, where he must of force take a counter-scarpe
betwixt the half Moon and the Bulwark, or else at a low ebb to assault
this Bulwark, as the assault given in January following showed that it was
their desseigne: but as it was exceeding difficult, so could it not succeed
well. From the beginning of the siege unto this day the enemy has still
battered this Bulwark furiously, and there were so many thousands of bullets
in it, as some would have undertaken to have made it new for the Bullets: and
yet the enemy could not make a breach; the Bulwark is a little disfigured,
so as a man unarmed and without any opposition might mount up, but a man armed
could not by any means, for that it is like unto a mount of Sand, and very
steepie, from whence they should fall rather then advance a foot: besides they
must force seven Palisadoes, made of great Piles, which are within the Port,
one a Musket shot from another, all which they must break before they come
to the foot of the Bulwark, then in the way as they mount there are certain
mines to blow up: and in passing the Musketeers of the half Moon, and of the
counterscarfe would so welcome them, as many of them would forget to return
unto their camp: moreover there are 13. Canons hidden in the counterscarfe and
other places, charged with chains and pieces of Iron to scour the place: In
the mean time the tide comes, whereunto they must yield or be utterly lost,
the which happened in the like sort at the assault of January in the year
1602. Notwithstanding all these great difficulties, no advise of the old
Captains, (who had considered of it,) could prevail against the obstinacy of
the States of Flanders; who notwithstanding all this, have promised 300000.
Flemish crowns monthly for this siege: and 100000. crowns when the Camp
should be lodged before the Town, a 100000. crowns when the canon should be
planted in battery, and 100000. when a breach should be made, and 300000.
crowns when it were taken. It may be they believed that (trying their
fortune,) there might chance some unexpected accident, which might cause a
success that all the Captains had not dreampt of, but the success was
contrary to their expectations, for if we consider the new fortifications of
the English, and the breaches which the Sea makes daily, ouerflowing and
breaking the little dummell dike, we shall find the place stronger then before
the siege.

The forts which the English men have made upon the South, are divided from the
Town, and as hard to take as the other.

The Archduke had great reason to swear (as his fugitives said) that he would
not go from the table before they had served him, for the besieged have laid
a wager that they will give it him so hot as they will burn his fingers.

This Gentle man of Don Catris said, that there were already about 3000.
soldiers slain before the Town, besides Pioners, and above two thousand hurt.

The 10. The Lord of Castillion slain.
of September, the Lord of Chastillon (being upon the high Bulwark of
Sand-hill) with Colonel Vchtenbruch a Scottish Liuetenant, and other Gentlemen
and men of command, at two of the clock afternoon had his head struck of
with a Canon shot above the teeth, his brains flew against the left cheek
of Colonel Vehten ruch, and made him to reele a little, the Scottish
Lieutenant was also grievously hurt.

These be ordinary accidents in war, neither is the the besieger any thing
more free from them then the besieged, the greater then the less, the strong
and valiant, then the feeble and weak.

That night 30. ships came into the Town, and a greater number were daily
coming, the which stayed at Flesingue for fair weather to weigh Anchor and
set sail.

The 14. of September also in the night there entered 23. or 24. sail more,
laden with victuals and munition, after the which the enemy shot furiously,
but by reason of a cloud and miste which did rise, they could not hitte nor
hurt any one, whereupon they ceased.

A fugitive of the enemies said, that there were many sick men in the Camp,
and that the Italians newly come out of Sauoye dyed by heaps; that the Canon
from the Town did every day kill many men, that the Soldiers fled from the
army by troops, and that many more would go, if the horsemen kept not good
guarde abroad, and that it was to be feared, that if the men of war were
long held in this constraint, being ill paid, they would mutine.

The 15. of September the enemy shot almost all night fiery Bullets and Flints
into the Town, the which the besieged returned unto them again in the same
coin.

The enemy had then but 16. pieces of Canon before the Town, The estate of
the besieger.
they had sent all the rest to diverse strong places, except fourteen which
they had sent to Nieuport to be new cast, for that they had been spoiled and
broken by the Canon of the Town. They had likewise sent away part of their
troops, and those which remained in the army stood in the water throughout
all their trenches.

At the same time were surprised sundry letters from The Flemings out of hope
to take Ostend.
men of quality of Bruges and other parts of Flanders, which showed that they
had lost all hope to take Ostend, and that the Flemings were much afflicted,
and yet notwithstanding the brute was that the Archduke would by no means
heat speak of raising the siege, how long soever it did continue, or
whatsoever it did cost.

The night before, the Duke of Holstein or Holsatia, brother to the King of
Denmark, and the Earl of Hohenlo, entered the town with eight or nine sail,
wherein their baggage was and some Poulder: they continued there two nights and
two days, and then returned to Middlebourgh without any annoiance or loss.

There came oftentimes men of quality both from Many of quality go to see
Ostend.
England and France, to see the place and the siege, but they stayed not.

There went out also 18. or 20. ships without any harm, but one that was sunk
and an anchor broake.

The Archdukes men made a half Moon or platform in their trenches that are
upon the South at the foot of the Sand-downes, meaning to plant six Canons
thereon to batter the West-rauelin, under the West Bulwark, where the besieged
wrought daily to make it higher and stronger.

The same day as the two former they did not shoot so much as they were
accustomed, the which seemed very strange unto the besieged.

The Noblemen whereof we have formerly spoken, went the same day with the
Governor and Colonels of Ostend, to see the fortifications of the Town, and
the enemies trenches which are about it. The enemy shot 25. or 30. Canon shot
at one vollee, against the South corner of Sand-hill, and brake a little bridge
set upon the corner to pass unto the False-Bray, which having done, they
ceased, whereby they might well see that they meant to give an assault, and to
take away all that might annoy them.

There went some out of the Town with Loapestaues, which brought in a Spanish
Lieutenant prisoner, who said, that many dyed in their Camp, and that many
fled daily, and more would fly, if the Horsemen in guard (which scoured all
the passages to the ampe,) did not hinder them, as has been formerly said.

There was also made a new Haven at the mouth or gollet, A new Haven at Ostend.
whereby the ships entered with less hazard and were more safe.

They built many houses in Albertus-fort, and round about, so as it might well
be compared to a little town, they thought the Archduke would make a Port or
Haven of the Sluice which is near, to use it instead of that of Ostend.

The 18. of September there entered about 24. sail into the Town, laden with
munition, victuals, bows, piles, stakes, plankes, and with diverse instruments
and commodities, and they went forth by the gollet without any hurt or loss.

The same day they discharged thrice all the Canons, Muskets and small shot
of the Town, in honor of the Queen of Englands birthday: this thundering put
the enemy in alarm, who presently began to shoot their fiery Bullets and
Flints into the Town, to the which the besieged like men of honor and
resolution failed not to reply.

They of the town having placed some Canons betwixt the uttermost Piles and
the Rampart which looks to the enemies Camp, and bends toward the Sea, were
the cause that the Sea swallowed up and carried away part of the ground, so as
the opening or the breach of the little Tummel dike grew greater daily.

The 19. General Vere being cured of his hurt, General Vere returned to the
Town.
returned into the Town.

Almost all this night the enemy shot fiery Bullets and Flints into the
Town, but without any effect.

About ten or eleven of the clock, when the tide went out, they of the town
(to the number of 200.) made a sallie upon the Sands, to fire certain Gabions,
but being too green or wet, it would not take, where they lost one Soldier,
and brought home ten or twelve hurt: in the mean time the enemies trenches
were fraught with shot, and their Horsemen were upon the Seashore, whether the
Canon from the Sand-hill shot furiously, being a clear Moone-light.

At the break of day General Vere sent forth certain adventurers to the
war, to take some one of the enemies, who returned about two hours after
noone, bringing with them two Wallons which they had taken in the army, who
said that the East quarter of the camp had been fortified with the regiment of
Asincourt, wherein were 900. men, but they were ill paid.

The same afternoon, the adventurers or fributers brought in a Germane
prisoner, who (besides that which they understood of the two wallons) said
that the reason why they had fortified the Camp on the East side, was for that
they expected the Archduke there, and that they had prepared a great number of
bridges upon wheels, and many great sackes full of Sand, to stop the mouth,
or at the least the opening or hole upon the West, and that they had tried this
invention at the Sluices and found it good, and therefore they had caused a
great number of these sackes to be made throughout all Flanders. And that upon
the East there was great store of Bows, great stones and many tumbrelles, to
build a fort according to the advice of the Ingeners. And he said also that
the Archduke had caused a Fourrier or Harbinger, a volontarie Gentleman, and a
Corporal, to be put in prison, The Archdukes rigor.
for saying that in their opinions the Town was not ready to be taken, and
that they were in danger to be hanged: that the Spaniards were wonderfully
incensed against them of Bruges, as having (above all other) pursued the siege
of Ostend, saying they were all traitors to the king of Spain and to the
Archduke.

The 20. of September, The Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord of Kessel,
came to Ostend.
the Earl of Northumberland an English man came to Ostend, with the Lord of
Kessel, brother to the Lord of Lockeren, one of whose servants had his arm
shot off with a Canon.

The same day the enemies did raise and fortify their nearest trenches toward
the Polder of the English.

The 21. of September, there entered 14. ships more into the Town with victuals
and munition, at whom the enemy made many a shot but could not hit any.

The same day the besieged had eight pieces of Canon sent them out of Zeland,
and they sent back some that were spoiled.

The 22. a Burges of Scluse came to Flessingue, who brought news of the siege
of Ostend: saying that the Archduke was resolved not to abandon it until he
had taken it, although he were the last, and should loose himself there: and
that the Soldiers were very ill paid, and might happily mutine: and that the
country six leagues round about, was spoiled and undone; and that the
Soldiers were up to the knees in water in their trenches, and had made little
banks to sit upon, and to keep their arms dry, and that all the Hospitalles
of Flanders, Brabant, Lisle, and all the neighbor Towns were full of hurt
men, which were in all seven thousand at the least.

The same day there came toward night eight sail more into the Town, with
munition and victuals, at whom the Archdukes men did not shoot, being not
able to see them by reason of the darkness.

The 23. of September it was written from Ostend, that Colonel Vehtenbruche had
been slain in the English quarter with a Musket shot the night before, which
struck him in the back and came out at his throat: and that a little before
a French Captain named Pomerade, had likewise been slain with a Musket in
the head.

The same day there entered two ships by the mouth or gollet, laden with all
kind of Munition and victualles, and two Dromlers laden with bows: the same
night the enemy brought great store of bows upon the East Side under the
Fortes, laboring very much betwixt the Catteyes and Reisern-heubt; they
brought also upon the South a great number of Wagons laden with bows, as if
they meant to stay there ten years.

On the other side they of the Town labored as earnestly in the English
trenches, upon the West and Southside of the Town, Fortification of the
besieged.
and joined them together with certain forts, that is, with the Boulwarke
which is within the Polder without the Town, and the two abandoned trenches
with the half Moon, the which is before the trenches on the west part, so as
these four pieces were made all one, without all danger of water in Winter.

The English trench upon the West was made stronger and thicker, and also more
advanced toward the South and North, even unto the causie (the which is about
50. or 60. foot long) where before it was open, so as the enemy might easily
shoot upon the Polder Bridge, and did commonly hurt and kill some soldiers.

The half Moon on the West side was joined with Cattey fort, to the West
trench with a Ditch and Piles, and Iron pikes before it, so as this half Moon
was exceeding strong.

Those of the Town placed two Canons in the casemate, the which is betwixt the
West Boulwarke and Helmont, to batter the enemies trenches, right against the
Porke-espicke, the enemy did all he could to dismount and break them, and in
the end they drew down a double Canon against the Porke-espike, and from
thence played upon these two pieces, but they shot so furiously from the Town,
as the enemy was forced to cease his battery being broken: after that the
enemy brought down two other pieces, upon the waters side, which runs by
the little broken ditche, with the which they shot against a Palisadoe which
they of the Town had made round about the Porke-espike, to defend the foot of
this fortification, least the force of the water should carry it away: those of
the Town having discovered their desseigne, played upon this battery from
Sand-hill, and the False-Bray, which is under Helmont, and from the West-port,
so as they were forced to cease.

About noone, a Frenchman of the enemies army came and yielded himself into
the Town, where he had sometimes served: Conut Bucquoy made Lieutenant
general to the Archduke.
He said that Count Boucquoy had been made Lieutenant general in the place of
Don Catris, and that they without made a chain to carry upon boats from the
Old-hauen, thinking therewith to do some great exploite being in their power.
The same day a Mariner and a Soldier fled out of the Town to the enemy.

The 24. of September, a Soldier of Lorraine came from the enemies camp into
the Town, who said that many Soldiers fled from the camp, and that they were
out of hope to take the Town, and that those of the Town did so annoy them
with their Canon, as the company under which he was (being at the first a
hundred and ten men) was reduced to 40. both by reason of the Town Canon, as
of such as were run away for want of pay.

That night three Ships with a Bark entered the Town, being laden with
victuals, at whom the enemy discharged some vollees of Canon shot, and slew in
one of them a woman with a child.

They brought out of the English trenches into the Town 22. men slain and
hurt by the enemies Canon, which shot among them that labored.

Upon the West side they discoured great store of Bows, Trees, and such like
things, which the enemy caused to be brought in Carts.

Upon the West-Bulwarke of the town they planted a new battery with defenses
about it, to play upon the enemies trenches, and upon their battetie which was
below betwixt Reisernheubt and the Cateis.

They also made an other battery upon the entry of the Haven in the new
Town, along the bridge by which they pass, from whence they played upon the
Cateys, to dislodge the enemies shot which played upon the Soldiers, and
others that were in the False Bray, and made great slaughter of them: thus they
daily changed their counter-batteries, as the enemy altered his batteries; the
enemy did not play so whotly with his Canon as he had done, but sought only to
spoil them of the Town with his Musket shot.

The enemy came to view a trenche that was fallen, the which his Excellency had
caused to be made the year before, upon the South and East side to defend the
ships entering by the gollet and the East-port.

The 25. of September, a ship laden with plankes was cast away, yet all the men
were saved: there entered some others into the town, at whom the enemy shot
but hit no man.

In the morning the enemy shot some fiery Bullets and Flint-stones into the
Town, but they ceased by reason of a great Rain. About ten or eleven of the
clock did rise a great Northern wind, the which on the East Side by the
gollet, and on the West by the little broken dike did drive great abundance of
waters up into the Country, so as the enemies trenches were so full as they
were forced to fly from them to their Platformes and Caualiers, the which they
had raised along their trenches, whereupon their Canon was planted: which they
of the town seeing ran up to the Ramparts, crying; Charge, charge: General
Vere having intelligence thereof, commanded presently that they should shoot
among them, so as many of the enemies Soldiers were slain.

A little Gallie of Zeland striving to enter by day into the Town, had her
Maste broken with a Canon shot, and was in danger to run on ground, the
enemy shot furiously at them, and killed a Mariner: in the end the Galley
entered the Town without any more harm.

The water before mentioned, carried away part of the enemies trenches right
against the Porke-espike, without doing any harm to the Town.

The 26. of September they shot fiercely on either side.

That day the enemies trenches were still full of water, and the breach of the
little dike was risen the night before, and their battery betwixt the Cateys
and Re^sern-heubt was much indamaged: the country was ouer-flowed a good
league about the town, so as their forts from the South to the West were all
environed with water, that is Colombie, La pierre S. Iean, Isabella and
Grossendurst: besides this the new Fortes at Cowebridge, and all the trenches
from the West unto Cowebridge, and so to the South and East, even unto the
great marrish and behind it were covered with water, along which tre^ches they
had made diverse plat-formes, whereon they had planted some Canons, whether the
soldiers retired themselves, and during these great waters they could not go
one unto another, these ouerflowings were usual unto them every new and full
Moon.

The enemy did also make a new fort at the foot of the East downs, planting
some Canon there to shoot at the ships, the which must pass toward the
South before they could enter into the Town ditches, by reason of the length
of the haue^. They had made two other batteries before upon the East, there is
one upon the North at the foot of the downs, to shoot at the ships when
occasion serves, before they come into the Haven or under the Town; the other
is upon the West at the foot of the West downs: and this new battery is 25.
or 30. yardes Southward of the downs, as far from the Town as the rest, and
all are made to shoot at the ships when they pass by the South to enter into
the Haven.

The same day the enemy played from the West upon the Town with 18. Canons,
and from the South with two, and on the East side, from whence with one only
Canon shot they did some hurt.

The Town was much indamaged by the tide before mentioned, in the false Braie
of Sand-hill, in the old dike of the Sea, which is of the North side of the
old Town, and in the dike of the East Sea; but by the wisdom of the
confederate Provinces, there are always worke-men within the Town which have
charge to repair all breaches of the Sea, and there is also good provision of
stuff fit for that purpose, the which is very well appointed for the
preservation of the Town.

The 27. of September, the wind was some thing laid, whereupon the waters did
fall a little, and did no more harm to the Town: but without, there were many
trenches and fortifications broken: that day the Canon did not play on either
side but only Musket shot.

All night the 28. of September, the Archdukes men shot many fiery Bullets and
Flint stones into the Town, and certain little vessels full of Nails and
Bullets chained together, with such like things, whereof one fell behind the
Governors lodging, and burst against a wall, making a noise as if it had been
full of devils, but it hurt no man.

The prisoners said that their men thought to kill a hundred men at a time with
this invention.

All the enemies trenches were broken and open, the water was within and
without, and they were forced by reason of the water to abandon the trench
nearest to the Porke-espike.

Those of the Town made a new piece at the North-east corner of the Bulwark,
to plant two pieces which were upon the mouth of the Raye, in the new Town to
entertain the enemies Muskitiers which lie in Rayheubten when it is dry.

The 29. of September, at night the great Constable of the Hargubuziers was
slain, and betwixt the day and the night, there were 40. men slain and hurt;
and for that the wind held North-east, and North-west sixe-dayes together so
as no ships could get out of the Haven, there were three hundred hurt and sick
in the ships to go into Zeland.

That night the enemy shot furiously into the Town with fiery Bullets, and in
the morning they dismounted one of the Town Canons which was upon Sand-hill,
the which hurt seven or eight men, whereof Master Henry one of the chief
Canoniers was one. The enemies trenches were still full of Water, and by reason
of the wind no man went into the Town, nor out by Sea.

The 30. of Septemher, as they set the watch, fire took the Poulder at the
rauelin of the Porke-espike, which spoiled six English men and hurt many
others.

The same day, the Smith of the Town advancing too far (being drunk) was
slain.

The same day also, came four English Ships laden with victuals, whereof one
entered the Town by the Gollet, the other three (by reason of the great Wind,)
were forced to pass on and to recover Zeland, and so did all the Ships of
war.

The Archduke had drawn much money from them of Flanders for the siege of
Ostend, and had done all they could to take it, as has been showed: but in
the beginning of October (according to the opinion of the Counsel of War,
and the admonitions of most of the Towns of the low Countries) The Archduke
resolves to raise the siege.
they had resolved to raise the siege from Ostend, and to keep Garrisons in the
fortes, but whilst that Winter lasted: the Flemmings advertised hereof sent the
Bishops of Gaunt, Bruges and Ypre with some other men of quality unto them,
who went to Niewport casting themselves at their highness feet, and showing
them the great misery and desolation where-into the Country of Flanders
should fall if Ostend were not taken, the which they laid open unto them with
many patheticall reasons, the which moved their highnesses (contrary to
their first resolution) to promise by the faith of Princesses, not to forsake
the siege, and that they would try all means possible to bring the enterprise
to good effect, so as they might be succored by them of Flanders, the which the
deputies promised to do to the uttermost of their powers and to that end they
would give six hundred thousand Crowns more besides the six hundred thousand
Crowns promised the fourth of July, and upon the conditions specified in the
letters of consent which were then drawn, and that without any diminution of
the tribute of ninety thousand crowns monthly, the which they had already
paid many months.

And to satisfy the curious reader I have added hereunto the letters of the
fourth of July, containing the above mentioned conditions.

Most gracious Princess and Lady. Most gracious Prince and Lord.
THe Clergy and four members of your Highness country and County of
Flanders, having heard a proposition of half a denier of the hundred, made
unto them in your behalf in the city of Bruges the 4. of July last past,
they together with the Knights, towns and Castles of the said country, with
all the heads and commons, every one in his quarter, do humbly thank your
Highnesses of the good inclination they show by effect, to the prosperity and
freedom of this miserable country so worthy of compassion, by the enterprise
they have now in hand; assuring themselves that the Almighty God will bless
it, and will give it a good end, to the ease of the poor commons miserably
vexed for these many years, and to the increase of the name, honor, and glory
of your Highness. And although by reason of former impositions, and the
poverty of the country, they may well excuse themselves of the demand made
unto them by the said proposition: yet to show the singular and great zeal and
good will they have to assist your Highnesses with this last money, and with
all their power and strength; they have consented and offer by these presents
to pay 600000. Flemish crowns, the one moitie before, and the rest after the
siege of Ostend, to be employed as it is mentioned in the proposition, and with
the conditions, precautions and reseruations specified in the letters of
consent: And first that the demand of 600000. crowns, bearing date the 24. of
February last past, shall remain by means of this present consent void and
of no effect.

Item that the managing and distribution of the said 600000. crowns shall
remain with them, as an imposition of the first demand upon every fire, and
shall be made by such persons as they shall choose and put in trust: and
more-ouer upon the said sum there shall be deducted all such money as has
been and is daily disbursed for diverse stuffes and works, and also for
Mariners, Carpenters, Sawers of Plankes and other workmen, and generally for
all such as are employed in the like things in the camp, and that according to
the declaration taxed, and the estimation of them of Flanders.

In like sort there shall be a good deduction made unto them out of the said
sum, of the interests or rents paid, or to be paid, for money which they
have borrowed for the advancement of this business and exploite of war.

Moreover there shall be abated what they have disbursed and furnished weekly,
and what they shall disburse for the contribution and entertainment of the
mutined Soldiers being in garrison in Isabella forte, with that which depends
thereon.

The said Estates of Flanders humbly beseech your Highnesses, that it would
please you to accept and take in good part this their consent, and be well
pleased with them in regard thereof, without requiring any further succoures
for their exploite, and believe that herein they have exceeded, taking upon
them a burden exceeding their forces, in giving the said sum besides the
ordinary contribution of 90. thousand Crowns a Month. They humbly beseech
your Highness to do them so much grace, as presently after the taking of
Ostend, to free the country from soldiers, except only such as shall be
necessary for the garrisons on the frontiers, to the end they may have means
to free themselves of the great debts wherewith they stand charged by reason
of the exploite.


Their Highnesses answer.
THeir Highnesses having a private dispatch made unto them, containing the
consent of the Clergy, and four members of Flanders, do take their
conclusion in good part upon the preposition made unto them in their Highnesses
names, and are well pleased with the affection they show, and have always
showed unto their service, and do accept the consent and offer made by them of
the sum of 600000. Crowns, instead of the half denier of the hundred which
they had demanded, to be paid according to the conditions contained in the
letters of the said consent; to which effect their Highnesses do give full
power and commandment to every one whom it may concern to conform
themselves and obey: and will that Letters Pattents be granted unto them, such
as shall be needful for to make the levy. They do also grant and agree,
that out of the said sum according to the supplication of the Clergy, and
the four members: the money disbursed by them shall be deducted, or shall be
disbursed for this exploit, namely in Mariners, Watermen, Carters, Carpenters,
or any other handy-crafts men, and generally all those that serve the Camp in
such like things, or that depend thereon, according to the declaration and
reasonable tax and estimation of the Clergy, and four above named members,
and in like sort, whatsoever they shall disburse for the contribution of the
mutined Soldiers of Isabella fort, remaining only upon their charge, and what
they have formerly paid upon this occasion.

They declare also, that they hope this desseigne shall come to a happy end,
before that all this money be employed, and that their meaning is not to charge
the country any more: yet they expect that as for their parts they will never
abandon them, so they will do the like in case necessity requires, and that
they will not leave this work imperfect: they promise also to discharge the
Province from all men of war, but such as shall be needful to arm the
Frontiers.

Given at the Camp before Ostend, the 10. day of August 1601. Signed Isabella,
Albertus, and underneath, Vasseur.


Although this sum of 600000. Crowns was to be paid at two times: that is;
the one half ready down, and the other after the taking of Ostend, yet their
Highnesses made this demand presently, which follows.

The Archdukes.
Reverent and worthy Lords and fathers in God well beloved and faithful, well
beloved and wise, having understanding that the 300000. crowns which you have
granted, and were levied to be employed in the necessities of the siege, are
almost all spent, as well in the two stiuers a day which is given to every
soldier for his service, as in worke-men, Wagons, Ships, Fagots, and other
like stuff, and that of necessity we must continue, we have thought good (for
fear least the work begun, should quail) to entreat you by these our
letters, to assist us with the other three hundred thousand crowns remaining,
the which you have promised us after the taking of Ostend: seeing that we
mean not to employ it elsewhere, but in the foresaid affairs, and that you
may be assured that our intention is not to raise the siege nor to depart from
hence, before we have taken the place by the grace of God, whom we pray to
have you in his holy keeping, given at the Camp before Ostend, in August. 1601.

Signed Isabella, Albertus, and underneath Vasseur.


The superscription was. To the reverend and worthy Lords and fathers in God,
our well-beloved, faithful and wise, the Clergy and four members of our
Country and County of Flanders, as commanding there.

The Clergy and four members of Flanders yield to this demand, and for the
speedy leauying of this sum they writ unto the Towns and Castelles in manner
following.

Honorable and wise, etc. Although the issue of the desseigne begun against
Ostend, grows more long then we did think or expect, notwithstanding, not to
suffer so commendable an enterprise of their excellencies to be ruinated, and
suddenly to loose all the advantage and expense that has been made so
freely, it is necessary that your Lordships according unto that which we have
granted upon the serious demand, which has been made unto us by their
highnesses, that you leauie with all speed, and hold ready the other Moitie of
your parts taxed of the some of 600000. crowns granted by us, and that you
deliver it into the hands of our commissaries in your quarter, at the latest
by the fifteen of September next coming as much as you hold dear and desire
to see a good issue of this enterprise, to our peace and prosperity, and fail
not herein for any excuse or pretext whatsoever, etc. At Bruges the 30. of
August, 1601. and underneath.

Your Lordships good friends, the Clergy and four members of the County of
Flanders, under written. F. de Grotte,


Let us return to our siege.

THe first of October, the enemy shot fiery Bullets and Stones into the
Town, and in the morning again more furiously, so as a fiery Bullet faling
behind a Burgesses house, set fire of a barrel of Poulder, the which burnt
all the house, and no man knows how that Poulder came there. The week before
two Merchants of Poulder, buying Poulder of the soldiers which they had
stolen, and sold it for little or nothing, were taken and punished, the one
who was a Burgeois was banished the Town for three years, the other who was a
Mariner was fined at 18. crowns to the poor.

The breach of the little dike grew still more large and deep, by which did
pass a great quantity of Water up into the Country, the which did much hinder
the enemies desseigne.

The Archdukes men labored earnestly to carry fagots from their battery
which was nearest to the town unto Alberts fort.

The 2. of October, there went out of the Town by night about 60. sails,
whereof some had attended eight days, and were kept in by ill weather, but
then they went all out without any hurt.

Those of the Town made hollow a ditch to cause the Water of the Gollet to
take a right course toward the enemies trenches, the which came beating
against their Counter-scarfe, which work was made by 60. soldiers, every of
the which did gain a Doller a day.

The Earl of Northumberland went out of the Town by night with some others,
the Bourge-maister and officer of the Town went with him into Zeland, to
recover stuff to repair the works which were broken.

The 3. of October, there entered thirty four ships into Ostend by the
Gollet, upon whom the enemy discharged above seventy shot, but they only slew
but one Mariner, and hurt some others, and tore their sails. There were three
laden with Poulder, some with Bauins, and other stuff fit for fortification,
the rest with munition and victualles, and with three double and eight demie
Canons; there remained yet five ships without, toward the South under the the
Sea dike, to stay for more Water at night: right against these ships there was
a little dike broken wherein they of the Town labored all the could to stop
it, upon whom the enemy played furiously both from the East and the South, but
the Bullets flue over them.

About noone the enemy did beat in pieces the bridge which went betwixt the
Polder and the West trenches of the English, so as they of the Town were
forced to make a longer, to go from the Polder to the English quarter.

Captain Nicholas Van-den Lier, was by them of the Town made general of the
Artillery, in the place of Vchtenbruch.

The same day there came great store of money into the Town for the payment of
the soldiers and other necessities.

The fourth day, the five Ships whereof we have spoken, were still at the
mouth of the Haven for want of Water, the enemy shot continuallye upon them
but they hurt no man.

There were also two ships ready to depart from the Town, but they could not
stir for the same reason.

The night before a small English bark was sunk, the which lay at Anchor in
the Gollet on the Southside of the Town.

At the break of day they made a Sallie of 500. men out of the Town on the
South-west side upon Cow-bridge, where they took two half Moons from the
enemy, who fled away: they slew thirty six, and brought away ten prisoners.
Of those of the Town an English' Captain had his leg shot off, and two
French Captains with some seven or eight Soldiers were hurt; but seeing that
above 2000. of the enemies came upon them, they retired themselves in time,
bringing many Cassockes and Spanish Hattes into the Town.

About noone Count Frederick Vanden Berg, set fire on all his lodgings, and
went with his troops to Alberts forte, they of the town thought it was to
fortify their trenches upon the West-downes against their Sallies.

The Prisoners of whom we spoke, which were Burgonions, said, that when his
Highness came before Ostend he had 9000. foot, and 1500. horse, and that
since there were 5000. more come unto him, but now they were not above 8000.
and that they were in great want, and many sick, and that many fled by reason
of the bad pay, for every Soldier had but two stiuers a day and a loaf and a
half, and sometimes they received not a penny in three weeks.

The 5. of October there entered 8. ships by the gollet, whereof two were shot
through and greatly indomaged by the Canon, for that they stayed too long at
the entry of the Haven, yet there was but one man slain.

That night the enemy shot fiery Bullets and stones into the Town, without
any great hurt doing, by day they shot likewise against the English tre^ches
and the Poulder, where they of the Town labored, whereof they hurt some: a
Canon shot beat in pieces a planke which a soldier carried upon his shoulder,
without hurting him.

The regiment of Cont Frederick descended to the Sand downs midway betwixt
the Town and Alberts fort.

The 6. day, the enemy shot not against the Town on the East side, but only
brought certain stuff to make some work, and about noone they did see them
carry many Bauins to the next fort or half Moon, into their trenches near
unto the English trenches, toward Cow-bridge: about the same time the
Sargeant-Maiors Liuetenant was slain upon the West Boulwarke.

The 7. of October, the enemy shot furiously with their fiery bullets and
stones into the Town from morning until night.

The same night, they discharged all the Canons in the Town, with many vollees
of small shot, for joy of the birth of the French Kings son.

That day toward night a small English bark was lost being laden with Bear
and victuals, having stroke against the piles right against the old town,
yet all the men were saved, and that night there entered two ships into the
Town laden with victuals.

The 8. of October, they without raised up a new Plat-forme and battery on
the East Side toward the South at the foot of the downs, the which
aduanceth toward the Haven, to plant four Canons thereon, (as they might
discern by the Canoniers) to annoy the ships, they labored not all that day
on the West part; after dinner they slew three men within the Town with one
great shot, and hurt many.

The 9. of October, they without shot vehemently into the Town with their fiery
Bullets and flints, and hurt some soldiers in the day and night.

At night about 25. sail, entered into the Town by the Gollet, with munition
and victualles, and five Ships with some Barks went forth: the enemy shot
above sixty Canon shot after them, but could not annoy them.

They without brought the battery or plat-forme which they had begun upon the
East, three yardes nearer, but they did not yet shoot from it.

The 10. day they of the Town discovered that the enemy had labored much in
their fort, which is betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern heubt, and that they had
made it very high and large under the Sands, or midway to the Port, as if they
had intended to make a Bulwark there.

There came a great Ship to the South-east of the port of the Town, the which
had lain there 14. days on ground, and could not stir for want of water,
there went out three or four Mariners to help to draw it from thence, but
whilst they were busy at their work the enemy came and slew one cruelly,
giving him above 40. wounds, and setting fire of the ship, the rest saved
themselves.

The same day a little English bark came toward the Port, but being a great
calm two of the enemies barks came to him with owers and took him, they of
the Town thought that this had bin done of purpose, for that the English and
the French might traffic freely in the enemies Camp.

Upon the East the enemy made a great trench on the East Side of their new
battery, and likewise along the South, stretching out right against that which
goes from the South to the North, at the East of their fort which is at the
downs, as if they meant to lodge some troops there: they began to work
there presentlye after the flight of a French Corporal, who went and presently
yielded himself unto them.

The 11. of October there entered sixteen or seventeen vessels laden with
victuals and all kinds of munition into the Town, they without shot furiously
at them on the East part, yet did no other harm but sunk one laden with
Bauins; all the men and Bauins were saved.

A Bullet coming from the West part fell into a ship and stroke off both a
boys legs.

The enemies did raise up their half Moon, the which is betwixt the Cateyes
and Reisern-heubt, and did likewise labor hardly at Cow-bridge, where they did
raise a great plat-forme near unto the English trenches, and upon the West
they did not cease to labor in their trenches.

They of the Town shot nine Canon shot in the day time from the Ships, but
the enemy answered them not,

The 12. of October beginning to grow dark, some of the enemies came upon
the South Side of the Haven, to spy and discover the Townsmens works, who
having discried them, they sent 6. or 8. leapers after them, who slew one, and
brought away three prisoners, whereof the one was a Sergeant, and all of the
country of Henault.

This night there went forth 48. ships, at whom the enemy made not one
shot, although it were so light as he might easily discern them: there
entered no ships but a small Bark.

Captain Grenu sallied forth at night with some of his men, but for that the
enemy did not present himself so soon, he sent back most of his men into the
town, and remained behind with 15. or 16. of his Soldiers, beyond the
gollet, to attend what the enemy would do, who coming forth upon him, he
charged them, and slew some at the push of the Pike, but seeing 150. horse
coming on the back side, he retired without any loss.

The Archdukes men did not labor so much as they were accustomed in the
trenches which they had made upon the East, nor in the Fort betwixt the Cateys
and Reisern-haupt, the which they did raise with Sand and Fagots, neither were
they seen to labor at all upon the South or West.

The same day, two women great with child sitting together at a door, were
slain with one Canon shot.

The 13. of October early in the morning, the enemy began to shoot his fiery
Bullets and stones into the Town, but there was no hurt seen or heard of.

They of the Town had begun a Trenche before the Bridge which is upon the
mouth or gollet, with a Pallissadoe, and before the trenche they made a little
Palissadoe with Pikes of Iron.

In the night the enemies raised up their battery which is at the East side of
the Sand-downes, stretching toward the North of them: but they did not then
plant any Canon. They labored also without intermission at their battery
betwixt the Cateys and Reisern haupt, upon the West-hauen, raising it very
high, and never went from it all the day.

There were moreover the very same day, eight or ten Soldiers slain and hurt
by the enemies Canon.

The 14. Six or seven horsemen give the alarm to the Town.
of October there grew a great alarm in the Town. General Vere with the
Governor Colonelles and Captains, ran to the West trenches where the alarm
was: six or seven of the enemies men at arms had given it, passing at a low
water from the West to the East through the old Town and the Gollet, they of
the Town shot at them, yet five of them escaped.

This night two ships entered by the East-hauen without any annoyance.

The enemies labored daily at their Trenches toward the East, as also upon
the South at Cow-bridge, and upon the West at their battery betwixt Cateys and
Reisern-haupt, there were eight or ten Soldiers hurt with the enemies Canon.

The 15. day at night, the enemy shot many artificial Bullets and Flintes
into the Town without any great harm doing. The same night there entered
nine ships laden with munition and victuals into the Town, at whom the
enemy shot much but in vain.

The enemy had two Frigates built like Galleys, in every one of the which they
might place 18. or 20. men, whom they sent sculking along the coast, to
surprise some ship, but fearing a storm, they struck their sails and retired
with their Owers toward the West, passing along the town, and never forsaking
the coast.

The week before they had taken three ships, and hurt about 30. men in them,
whom they cast ouerborde, bringing them only in, that were sound, one of the
hurt recovered the fleet with swimming.

The trenches without upon the West unto Cowe-bridge, and those which stretch
toward the South and East, were full of water, so as the enemy was forced to
retire to his Plat-formes: and yet there was no storm.

The 16. of October, six ships laden with victuals and munition came into the
town, after whom the enemy discharged above 50. Canon shot, but did them
little or no harm.

They brought many Cart-loades of Bauins and other stuff to the Forte, which
is in the East without the town, to fortify it.

That day the Canon plaide little, but there were six Soldiers hurt with
Musket shot in the town.

The 17. the enemies shot very furiously with their fiery Bullets and stones
into the town.

In the night they did cast themselves into the half Moon, which is beyond
the gollet before the bridge, in the which (according to the order which was
given by the commanders) there were none but laborers which did presently
abandon it: the enemies being entered, they were presently welcomed with
Canon-shot from the Bulwark of the Spaniards, and from Pekel, the which had
been planted there expressie: as also by a troop of Musketeers from the
Rauelin which is upon the counterscarfe right against the Spanish Bulwark, so
as they left many of their men there* there were but four of the town hurt:
the Chirurgians of the town went thither afterward, and brought away Sacks
full of man's grease which they had drawn out of their bodies. There was as
great abundance of blood, as if there had been a great combat fought, and
there was much without the half Moon: the ground was strowed of all sides
with arms, legs and hands: such as went thither first, found much money upon
the dead men, and garments of good price, with perfumed Gloves, whereby it
seems that many Spaniards and men of command were slain there. They had also
brought with them many preparatiues and devises to burn the Bridge, and many
Spades, Hammers, Hatchets, Pike-axes, and other instruments, as it were to make
some fortification.

The enemy carried his battery from betwixt the Cateyes, unto the Sea side
toward the North.

At night there went forth fourteen ships, and not any one came in. A
Burguignon prisoner said, that in this last assault there were not slain above
eighty five or eighty six upon the place, amongst the which there were some
men of command: he said moreover that they would stay it out all Winter, and
that his Highness had made provision of stuff to build lodgings for the
Soldiers round about the town.

The 18. there was nothing remarkable, but that two French men fled to the
enemy.

The 19. of October, the enemy made high defenses upon their battery at the
East: afternoon they of the Town discovered a great troop of their enemeis
going from Alberts fort to the fort of La Pierre S. Iean, and upon the East
side many Wagons laden with Bauins the which they carried to the fort they have
at the downs.

The same day, there were 9. or 10. soldiers of the Town slain and hurt.

The 20. The Archdukes men approached nearer by a 130. yardes.
day at night, the Archdukes men made a long trench near unto the lower end
of the Gollet, 120, or 130. yardes under their new battery, and approached
nearer unto the Town with 32. Gabions in length and four in thickness: it
was for this purpose that the troops (we spoke of) passed the day before from
the West to the East, to defend them that should labor in this work, and that
by day they conducted so many Wagons laden with Bauins, to employ them in the
night work.

This day the enemy shot from this new battery, and to advance this trench
they left their trenches upon the South and West part.

At night there came into the Town four ships and one bark full of men, the
enemy shot at them in vain, they discovered their Gabions nine thick.

A Germane of the enemies Camp came and yielded himself into the Town, who
said, that there was exceeding great want in it: that all soldiers which could
find any means to fly forsook the army; and that the enemy would plant
nine Canons at his Gabions.

Afternoon the water being retired they began to labor again at their
battery, betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern-heubt. which they drew down along to
the Sea, to batter the ships on the North-side of the old town, as well on
the West side as on the East, wherein they spent all that night.

The 22. of October, 44. ships past out of the Town, and two entered, one laden
with English Bear and the other of Breda, at whom the enemy shot little.

The same day before noone the enemy brought many carts laden with bauins to
the fort which is at the downs, and did lengthen the new trench, which is at
the lower end of the Gollet with three Gabions, and after dinner there past a
great troop of Soldiers from the West to the East.

The foresaid fugitive said that the enemies resolutions was to make his chief
attempt upon the East Side, and he said moreover that if he could stop the
entry of the ships, he would be master of the Town within 14. days.

They played both with Canon and Musket on either side all that day.

After dinner they of the Town discovered above a 100. carts which the enemy
conducted to the East, to the fort which is beneath the downs.

They of the town labored continually at the Blindes (the which are works of
earth, of a mean height, square or in cubit, to cover them which go in the
streets, and to receive the Bullets) against the enemies batteries and trenches
which are at the Cateys; that day the fire took their lodgings on the
East Side.

The night of the 22. day there was much shooting on either side, both with
Canon and Musket, so as it hindered the enemies work, whereas they had lately
planted their Gabions: yet they did not leave to conduct many carts with
Bauins toward their new battery, from whence they made eight or ten shot that
day, as also some from their batteries which are at the downs.

About ten of the clock at night 25. or 26. ships went out at the Haven and
the enemy never shot at them: there entered two laden with English Beer and
other victualles, at whom they made two shot, but hurt them not.

The 23. of October, the enemy shot all night with his fiery Bullets and stones
into the Town, the which hurt some soldiers.

The same night as the former, they of the Town shot furiously upon the
Gabions which are near unto the Gollet, and hindered the enemies work: there
went forth also three or four Ships at whom they never shot.

They without, although they labored not, yet did they cause great store of
Fagots to be carried to the East: they were continually busy at their works
which are betwixt the Cateyes and Resern-heubt, the which they carried tawardes
the North: where (in my opinion) they did them of the Town a great pleasure,
freeing the North-east part from the furious waves of the Sea, the which did
much endomage them before the Porke-espike and Helmont,

The 24. of October they shot fiery Bullets and stones into the enemies Camp.

A Ship going out of the Haven at night did run upon the Sands on the
enemies side, the master and a little boy saved themselves, two Carpenters
were drowned thinking to recover the town by swimming: there were besides
three sick men, with a woman and her child, whom the enemy took and then set
fire of the ship.

They did nothing but carry Fagots to the East, they of the Town did not see
them work, but they found that their Gabions were seventeen large and thirty
five in length. The continual shooting of the besieged did much annoy them in
their work. As for their batteries of Cateyes and Reisern-heubt, they labored
continuallye, raising them and fortifying them daily.

The 25. of October, a Captain of a Ship went in a cock boat round about
the Gabions, which are upon the Gollet to view them, where he found no man, nor
any one near, but only three which had bin slain with the Town Canon.

That day there went no Ship in nor out, and for that it rained much, there
was no shooting, and likewise for the same reason the enemy left laboring,

The night of the twenty sixth day, was foul weather and a great tempest, which
was the cause that the Canon played not, but in the morning they saluted one
another.

The Sea (being swelled extraordinarily by reason of this tempest,) carried
away some of their Gabions which were not yet fully filled nor fastened.

The Water at the very same time was risen ten or twelve yardes up into the
trench which is upon the Gollet, so as the enemy had no man there, and upon
the South and South-west a League and a half up into the country, which
covered most of the enemies trenches: and there was no thing to be seen dry
but their Plat-formes, whether they had retired themselves, this torment was
the cause that no ship went in nor out. It did somewhat indamage the town at
the Porke-espike, and the False-Braye, yet not so much but it was in few hours
repaired.

The 27. at night, according to their commendable custom, they shot store of
fiery Bullets and Flints of either side. There entered an English Bark laden
with Beer.

The enemy was fortified with a regiment of Italians, and some Wallons.

The night of the 28. day, four Barks went forth, at whom they did not
shoot; but none came in.

The same night they of the Town made a Sallie of 200. Soldiers, and some
Mariners, the water being high, and went upon the enemies Gabions, many of the
which they brake and cut, with many sacks full of earth which they found within
them, whereof they brought some into the Town.

After noone they might see pass toward the East quarter, two troops of
Carts laden with Bauins.

That day they shot but little on either part, and there was but one man
slain within the town.

The 29. there went no vessel in nor out.

There were a great number of Gabions which they of the Town had not broken:
The enemy began to work behind them, and did not leave for all the Canon of
the Town which played furiously upon them.

They without had made a great work upon the East, which they of the town
thought to be some new Forte or Battery, but in the end they found it was a
Channel or Conduict to pass from Plassenthale to the Conduict of Bruges,
containing about half a League, that they might more commodiously furnish the
Forts of the East with munition and victuals, as well as those of the West,
called Saint Pierre Isabella and Albertus, which receive their provisions by
water.

About ten of the clock they of the town made a Sallie of 60. or 70. men, and
some Leapers and Friboters, charging upon the enemies Gabions the which they
took. There were about 60. men laboring in them, who fled: presently there
came 35. or 36. of the enemies Horse upon them, so as having viewed well the
gabions, they were forced to retire: one of their soldiers was slain, and
three or four hurt with the Canon. The Canon of the Spanish Bulwark and of
Pekel (which had been planted to that end,) played through the enemies, and
ouer-threw some of their horsemen, one of them was drawn by his horse even
unto the town Trenches, who being searched, there were found about him eleven
Rose-nobles: an other was taken and brought near the Town, where he was
slain. there were also many footmen slain with the Canon, in the mean time
the enemy short from the West part upon the Town, where they did no other
hurt but struck off a Soldiers arm.

The 30. of October no vessel went in nor out: the Town was much indomaged by
the great torment, who presently sought to repair what had been broken.

After dinner some Carts laden with Fagots, munition and victuals, were
conducted toward the Forte which is at the East on the Downs: the enemy made
some shot from the West against the Porke-espike, and from the East into the
town.

The same day some traitors were taken within the town, Traitors taken in the
town.
of whom we will speak in another place.

The last of October there went no vessel in nor out.

The enemies labored still behind their Gabions, they of the town shot
vehemently upon them from Flammemburg (a high Platform so called being within
the Town): they without labored also upon the East at their new channel, to
make it deep enough, for that the country is high in that place.

At four of the clock in the afternoon, a great flote driven with the
Nor-west wind overthrew nine Gabions, which they without had planted to cover
their laborers from the town Canon, but for that they were tied together with
Cables, they remained in the same place.

The new battery on the East side under the downs, was all drowned, the tide
having never been so great on that side.

They discovered more Carts laden with Bauins on the East part then the day
before.

Upon the South and South-east, the country was all covered with water above a
league about, and all the trenches on the West under the Sand-downes, and
toward the South and South-east were full of water, so as the enemy was
forced to fly up to their highest plat-formes and caualiers, the which they
had to the number of eight along those trenches, in their retiring there were
many of them stayed by the way by the Canon from the town.

The enemy during this great water shot furiously upon the Porke-espike to
shake it, and to overthrow it, but they prevailed little more then the hurting
of some Soldiers that were upon it.

They of the town ran by troops upon the Rampars to see if the Sea and the
violent wind would not carry away their Gabions, in the mean time the enemy
shot at them but hurt no man.

The first of November, the besieged began to repair that which the Sea had
carried away of the Porke-espike.

They without were not seen to labor in any part, there were many volees of
Musket shot on either side, but without any notable loss.

There was a German brought prisoner into the town, who was lame of half
his body, and simple, they could draw nothing from him but old stale news,
that many of their Soldiers fled, that they were ill paid, and that there was
great poverty and many sick in the camp.

They of the town thought that the Block-house upon the South should be
carried away by the water, for that the enemy drew forth much wood out of
their retrenchments.

The 2. of November there went no ship in nor out.

In the night the Archdukes men did lengthen their Gabions which are upon the
Gollet with 30. others, at the end which is toward the South: and whereas the
first do stretch from the South to the North, these lean something toward
the East, to cover their workmen; the place where they are set is rough and
somewhat high, the which helps them much, so as the Town cannot discover them
in their works: yet it is to be supposed they labor, for that the same day
(the which was the first time) they did see horsemen in guard at the foot of
the downs, by the new battery as if they had feared a Sallie.

They of the Town thought that the enemy had other work then to charge them,
they were far besides their count, for the Sea did every day make new work
for them, their trenches upon the West (which are right against the
Porke-espike) were opened above forty yardes by the last tempest, so as the
Gollet or mouth became daily, greater and larger, and did little harm unto the
Town.

Before noone they shot little, presently after the General Sir Francis Vere
came upon the Spanish Boulwarke and to that of Pekel, commanding them to
shoot earnestly at the Gabions, which was the cause they spent some fifty shot
suddenly.

The 3. of November they of the Town made a sallie of a 150. men as well
leapers as soldiers, and seven horsemen, who surprised the gabions and cut
the cords and Cables with the which they were tied, and overthrew some at the
East end: in the mean time some of the enemies horse went toward the rauelin
of the town to cut off their way: the horsemen of the town (whereof I have
spoken) seeing that, went to meet them with a 150. muskateers of the rauelin
which is on the other side of the Gollet, before the bridge of their enemies
side, who repulsed them: then they of the Town gave fire to the Canon, which
slew five men with one shot among thirty or forty which showed themselves a
far off towrades the new battery: there was also a horseman and some
soldiers slain upon the rauelin; during this encounter the enemies gathered
together behind the new battery, there went forth three troops of horse
against them of the Town: As for the foote-men they skirmished with them that
first sallied out of the town: these three troops with that which had been
chased came with a full carry toward the rauelin of the Town, but being
come near unto the foote-men, they were beaten back by them, and by the Canon
from the Town, which thundered furiouslye from the Spanish Boulewarke, and from
that of Pekel, so as they returned as fast as they came: and seeing that they
of the Town had made hedde against them they retired behind their battery,
and they of the Town did likewise retire into their rauelin, In this skirmish
there were four of the Town slain and six hurt, as for the enemies they lost
a good number, they of the Town recovered six or seven Lances with
banderolles, and among them the Cornet of Count Aremberges wherein were his
arms: the enemy had gathered together another troop of soldiers behind
their new battery, which durst not show themselves near, but retired
presently, during which time they of the Town sent them many vollees of Canon.

As for the Gabions they were in very badde estate, they did see through some
part of them which were in single rank, others were overthrown, and the
enemies themselves thinking that they of the town were hidden behind them,
shot through them, and their Bullets came even unto the gollet, but they of
the Town found no man working there.

At noone the enemies transported much wood out of their Trenches into their
Block-houses, and upon the West they razed certain Plat-formes, and carried
away the Bauins to Alberts-fort and to his Block-house, whether it seemed they
would retire themselves, and it was held for certain, that a great part of the
Soldiers had been drawn out of the camp and sent into Brabant with a good
number of the horsemen.

They of the town made an other sallie, but the enemies did not abandon their
forts, showing themselves only a far of, so every one keeping his advantage,
there was nothing done.

At the same time a great and dangerous treason was discovered, the which was
practiced in the town.

An Englishman named N. Conisbye, Great treason discovered in the town.
having served the enemy long, and been Captain of a company of foot in
their army, returned through France into England, where he prevailed so much
(by means of his friends) as he obtained Letters of commendation to Sir
Francis Vere General of the English forces in Ostend. Having these Letters he
went to Ostend, and presented himself unto Sir Francis Vere, desiring him to
admit him of his company, at which the General could not refuse him, being a
Gentleman. This traitor being thus crept into Ostend, began to play his part:
he received letters and other things weekly from the enemy, and gave them
intelligence what past within the town, and of the means to annoy it, making
his practices and proiects according to the instructions he received from them.
To send his Letters to the enemy he carried them into a broken boat, the
which in the beginning of the siege had been sunk by the enemy, and was upon
the dry ground betwixt the Town and the enemies Camp, making a show as if
he went to untruss, knowing well the place where he should hide them: the
enemy came at night to fetch them with a little Boat, and upon certain days
brought him an answer to the same place: and sometimes money for his
entertainment and his practices, the which he went to fetch in the same
manner: When he was discovered, he had corrupted four men, and amongst others
a Sargent called William N. who revealed it: This Sargent coming out of
prison, where his Captain had caused him to be laid some days in Yrons,
being all malcontent, met by chance with this Conisbye, who said unto him
that he was very glad to see him out of prison, and asked him what was the
reason that he had so great and grievous a punishment: to whom the Sargeant
(railing upon his Captain) swear earnestly that he would be revenged of the
wrong he had received, although it should cost him his life: Conisby thinking
to have found a man fit for his purpose, said that there was good means
without loosing of his life, but contrariwise he should make his profit and
advance himself, wherein he might help him much, and if he would follow his
counsel he should want no money. The Sergeant began to give ear unto his
words, and seemed to be well affected to his desseigne, and to do what he
would advise him. Conisbye (after he had made him to swear not to reveal any
thing that he should say,) discovered himself unto him, and presently asked
him if he had the resolution, and would set fire of one of the Magazins of
munition, with a certain invention of Poulder, of Lead, and of Match, the
which the Sargent promised to do, saying that it was very easy, for that he
was often sent to fetch Poulder for the Soldiers; Conisbye said moreover unto
him, that he had practiced some others, and would have more, to the number of
twenty, and then would execute his desseigne in this manner. One of the
Magazins being set on fire, he would work so as he would have the guard of a
Sluice which is in one of the Bulwarks of the town, nearest unto the enemies
Trenches, where they should give the assault, and take the town by that
means: the Sargent made show to like well thereof, demanding only of
Conisbye a promise of his hand for the assurance of his recompense, when the
work should be done: having this promise, he goes presently to the General
Sir Francis Vere, and discouers unto him this practice: Conisbye being
apprehended and put to the Rack, confesses all, and that he came to Ostend
with that intent, together with the instructions and promises he had from the
enemy: his accomplices were likewise imprisoned.

The 4. of November there were many volees spent of Musket shot and some of
Canon.

The night before there went forth fourteen sail, at whom they never shot,
and not one came in.

The enemy this night raised a mount in the midst of their Gabions, the
which is a long trenche of about 70. or 80. Gabions of rank.

They also set Gabions at the two sides of their new battery, which is at the
foot of the Downs, and directly at the East of the trenche of their Gabions,
six or seven on the North-side, and toward the Sand-downes thirteen or
fourteen to serve for blindes and to covet their men from the Town Canon,
who shot very vehemently when as they did see day.

About noone an Englishman went out of the trenches and yielded himself to
the enemy, it may be to carry them news of the imprisonment of his
companions.

All that day the Canon and Muskets ceased not, yet was there not any man hurt
in the town.

The 5. of November they of the town shot some fiery Bullets into the
enemies Camp, and all the night was spent in Musket shot.

At night there went out one ship, but none came in.

The enemy was busied to deface some plat-formes and trenches upon the South
and North parts, which the water had overthrown, carrying the Bauins unto the
Downs and to their Block-houses.

About noone a horseman entered into the Gollet of the town, but as he went
slowly seeming to be drunk, three or four other horsemen followed him, and
one amongst them (who had a great red scarf about his neck) ouer-tooke him and
gave him many wounds with his Courtelas, and ouer-threw him, one of them took
his horse, and so they returned to their trenches, leaving him for dead. Some
of the town having seen this, cast themselves into the gollet to swim and
fetch him, but presently four or five of the enemies horse came, who took him
and marched toward their quarter, but before they could recover a place of
safety, they of the town shot amongst them and ouer-threw one of them that
carried this Caualier, the rest fled, leaving two dead for one.

The same day the adventurers brought a prisoner into the Town, whom they had
taken betwixt Bruges and Dixmude, four leagues from Ostend, who said that the
regiment of Count Frederic de Berg, and some Ensigns of the Count de Bouquoy,
and Fresin were gone to succor Hertzegenbusch which his Excellency had
besieged: and that many of the Arch dukes Soldiers fled daily, that they were
ill paid, and had many that were sick among them.

They without brought great store of Bauins and other wood, by the new Channel
of the East Side to the fort which is at the Downs.

The 6. of November they shot furiously with stones into the town.

In the morning they might see the Gabions toward the North of the new
battery ouer-throwne, so as they might see through them, there were only
four standing the which were empty, and served only to take away the sight
that they might not shoot at their men: more-ouer they did see them transport
great store of wood by the new Channel toward the East.

In the afternoon they did see the enemy labor very earnestly behind their
Trenches and Gabions, at whom they of the Town shot sometimes: they did
also see them transport much Wood and Bauins to the new Block-house at the
Downs.

The prisoner of Bruges taken the day before, being examined, said, that at
Bruges and throughout all Flanders they made them believe, that in Ostend they
dyed by heaps, of hunger and thirst, and that many Soldiers forced by
extreme necessity fled daily: that there was nothing but mutinies and
seditions in the Town, and that the Archduke should have them soon at his
pleasure, and that no man durst deliver any ill news to the prejudice of the
Archduke for fear of his life.

The seventh of November they without shot no fiery Bullets, but only many
Stones into the Town.

They labored daily behind their Gabions upon the Gollet, although they of
the town shot often: they began also a new Corpse de guard in their new
battery, which is Eastward of the Downs behind the Gabions and looks to
the bottom of the Gollet.

The 8: of November they of the Town did see the enemy labor very earnestly
behind the Gabions, some casting up sand, others beating in piles, as if they
would raise a Plat-forme to plant Canon thereon.

The enemies came near unto the half Moon of the Town which is at the end
of the bridge on the other side of the Gollet, but seeing them of the Town
issue forth to entertain them with resolution, they returned after they had
discharged some shot.

After dinner an Ensigne-bearer a Frison was slain with a Musket shot being in
the Polder.

They without shot stones into the Town day and night.

The 9. day they shot many stones with their great Canon, yet they slew no man:
in the night they raised their battery which is upon the North betwixt the
Cateyes about three foot, and there made Canoniers to plant three pieces.

About 10. of the clock at night there entered a Bark laden with Beer with a
boat into the Gollet, the enemy shot furiously at them from their batteries
on the downs and at the foot thereof, and likewise with their Muskets from
their Gabions, which was the first time they shot from that place, yet the
Bark entered happily without any harm.

They of the Town discovered the fleet which was come from Zeland, who
prepared to enter at night, the which did rejoice them very much, for there
were three weeks that no vessel had entered.

The enemies according to their custom shot many stones into the Town but did
little harm.

The 10. of November there entered 13. Ships by the Gollet, the enemy shot at
them with his Canon, and with his Muskets from the Gabions, without hitting of
man or Ship, they only shot through some sails.

At night the enemies with their Barks borded two ships, the which they took
and spoiled, and carried away the men that were in them.

There were many that labored in the Gabions upon the Gollet.

There was one ship had passed on two far and stayed before the Bulwark of
Spain, the enemy shot all the day at it, their were 9. or 10. others had
entered with it, but they had cast Anchor behind the half Moon, which is upon
the Gollet for the defense of the bridge, and could not be hurt.

The plat-forme which the enemy had begun behind the Gabions, which are upon
the Gollet, did now appear above them, and it seemed they would plant Canon
thereon.

The 11. of November, there were some of both parties which parled together
betwixt the Gollet and them, but a Canon being discharged from the Town every
one retired.

The Archdukes men labored continually to finish the plat-forme behind their
Gabions, by means whereof they thought to stop the entry of the ships
into the Town, and held it for certain that within fifteen days after this
work was perfect, the Town was theirs: but they of the Town found out a new
secret, for the safe entry and going forth of their Ships, and to make this
infinite charge of the Archdukes fruitless.

The ships which had remained the last night behind the half Moon, entered
this night into the haue^, and there was no other loss in this goodly fleet
of 52. or 53. sail, but only that which had been on ground before the
Bulworke of Spain, was shot through with the Canon.

Upon the East Side, they did see about twenty five wagons laden with bauins
and wood, come from the new channel to the fort that is at the downs, and some
from Bredene.

That day there was not any man slain only three or four hurt.

The 12. of November, they shot many fiery Bullets and stones of either side,
with much small shot.

That night the Governor called the Lord of North, accompanied with Captain
Roll Grenu and Bronchaulx, dela Digne, two Ministers, and two other men of the
Town went out with two ships for their conuoy to go into Zeland.

They might see upon the high plat form which the enemy had made behind the
Gabions, four Canoniers to plant Canon at, to stop the entry and going out of
the ships, for the effecting whereof they wrought all they could, else they
shot little.

The night of the 13. day they shot not; in the morning they saluted one
another with their Muskets.

The enemy labored still at their battery behind the Gabions, making it
higher and larger, and neglected their other works.

They made a great Corpse de guard near unto Albert fort, although that both
within it and at the foot of the downs there were many fair houses.

About noone they discovered a great fire in Albert fort, and they said it was
fire fallen from Heaven, it burnt so violently as it could not possibly be
quenched: there was lost for 150000. Florins in Jewels: the Estates of Flanders
to repair this loss made a present of a 100000. Crowns to the Archduke.

The Ship which had been three days before on ground in the Gollet before
the Bulworke of Spain, entered at night into the Town Ditch, the enemy made
ten or twelve shot at it but could not hitte it.

The enemies whole hope for the taking of the Town, was to stop the entry
of ships, they thought to have effected their desseigne by means of their new
plat-forme which they made behind the Gabions, but they of the Town made a
new Haven, The townsmen make a new Haven.
the which is not much commanded by the plat-forme, and by that means the
enemies hope vanished to smoke. The Archdukes trenches upon the west side
were neglected and fell daily, and the water from the Sea increased so in the
West Gollet, as at this day it is a deep and goodly ditch.

The 14. of November at night the Canons and muskets shot vehemently on either
side: and in the night there went out 7. or 8. ships, but the enemy never shot
at them.

They without labored continually at their battery upon the Gollet, making
strong defenses there: and they of the Town were busied about their new Haven.

After dinner two of their soldiers that were within the half Moon upon the
gollet fled to the enemy: and presently five or six horsemen came from their
battery at the Gabions to receive them, and at the same instant they began to
shoot at the town, and at those that wrought in the half Moon, yet they
hurt no man: they might then easily discern five Canoniers in their battery.

The Archduke had been in person at the Camp upon the West, where he had
changed some quarters and garrisons; they of the town shot at the Soldiers
as soon as they appeared upon the trenches.

There was more Canon-shot that day then the four before, but more from the
town then without, there were but three hurt in the town, and not one slain.

The 15. of November being dark they shot a little on both sides to
entertain the custom, and in the night the enemy shot great stones.

That night there went 18. or 20. ships out of the Haven, but none entered, the
enemy shot much after them and killed two Mariners and a Boy.

The enemy labored continually at their battery of Gabions, and at that
which is betwixt the Cateyes, but they did not yet open their Canoniers.

The enemy shot against the Mill which is upon the Bulwark of Flammenburg, the
Bullet struck of a French-mans leg, and all the flesh off the other, so as
he was little better then dead. He was scarce retired from thence, but another
Bullet struck in the same place, which stayed there and did no harm.

That day there was not any one but this Frenchman hurt in the town, and an
other a little hurt in the leg.

The 26. of November (by reason of the contrary wind) no ship went out of the
town, there entered an English man at whom the enemy made some Canon shot,
but more store of Musket from their battery which is upon the Gollet, yet they
hurt no man.

They without labored still at their battery upon the gollet, but they did
nothing that day in their other batteries.

They shot whotly for half an hour upon the town of the West side, some
thought it was for the coming of some Noblemen; others that it was by the
intelligence of a fugitive, who had fled to them the night before: after dinner
they shot also at Flammenbourg but hurt no man.

A Frenchman fled out of the town unto the enemy, who (to escape) thrust
himself into the gollet up to the neck.

The 17. of November the enemy shot many great stones into the town.

About midnight the enemy sent from the West part some horsemen into the old
town and carried away three prisoners, at the same time from their battery of
Reisern-haubt they cast some plankes over the Haven, whereas it is narrowest at
a low water, on the which there passed 30. men into the old town, from
whence they were presently repulsed with the canon.

An Englishman seeking to fly unto the enemy, was presently taken and hanged.

Also a French Gentleman disobeying his Sargent and making a great tumult, was
committed to prison, and eight days after condemned by the council of war
to be shot. But for that he was borne of a good house, all the French
Captains entreated General Vere to give him his life, the which he granted,
upon condition, that he should ask the Sargent forgiveness, the which he
would by no means do, notwithstanding any persuasions: whereupon they gave
him eight days to resolve with himself; which being past, and he still
obstinate, he was brought to the place of execution and tied to a stake: but
when as he did see the Harguebuziers ready to shoot, he began to have horror
of death, entreating that he might be unbound, promising to perform the
sentence, and to ask the Sargent forgiveness, the which he did presently and
was delivered.

That day the enemy was not seen to labor in any place, nor to carry Fagots
from the new Channel of the East.

The Plat-forme upon the Gollet is right against the Cateye of the Town,
betwixt the Bulwark of Pekel and the East-Port, where before there were
neither Rampars nor defenses: they of the Town (to cover themselves from the
enemies Canon) planted Gabions, so as the enemy could not pierce them, and if
the Bullets flew over, then they went into the West quarter among their own
Soldiers.

That night came in an English ship with a hundred Tun of Beer, the which
entered into the town being Moone-light, the enemy shot at them from their
batteries.

The same night the enemy labored at their battery of the North, betwixt the
Cateyes, and did raise it with sand, leaving their Canoniers still shut.

The 18. the enemies shot stones and flints into the town, and the besieged
exchanged fiery Bullets with them.

At the break of day they without labored at their battery of Gabions,
making it higher and larger, neither did they shoot nor labor in any other
quarter.

In the afternoon they began to labor in one of their trenches on the West
part, but they of the town having shot some volees of Canon at them,
scattered them presently.

At night there went two ships out of the town for England, but none came in.

The same night a Spanish Ancient came and yielded himself into the town,
(who (as he said) had slain a Sargent: he affirmed that there were 3000. men
gone out of the Camp into Brabant, and that his Highness had sent new
commissions into Arthois and Haynault to leauie 3000. men, that the Canon from
the town did every day much spoil in the Camp: and that they were yet 6000.
men before the town: that is, two regiments of Spaniards, three of Italians,
and one of the Wallons, comprehending the garrisons of the Fortes: that it was
now twenty days since the Soldiers received a penny, and before the
Soldiers had received but 14. Stiuers in 16. days. He said also that when as
the Fort of Albert was burnt, his Highness had lost above 60000. Ducats in
Jewels and other things, and that the Flemmings had made him a goodly present
in recompense of this loss: he said moreover that the Captains durst not eat
in the sight of the Soldiers for fear of a mutiny, This Soldier had a
memorial of the siege of Ostend in the Castillian tongue, out of which was
taken that which follows, the which many serve to the History, and happily may
be pleasing to the reader.

The Spaniardes are very much discontented, for that the Archduke continues
the siege of Ostend, and above all for that he has cast and dismissed so many
old experimented Captains and men of command which did dissuade him, and has
put young men into their places. That there was a great number of Captains and
men of command dead, and that the regiment of Don Iean de Brachamonte (which
had been 1500. men strong) was brought to less then 900. The Captains say
that the Archduke is good for nothing but to spoil soldiers, and to wast the
number of good and honorable men: for that he understands nothing in the art
of war, the which does much grieve the soldiers that are there: who (among
other things) are beaten with three enemies, hunger, cold, and sickness, and
are not paid, that for many days they have received but 25. stiuers, and
fear they shall receive less hereafter. That the Flemmings (and especially
they of Bruges) cannot or will not contribute any more for the entertainment
of the army, and that the brute was, they should have no more munition Bread
nor Beer, and that insteede thereof, for two stiners which they were
accustomed to receive, they should have five a day: the which seemed very
strange unto the Spaniardes: They say also that the comissaries and undertakers
of the amonition and victuals do make them less and falsefie them daily,
especially the beer of Bruges, who (when the vessel is half out) fill it up
with water, the which was a sign that the Spaniards had a desire to mutine if
they paid them not money. They said also that there were dead at this siege
four Colonels, eight Spanish Captains, ten Wallons, and nine Italians, and
some Germans and Flemmings, with some thousands of soldiers, all men of
command, and workmen, and that it is a pitiful thing to see how the new
Spaniardes and Italians, died miserably for cold and other discommodities.

The 19. of November, they shot little; after dinner they might see plainly
how the enemies defaced their trenches to have wood to burn: there was no
speech of any hurt in the Town that day.

At night their arrived 5. ships, the enemy shot much at them, as well from the
downs as from their battery at the Gollet, yea with their Muskets from the
Gabions, but did them no harm.

The 24. of November, the Archdukes men shot more Canon and Musket then they
had done in eight days before, the which they returned them from the Town in
the same money.

At the break of day there were two soldiers slain, and some others hurt
with the Canon, from the West part.

From the morning until noone they might see a great number of Wagons pass
into the West, betwixt the forts of Isabella and La piere S. Iean, and likewise
to the East behind the causie of Bredene: yet the enemy wrought not in any
place.

They of the Town were not slothful in working at the new port and at the
Bulworke of Pekel.

In the night an English Corporal was taken who had hid himself in the
dark, for some ill desseigne.

Two great barks went out of the Haven and none entered.

The 25. of November, the enemy never ceased from night to the morning to
shoot great stones and firye Bullets, so as two houses were set on fire, but
they were presently quenched.

At night Captain Poelgeest died suddenly being well at noone.

The Wagons went still to the East and West, yet the enemy wrought not in any
place,

At night there went 21. ships out of the Town, at whom the enemy shot 7. or
8. vollees of Canon, yet he hit not any, there entered none into the Haven.

The 26. at the break of day there was much shooting on either side for two
hours, and then they ceased.

They without ceased not to work at their battery on the Gollet: and they of
the Town omitted no time to work at their new Haven, and at the Bulworke of
Pekel and defenses thereof, and at the East-port.

After dinner they might see many Wagons going toward the Sand downs in the
East, toward night the Canon played on either side a while, and then great
store of Musket shot.

A little before night the enemy shot furiously with stones, and soon after
ceased, there were two only hurt that day.

In the night there went fifteen ships out of the Port, at whom the enemy
did not shoot, and not any one came in.

The 27. of November in the morning, four ships entered the Gollet, whereof two
were laden with fresh fish, the enemy shot at them, but could not hitte them.

The enemy wrought this day upon the West-downes, and in their battery upon
the Gollet, yet not so much as they had done before, neither did they work any
where else.

That day Captain Poelgeest was honorably interred.

The 28. of November being the day of the feast of S. Elizabeth, This was on
the 17. of November stilo veteri
(according to the ancient Calender which they use in England) Sir Francis
Vere General of the English, caused all the Canons of Town to be shot off in
honor of the Queen of England by their example, the enemy did as much in
honor of the Infanta Isabella, and there was hard such a noise and thundering,
as if there had been a general alarm both within and without, which being
done they were quiet all the morning.

In the mean time the townsmen ceased not to work in their new Haven, and at
the Gabions betwixt the Bulworke of Pekel and the East Port.

The enemy was not seen to work in any place, which made them believe that
they were troubled to defend themselves from cold, and to keep their
soldiers from flying.

The Counsel of war of the English caused a thief to be hanged, and his
companion to be whipped, whom they entreated not so rigorously, by reason of his
youth.

At night they of the Town shot fiery Bullets into the enemies Camp, who sent
them back again many stones, yet was there not any one hurt in the town.

The 29. of November the enemy began early in the morning to shoot stones
into the town.

They might see them conduct many Wagons toward the Fortes which are upon the
Downs at the East and West, betwixt the Forts of Isabella, Albert, and La
Pierre S. Iean.

There reigned a strange disease in the town, Sickness in the town.
of the which they that were struck either died or were cured betwixt the
morning and night, there dyed many thereof, but there was no speech of any that
was slain or hurt in the town that day.

The Archduke and the Infanta went for fourteen days to Bruxelles.

That night there went no vessel in nor out.

The 30. of November at the break of day the sluggards were awaked with Canon
and Musket shot, which played furiously on either side.

The enemy made some Canon-short in the day time, wherewith they killed two
Soldiers and hurt some others.

The enemies Canon giving some intermission they lost neither the occasion nor
the time, but continued their works at their new Haven, as also at the half
Moon which is upon the gollet near unto the battery of the enemies Gabions,
the which was made so strong, as it was almost incredible; and though it be in
an open place, and at the mouth of the enemies Canon, yet could they never
win it. They have given two assaults, and sought to be masters thereof, even
in the beginning when it was made, but they have been still repulst with great
loss of their men, and were forced to leave it.

That night no ship went in nor out of the Town.

The first of December at night the enemies played vehemently with their
Muskets into the Town, and they discharged their Canon three times in the
honor of S. Andrew patron of the house of Bourgongne.

The enemies Trenches, (the which at every spring tide were full of water,) by
the which they might have gone covered from one plat-forme unto an other, being
eight in all, were almost all ouer-throwne, so as they were forced to show
themselves as they passed, and the Canon from the town spared them not.

Upon the West they might see their Wagons part from the Forte of Albert,
Isabella, and La pierre S. Iean, and return with all kind of victualles from
Bruges, for that they could not bring it by water, the channel being frosen.

In the night the enemies set fire on their thirty five Gabions which were
upon the Gollet, for they served them now to no use, and they had placed them
there but only to cover their laborers whilst they wrought at the
plat-forme, the which was a high work, and almost perfected, whereon they
might plant seven or eight Canons.

The 2. of December, a Soldier of the Town fled and went to the enemy: two
Mariners were slain by the East-port, and a Harguebuzer in the West.

The Townes-men shot almost all night into the enemies camp, who answered
them not, the which made them imagine that they wanted Poulder.

The same night 14. ships went out of the Port without any annoyance. There
were two English Barks laden with Beer which would have entered, but they
ran on ground, yet by the help of some other ships they returned in safety
to the fleet,

The 3. of December at the break of day, the Muskets played furiously on
either side, after that, the enemy played with his Canon into the town, but
they would not be long indebted unto them.

Some that had gone out to the wars returned that day; they had taken two
Wallons prisoners, who were so obstinate and wilful as they would not march,
so as the Soldiers were forced to kill one, and to bring the other into the
town upon their necks, after that they had used him in the worst sort they
could: for General Vere had commanded them expressly to bring some one to
learn news of the enemy: but this man was yet so wilful, as neither for
threats, fair words, nor any other devise, they could draw any thing from
him, but in cursing with injurious words, he said that his Highness would not
leave the Town before he had brought it to his will.

They could not see the enemy work in any place; but the Townes-men ceased
not at their new Port, the Bulworke of Pekel, and the defenses betwixt it and
the East-port: and although the enemy shot little, yet the Townes-men abated
nothing.

The night before the fourth of December, the two English ships (whereof we
spoke before) entered into the Town, it was a bright Moone-light, and the
enemies shot hard at them yet could not hurt them.

At the same time when as these ships entered, fire took a house at the
East-port, and for that this house was in the right-vp-street, and a great
concourse of people coming to quench it, the enemy shot continually at them,
and yet there were but three soldiers and a Boy slain, and the fire in the
end was quenched.

The night was quiet enough, Assault at the English Trenches, and repulsed.
without any great shooting on either side, until about three of the clock,
that the enemies came in great numbers to give an assault unto the English
trenches, in three diverse places, during the which (being about an hour) they
shot furiously on either side: the enemies cried so loud in French; Enter,
enter, advance, advance, as they heard them easily into the Town. they were
chearefully received and valiantly repulsed three times, and in the end were
forced to retire. There were three Soldiers of the Town slain, and some
hurt: as for the enemy, we cannot well know how many were slain, it was so
dark: But day being come, they found so much blood upon the place, as they did
judge a great number to be slain and hurt, and they might hear them say in
returning one unto another: Companions let us carry away our Captain: here is
no good to be gotten. General Vere hearing the alarm, ran to those Trenches
half naked, his presence did so encourage the Soldiers, as they wished that
the enemy would return again.

The enemy in the morning began for the first time to shoot from their
battery which is at the West upon the Cateyes, and shot three or four times
through the Blindes or couerings.

The leapers brought in a prisoner of the Country of Luxembourg, who said that
he was servant unto the Cont Barlemont.

The night before the 5. day of December, the townsmen shot many Stones and
fiery Bullets into the enemies Camp, who shot not until the morning when as
they played furiously from the West, and pierced some houses without any great
harm.

They also made many a shot against the Generalles house, and beat down a
pane of a wall, and before it carried away a French Ancients leg, whereof he
died soon after.

They of the Town labored at their defenses betwixt Pekel and the East Port,
and at their new Haven.

That night there entered two ships; in the one of them was the commissarie
Doublet who brought fifty thousand crowns for the workmen, the which are
commonly soldiers who gain very much.

Yesterdaies prisoner said among other things that the Sunday before, the
soldiers had mustred upon the East; and insteede of two stiuers which they
received, they promised the^ 5. but for that they were ill paid the two, they
had less hope of the five, and that many fled away daily and many died, and
that within three days they had found three soldiers frozen to death in one
lodging.

The enemy shot vehemently that day from their new battery betwixt the Cateyes
and Reisern-heubt; they pierced some houses in the top, and shot against
Sand-hill the which seemed to them of the Town a mere folly, for if they had
spent 10000. Canon shot against this Bulworke and the rest, they should have
auailed themselves little or nothing at all.

The 6. of December it chanced (the tide being low) two of the enemies
soldiers came to the bancke of the Gollet on the East Side, to whom two
soldiers of the Town showed them selves on the other side, all of a good
humor, without any will to hurt one another, who parled friendly together: the
enemies asked them of the Town what they thought of the plat-forme which was
upon the Gollet, and whether they of the Town could hereafter receive in any
victualles, with such like discourses: whereunto the Townsmen answered, that
they little regarded that plat-forme, for that there was a new Haven made, to
use when need should require; and that they looked to receive daily store of
victualles and other things necessary: and besides that, they had yet store of
provision for a long time of good Wine and good English Beer, and better
cheap then in the Camp; well said the others, we will go and drink with you,
look you use us well: hereupon a horseman of the enemies came, still crying
after his companions, who retired, saying, we recommend you unto God until our
next meeting.

In the morning they might perceive 400. Wagons going toward the East, but the
enemy was not seen to work in any place.

They without, brake and burnt all their Gabions which were upon the Gollet,
whereas all the plat-forme appeared plain, and there might they see some loope
hoales.

The Townsmen shot all night with fiery Bullets into the Camp, and the enemy
likewise into the Town, wherewith there was a woman slain and her husband
hurt.

The 7. of December both morning, and evening they shot fiery Bullets and
stones of either side; in the morning there were some of the town hurt, and
amongst the rest Sir Horatio Veres Secretary had his leg shot off.

They without, shot furiously into the Town from their battery which they have
raised at the foot of the downs, upon the end of the dike on the East Side,
as near the Town as might be, where they had planted three pieces.

At night Sir Horatio Veres Secretary (having his leg cut off) died.

The 8. of December in the morning they of the Town began to play with two
whole Canons and three demies, against the enemies new work, the which they
had raised betwixt the Cateyes and Reisern-haubt, which sport continued above
two hours. In the mean time the enemy shot violently into the Town from
their other batteries of the west, most part whereof lighted upon the houses,
which the Townsmen little regarded, being acquainted therewith.

Besides they might see them without, labor carefully upon the downs, to make
a new trench of wood to go from one battery to another.

In the night, two Barks went out and one came in, with a little shaloup at
whom the enemy shot hard, but could not hit them: this was the first time
they shot from their battery which is upon the Gollet.

There entered likewise a shaloupe by the North-Hauen, into the which there came
a Canon shot from the West, which carried away a Mariners arm: They shot
much on either side yet few were hurt.

The night before the 9. day there were many stones and fiery Bullets shot off
either side, according to the custom: and some Bullets passed through the
houses: a Burgess found in his celler in the morning three canon Bullets the
which had made a great noise and broken all there abouts.

The night before the tenth of December, after they had stayed of either side,
at midnight they began to shoot many stones and Musket shot until the morning.

In the night they of the Town heard their enemies laboring upon their new
plat-forme in the East, to beat in and cut, as if they had driven in some
piles, and had planted more Canon.

After noone a Mariner entered by the North Haven in a shaloupe, who was come
from England, and had brought a vessel full of goods, the enemy shot at him
but could not reach him: He said that he had hard reported at Sand-witch by
Flemmings that were good and credible men, and did assure it for certain, that
the fire which had been lately in Alberts fort came from heaven, and had taken
first in the Archdukes lodging.

The 11. of December as the day before, the enemies were busied to deface their
old works and Ramparts upon the South and South-west, to have Wood to burn,
the Townes-men shot sometimes at them with their Canon.

They shot also from their new battery upon the Gollet, into the Town and
upon the Haven, to try their Canon, without doing of any great harm, there
were but three hurt that day in the town, and without danger of death.

The night before the 12. of December they began again to shoot stones and
fiery Bullets, until midnight without any great effect.

In the night a little Boat went from the town to the Fleet, to fetch from
the English ship (whereof has been spoken) certain sheep and live hogs,
and returned into the town, beating the hogs to make them gront, to spite
the enemies, who shot after them yet could not hit any.

In the morning the enemy shot into the town, and at the Bulworke of Pekel,
from their batteries of Cateyes and the Downs.

The 13. of December there entered a Bark laden with fresh fish into the Town,
at whom the enemies made two shot but could not hurt him.

Captain Gisbrecht Kolbe of Bruges, dyed of a burning fever, having been sick
only two days.

It was such a miste that day, as they could scarce see from the town unto the
enemies trenches.

There was a Canonier slain, and no man else hurt.

The 14. of December from the beginning of the night unto the morning, they
shot fiery Bullets and stones on either part, with ordinary Bullets through
the houses: the Governors house was shot through at noone day, yet no man was
hurt.

In the night a ship of Vlisingue went out of the Haven, at whom the enemy shot
not.

In the afternoon the enemy changed his guardes, at whom the besieged shot
as soon as they might discover them.

The 15. of December (according to the custom of war) they shot of both
sides, but there was no man flaine nor hurt within the town.

At night three ships went out of the Haven, and were nothing indomaged by
the enemy, who shot at them.

The 16. in the beginning of the night the enemy battered in ruin, and shot
some fiery Bullets into the town.

In the night the enemies brought before the town three great Barks full of
stones and sand, with an intention (during the darkness) to sink them in the
gollet: and so to stop the passage of the ships: but this devise succeeded
not: the Barks were cast directly against the old Town where they ran a
ground.

The morning was so dark as they could not discern what the enemy did, but
about noone the water being low, the enemies began to play with their Muskets
and Canon-shott into the town, yea upon the three Barks that were run on
ground, whether they of the Town were gone to see what was in them: their
Horsemen came likewise (having past through the Haven) and chased them of the
Town away three times, so as they were forced to leave them and to attend more
water.

The 17. of December the enemy shot many stones into the Town. The same day,
one of the enemies horsemen being drunk, came to the halfe-Moone of the town
(which is upon the gollet;) and entreated them to lead him to his quarter: they
in the halfe-Moone slew his horse, and (to be short) took him prisoner.

Upon the West side, two Italiens (standing Sentinel,) were taken and brought
prisoners into the town.

The three Barks (whereof we did speak) were this night beaten in pieces by
them of the Town, and the greatest part of the wood carried in.

In the afternoon the besieged shot against their enemies battery upon the
Cateyes, and toward the East upon the enemy that was come down upon the
Sands, the Sea being gone: of whom they slew some, and the rest fled. There was
one man slain in the town, and three hurt.

The 18. of December in the morning, a ship went out of the Haven, at whom the
enemy made three shot but hit it not.

After noone they of the Town seeing the enemies change their guards, shot at
them.

The prisoners that were taken yesterday, said that their men had no opinion
nor courage to take the town by assault: and that their only hope was in time
to stop the coming in and going out of the ships.

At night there went out two ships, and the enemy never shot at them. The
enemy shot fiery Bullets and stones at the town until midnight.

The 19. day in the morning being fair, there went a Bark out of the Haven,
at whom they shot from the battery that is upon the Gollet, but hurt them
not: after noone they shot no more on either side.

The 20. day they of the town shot furiously against a Block-house, where they
did see the enemy working, and amongst the guards when they changed: the enemy
shot so little this day and the day before, as there was no man slain in the
Town, but some hurt.

The 21. An assault given, and the enemy repulsed with loss.
of December at the break of day the tide being spent, the Archduke gave a
furious assault to the old Town, with 700. or 800. men, the which continued
well two hours.

The assailants with a certain artificial fire burnt the Palissadoes, but
they within (the alarm being given) played with their Canon and Musket through
the troops; so as the water rising, the enemies were forced to retire to their
trenches, without getting any thing, but leaving behind them many slain and
hurt: they of the Town issued forth, and among other prisoners brought in a
Spanyard, a man of command, who being examined by the General, said, that the
truth was, the Archduke his Lord, had taken occasion to press the Town by
the weakness of the Garrison, and small number of Soldiers that were in it;
and that of long time they had received no refreshing of Soldiers and
victuals, whereof he had certain intelligence: that to this end his Highness
without loosing any more time, had gathered together as many Soldiers as
possibly he could, out of Brabant, Arthois, Hannault and other places, and had
brought to the number of ten thousand men, being resolved to assault it, in
diverse places, the which he did hope to take by Christmas, and it might chance
before, if occasion were offered. The General having fully understood the
confession of this prisoner, and knowing that it was true, for that a little
before he had received the like advice from diverse places, being conformable
there unto, and with all that he had made trial of the weakness of his men
in this last assault, and that he had not soldiers sufficient to man all the
places of the Town, and to defend them; he thought it fit, (to break of the
enemies desseigne, and to avoid this danger, and also to gain some time) to
entertain him with a vain hope, and under color of composition, to spend
some days in parle, not doubting but to draw it so out in length, until the
succors which he expected were arrived at the least he should have sometime to
set his men in order; and in the mean time to prepare al things necessary for
the defense of the place: for this reason he sends Captain Lewis to the Camp,
to make a motion for a peace, and to demand a truce and cessatio^ of arms,
during the conference, and for assurance thereof hostages to be given of both
sides. Captain Lewis (having had a good audience of the Archduke, A treaty
with the Archduke to win time.
and delivered all that he had in charge, returns unto the town with his
answer, and on his highness behalf there came with him Captain Rabas Governor
of Escluse a Town in Flanders, and the Sargeant Mayor of the Spaniardes, to
remain in Hostage for assurance of the treaty. At their first coming there
was some disorder among the soldiers for want of well understanding*
esspecially among the Romans or new Gueus (these are they which yielded up S.
Andrews fort to Prince Maurice, in the I Will of Bomel, and turned to his service
in the year 1600.) which caused an alarm in the Town, so as the deputies or
Hostages retired to the Camp: a while after this trouble being pacified,
General Vere sent two English Captains again unto the Camp with whom those
men (before mentioned) returned, to treat on the Archdukes behalf with them of
the Town. The General propounded unto them (as they said) articles very
impertinent and without reason, that is. That he would depart with coulors
flying and full arms, and that the soldiers should carry away their beggage,
victual and Canon, moreover he demanded a marvelous great some of money for the
soldiers, and some days of respight, that they might (at their ease) ship
their goods and Canon, and carry them away. Ribas made many iournies to know
his Highness pleasure, who yielded to most part of the articles, but he would
by no means hear of giving any money to the soldiers, and would have them go
away by Land, offering to give them a Conuoy to Breszkins, right against
Flussingue, or near unto it, to pass at their pleasures into Zeland,

On the other side they of the Town would not go from their first articles,
only they yielded some thing in that which concerned the Canon and arms. And
so three days weere spent in these parlies.

During this treaty and cessation of arms, many inhabitants of Bruges and
other places both of the East and West side, walking along the Sea side, came
near unto the Town, and talked with the Townsmen who showed themselves
unarmed upon the Rampars.

The 22. of December General Vere was all day busied in disposing of his
guard, and in setting a better order among the Soldiers, to endure a new
assault if the enemy had charged them: the enemy was also all the day in
arms and changing of his guardes, which was the cause they began to shoot
again on either side.

There came from the Fleet into the Haven 32. sail, at whom the enemy shot
from four batteteries, yea from that which is upon the Gollet, but the
greatest harm they did, was to shoot through some of them, yet all the
merchandise and every thing within them was safe.

They of the Town labored continually in the new Haven, without any
intermission, no not in the night.

The night before the 23. of December, the enemy shot much upon the town,
and battered it in ruin.

The same night there entered two small Barks into the town without any harm.

After midnight being a low water, General Vere went forth in person with two
Captains more with him into the old town, to visit it and to view the
situation, and went the round, encouraging the Soldiers and commanding them
to keep good guard.

In the morning they began to shoot on either side: the enemy shot much at
the three ships which had been pierced.

During the treaty their Highnesses showed themselves before the Town within
Canon shot: the Infanta was upon the nearest Mountains of Sand, with twenty
Ladies and Gentlewomen in her train, and the Archduke with many Gentlemen,
and the guardes of his body, being so near as one might easily discern them,
the which was also confirmed by the Governor of Escluse, that their Highnesses
were come thither under the assurance of the truce.

Hereupon the 25. of December being Christmas day, a fleet of Ships of
Zeland came before the Town, in the which besides all other kinds of
provision, there were five Ensigns of Zelanders which made 600. men and 300.
Mariners, the which entered into the Town at diverse times in long boats and
Shaloups by the North entry or middle haven at noone day in view of the enemy,
who shot at them from the four batteries of East and West without ceasing,
and yet did no other harm but only hurt three Mariners: by this means the
treaty was broken off: and they said unto the Governor of Escluse, that he
must return to the Camp, for that the cause of this treaty ceased, by the
arrival of these succors, whereat he was much amazed, growing in choler for
that they had retained him there for nothing, and using some injurious words,
he maintained that there were no Soldiers arrived, but only some munition
and victuals, until that Captain Pottey (who came with the Fleet, and whom
he knew well) was brought before him, and assured him that it was so: About
noone the Governor of Escluse was led out of the Town, and two hours
after, one of the English Captains returned for him into the Town, and having
sent back the Satgent-Maior of the Camp a Spaniard, the other English
Captain returned in like sort: this done there was great joy in the Town for
their happy and unexpected delivery, General Vere sending back the Sargeant
Mayor, charged him with a letter to the Archduke of his excuses, as follows.

We have heretofore held it necessary for certain reasons to treat with the
deputies which had authority from your highness, but whilst we were about to
conclude upon the conditions and articles, there are arrived certain of our
ships of war, by whom we have received part of that which we had need of, so
as we cannot with our honor and oath continue the treaty, nor proceed in it,
the which we hope your Highness will not take in ill part, and yet when your
power shall reduce us to the like estate you will not leave (as a most generous
Prince) to give us a gentle audience.

From our Town of Ostend the 25. of December. 1601. Signed. F. Vere.


THe 26. of December, after that these spectators which did attend another
issue of the business had been refused, they began again the war more
cruelly then before, the enemy battred in ruin above the plat-forme which is
upon the Gollet, but the besieged were so acquainted with it that they cared
not for it.

The same day there entered 48. sail laden with victualles, munition of war
and other things necessary, by the Gollet into the Town, the enemies Canon
hurt but two ships, the which notwithstanding were saved, and other of them by
the indiscretion of the Pilot ran a ground on the enemies side, the which was
spoiled and burned by them.

All this time they kept strong and good guard.

It seemed the enemy had a meaning to give an other assault unto the Town, for
this cause there was good guard kept and the gardes doubled, and all things
fit to maintain an assault held in a readiness, but they attempted nothing,
for that the enemies desseigne had been broken for this time, by the means of
this parley, during the which the succors arrived.

The 27. of December, the enemy began again to shoot stones and fiery bullets,
and they of the Town sent them their exchange presently.

The same day there came fourteen sail into the Town, at whom the enemy
made above sixty Canon shot, but did them little harm, only one bark
laden with turffes, ran a ground upon the East port, against the Sea dike, at
the which the enemy shot vehemently, and beat it almost in pieces, yet all
the turffes were saved: So within five or six days there entered forty eight
ships into Ostend, whereof three only were lost by the ill conduct of the
Pilots. And on Christmas day there entered at the least 400. long boats and
shaloupes with soldiers, and the most of them in the day time, the which the
enemy could not hinder with their four batteries of the East and West.

They expected also in the Town a greater number of soldiers to fortify the
Garrison the which gave them more courage and assurance.

The 28. at night there went two ships out of Ostend, at whom the enemy shot
but he could not reach them. The same night there entered 200. Mariners into
the Town to fortify the Garrison.

The enemy planted 12. or 13. Gabions under the downs, right against the west
Port, where before there had bin a battery of two Canons, the which was partly
mouldred away, and partly beaten down with the town Canon. About noone a wagon
went from Albert fort to the Cateyes, they which seemed to be well laden, about
the which there were some horsemen; they of the town made two shot at them from
Sand-hill, which did beat the Wagon in pieces and scattered the horsemen.

The 29. the enemy began again to shoot with fiery Bullets and stones, the
which they had not done in some days past.

At night there went forth 4. ships, at whom the enemy made some shot from
their battery which is upon the Gollet, but did not hurt them: an Italian
being in guard was taken by the neck and brought into the town, who said that
the greatest part of the men of war were retired, and that there remained no
more in the Camp but what was necessary for the ordinary gards the which was
false, as appeared afterward. A horseman of the enemies (the water being low,)
entered into the old Town, and took a Sargeant prisoner, but a Musketier shot
so well after him as he killed his horse betwixt his legs, and by this means
freed the Sargeant, the horsman notwithstanding saved himself, and the saddle
was brought into the Town.

The enemy planted on two broken batteries at the West, upon either a Canon,
with the which they shot against the Porke-espike and Sand-hill, the which they
of the Town held a mere folly and did not esteem it.

The Town was wonderfully fortified by the great care and diligence of
General Vere, who himself in person stood in guard in the night, whilst the
tides were low the which did much encourage the soldiers.

The 30. of December, there was little shooting neither did any vessel enter
nor go forth by reason of the great wind.

It was so quiet about the Town, as one would not have said it had been
besieged, the enemy had enough to do against the cold.

The 31. of December there was in a manner no shooting all day or night.

The besieged having intelligence that the enemy prepared to give them a new
assault, they manned their chief places, as Helmont, Sand-hill and others: and
furnished them with Canon and stones, the which wrought the effect that shall
be spoken of on the 7. of January.

At night two ships went forth without annoyance.

It was thought the Town was now forrified with above 1200. men, all which
labored above eight days in the fortifications, where nothing was forgotten
that might help the besieged or annoy the enemy.

That day there no speech of any slain or hurt.

The first of January, they sent new years gifts with Musket shot; 1602.
the enemy made 10. or 12. Canon shot at the Town without any harm doing,
there was no man slain nor hurt that day.

The Archdukes men (knowing they did but thunder with their Canon through
houses already broken,) grew daily more cold; that day there went no ship in
nor out, by reason of the great wind: a Bark which the day before had stuck
upon the Sands near unto the half Moon, was drawn into the Haven this night.

The 2. day there was little shooting on either side, only in the morning they
sent some Canon-shot one unto another, but (a great rain falling) they stayed,
so as that day there was no man slain nor hurt in the Town.

The 3. of January, the enemy made two or three shot into the town, and so
rested all that night, they shot awhile in the day time but hurt no man.

General Vere had sent some Soldiers into the country to learn some news;
having been six days abroad, they returned this day, and brought news, that
in the country they durst not say, but that the Archduke was already master
of the town, although his resolution were only to give a general assault
within eight or ten days, the which they held so assured, as they durst not
hold the Town but for taken.

The 4. of January they discharged many Musket shot, and about midnight the
enemy shot 8. or 10. Canon-shott, and an hour or two after day, 10. or 11.
more, with one of the which a Smith was hurt in his house with a piece of a
Stone, and some Soldiers.

All that day nor night no ship went in nor out: about noone they of the
town discovered in the enemies camp some Nobleman mounted upon a white
Horse, before whom marched five or six foote-men: they shot at them, and the
enemy into the Town, which sport continued two hours and more: there were
three Soldiers slain in the Town and some hurt.

The 5. of January, they did shoot continually day and night on either part,
and there were three soldiers in the Town slain.

The enemies made a new Port at their fort which is in the East.

The 6. of January, they shot much on either side according to their custom,
but they of the Town more often then the enemy, for that they showed
themselves but one or two at a time: about four of the clock in the after
noone the enemy releeuing his gardes, they of the Town shot furiously at them,
and they answered them with the like, there was no man slain in the Town but
one or two hurt.

The same day three ships went forth, at whom the enemy shot much, they did no
other harm but brake one of their Masts, yet they went away safe.

The 7. day of January, the Archduke battered all the day long, (without
intermission) the Bulworke of Sand-hill, Helmont, Porke-espike and other places
near unto them, with 18. Canons from two of his batteries, the one is at the
foot of the downs upon the Cateyes, and the other on the South Side thereof,
all the Bullets waying 40. or 46. pounds a piece, the Canoniers did reckon
above two thousand shot, besides that which was shot on the East Side of the
Town: this done about six of the clock at night the tide being spent he gave
a general assault, his numbers were great, his horsemen driving them forward
behind, and they came with great fury upon the old Town, A furious and
bloody assault.
the which they entered by the West Haven, and by it, (as also along the shore)
they began to give the scalado to Sandhil, (having first broken and
overthrown the Pallissadoes) and had (to that end) carried many ladders with
them, and light Bridges for an assault, the which they fastened in diverse
places with such fury, as it seemed the town would be taken.

General Vere with his Brother Sir Horatio were placed in that quarter with a
troop of chosen Soldiers, to succor their men in case there were need, who
seeing what past, the General crossed (with a part of his troop by the mines)
into the False-Braye, casting himself with great cries upon the Archdukes
men, whom he repulst three times, and although they returned always with fresh
Soldiers, yet could they not prevail with their Pikes and Muskets against the
fury of the English: notwithstanding the Archdukes men did well, and gave an
assault at one instant in all places: yet must they needs fly. The advantage
of the besieged consisted in the preparations which they had made, being long
before advertised of the enemies desseigne.

Upon the East Side the assault was likewise given, Assault upon the East
but about two hours too late, for the water began now to rise, the which did
much amaze the Soldiers, for they did see that if they stayed there any longer
they could not be relieved by their fellows, which was the cause that they
retired: the greatest slaughter was made in their retreat, for the Canon
(charged with chains and small Bullets,) and the Muskets could not miss so
thick a troop.

The Archdukes men gave an assault also unto the Fortes of Helmont,
Porke-espike, Assault at Helmont and the English trenches.
and to all the English Trenches, which Trenches (according unto the Generals
order and command) being weakly manned, were easily taken, but soon after
finding great resistance in the town, at the Polder, South-bulwarke and their
Rauelins: considering that there was no means to come unto the town that way,
after they had set fire on the Corpse de guard, they abandoned the trenches.

General Vere had caused two double Canons to be planted that day upon the
flanks of the West port, with some other pieces that were there before, the
which with others in other places, did scour along the Sand-hil and the West
Rauelin, and played upon the coming and return of the enemies, and whilst
the assault continued, they charged them with chains and nails, and little
sacks full of Musket Bullets, which made a great slaughter, so as there was a
pitiful cry of hurt men and dying, and the Soldiers fell one upon an other
pelmel.

The enemy being hot at the assault, and the water risen; General Vere
caused the sluices to be taken up, the which did cool the enemies courage: and
he (growing more and more assured) charged them and put them to flight,
recovering all their ladders, bridges and other instruments which they had
brought.

All about the Sand-hill even unto the old Church, and all about the
Porke-espike, in the West Rauelin, and in the English trenches, all was full of
dead bodies: I speak not of those that were slain going and coming by the
Canon charged with chains and small shot, nor of those that were drowned, some
of whose bodies were carried along the shore even unto Calais.

The spoil was great in money, apparel, and other things of price: Searching
among the dead, they found a young Spanish woman near unto Sand-hill, in man's
apparel, the which (as they might guess by her wounds) had been slain at the
assault, she had under her apparel a chain of Gold set with precious
stones, with other Iewelles and silver, during this assault the Archduke was
behind the battery of Cateyes, and the Infanta Isabella at the fort of Isabella.

Those which gave the assault to the old Town were furnished with two or
three days victuals, which they had brought in by sacks, they had also all
kinds of instruments to entrench themselves if the enterprise had succeeded.

They of the Town had dismounted and cast down all the great pieces that were
in the false bray and at the Porke-espike, least the enemy should use them
against themselves: the enemy had already brought six Barrelles of Poulder to
the Rauelin of the Porke-espike, to furnish it and defend it against the Town,
but having no leisure to use them, they were forced to leave them to save their
lives.

The order which the Archduke had given, was that during the chief assault on
the West side, other troops should charge upon the East, and if this had been
executed with dexterity, and that all his troops could have joined together,
General Vere had had much more trouble to resist them, and the party had been
doubtful.

They were to that end in theer great battailons before the Town upon the
Gollet, but the tide which came in (as we have said) did somewhat disappoint
this desseigne; then one of the Town going out of the half Moon, yielding
himself unto them, diuerted them, saying that there were but forty soldiers
in the half Moon, and offered to conduct them thither, the which he did and
they took it easily. The Generals wisdom.
General Vere with great judgment had left it thus ill manned to draw the
enemies thither and by that means divide them, and make them to loose time,
contenting himself to guard the strongest places and most importing, assuring
himself that he should soon recover the weaker.

The Archdukes men having thus taken the half Moon, and being many therein,
they began with Spades, Pike-axes and other instruments which they had
brought, to fortify themselves against the Town, but all prevailed not, for
they of the Town began to shoot at them from the South Bulworke and from that
of Spain, with their Canon and Musket, with such fury as they slew very many:
and with all seeing the tide to rise more and more, they began to faint,
there upon General Vere sent Captain Day with some troops against them: who
fell upon them with threats and cries, and chased them out with great effusion
of blood; the next day they told 300. slain in the half Moon, besides them
that were drowned and hurt.

In this general assault which continued above two hours, The Archduke
loses above 2000. men.
in all the places above mentioned, the Archduke lost above 2000. men amongst
the which there were a great number of noble men, and commanders in war, that
is the Cont d' Imber an Italian, Noble men slain.
who offered as much gold as he did way for his ransom, and yet he was
slain by a simple soldier; Don Durango Master of the Camp, Don Aluares
Suares Knight of the order of S. Jacques, Simon Anthony master of the Camp,
the Sargeant Mayor who had been in hostage at Ostend in December, 1601. and
the liuetenant governor of Andwerpe.

There were only 30. or 40. soldiers of the Town slain, and about a 100.
hurt: but of men of command there were slain Captain M. Haeffren, Captain
Nicholas Vandenlier, and a liuetenant of the new Geulx, two English
Liuetenants, an Ancient, two fouriers of Captain Haeffrens, a gentleman of
General Veres, and Sir Horatio Vere was hurt in the leg.

The Archduke sent a trumpet the next day to have leave to search among the
dead, the which was granted him for four hours.

The names of the noble men and chiefes which commanded the Archdukes men at
this assault are Cont Farnese an Italian with 2000. men of his Nation against
Sand-hill. The Cont Bouquoy with 2000. men upon the Gollet against the East
Rauelin, The commanders names for the Archduke at the assault.
but for that the tide was too high before he began to charge, he retired and
went upon the half Moon, from whence he was expelled. The Governor of Dixmude
with 2000. men against the Porke-espike, who was repulst, another Captains
with 500. men upon the west Rauelin, and an other with 500. men also against
the south squares (there are fortifications made in square, whereof they take
the name) and the Sargeant Mayor against the West square with a 1000 men from
whence they were all repulst.

And for that all kinds of lewd people fly into the low Countries, from
Italy, Spain, Germany and al other foreign Countries, as if cofers full of
crowns attended them wide open, we will here set down the copy of a letter
found about one that was slain, to the end they may see to what a feast they
bring them, and how they are served.

GOod brother, after my humble commendations done unto you, I will let you
understand that I am in good health thanks be unto God, hoping to have the
like news of you, moreover I would not fail to acquaint you with that which
passes here, first you must understand that I have great want and much pain,
as well by reason of the bad weather, as through cold; for all the Country here
abouts is covered with water, and we are very ill paid, and without hope of
any better hereafter, which is the only reason why our enemies hold Ostend so
long.

They are as strong as they were the first day we came before it, and we know
not what means there is to take it, being impregnable, if God do not look on
us in mercy and pity, and take compassion of our extreme miseries, and of
the great mortality which is among the poor soldiers; we are 48. hours in
the Water in guard in the trenches, and never stir, and are not much better
in our quarter; and yet we must take all patiently, and besides all this we
do daily yea hourelye expose our bodies to the mercy of the Canon, Musket,
Stones, Grenadoes, and other small vessels full of wilde-fire, without straw
to lie on, victualles or any thing else, but what we buy for four times the
value, you may thereby guess in what case a poor soldier lives, that is naked
and without money at this time, the which is rightlye to die of hunger and
cold; this reigns chiefly among the Soldiers new come from Italy and
Spain, whom I have seen 18. or 20. dying together behind our quarter. For my
part God be thanked I have neither been sick nor hurt, and I have a crown in
my purse, the which makes me to hold my self the happiest Soldier in the
army, for money is dainty here, and it is held a strange thing to see a piece
of silver. The God of all mercy help us; but truly it is a great folly to
believe that his Highness can take Ostend. From the Camp this 29. of December
1601.

The 8. of January there were great numbers of dead bodies seen before the
old town 40. and 50. on a heap all naked: they were all goodly young men and
black, as Spaniards and Italiens. The Archdukes men had carried away three
Boats full. They had a white mark in their hattes for a token: some prisoners
said they had been forced to this assault by the Archduke, who had been
drawn thereunto by some Captains, which desired to find a means to free
themselves from these toils and miseries, and to seek to make an end of the
siege of Ostend: the which was also his Highness intention, and indeed it
freed a great number of the miseries of this world. They say they had made an
oath to put all to the sword they should find in the town, both women and
children.

The 9. day there was little shooting on either side. This day the Captains
and men of command of the town which had been slain at the last assault,
were honorably buried.

There was no speech of any slain or hurt in the town, some of the enemies
which had been slain or drowned at the last assault, were cast up by the sea
into the old town, some of them were richly apparelled and had good booty.

The 10. of January the Muskets played hotely on either side, as for the Canon
they of the town shot more then the enemy, and it seemed the enemies were so
amazed with the reception they had had of them of the town, as they knew not
what to do, such as escaped, thought still that death held them by the throat.

The 11. day there was no great shooting, and that without any great effect,
but piercing of houses: That day there came certain ships full of men of war
to the fleet before Ostend, the which did much rejoice them of the town, but
as some Captains and Soldiers would have entered into the town, the enemy
shot at them, and slew some: and about three of the clock in the afternoon
some Ships and Barks coming toward the town, the enemy shot at them, and
struck a ship betwixt wind and water, and sunk a Bark which was before the
North-hauen, but all the men were saved, only two Soldiers were hurt, but
without any danger.

The night before the 12. day there was great shooting of Muskets on either
side: they of the town shot two hours together fiery Bullets and great
stones. then they ceased until day, when as they began again, the tempest was
so great as no ship could come into the town, there was no man hurt.

In the beginning of the night, the tide being gone, some of the enemies
horsemen past by the old port into the old town, with an intent to set fire
of the Barks, with the which they brought the Soldiers from the ships into
the town, but they of the town shot so furiously after them from Helmont and
the West Bulwark, both with Canon and Musket, as they forced them to retire
with speed.

All this night was spent in fetching of the Soldiers from the ships unto the
Town, the which was done without the loss or hurt of any man.

The morning being fair there entered 16. ships by the gollet into the town,
at whom the enemies shot much, and did nothing but pierce through a ship, but
all the men and whatsoever was in it was saved.

After dinner the new troops with their colors were set upon the West port
of Helmont, where they did their deuoire to shoot at the enemies defenses: the
enemy shot also at the town from their battery on the West, without killing
or hurting of any man.

In the beginning of the night before the 14. day, they shot of either side:
they of the town trimmed up a great Bark with artificial fire, to burn some
of their enemies works, but this devise succeeded not.

In the morning before day, about four of the clock, being a full sea, ten
ships entered into the Gollet, but being forced to stay by reason of foul
weather, the enemy shot furiously at them and sunk three: there were three
slain, and three hurt, all that was in them was saved.

The same day the Seignior of Marquet came into the town with fourteen
companies of Soldiers, so as all the Trenches, Spurs, Bulwarks, and
rauelins of the town were then manned with new companies.

In the old town near unto the old Church in the afternoon, there was a
Lieutenant and an Ancient slain, and a Scottish-man had his leg struck off.

The 15. of January they entertained one another with Canon and Musket till an
hour within night.

There was great joy in the town, as well among the Soldiers as the
Inhabitants for the goodly succors that were come unto them.

There entered yet many Soldiers that night in Boats, and not one hurt. They
of the town shot more into the Camp then the enemy did into the town, yet
there was no man slain nor hurt.

The 16. of January in the beginning of the night they shot little* upon the
morning they of the town shot from the West Bulwark, but they answered them
not.

All this day was spent in mustering of the Soldiers in the Town. There were
81. companies of the old garrison, and 31. of the new: and although this were
done with great noise of Drums and shot of Muskets, yet the enemy made not
above three shot into the town, which made them of the town to think they
would raise the siege.

The 17. of January, three ships laden with victualles and English Beer,
entered by the Gollet, at whom the enemy made many a shot, but could not touch
them. That day there was nothing done, the enemy only defaced certain
batteries made upon the West and East.

The 18. day the enemy shot little, yet after dinner with one Canon shot from
the East, they slew 2. Soldiers in the green market, and hurt three, and with
another shot from the same place stroke of Captain Rolls liuetenants legs,
whereof he died presently and hurt two or three others.

And for that at the same time the enemies changed their gardes, they of the
Town played with their Canon and Musket through them, and overthrew many.

The 19. of January, there went forth seven ships full of soldiers, at whom
the enemy made no shot, the night was so dark as they could not see-them.

Both before dinner and after, the Canon played a little more on either side
then the day before. They of the Town shot against the battery of the Gollet,
and the Sand downs upon the East, and the enemy from the same place upon the
Town, and yet no man was hurt. But there died daily six or eight of
sickness.

The 20. of January, General Vere sent forth some of his Leapers or
adventurers to take some prisoner of the enemies Camp, they took an Italian,
whom the enemies would have taken from them but they could not.

This night there fell out a great accident at the going forth of the ships.
There were three sunk, whereof two were full of soldiers of the companies of
Captain Treslon Gistel and Hauttun: the third was a ship that brought
English Beeere. The Ancient to Captain Gistel saved himself and lost his
wife: there was also the widow of the deceased Treasurer or receiver of the
contribution. The C. Euereuuiin, and a comissarie of the treasurer Doublets.
They were about two hours crying for help, before the enemy could go unto
them, and if any had gone in time with boats, they might have retired them
from thence, but seeing that they of the Town did not succor them, they sent
a Drum through the Water to the enemies Camp, to require fair wars, else
they would all die with their arms in their hands: the enemies granted what
they demanded and took them prisoners, and presently the three vessels were
burnt.

All this night there was little slooting on either side, nor any one slain
nor hurt in the Town.

The besieged labored diligently betwixt the Bulworke of Pekel and the East
Port: In like sort at the new Haven: so as the Town grew daily stronger,
wherein General Vere spared neither pain nor travel without fear of any
danger, going the round twice a day and once a night, to see if the Corpse de
guard were well furnished, and the Sentinels well set, especially when the tide
was spent.

The 22. day of January, they shot of either side many fiery Bullets and
stones, without any hurt done in the Town, but that some soldiers going to
fetch away the bordes of some ships which had been sunk (ten or twelve days
before) the enemy shot at them from the battery of the Gollet and hurt four,
the which they of the Town seeing, they shot at this battery and at that of
the East downs from the Bulworke of Pekel.

That same day Captain Battemburg (who died of sickness the day before) was
honorably buried in the Town.

The 23. day one of the enemies (being very drunk) came into the Town, the
General caused him to be kept, that no man might speak with him before
himself. The General also sent a Drum to the enemy to know some news of
the prisoners that had been taken in the ships the 20. of this month. This
fugitive said that they had put some of them to death, for that they were of
that company that had yielded up S. Andrews fort

The besieged shot furiously from the Bulworke of Pekel, upon the Gabions which
were upon the Gollet.

The 24. of January, the shot of either side with fiery Bullets and stones
until midnight.

The fugitive said, that the pieces which were within the town upon
Flammemburg, the which are demie Culuerins, did much harm to the enemies
Camp, and that many soldiers had been slain.

The besieged labored to fortify the old Town, and had a 1000. men in work
there.

The enemy made a new battery on the West side, betwixt the battery of the
Cateyes and the West downs.

The enemies changed their gardes in the after noone, they of the Town shot at
them from the west port and from Helmont, and many were seen to fall.

The 25. of January, they shot furiously of either side, with fiery Bullets and
stones.

From the morning until noone al was quiet enough; but presently after, the
tide came with such a fury as all the Country was covered with water, and the
plat-forme upon the Gollet was so overflowed as they could do nothing with
their Canon.

That day an Ancient had his leg shot off with a Canon which came from the
West, and two Liuetenants of the new Garrison died of sickness: there was no
man else slain or hurt.

The 26. day two French soldiers ran to the enemy, they played hotly with
their Canon and Muskets against the Town, who presently repaied it, and it
seemed it was their duties to render carefully such offices one unto another.

The besieged (seeing many go and come betwixt Alberts fort, and the forts
which are near unto the Town) shot more vehemently then before.

They of the Town shot furiously from Flammemburg to the west downs, and the
enemies from the battery on the Gollet to Flammemburg.

That day one of the soldiers in guard in the half Moon upon the Gollet went
and yielded to the enemy. There was no man slain nor hurt in the Town.

The 27. day the Townsmen shot furiously with their Canon, Muskets, stones and
fiery Bullets into the enemies Camp, so as they were constrained to be all
night in arms until the morning that they ceased of all sides.

They were not seen to labor in any of their fortifications, although most
part of their trenches were broken.

The 28. of January, the besieged finding that the enemy labored at the
battery which is upon the Gollet, they played furiously on them from
Flammemburg, and the Bulworke of Pekel,

The same day one of the soldiers of Captain Grenu fled to the enemy, after
whom they of the town shot in vain,

They of the town having discovered some of the enemies Soldiers gathering of
Muscles upon the shore at the end of the Cateyes, they shot at them from
Helmount and slew some.

This night a small Bark went out of the Gollet without harm, which was the
first since the 20. of the month.

The 29. in the morning they shot furiously of both sides; yet there was no
harm done in the town: the rest of the day they were as quiet as the wars
had been ended.

The enemy labored no where, but they of the town were still about their new
haven and East-port,

The 30. the besieged seeing many of the enemies going and coming betwixt the
Cateyes and Albert fort, they planted against them those Canons which was upon
the West-port, Helmont and Sand-hil, with the which they slew many, for the
Bulwark of Sand-hill commands over all the Seashore, even unto the fort of
Albert.

The 31. of January they of the town shot so furiously from the Bulwark of
Pekel and Spain, upon ten or twelve small vessels which the enemy kept in a
little channel new made, and were new vnlading them, as they forced them to
leave their work: yet the enemy made not one shot into the town, but only
with sierie Bullets and stones against the ships that were within the gollet,
to the which they did no harm.

At night two ships went out of the Haven, and one Shaloup came in, at whom the
enemy shot but hurt them not.

The 1. of February the enemies changing their guardes after their accustomed
manner upon the West, they of the town shot many volees of Canon and Musket
after them.

The 2. of February the enemies stopped up a Blockhouse near unto Cowe-bridge,
and did fortify it, and did inuiron the Forte of Grossendurst with Palissadoes.

The Townes-men thinking they would also work at the Plat-forme which is upon
the Gollet, shot furiously at it from the Bulwark of Pekel: the enemy sent
them many Musket shot and fiery Bullets, yet no man was slain in the town,
and but three hurt.

The 3. of February General Vere sent an other Drum unto the Camp, for that
he whom he had sent the 22. of January (to learn news of the prisoners taken
the 20. day) was not returned: this brings answer that the first had been
detained until that the Count Bouquoy had news from the Court, upon the
demand which had been made unto him by General Vere, touching the prisoners,
the which (as the Trumpet reported) were 90. and had been all sent together to
Bruges, and that some sick and hurt men had perished in the Sea when as the
ships were burnt; and that the enemies had saved a Master of a ship and his
Boy, who were fled to the top of the Mast, which appeared yet above the water:
and that some of the prisoners had been slain in cold blood and some hanged,
for that (by their own confessions) they had been in S. Andrews Fort.

The 14. of February about midnight, the enemy shot some 80. Canon shot
against a ship that was not serviceable before the East port, for that they did
see some Soldiers in it that brake it in pieces, three of them had their
legs shot off, and some others hurt.

The same day a Soldier being in a lodging near the West-gate with a pott of
Beer in his hand was slain.

In the mean time the besieged shot furiously from the Bulworke of Pekel at
the platform of the Gollet.

Three Soldiers of the town being fled to the enemy, came presently forth in
view of the town, threatening (with spits furnished with roast-meat) as if they
had wanted victuals, the which was false.

The enemy labored upon the South-west near unto the Fort of Grossendurst,
at a Rampart which is in an old wall, the which they raised up higher, and in
the midst did build a Corpse de guarde, about the which they made defenses:
they of the town knew not what they would make, no more then of Grossendurst,
about the which they had made Palissadoes, for that they had not used them in
all this siege.

The town was then environed with 27. Fortes and Block-houses, in the
fortification whereof they labored daily.

In the beginning of the night of the fifth of February, they shot of both
sides with fiery Bullets and stones, but in the day time they shot nothing so
much.

The 6. of February in the night they of the town made many Canon-shott
against a certain work which the enemy began to raise at the end of their
battery on the Cateyes, more advancing toward the Sea, to plant Canon
thereon, besides those that were already, to shoot more easily at the ships
coming in and going out of the Haven.

The besieged shot also continually at the battery on the Gollet, from whence
the enemies shot to the sea dike, which is before the fortifications of the
town.

That day nor the day before there was no man slain in the town, only one
Soldier that was shot through, standing Sentinel in the old town upon the
East-rauelin.

The night before the 7. of February the enemy shot many Arrows with Letters
into the Town, by the which they promised to give good entertainment to those
that would yield unto them; saying that they had not sent them which yielded
unto the Galleys, and that the report of some of theirs which had fled into the
town was false.

They labored also this night at their work on the North of their battery of
Cateyes, and had raised it almost equal: they wrought also at their Ramper
near to Grossendurst.

They of the town wrought also at their new Haven, and in the fortifications
of the old town.

The 8. of February they shot all night on both sides with fiery Bullets and
stones, there was no man slain within the town.

In the morning a Soldier of the half Moon ran unto the enemy.

Before noone a French Soldier passed the Pikes, for that he had slain
another soldier trecherously, he had been discovered by the means of his
Hat, which fell down in flying away after that he had done the deed.

The besieged labored continually at the rampares of the old Town.

The 9. of February, they shot little of either side.

There were some soldiers embarked in the Haven which had stayed there above
three weeks attending the wind, to sail into Zeland, whereof there died many
daily of sickness.

The 10. of February, they shot on both sides with fiery Bullets, stones and
Muskets until midnight, and after they ceased.

The 11. day about two hours after midnight there went 12. ships out by the
Gollet, at whom the enemy made above 60. shot from their battery which is upon
the Gollet, and only shot one betwixt wind and water, the which returned into
the Town without any more harm: there was no speech of any slain or hurt
that day in the Town.

The 12. of February, there came 15. ships to Ostend, laden with munition,
victuals and soldiers, whereof two by the Mariners fault ran on ground
near to the enemies battery upon the Gollet, the one was full of Holland
Beer, some 36. or 40. yardes on the North side from the battery, in a place
whereas the Town soldiers durst not go for fear of the Canon, the enemy set
fire of it in the morning, but it would not take; the other was laden with
English Beer, as near the battery on the South side, or nearer, in a place
whereas they of the Town could not shoot at them; the soldiers of the half
Monne which were 250. yardes of drew out all the Beer and other things, when
as the enemy durst not show himself to hinder them, for fear of the Canon of
Pekel and the Bulworke of Spain, but they of the Town could not have the
other ship: a Mariner had his leg shot off, and a woman with two others
were hurt.

The enemies within few days had much advanced their battery of Cateyes, two
yardes toward the North, and began again to work: General Vere caused a
demie Culuerin to be planted against them, the which this night, (after a low
Water,) made twenty shot to hinder their work, and for that this piece was
upon Helmont, the enemies made four shot from the East against it, whereof
some passed over Helmont, and went into their own quarter which is upon the
Cateyes, wherein they hurt themselves, as they might see which were in guard at
the Porke-espike and Helmont.

This day five soldiers of the Town went and yielded to the enemy, fearing to
be punished for mutinies and disobediences.

The thirteen of February in the night, the enemies carried away by piece
meal whatsoever was in the ship that was run on ground of the North side
of their batterye, not daring then to go by day.

The same night the Leapers and adventurers brought a Spanish ancient prisoner
into the Town.

The 14. the enemy labored all night at their battery of Cateyes, and raised
up the end which they had begun the day before, almost equal with it,
although they shot continually at them from the Town.

This night a ship went forth of the Haven without harm, and yet the enemy
shot much at them.

There entered many soldiers in shaloupes from the ships of war into the
Town and no man was hurt.

The Spanish Ancient taken prisoner the day before, said, that the enemy had
small hope to take Ostend, and that the Archduke continued the siege against
the advice of the Council of war, and was grieved that he did not raise the
siege wholly, when as he went to succor Hertzeghenbusch, the which was a good
pretext, but seeing it was so, that for his own reputation and for the honor
of the King of Spain, it did import him to continue the siege, he would not
now raise it: moreover he said that there were 12000. foot and seven hundred
horse before the Town, and that they had promised five stiuers in money and
two in bread a day to every soldier but they were ill paid: and that at the
last assault, his highness had lost the choice of all his whole army, most
part of them being Spaniardes which had served the King in those Countries and
else where, and that the enemy was about some invention to stop up the Haven.

As for the fortifications of the town: there is in the old Town against the
Sea, from Sand-hill toward the North, four strong Blocke-houses, upon every
one of the which there are two Canons, and farther into the new Town they have
made a new Rampart, and new Ditch, and the old Rampars (which run along
the Sea) had been fortified within.

At this work and such like there were a 100. men laboring from one Sun to
another, one half labored from the night to the morning and rested the day,
and the other from morning until night and then rested, and they were paid by
the Commissaries of the Stats going from their work.

The 15. of February two ships went out of the haven at night without any hurt.

The enemy set that day 3. sentinels on the East side more then he was
accustomed, so as the half Moon was always environed with them.

The besieged thought it was by reason of the troops that were arrived, for
there were 15. companies come into the Town with Colonel Edmondt: yea some in
barks in the day time, at whom the enemy shot and hurt two Mariners.

The enemy labored also that day upon the North side of the battery of
Cateyes, not ceasing for all the Town Canon which played continually* they did
also shoot, but there was no man slain nor hurt in the Town, only one
Carpenter, who had his arm stroke off with a Canon upon the West bulworke.

The 16. of February they might see the three extraordinary sentinelles upon
the East, for that the enemy feared a sallie from the Town being little less
then 6000. men in it.

There were (besides this number) some Soldiers in the ships of war at
Anchor before the town, the which could not enter by reason of a tempest: yet
some being more hasty, entered in small Barks, one of them through error by
reason of the night, landed his men of the enemies side, and so returned
toward the ships, the Soldiers perceiving that they were of the enemies
side, ran to the waters side, where by good hap they found an other Bark
which came to land other Soldiers, of whom they demanded succor; the Mariner
having carried away his men, came to fetch them, but in the mean time the
enemy had discovered them, and pursued them, so as they were forced to run up
to the chinne in the water to save themselves, and there was not any one of
them lost.

The 17. of February the enemy began to shoot with his canon and stones into
the town, and they answered them with the like, the which continued all night.

They of the town shot all the morning from Sand-hill, Helmont, and the
West-gate Bulwark, at the battery of Cateyes, although they could not
perceive that the enemy had labored there that night or the night before.

The 18. of February in the beginning of the night they shot furiously on
either side, both with Canon and Musket; and as they changed their guardes,
Captain Bernards Ancient had his hand wherewith he held his colors struck
off with a shot. These Canonades continued all night, they of the town slept
not, but gave them their exchange, and in the morning they ceased a little.

There came an Italian flying into the town, who (by his saying) had slain
one of his companions at play. He said among other things, that the Archduke
was yet resolved not to depart from the town until he were master of it: and
that the enemy had resolved to make a Bridge upon the West-hauen, to pass
into the old town, and on the East Side they would make a ditche from the
Downs unto the Gollet, and besides that, they would spoil all the sluices and
channels which went into the West-gollet: and moreover he spoke something
touching the coffeehouse of the Soldiers in the Camp.

After dinner the enemy shot little into the town, and there was no speech
of any slain or hurt.

The 19. of February, as they were changing of their guards in the town, the
enemy played furiously at them both with Canon and Musket, and Captain Morgans
Ancient with three other Soldiers were slain at one shot, and some others
hurt: and soon after there were two other Soldiers slain, not far from
General Vere, who was upon Helmont, speaking with the Colonels Marquet, Lohn,
and Edmondt.

This night there entered into the Haven two ships laden with men, and three
with poulder, at whom the enemy shot but could not hit them. There was also
some Canon spent on either side without any hurt to the town.

The 20. of February the enemies Canon played all night, and slew Sir Horatio
Veres Cook in his Kitchen.

The same night there entered 6. ships into the Gollet, whereof two only came
into the town, the other four by the ignorance and fault of the Mariners ran
a shore near unto the enemies battery, one was laden with Turfes, an other
with Piles and Plankes, and the other two with Beer and other commodities: the
enemies did what they could to board them, but they were hindered by the
continual shooting from the town, which shot at them from Flammembourg and
the Bulwark of Pekel: most of the men saved themselves in the half Moon, but
the women and children were taken by the enemy. They of the town seeing the
tide come in, and that the enemy would take these ships, they ceased not to
shoot fiery Bullets at them, so as they beat them in pieces, the greatest
part of the merchandise was seen floating upon the water, the rest burnt with
the ships.

The enemy grieved for the loss of this booty, shot from all their batteries
upon the town, they slew two Soldiers and hurt some others.

The enemy going to work upon the North side of their battery of Catteyes,
they of the town shot at them to hinder them.

The besieged were not idle, but labored to fortify the town against the
violence of the Sea, for that the Mariners said they should within few days
have a great tide.

The 21. of February there was little shooting on either part. The enemies
labored carefully to raise their trenches and defenses upon the West, and that
night they did much advance their battery of Cateyes.

Two ships more straied out of their course toward the enemies camp, near to
the downs upon the East, but they of the town thought they had done it
expressly to sell their merchandise the better, seeing the enemies shaloups
board the^ without any show of hatred.

The enemies sent to the town the wives of six Soldiers whom they had taken
in the four former ships, after they had had their pleasures of them, and
turned them away naked, with other outrages, yea their little children were
black with stripes.

This day there was little shooting, nor any man hurt in the town.

The 22. of February in the beginning of the night, they shot furiously for an
hour and a half one against an other, the besieged continued all night, even
when the tide was spent, to hinder their enemies work. In the morning they
might discover where the enemies had labored upon the North of their battery
of Catteyes, and raised it somewhat.

Moreover the enemy labored upon the West corner of the West-downes, the
which they fortified in such sort, as if they meant to stay there ten years.

After dinner, a poor woman with child, the wife of one of Captain
Weinbergens Soldiers (who was in guarde in the half Moon) being gone forth
to gather up some boards of the broken ships, was slain most barborously by
one of the enemies, before she could be succored by them of the town: there
was none else slain or hurt that day.

The 23. of February the enemy shot much at the ships that lay in the town
ditches, discovering them easily for that the tide was high and the billow
great.

After dinner M. Georges ingenier of the town, being busy about the making of
some fire-workes, the next house being by negligence set on fire, fired his
work, and slew him with three of his servants, and hurt many others: the enemy
seeing this, shot both from East and west upon the Town for an hour together,
without any harm doing: the fire was presently quenched by such as are
appointed for the like accidents.

The 24. of February in the beginning of the night, the enemy shot fiery
Bullets and great stones into the Town.

The work which they had begone upon the North side of the battery of Cateyes
fell down for the most part, as also that which they had made under the corner
of the West downs, and that which they had begun upon the West downs was in
like sort ouerthrown, for that they were almost all made of the white Sand of
the downs, and the water had washed it away at the foot.

The old town was not freed from this nights ruin, the enemy seeing that
the last night the tide had made many breaches in the Sea dike, near unto the
East gate, they began to shoot from their battery of the Gollet to overthrow
it quite.

The Gabions which were upon the south side of this battery to the number of
35. were this night carried away by the sea, for that they were not full, and
served only for Blindes and couerings, for the chief battery is upon the
North, and there are 36. Gabions,

The enemy shot continually upon the old Town and the Porke-espike, to
increase the harm which the Sea had done them.

The Water was so high that day, as the Country upon the South and West was a
League about overflowed, and all the enemies trenches and Blockhouses environed
with water.

The English square was also in the water, the Countercarfes upon the west were
pierced, and there came much water into the Town both by the East and West.

There was a breach of ten yardes long in the sea dike near the East gate; the
Bulworke of Pekel began to fall, the new Haven was spoiled and the old Town
much indamaged.

Part of the half Moon upon the Gollet was fallen, whilst this great tide
lasted, the enemy made above 1800. Canon shot against the Town, and especially
against the dike and other places that were endamaged: yet there were few
slain or hurt.

They of the Town answered them in like sort from all quarters, and it was a
terrible thing to see, for both the Town and the Camp seemed as if they had
been all one fire: the alarm was general, not so much for the shot, as for
the great ruin the Sea made in diverse parts of the dike, Port, Rampars and
defenses.

The 25. day they might see diverse works under the West downs right against
the Porke espike overthrown, and that which had been begun on the North of
the battery of Cateyes to be much defaced: they without labored at the West
downs.

They of the Town shot from the Bulworke of Pekel into the Camp, and the
enemy into the Town, there was one soldier slain upon Sand hill and two hurt
passing upon the rampars.

The 26. of February, they shot on either side until midnight, and then ceased
a while.

Before noone the adventurers of the town brought in one of the enemies
prisoner, who at the first would not speak, seeming simple and a fool, but in
the end he said that two regiments were gone from the Camp into Brabant.

There was great joy in the Town, the besieged having discovered upon the West
some ships coming from Zeland.

The 27. of February, at the changing of the gardes two soldiers had either of
them a leg shot off.

The same night four ships went out of the Port, of the which the enemy shot
one through, yet by the dexterity of the Mariners it was drawn forth.

The Master of the works laboring in the Counterscarfe was shot into the
raines of the back with a Musket, and two others were hurt.

The enemy began to repair the corner of the west downs, and they drew out
great store of goods out of the boats that were in the new channel.

The 28. of February (the water being high) there entered 8. sail into the
Haven whereof the enemy shot two through, but for that the one got unto the
Rauelin of the Town and the other near to the Sea dike, they were presently
succored by them of the town, and all saved that was within them.

Colonel Dorth entered the town with a number of soldiers in shaloupes, and
some comissaries and treasurers of the States, with money for the soldiers and
laborers.

The Counterscarfe (which had been broken) was repaired this night by the
diligence of them that commanded in the Town: and likewise the old Town
(which had been much indamaged) was repaired and put in defense; so as the
besieged feared not their enemies on that side.

After dinner the besieged shot from Flammemburg, where they had planted two
demi culuerins, at certain soldiers that were upon the Sands, near unto their
boats, at the foot of the downs, who presently fled.

The enemy shot sometimes toward the Sea, against the ships that were in the
road: the ships of war also in going and coming shot at the Archdukes
Camp.

That day in the after noone four of the enemies soldiers came and yielded
themselves into the Town, and being pursued near, the besieged gave them
their hands: they said, their men had been on the East side four days
together in battle, fearing least they of the Town (who had received in so
many soldiers) would make some sally out upon them.

About that time the Spaniardes began to mutine in the Archdukes Camp, The
Spaniards mutine for want of pay.
and said openly, that they had brought them unto the slaughter yea unto hell,
many of them conspired together to carry away the Archduke and the Infanta (if
they could) to Newport, to have paiement of that which was owing them, by the
means of a general mutiny: this was discovered and ten or twelve of the
principal, (whereof one was all aparaled with gold) were stra^gled: Some
private men did write from Andwerp, that the Archduke did fortify his Camp
more against the secret practices of his own men, then against his enemies:
and that the Spaniardes having made some new practices, had been discovered by
some of them, and ten of the chief were presently hanged: they of Andwerp by
their letters lamented their miserable estate, Complaints of them of Antwerp.
for that they could hardly recover any victualles, and that with great
impositions, and yet they did see no advancement in their affairs, nor any
better hope to come: as for Ostend, there was less hope to take it then the
first day: and the desseigne which had been made to stop the gollet, and to
hinder the going in and out of ships, had failed, spending their time at
three platformes which batter the town in ruin, to tire the besieged with
their Canon, having no likelihood to force the town, in the which there were
above 6000. men in garrison, and they received fresh men daily, with munition,
victuals, and all other commodities by the gollet, in despite of the platform
which is thereon.

The night before the first of March it was a great mist, the enemy took
this occasion, fastening a Cable cross the Gollet, where the ships should
pass, tying nine pipes unto it, this was tied to three Anchors, to stay the
ships all together, and then to sink them with the Canon: but the ships by
chance stirred not: this fogge being past, the besieged discovered the pipes,
and by the means of an other dark cloud which came presently, they sent some
Boats to see what it was, who cut the Cable and brought it into the town, and
so this invention was made fruitelesse.

From the beginning until midnight both the Canon and Musket played much on
either side.

The same night there came five Barks to Ostend laden with fresh fish, at whom
the enemy shot but could not hit them.

This day three Soldiers of the town and a boy went and yielded themselves
to the enemy, and some days after a French Fourrier, who had mutined.

After dinner they of the town brought in a prisoner, Great necessity in the
camp.
who said there was great necessity in the army, many sick, and great
mortality, and that no man durst presume to speak of raising the siege, nor
discourage his companions, nor report any ill news touching the siege, under
pain of corporal punishment: and that their Highnesses had resolved not to
leave the town before they were masters thereof, according to the advice sent
out of Spain, whatsoever it did cost, or whatsoever could chance: and that all
the German Captains (which had served their Highnesses) were gone into
Germany to leauie troops. and that they were about some preparations to make
the gollet fruitless, and to hinder the entry of ships.

They might see the enemy busied still to repair the corner of the
West-downes, but they could not discern them working at the Cateyes, there was
no man slain nor hurt that day within the town.

The night of the 2. of March there was little shooting on eyther-side until
midnight, that (the tide being gone) they of the town shot upon the Camp, to
hinder their enemies work.

This night a ship went forth, and none came in, yet many Soldiers came into
the town in Shaloupes, which entered by the North-hauen. In the afternoon they
might see the enemies drawing forth diverse merchandise and commodities out of
the Boats which were in the new channel upon the East.

The 3. of March in the beginning of the night there was little shooting, yet
one shot struck of the legs of a Lieutenant and an Ancient upon Flammemburg.

The night being dark and the tide high, there entered 50. sail into the
town, at whom the enemy made 40. shot and never hurt them.

A little before day there entered eight sail more, there were yet many in the
road, and others which passed fetching the wind, to enter at night when it
should be dark, the enemy shot at them, yet could not hurt them.

And for that it was a great mist that day, and also there was a general
muster, there was little shooting nor any man slain nor hurt in the town.

The 4. of March (the tide being high) there entered 21. sail into the gollet,
the enemy shot two through, whereof the one was laden with Bauins, and entered
into the Haven, and the other with Turfes, the which by the error of the
Mariners who were blinded with the smoke of the Canon, ran on ground near
unto the enemies battery, the men were all saved and brought into the town,
which done the enemy set fire on the ship.

All that day both the Canon and Musket played hotly on either side: there were
four soldiers struck with one shot upon the Bulwark of Pekel, whereof two
died presently.

The night of the 5. of March, two small Barks with General Veres horses and
baggage went forth, at whom the enemy shot but hurt them not.

Before the break of day the enemy shot many fiery Bullets and stones into
the town, and struck off a Mariners leg which was in the new-hauen.

The Sea dike near to the West gate, having been broken, the enemy might see
from their battery of the Gollet, the Soldiers as they went and came in the
town, and shot at them, yet they hurt few.

In the afternoon they hurt four laborers which wrought in the Sea dike
near unto the East-port.

A little before, the Estates had sent an Ingenier into the town, who with
another (which had continued there all the siege) labored diligently in the
fortifications of the town, the laborers wrought cheerfully, for that they
were well paid.

The 7. of March they shot fiery Bullets and stones on either side until
midnight, and then the Canon and Musket played. They did easily see the enemy
labor at the Catteyes, but they suffered the corner of the West-downes to go
daily to ruin.

And for that at the West Square and at the Polder (which is without the town)
there was some thing ruined, they began to labor to fortify them with
trenches, defenses, and ditches of 60. foot, and the counterscarpes which are
about them: the which being finished, the enemy had no means to come near
the town on that side, nor by the North-west, for the town was exceeding well
fortified on that side, and almost impregnable.

The tide was so high that day by reason of a strong Northerly wind and a
tempest, as all the enemies Gabions and Block-houses were environed with water.

About noone a Soldiers wife being near the Eastgate where the dike was
broken, had her head shot off with a Canon, and a Soldier both his legs.

General Vere departed, General Vere leaves Ostend.
and Colonel Frederike Van Dorp commanded in the town, with the Colonels Dort
Marquet and Edmont.

The night before the 8. of March about midnight the water being high, there
entered 34. sail by the gollet into the town, at whom the enemies made but two
shot, although presently after the shot above 80. in one of these was the
baggage and provision of Colonel Dorp.

In the mean time they of the Town shot from Pekel Bulworke, and from that of
Spain, against the enemies battery, which kept them from shooting at the
ships, not seeing them by reason of the great smoke.

In the afternoon they discovered many boats going to Alberts fort and there
discharged.

They did also see the enemy enlarge and raise his battery upon the Gollet
toward the South, and repaired their battery at the foot of the East downs
upon the South side, the which they had let fall this Winter, and that they
made a trench beneath the East downs betwixt the two Cateyes, to the end they
might go from one battery to another covered from the Town Canon.

There was no man slain nor hurt in the Town that day.

The 9. of March every one was set to work in the new Haven, which had bin
indamaged with the tide, and they hoped to repair it speedily.

Within 14. days there were 18. or 20. soldiers which had fled out of the
town unto the enemy, some of them were taken again and one of them was hanged
the day before: the enemy seeing this lightness, thought it a good means to
weaken the garrison of the Town, shooting many letters into it, where by they
promised to give them good entertainment that should yield unto them, or else a
pasport with some money to return into their Countries.

About two of the clock in the afternoon, the first ship went out by the new
Haven, the enemies made many shot at it, whereof one overthrew a Pipe that
stood upon the hatches. There came also two Frigates against it, there were two
companies of Soldiers in the ship which showed themselves too soon, and shot
at the Frigates, and presently there came four great Barks from the town to
succor them, which made the Frigates retire to their trenches or Forte near
the Downs.

This ship went to the Fleet with a Northerly wind, Colonel Edmont gave unto
the Pilote two Rose-nobles to drink.

Colonel Lohn parted from Ostend to go into Zeland.

The 10. of March they shot fiery Bullets and stones on either side.

After midnight the water being high, there went 33. sail out of the Haven, A
new Haven at Ostend.
at whom the enemies shot, but did them no great harm, they went forth by the
new Haven, and at the same instant the besieged shot furiously against the
battery of the gollet from whence they shot most at the ships.

The enemy labored daily at this battery, as also at those which are above,
and at the foot of the downs: they might also see that the night before they
had labored on the North side of their battery of Catteyes.

They labored also at a new battery behind their gabions upon a mountain of
sand, the which they made square with Bauins and Sand, and raised it very high.

A little after dinner there came 16. sail into the town by the new Haven, at
whom the enemy shot much but to no end: They shot also from diverse batteries
at the people which showed themselves openly in great numbers to see the entry
of these ships: their were 9. or 10. strooken with one shot, some slain,
others hurt. Their were three also slain upon the Bulworke of Pekel, four at
the new haven, and three in the old Town: It was strange to see the folly of
this people, which put themselves in danger by multitudes, when any ship came
in by day, without any other subject.

Besides these ships, there entered many soldiers and boats into the Town that
day.

The 11. of March, in the night there entered 13. ships more into the Town by
the Gollet, whereof three were shot through, yet little or no harm done. One
of them being laden with turffes went behind the half Moon, whether the
enemy could not go: so as within 10. or 11. days there had entered little
less then a hundred sail into the Town, laden with all commodities, in open
day or by moon light by the Gollet, they might have entered more safely by the
new Haven which was now repaired.

This night there were five soldiers struck on the East side with one Canon
shot, whereof two dyed.

There were two others slain in the South square where they labored.

There was also at the green Market a soldier cut in two in the midst with a
great shot, and another had both his legs struck of.

The 12. of March the enemies shot many stones into the town, and canon shot
at the west rauelin, above two hours together, to keep the^ of the town from
working.

That day there went seven ships out of Ostende at whom the enemy shot but
hurt them not: And for that the North-winde was somewhat loud, the the
trenches and Blocke-houses of the enemies were full of Water as if it had been
a great tempest.

This day they shot as of custom, yet there was no man slain nor hurt in the
Town.

The thirteenth of March no ship went in nor out.

The fourteen day was as quiet as if there had been no enemy before the
Town, there was one soldier slain in the old Town, and another had his
legs struck of.

About noone the tide being spent, twelve horsemen of the Town went out upon
the Sands near unto the Cateyes, thinking to draw forth some of the
enemies, upon whom the Town Canon (which was planted for the nonce) should
have played, but no man appeared.

They might see a great number of vessels in the new channel on the East Side.

The 15. of March there parted twenty five sail from Flessingue, laden with
soldiers, munition and victualles, the which arrived all together at Ostend.
The coming in and going of the ships was in a manner like all the rest of this
year, as in like sort their ordinary shooting, the which the reader may imagine
by that which has bin written and that which follows: we will leave this
discourse (the which is happily too long) because we will not weary him, and
will talk of other accidents which have past this year, to take our first
train in the year, 1603.

The 5. of July 1602, the Commanders charged them of the town, that at the
break of day they should celebrate the first day of the siege of Ostend,
shooting of all there Canon insteede of belles, for they had none, and even the
women and children were commanded to beat upon kettles, pannes, and other
things to make a great noise, which put all the Camp into alarm, not knowing
what it might be: There was also a Sermon made to give thanks unto God for the
miraculous preservation of the Town this year, with hearty prayers that it
would please to him preserve it so hereafter.

The Archduke having certain intelligence that the army of the States under
the command of Prince Maurice, Prince Maurice comes into Brabant.
past by Brabant to come to succor Ostend, he caused his Camp to be fortified
against the Town and entrenched himself without, to attend this army: these
news did wonderfully rejoice them of the Town, who hoped to be freed by this
means, but for some let, or occasion that was offered, his Excellency past not
into Flanders.

News being come unto the Camp that Prince Maurice had laid siege to Grave,
and the Archduke fearing nothing behind, Prince Maurice besieges Grave.
resolved to find some means to press Ostend more straightly, and to stop
the passage for the ships, to this end he causes Saulcisses to be made (so
they call certain things made of wood, ryed together very close with hoopes of
iron, like unto a tun, but bigger and longer, behind the which a horseman
might easily cover himself, and to roll it they must have 50. or 60. men) the
which were planted on the East side of the town upon the Gollet, and behind
they wrought presently, although the town shot furiously upon them.

The enemy also made very great gabions which they filled with very great
stones, to resist the Sea and the shot from the town.

Whilst these things were doing before Ostend, Prince Maurice did all he could
to take Grave both by mine and battery, forcing it to yield the 20. of
September 1602. and made himself be known for the lawful heir and Lord
thereof, in view of the Admiral of Arragon Lieutenant general to the
Archduke, who encamped near unto the town to succor it, but seeing his
Excellency very well entrenched, and that he should prevail nothing, and that
his troops did leave him daily, in the end he retired without any exploite
doing worthy the remembering.

The Archduke having intelligence that P. Maurice had taken the town of
Grave, was more earnest then before to stop the passage of the ships; the which
notwithstanding all the inventions his men could find out, have entered all the
time of the siege, and a great number by the gollet at the Canons mouth,
oftentimes at noone day without fear of any danger.

Their inuencion of Saulcisses proved also fruitless for this desseine, they
tried yet many other inventions, both to fill up the Gollet, and to annoy the
ships in passing.

Among other inventions the enemy filled a great number of sacks with sand to
stop up the gollet, having tried this device in the channel near to Alberts
fort, but here it proved fruitless by reason of the violence of the tide.

That which most afflicted the besieged this year was the sickness that was
among them, Sickness in Ostend and in the Camp.
whereof some dyed daily: neither was the enemy free from it.

The Estates of the confederate Provinces, considering that the discommodities
the soldiers suffered was the cause of this sickness, Ostend new built.
they caused the town to be new built, and the streets were so disposed, as
the enemies Canon could do them little harm, dying at the first thing it hit,
so as of 50. shot not one did hit a man, and when any such thing chanced, they
held it for an extraordinary accident, which did not trouble them, and this
made the sickness to cease.

This year 8. great Galleys were rigged and made ready at Seuille in Spain,
Galleys of Spain under Spignola.
their chief commander was Frederike Spignola: that wherein Spignola went was
called S. Lewis, the Captain thereof was Redon. The second the Trinity, the
Captain Pedro de Fergas. The third the Occasion, the Captain Auila: the
fourth Saint Philip, the Captain Don Rodrigo de Neruaiz. The fifth the Morning,
the Captain Pedro Collado Tenorro. The sixth S. Iuan, the Captain Hernando de
Vergas. The seventh Hiacintho, the Captain Christouall de Mongis: and the
eight La Padilla, the Captain Iuan de Sossa. There were 400. men in every one
of these Galleys besides the slaves, and eight hundred Soldiers they took in
as they past at Lisbone. These Galleys went their course toward England, and
were sent by the King of Spain with some others which the Archduke had, to
scour along the coast of England, Holland, and Zeland, to interrupt their
trade, and to annoy them of Ostend by Sea* Two of them, the Trinity and the
Occasion were sunk by Sir Richard Luson Knight, then Admiral in those Seas
for the Queen of England, upon the coast of Spain and Portugal, about the
Cape of Sicambre; afterward these Galleys took their course toward the
Lowe-Countries, and the third of October according to the new computation, they
were first discovered by two of the Statesmen of war: the one was called the
Tiger, whereof Jacob Pieterssen-Mol was Captain: and the other the Pelican,
whereof Timen Luberts was Captain: these two Ships followed and chased these
six Galleys.

The same day Robert Mansell Knight, then Admiral for the Queen of England in
the narrow Seas, lying betwixt Dover and Calais, discovered them also: and sent
presently to Captain Jonas, Captain of one of the Kings ships called the
Advantage, commanding him to go presently to Calais, and along all the coast
of Flanders, and to give and alarm with Canonadoes, especially to give
advertisement of the coming of these Galleys to the States Fleet, which lay
then upon the coast of Flanders; the which the Captain did perform most
faithfully and very speedily.

The Admiral did also oftentimes shoot of the greatest piece of Ordinance in
his ship, to advertise and call an other of the Kings ships called the
answer, whereof Bredgate was Captain, who rid at an Anchor South of the
Downs, and he presently set sail.

Soon after there arrived 4. ships of the Estates of Holland, of the which the
Seignior Opda^ and Henszbruch was Admiral, lying then sick at Porthmouth in
England, in whose absence and by his appointment, John Adrianssen Cant,
commanded in quality of vice admiral the Captains of the three others were
Garbrandt Iohanss Stahl. Heinric Hartman and Garbrandt Ianssen of Enchuysen,
who (having hard this shooting) had put themselves to Sea toward France. In
the end they discovered the galleys, and seeing them to bend their course
toward the coast of England, they turned their prowes against them, and so did
Captain Bredgate, of whom we have spoken, all these together chased them
until they came right against Dover where they over took them and played
furiously upon them with their Canon, breaking some of the Chains whereunto
their slaves were tied, whereof a good many leaped over board, and some
recovered the land; but for that it was dark, and the Sea was calm near the
shore, they escaped for that time. A while after the Moon began to shine,
when as they might discern the 6. galleys row before the^ above the cape of
Dover, bending presently toward the Goeyng (the which is a very dangerous
bank called by the English Goodwin Sands) and a good gaile of wind rising,
they hoised as much sail as they could well bear to chase the galleis; they
being come almost right against Grauelin, there comes happily against them from
the coast of Flanders, a man of war of the States called the Mackerell, whereof
Gerard Olie was Captain, who charged the galley Saint Philip, and slew 60.
men, yet she got of his hands, and hoised her sail to fly, the viceadmirall
seeing this, with his ship called the Moon, ran withal his force betwixt
the great mast and the poupe of Saint Phillip so as he brake an Anchor and some
Iron work of his ship, and carried away with him the hinder part of the
galley, and the helm, and brake their mast, making two Canon shot at them in
the galley being charged with pieces of old Iron and small shot, so as the
owers, banks, arms and legs flew into the air, and presently the galley
began to sink: The Galley S. Philip sunk.
then Jacob Pieterssen Mol struck with his ship against the maine mast and
the galley sunk: yet there were many saved, Captain Garbrandt Ianssen of
Enchuysen, seeing the Captain and the principal of the galley, about some
twenty of them in their boat, seeking to save themselves he sent forth his
boat and caused them to be brought aborde of him, else they had been all
drowned: then Captain Garbrand Ianssen Sahl first of all struck the galley
called Aurora or the morning, where Pedro Collado was Captain, and brake five
or six owers with the hinder part of it, and beat down one of their mastes,
making some shot into her but without any great effect, then the vice admiral
took her betwixt the mast and the poupe, and there with brake half and Galion
of his own ship, and cut of all the hinder part of her, overthrowing the
helm into the Sea which was of six pieces, thereupon, The Galley called Aurora
sunk.
Heinrich Hartman of Rotterdam struck betwixt the maine-mast and the prowe, and
with that blow the galley sunk; there were about 40. persons saved: So four
of these galleys were lost, the other four were pursued so swiftly as two of
them were broken upon the coast near Newport, and another near unto Dunkerke,
the eight wherein Spignola was, saved herself with great difficulty in Calais,
where the slaves were freed, and went whether they pleased, and Spignola with
his gentlemen and others whom he could save, went to the Archduke to
Bruxelles. There were carried prisoners into Holland, of soldiers, slaves, and
other persons that were taken up in the Sea about 180. liberty was given to the
slaves with apparel and some silver, to go into their Countries, or whether
they pleased.

To return now to our chief discourse, the Archdukes men seeing that their
battery upon the gollet succeeded not as they expected, and that the ships went
in and out thereby; they made a certain work, which they called a float,
which was as it were a great and large plancher of wood, the which might swim
upon the water, it was armed with defenses, and fit to plant Canon thereon, the
which they thought the Water would hold up, and not carry it away nor break
it: this they brought unto the Gollet, but the waves of the Sea brake it, and
so this invention proved fruitless as the rest.

We have before spoken of the coffeehouse of the Archdukes soldiers for
their pay, for the which in the end they mutined and retired to Hoochstraten,
and had intelligence with Conte Maurice for their preservation, making the
whole Country, (even unto the gates of Andwerp) to contribute for their living
and entertainment, and this caused the Archduke to make a proclamation
against them; whereof you shall have here a copy with the answer of the said
mutiners, to serve for the history as follows.

The Archdukes. 1602.

AS we had caused our army to join with an intent to succor the town of
Grave, A proclamation and proscription against the mutiners.
the which is besieged by the enemy, and whereas the soldiers that are within
it defend themselves so valia^tly and resolutely as they deserve great praise,
being now going to that end in person, we have been informed that some
soldiers of our said army which was near unto the enemies Camp, (under
color that they would mutine, to recover that which falsely they pretend to be
due unto them) have wickedly forsaken and abandoned their colors, and (after
many attempts upon sundry places,) have in the end surprised the Castle of
Hoochstraten, by treacherous and wicked means, having given many vehement
presumptions, that they hold correspondencie and have intelligence with our
enemies, and mean to employ them. A thing which is prohibited and against all
reason and Justice, and which never any other soldiers have committed: but
contrariwise such as have been in mutiny, when as the enemy has besieged any
place of ours, or that we had need of men for any expedition, they came forth
of those places into the which they were retired to serve us willingly and
readily.

And for that the chief actors of this treason and wickedness be men to whom
there is little due, for that some are new come, and others were of the
mutinies of Die, Vueert and Karpen, where they had their accumpt and
reckoning, and were paid whatsoever was due unto them within a short time,
being men accustomed to invent alterations to seize upon the contribution
money, without serving of us, having induced, deceived and forced the rest to
commit this treason, whereby the execution is hindered of succouring their
brothers and companions besieged, and other courses which we might take against
our enemy* forcing us to turn our arms against them, as against our
domestical enemies, and more prejudicial, for that thereby the enemy is the
more fortified. And for that this act is strange, odious, foul and of bad
consequence, it deserves to be punished exemplarily. For this cause desiring to
set an order for the benefit of the public, and the good of our vassals and
subjects, we ordain and command all Soldiers and persons of their company
which are in the said castle of Hoochstraten, or shall join there, or in any
other place, under color of alteration or mutiny, that within three days
after the publication hereof, they return unto their Ensigns and colors, or
present themselves before the governor of Liere or of Herantals, to the end
they may send them presently to their Ensigns, where they may remain quietly
and peaceably, as if this mutiny had not chanced; and we give them our word
and faith, that neither now nor at any time hereafter they shall be punished,
nor reprehended for this fact, although they were the chief motives, but shall
be entreated with much love and affection, and will endeavor to give them full
satisfaction, as to men whom we desire to gratefie and reward. And in case they
shall refuse to obey, the said three days being past, as well they which are
now there present, as they that join with them, we declare them henceforth
rebels, traitors and wicked men, which have committed high treason In primo
capite. And as such we condemn them to death, their goods confiscate, the
which we do presently make forfeit and united unto our treasor: and we give
liberty to all men of what estate and condition soever they be, freely (and
without incurring of any punishment) to kill the said mutiniers or any of them,
although it were suddenly, or in what manner and sort they can: and whosoever
shall kill them, there shall be given unto them for every one of their heads
ten Crowns: and if it be of any one that has been an ordinary officer a
hundred Crowns, and of those whom they call of their council, the Sargeant
Mayor and Governor of the Horse two hundred Crowns, and for the Electo five
hundred Crowns: and if they which shall kill them be any of them, we pardon
them and give them the said sums. And we expressly command all Judges of our
Armies, Estates and Signeories, that they seize by Inuentarie, upon all the
goods mooueable or immouable, which the said mutiners, or any one of them shall
have, and the apparel or other things of their wives and children, and that
he said goods be put into the hands of the depositor of the army, and be sent
with a true and formal certificate unto the Superintendent of the mylitarie
Justice of the army, to the end he may unite them to our treasor. Whereunto
we do presently condemn them, commanding all persons, that have money or any
other thing of the said mutiners in their hands, or of their wives or children,
by exchange, in pawn, in guard, or by what means soever, that they do not
deliver it but make it known unto us, to the end it may be seized on, as has
been said, upon pain of confiscation and loss of all their goods that shall
conceal them, and an arbitrarie punishment. And for the foulness of the fact
and bad consequence thereof, for other Princes to whom the like may chance in
their armies, this being left unpunished: We therefore require and beseech the
Emperor and King of Spain, our Lords and Brothers, and all other Kings,
Princes, and Potentates, into what part or place soever the said mutiners shall
come, or shall have any goods, that they will cause them to be apprehended and
taken, and sent unto us, and their goods to be safely kept, sending us a
certificate in form aforesaid, being ready to do the like in our Countries
and Signouries at your requests, whenever you shall desire it. And we do
expressly forbid the wives and children of the said mutiners, to go into any
place where they may be, or shall be, nor to treat or to confer with them
either by word or writing, during the said mutiny upon pain of death. And
that every one may strippe them and take them without any punishment, if they
go unto them, or if there be any suspicion that they mean to go to their
said Fathers and Husbands. We will also that within three days they depart our
Countries, and that they return not without our especial license, upon the
like pain. We command also that no man within our countries or without, that
shall be there under color of merchandise, victualers, or servants, or in any
other sort whatsoever: shall serve, assist, or give victuals, munition, or any
other thing to the said mutiners, to their servants, Horses, or to any one that
shall belong unto them, although it be for money, upon pain of death, and
other pecuniarie punishments, according to the will of our Judges, and the
quality of the offense and person, and also they that find them may kill them
without any offense In Flagranti. And that out of the Muster books of the
Army, be drawn the names, surnames, marks and places, where the said
mutiners were borne, and those of their fathers. And being necessary to make
it publicly known, let information be made, so as it may plainly appear
that they are condemned, and that the said mutiners are proclaimed in our
court, and in the places where they were bred or borne, as well in our
countries, as in those of the Emperor, the Catholic King, and other Princes
our friends and confederates, for banished, infamous, treacherous, and base
men, which have committed high treason, In primo casu: And that moreover the
punishments ordained against such by law, may be executed upon them, their
children and descendents. By the which we hold them and declare them from this
day condemned. And to him that shall be the means to dissolve this mutiny,
and to deliver into our hands the culpable, we pardon him, and offer to give
him a very honorable reward: and the like to all those that shall assist him
and give him aid, although they were of the same mutiners and chief authors
and officers thereof. And to the end our proclamation and proscription may be
kept and inuiolably observed, and may come to the knowledge of all men, as well
general of the Horse, Commanders of men at arms, Master of our artillery,
Clonels, Masters of the Camp, Governors, heads of troops, Captains and
officers entertained, soldiers and all other martial men, of what quality,
condition, pre-eminence or nation soever they be, as also our other vassalles
and subjects; we command that it be publicly proclaimed and be given in an
authentike form to the Licentiat Iean Frias, of his majesty's counsel
superintendent of martial causes in these parts, to the end he may cause it
to be observed, kept and fully executed, and may give it to the Auditor
general, and other officers and persons whom it does concern: to the end
that all Judges of Towns and villages may give him notice of what shall
succeed, and he advertise us, that we may provide and decree what shall be
needful for the due execution thereof: and that also another formal copy be
given unto Master John Richardot Knight, president of our privy Counsel, and
Counselor of our Counsel of Estate, that for as much as shall concern him,
he may cause it to be observed from point to point, as has bin decreed by us,
and commandment given to the other ministers and Justices of our Countries to
see it accomplished: In token whereof we have caused this present proclamation
to be made, and set our seal unto it, made at Die the 15. of September, 1602.

Signed Albert, and underneath. By the appointment of their highnesses* and
signed I. de Mancicidor.


The answer of the Squadron, Electo, and Counsel of men of War retired into
Hoochstraten. 1602.

IF proscriptions and threats may stand for payment, the Squadron, Electo and
Counsel of soldiers retired into Hoochstraten, may soon make ready their
quittances and send them to your highnesses, confessing that they are well and
duly satisfied of all arrerages: but for that this kind of payment neither
feeds the belly, nor couers the back; and that in the mean time they (which
for so many years have hazarded their goods and lives without pay or reward,
and as it were for Gods sake, to maintain your highnesses in their estates)
might be in danger (for want of other payment) to die of hunger and misery. It
is reasonable that the said Squadron, Electo and Counsel should make known
unto all the world the lies and horrible cruelties wherewith the said
proscription is filled, that the equity of their cause may be known thereby,
and that every one may judge if their Highnesses have reason to thunder thus
out in choler against them, things which should rather terrify women and
children then men.

Choler makes their Highnesses to say (we term it choler, for truth can give
no such testimony) that they had caused their army to assemble to succor the
town of Grave, then besieged by the enemy, what means this? was the Town of
Grave besieged at Tilmont or at Leeubs, was it not besieged above a month
after? how could their highnesses succor the Town of Grave at Tilmont so long
before it was besieged? he ads with the like ground ( And going my self in
person to put this desseigne in execution) what is he amongst us, or or of all
the rest, that did ever see him in the army, when as Prince Maurice would come
to visit us, charging us upon our own dunghill, being followed by them which
two years before had entertained their Highnesses so roughly near unto
Newport. The world knows they sometimes busy themselves at Bruxelles and
sometimes at Gand, to give order to their affairs, that their persons may be
no more subject to such dangers: we confess notwithstanding that his Highness
after the Town of Grave was lost, came unto the Camp, not that there was any
need of his presence; for he came but to whett his arms against his friends
and faithful subjects, seeing that he had found his enemies weapons too
sharp, and his own too much blunted in Flanders, to cut the knotes of so
strong a bond; if we say true or no, let them of Delmonds and Venlo witness. It
is said with the like truth, that at what time his Highness prepared to succor
the Town of Grave, we under color of a mutiny did abandon our coulors. The
art of Arithmatike or numbering should not be practiced by giddy brains;
choler is an enemy to the memory: but if a good friend seeks to supply the
defect of another memory, he merits reward; If for such a benefit we deserve a
recompense, it is in your Highness to acknowledge it, and to speak the
truth, the memory whereof is fresh yet to all the world, as well to our
friends as enemies: but that the one is blinded with the dark mists of
passion, until their giddie spirits be lightened by the truth: we say then that
we have employed our selves for their Highnesses service without regard of the
extreme necessity and misery whereunto we were brought for want of money, so
long as the Admiral of Arragon, who was our commander (and not your Highness)
was camped before the Town of Grave, neither did we begin to seek any
means for our pay, before the army was far retired from the Town, and that
the said Admiral of Arragon had no intent to attempt any thing, either for
the relief of the Town, or against the army of Prince Maurice. This was
apparent when as the siege of Grobbendoncq Governor of Bolduc, (after that he
had labored long in vain, propounding all the reasons he could devise to
induce his Highness to seize upon the Town of Hanestain, and by that means
cut of the victualles from Prince Maurice his army (the only means to
frustrate his desseigne) in the end he retired himself with much
coffeehouse without doing any thing. Then we began to embrace the
pursuit of our just cause. If all they that have taken this course shall be
held for traitors and rebels, there is not any one that serves their
Highnesses which can be free from this blame: for who has ever been paid
using the contrary course. Their Highnesses name Dieest, Vueert and Carpen*
places which will yield testimony of their saying, the memory is yet fresh of
that which lately happened there.

It is said also that there is little or nothing at all due unto us, and that
we do falsely challenge that which we demand: being men that are newly come
from Italy and other places or that a little before had been fully satisfied
at Die, Vueert and Carpen, if this be true or no, the accoumpts will show
it, and if the sum of three Millions of Livers be small with their Highnesses,
yet is it great for us. But admit the sum be small as their Highnesses say,
it is then more easy for them to find then a greater, and they should not for
a small matter suffer us to be reduced to this extremity. As for treaties and
correspondencies which we have with the enemies of your Highnesses, we find it
stange that they should hold it contrary to reason and all laws, seeing that
in their proscription, they confess that it has been to maintain our selves
with them. For when as we see their Highnesses arms turned against us as
domestical enemies, instead of giving us hearing in our just complaints: was
it not time (being reasonable men) to do that which brute Beasts without
reason do teach us, who with all their force and power oppose themselves
against the violence of such as would oppress them. Our actions then are not
without ground or reason, but are rather grounded upon reason it self, and
upon the general law, necessity being not subject to any law, yea upon the
law of nature, which has given this instinct to all creatures, to forget
nothing that may serve for their preservation.

It is lamentable thing, that they which for so many years have ventured
their lives, and powered out their bloods so willingly for the service of their
Highnesses, should be now brought to hold their lives as it were in see of
their enemies, and that contrariwise they seek all means on their Highnesses
part, to root them out, depriving them of their lives, wives, children,
victuals, and friends, as it appears more amply in the said proscription. His
Highnesses knows well the example of David, who retired to Achis King of the
Philistines, his capital enemy, when he was forced to fly before the face of
Saul his Lord. It may please his Highness to let the Serenissime Infanta
understand these reasons, and not to think it strange if that we being
Soldiers would follow the example of such a man of war as David. It is said
that these courses were never practiced by others, whereunto we will make no
other answer, but that all our companions know the contrary. How did they of
Siche behave themselves? who had their deputies continually at the Haige,
entering and coming forth of Breda at their pleasures, and resting at
Langhestrate under their wings which now embrace our defense, entreating whole
troops of Prince Maurices as friends, suffering them to pass through them
without any let. The examples which their Highnesses propound unto us of such
as have mutined heretofore, and yet have abandoned their retreates, and have
offered themselves at need to their Highnesses service, are things propounded
with little consideration: for since that we retired our selves into this
place, their Highnesses never required any thing of us as they did of the rest:
what reason then have they to complain of us in this case? But if they had
sent unto these others a Herald at Arms, to signify unto them such a
proscription as ours, it is to be thought they would not have left the places
they then held, but upon good terms, neither would they have showed
themselves so zealous to their Highnesses service. It were also to be desired
for their honor and reputation, that this great zeal and ready obedience of
the mutiners had been delayed a while, for that being too rash, it has been
more prejudicial then profitable to their Highness, when as (without respect
of their Highness word) they did so villanously break it in the behalf of
them of Suaescheuobre near to Ostend, the which cost that day the lives of a
great number of our companions: notwithstanding if their Highness find herein
any act of obedience, as it seems, seeing they exalt them so much for that
respect, they are freed from that blame. They will make us believe, that we
are men accustomed to make mutinies. We will receive this reproach in part of
payment of our debt with the rest; for of late years such as have carried
arms for your services, have received no other payment: But what brute is
there among the people? every man says openly that your Highness have brought
in this custom, that the Soldiers being paid in this sort without silver,
the cheer in court may be the better. And in truth when there is speech of any
exploite of war, those which hold places seized, do willingly leave them
and come and offer themselves to your service, being full of zeal and
obedience. This cannot be called mutining but rather wintring: for, for these
many years all your men of war have learned to winter in this sort: Even as
your Highness did change your Ecclesistical estate into a secular, we did much
rejoice, thinking that your Highness after that you had been Cardinal,
Archbishop, and chief of the whole Inquisition of Spain, would not impose
any stricter rule unto your Soldiers, then that which your Highness might
read so often in the Bible, which is, Content your selves with your pay: But
it seems (to your great prejudice) that you have forgotten it: And there is no
man can dream where your Highness has found out that Canon, by the which you
will begin the practice of a law which is not yet established: that they must
content themselves without pay.

We did always believe that the Ecclesiastical laws had been the strictest,
as coming from God, and regarding men's consciences: but we find our selves
short of our reckoning. As for the money of contribution, your Highness must
know what becomes of it, and it is a ridiculous thing even for the peasants to
say that we receive it: The truth is that to live we go upon your lands; what
should we else do? your Highnesses gives us nothing, and Soldiers are no
Camelions to live by the air: even so by law the creditor has an action on
the debtors goods: but for all that, your Highnesses ordinary contributions
are not diminished. Under correction, that Secretary merits to be dismissed
from your Highnesses service, that in your names has not been ashamed to pack
up together so many palpable lies in so little writing: for that which has
been so often practiced, should not be held for strange: that which is
grounded upon good reason and the common law of nature, is neither infamous
nor dishonest. And as for the consequence it cannot be so bad, seeing that the
great services done with so great zeal and obedience by our companions, and
the which we have not yet refused, are so highly praised by your highness; If it
were lawful for us to say some thing in your ear, we would think to hit the
mark, which is, that some have advertised us from good part, that your
highnesses grow so extraordinarily bitter against us, and more then against the
rest that have gone before us, somewhat to pacify the people; seeing that of
so many wounds which have been received since some years, they could never
find means to cure one, the which is credible, seeing your highnesses make no
difficulty to hold us for companions with them which were besieged in the
Town of Grave, and which have won so much honor, and esteem for their good
deuoir, which makes us to hold many things set down in your proscription,
somewhat tolerable, and to be inserted only Pro formo: It is said that we
must return within three days to our coulors, or else your highnesses do
proclaim us traitors and rebels, etc. Condemned to die and our goods
confiscate, etc., To condemn them to die that have no will to die, and that
have means not only to defend themselves, but also offend them that would
assail them, were very absurd and your highnesses may well think, that we
hope to employ our arms so well, as the tolleration which you have given to
kill us in what sort soever, shall not let you nor your substetutes see as few
as may be of our heads, for the which you shall not need to pay ten, fifty or
a hundred Crowns promised by your prescription, according to the quality of
our persons, to them that shall acquit themselves of this charge.

As for that which is said of our goods, mouable and immovable; your
highnesses know well what mouable or immouable goods such poor soldiers half
dead with hunger can have; our mouable goods cannot be made Mobiles but by our
selves, which be our arms, and we may also call them our immouable goods for
them that would attempt to charge them: daring well affirm that even of his
highness, himself they would be found too heavy and immouable, if he were
possessed with this desire: and if there be any other mouable goods found among
us, we do freely make offer of them to such as will fetch them: and as for
money, apparel, and other things belonging to our wives and children, the
registers of your highness army shall need no clarke to inroule them: if you
have no other revenues and means to feed so many hungry bellies, it is to be
feared that within few days your highnesses will be brought to have as little
money and clothes as we had with our wives and children, when as necessity did
force us to assemble in this place to find some means to feed and cloth our
selves: for we may say, that we were then in a manner like unto the Indians
which go naked, which nakedness by reason of the great cold in these parts
is not very tolerable. Neither your Highnesses nor my Lords your brothers, the
Emperor nor King of Spain, shall profit much by our clothes, nor our goods
lying under their jurisdictions: and as for the defense made unto our wives and
children to come unto us upon pain of death, we take it for a great favor
which your highness have done on us, not desiring in the estate wherein we
are to have our heads much troubled with our wives: It were a ridiculous
spectacle that after they had taken away our wives and childrens clothes; and
they confiscate to your Highness, to condemn them to depart the Country
within three days; the conduct of this naked troop would serve for a
recompense to some one of your Court, who by the show of so strange a sight,
might easily draw some good sum of money from the people being curious of
novelties. But do your Highnesses think to famish us by the defense which you
have made to bring us any victualles? do you think it is possible for your
subjects to obey you in this respect? seeing it is not in your power to
warrant them against us? for if you desire to maintain the contents of your
proscriptions causing us to be slain by your subjects, Itsh all be easy for
us always to revenge our selves of this cruelty by reciprocal actions.

It is said in your proscription that your Highness desires it should be
executed against our children and successors: we do not think that your
Highness (being an Arch-bishoppe and reading the Bible) has ever found the
like, but contrariwise have often heard (although they were soldiers) that God
does never punish the children for the fathers offense, unless they were
likewise culpable. And if we had committed all the offenses in the world (the
which is not so) by what divinity has your Highness learned that you should
proceed so against innocents? Is it for a matter of consequence? What
punishment then will their Highnesses reserve for themselves and their
successors seeing they are the cause of all this.

All Kings and Princes shall have cause to look into your Highness carriage,
and to learn how they speed that make war without money; which is the
synowes thereof.

Those which in times past have woone reputation by the Wars, have followed
contrary courses Cyrus, Alexander, Scipio, Julius Caesar, and many others did
never impouerish their soldiers, but contrariwise have enriched them; they
used no proscriptions nor menaces or threats against them, in case of
discontent: but have sought to pacify them by mildness and courtesy, and if
it were needful to suffer with them, they did never counterfett: what did
Alexander when in a dray a barren Country, they brought him a Helmet full of
water, he was better pleased to cast it on the ground then to drink, seeing
that it was no more but for himself, and that his Army had great need,
showing by this example that he desired to fare no better then his soldiers.

Your Highnesses, have ten, a hundred, yea five hundred Crowns to buy our
heads, but you cannot find ten, a hundred, nor five hundred farthings to
maintain our bodies and hearts in your faithful services; you have found
the means to exceed many great Princes, yea the Emperor Charles the fifth of
most famous and happy memory, the Emperor now reigning and the King of Spain,
in all kinds of state and pomp, and yet ye cannot find any means to pay
your poor soldiers (the only foundation of your estate) but by proscriptions
and threats. Alexander the great seeing the Macedonians (whom he had greatly
enriched) disobedient, and nothing favoring his victories, sought to pacify
them by mildness and courtesy, and it succeeded well. Your Highnesses
contrariwise after you had rashly and miserably thrust headlong the best part
of your most resolute Soldiers and Captains, and seeing their affairs
brought to a lamentable extremity, you sought to ruin them quite, paying them
with proscriptions and threats, and promising recompenses to them that should
kill them. Julius Caesar seeing on a time a coffeehouse among his old
Soldiers, which desired to retire home to their houses, refusing to go into
Affrike about an expedition, he omitted nothing that might pacify them by
amiable means, honoring them with the name of Quirites, that is to say, Good
and old fellow Citizens; and by this means he satisfied them. Your Highness
may learn hereby how a Prince ought to carry himself to his Soldiers, who by
his fault are become miserable.

Besides all the points contained in this goodly proscription, they will charge
us to be the cause of the desolation of the country of Luxembourg, because we
did not hinder it; it is well known that before we were taken for traitors and
rebels, your Highness arms were turned against us, every man was allowed to
kill us, and our heads were set at ten crowns a piece.

How can all this accord well together? It had been far better your
Highness had employed your forces to preserve Luxembourg, and not to suffer so
goodly a Province to be so miserably wasted. Seeing then the foulness of your
proceedings, and the bad consequence which other Princes may gather thereby, in
comitting the like excess against their men of war.

The Squadron Electo and Council, beseech all Princes and commonweals to
make use of this example, and to take heed least abusing thus their good and
faithful souldiars, which are the sinews of their estates, they draw not the
like mischief upon them, which threatens daily more and more to ruin their
highnesses.

The Archduke after this proscription of the mutiners, went to besiege them at
Hoochstraten, where he pressed them very hardly, although they were very well
fortified with three ditches and ramparts, where they made good resistance, and
Mounsier de Rosne son was slain there, yet the mutiners seeing in what case
they were, provided for their safety, and compounded with Prince Maurice, who
came to succor them, causing the Archdukes men to raise the siege, delivering
by this means the Castle of Hoochstraten into his excellencies hands, and he
put the said mutiners in garrison into the town of Grave. They were full six
thousand men, horse and foot.

They of Ostend left not to molest the Archdukes men daily. And we may say
that this siege is a stop for his forces, the which for these three years
space have taken cold before this heap of Sand, the which has already cost
the Province of Flanders near three Millions of goulde, besides that which the
King of Spain, and the Archduke, have employed for their parts, and likewise
what the estates of the united Provinces have contributed, all which is not of
less value, the which may well be said a wonder of this age.

The first of January. 1603. they sent one an other 1603.
new years gifts with Canon and musket shot.

In February the float whereof has been spoken, (which had been set upon the
Gollet to stop the passage of the ships) was broken by a tempest and a
strong North northeast wind, and did no more trouble the ships going in nor
out.

From the beginning of the siege unto the first of March 1603, 250000. bullets
shot against Ostend.
there were shot against the town 250000. bullets of iron, every one waying
betwixt 36. and 50. pounds, and a number of Canon spoiled: as soon as the
Canoniers did cease never so little, the Infanta (the Archdukes wife) lying at
Newport, sent in post to command them to shoot continually.

The besieged lost no time, for they shot a 100000. The town spent a 100000.
shot.
Canon shot against the army, and often sent their canons into Zeland to be
changed or new cast.

They reckoned of dead men, as well through necessity as by the Canon in the
Arche-dukes camp 18000. Number of the dead on either side.
men and of them town 6000. or 7000. amongst the which there were of either
side men of mark chief commanders in war, and Captains.

The 12. of March Captain Granszfelo had his leg shot off with a Canon being
on the west rauelin and died upon the place.

The 16. day there entered three ships by the new Haven, the which were shot
through with the Canon.

The 17. the enemy planted 6. demie Culuerins and a whole one upon a
plat-forme called the swallows neast.

The 20. of March they began to shoot from thence and among others, hurt 9. men
with one shot: they made 375. shot that day.

There entered 17. ships into the town by the gollet, which were much annoyed
with the Canon, there were three men slain and two ships sunk.

The 24. of March in the night there entered 22. sail into the Haven, whereof
the one was laden with horses.

The 26. day the enemy planted three pieces at the Gollet, upon a new
plat-forme.

The 29. there entered three barks in the day time, whereof the one was laden
with Turfes, at whom the enemy made about 68. shot, and pierced that with
Turfes in eleven places, the which sunk in the new haven.

The 30. of March there went 10. sail out of the Haven, whereof the enemy
took four with their barks.

The 31. of March they parled together, as well to redeem the ships, as to
hold quarter (that is to say Truce) by land, and not by sea, but their
followed nothing.

The 2. of April a corporal of the governors company was shot, for that he
had slain his sargent in the night, he was called Hans Huhm, and was a
Brabanson.

The 4 of April 2. Frenchmen of the Town being in guard on the west square,
fled unto the enemies to the crows neast: the same day the adventurers of the
Town brought in one of the enemies prisoner, who said that they of the Town
labored continually at a new platform, and that every man which laid the
bauins had two dooble ducates for the day and night, and that they which
brought the bauins and other stuff did get as much: and he said moreover that
he had bin in guard the night before, and that six men had been struck with
one shot.

The 6. of April the besieged made an enterprise to surprise the enemies
sentinels on the East side, and to cut the Corpse de guard in pieces; and as
some of their men were under the Plat-forme to hear what was done, they were
discovered, and presently the alarm given throughout all the Camp, the which
forced them to retire.

The 7. of April they of the Town dismounted a demie Culuerin which was at
Luysbos upon the Gollet.

In the night there went forth four sail, whereof three were nothing hurt,
the fourth being shot betwixt wind and water, returned, and soon after went
to Sea again.

The 10. of April three men to whom they had promised a 100. Dollers, brought
in a ship which had been fired, one of them (who was a Canonier) had a
Hargubuze shot in the arm.

The same day a Culuerin was planted upon the Polder.

The 13. of April did blow a violent South-west wind, so as many old walls
and couerings of houses were blown down, and the Church steeple, under the
ruins whereof a man was slain, and another had his legs broken; almost all
the enemies Gabions upon the East were overthrown, and their new work upon
the Gollet was likewise much ruined.

In the night the enemy gave an assault to the town of al sides, A furious
assault
with great forces; upon the East side they pulled up above a 100. piles at the
half Moon of the town, but they were repulsed and forced to retire: upon the
West side they gave an assault to the Porke-espike, and brought thither two
barrelles of Pitch and Rozen, but in the end they were repulst; Captain
Hanekrots Lieutenant was slain, and Captain Bocke had a Hargubuze shot
through the body, whereof he died three weeks after.

At the same time the enemy gave an assault to the Rauelin of the Polder, The
Polder taken.
from the which they were at the first repulst, but they returned with such
fury as they took it, and the Polder square, West square and Sout square, and
yet there was a demie Culuerin with some iron pieces upon the Polder square,
which played their parts well. The put them all in a manner to the sword, and
the next day in the morning they slew them in cold blood which had remained:
they hanged up a Canonier and then cast him down the Trenches with derision:
This assault continued four hours.

The 14. of April, about 9. of the clock at night the besieged made a sally
upon the squares, from whence they were repulst and lost many of their men, and
amongst others Captain P. Frist, and the Colonel of the Suisses Lieutenant, an
Ancient of the Suisses and one of the English: so as there were 400. men of
the Town slain, and amongst them many men of mark and valor. The enemy
lost a 1000. men with all hope to take the town by assault.

The 16. the besieged redeemed the Lieutenant Colonel of the Suisses body for a
100. Dollers, The number of the slain.
and it was brought into the Town.

That day and the day before there, entered 7. companies of soldiers into the
Town, two of Suisses one of Denmark, one of English, two of Sueden, and one
of the low Countries. That day the enemy did fortify himself on the East side.

The 17, of April, 4. Culuerins were brought to Ostend, three Demies and one
Minion.

The 18. of April there went a Bark forth whose owers were broken by the
enemy.

The 19. the besieged planted a bastard Culuerin upon the Bulworke of Pekel,
and another upon the Bulworke of the Polder, and the third upon the North-east
Rauelin.

The 20. they planted another bastard Culuerin upon the west Port.

The 21. of April, a messenger came to Ostend with letters, which did much
rejoice the besieged, giving them to understand that they should be soon
relieved.

The 22. of April there was a Culuerin planted upon the Polder, to shoot at
the swallows neast.

The 23. the besieged shot three pieces at the swalloes neast, and dismounted
three of the enemies Canons.

The same day one fled from the enemies Camp into the Town, who gave
intelligence that the Archdukes men had resolved to give an assault to the
half moon upon the East; both by water with barks, and also by land* they of
the town (to prevent this enterprise,) set aboat in guard near to the half
Moon, the which was twice sunk, the guard of the place fell out by lot to
Captain Seknitt.

The 24. of April there entered 32. ships into Ostend by the new haven, at whom
the enemy shot about 80. Canon shot, and wounded a Mariner to the death:

The same day the enemies planted eight Canon upon their new battery, and made
there about eleven Canoniers.

The 27. of April there entered eleven companies into Ostend, three of them
were of Zeland and the rest Scottish and English; there were two slain in one
bark, and a boy had his legs struck of.

The 28. of April there entered a ship at noone day into the Town, and at
night there went six forth: the same day there was a proclamation throughout
the town, at the sound of the drum, no man upon pain of death, to fight,
quarrel or stricke.

The 2. of May they brought two Canons from Zeland into the town: and the
adventurers took two of the enemies prisoners.

The 3. of May a french man of the enemies Camp came and yielded himself into
the town, in the night there entered two Companies of soldiers.

The 5. of May two french men of the town went to the enemy: at night a bark
of the Town was sunk and two men slain in another.

The 7. of May there came seven galleys before Ostend, who fought with seven
ships of war, but they were beaten and made fly.

The 8. of May Lieutenant Gesseler was slain.

The 10. of May there entered 34. sail into Ostend by the Gollet, at whom the
enemy discharged 128. canon shot, and sunk five; one was laden with bullets,
another with a Culuerin, and the rest with munition: they of the town seeking
to save the ship that was laden with bullets, had five of their men hurt with
one shot, yet in the end they saved it, as also that which had the Culuerin,
being forced to cast the Culuerin into the water, the other three were
presently lost.

The 11. and 12, of May, the soldiers which lay in the Road, were brought
into the Town, about 30. companies, so as then there full 80 Ensigns in the
Town.

The 13. of May they parled, and there were two prisoners exchanged: at night
there was brough 120. barrels of Poulder into the Town.

The 14. of May, three French men of the Town fled unto the enemy.

The 15. there went forth 7. sail at noone day by the new Haven, two whereof
were sunk, one of the which (the master being hurt in the arm) went unto the
enemies side, the other was quite beaten in pieces, but al within it were
saved* The same day there were three mariners of the Town slain by their
own men; and Captain Blommert died, nine of the enemies swamme through the
Gollet, to spoil certain vessels.

The 16. of May there was a truce made on the East side, but not upon the
water, and five prisoners were exchanged: they of the Town had intelligence
that the enemy had some practice to sink two ships that lay in the Gollet.

The same day, about 60. ships and barks set sail, whereof there was but one
sunk, in the which there was the baggage of two captains Frisons, and their
spoil which was worth much.

The 17. of May, there came a company of Frisons into the Town, and there was
Beer also brought in; before a barrel of English Beer was worth twenty four
Livers which is eleven German Dollers, and and that of Holland. 20. livers.

The 19. day, they might discover about 30. sail at Sea, they shot furiously
on either side: there were two men slain in the town, and one soldier that
would have fled to the enemy.

The 20. of May there went in three ships by the gollet, whereof two were
sunk.

The 21. of May in the night the troops of Naninck went forth: and a soldier
of Schleumers company was hanged, for that he would have caused the soldiers
to mutine.

The 22. of May there entered 20. ships by the gollet, whereof three were
sunk.

The 23. of May eight ships entered by the new haven, whereof two were sunk,
one laden with a Culuerin, (the which was saved) the other a merchant and he
perished.

The 24. of May there entered 29, ships by the new haven whereof two were
sunk.

The 25. defenses were made by the sound of the dromme, for all mariners or
other persons, to make sale of any merchandise before it had line 24. hours in
the halles for that they made monopolies, which caused a derth: Good orders in
Ostend.
It was also forbidden to play at Cards, Dice or any other thing, upon pain of
imprisonment, and to fast eight days together with bread and water: likewise
for men of command not to be drunk being upon their guard, upon pain to loose
his arms and to be degraded: And there was a promise made of 50. Crowns to
him that could take any one dead or alive that would fly unto the enemy.

That night there went 9. ships out of the town without any harm.

The 26. of May the besieged received 100000. pound weight of Poulder, whereof
40000. for the soldiers, and 60 the Canon; a sargeant came and yielded himself
into the town, who said that the besieged did much anoy the new battery upon
the gollet, and had that day slain a canonier, and stroke of an others legs.

The 27. of May at the break of day, being an easterly wind, a full sea and
calm, the general Don Frederike spignola (by the Arche-dukes commandment,
who omitted no opportunity to annoy Ostend) parted from Escluse with 8. galleis
and 4. frigatts well appointed both with slaves and mariners, and in them were
2500. musketers and small shot; they showed themselves at the west of the
ditch of Escluse, betwixt the banks called Francois Pol, (that is to say) the
chief or head, and rowed eastward of this ditch. The ships and galleys of the
States and of Prince Maurice, (being Admiral general of the sea) seeing that
their meaning was to charge them, wayed anchour, and hoysed up their sails,
taking their course toward the east, although the tide were contrary; and the
wind also being so weak as it would not fill their sails. Spignolas galleis
having the advantage of wind, Combat at Sea.
tide, and sun, upon the States fleet; went by the North beyond the Francois
Pol into the Vuielinghe or gulf, turning their prowe against the fleet. Being
in the Vuielinghe about 5. of the clock, the 8. galleis divided themselves in
two four and four, with some space betwixt them, and came in this order very
furiously with a great cry, and with all their force against the states army,
first 2. galleys set upon the ship of lost de Mohr vice admiral, called the
golden Lion; don Fredirike Spignola was in one of these galleys, the which had
no banderolle or flag upon his mast, but only above the Chamber of the
captains lodging; Mohr the vice admiral defended himself valiantly and did
much indomage his enemies with his great ordinance, Spignola slain.
so as Spignola himself was there mortally wounded and died before he could go
a shore: four other galleis went after the ship of Captain Legier
Pieterssen of Groningh called the Segel-hont or flying-dog; one of them took
him right upon the stern with his spur or point, and made him retyer; at
the same time the gunner of the dog set fire to a piece, the which made such a
spoil of the soldiers in the galley, as it seemed a Cart had passed from one
end to the other: The Hollandoise or black galley wherein Jacob Michielson was
Captain, did fight with the other two galleys; this skirmish having continued
a while, two of the galleys which were nere unto the shipe of Legier
Pieterssen, forsook him, and went against the galley of Zeland called the
Flight, in the which Cornelius Ianssen of Gorchu^ was captain, who played his
part as well as the rest, and without doubt had wone the honor, if an accident
of fire had not chanced in his galley; The 2. other galleys did in like sort
leave Legiers shipe, and rowed against the Hollandoise or black galley: One of
them was vice admiral to Spignola and had a ba^derol upon her mast, these 4.
galleis had enough to do with the Hollo^doise, who defended her self so
valie^tly, as notwithstanding that these 4. had grappeled with her to draw her
into Escluse, yet were they forced to leave her after along fight. The galleie
of Holland being thus forsaken by them that had assailed her, went against them
that were in fight with the vice admiral lost de Mohr. An other ship whereof
Criin Henrihes of Zierc zee called the Alte-hont or the old dog, although he
were not charged, yet did he much harm to Spignolas Galleies; he was among the
rest, and did flank them shooting furiously upon the enemies galleyes, which
were in fight with the vize-admirall and the black galley. There was such a
slaughter on every side, but especially in Spignolas galleies, as even a heart
of Flint would have bin moved to pity: neither of them showed any base
cowardice, they were all so attentive man to man, with the Canon, Muskets,
half pikes, swords, and other arms, to shoot, strike and anoy an other,
without any care to avoid the enemies blows, as it was a horrible things to
see: in the end Spignolas men fainted, and fled to Escluse in great disorder,
carrying back all their galleys, being favored by the neerenes of the
retreat. According to the letters written from diverse parts, The number of the
dead.
there were slain on the Archdukes side; the General Frederik Spignola with
above 800. men; and there were some hundreds hurt on the States side; There
were some 36. slain, and amongst them Captain Jacob Michels and his
Lieutetenant: The Vize-admirall Iost de Mohr, and Captain Legier Pieterssen
with some 60. others which were hurt in the Vize-admirall and the galley of
Zeland, there were in either of them about 18. Englishmen of the garrison which
is at Flesingue for the King of England, who served very well, there were 8.
slain and 15. hurt which are comprehended in the number of the dead and hurt.
In this combat Iost de Mohr the Vize-admirall commanded, instead of the
signeur William Van Halteyn Lieftenant Admiral to the Prince Maurice: which
lieutenant (hearing the Canon shot) parted presently from Flesingue, with 5.
ships of war and one frigate, to come to the succor of his men, before the ditch
of Escluse, but the combat was ended, and the enemies retired when he arrived.
Behold what passed then with the galleys of Spignola, wherein is verefied that
which the royal Prophet David says in the 16. and 34, Psalms, that victories
come not from the force and power of man, but from the grace, succor and
assistance of Almighty God.

The 28. May, Monsier du Fort went out of Ostend with part of the French men at
night there went forth two great ships, whereof the enemies took one.

The 29. of May two soldiers of the Town meaning to fly unto the enemy, one
of them was slain; two ships went forth whereof one of them was sunk, and
fell near unto the enemies battery: the Pilot saved himself, there were 19.
soldiers of Ghistell which were taken, and as some say were hanged.

The 2. of June the Leapers or adventurers of the Town brought in four
prisoners, and amongst them one of the enemies adventurers.

In the night a little boat past over the dike, to surprise the enemies
Sentinel: the same night the enemy advanced nearer unto the town upon the
west square.

The 3. of June they of the Town made a sally, in the which Captain Hanikrot
was hurt in the cheek, arm and leg.

The 4. day at night there entered 20. Marchantes ships, whereof three were
sunk.

The same night they of the Town made a sally upon Lusbos with a 1000. men,
and won the Platform and the enemies trench turning some of their own Canon
against them; A salie of 1000. men.
they cloyed two, and cut in pieces the Corpse de guard, Canoniers, and other
officers of the artillery, whom they found there: of their parts they lost the
lieutenant to Conte Ernest of Nassau, the first lieutenant of Hauszman, and the
Baron of Sancy a frenchma^, Grouestein Colonel of the Frisons was hurt in the
leg with many others, and in the end they of the Town were forced to retire.

They buried their dead men together: the simple soldiers as well of the Town
as of the enemies were buried in the downs, and the men of commandment in
the Town.

The 8. of June they brought 100. barrelles of Poulder into the Town.

The 9. day there went 5. ensigns of French out of the Town: three soldiers
fled out of the Town to the enemy, and in the night there entered 44. ships
into the Town, whereof two were sunk. About the same time Lieutenant Bitter
died.

The 11. of June 5. sail went out of the Town by the new Haven, whereof one
(in the which were Frenchmen) was sunk, and some of them lost.

The same day the bowels of the Barron of Sancy were honorably enterred at
Ostend, and his body, imbalmed and sent into France.

That night there were two barks sunk, in the one were artificial
fire-workes, and in the other victualles for Captain Elias.

The 12. of June at night they of the Town set fire on the West square the
which burnt all night: the day following they discovered 8. Canoniers which
they had not seen before.

The 13. of June there were 13. sail went out of the Town; the same day
before noone Ancient Long died, who had both his legs struck of with a
Canon.

The 14. day there entered two companies into Ostend, the same day the enemy
began to batter from the Poulder square, the half Moons of the Town, that
is, the half Moon of Sednezden, that of Slimmer, and the Bec-af or folly of
the East, the which is a bow shoot into the Country, under the half Moon of
Slimmer, to the which the night following they gave an assault. The Governor
of Ostend fearing that if the enemy should become Master of this place, he
would build a fort, which might greatly prejudice them of the Town, for that
it would take from them the means to transport their stuff, and also the
enemy might then cast a bridge upon the Gollet, without any let or hindrance,
and by that means go from one Camp unto another in less then half an
hour: where as now they must have above six: he resolved with the Counsel
of war to provide for it as well as he might possibly.

The enemies passing by night at Bec-af upon a bridge with Ladders and other
instruments, they were presentlye received by ten or twelve Musketeers, who
shot at them giving the alarm by that means, and so aranged themselves
presently with their troops which do attend the enemy; which entered almost at
the same instant with the^, crying, amassa, amassa, guadagnato guadagnato: but
being furiously charged by them of the town they retired faster then they
entered.

If they had charged home to the half Moons, they had been received in the
like sort, for they were very well manned and guarded, in the morning they found
many slain and a piece of the enemies bridge broken.

The 17. of June at night there went forth 6. ships, and some prisoners were
exchanged on either side,

The 18. there went forth 4. ships.

The 19. one ship went forth which received 17. Canon shot.

The 21. of June there went forth 40. sail whereof six were sunk.

The 22. they brought a hundred barrelles of Poulder into the Town.

The 24. of June there entered 4. companies of soldiers into the Town, and
six sail in the day time, whereof three were sunk and one Mariner slain.

The 25. there entered 5. ships in the day time without any harm.

The 26. of June, there entered 12. more in the day time, and 9. went forth
without any hurt. There entered a frigate in the which there were twenty four
persons hurt for that they wonderfully pressed in her.

The 27. of June Colonel Bruges went forth.

The 28. day there came fire-workes into the town.

The 5. of July part of the ships entered with all kinds of fruits and herbs
without any loss, and also with store of Poulder, and for that it was the day
of the besieging of that place, it was celebrated, and all the Canon of the
Town shot of: In the night Captain Adam van lie was slain, being without
the half moon of the Polder; his bowels were interred in the Town, and his
body was carried to Dordrecht.

The 8. of July two loopehooles at Luisbos were beaten down, toward the sea;
at night a strong northerly wind cast a ship upon the east shore.

The 9, of July there went forth three fisher boats.

The 11. of July there entered eight sail by the new Haven; the night before
there went forth 30. where of one was sunk, but the barks did succor it and
brought it into the road, from whence it sailed toward Flesingue. The same
day Bort Lieutenant to Geniel was slain, whose body was carried to Scoonhouen,
and his bowels were buried at Ostend.

The 12. of July there went forth two ships whereof one was sunk: and in the
morning there entered 5.

The 13. of July early in the morning, Colonel Dorp (who had been governor)
went out of Ostend; and at the same time the seigneur de la Nort (who had
commanded there before) came in his place, with 4. companies of Zelanders.

The 15. of July a soldier of the enemies camp came and yielded himself into
the Town.

The 17. Captain Calwart was slain near unto the half Monne of Geniet, his
body was carried out of the Town.

The 19. of July there went 20. sail out of the town whereof two were sunk,
in the one was the baggage of Captain Smith, and in the other the company of
Colonel Dorp in the which 5. soldiers were slain at one shot, and many were
drowned and miserably burnt, the fire having taken the Poulder.

The 21. there went forth 6. ships with a bark of the Town full of soldiers.

In the night the besieged shot from the West Bulwark to the South-square
with a demie Culuerin, the which was set on fire and burnt all the covering,

The 22. of July at night the besieged likewise set fire upon Luysbos, the
which consumed all the bauins and wood thereof, and all the loope-holes, there
was a great fire in the midst thereof, and the enemy did what he could to quench
it, but it was in vain.

The 23. of July the besieged planted gabions without the half Moon of the
Polder, thinking to raise up an other half Moon, but the ground was to wet:
that night the lieutenant to Captain Kief named Brus was honorably interred.

The 27. of July there entered 40. ships in the day time into Ostend, without
any more hurt but the loss of 3. or 4. men; some entered by the Gollet, and
others by the new haven; amongst other things there were 3. culuerins in them.

The 28. of July there entered 24. sail more in the day time, among the which
there was one merchants ship sunck, the which came against the rauelin of the
town the frenchmen ran to it, whereof there were 5. slain.

The 28. and 29. there entered three companies of Prisons, Hollanders, and
Zelanders into the Town.

The 30. of July the enemy shot from the East many fiery Bullets, stones,
and other shot into the Town: That night Colonel Lohn entered into Ostend
with ten sail.

The 31. of July the besieged cast balls of wild fire upon the enemies
plat-formes, the which was presently quenched because it was so calm: there
entered two ships.

The 3. and 4. of August there went 29. sail out of Ostend, and in them ten
companies of soldiers,

The 5. day there went forth 12. sail more without any hurt.

The 7. of August there entered 28. ships.

The 10. of August there entered 5. fisherboats.

The 11. of August the besieged were all day and night in arms, thinking there
would be an assault given: the same day they set fire of Luysbos, but it was
presently quenched.

The 12. day the enemies mustered and changed their Camp, they of the Town
thinking it had been to some other end stood in arms: the same day five
Frenchmen went to the enemy by the West side.

The 15. of August two Frenchmen more fled to the enemy upon the east side:
Luysbos was again set on fire, but soone-quenched.

The 17. day two Frenchmen going to yield unto the enemy were stayed and slain.

The 19. of August there entered two companies of soldiers into the Town.

The 20. and 21. there entered 7. companies more, the same day they of the town
set fire on a plat-forme, at the which they shot a 150. fiery bullets, it took
not fire until the 136. shot and continued 3. days and 3. nights. The same
day there entered 9. sail.

The 24. day there entered five sail more in the day time, in the which was a
company of soldiers, with Poulder and Matches: in the night the enemy brought
some part of another floate.

The same night there went some ships out of the Town, one of them, in the
which were 13. sick persons, and five women, had her helm struck of: they of
the Town took eight prisoners.

The 25. of August, the enemy brought another part of their float, the which
was (by a fugitives saying) of 80. tuns in length, and five fadome thick.

The same day the five women were restored, after they had bin ravished with
all indignities.

The 26. of August the enemies hung up all those sick men, Cruelty of the
enemy.
except one, whom they slew with their swords, being so weak, as he could
not go up the ladder.

The last of August the adventurers returned and brought in one of the enemies
horsemen prisoner.

The 2. of September the adventurers went forth, accompanied with some
Mariners, and took an ancient, a Corporal, and an Ingenier.

The same day, and the 3. the besieged shot at that which remained of the
enemies floate, and did in a manner ruin it quite.

The 5. of September there entered 9. ships.

The 8. of September the besieged demanded a truce of the enemy, who required
five days respite to consider thereof.

The 19. of September there went forty sail out of Ostend, whereof six were
sunk, and two taken by the enemy: one of them did run above a League along
the coast, being laden with stuff of great value; they did hang up the Pilot
toward the East: the horseman taken the last of August suffered for it, and
was hanged in Ostend for the Pilot.

The 25. of September they labored in the new haven which was spoiled: There
entered 28. sail into the town, three of the which were full of Mariners.

The 28. in the night there entered five sail into the Town, whereof three
were sunk.

The 29. of September there went forth five fisher boats, and Colonel Dorth
went forth in a small bark. That night they of the Town were busy in working
at the dike which was broken.

The last of September, there were three barks and three boats taken going to
fetch flagges, there were two slain and some taken prisoners.

The 3. of October there entered 18. ships by night into Ostend, and there went
forth 31. whereof one was sunk, after that the men which werein her had bin
saved she ran against Luysbos, where the enemies burnt her.

The 5. of October there entered 9. ships laden with ten Canon and some munition.

The 7. of October in the night there went forth 32. sail with little harm:
that day the besieged shot upon Luysbos and the enemy upon the Town, so as
there were many arms and legs shot off on either side, and many men slain,
they might see the Poulder in the Camp set on fire, which did them much harm.

The 8. of October there went forth 11. sail, and 12. entered.

The 10. day there went forth six ships with the messenger of the Town, who
went into Holland.

The 11. of October, the enemies with one of their Barks took a ship in the
day time which was bent for Flessingue. They made a Salve, every one of the
Musketeers three shot, and every one of the Hargubuziers two, at the coming of
some noble man into the Camp.

The Governor caused the new Haven to be newly repaired, making it more
commodious for the ships then before.

The sickness which had bin great in Ostend began now to cease, the Town
being furnished with better Physicians and Surgions.

The Town was every day fortified more and more: About that time there entered
18. Ensigns of soldiers into the Town.

The 17. of October, in the night there entered 14. sail into the Town, one
was broken at the entry of the Haven, and a man had his head struck off with
a Canon.

The 19. there went forth 13. sail.

The same day there appeared without the Town 13. great Barks and 4. ships
which came from Escluse; and it seemed they would cast another floate upon the
Gollet, they of the Town prepared to receive them.

The 20. at night they approached with a new floate, which they carried back
presently.

They brought behind Luysbos four ships and some great Barks in the which
they had placed some slaves of Escluse.

The 21. of October there came in 10. ships at noone day, whereof the enemy
took one laden with Bauins, and carried it to the West shore.

The 22. in the night there went forth ten ships without any harm.

The 23. of October, the enemy brought another floate, the which was very great
and thick, which they carried almost half nearer then the first, and more
toward the East Rauelin. Presently they opened five loope holes, and shot
furiously at the Bulworke of Pekel, so as they of the Town were presently
forced to retire their Canon a little, and at that time they had no other place
from whence they might shoot at this floate, but the Bulworke of Pekel.

The twenty six of October, the tide being gone, the enemies thrust a Canon
behind their floate, from the which they made four or five shot at the East
Rauelin, and then when the tide came they presently drew back their Canon with
much toil. They of the Town had not yet shot much at it.

In the night the batteries of the Bulworkes of Spain, of Pekel, and of the
East Rauelin, were prepared and made ready.

One end of the floate was undone, they of the Town were in good hope to
ruin it in very few days, it was so low as the least wave past over it.

This night there arrived two English Barks laden with Beer and other
provision.

They of the Town were much troubled to transport their Canon from one
Bulworke unto another to shoot at the floate.

The dike upon the South Side was broken again, they were much troubled to
repair it, although they spared no money.

The 27. of October they might see their enemies laboring at their floate with
pieces of wood, and beating in of piles behind it.

The besieged shot at it with Grenadoes, chains, and stones, meaning to make
five Canoniers more to plant pieces at.

They of Ostend had intelligence from diverse places, that the Marquis Spignola
with his Ingener Pompee, had some practice in hand to deprive them of the
Gollet, and to take them by assault, but hitherto al their subtle devises are
come to smoke.

The 5. of November there entered 11. sail into the Town, and the like number
went forth without any harm.

The 17. day the enemy brought another float which held from the end of the
first floate unto the bank of the Gollet.

The 20. of November, a strong wind coming from the Sea brake this floate of
the 17. of November, already much shaken by the town Canon, so as there scarce
remained any show of it.

The 25. day they brought yet an other float, which prevailed no better the^
the rest, but was broken partly with the wind, and partly with their continual
shooting from the Town, so as when the water did rise, their pipes and other
vessels parted and went one from another: many beams and other stuff were
cast into the Town, so as this invention served them to no purpose.

The same day the enemy cast wild fire from Luysbos to the North east Rauelin,
there were 9 soldiers and Mariners slain in quenching it, and many hurt, in
the end it was quenched without any more harm.

The fleet of Zeland showed it self the third time before the Town, having
still been put back with a contrary wind; in the end having a fair wind
they entered, there were in it some companies of Soldiers Prisons, with
munition and victuals.

A Turkish slave came and yielded himself into the Town, who said that
Spignola had put slaves into his bark, thinking therewith to annoy Ostend
much, but hitherto he had done nothing.

The same day there entered ^. ships without any loss.

The 26. and 27. of November the enemy shot some fiery bullets but with out any
effect.

The 27. the besieged did cast many Grenadoes the which did much harm in the
enemies approches.

The 28. day the besieged brought a new piece upon the North-east Rauelin.

The 30. of November the enemy fired this Rauelin, the which was quenched by
the Mariners, to whom was given a tun of Beer.

The first of December they fired the same place again, the which was quenched
in the night.

They of the Town did beat down a corner of Luisbos with the Canon. That
night it did freese hard and was very windy.

The 4. day there entered six Fishermen into the Town whereof one was sunk,
at night they of the Town received 200. barrels of Poulder.

The 5. of December two Irish men of the enemies Camp fled into the Town.

The 6. day, three soldiers of the Town went unto the enemy.

The same day there blew a strong North-west wind which carried away a great
part of the enemies floate.

The 7. and 8. of December the enemy shot furiously upon the Town Rauelin,
and did great harm to it.

The 9. day Captain Simon Krynen Rotbol entered the Town, the same day a
Bark was sunk in the new haven, in the which Captain Bebery was: within 4.
or 5. days there had entered 12. companies into Ostend.

They of the Town took a prisoner, who was so confident and resolute, as he
would never discover any thing of the Archdukes Camp, neither could they
learn any news of him.

The 10. of December some ships would have come into the Town, whereof six
stuck fast, for that they entered too soon into the hoale, (which is the new
haven) the rest seeing that, put forth to Sea with great danger, being a
South-east wind: the enemy shot continually at them, and annoyed them much:
the Mariners say for their excuse, that they were forced to set sail having
both weather and wind contrary: at night the enemy brought another floate.

The 11. day they of the Town shot furiously upon this floate. There were 10.
men hurt in Captain Peter Wilkens Bark.

The 12. of December, the enemy brought another floate.

The 13. there entered a ship by day.

The 15. there were two Barks lost, but all that were within them were saved,
at night there went forth some Mariners.

The 16. of December, they parled about the redeeming of prisoners: two came
from the South-square to yield themselves into the Town, who said that the
enemy would give an assault with a certain bridge.

The 17. of December, it was a great tempest with a North-weast wind, the
which did much harm on either side.

The 18. of December, there entered 41. ships into Ostend, the which were almost
all shot through with the Canon, and yet were they all saved, one only was
sunk: and another (being laden with victuals) was abandoned by the Pilot, and
yet entered into the town. That day the Governor Ghistil arrived at Ostend.

The 20. day there was a great tempest with thunder and rain from the
Southwest.

The 22. of December there entered 27. sail into Ostend in the day time,
without any loss, one of Amsterdam was the first, falling to her by lot.

The 23. day, the Captain of the black galley arrived with a 150. mariners,
and the Seignier de la North (which had bin governor) went out of the Town.

The 24. of December, all prisoners Mariners and Marchantes were exchanged one
for another, and the truce continued.

The 25. of December, being christmas day, the enemies brought another float,
the which was not great; they of the town shot continually at it day and
night, with 8. Canons and could not break it, being bound very fast unto the
first: the enemies labored there without intermission.

They also brought a floate upon the West side, and placed it whereas it looked
upon the Porke-espike and the false braie, it was far better then the other,
for that the Water is not so large in that place as in the Gollet, but being
nearer unto the Town, it was more easy to fire.

The 28. of December, there entered five companies of English into Ostend.

The 29. day there went forth 24. ships without any harm: and the same day
Captain Kalb of Vtrike was slain.


The Copy of a Letter written from Andwerp the 30. of this month, whereby you
may learn many notable particularities.
HEre we have had great hope of the taking of Ostend, especially when as they
thought the Gollet might be cut off, and made unprofitable for the enemies, but
in the end the Sea has carried away all the works: notwithstanding there is
yet some hope to prevail: Spignola has undertaken it, and does daily employ
some about the works. He has casziered and dismissed above 600. men, as well
commanders, Captains and Sargeants, as commissaries and Treasurers, whereof
some had put to account to the King, or to the Country, five stiuers for every
Bauin, whereas now they have them for half a stiuer: he has also reformed
the common soldiers.

The Country of Flanders does contribute for the entertainment of the army
12000. flemish Crowns a day, comprehending the munition, forrages, and stuff
for buildings and services, all to be deducted out of their rates by the other
Provinces, for the term of six months to begin the first of November. They
mean to make five forts or plat-formes more before Ostend, at the which they
labor already. all things are ready to batter the Town and to give an
assault, with great forces, the army (which has lodged at Kempen) does now
march toward Ostend, the assault shall be given upon the first occasion that
is offered. They have promised generally to all soldiers, (the Town being
taken) to pay them all arrerages, and to give them four months pay more then
is their due, with leave and pasport to retire for such as shall demand it.
They make many engines at Nieuport, Bruges, Gand, and other places, and amongst
the rest canons of wood, a fadom long, with great bands of Iron, the which one
man may carry for a need; these they shall charge with nails with two heads
or crooked, and every piece shall make but one or two shot at the most, they
expect shortly to hear of some great exploits, whatsoever shall befall, they
have resolved not to raise the siege nor to abandon the Town.

Not long since in a sollemne assembly of the Council at War (whereas all
the commanders Colonels and chief Captains were present) his Highness
(amongst other questions,) demanded how long the Prince of Parma had been
before Andwerp, and being answered him, about eighteen months, he said it
was not then eighteen years, and when we have been so long before Ostend,
we shall take it, yea if we should employ all that is in the King of Spaines
power. The speech is, that we shall have 14. thousand Italians and Spaniardes
in the spring, and to that end they labor continually in the munition houses,
to make dublets, breeches, cassackes and such like and you would say that the
war does but now begin: You may see hereby, that they spare no cost, nor
fear any danger or discommodity, yea they are without fear of death, hoping
to enjoy this spouse in despite of her.

The last of December at night, eleven soldiers went forth of the Town to
fire some of the enemies works, but the Bauins would not take, so as they were
presently forced to retire with the loss of four of them.

1604.
The first of January (according to the custom of war) they saluted one
another with Canon and musket shot and many were slain,

The 2. of January 8. ships went out of Ostend, whereof one was sunk, the
which ran on ground behind Luysbos.

The 3. of January there went forth 24. sail together without any loss.

The 6. of January there entered three ships.

The same day seven Loapers or adventurers brought a Corporal and two
Soldiers into the Town; by whom they knew (according to the letter from
Andwerp of the 30. of December) that within eight days the Camp had been
fortified with 50. enseignes of foot, and seven Cornets of horse, and that
they expected the Arche-duke; so as it semes they have a desseigne to give a
general assault, but they of the town are strong and furnished with all
things necessary, to defend themselves, and to hold out besides the succors
which are daily and houerly sent unto them.

The 9. of January four ships went out in the day time without any loss.

The 10. of January an Italian of the Camp, came and yielded himself into the
Town, and said that the enemies had resolved to give an assault to the half
Moon that is upon the Gollet, the first dark night that should come. And to
that effect they had built a bridge, Pompeies Chariot.
which they called Pompees Chariot, by the name of Spignolas Ingenieur. It is
made in manner of a Chariot with four wheels, every one being 15. foot high
and six broad, behind comes the Bridge, supported upon a high cross beam,
which is at the end of the Chariot, the moyty of which Bridge that goes before,
does rise and fall as they please, by the means of two Cables that past by two
polleys, which are fastened at both ends through a Cross, the Beam whereof
as a great Maste, a 150 foot long, the which stands upright before the
chariot, the bridge is 60. paces long, and 16. broad, as it is plainly to be
seen in the plott of the town of Ostend. As for the effect of this engine,
the virtue of the garrison, and the good hap of the States has turned all
into smoke: this fugitive says also, that the enemy should assail the town
in four or five places at once.

The tempest and foul weather had almost overthrown the East Rauelin, so as
the enemies had now better means to annoye the ships, going in and out of
the Town: the besieged looked for stuff daily out of Zeland to repair it.

The enemy brought yet another floate on the West Side near to Sand hill,
right against the old Haven.

They of Ostend did writ into Zeland, that all went well in the Town, and that
they had no want but of stuff to repayer the breaches which the Sea had made.

Here ends the Germany discourse, I have recovered many instructions from
diverse places, containing the most memorable things that have passed since, at
the siege of Ostend, as well without as with in, unto this present, the which I
have added hereunto, to acquaint the reader as well with the intelligences and
letters written from Ostend, as from other places.

From the 15. of January to the 19. of February there has entered at diverse
times above a 150. sail great and small, with four Canons, two demyes, and
ten companies of soldiers.

The Archdukes men make there approches at the South-west, betwixt the Polder
and the old Haven or platform. They press us most under the west rauelin;
and we have 15. companies in guard in the counterscarfe. They make battery
upon battery, hoping to make a breach: for our parts we double and fortify
our counterscarfe; we peerce six Canoniers upon the Polder, and ten others
which flank upon the approches, with four more in another place. The next
night they should plant two small Brass pieces in the half Moon of the
Polder, and two others in the Curtin of the West-Rauelin, with which pieces
they shall play and indomage the enemies works; their approches are exceeding
near, we do nothing day and night but shoot Grenadoes, fiery bullets, and
stones at them; yet they cease not to labor continually, so as you would say
they are slaves which are at this work: we do not think but in the day and
the night they loose above three hundred men the place where they press us
nearest, is the half Moon at the Polder, and the West Rauelin, we cast
Grenadoes unto them with our hands hourly. We have prepared a Bark full of
wild fire, the which at the first occasion we will thrust against their
approches: The composition of this fire is such, as the more they shall strive
to quench it, the more vehemently it will burn. God send it good success. Our
double Rauelin shall be soon finished, they do nothing at the new Haven. The
enemy approaches near upon the gollet, and labors there continually, but that
will avail them little: we remove our canon from the west part: our half
Moon of the Spaniards, is made above like unto a clothiers tainters whereon
they stretch their cloth, to withstand the force of Pompees chariot: This
chariot has been once tried, but after they had well observed it, they
carried it back to the downs.


The 10. of March from Ostend.
THe first of this month the wind was very high at West Northwest, with a
furious tempest, so as out town has bin wonderfully indomaged. The tide has
bin so high as many have bin forced to leave their lodgings and houses. The
ancient inhabitants say, that there has not been any so great these forty
years. This tempest has continued unto the fifth of this month; upon the
East Side, it has wholly ouer-throwne our Rauelin with the Curtain, even unto
the East gate, as also the East-Rauelin which is right before the gate, the
enemy shoots there, and does much harm.

The Strod-dicke (that is to say, the Dike made of Straw, which always keeps
the water under the Soldiers feet) is broken in diverse places. The half
Moon of the Spaniards upon the Gollet is free from harm.

A corner of the counter-scarpe has been carried away by the tide.

The enemies Lueschosch or Luysbos, has also been wonderfully ruined, and
there is 100. paces fallen down to the ground betwixt the two batteries
together with the chief battery at the end of Luysbos toward the Sea shore,
in such sort as the least part thereof is standing, and had not that been
which they had newly made, Luysbos had been quite carried away with the
Soldiers, and whatsoever was upon it.

The old town has had a good share in this wrack, and if the wind had not
somewhat abated the third day, all the town had been in danger, but the
Almighty God by his mercy did provide for it. A great part of Sand-hill was
ouer-throwne, but the Pork-espike was not touched. The counterscarpe has been
wholly carried away, so as the water cannot be stayed within the town ditches,
and when the tide is gone, they go on dry foot. The works of the Archdukes
men upon the West Side, and their new approaches betwixt the old Haven and the
West square, have been wholly ruined, except that which they have newly made
under the half Moon of the Polder which stands yet.

The 3. day we set fire on their approaches which they abandoned.

The 4. they took Becc-af or the folly of the East from us, but we made them
presently to forsake it.

The 5. day the Archdukes men made 150. Canon shot upon Sand-hil, Helmont,
Porke-espike, and the West-rauelin.

The sixth of March our men forsook Becc-af, which the enemy seeing, he
presenlty seized on it, but soon after (fearing that we would blow them up)
they forsook it again of themselves. They have also shot vehemently this day
from the Polder-square, South-square, and West-square, seeing us to work at
our Canoniers: we have shot so furiously from the West-gate, as they have
been forced to retire their Canon. There have been spent above 300.
Canon-shott on both sides; to morrow or the next day we shall batter the
enemies approaches which are under the half Moon of the Polder with 19.
Canons, and shall fire them. Every night when as the water is low we are
continually in arms.

The 14. two Suisses of the Archdukes Camp came and yielded themselves unto
us, and said that they had received no money in seven weeks: that there was
great mortality in their quarter, and that the Soldiers had no courage to
come to the assault: but we believe them no more then needs must: we are the
next night in guard, and the day following.

God be thanked we are yet strong enough, and have no need of any thing.


From Ostend the 24 of March.
THe 15. of this month there went forth 36. sail whereof one was sunk.

The 17. there entered 9. sail and 9. pieces of ordinance, as well whole as
demi culuerines.

The 18. there entered 42. sail without any harm or loss.

The 21. in the after noone Colonel Ghistel our governor was slain with a
musket shot.

The same day, two of our Scottishmen went and yielded to the enemy.

The 22. The Governor of Ostend slain.
they without asked us if our Governor slept still; having opened him, they
found the bullet had peirced through his heart, and had stayed in the left
ear, his bowels were interred here, and his body imbalmed and sent to Vtrecht.

The 23. day one of the Arche-dukes soldiers came and yielded unto us, saying
that without doubt within 3. days the Archduke would give us an assault; and
that all the preparatiues were ready.

The same day M. David de Orleans Ingeneur and chief master of the
fortifications within the Town, and the most renowned in Christendom was
hurt, he gave order for all things, and then passed into Zeland; but there is
good hope of his recovery.

The enemies advance their approches much upon the West and Southwest, and are
already under the point of the half Moon of the Polder; but that is no great
advantage, we are strong in men and want no resolution, and have more provision
then we need: God be thanked here is no speech of any sickness; since the great
tide there have entered above a 100. sail without any loss, withal kinds of
commodities and we expect more daily.

The Colonel Lohn has been chosen Governor in the place of Colonel Ghistel.


Letters from the Archdukes Camp.
AS for the affairs of the siege of Ostend of our side they do nothing, and
these three months they have little advanced: Pompees Chariot has made a
great show, but there is no likelihood that it shall work any greater effect
then it has done hitherto. The Tide of the first of March has been wonderful
terrible, for there has not been the like seen in the memory of man. It
surprised us in the night, at a little platform, and carried away all the
Corpse de guard, which were upon the head of the dike, yea the little Baraque of
the Count Boucquoys, Baraque signifies a lodging.
it overthrew three or four Canons, and forced all the Soldiers of the guard
to clime up, unless they would be drowned: it drowned much of our quarter, and
carried away a good part of the watermens: But the hurt it did unto the Town
was nothing less: The entry of the haven was all broken; the counterscarfe
ruined in many places; Bruges Gate quite laid open, the rampere broken in
many places in such sort as maine thousands of Canon shot could not have
done more; for seven or eight days after; they battered the town with twenty
five Canons. and it was propounded to give an assault, and concluded so to do,
but the order was afterward changed. They suppe now upon the side of Albertus
fort. Catrisse Master of the Camp, and the Bourgingnous on the Polder side,
are already alodged at the Counterscarfe, they have but eight foot of earth to
pearce: Catrisse was shot through the body with a Musket shot; and
Mounsiuer de Torres has been called to command in his place where now he
is; the said Catrisse died on Sunday at night, his Sargeant Mayor called
Rouuille was slain the night before: and the day before Captain Liestre,
brother in law to Catrisse, was sore hurt.

I know not what the event will be: Captain L' Enfant Sargeant Mayor of the
Liegeos was slain a little before: Monsieuer de la Malaise Lieutenant Colonel
of the Liegeois is hurt: Mounsieur de Torres escaped fair from a Grenado which
fell at his feet. The Italians advanced to the Cangrego, and the Spaniards to
the Porke-espike, so as they have taken good footing, and hope for a good end,
it were happy it might be soon, for the enemy makes himself strong.
Mounsieur de Ghistell Governor of the Town dyed eight days since of a Musket
shot: he whom the Soldiers have chosen in his place, has had his leg shot
off within these four days. Behold the estate of our affairs at this day.
The 2. of April 1604.

The Estates of the confederate Provinces and the Prince Maurice, seeing that
the Archduke Albert continued still his siege before Ostend, The resolution of
the Estates and of Prince Maurice.
the which he held straightly begirt by land: And although he prevailed not in
his desseignes, which were to reduce it under his obedience, sparing neither
men, money, munition nor any thing whatsoever to that effect: Yet the Estates
of the confederate Provinces, thought it fit to prepare an army to raise the
siege from the said Town, or at the least to annoy the Archduke in some
other place, whereby he might be constrained to turn head, and to withdraw
some part of his forces, and so to cease the daily alarmes which he gave to
them of Ostend, who had been besieged three years.

To effect this desseigne it was resolved by the said Estates to stay all
ships and boats fit for that purpose both of Holland, Zeland and Friseland,
to the number of four thousand sail and more, the which they caused to
repair to Dordrecht, Goroum, Schoonhouen and other places of Holland: 4000.
vessels furnish an army.
the Rendeeuous being given before the Castle of Ramekins in Wallcheren, the
which is one of the Islands of Zeland. They of Horn, Enchusen, and Amsterdam
did furnish 500. sail, it was an admirable thing to see the men of war and
Mariners, which came to Dordretch: for whose service the ships were rigged
and made ready, as well for them, as also to carry a number of pipes full of
fresh water, with Wagons and horses, sackes to fill with earth, artillery and
other necessary munition, so as it was a goodly thing to behold this equipage.

The 21. of April Prince Maurice parted from Dordrecht with 12. or 14.
thousand men: amongst the which there were 20. companies of horsemen, and all
the above named ships of War, with the rest that were in other places: The
which being come to an Anchor before the hoale of Middlebourg, and along the
shore of Armude, there were found above three thousand and three hundred ships
of war, without compting all other charges requisite in an army. At which
place his Excellency concluded with the Estates, where they should land in
Flanders.

The 24. of April the gates of Armude were open from nine of the clock at
night until three in the morning, where proclamation was made at the sound of
the drum, that al soldiers should imbarke presently upon pain of death, every
one in his own vessel; the which being done, and the tide being good, all the
fleet passed toward Flessingue and Ramekins, sailing toward Wulpen, the
which is at the mouth of the Haven of Escluse, and having a south-east wind
they came betwixt Wulpen and Cadsandt, into the black port or hoale, where
they landed; the places lying commodiously, but two leagues distant from
Flessingue, and one from Escluse.

The 26. of April, they came to the I Will of Cadsandt, where they landed without
any opposition or let: Such as were in guard at the black Port and other
places fled: so as Prince Maurice marched toward the fort of Hossede, and
having taken it, he went toward that of Lippinon, causing the Captain (who
commanded therein) to be summoned to yield the place, who made answer that he
would first see the Canon before he would yield, Prince Maurice sent him word,
that if he forced him to make on Canon shot against the place, he would put all
within it to the sword, and yet he gave order to bring two canons, the which as
soon as the besieged did see they yielded. They of the fort of Estfliet, being
likewise sommoned to yield, made no answer but with their Canon, to such as
presented themselves before it, but toward night, seeing the Canon planted,
they yielded, leaving their artillery, munition for war, and victualles in
the fort; those which came forth were full six hundred men, so as all the I Will
of Cadsandt and the said forts were now in the possession of Prince Maurice: In
the mean time the rest of the army was busy to discharge the ships in the
said Island.

The Archduke (having intelligence of Prince Maurice his descent) sent some
troops from his Camp before Ostend, who arrived the 25. and 26. day, and
entrenched themselves in a half Moon upon the West side of the Port of
Escluse, to stop Prince Maurice his passing.

The 27. of April, Prince Maurice sent some of his ships, with some soldiers,
(being accompanied with the black Galley) toward the entry of the haven of
^scluse, to pass his men with shaloupes: But the Archdukes men being to the
number of a thousand horse and three thousand foot (according to the report of
some prisoners) which then were encamped at the said entry, and had some
artillery planted even with the water, gave them such a welcome as they were
forced to retire having lost some Mariners, notwithstanding that his
Excellency had two batteries on this side the haven, every one of six pieces
of ordinance.

The 26. of April Prince Maurice did nothing but assure himself of the I Will of
Cadsandt and the Archdukes men in their fortifications: his Excellency caused
some artillery to be brought even under the Castle of the Port of Escluse, to
annoy the Galleys that lay there, but they drew them higher into the Town, and
then they shot little on either side.

In the mean time they of Ostend being advertised of the descent of Prince
Maurice, rejoiced much, hoping to have some rest, as indeed they had for a
while; but they omitted not to shoot more courageously against the enemy, with
their fiery bullets especially against a great Bul-worke the which they called
Loucqen Pot, where the fire took, the which the Archdukes men seeing, they
drew away their artillery, and suffered it to burn and ruin.

The last of April, sundry ships went in and out of Ostend by the new Gollet,
and yet they shot not at them, notwithstanding that the Mariners were feign
to thrust their vessels in and out by maine force, a thing which had not
been long used in the Country, so as for the present, they of Ostend are in
hope that the Town will be hereafter better furnished then it has bin,
especially for that they hinder them nothing in their fortifications. Prince
Maurice having effected what he desired in the I Will of Cadsandt, being loath to
loose any time, he sent to discover the most comodious places to enter into the
firm land of Flanders; so as the 30. of April, his Excellency past the
stream which comes from Escluse toward Isandicque, and having transported
his army without any encounter, he presently took the fort of Coxi, and the
Lieutenant with ten others prisoners; such as would defend themselves were
slain choosing rather to stand upon their defense. then to save themselves by
flight, some prisoners that were taken said, that the enemies were in a great
terror, and that they of Escluse did fortify daily, setting their Galley
slaves to work, which do serve them to no other use in the Town.

The Arch duke notwithstanding is constrained to disperce his forces, The
Archduke deuides his army into three.
according to the resolution of the Estates* and is forced to divide them into
three that is, one part before Ostend another toward the Prince Maurice and
the third against the incursions of the mutiners, the which are 1200. horsemen,
accompanied with a thousand six hundred Caualiers of his Excellencies, and a
thousand five hundred Musketeers on horseback set upon Coussins, the which
were made this Winter in Holland.

His Excellency making his preparation to besiege the fort of Isandicque,
changed his resolution, meaning first to force three other forts which are
near to that place.

The of 1. May, he Camped before Saint Marguerits fort, where there was spent
from noone until midnight, with nine Canons, about some hundred shot, the
which did so terrefie them, that although there were at the least two thousand
horse and foot, with the peasants, yet they abandoned the place and fled by
night; and so did they in like sort of the forts of Saint Catherine and Saint
Philip, although in all the said forts there were three thousand foot and
sixteen companies of horse.

The 3. of May, his Excellency besieged Isandicque, where he intre^ched
himself in such sort round about, The siege of Isandicque.
as no man could go in nor out, he brought much ordinance unto it, and
commanded certain ships of war to present themselves by Sea before it,
with some Brigandins and shaloupes to stop their passage forth by Sea: In the
mean time the Archdukes men which were upon the West side of the Haven of
Escluse (thinking now to have a good opportunity to recover the I Will of
Cadsandt,) caused many shaloupes to come from Bruges, and with some that were
at Escluse, in the which they embarked 2000. men; but those which Prince
Maurice had left in guard in the said Island, suffered some thousand to land,
whom they charged so furiously as they put them in route; most of them were
Italians and Spaniardes, who cried ala barca, alabarca, laboring to recover
their shaloupes, but as they pressed into them, some of them were ouer-whelmed,
and a great number were drowned, they could not take above 16. or 18. alive,
and 8. shaloupes whereof the prisoners were presented to his Excellency.

In the end Prince Maurice having entered into the maine land, Prince Maurice
before Escluse.
he set down before Escluse, sending his horsemen to scour the Country almost
as far as Gaunt and Courtray, who returned with great spoil, so as they of
Flanders are more oppressed then they were ever, all the burden of the war
being fallen upon them. His Excellency has given leave to many ships to
retire themselves, and there comes daily new troops to the army from diverse
nations.

The Archduke is come to Gaunt to dispose of his affairs, and has placed a
great Garrison in the Town: They of Bergues vpzoone write, that the mutiners
have surprised the Town of Wauere above Bruxelles, and make their courses into
Haynault, spoiling the Country where they pass, and have burnt the Suburbs of
vilnorde for that they would not pay the contribution which they demanded,
the which does greatly terrify the pesants, so as the Town of Gaunt and
Bruges are full of Country men, who are fled thither with their wives children
and cattle.

Saturday the eight of May, three soldiers came out of the fort of Isandicque,
and yielded to his Excellency; they said, that the besieged had need of all
things and especially of fresh water, and that if the Canon once played, they
would not make any great resistance.

The ninth of May, Prince Maurice sent to sommon them by one of his trumpets,
Isandicque sommoned by a trumpet was slain.
whom they slew with a Musket shot; Prince Maurice offended at this outrageous
act, sent a drum to demand him that had committed it, threatening, that if
they failed therein, not to receive any one of them to mercy; They sent forth
two Captains to make their excuse, saying that they knew not who it was had
made that shot, finally, they delivered an Italian unto him, Compotion of the
fort of Isandieque.
and then it was yielded upon these conditions.

First that the besieged should depart the fort with their arms, their matches
out, and their drums not sounding.

That they should leave the Canon and munition of war.

That for four months they should not carry any arms in Flanders against
his Excellency.

That they should furnish them with ships to carry away their sick men and
hurt with their baggage to the Haven of Sas, which ships they should be bound
to send back, and for assurance thereof until they were returned, they should
leave two Captains in hostage.

According to which accord, they departed the 10. of May at five of the clock
in the afternoon, being in all, about 600. men, Italians and Wallons.

The eleventh of May P. Maurice went with 1000. foot and seven companies of
horse before a ruined town called Aerdenburg, Aerdeburg a ruined Town.
betwixt Gaunt and Escluse, the which is another passage, bordring upon that
country which the Sea has gained, in the which there was a regiment of
Germans, with some troops of Horse, which had entrenched themselves to stop
the passage, but they were as faint hearted as the rest, and fled out at the
back side into the Marshes, leaving withal a Castle reasonably strong, into
the which there was a garrison put of 2000. men, which holds Escluse besieged
on that side, so P. Maurice entered the second time into Flanders, finding many
enemies, but small resistance.

The 16. of May, the whole army (that only excepted which was left for the
guard of the I Will of Cassandt) being parted from Isandique passed at Aerdenburg,
taking the way of Dam, Dam a Town in Flanders.
the which is upon the river that goes from Bruges to Escluse: upon the way
half a league from Dam, there is a water (which cannot be easily waded
through, by reason of the mudde) the which has a little Bridge and a Sluice,
unto the which the tide flows: here the Archdukes men had entrenched
themselves, to the number of 4000. horse and foot, upon so straight a passage,
as but two horsemen could march in front: the fort was reasonably strong, and
sufficient to stay Prince Maurice his army: yet after some resistance they
abandoned the place, and retired by Dam on the other side of the river; they
left upon the place 300. men slain and hurt, and among the rest there were two
Captains slain, and three prisoners, two Italians and one Spaniard, and a
Sargent Mayor sore hurt, there were more taken prisoners then slain. The same
Soldiers being retired (as has been said) by Dam on the other side of the
river, made a show as if they would once again attend the Prince, and to that
end they lodged themselves in a place of more advantage then that which they
had abandoned; they had a great channel by the which the sea did flow unto
Bruges, and with all the river and dikes which covered them.

The 18. of May part of the army having bin all night in battle the Lord of
Chastillon having the point with a part of his regiment, thinking to charge
the^, he found they had left the place. The same day at night the army camped
before Escluse.

The 23. day S. Georges forte which is upon the bank of Escluse yielded.

The 30. day the Archdukes me^ to the number of 4000 foot, and 2000. horse,
thinking to put some me^, munition and victuals into Escluse, were chargd by P.
Maurice and put to route, and their victual and munition taken: there were few
slain, and the number is uncertain, for that the contry is covered and full
of Marshes The galleis being unprofitable for the^ of Escluse, they drew forth
the slaves, and sent them out with some soldiers, who being incou^tred by P.
Maurice his troops, were dispersed, about 100. of these slaves being chained 2.
and 2. together saved themselves in his Excelle^cies camp, where they had good
entertainment, and some of them came into France.

The 5. of June on Whitson-eue, Assault at Ostend the 5. of June.
there was a general assault given in three sundry places, the most obstinate
that might be: they renewed it thrice, and it continued eight hours, the
enemies had made certain Mines, which annoyed them more then the townes-men,
having blown them up too soon; there were 800. men slain, and 500. hurt of
their part, and among the rest, the Seignieur of Bossempierre. Bossempierre
slain.
There were about 100. slain in the town, and some hurt.

The 17. of June the enemies gave an other assault the which lasted from two of
the clock in the afternoon until eight at night, An assault the 17. of June.
when as the enemy did win some of the Rauelins of the Polder, at the which
they lost but 150. men: and they of the town some hundred: amongst others
there were four Captains slain: And although the Town Soldiers behaved
themselves very well, yet the enemies lodged upon the Polder rampers very near
the town, where they did strongly entrench themselves.

There entered at the same time into the town 17. companies of Soldiers, with
munition and victuals by the Gollet.

The Arch duke seeing that a part of his forces were drawn away to suppress
the insolent courses of the The Archduke compounds with the mutiners.
mutiners (to the end that he might fortify himself the more against Prince
Maurice, who lay before Escluse) he sought a means to make an agreement with
them, the which he effected, conditionally that he should (as he had promised)
pay them whatsoever was due: that he should remit and discharge them of all
such money as they had levied: that he should forgive whatsoever was past:
disanull the proscription which he had made against them; and give them
Ruremonde for their assurance; giving to every footman 10. stiuers a day, and
to every horsemen 25. until they had received their full pay. The said
mutiners yielded unto his Highness the castles of Hochstraten and Carpen, and
to P. Maurice the Town of Grave, with the 1600. Caualiers, and 1500.
Musketeers which had joined with them, and the said mutiners were not bound to
serve his Highness until they had received their full payment.

The Reader shall be advertised that the Archduke does press the town of
Ostend very hardly, Conclusion and end of the book.
for that Prince Maurice is camped before Escluse, so as they daily make new
attempts to take Ostend: and they within the Town do all they can to defend
it, having made new retrenchments to that end, whereby we may conjecture they
cannot be yet forced, yet either of them do what they can to take or to defend
the place: which is the occasion why we end this book, for that every three
days they give new assaults, the which would be but a repetition of the like
things we have before set down; and therefore the courteous Reader shall
content himself with this, until there shall fall out some other memorable
thing, the which in time we will offer his sight.


A continuance of the sieges of Ostend and Escluse, with a pourtrait of the new
retrenchments at Ostend.
WE have heretofore said that Prince Maurice had taken the I Will of Cadsandt, and
set footing into the maine land of Flanders, to incampe himself before
Escluse, and to beseege it. Before we proceed any further, we will represent
unto you the situation of the town. Esclufe is a Sea town lying in the
country of Flanders, which they call Flamigante, three leagues from Bruges and
five from Middlebourg, in Zeland: In former times it has been a good and a
rich town, but through the quarrels and wars it has had with the Brugeois,
it has been made subject unto them, and much impouerished and diminished. It
has a goodly spacious Haven, capable of 500. ships; the town is exceeding
strong both by Art and Nature, environed of all sides with the Sea, Marshes
and drowned land so as in a manner it is inaccessible. In the beginning of the
wars it held for the confederate Provinces. The Prince of Parma besieged it
in the year 1587. and did batter it with thirty Canons and eight Culuerins,
making a breach of two hundred and fifty paces, where his men gave seven
assaults, and were valiantly repulsed by them within the town, who fought for
their lives and liberties: In the end succors coming within view of the
town, and being hindered by the valor of the Prince of Parma, either to enter,
or to do any other exploite importing for their relief, the besieged after
three months siege, yielded up the town the 4. of August, upon honorable
conditions. Since which time Escluse has continued under the Spanish
government, who have so afflicted them with subsidies, garrisons, and such like
vexations, as the greatest part of the Inhabitants have abandoned it. The King
of Spain (by the advice of Spignola) made choice of this place for the
retreat of his galleys, whereof we have spoken before, and even when as his
Excellency came to incampe before it, there were some the which being made
unprofitable by his Excellencies forces, they of the town drew forth the
slaves, and sent them away as unprofitable mouths, to spare their victuals
which are very scant. These are they we have seen in France some months
since, who saved themselves, when as their leaders were put to flight by his
Excellencies men. His Excellencies quarter is upon the North-side of the town,
whereas there are many Block-houses and trenches, as well against the town as
without, to hinder the succors. The second quarter is Count Williams,
fortified almost like unto his Excellencies. Count Ernest quarter is some
distance from the rest, upon the West of the Town, fortified with
Black-houses, having a bridge upon Kreck to go to Sterdenburg upon the
South-west. In the drowned land there are fourteen ships and some Barks with
Block-houses, whereas the Seigniour de la Noot commands. His Excellency has
caused some batteries to be made, but they have not yet done any thing. He
hopes to have the town by famine, the besieged having great want of victuals,
and especially of fresh water. His Excellency makes the Inhabitants of
Flanders to contribute even unto the Gates of Gaunt, for the entertainment of
his Army.

The Archduke in the beginning of July went to vist the Infanta, and to assure
the inhabitants. As for the siege of Ostend, Ostend.
the Archdukes army consists of eight or nine thousand foot, and fifteen
hundred horse, and every day there enters two thousand men in guard into the
trenches* the Sea having ruined the fortifications of the town, and especially
their counterscarfe, by the breach whereof the water has run out of the
ditch, so as the Archdukes men took it, and have gotten to the foot of the
town rampere. The Bourguignons are lodged on the right hand, the Spaniards on
the left, and the Italians in the midst.

The second of June the enemy blew up a mine at Polder Bulworke, A mine at
Polder Bulworke.
the which did little harm to them of the Town, but buried many of their own
men being falty without: the which did cool the heat of the Archdukes men
being ready to go to the assault. At the same time being come to handie blows,
they of the Town played with their Canon and Muskets upon them, where there
were about fifteen hundred slain and hurt, and of the Town forty.

The 16. day, the besieged made a sally, A Sallie
in the which they slew five or six of them which labored in the mines, and
took four or five prisoners, amongst the which there was one of the chief
Masters, and undertakers, who said that the enemy did mine under the the
West-gate: Spignola sick.
and that Spignola was extreme sick, whom they held for dead.

The besieged seeing themselves thus pressed, Retrenchments of the besieged.
had long before begun two retrenchments at the Rampere, (the foot whereof
the enemy was lodged) a hundred and fifty paces one from another; their ditches
are forty foot broad the which they fill with water by the sluices they have
within the Town, and which cannot be taken from them; betwixt these two
retrenchme^ts there is a half Moon. The first was made defensive about mid
June, and some pieces of Canon planted thereon as also upon other plat-formes to
play upon the Archdukes great battery; the portrait is set down in the
beginning of this discourse.

The 15. day the besieged were in arms all the morning, thinking that the
Archdukes men had prepared to come unto an assault, but it was a general
reuew which they made.

The 16. day the enemy blew up a mine near unto the West gate, the which
wrought small effect, the besieged labored to repair the breach which it had
made, and did counter-mine continually. An Italian soldier came and yielded
himself into the Town, who said that there was another mine near unto it,
which the enemy would blow up the next day, and give an assault, the which they
did, but they were repulsed with great loss of their men.

There were diverse other mines and assaults, like in a manner to the former, in
one of them Captain Hamilton a Scottishman was slain; Berendrecht Governor
of Ostend was also slain about the same time. Colonel vtenhouen who was sent
to succeed him, had a Musket shot through the neck, Captain Marquet does now
command there, being sent by his Excellency. They of the town had beseeched
him to give them a Governor of the same country, some man of valor and
authority. The besieged have no want of any commodities, being refreshed daily
with all things necessary from Zeland: The Inhabitants of the Town are so
assured, as many of them have caused their wives to return, being retired for
the amazment of the mines.

The trenchments being finished, The besieged forsake the old rampere.
the besieged resolved to bandon the old rampere to spare their men. It is a
strange thing and worthy of memory that they have so long time disputed for a
rampere of thirty foot thick, so much battered, mined, countermined and sapt.
The Spaniardes presently zeased upon the old rampere.

The 15. of July Colonel Marquet Governor of the Town, A Sallie
caused a sally to be made about eight or nine of the clock at night, to cloy
the enemies Canon, of whom there were many slain but seeing the whole army
coming upon them, they retired.

The siege being planted before Escluse, they of Ostende, thinking it would be
a cause to make the Archduke to press them more straightly, to divert his
Excellency by this means from his entriprise, labored continually in their
new retrenchments, making one behind an other, as you may see in the
portraite, seeking out all inventions possibly to that end, and to make the
same firm, and to keep it from falling, they have thought it good, besides
the Bauins to mingle hay therewith and to fill sackes

Spignola, being recovered of his sickness, prepared to batter the
retrenchments upon the end of July.

The besieged are incoraged by the neernes of his Excellencies army, thinking
that they fight in view thereof, to the end that resisting the enemy still,
Prince Maurice might the better effect his desseigne upon Escluse, which is to
force them to yield by famine.

A discourse of that which happened at Ostend since the 17. of June unto the
end of the siege.
AFter the death of Mou^sieur de Ghistelles governor of Ostend his successor
Colonel Adrian van Lhoon was likewise shot, then the command of the town
remained in three of the chief Captains, whereof the one called Captain
Beerendreght was slain, and Mounsieur Vtenhoue (another of them) being hurt
retired into Zeland: about the last of June Mounsieur Marquet (a gentleman of
good sufficiency) was sent for governor: the Marquis Spignola having now the
absolute charge of the whole camp before Ostend, Spignola general of the
Camp before Ostend.
being a man of great resolution, dilligent, affable and liberal: rich of
himself, having furnished the king of Spain with great sums of money for the
maintenance of this siege: after that he had (about the 17. of June) taken
Helmont, with the west and South-west Bulworks, Sand-hill standing then in
great danger; the besieged (having before hand made new Bulworks with other
fortifications opposite unto the^,) did now begin with all speed to make new
retrenchments, in diverse parts of the Town, so as one part being lost, they
might have another retreat, and their last refuge was by the havens mouth,
where they had made a Blockehouse or reduite environed with the Sea, in this
work they used the advice and skill of an English Ingeneur called Ralse Dexter
an old seruitour in those Coutries.

In the mean time the besiegers continued the approches and works toward the
Sand-hill and new works, by mines and battery from their plat-formes, giving
diverse assaults with advantage, so as the Archduke was in great hope to take
Ostend before that Prince Maurice should be well entrenched before Sluice,
being now lodged in the town ditch, which was a hard sandy ground, subject to
sap and mine, and this was the general opinion of all his council at war.

Prince Maurice General of the army of the united Provinces, P. Maurice
entrenched before Sluice.
had time enough to entrench himself strongly before Sluice, yet not so
suddenly, but that there entered about 1500. men with some small supply of
victuals, at two several times through the marshes. Notwithstanding soon
after the town was so entrenched about, and all the marish grounds joined
together with bridges in such sort, and in some waters, ships and armed Barks
brought in all so strongly fortified, and of so great a compass, as the works
were wonderful for so short a time.

Prince Maurice having finished and furnished his outward fortifications with
three skonses, he began to make his entrenchments and battery against the
town, causing a marvelous long Bridge to be made to give an assault over the
haven; but having intelligence by some that fled out of the Town, that their
victuals within grew scant, having above 3000. soldiers 1500. galley-slaues,
besides the Citizens to feed, he resolved to famish them, being assured that
Ostend would hold out. Moreover he knew that a secret way by the which the
Governor Serrano did think to draw in victuals by night, was cut off by a
fort which his Mariners had made, and the ways under water made deeper.

They of Escluse being in great extremity, made fires nightly upon their
steeple, craving succors; Sluice in extremity. 1604.
so as the Arck-duke (seeing Ostend to hold out) began to find his own fault,
in that he had not resisted the entire of P. Maurice with all his forces: he
therefore resolved to succor Sluice, and yet to keep Ostend still besieged,
giving order to advance the approches toward the new retrenchments, the which
the Marquis Spignola was very loath to do; It is said that he had written into
Spain, that he was marching to the relief of Sluice, with small power and
little hope, and not without danger of the winning of Ostend, but he was forced
thereunto to satisfy the Archdukes humor and obstinacy.

The Archduke gathered together all the power he could, and by great promises
drew the mutined Soldiers to do him service in this action, who came unto him
with a gallant troop of horse and foot; he gathered together also a number of
Wagons, and so framed an army under the command of the said Marquis Spignola,
not without great envy of the Spaniards and others, leaving the siege of Ostend
well furnished with directio^s and necessaties.

About the end of July the Marquis Spignola marched with 5000. men toward
Sluice, Spignola marches to relieve Sluice.
he took an old town called Middlebourg, and so sought round about to force
through the Princes camp, but all in vain: at length when he had tried all
quarters with loss on every side, he resolved the 17. of August to put his
enterprise in execution on the side of Coxie which is beyond the I Will of
Cassandt, having some intelligence that that quarter was but weakly guarded.

Prince Maurice being advertised that the Marquis Spignola had resolved to make
some great attempt upon the side of Coxie by Cassandt, holding that quarter the
easiest to force, and fittest for his approach to Sluice, if he might lodge
there: seeing that he was retired the 16. day at night from before his trenches
where he had camped, he imagined that he was gone to put his enterprise in
execution: he went therefore at night to dispose of all things, if the enemies
should present themselves, which was to lodge few men in the two first forts,
which he had opinion they would assail, commanding the Captains who had the
charge thereof, to make some resistance if the enemies came upon them, and to
retire into their trenches as men surprised and amazed, drawing them in as
near as they could to his artillarie, which discovered all; he had also lodged
2000. Musketeers near unto the^, the Lord of Chastisllon, with six companies
of French, and Colonel Veer with six of English, commanding that the artillery
should not play until the enemies were come to handie blows with them, to the
end they might draw on the other troops that came to second them into the
trenches, he lodged his horsemen in such sort as they might set upon the enemy
behind during the fight, and so disorder them, or to charge the bands of
Spaniards, Italians, or Wallons, in their retreat as they pleased. The
mutinadoes to the number of 2000. had the point, who giving a furious charge
before day, forced the first defenses, and entered the trench, where they made
some resistance in retiring: those which commanded at the Artillery, seeing
them so near, with great advantage, took the opportunity to discharge their
Canon, without attending those that were to second them, so as his Excellencies
horse could not come in time to charge them. Spignola repulsed at Sluice.
The 2000 men which first entered, seeing themselves ill entreated by the Canon
and Musket shot, and part of them slain and hurt, they retired in the dark
to their other troops which fled. There were many men lost in this charge. It
was written to his Majesty that there were fourescoare men of command slain,
amongst others the Marquis of Ranty, borne of the houses of Lalain and Croy;
Alfonso Borgias, who commanded the Spanish footmen; Maintenon a Frenchman,
the rest were masters of the Camp, Captains, and some voluntary Gentlemen.

The next day they of Sluice seeing Spignolas repulse, and the army retired,
being no longer able to subsist for the great want of victuals which did
consume them, they sent forth two Captains to his Excellency to treat of a
Capitulation: whereunto his Excellency answered, that there needed but three
words, without any further discourse.

The first; that if they would depart that day, they should go with their
Colors flying, Drums sounding, their matches light, Bullet in the mouth,
with their arms and baggage, like men of honor and good Soldiers.

If they stayed until the next day, they should then depatt with white wands.

But if they temporized until the third day, he would not suffer them to carry
away any thing but Halters about their necks, knowing they did it through
malice, being pressed by extreme necessity, being not bound thereunto in
honor, seeing they had no hope of succors, but would glory in showing
themselves obstinate.

The two Captains being returned into the Town, made report of the conditions
propounded by Prince Maurice, Sluice surrendered the 10. of August.
but they could not resolve to depart that day, but the next day they changed
their opinions, and departed with honorable conditions, being about four
thousand and two hundred men, almost hunger-starued, for all their bread and
victuals were spent: many of the Galley slaves had not touched any bread in 10.
or 12. days, and did feed upon grass, green leaves, leather, old shoes
tenderly sodden, partchment and such like.

The conquest of this strong situated town, very fit for many attemps, with
70. pieces or more of great ordinance, and 10. or 11. Galleys with their
furniture, encouraged the united Provinces to think upon some course for the
relief of Ostend, for the effecting whereof they made a general asse^bly of the
states at Sluice in the end of August.

Spignola being returned with his forces to the siege of Ostend, the Archduke
placed strong Garrisons in Blankenbourg, Dam, and Bruges, fortifying all places
that might stop Prince Maurice his passage to Ostend.

In the mean time they of Ostende had diverse and sundry advantages against
the enemy by sallies and countermines. The 10. of August they made a sally,
chased the besiegers from the old Bulworkes, seized of their ordinance and
cloied it, but in their retreat (some having ventured too far) 2. or 3. of
their captains and officers were slain. Spignola being returned, Spignola
returned to Ostend.
he pressed them more then before, and finding the Spaniardes to fly from al
services, for the envy they did bear to him and to the Italia^s, he resolved
to employ the Germans in their steed, and to draw them unto it by his
bounty: having therefore made his approches to Sand-hil by mines and other
devises, he resolved to give an assault with the German regimentes of the
Earls of Foglia and Barlamont, being for the most part all old soldiers and
of great resolution, who after much resistance took Sand-hill, Sandhil taken
by the enemy.
and slew all them that had not retired in time, the which was a great
furtherance to obtain their intent: for this their good service Spignola
bestowed of them out of his own bounty some forty thousand gilders to drink,
with great thanks and commendation.

In the mean time the assembly of the general Estates of the united Provinces
of Nether-land, Reasons upon the continuance of the siege of Ostend.
being at Sluice to resolve what was best for them to do for the relief of
Ostend, propounded that this long, bloody, and chargeable defense of Ostend,
was to have an entry into the maine land of Flanders. thereby to force them to
their contributions and to keep the war there, that seeing they had now
taken the strong town of Sluice the Island of Cassa^dt, with many forts and
skonces, besides the strong fort of Isandike and the ruinated walled Town of
Ardenburg, (which they resolved to fortify and to build a new) all which
contained a great piece of ground in the maine of Flanders, whereby they had
good means to draw all the wars into Flanders into the enemies Country, and
so force the Country to contribute, 70. 80. or 90. thousand gilders monthly,
all which being now obtained, they thought it needless to be at any further
charge. Moreover besides the small likelihood there was to defend it: there was
no hope to take all the forts and skonces round about it, without the which the
town would be to them of no moment. And for the great benefit of the haven to
the enemy, they thought, what with their shipping by sea, and their strength of
horsemen by land in Flanders, and their daily courses to incumber and stop the
rivers and passages within the Country, withal they would not despair, that
when the forts round about should be either broken or neglected, to recover the
Town again, keeping the dominion of the Sea, which advantage they pretend
above their enemies, and that when as the place should be repaired by their
enemies against the violence of the Sea, the which now against winter required
a great charge of 30. or 40. thousand crowns.

These and such like considerations being propounded, the estates resolved to
leave the defense with the best and most profitable conditions they could: They
resolve to yield it up.
unless Prince Maurice with his maine force would attempt to raise the siege,
or else make a show for the obtaining of more reasonable conditions; but the
fortification of Sluice and of their other conquests being very necessary, to
take all means from the Archduke to besiege Sluice again; did hinder the
same, saving a little show made to no effect.

Wherefore the Sand-hill being taken by force in September by the Germans, as
we have said, and the Marquis Spignola making his approches and mines in the
old Town about the old Church, by which it was greatly feared that with any
great tides or Western Winds, the Sea might make some great breach, and be a
hindrance to any good composition, Mounsieur de Marquet the governor with his
Council of war in Ostend, knowing the will and pleasure of the Estates of
the united Provinces of Nether land their masters, Ostend surrendered the 12.
of September 1604.
having shipped all the principal ordinance and munition, leaving some for a
show, entered into treaty with the Marquis Spignola the 8. of September,
concluded the 10. day: and they departed the 12. day, after three years and
ten weeks siege, and that a continued siege without intermission, with
fighting and shooting of great ordinance day and night both from within and
without, the like has not been seen in any man's remembrance, nor read in any
Histories.

The number of shot spent of both sides may hereafter come forth in so me
relations and likewise of the dead in three years space.

It is written that there was found in a Comissaries pocket who was slain
before Ostend the seventh of August diverse writings and remarkable notes, and
amongst the rest a note of the number of the Archdukes Camp that died without
of every degree. As follows.

Masters of the Camp. 7. Colonels. 15. Sargent Majors. 29. Captains. 565.
Ancients. 322. Lieutenants. 1116. Sargents. 4911. Corporals. 9166.
Lansepesadoes. 600. Soldiers. 54663. Mariners. 611. Women and children. 119.
All amount to 72124. persons
Which number is not so great, considering the time of three years,
sicknesses, and the cold Winters upon the Sea coast in so cold a Climate,
fighting against the Elements the which in former times has not been used.
There is nothing yet come to light of the number that died within, but it is
thought the number is far less, both for that they were not so many in the
Town, and had more ease, and were better victualled.

The conditions of the composition were honorable. The Articles.
To go forth by land as many as would, with their Colors flying, Drums
sounding, their Matches light, and Bullets in their mouths, with four pieces
of Ordinance, and Bullets and Poulder for ten shot: and two hundred Wagons
to carry away their stuff, besides all the Ships within the Town that were
laden, and the rest to be laden with their baggage, and householde stuff,
their wives and children, leaving the rest of the ammunition behind, the chief
whereof was shipped before, they left about eight pieces some not mounted, others
cracked and broken with two or three morters, and some 80. bartels of Poulder,
the rest was shipped away or made unfit to use.

And so there went forth about four thousand tall Soldiers by the Stronde
toward Blankenbourg, having been feasted and banketed by their enemies, both
within the town and without in Spignolas Tents, and had a conuoy to conduct
them, and their ships departed in like sort; they lodged that night at
Blankenbourg and the next day they came to Prince Maurice his camp before
Sluice, where all the Colonels, Captains and chief men were kindly
entertained and welcomed by his excellency, and the Baylife of Ostend was made
Baylife of Sluice.

There remained no Inhabitants in Ostend, only one old man, and a woman or two,
but all retired, leaving it as heaps of earth and sand. The Archduke came
thither with the Infanta to see the place, and from thence they went in
pilgrimage to our Lady by Dunkerke, to whom they did ascribe the victory. All
the country people there abouts were commanded to bring in stuff of wood and
Bauins, to repaier the Town against the Sea.

The Archdukes Camp is disolued, and the soldiers are dispersed into the
cities and towns of Flanders, which were forced to receive them for
garrisons, to withstand the incursions of the garrisons of Sluice and
Ardenbourg, the which his excellency had fortified with many Bulwarks, leaving
there this winter some 7. or 8000. foot, and 2000. horse in garrison, having
built stables for their horses in Ardenbourg and Isendicke. Monsier Vander Noot
being made Governor of Sluice under Cont Hendrik Fredricke of Nassaw, brother
to Prince Maurice.

FINIS.


An Explanation of the figure of the retrenchments of Ostend.
51, A Half Moon before Helmont in the which they of the town kept guard a
long time. 52. Helmont cut off from the Town marked 42. in the whole card of
the Town represented in the History. 53. A Bulworke on the West, where a mine
played the 16. of June, and the next day an assault was given in the whole
mapp. 39. 54. The Gallery or Corredor from Polder Bulworke to the
Counter-scarfe. 55. Here a mine was blown up the second of June, and an
assault was given. 56. Here they of the Town had a half Moon and kept guard.
where they made a mine. 57. The Bulworke of the South-west. 35. 58. The
Castall, or stable of Kine, the South Bulworke. 59. A half Moon within the
Counter-scarfe where they of the Town kept guard. 60. A half Moon taken by
the besieged, cut off and separated from the town. 61. A Rauelin. 62. The
West Rauelin 63. The Porke-espike, a part whereof the enemy blew up ane seized
on the rest 41. 64. A Blocke-house before the North gate. 65. A Bridge, 66. A
Rauelin. 67. New Helmont. 68. The new Bulworke of the West. 69. Sure gardes or
vrigandes. 70. A Plat-forme upon the market place, whereon they have made three
batteries marked with the numbers of 71. 72. 73. Afterward it was changed to
the new West Bulworke, number 69. the which is of eight pieces, to play upon
the enemies Catteyes, and is changed as occasion serves, as you may see in the
portrait.

