THE PICTVRE of a Puritan: OR, A Relation of the opinions, qualities, and
practices of the Anabaptists in Germany, and of the Puritanes in England.

Wherein is firmly proved, that the Puritanes do resemble the Anabaptists,
in above fourscore several things.

By Oliver Ormerod, of Emmanuel College in Cambridge.

Whereunto is annexed a short treatise, entitled, Puritano-papismus: or a
discovery of Puritan- Papisme.

Newly corrected and enlarged.

Nulli dubium est, vt qui inter se discrepant, in ecclesia oppugnatione
consentiant, iuxta illud, quod Herodes et Pilatus inter se discordantes, in
domini passione amicitia f^ederantur. Hieron. in Isaiam. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. LONDON
Printed by E. A. for Nathaniel Fosbroke, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the West end of Paul's. 1605.

To them, and to none but them, whom the Puritanes have laden with
contumelies, slanders, defamations, and oppr* bri^us detractions: O. O.
presents this Picture.
SO great was the skill of Apelles, Pyrgoteles, and Lisippus, as that
Alexander the great commanded, that none should paint him in colors but
Apelles: none should grave him in stones but Pyrgoteles: and none should faigne
any part of his princely person but Lisippus.

So cunning was Zeuxis, as that he painted a boy carrying grapes, that the
birds came and picked on them, as if they had been natural grapes.

So skillful was Praxiteles, as that he graued in a Marble stone* the jmage of
Venus, so perfectlye and so lively in each point, that a certain young man
f^ll in love with the jmage, and came often in the night, when no man knew, to
kiss and to embrace the jmage of Venus.

Yea, so cunning were Painters in former ages, as that it moved Saint
Crysostome, to break out into this speech: Chrysostom. in Psalm. ^0.
Pictores imitantur art naturam, et colores coloribus permiscentes, visibiles
corporum depingunt imagines, and faciunt homines, and animalia, and arbores,
and Reges, and rusticos, and barbaros, and pugnas, and rixas, torrentes
sanguinum, and lanceas, and loricas, and scuta, and sedemregalem, and
imperatorem sedentem, and barbarum subditum, and gladium acutum, and fluuios
decurrentes, and campos varijs floribus adornatos, and omnia quae videntur, per
artem imitantes, mirabilem historiam videntibus praestant.

All which notwithstanding, the painting of a Puritan is so hard and
difficult, as that the joint skill of Apelles, Pyrgoteles, Praxiteles, and of
all the cunning Painters in Saint Chrysostoms time, will scarce reach this
object.

For as Proteus changed himself into diverse shapes, and appeared sometimes
like a flame of fire, sometimes like a Bull, and sometimes like a terrible
Serpent: so the Puritan changes himself likewise into diverse shapes, and
appears sometimes like a Protestant, sometimes like a Papist, and sometimes
like an Anabaptist.

It may therefore seem strange, that I, who never before handled the Pensill,
would for my first counterfaite shadow the Puritan. I am (I confess) at a
loss, and know not herein what to answer: only this I say concerning this
my first picture, as Phydias said concerning his first protraiture: if it be
liked, Iwill draw more besides this; if loathed, none but this.

But to whom shall tender and present this picture? may I not to the dead, as
well as to the living? are the bars of the grave so vnexorable, as that they
ca^ deny a man to continue that affection to the memory of those that are dead
in the Lord, which he carried to them beiug alive?

May I the^ present it to the dead and breathless corpse of our late Queen of
famous memory? may I there cry out against the ungratefulness of those
Ministers, who have never ceased since she was gathered to her Fathers until
this day, by their co^ferences in private, by their Broakers and coursers up
and down, by their books and Pamphlets in print, and by all other means that
possibly they could devise, to deprave her proceedings, and to defame that
most ancient kind of commendable church-gouernment, which through Gods great
mercy and Godly laws of her Highness, was according to his holy word
established amongst us?

This puts me in mind of Scipio Affricanus the elder, who made the City
of Rome ( Exangue^ et morituram Val. Max* Lib. cap. 3.
being in a consumption, and ready to give up the Ghost) Lady of Affricke. At
length being banished into a base Countric-towne, his will was, that his Tomb
should have this inscription upon it: Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem mea habes:
unthankful Country, thou have not so much as my bones.

And does not the unthankfulness of the Puritan-faction, give me just
occasion to make applycation hereof? How many blessings did the Lord bestow
upon this Church and commonwealth, in the halcyon days of Queen Elizabeth?

To name only one particular, she made this Church being in a consumption,
and ready to give up the Ghost, Lady of Europe.

But what is become of their gratitude? How quickly have they exiled her from
their thoughts and buried her memorable acts in oblivion? Ingrati puritani.

But to leauc the dead and come to the living: may I in all humility present
it to you my Liege Lord and Sovereign? I cannot conceal from your Highness,
how that their chiefest writers have blazed and diuulged abroad, that T. C.
lib. 2. page 4^.
Christian Sovereigns ought not to be called heads under Christ, of the
particular and visible Churches within their Dominions: T. C. lib. 1. page. 192.
that they ought not to meddle with the making of Laws, orders, and ceremonies
for the Church: Exhort. to England page 91 92.
that their discipline ought to be set up: that all Princes ought to submit
themselves under the yoke of it: yea, and that what Prince, King, or Emperor
shall disanull the same, he is to be reputed Gods enemy, and to be held
unworthy to reign above his people.

But who am I, that being not called for, should dare to come before so high
and mighty a Prince, and b^ing so small a present?

It was the danger of Hesters life, though she was a Queen, to come before
the King, unless she were called for. For it was their law, that Hester, 4,
whosoever, man or woman came into the inner court, which was not called,
should die, unless the King held forth his golden Rod.

May I present it to you of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, upon
whose hands also our late Queen leaned?

The Puritanes which slander her Highness, cannot but slander your Honors,
whom she did associate to her self, in administering her government. For she
imi^ated Hester. 1.
Ahashuerosh the King of the Persians, who did nothing in the remove of Vashti
the Queen, without the advice of the seven Princes which saw the Kings face,
and sat first in the Kingdom.

But who am I, that I should dare to interrupt your grave consu^tatio^s with so
slight a schedule? Right reverend Fathers of the Church, to whom God has
given his Vrim and his Thummim, may I present it to you? The Right reverend and
gracious Lord, who not long since was among you, as a Diamond set in Gold, had
great experience of their opprobrious speeches and peremptory practices, and
could have spoken by experience, as Aeneas did of the troubles of Troy, et
quorum pars magnafui. And it is not unknown to any of your Lordships, how that
the Puritanes blush not to write, that Hay any work. page 14. 15. 20. 21. and
Marli^ marprelate in his Epistle to ^ terrible Priests.
Archbishops and Bishops are superfluous members of the body of Christ: that
they are unlawful, false, and bastardly governors of the Church: that they
are the ordinances of the Devil: yea, that they are petty Popes, petty
Antichrists, Bishops of the Devil and incarnate Devils.

But who am I that I should presume to present this to so great Personages?
Alas, I am peccatorum maximus, Apostolorum minimus.

Cathedral Churches, may I tender it to you? I cannot but tax the railing
Admoni. page 224. 225.
Puritanes, for calling you the dens of loytring lubbers, where (as Ibid.
they say) M. Deane, M. Vice-deane, M. Cannons, or M. Prebendaries the greater,
M. Petty Cannons, or Cannons the lesser, M. Chauncelor of the Church, M.
Treasuror, or otherwise called Judas the purse-bearer, the chief Chaunter,
singing men, special favorers of Religion, squeaking Quiristers,
Organ-players, Gospellers, Pistlers, Pentioners, Readers and Vergers, live in
great idleness, and have their abiding.

But not to forget my Mother, and her Sister, the famous Universities of
Cambridge and Oxford: may I present it to you? I hold it an especial part of
my duty, to acquaint you with their slaundering and odious traducing of your
Children. S. H. in his plea. page. 193. 194.
There is (says a favorer of the new-fangle faction) a strange manner of
preaching in use in many places, both in the Universities and elsewhere, which
no man well affected, but if he knows it, he does exceedingly pity it. One,
as though the Pulpit were but a Scaffolde, in which he like a Master of
Defense were to play his prizes, and to give testimony of his wit, plays upon
every word, and descanteth upon every letter in his text, and as though the
Scripture were but a Rattle for children and fools to make sport withal, he
tosseth it hither and thither, and will not fail to offer it any violence, to
frame it to an imagined conceit, and to draw it to an idle purpose.

An other, as if his purpose were only to amaze the vulgar, and to affright
and astonish the multitude, mounteth aloft, and is all in his great words,
and new coined phrases, more fit for a Mimick or Tragedian, then a Minister of
the Gospel. A third, to gain the opinion of a profound man, that looks into
matters of more depth then the common sort, rubbeth over the unsavory writings
of some Moth-eaten Friar, and by an uncouth fashion of teaching, together with a
multitude of allegories and intricate distinctions, amazeth both himself and
all those whose unhappy chance it is to be his hearers. A fourth, to be
reputed a good linguist, and a man of great reading, stuffeth his Sermon with a
legion of allegations, and enterlaceth it with many shreddings of Latin and
Greek, and by that means though his Doctrine perhaps may be profitable, yet
he confounds the memory of the diligent and attentive hearer.

To conclude, I present this to them, and to none but them, whom the Puritanes
have (and whom have they not?) laden with contumelies, slanders, defamations,
opprobrious detractions and uncharitable accusations: asking pardon for my
boldness, and patronage for these my simple endeauours, and beseeching the
God of heaven and earth, to multiply his richest blessings, upon all those that
in simplicity ^. Cor. 1. 12
and Godly pureness have their conversation in the world.

The true affectionate Lover of all that are pure in heart. Oliver Ormerod.

To all Favorites of the Puritanfaction, peace and truth.
IT is not unknown to any that has perused the writings of Heathen writers,
how that the Persians kept in their Houses, the picture of an Epicure, sleeping
with meat in his mouth, and most horribly ouerladen with wine, that by the
view of such an ugly sight, they might learn to eschew the means of the like
excess.

It is also reported, that the Parthians, to make their youths, to loath the
alluring trains and deceitful entisements of Harlots, had most curiously
carved in their Houses, a young man blind, besides whom was adjoined a woman far
more excellent then Pigmalions image: having one hand in his pocket, as noting
her theft, and holding a knife in the other hand, to cut his throat.

The like means (loving Countrymen) wish I you to use, for the restraint of
Puritanisme. Vouchsafe (I beseech you) to keep in your Houses, this Picture of
a Puritan, as the Persians did the Picture of an Epicure, and the Parthians
the Picture of an Harlot: and I doubt not, but the very sight thereof, will
bring your selves, your wives, your Children, and your servants, to a full
detestation of the Puritan-faction.

Farewell.
To the Reader.
WHen Bucephalus was painted, Apelles asked the judgment of none but Zeuxis:
now the Puritan is painted, I appeal only to the learned. As for the
unlearned, I say unto them, as Apelles said to the Shoemaker:

Ne suitor vltra crepidam:

Judge thou not of this pictures thigh,
Except thine Art do reach so high.
The Picture of a Puritan: OR, A relation of the opinions, qualities, and
practices of the Anabaptists in Germany, and of the Puritanes in England: Made
Dialogue-wise, in a most plain and familiar manner.
The Englishman. WEll met Sir, let us two walk and talk together (as those
two Luke 24. 14
Disciples of Christ did, that went from Jerusalem to Enimaus) of the things
which are come to pass in these our days.


The German. What things?


The Englishman. Art thou only a stranger in England, and have not known the
things which are come to pass therein in these days? have thou not heard of
a Scismaticall and indiscreet company, that resemble the Anabaptists in
Germany?


The German. I have read in one of your English writers, that Perkins in his
treatise of applying gods word to the conscience. page v^^.
there is in England a Scismatical and indiscreet company, that would s^eme to
cry out for discipline, their whole talk is of it, and yet they neither know
it, nor will be reformed by it: that they are full of pride, thinking themselves
to be full when they are empty: to have al knowledge, when they are ignorant,
and had need to be catechized: that the poison of Aspes is under their lips,
and that they refuse not to speak evil of the blessed servants of God. Are
these they that resemble our Anabaptists?


The Englishman. Yes, if you please to relate the opinions, qualities, and
practices of your Anabaptists, you shall see plainly, that our Puritanes do
shake hands with them.


The German. I will with all my heart.


The Englishman. Then begin when you will.


The German. The 1. semblance.
A Vide Sleidan libe 4, and 6.
Bout six years after that Martin Luther began to preach the Gospel, the
Devil (to disturb this work) stirred up certain rash-pates and giddy-headed
preachers, that misliked not only the Doctrine of the Pope, but of Luther also.


The Englishman. When Queen Elizabeth (whose memorial be blessed for ever)
came to her Crown, she found the church of England (as Inueni lateritiam,
reliqu^^ mar^^rean^.
Augustus did the City of Rome) of brick, she turned it into marble: she found
it in the sands, she set it upon a Rock, the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles. Yea, she caused the everlasting Gospel to be preached throughout al
her Realms and Dominions, and restored both the letter of the Bible to a
vulgar language, and al her people to freedom of conscience, who might not
read it before, but privily and by stealth, as men eat stolen bread. But the
Devil (to disturb this work) stirred up certain hot-brained, inconsiderate,
and importune Preachers, who neither liked of the Pope, nor of the present
estate of the Church, for want of some purity, as they fancied. Yea no sooner
had snee taken the Scepter into her Princely hand, but some of these audacious
spirits (being then beyond the seas) sent word into England, that their
pretended holy see their exhortation to England printed at Genena Anno Dom.
1559.
discipline ought to be set up: that all Princes ought to submit themselves
under the yoke of it, that what Prince soever did disanull it, was to be
reputed Gods enemy, and to be held unworthy to reign above his people. And
not long after some of them returned home and spoke very homely against the
book of common prayer, and against the rites and ceremonies of the Church of
England. But they being then (as they have been ever since) over matched by
the reverend Fathers of our Church, childishly made their complaint to Master
Beza, as appeare^h by an Epist. 8.
Epistle of his, which he wrote to Doct. Grindal, in the year of our Lord. 1556
and by an other Epist. 12.
Epistle, which he wrote about a year after, where he has these words: Being
saepe multu^ques. etc.
often and greatly desired of my dearest belooued Brethren of the Churchof
England, that in their miserable estate I would give them some counsel
whereuupon their consciences might rest: (Diuersmen holding diverse opinions) a
long time I deferred for diverse weighty causes so to do: and I protest, that
most willingly I would yet have been silent, but that I suppose I should
greatly offend, if I should still r^^ect their so many petitions, and
pitiful gro^^ings. By this it appears, that these groaners disliked not
only the Church of Rome, but the Church of England also. Now let us see the
cause of their dislike?


The Germane. The 2. semblance.
The Anabaptists disliked the Church of Germany, because it was not so
perfect, nor served so fitly for the planting of purity, as they thought
requisite. And for this cause M. Calvin. aduers. Anabap.
Calvin does not unfitly resemble them to the Puritanes in former ages. In
times past (says he) there were two sects of Heretics, which troubled the
Church greatelye: the one sect of them were commonly called Puritanes, the
other Donatists. And both of them were in the same error that these dreamers
are in: seeking for a church, wherein there should want nothing that might be
desired.


The Englishman. T. C. Repl. page. 17. sect. 4
And in the same error was one T. C. a chief founder of the Pnr^tan-factio^. I
will acquaint you with his words: The Church in the whole and general
government and outward policy of it, may be pure and unspotted. And to this
his error does his Proselytes also incline ouer-farre. For which cause, we may
justly term them Anabaptisticall, proud, and Hypocritical Puritanes, and say
unto them, as Calvin. aduers. Anabapte art. 2.
Master Calvin said to the Anabaptists in his time: Cum sub specie studij
perfectionis, imperfectione^ nulla^ tolerare possumus, aut in corpore, aut in
me^bris Ecclesiae: tunc diabolum nos tumefacere superbia, et hipocrisi
seaucere, moneamur: Where as under the color of a desire of perfection, we
can tolerate no imperfection, either in the body, or in the members of the
Church, then may we be admonished that it is the Devil which puffs us up
with pride, and seduceth us with Hypocrisy. But to proceed: were there many
of these Sectaries in Germany?


The German. Vide Sleid. Lib. 4. et 6.
There were but very few of them at the first, but afterward they did grow to
such a multitude, as that there arose up in arms above an hundred thousand of
them at once, who sacked sundry towns tn Germany, murdered some of the
Nobility, and committed many other outrageous villainies. Yea their factious
teachers by their continual clamours, Philippickes, and inuectiue declamations
against the enormities (as they supposed) both of the state ecclesiastical and
civil, had so whetted them on, as that they could not wholly be vanquished,
until Sleidan lib. 7 paulo p^st medium.
almost an hundred thousand of them were slain by the united forces of the
Princes of the Empire.


The Englishman. How did they grow to such a multitude?


The German. THey had their private conuenticles, where they The 3. semblance.
linked themselves together, and gave mutual faith and oath each of them to
stick to other.


The Englishman. So hold our Sectaries also their conuenticles in private
houses, and in secret corners, which Veritai non ^^^rit angulos
truth seldom seeks. For example sake, and for veryfying what I have said, I
will acquaint you with some of them.

It was at a private Anno, 1572,
conuenticle, where the admonitors agreed, that the admonition (which the late
Archbishop confuted) should be compiled and offered to the Parliament
approaching.

It was at their private conuenticles, where they framed the said platform.

It was at their private conuenticles, where they concluded, that their said
giddy fancies should be committed to one of the chiefest of them, to be
corrected against an other Parliament, which Anno, 29, Reg Eliz.
then approached.

It was at a private In Convent Anno, 1588
conuenticle, where conference was had again about this second corrected
platform.

It was at a private conuenticle, where the doubts which grew at their former
assembly, were debated.

It was at a private conuenticle, where it was concluded ( T. C. being present)
that their platform was an essential form of discipline: and where they
subscribed to the greatest part of it, without any further expecting the
Magistrates pleasure.

It was at a private In Convent. Anno. 1588.
conuenticle, where those things which in their forenamed subscription they
expected, were discussed, and reserved to be examined by certain breheren in
an other assembly.

It was at a private In cantab. Anno. 1599.
conuenticle, where T. C. with his adherents, corrected, altered, and amended
the said book of discipline.

It was at a private conuenticle, where they did (as the B. examined in the
Starr^-chamber.
examinate remembered) agree amongst themselves, that so many as would, should
subscribe to the said book of discipline

It was the departure from a private conuenticle, for the which G. craved
pardon G. to F.
Touching my departure (says he) from that holy assembly I crave pardon.

It was at a private conuenticle, where L. was to give notice. L. to F.
T* C. says, that at your late being at Wroxall, you determined your next
meeting should be at Warwick, at the Quarter Sessions: that Tuesday for the
humbling of our selves, and the next following to consult of other matters: his
request is, that you would give notice thereof to the Brethren of our
conference.

It was at a private Anno. 1584
conuenticle, which nine of this faction craved to be had about certain
matters that were to ^e presented to the Parliament* We (say they) have as yet
no new matters to perform unto you, but as son as we have concluded any
thing: we will forthwith send unto you the same and others.

It was at a private See the ^uruey. Cap. 4.
conuenticle, where these questions were propounded to be determined, viz: 1.
Whether there ought to be Doctors in every Church? 2. Whether the Doctors may
administer the Sacrament? 3. Whether there ought to be women Deacons in every
reformed Church? 4. Whether the Presbytery be not described too generally, and
very imperfectly? 5. Whether suspension may be proved to be a censure of the
Church? 6. Whether the Elders ought not to be perpetual, as the pastors are?
7. Whether men must stand to the sentence of the greatest part of the
Consistory? 8. Whether Marriages and Spousals, and things concerning them, do
belong to the Ministers? 9. Whether there should be sureties in baptism? 10.
Whether there ought to be no restraining from, or noting of such a one, as for
disobedience to the consistories Admonition, is in the way of excommunication?


It was at a private conuenticle, where T. S.
one of this cousening crew requested, that this doubt might be resolved, viz:
Whether he himself (being greatly indebted, and having not sufficient to
discharge the same) should pay his Godly creditours first, or his profane?

It was at a private Anno. 1586
conuenticle, where P. craved F. to move another such like question, and his
words were these: Move T. C. and the other our reverend Brethren, to deliver
their judgments, wether all laying out of hair be forbidden to all women:
especially at their repair to the public meetings of the Church?

It was at a private Anno. 1587.
conuenticle, where it was questioned Whether it were in any respect tolerable
for women that profes Religion and the reformation, to wear doublets: little
hats with feathers, great gowns after the French and outlandis^ fashion: great
Ruffes, and hair frisled, or set out upon wire?

Yea, there was a private conuenticle, or an assembly of three Ministers,
appointed out of Essex, Cambridgeshire, and Norfolk, to meet the 8. of May,
1582. at Cockefield, there to confer of the Communion Book, what might be
tolerated, and what necessarily to be refused, in every point of it: apparel,
matter, form, days, fastings, injunctions. etc.

But what need I mention these things that were done in the days of Queen
Elizabeth?

It is most apparrently known to al me^, that they have never ceased since his
Majesty's most happy entrye into this Realm, until this day, to meet
together in private houses, and there to meddle with matters too high for the^.
To insist only in one particular, did not H. I. send a letter from Woodstreete
in London, June. 30. 1603. (and therein enclosed the form, to be subscribed
unto) to one in Oxford; desiring so many hands thereunto, as conveniently he
could get? Now where was this platform framed, which H. I. enclosed in his
letter? was it not at a Classical Assembly? And was not the voice Iaacobs
voice, and the hands the hands of Esau?

And thus by their plotting and plodding together, they (being few in number at
the first) are grown to such a multitude, as that one of their own preachers
said openly in a Pulpit, he was persawded that there were 10000. of the^ in
England, and that the number of the^ increased daily in every place of al
states and degrees. For the proof hereof, I refer you to one of their own
Page 3. and 4
Books, entitled, The state of the Church of England, laid open in a
conference between Diotrephes a Bishop, Tertullus a Papist, Demetrius an
Usurer, Pandochus an Inne-keeper, and Paul a Preacher of the word of God. But
what need I send you to the infectious writings of factious writers? who
knows not, that the Puritan-Preachers have infected all the parts of the
Land, and distracted millions of the vulgar sort from their love and liking of
the present state? yea, these their factious leaders have so set them on fire,
as that they are become scalding hot in desire of innovation.

And although our gracious Sovereign has continually labored since his
Majesty's entry into this Realm, until this present time, by what means he
possibly could devise, to extinguish and quench their raging heat: yet so
fiery are many of these factious spirits, as that no liquor will quench their
furious flames. But his Majesty will (I hope) keep them from kindling again,
least a greater mischief do ^as^e thereupon. For as a fire tha^ i^ kept down*
if it break for^h again, does burn more fierecly: so these, fiery spirits
that have of late been kept down, if they break forth again, they will rage
more furiously.

But not to digress any suithe^* show me (I pray you) more at large, how the
Anabaptists did spend the in time at their private conuenticles?


The German. The 4. semblance.
THey spent it not in Gluttony and drunkenness; but in fasting, in praying, and
in hum^ling of themselves: a Vide Bulling. Fol. 11. and 17.
And by these their Hypocritical fastes, they seduced many of the vulgar sort.


The Englishman. Although extraordinary fasts, had always their ^manation from
public persons, as appears by these places of Scripture: Number. 10. 8. Iud.
20. 2. 26. 1. Reg. 21. 8. 2. Chron. 20. 3. 1. Sam. 7. 6. Ezra. 8. 21. Esther.
4. 16. Though the keeping of them without the knowledge and authorizement of
the Magistrate, be a minishing of his authority, by preventing his decree,
and controuling (as it were) his government; though it be a prejudice against
him, either that he does not know the conueniencie and necessity of
extraordinarye humbling of men's souls, or that he is too slack and ouer-colde
in Religion; though it argues an affectation of singularity, and gives
sentence against all the Land besides of negligence in Gods affairs: yet it
has been an ordinary thing with our Sectaries, to keep such extraordinary
fasts, whereunto the authorizement of the Prince was not had.

They have often (as a credible man reports) run to Fasts, which were kept
with a manifest disobedience to the powers that God has ordained. His words
are these: King upon Jonas* Lect. 35.
In many the dangers of our land, both at home and abroad, many the members
and subjects thereof, as if our country had no more Orators, and there were
none to stand in the gappe but themselves, have assembled together, either in
Towns (...), and some time in a private ^^use to fast. But if you will not
believe his repor^e, I will show you their own hand writing, and acquaint you
with a letter which nine of our Sectaries wrote to F. Anno. Dom. 1584. wherein
it is thus written: Being persuaded that you and our Brethren with you, have
determined what course is to be taken, and used for the procuring some good to
be done at the Parliament: we thought it necessary to write unto you, that
we might be certified of your purposes herein: whither you mind to be
exercised in prayer and fasting, and upon what day, or what things else you
would wish to be performed, by us that may stand the church in stead. This also
was Hackets practice, as appears in a postscript of a Letter to T. C. I will
humble my self S^e the conspiracy for reformation* Page. 16.
(says he) before his Majesty in fasting and prayer, and I hope that God will
stir up some others to join with me in spirit, though few or non^ in person
do, only one I am assured of.

It is likewise In the consp. Page. 10.
reported, that Coppinger requested two of his familiar acquaintance, to f^st
and pray with him, for the obtaining of a Widd^we, to whom he was a suter.
This Coppinger (though some say the contrary) was one of the Puritan-faction,
as appears by these words, which are found in a letter which he wrote to
Hacket: Conspir. page 23.
The zealous Preachers (says he, speaking of a certain factious Ministers
that could not digest the orders of the Church) are to be in the
Star Chamber to morrow. etc. my self (if I can get in) am moved to be
there, and I fear (if sentence with severity be given) I shall be forced (in
the name of the great and fearful God of heaven) to protest against it.

But what need I make this digression? They themselves cannot deny but that
they have drawn the people from their work, called solemn assemblies, and
proclaimed fasts without the knowledge and authorizement of the Magistrate. And
by these their Fastes (which were indeed plausible in the sight of men) have
they commended themselves to the people, we one credit to their faction, and
seduced a number.


The Germane. Yea, but our Sectaries had many other sleights besides this.


The Englishman. What other?


The German. The 5. semblance.
Ask you me this question? Is it not recorded in Bulling. aduers. Anabap.
Lib. 6. cap, 10, ^t Gualther in 1. Cor. Epist. dedicat.
Books extant to the view of the world, that they disturbed the Church of
Germany, under the pretense of reforming it? And thus when they did intend
evil, they did pretend good.


The Englishman. So have our Sectaries also their pretenses and cloakes to
shadow their contentions withal: for they pretend the glory of God, and the
reformation of the church, as appears by a Petition, which they lately
exhibited to the Kings Majesty: wherein they term themselves his Majesty's
most humble subjects, the Ministers of the Gospel, that desire not a disorderly
innovation, but a due and godly reformation.

Lo here, they presumed to tell his Highness, that they sought to reform the
church; when indeed they went about to deforme it. But tell me, had your
Anabaptists any other sleights?


The German. The 6. semblance.
YEs, Quia nulla specie illustriore seduci possunt miseri Christiani. etc
Calvin aduers. Anabapt.
because fillye Christians, which with zeal do follow God, cannot by any
other more notable show be seduced, then when the word of God is pretended: the
Anabaptists (against whom we write) have that evermore in their mouths, and
always talk of it.


The Englishman. He that did trans-forme himself into an Angel of light,
being a fiend of darkness, has also taught our Sectaries to inform the common
people, that the word of God is on their side, it being against them. But
hereof we will speak more afterward. Now let me entreat you, that if you
have observed any other policy in your Sectaries, you would vouchsafe to rel^te
it.


The German. The 7. semblance.
YEs, Gastius de erroribus Catabapt.
I have observed with Gastius, that under pretense of zeal, they subvert
whatsoever other men have builded and with Zuinglius, that Zuinglius in
Ecclesiast.
whatsoever they speak, they speak it of zeal.


The Englishman. Our gracious Sovereign (whom the Lord tender as the apple of
his own eye) has observed the like zeal in our Sectaries, as appears by
these his words:

See the proclamation for the authorizing of an uniformity.
At our very first entry into this Realm, being entertained and importuned
with the informations of sundry ministers, complaining of the errors, and
imperfections of the Church here, as well in matters of Doctrine, as of
Discipline: Although we had no reason to presume that things were so far
amiss, as was pretended, because we had seen the Kingdom under that form
of Religion which by law was established in the days of the late Queen of
famous memory, blessed with a peace and prosperity, both extraordinary and of
many years continuance (a strong evidence that God was therewith well
pleased.) Yet because the importunity of the complainers was great, their
affirmations was vehement, and the zeal wherewith the same did seem to be
accompanied, very specious: We were moved thereby to make it our occasion to
discharge that duty which is the chiefest of all Kingly duties, That is, to
settle the affairs of Religion, and the service of God before their own. etc.
The 8. semblance.



The German. I Have also observed with Zuinglius in Elencho co^tra Anabapt.
Zuinglius, that it was Melancholy and wrath, and not true zeal, which the
Anabaptists made show of.


The Englishman. I will not any way prejudice the zeal of alour obstinate
Ministers but I must needs tell you this, that in many of them I find a
preposterous, an inconsiderate, and a braine-sicke zeal, or (to use Zuing. L.
de Baptism.
Zuinglius his words) saturninam quandam and Melancholica^ ingeniorum
contumaciam: But let us leave this their pretended zeal, and come to some
other particulars: had they no other sleights besides these that you have
already mentioned?


The German. The 9. semblance.
YEs, Sleidan. in C^m. 5.
there was one Thomas Muncer a Preacher, who (as Sleidan and other
Germaine-writers report) did greatly labor both by his conferences in
private, and by his Sermons in public, to draw the common people from their
liking of the present estate.


The Englishman. It has likewise been the practice of our factious preachers
in their verbal Sermons, to speak against the stat^ ecclesiastical, the book
of common prayer, and the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England. For
the proof hereof I refer you to the very confession of their own lips.
On Tuesday (says Anno 1586.
one of their own side) T. C. kept Master Fens Lecture: the Text, Psalm*
122* 4. Unto the end: taking thorns as T^emelius does, and urging the
discipline: the want whereof he affirmed to be the cause, that some friends
for sooke our Church.

And as this is the practice of some of our factious Ministers in England: so
is it also the practice of the same faction in Scotland. Yea, (...) Page* 38.
39.
they snapper out grosselye with the truth of their intentions: informing the
people, that all Kings and Princes are naturally enemies to the liberty of
the Church: and can never patientlye bear the yoke of Christ: with such sound
Doctrine fed they their flocks.


The German. The 10. Se^blance.
THe Anabaptists did not content themselves therewithal; but to the end they
might do y^ more harm, they published factious Books to the view of the
world, as may be gathered by this speech of Master Zuinglius to the
Magistrates in his time: Zuinglius. de Baptism.
Si hoc cuiuis hominum impune facere licebit, vt quae priuato suae rationis
consilio adinuenit, in vulgus spergat, inconsulta, imo resistente etiam
vniuersatotius ecclesiae authoritate, breui plus errorum quam fidelium and
Christianorum in ecclesia erit cernere: If it be lawful for every man to
publish abroad among the people, those things which he has devised of his
own head, before he has consulted with the Church, nay against the authority
of the whole Church: in short time we shall see more errors in the Church,
then there be faithful men and Christians. And in an other place: Si hoc
permittamus, vt capitosus quisque and male-feriatus homo, etc. If we suffer
every headie and braineles fellow so soon as he has conceived any new thing
in his mind, to publish it abroad, gather disciples, and make a new sect: in
short time we shall have so many sects and factions, that Christ which scarce
with a great pain and labor is brought to unity in every church, should be
divided again into many parts.


The Englishman. Neither did our Puritanes therewithal content themselves; but
that their poison might ranckle the farther, to the disturbance and perrill
both of the Church and commonwealth, they have published a great number of
Books, which are as fit for the fire as the Books of curious Arts, Act. 19.
Yea, and they have also exhorted the common people to peruse these their
sedicious Pamphlets. I pray you (say they) In a Book of theirs entitled, the
state of the church of England. etc. Page, 10.
when you come to London, see if you can get these books: The Ecclesiastical
Discipline: A learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government* The
Counterpoyson. A Se^mon on the 12. to the Romans* and Ma^ster Cartwights last
reply: some of which books have been extant this dozen years, and yet are not
them answered: and you shall there find that the government of the Church is
contrary to the word of God.

But not to speak only of their Books in g^nerall, let us take a view of the
Contents thereof in particular.


The German. Our Sectaries did stuff their books with inuectiues and
outcries, both against the Magistracy and the Ministry.

TO begin with the Magistracy, they taught (as Master The 11. se^blance.
Bulling. aduers. Anabap. Fol. 19.
Bullinger also records) that the Ci^il Magistrate, has no authority in
Ecclesiastical matters: and that he ought not to meddle in causes of Religion
and Faith.


The Englishman. Our Sectaries come not far behind them herein, as
appears by these their spee^hes: T. C. lib. 1. Page. 192
for the making of orders and ceremonies in the Church (says T. C.) they do
(where there is a constituted and ordered Church) pertain unto the Ministers
of the church, and to the Ecclesiastical governors: and that as they meddle
not with the making of civil Laws, and Laws for the commonwealth: so the
civil Magistrate has not to ordain ceremonies partaining to the Church.

T. C, lib, 2, Page, 1^5.
And again, No civil Magistrates in councels or assemblies for Church Matters,
can either be chief moderator, ouer-ruler, Judge or d^t^rminer. Admon. 2
No civil Magistrate (say the admonitors) has such authority, as that without
his consent it should not be lawful for ecclesiastical persons, to make any
church order or ceremony. Admon* 1
And again: To these three jointly, that is, the Ministers, Seniors and
D^acons* is the whole regiment of the Church to be committed.

By this you may see, that our Sectaries do shake hands both with the
Anabaptists and the Papists. But albeit these three contrary factions have
united and joined themselves together, and do al jointly oppugn the Princes
authority in causes ^cclesiasticall: yet the authority of the sacred
Scriptures, the judgment of the ancient Fath^rs, the decisions of ancient
Counsels, and the practi^e of Christian Princes in the p^imatiue Church, are
able to sever and dis-ioyne all their forces.

To begin with the Scriptures, they give sufficient warrant to civil
Governors to ordain Laws in Ecclesiastical causes; and do expressly teach,
that 2. Reg, 12, 4, 2, Chro. 19. 4. Ibid^m. 30* 1 and 34. 3.
Iehosaphat, Hezekias and Josias, did make Laws for the recalling and
excercising of the Service of God.

As for the Fathers, they hold it to be an Oracle for truth, that Aug. Epi. 48
Kings do serve Christ, in making laws for Christ. Yea, Aug. Epi. 50
Rex aliter seruit Domino (says Saint Augustine) quia homo est, aliter quia
etiam Rex est. Quia homo est, ei seruit viuendo fideliter: quia vero Rex est,
seruit leges just a praecipientes and contraria prohibentes conuenienti vigore
sanciendo: A King serves the Lord one way as he is a man, and an other way as
he is a King. As he is a man, he serves him by living faithfully. As he is a
King, he serves him by making laws with convenient vigor, to command that
which is right, and forbid the contary.

But not to insist only upon Saint Augustins judgment, The Vide Sozomen. lib.
1. cap 17.
Bishops that came to the counsel of Nice, gave to the Emperor supreme
authority in making ecclesiastical orders; and committed the hearing and
determining of their controversies to his highness.

Christian Princes also have ever exercised this their authority. Eusebius. lib.
4. ^e vita constant.
Constantine called himself a Bishop out of the Church, and he made laws
(as Eusebius lib. 2. de vita Constable*
Eusebius records) in things pertaining to holiness toward God, and to the
appointing of meet things for the Church of God. Th^odosius his successor
took the same course. Sozomen. lib 7, 12.
He made most severe Laws against all those that crossed the stream of
Christian Religion. Yea, Vi^elib. 1. and 2, Legum Franciae.
all Princes and Potentates retained this their prerogative until the time of
Charles the great, and Lodouicus after him. But by what other means did your
lawless Anabaptists oppugn the Mgistrates authority?


The German. Our Maisterlesse and lawless Anabaptists, in process The 12.
se^blance.
of time, began to strike at the head of Government in general, and would have
framed a body of men, like the body of Polyphemus, without his eye; or like
the confused Chaos of old time, when height and depth, light and darkness,
were mingled together: for they attempted (as Hemi^gius et Bullinger aduersus
Anaba. Gastius de ^rro^ibu^ catabaptist.
Hemingius, Bullinger and Gastius do record) a paritie and equality of
civil estates.


The Englishman. The Lord who made two great lights, the greater light to rule
the day, the lesser light to rule the night, and who in the beginning
established a superiority in all creatures: his will is, that there should be
a Maisterie and Domion in every order of men: and that paritie in a Christian
Commonwealth, should most carefullye be shunned, as being the Mother of
Anarchy and confusion.

Nevertheless our Sectaries also (as hereafter shall be showed) have
attempted paritie in the Ministry: and I fear that equality of Ministers
would pull on equalitye in the other estates. I fear (I say) and that not
without cause, for the chiefest amongst them says flatly in a book extant to
the view of the world, that T. C. page. 144. sect. 1.
The gouennment of the Commonwealth, must be framed according to the
government of the Church. From which words I reason thus: The government of
the Commonwealth must be framed according to the government of the Church: but
there must be equality (by T. C. his confession) in the Church: ergo. But to
return to your Anabaptists; did they thus seek to overthrow your commonweal
and state of government?


The German. YEs, and yet they in words protested, that they endeavored The
13. se^blance.
to take no au^horitie from the civil Magistrate, as appears by these words
of Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
Zuinglius: Though they protest and by oath deem, that they take any authority
from Magistrates, yet shortly after we should have seen it come to pass,
that they would have been disobedient to all laws of Magistrates, if once
they had increased to that number that they might have trusted to their own
strength.


The Englishman. Our Puritanes will make as solemn protestations as any men
can do, and by oath deny that which your Anabaptists did; but I protest (to
use his majesty's words) (...), L. 2. page. 42.
that ye shall never find with any highla^d or border thieves, more lies and
vile periuries, then with these phanaticke spirits, and we may well say of them
as Zuinglius said of your Anabaptists: Though they protest, and by oath deny,
that they take any authority from Magistrates, yet shortly after should we
have seen it come to pass. etc. But I marvel they would attempt to
overthrow the Magistracy?


The German. IT is not to be marvelled at, for they sought (as Master The
14. se^blance.
Bullinger says) Bulling. aduers. Anabapt. ^ol. 95.
to be free from all Laws, and to do what they listed. Their talk utters
nothing else (says Gastius de erroribus Catabapt.
Gastius) but liberty in external things. Yea, It was their opinion (as one
of your own H^oker of ecclesiastical policy.
writers has observed) that a Christian man's liberty is lost: and the soul
of man redeemed by Christ, is injuriously drawn into servitude under the Yoke
of human power, if any law be now^ imposed besides, ^he Gospel of Jesus
Christ.


The Englishman. Laws made without contradiction to positine Laws in
Scriptures, and received by a whol^ Church, are such, as that they which li^e
within the bosom of that same Church must not think it a matter indifferent,
either to yield or not to yield obedience. For (as Master Perkins in his
treatise of conscience.
Perkins says) wholesome Laws of men, made of things indifferent, so far
forth bind conscience, by virtue of the general commandment of God, which
ordains the Magistrates authority: that whosoever shall wittingly and
willingly, with a disloyal mind, either break, or omit such Laws, is
guilty of sin before God. Yea, the very laws of men may after a sort be
termed the law of God. The Emperors (says Saint Aug. Epist. 166. lib. ^.
contra secundum Gandentii epistolam.
Augustine) when they command good, it is none but Christ who commands by
them. Notwithstanding all this, our Puritanes (upon my knowledge) think, that
a Christian man's liberty is to live as he list, and for this cause some of
them have refused to receive the Lords supper kneeling. etc. They will not
(forsooth) have their souls drawn under the yoke of humane power. And a
thousand of the Clergy did not long since See their surplicatio^ to the King*
groan under the burden of humane rites and ceremonies.

Thus you see that our Sectaries think it servitude and an unsupportable
burden, to submit their necks and souls to the yoke of humane obedience
in things indifferent: which (as our Gracious Sovereign has well observed)
See the sum of the conference. page. 71
smells very ranckly of Anabaptisme: comparing it unto the usage of a
Beardlesse Boy, (one John Black) who the last conference his Majestye had with
the Ministers in Scotland, in December 1602. told him that he would hold
conformity with his Majesty's Ordinances for matters of Doctrine: but for
matters of ceremony, they were to be left in Christian liberty, unto every
man, as he received more and more light from the illumination of Gods spirit,
even till they go mad quoth the King, with their own light: but I will none
of that, I will have one Doctrine and one Discipline, one Religion in
substance, and one in ceremanie. But what other things have you observed in
these your peevish and perverse Scismatickes?


The German. I Have observed, that they were of such a perverse nature, The
15. se^blance.
as that they would not only take unto themselves liberty in things
indifferent, and therein omit their duty: Gastius d^ erroribus catabapt.
but they endeavored to the utmost of their power, to commit the quite
contrary, that so they might cross the Magistrate.


The Englishman. That which you say was the custom of your Anabaptists has
been the custom of Heretics and Scismatickes, in all ages. The Eunomian
Heretics in dishonor of the blessed Trinity, brought in the laying on of
water in baptism but once, to cross the custom of the church, which did it
thrice: other Heretics which held the T^initie to be three distinct, not
Persons, but natures, abused the cereremonie of three times laying on of water,
to the strengthening of their Heresy, and to the crossing of the custom of the
Church in their times.

The self same thing has been practiced by our Scismatickes: for some of
them have sent their Servants to the Plough and Cart, upon the very f^ast of
the Nativity of Christ, to cross the custom of our Church, which keeps it
holy. Others (as the reverend Fathers in Oxford were credibly informed) did
Oxfords answer to the Peti^ion.
spend the fifth of August last in fasting* to cross that authority which
commanded them to celebrate it with joy and thankefulnes for his Majesty's
most strange and wonderful deliverance from the conspira^ie of the Earl of
Gowrie. King upon I^nas* ^ect. 36.
And I heard of a nation of m^n (says Doctor King) when their King had
intended a feast for the honor of his country, they on the contrary side
proclaimed a Fast, as if God had sent them an Ambassador of the last judgment.
And I know a society of men, who in the time of Lent, were wont to eat
Flesh-meate seven days in the week, though out of Lent but five days. I
think they did it for no other end, but only to cross the authority of that
power which inioyneth us to abstain from Flesh-meate at that season of the
year. Thus do they behave themselves much like them, unto whom it was said
by Christ in the behalf of all painful Apostles and Ministers: We have
piped to you, and ye have not daunced: we have mourned to you, and ye have not
wept. To conclude, they will ever be in an extreme: for when we Feast, they
will Fast, and when we Fast, they will Feast. But tell me Sir, did they not
also speak evil of them that were in authority?


The German. The 16. se^blance.
YEs, they did (as Zuinglius reports) speak evil of the a Zuinglius in
^lencho contra Anabap.
civil Magistrate, and if at any time here proved the^, then they straight
way said, that therefore he was an enemy unto them, because they did tell him
of his faults.


The Englishman. Your Anabaptists come far short of our Sectaries in this
point: for many of them have reposed a great part of their Christian profession
and zeal, in the reproaching and odious traducing of them that are in
authority.

Exhortat. to England. Page 92.
They have exhorted the common people, to repute those Princes that live not
under the Yoke of the pretended holy Discipline, for Gods enemies: (...).
Page. 39.
They have informed them, That all Kings and Princes are naturally enemies to
the liberties of the Church. Yea, they made complaint to his Highness, that
our late Sovereign made their yoke grievous: and that she had laid upon them
an heavy burden of human rites and ceremonies. They have depraved and
slaundered not only the Communion Book, but the whole estate of the Church,
as it was reformed by her Majesty: Yea in her Highness life time, the state of
this Church of England was so depraved beyond the Seas, by these our
disciplinairians, as that it has been conceived by Godly men in foreign
Countries, that we have Gualther episcop^, Eliens. Anno. 1574.
No laws, no good orders, no discipline, but that every man may do what he
list. But I pray you tell me, were not your Anabaptists punished for these their
vile attempts?


The German. The 17. se^blance.
YEs, but they greatly compla^ned, that Bulling. aduers. Anabapt Fol. 11.
nothing was used but violence.


The Englishman. So have our Secta^ies also complained to the Kings Majesty,
that Petition exhibited to the Kings Majesty
they have been suspended, silenced, disgraced, and imprisoned for men's
traditions.


The German. Well, let us leave this their impugning of the Magistracy, and
come to their oppugning of the Ministry. And let us begin with the
Universities, because they are the ordinary means to maintain the Ministry.


The Englishman. With the Universities? why? I hope they did not oppose
themselves against the fountains and Wel-springs of good learning.


The German. The 18. se^blance.
YEs, The Author of the Survey. cap. 26.
your own writers can te^l you, that they wrote very scornefully against the
University degrees.


The Englishman. And to tell you the truth, so did our Sectaries too. These
words I found in a Manu-script of theirs.
Doctors in Theology (say they) is unlawful: It is man's ordinance without t^^
lord of God: it cannot be taken without an idle oath* it is offenciue to the
Church of God: it is a matter of distinction of the minds of the Ministers: it
is one of the swelling titles forbiddin to Ministers: it is a Relic of Rome,
as are Priests, Deacons, Archbishoppes: it is in regard of the form thereof,
a manifest abuse of Gods ordinance of his Ministers, after an apish manner,
giving authority of preaching: it is an idle name to be called Doctors,
except they have Scholars and do teach them etc. But what need I produce
their Manu-scripts? It is See their addition to the first part of the Admon.
and T. C. Lib. 2. page 2^.
apparent enough in their Books extant, that they mislike the degrees of
Doctors and Batchelors in Divinity.


The German. The 19. se^blance.
YEa, but our Sectaries misliked not only degrees in the University, but in
the Ministry also. For the proof hereof I refer you to the express words of
Gerlach. in Hyper. Dan. Page. 3.
Gerlachius a learned man of Tubing. Li^et (says he) titulos, etc. Although
thou beholdest with disdain (as it were from above) the titles and orders,
after the fashion of the Hypocrites and Anabaptists: yet with a vain
persuasion of knowledge and foolish arrogancy, whereby thou contemnest our
Countrymen in respect of thy self, and do challenge especial knowledge to
thee and thy fellows only: Plus turg^s quam omnes Doctores et
Superintendentes nostri: Thou swellest more with pride then all our Doctors and
Superintendents. And what comes into thy mind, that thou should cavil at
the degrees of Ministers, as though it were not lawful to ordain such degrees
for the building and government of the Church? Did not God himself in the old
Testament, appoint chief Priests and Levites? and in the New Testament, gave
he not some Apostles, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Doctors? You see
here that the Anabaptists contemned our Superintendents and beheld with
disdain their Titles and Offices.


The Englishman. The Titles and Offices of Arch-bishoppes, and Bishops, are
more ancient and necessary, then the Titles and Offices of Superintendents
are: for the Apostle Peter did (as Clemens has observed) appoint in Clemens in
Compe^diario Christiana Religion.
every Province, one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the Province
should obey. And we read that Dyonisius Areopagita was Volusus epist ad
Nichol. 1.
Archbishop of Athens, and appointed thereunto by Saint Paul: that Timothy
was Chrysostom. in 1. Timoth. 5.
Bishop of Ephesus: that Titus was Chrysostom. in 1. Tit.
Bishop of Creta: that Saint John Eusebius. lib. 3 cap. 23.
governed the Church in Asia, after his return from Pathmos that James was
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Bishop of Jerusalem: that Polycarpe was Tertul. de Prescript.
Bishop of Smirna: that Demetrius was Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 1
Bishop of Alexandria: that Saint Cyprian was cyprian. lib 4 Epist. 8.
Bishop of Carthage: that Saint Gregory was Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 14.
Bishop of Pontus: that Saint Chrysostom was Theod. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Archbishop of Constantinople: that Theodoret was Theod. epist ad Leon.
Bishop of Cyprus. And in Elutherius his time which was Anno Dom. 180. when
this Realm was first converted to Christianity, there was (as Master Fox
Tom. 1. page 146.
acknowledges) appointed in the same, three Archbishoppes and 28. Bishops. All
which notwithstanding, the favorites of the new fangle-faction, would have
(instead of Arch-bishoppes) an equality of Ministers. If you wi^ restore the
Church (say the Admonitors) to his ancient Officers, this you must do,
instead of an Arch-bishoppe or Lord Bishop, you must make equality of
Ministers. Yea, T. C. lib, 2, page. 438.
the learned of them is not ashamed to write, that Archbishops and Bishops
are new Ministeries never ordained by God.


The German. The 20. se^blance.
A Although Gerlachius. in Hyper. Dan. page. 30.
the Anabaptists pretended the forenamed equality, yet they sought Dominion,
and labored only to pull the rule from others; that the rule might have bo^^e
in their own hands, and that they only might have borne the sway.


The Englishman. That our Puritanes do the like, I prove it by the late
Archbishops experience. You desire (says In his dese^ce of the answer to the
Admonition, page 459.
he) this equality, not because you would not rule (for it is manifest that
you seek it most ambitiously in your manner) but because you condemn and
disdain to be ruled, and to be in subjection. Indeed your meaning is (as I
said before) to rule and not to be ruled, to do what you list in your several
cures, without controlement of Prince, Bishop, or any other. And therefore
pretending equality, most disorderly you seek Dominion. I speak that I know
by experience in some of you. But let us see what other speeches they delivered
against your ecclesiastical Magistrates. The 21. se^blance.



The German. What needs so many words? Gerlacius in Hyper, Dan. Page. 30.
Gerlachius tells you, that they disdained them, scorned them, and rayled on
them.


The Englishman. Yea, but they have not come near our Puritanes in this point.
I will acquaint you with some of their speeches which they have belched out
against the Reverend Fathers of our Church. They See their Book inituled Hay
ye any work, page. 14. 15. 20. 21
blush not to say, that Archbishoppes and Bishops are superfluous members of
the body of Christ: that they maime and deforme his body, making it by that
means a Monster: that they are unlawful, false, and bastardly governors of
the Church: that they are ordinances of the Devil: that they are in respect of
their places, enemies of God: that they are Petty Popes, petty Antichrists,
Bishops of the Devil: that the laws that maintain Archbishops and Bishops,
are no more to be accounted of, then the laws that maintain stews: and that
the true church of God ought to have no more to do with them and their
Sinagogues, then with the sinagogues of Satan. But not to interrupt your
speech any longer, what was the c^use that the Anabaptists railed on your
church-gouernors?


The German. The 22. se^-blance.
SVrely Bulling. advers. Anabap. Fol. 19. 95. 242.
because they endeavored to bring them to conformity by compulsion.


The Englishman. By the orders of our Church, and laws of the Realm, there is
required of our Ministers a subscriptio^ to his Majestres lawful authority in
causes Ecclesiastical, to the Articles of Religion, to the Book of Common
Prayer, and to the orders, Rites and Ceremonies of our Church.

Now because our Church-gouernours do (according to their duty) deprive those
of their livings, that refuse to subscribe heerunto: The Puritanes do
complain of rigor, and revile Gods high Priest, which Saint Act. 23. 5.
Paul repented he had ignorantly done, though that high Priest was an usurper.

I confess indeed that they have yielded to subscribe to See their petition
to the King.
the Articles of Religion, and to the Kings suprmacie; but this is not
sufficient: for it is a thing too manifest, with what libelling and railing,
the form of our Service, of our Ceremonies, of our apparel etc. has been
depraved and shamefully slaundered by these factious Sprits. They have blazed
and diuulged abroad (as shall hereafter be showed more at large) that the
Communion Book was culled and picked out of the Popish dunghill, the Mass
Book: that it is Papisticall: that it were better to conform our selves in
outward things to the Turks, then to the Papists. It behooves therefore the
reverend Fathers of our Church, to compel them to subscribe, not only to the
Articles of Religion, and to the Kings supremacy, but to the Communion Book
also, and to the Discipline of our Church.

Neither ought they to think, that they are too rigorously dealt withal, if
that they be compelled and urged to show their conformity in all things;
seeing that the same course is taken in all other Churches for the repressing
of schism. To insist only in one particular, whosoever is made Minister at
Geneua, he swears to keep Vide leges Geneuens. Fol. 3.
all their Ecclesiastical ordinances. Yea, we read Vide Bezam in vita Calvin
that Master Calvin procured a general oath to be taken through out the whole
City of Geneua, for the approbation thereof. Now why should not our Reverend
Bishops have as free liberty to do the like? But tell me, did not your
Anabaptists require a secret subscription of their followers?


The German. Yes, although they would not yield their conformity with us in
observing the good laws and ordinances of our Church: yet priuatlie (as
Sleidan. L. 6
Sleidan reports) they gave their mutual faith, and oath each to other.


The Englishman. The 23. se^blance.
SO have our Sectaries also required a secret subscription unto such a new
form of Discipline, as T. C. with his adherents (after many meetings,
plottings and ploddings) had devised. To veryfie what I have said, at a Anno.
Dom. 1588.
Conuenticle in Couentry they subscribed unto the practice of the greatest part
of their platform. And at a Anno Dom. 1589.
Conuenticle in Cambridge (where they corrected, altered, amended and perfected
their Book of Discipline) they voluntarily agreed amongst themselves, that so
many as would, should subscrible to the said Book. Yea, in their Book of
pretended holy Discipline, it is ordained, that the Ministers shall admit none
to the holy Communion, except they submit themselves to their Discipline.

Thus you see that although our Sectaries refuse to subscribe to the good
orders of our Church: yet, they themselves require a subscription, both of the
Clergy and the Laytie. But I pray you, what were the things which they
refused to subscribe unto? were they matters substantial, or accidental and
ceremonial? The 24. se^blance.



The German. WHat need you ask me this question? Master Zuinglius de
Baptism.
Zuinglius tells you, that they went about innouations of their own private
authority in those Churches, where the Gospel is (...), and (...) in
external things. Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
Again, he calls them authors of contentions, and troublers of the Church,
because they strove about external matters. Master Bulling. advers. Anabaps.
Bullinger also proves them to be contentious, because they troubled and
divided the Church for external* matters: grounding his argument upon these
words of Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 11. 16
If any man lust to be contentious, we have noe such custom, neither the
Churches of God.


The Englishman. Our, Puritanes likewise dissent from us in things accidental
and ceremonial: As for example, the Cap, the Surplesse etc. are (as both Peter
Martyr in Epist. 3.
Peter Martyr, and Beza in Epist 8. and 12.
Theodore Beza do confess) adiaphora, that is, things in their own nature
indifferent: and yet neuer-thelesse, we have many Ministers in England, that
are of so p^ruerse a nature, as that they will rather loose their liuinges, and
for-sake their callinges, then wear them. But in so doing, what do they else
but make known to the world their insolency and folly? For Whitaker. de
Eeclesi, controuers. 2. quest. 4 in respons. ad vltimum Bellarmini arg.
(as Doctor Whitakers speaks in our behalf) In rebus adiaphoris non
improbandum esse communem ecclesiae cons^etudinem concedimus, and eam
improbare, insolens and insanum esse dicimus cum Augustino: We grant that the
custom of the Church, is not to be disalowed in things indifferent, yea, we
avouch with Saint Augustine, that it is insol^ncy and mere madness to ^isalowe
the same. But proceed.


The German. Having showed their dealing with our Arch-ministers: it
remains that now I come to their practices against our inferior Ministers,
the learned and obedient Clergy of the Church in Germany.


The Englishman. What did they quarrel with them too?


The German. The 25. se^blance.
YEs, they bitterly inueighed against them, saying, Bulling. Fol. 1. 11. 18.
that they were not ordinarily and lawfully called, because they were not
called by the common people.


The Englishman. Our Admonitors say likewise in plain terms, that we Admon.
1. Fol. 1.
have neither a right Ministry of God, nor a right government of the Church.
And they do also with your Anabaptists pretend this to be a special
greeuance of theirs: namely, that the common people of every congregation may
not elect their own Ministers. Yea, read these places, T. C. Lib. 1. page.
35. Lib. 2 page. 121. 122* 125. 126. 229. etc
of T. C. his writings, and you shall see what a plausible course he takes, to
win the favor of the vulgar sort. He tells them that they are injured in
many things, and intituleth them to a great interest in sundry Church Matters,
viz: that they ought to choose their Ministers: that imposition of hands
should be in their names: that the censures of the Church should be executed
with the peoples consent, etc. But what other things have you observed in
these your quarelsome Sectaries?


The German. The 26. se^blance.
THey cried out against beneficed men, and said, that they had Bulling. aduers.
Anabapt Fol. 18. 102.
stipends and labored not: that they were ventris Ministri, Ministers of the
belly: and that they could not teach truly, because they had great livings*


The Englishman. So do our Sectaries likewise beat the Pulpit, and cry out
against Non-refidents, and double beneficed me^, and tell the people, that they
are Isai. 56, 10. Ezekiel, 3, 18
I doll Sheyheards, dumb Dogs, no Ministers: and that they do fleece, but
not feed their flocks. And this they do, not to reform them, (for they
speak it usually behind their backs) but to defame them: not to promote the
Gospel, but to bring them into hatred with the people, that thereby they
themselves may the rather prevail in their enterprises.

I would not have you think, that I allow either of dumb and greedy Dogs,
which the sacred Ier. 48. 10. Isai. 62. 6. Act. 20. 28. 1. Peter. 5. 2.
Scriptures do disalowe; or of negligent Preachers, whom Council. chalcedon.
can. 10. council, Constantinopol. can. 24.
Gods word also does condemn; or of Non-residents, whom the conci, Sardicens.
can. 14.
Cannons of councels, the canon. 18. Apost.
Cannons of the Apostles, and the Distinct. 39. can. Siquis vul^ etc.
Cannon-lawe does reprove: but I only dislike their Anabaptisticall manner of
Preaching, viz: Their speaking against the sins of Magistrates, when there
are none in presence* and their girding at their fellowe-Ministers, when there
is not a Minister in their congregation besides themselves. This (I take it) is
not that right dividing of the word, which Saint Paul commends to Timothye:
this is not that giving unto every one his portion and meat in due-season;
which the Minister of the Gospel, as a faithful dispenser, and steward in the
Lords house, ought to know. But why did your Anabaptists thus cry out against
benificed men?


The German. THe only thing which they ^ymed at, was that the Pastors might
be expelled, that so they might succeed them. They teach Zuinglins in
Ecclesiast.
(says Zuinglius) that such cannot preach the Gospel sincerely, which have
benifices: but their hope is to have the true Pastors expelled, that they may
succeed in their places: and yet they publicly protest, that they seek for
no living.


The Englishman. There were a thousand of our Ministers that exhibited a
supplication to the Kings Majesty, and therein craved, that double benificed
men should not be suffered to hold, some two, some three benefices with cure.

This their Petition I greatly misliked not: for I am not ignorant, how that it
was decreed by the ancient Fathers assembled at the Council of Chalcedon,
that noe man should be ordained Minister of two several Churches, in two
several places. I will give you their words: Con. chaleed ^an. 10.
Let no man be ordained Minister of two several Churches, in two several
Cities: but let him remain in that, unto which he was first called. And if
for vain glory he shall afterward go to a greater Congregation, let him
immediately be recalled to his first charge, and in that only exercise his
Ministry. But if one be called to an other charge, let him simply give over
the former, and have no interest in the same.

That which I misliked, was the Anabaptisticall intent of some of them, who (to
my knowledge) set their hands to the said Supplication. I am in good hope (said
one of them) that double and triple beneficed men shall now by our means be
removed, and that others of our fellowe-Ministers (he meant his factious
fellows) shall succeed them. But to leave this particular, did they not seek
to take away their good name, as well as their liuinges?


The German. YEs, they cried out against our Ministers in Germany, The 28.
se^blance.
and said, that they did not themselves those things, which they taught unto
others.


The Englishman. So do our factious Ministers likewise bear the world in
hand, that all Ministers besides themselves, See their Petition to the King.
do seek only their own quiet, profit and credit in the world. But what was
the cause I pray you, that your Anabaptists did thus revile, back-bite, and
slander your Ministers?


The German. SV^ely, it was only because they opposed themselves against
them, and their factious proceedings. And this made Zuinglius (being to enter
the lists against them) to say thus: Zuinglius de Baptism.
Scio quibus conuitijs et quantis furoribus illorum hic me exponam: I know to
what reproaches and to how great rages of theirs I make my self subject. And
again: Although they maruelously slander us, and daily with new clamours
revile and backe-bite us, yet will I never leave off the defense of the truth,
before their contumaey be made known to all men.


The Englishman. The selfsame cause moved our Sectaries also to revile,
backe-bire, and slander our Ministers. I will not name the slanderous
reports, the unchristian taunts and contumelies that Martin Mar-prelate, the
Displayer of men in their colors, Doctor Somes Painter, and other
blacke-mouthed Puritanes, have laden the faithful Servants of God with. Take a
view only of T. C. his Books, and you shall find that he utters almost
nothing else, but speeches of disdain and reproach. The especial grace he
had in writing, was in bitter inuectiues against a Reverend man, whom he
ought to have reuereced.

How often does he report Master Doctor in one In his first reply.
book, in contempt either of the degree, or of the person? 370. times is the
least. And for this very cause does the said learned Doctor Whit-gift in his
preface to the Reader.
Doctor compare the Puritanes to your Anabaptists. His words are these: Those
that be in the Ecclesiastical estate (and desirous to keep the peace of the
Church) I have to adm^nish, that they be not discouraged from doing their
duties, because of the slanderous reports, and unchristian taunts and
contumelies, that our unquiet brethren lade them with* knowing that it has
been the usual practice of all Sectaries and especially of the Anabaptists.
But to proceed, to what end did they thus slander them?


The German. The 30. se^blance.
THeir end and porpose in slaundering and reuiling of their brethren, was (
Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
as Zuinglius testifies) to win credit unto them selves, and to discredit
those that set them selves against them.


The Englishman. At the self same mark have our railing Sectaries aimed. But
tell me, why did your Sectaries seek to win credit unto them selves? The 3.
1. se^blance.



The German. WHy? Surely, because (as Bulling. aduers. Anabapt
Bullinger records) they attributed much unto themselves, and pleased
themselves very well: but other men they condemned, and therefore their minds
were full of pride, and contempt.


The Englishman. Your Anabaptists come not near our Sectaries in Pride and
contempt: for every young vpstart does think himself to be far wiser, then
the grauest man in the land. They did not long When they conferred about the
Petition to the Kings Majesty.
since, single themselves from their fellow laborers in the Country, and
thought them not worthy to be acquainted with their enterprises. None
(forsooth) but such as were of their Pares cumparibus facillime congregantur.
own humor were called to their assemblies, or rather conue^ticles. But what
do I mention their contempt of their fellow Parishpriestes? They are so full of
seditious singularity, and ouer-weening contempt, as that they contemn the
reverend Fathers of our Church, and grudge that* Bishops are allowed to be of
the upper house of Parliament. The Author of the Humble motion wishes, that
in Humble motion* Page. 52.
steed of the Bishops there might be present in the Parliamenthouse, some wise
(they account Bishops fools) and grave Ministers of especial gifts and
learning, s^rted out of all the land etc.


The German. The 32. se^blance.
YEa, but out Anabaptists were so arrogant, as that they bragged, that they
would defend their cause, not only with words, but with the shedding of their
blood also.


The Englishman. So have our Sectaries too. Certain of the things (say T. C.
Reply page. 5* sect. vlt.
they) which we stand upon, are such, as that if every hair of our head were a
l^fe, we ought to afford them for the defense of them.


The German. Your Sectaries (I see) were very audatious; but yet ours did
far surpass them.


The Englishman. Wherein I pray you?


The German. The 33. se^blance.
A Great number of ours assembled themselves together, and set down (as
Sleidan Lib. 5.
Sleidan witnesses) certain things which they required the Princes and
Magistrates of the Provinces of Germany to reform. Did your Sectaries ever
attempt the like?


The Englishman. Yes, to the number of more then a thousand of our Ministers,
all groaning as under a common burden of humane rites and ceremonies, did not
long since humble themselves at his Majesty's feet, to be eased and releiued in
this behalf: and set down likewise (as your Anabaptists did) certain points,
which they required his Majesty to reform. But to proceed in order, did any
of your Ministers join with your Anabaptists that were before conformable to
the orders of your Church?


The German. The 34. se^blance.
YEs, it happened, that one Bernard Rotman (who before had preached against them)
vide Sleidan Lib. 10.
fell away from the truth, and began to show himself a favorer of their
opnions: which thing gave so great encouragement unto them, as that they
challenged the sound Preachers to disputation.


The Englishman. It hapened also amongst us, that diverse Ministers, who (as
they In their Petition to the King.
themselves have confessed) had subscribed to the orders of our Church, fell
away from their former love, and liking thereof, and joined with the
Puritane-faction. But you tell me, that your Anabaptists did challenge your
Preachers to dispute with them: was there any public disputation granted
them?


The German. NO, and for this cause they greatly complained and The 35.
se^blance.
cried out, that the truth was oppressed: that innocent and Godly men which
would have had all things reformed according to the word of God, could not be
heard nor have liberty to speak: and that Master Zuinglius stopped their
mouths, and defended his cause, not by the word of God, but by the authority
of the Magistrate.


The Englishman. See their Book entitled the State of the Church of England.
Page. 38.
So do our Sectaries likewise cry out, that the Clincke, the Gate House, the
White-lyon, and the Fleet, have been our only arguments, whereby we have
proved our cause these many years. But I pray you did your Ministers confer
with your Anabaptists? did they use no means to reclaim them?


The German. Yes, although there was no public disputation granted them,
yet did they confer with them from time to time, thereby to reclaim them from
their errors.


The Englishman. I pray you what kind of arguments used they?


The German. Truly, instead of sound and sustantiall arguments, they used
sophistical fallacies.


The Englishman. I do think that your Anabaptists do not come near our
Puritanes in this point.


The German. Why do you not think it?


The Englishman. Because our Puritanes do think, that they have Logic
enough, when they have read and conned over Ramus his Logic: and so
consequently, they often use fallacies, before ever they be aware. They cannot
(forsooth.) endure to read Aristotle's golden Book de sophisticis Elanchis.


The German. What? are some of your Students trained up in Peter Ramus?


The Englishman. Yes, as it was the wisdom of the Dan. 1. 41*
King of Babylon, to take young Children of Israel, whom he might teach the
learning and tongue of Chaldea rather then their old men: so it is the wisdom
of some Ramisticall Tutors, to season our green vessels with this liquor of
Puritanisme, that they may keep the taste thereof while life remains. But
not to interrupt your speech, what fallacies used they?


The German. The 36. se^blance.
THey usually reasoned ab eo quod est secundum quid, ad ^d quod est simpliciter.


The Englishman. I must entreat you to express your mind more plainly, that
I may understand your meaning.


The German. My meaning is this, they usually reasoned after this manner:
vide Bulling. aduers. anabap. fol. 9. and 18.
Such and such things were not in the Apostles days: therefore they ought not
to be in these days.


The Englishman. This fallacy has been the original and Wel-spring of many
both old and new schisms: of old, as of them that called themselves
Apostolicos, and of the Aerians: of new, as of the Anabaptists, Brownists,
Puritanes, and others. To insist only in the Puritanes, we must (say Admon. 1.
Page. 105
they) have Surplesses devised by Pope Ardian: Interrogatories ministered to the
Infant: Godfathers and Godmothers brought in by Higinus: holy Fonts invented
by Pope Pius: crossing and such like pieces of popery, which the Church of God
in the Apostles time never knew: and therefore they are not to be used.


The German. The 37. se^blance.
Our Arist. de sophisticis. Elench. Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Anabaptists used an other erroneous kind of reasoning, which Aristotle
calls To en arche aiteisthai: which is, when a man frames unto himself
certain principles of his own devising; grounded neither upon authority,
neither yet upon substantial reason, and then upon the same will conclude his
purpose.


The Englishman. This fallacy has also been the foundation of many both old
and new schisms: of old, as of the Aerians, who forsook the Church, because
therein were some things used, which Heritickes had abused: of new, as of the
Anabaptists, Brownists, Puritanes and others.

To insist again in the Puritanes only, they commit this fallacy in using
these two false Principles: the one, when they say that to be invented by the
late Popes, which was not invented by them: the other, when they say, that
nothing may be used in the Church of Christ, which is used in the Church of
Rome.

To begin with the first, they commit this fallacy, when they say that the
Surplesse was devised by Pope Adrian: for the Godly Fathers of the Church, in
the purest estate thereof, have left it in writing, how that the Ministers in
their times did usually put on white garments, in the execution of divine
Service, and in the celebration of the blessed Sacraments. For proof hereof,
I refer you to Saint Chrysostom. ad Populum Antioche^ Hom. 6.
Chrysostom, to Saint Hieron. Lib. 13. in Ezchiel. 44. et in Lib. 1. aduers.
Pelagium cap. 9.
Jerome, and to the Council. Carthaginens. can. 46.
Council of Carthage, at which were present, two hundred fourteen Bishops.

But what do I mention these times? it was used in the very days of the
Apostles, as is aparant by the testimony of Hegesippus, who (as Saint Hierom.
de sriptorib. Ecclesiast.
Jerome says) lived near the Apostles time. His testimony is this: Hegesip.
lib. 5. Comment.
when James, who was sir-named Iustus, went into the Temple, he was Linea non
lanea vest in duebatur.
appareled with a linen, not with woollen vesture.

Again, they commit this fallacy, when they say, that Godfathers and
Godmothers were brought in by Higinus: for they were in Dyonis. Areopag. lib.
7. de Ecclesiast. Hierarchia.
Dyonis. Areopagita his time, who lived in the time of the Apostles; and they
have continued in all pure times since, as apeareth by sundry learned Tertul.
aduers. Marcione^ lib. 3. Idem de praescrip. aduers hareticos* at in lib. de
resurrectione carnis. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 14 ^ Cyprian lib. 1. post, 6. August.
epist. ad Bonifacium et lib. de Rectitud. Catholica conuersationis. Isider. de
officij ecclesiast.
writers.

They do also commit this fallacy, when they say, that crossing in Baptism is
a piece of Popery: for it was used in the Church of God, within the compass
of three hundred years after Christ: which was long before the Mystery of
iniquity bid begin to work: and has been used in the Church of God ever
since.

For the justifying of what I have said, I refer you to the writings of
Tertull. de corona miletis et lib. 3. aduersus Marc. ^^.
Tertullian, Justin. Martyr ad Orthodox quast. 1. 18.
Iustine Martyr, Cyprian. epist. ^6. ad Th^barita^o^ et in lib. de vnitate
Ecclesiae.
Cyprian, Orig. sermon. 8. in diverse. et in psalm. 38. h^. 2.
Origin, Gregor. Niz. in oratione aduersus eos qui differunt baptismum.
Gregory Nizen, Basil. de spiritis sancto. cap. 27
Basil, Ambros. in l. de ii^ qui mist eriis i^itia^tur.
Ambrose, Hierom. in Ezech. ^.
Ieroni, Rabanus lib 4. de ^^ctitut. clericor. cap. 5
Rabanus and Goulart in Cyprianum.
Goulart. But what do I cite these Fathers? Dyonis. Areopag. de ecclesiast.
Hierarch cap. de baptism^.
Dionisius Areopagita, who lived in the Apostles time, makes mention of the
cross in Baptism.

The Petitioners also committed this fallacy, when they told his Majesty
that see their Petition to the King.
the restraint of Marriage is a Popish Cannon: for it is a Cannon of an ancient
Provincial Synod. Laodicen. can. 52.
Synod, which was confirmed in the sixth general Synod held in Trullo.

But to come to their second Principle, they do (I say) commit the forenamed
fallacy, in using a second false Principle, viz: when they teach, that we may
not use that in our Church, which is used in the Church of Rome. How false this
their Principle is, I appeal to Calvin in Exid. cap. 23. verse. 24.
Calvin Iunius in Academ.
Iuius, Peter Martyr in an Epistle to H^^per.
Peter Martyr, Gualthe^ to N. and M.
Gualther, and all other writers of note.

Yea, one of their own principle writers ouer-throweth this their common
Principle. These are his express words: T. C. in his Epist. pr^fixed before
his second Book.
If amongst the filth of their herisses, there may be found any good thing (as
it were a grain of good corn in a great deal of darnell) that we willingly
receive, not as theirs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the
Philistines, whereof they were unjust owners. For heerin it is true that is
said: the sheep must not lay down her fell, because she sees the Wolf
clothed with it. Yea, it may come to pass, that the Synagogue of Satan, may
have some one thing at some time with more conuenience, then the true and
Catholic Church of Christ. Such was the ceremony of pouring water once only
upon the Child in Baptism used with us, and in the most reformed Churches:
which in some age was used by those of the Eunomion heresy.

Lo here, I have wounded their Goliath with his own sword. Let us go on.


The German. The 38. se^blance.
THe Anabaptists used a third fallacy, which Anst. de sophist. Elench. Lib. 1.
cap. 5.
Aristotle calls to para (to) to me aition, os aition tithenai, that is, the
taking of that for the cause of a thing, which is not the cause. For they
reasoned (as both Bulling. aduers. Anabap.
Bullinger Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
and Zuinglius does report) on this manner: your Ministers cannot teach truly,
because they have great livings.


The Englishman. Our Puritanes have committed the same fault in sundry places of
their writings: as namely, when they condemn Surplesses and other
particulars, because (as they say) Admon. page 241. sect. 2.
they work discord, and do hinder the preaching of the Gospel, when as the
apparel is not the cause thereof; but it is the sinister affection, the
contentious mind, the perverse and the rebellious nature of man.

Again, they use this fallacy, when they say that Admon. page 42. sect. 2 3.
Ministers do now run, and ride for benefices, and by unlawful suit and
buying, prevent other suitors, because the congregation has not authority to
call Ministers: For it is not the fault of the calling, but of the man.

And again, the Book of ordring of Ministers and Deacons set forth by this
Church of England, requires, that whosoever is to be admitted into the
Ministry, should be so tried both for learning and life, as Saint Paul
requires 1 Timoth. 3. and Titus 1. Now the Admo^. page 36. sect. 1.
Puritanes do ascribe the neglect of this duty to the rule appointed, as if
we should call the Law evil, because some Lawyers in their office do swa^^^
from it.

T. C. also played the Sophister when he condemned our prescript form of
service or Liturgy, T. C. reply. page. 104. sect. 3.
because (as he said) it maintayneth an unpreaching, an (...) and vnlafwul
ministry, for it is not the prescript form of service that maintayneth
vnleraned Ministers, noe more then it is the word of God that engenders
heresies.

But what other fallacy committed your Anabaptists?


The German. The 39. se^blance.
THey committed (as you may read in our German writers) an other fault in
reasoning, which Aristotle ^rist* de sophisticis elench* lib 1. cap. ^.
calls sophisma para to ^pomenon, that is, when either there is an erroneous
consequence, or else none at all. They did licentiously wring* or wrest the
Scriptures to serve their own ^utne, and quoted many places of Scripture, from
which they could infer nothing by necessary cons^quence.


The Englishman. It has been the trick of Heretics and Schismatikes in all
ages, to fill the margents of their Books full of plac^s of Scripture, that by
this means they might the more easily deceive the simple people, and make them
think, their whole Books to be Scripture and nothing else but Scripture; when
as in deed they wrung from the Scripture that since, which the words
themselves would not bear.

To insist only in our own Schismatikes, they neither care for mayor, minor,
nor conclusion, so they say something. Take a view of their m^rgents, and you
shall see how vainly they have painted them with shameful abusing of the
Scriptures.

To prove that ministering of interrogatories to Infants is a mocking of God,
and a foolish toy* they quote, Galat. Admonition 1. page, 192. Sect. 2
6. 7. Be not ye deceived* (...) ^ocked: for whatsoever a man sows* (...)
shall he reap.

To prove ^h^^ is not in the Godfathers and Godmothers* ^perfor^e that which
they promise, Ibidem.
they quote Romans 7. 15. ^allowe not that which I do: for what I would, that I
do not: but what I hate that do I. And verse 18. for I know, that in me,
that is in my flesh, dwelleeh no good thing: for to will is present with me:
but I find no means to perform that which is good. And verse. 21. I find then
by the Law, that when I would do good, e^i^^ is present with me.

To prove that we should not receive the Communion kneeling* Admon. ^ag 182.
sect. 1.
they qu^te, Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow down to them nor* worshipe them.

To prove that Ministers are not ^yed to any form of Prayer invented by man,
Admon. page 77. sect. 3.
they quote, 1. Timo. 1. 2. unto Timothy my natural Son in the faith, grace,
mercy, and peac^ from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

To prove that Archbishops etc. and their Offices came out of the Popes
shop, Admon. page 209.
they quote* Luke 16. 25. But Abraham said, Son remember that thou in thy
life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains* now therefore
is he comforted and thou art tormented.

To prove that there ought to be an ^quality of Ministers Amon. 1. page. 124.
sect. 1.
they quote in their Margent, 2. Cor. 10. 7. Look ye on things after the
appearance? If any trust in himself, that he is Christ's, let him consider
this again of himself that as he is Christ's, even s^ ^re ^e Christ's.

To prove that Ministers should not wear Cappes, Gowns, etc* but that they
should be known by their voice, learning and Doctrine, Admon. 1. page, 53.
sect. vit*
they quote* Math. 26. 48. Now he that betrayed him, had given them a token,
saying: whosoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him. And verse 73.
They that stood by said unto Peter, surely thou art also one of the^: for even
thy speech be^rayeth thee.

To prove that tyranous Lordshipe, (as it pleases them to call it) cannot
stand with Christ's King*dome, In the preface of the Admonition.
they quote, Math. 15. 23. But (...) her not a word. Then came to him his
Disciples, ^^d besought him saying: send her away, for the cries after us. And
Luke 16. 15. Then he said unto them, ye are they which justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts.

To prove that e^^ry congregation ha^ their De^cons, Admon. page 114. sect. 2.
they quote John 13. 27. And after the soppe* Satan entered into him. Then said
Jesus unto him, That thou do, do quickly.

To prove that civil offices, joined to the Ecclesiastical, are against the
word of God, Admon. page 216. sect. 1.
they quote. Luke. 9. 60. 61. And Jesus said unto him, let the dead bury the
dead etc. And 1. Timoth. 6. 11. But thou o man of God, flee these things, and
follow after righteousness, Godliness, faith, love, patience and meekness.

To prove that no ceremony, order, discipline, or kind of government may
be in the Church of God, which the Scripture has not in particular set down,
T. C. T. C. page 41. sect. 1.
quoteth 1, Cor* 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink* or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. with these and a thousand such like places, are their
Margents pestred.

Now r^duce every one of these into a Syllogisticall form, and you shall see
many a rediculous sequel.


The German. I see already how ridiculous they are*


The Englishman. Well then, proceed to an other matter.


The German. The 40. se^blance.
Our A^^^^^tists used an other falla^ie, which Arist. de Sophist. Elench. lib.
1. cap. 5.
Aristotle calls agn^^antou elegchou* which is committed, when either the
st^te of the question is changed, or when the adversary, i^ opposing, does
violate the law of oposition, and disput^th not ad idem. To make this plain,
Zuinglius took upon him to defend, that some external things, may be brought
into the Church, which are not expressed in the Scriptures* and they replied,
as if he had said, that some things necessary to salvation, might have been
brought into the Church, which are not in the Scriptures* For they alleag^d,
Math. 1^. 19. To which reply of theirs* Zuingli^s thus answers* Zuingliu^ d^
Baptism^.
I speak not as you say me to speak, I speak only of external and
indifferent things, whereof there be many which are neither commanded nor
forbidden* by any express word of God etc. and again: for this that w^ speak
of* is not necessary unto salvation, but it is external etc.


The Englishman. T. C. page 79. sect. vlt.
T. C. objected unto the late Arch-bishope the self same text for the self
same purpose: to which objection of his, the forenamed reverend man answers
with Zuinglius.

The Admon. page 30. sect. 2.
admonitors also to prove that those things only are to be placed in Gods
Church, which God himself in his word commands, do quote, De^t. 4. 2. Ye
shall put nothing to the word which I comma^^d you, and^. And Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed ye do it: thou shall put nothing thereto.

Thus you see, that whereas we defend that matters of order, government and
Discipline etc. may be used in the Church, though they be not laid down in
the Scriptures: they aleadge places against us, which only prove that we must
not, in matters of salvation add any thing, which may not be gathered from
the sacred Scriptures. But what other false arguments used they?


The German. The 41. se^blance.
THey drew arguments from the authori^^e of the Scripture negatiuely: for
which cause Zuinglius in Elencho.
Zuinglius thus reprooueth them: You can find no hole to escape at: for you
foolishly reason negati^ely etc. And again, you make the negative only your
foundation.


The Englishman. A testimoni^ diuino valet argumentum affirmat^e and negative
Keck^em. lib. 3. System. Logic* cap. 16.
A testimony drawn from the authority of the Scriptures, holds (says a
late learned* L^^itian) both affirmatively and negatiuely; but this maxim of
his must be thus limited: tenet in rebus subst antialibus, non in
accidentalibus, that is, an argument drawn from the authority of the
Scriptures, in reasoning about things substantial, or matters of salvation and
damnation, holds both affirmatively and negatiuely: as for example, God has
not laid down this or that thing in scripture, as a matter of salvation:
therefore it is not a matter of salvation. But an argument drawn from the
authority of the Scriptures negatiuely, in reasoning about things accidental
or ceremonial, is of noe force. And yet our Sectaries have commonly used this
kind of reasoning: for which cause our late In his defense of the answer to
the Admon. page 590. 591.
reverend Archbishop compared them to your Anabaptists. But to leave this
particular, what other sophistry used your Anabaptists?


The German. What other? Truly, they immitated the Devil that graund
Sophister.


The Englishman. The Devil? Wherein I pray you?


The German. When the Devil had taken up Christ into the holy City, and
had set him on a pinnacle of the Temple, he began to dispute with him, saying:
Math. 4*5.
If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down: for it is written, that he
will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall lift thee
up, least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone.

Lo, here the Devil took upon him to prove, that Christ could not possibly
break his neck, though he should throw himself headlong from the pinnacle of
the Temple. The place which he aleaged for the proof thereof is that place of
the Psalm, He shall give his Angels Psalm. 91. 11
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; that is, so long as thou
keep thy self within the ways of thy calling, so long shall my Angels
preserve thee.

Now compare these two places together, and you shall see, that the Devil
quoted the Scriptures very Sophistically and subtly: alleging only so much
as served for his turn, and leaving out that which made against him, viz* to
keep thee in all thy ways.


The Englishman. And did your Anabaptists the like?


The German. The 42. se^blance.
YEs, as appears by this speech of Zuinglius de Baptism.
Zuinglius: They have not thing else in their mouths, but only this: docete
et baptizate, teach and baptize. Behold (say they) the commandment of Christ.
In the mean time they do not mark* nay indeed they will not mark, that the
same thing which they so much cry upon, doctrine, is afterward also set
after, when as he says, docentes eos seruare. etc. And again: we have the
word of God more clear and plain then yours, which is, teaching you to
observe all things which I have commanded you, and th^se words are put after
and not before Baptism.


The Englishman. Our Admonitors used the same Diabolical Sophistrye, for to
prove that there ought to be a paritie of Ministers, Admo^. pag^ 124 sect. 1.
they do quote 2. Cor. 10, 7. but they conceal the words immediately
following, which be these: For though I should boast somewhat more of our
authority etc. I should have no shame. Our of these words, which they in
their quotation do leave out, Master Calvin gathers the quite contrary.
calvin i^ Cor. 10. 7*
It was for modestye (says he) that he joined himself to their number, whom
he did far excel: and yet he would not be so modest, but that he would
keep his authority safe* therefore he adds that he spak^ less then of
right he might have done. For he was not of the common sort of Ministers, but
one of the chief among the Apostles: and therefore he says, if I boast more,
I need not be ashamed, for I have a good cause. And again: although the self
same office be common to all the Ministers of the word* yet there be degrees
of honor.

But what other false quotations of theirs have you observed?


The German. The 43. se^blance.
Our Anabaptists, for the establishing of their kind of discipline by
excommunication, quoted Mat. 18. 15. for which cause Master Calvin reprooueth
them, saying: Calvin. aduers. Anabapt.
but they are again deceived, in that they consider not, that the Lord
speaks in that place of secret faults: for as for those which are manifest,
and give unto the people cause of offense, they are to be corrected by other
means then by secret admonitions.


The Englishman. So did our late Reverend Archbishop also reprove T. C. for
alleging the self same place, to the establishing of his pretended holy
discipline. In his defense of the answer to the Admonition. page. ^0.
Where have you learned (says he) that Christ in the 18. of Matthew, does
appoint any general rule for public offenses, such as negligence and
contempt in frequenting public prayers, and hearing the word of God is? the
very words of Christ, If thy Brother trespass against thee, etc. Do teach
that be means not thereof open and known, but of secret and particular
sins, etc. To conclude, thus in every page of their Books allege they the
Scriptures; not considering that divine Axiom, which a late Keckerman. in lib.
3. Syste^. logici. cap. 16,
Logitian has gathered out of the ancient* Fathers, viz: Testimonium Dei
alieno sensu acceptum nulla^ in probando vi^ habet.

But what other manner of reasoning used they?


The German. The 44. se^blance.
THey did also usually reason (as Zuinglius in Elencho contra Catabapt.



The Englishman. Our Sectaries use the self same vicious and Anabaptisticall
kind of reasoning: for if you confer or dispute with them, either about our
Discipline, or about the ceremonies used in our Church, they will immediately
reason thus:

Argum* ^ fact^ ad i^s.
This or that Discipline is used in reformed Churches, beyond the Seas: ergo we
must use the same.

Argum, ^ non fact^ ad n^^ ius.
Or thus: this or that ceremony is not used in the church of Geneua: ergo we
must not use it.

This kind of reasoning the Admonitors used in their preface to the
Admonition: and it is also now adays used of their Proselytes and followers,
who like of nothing well but of that which comes from Geneua: I will therefore
send them to Geneua for an answer. Beza contra Sarrau* page 127.
We of Geneua (says a learned man of the church, speaking of this church of
England) do not prescribe to any Church to follow our pec^liar example, like
unto ignorant men* who think nothing well, but that which they do themselves.

But to leave this their Sophistry, did not your Anabaptists yield to the
truth, when they heard it demo^strated unto them, and these their sophisimes
confuted?


The German. The 45. se^blance.
NO, they were (as Bullinger. aduers. Anabap. For. 78. and 244.
Bullinger reports) stubborn and wilful, and would not recant, though they
were convicted by disputation.


The Englishman. Our gracious Sovereign was at his first entry into this
Realm, See the Proclamation for the auth^^^z.
entertained and importuned with informations of sundry ministers, co^plaining
of the errors, and imperfections of the church here, as well in matters of
Doctrine as of Discipline, And because the importunity of the complainers was
great, their affirmations vehement, and the zeal wherewith the same did seem
to be accompained, very specious: His Highness caused a conference to be had at
his Honor of Hampton Court, in the month of January last: where before his
Majesty and his privy Counsel were assembled, many of the greatest Bishops
and Prelates, and many other learned men, as well of those that were
conformable to the state of the Church establ^shed, as of those which dissented.

The sucesse of this conference was such, as happens to many other things,
which move great expectation before they be entered into, but in their
Pariuriunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
issut produce small effects.

For his Highness and his Honorable privy Counsel found mighty and vehement
informations supported with so weak and slender proofs, as it appeared unto
his Royal Majesty and his Honorable privy Counsel, that there was no cause
why any change should be at all in that which was most impugned, the Book of
Common prayer, containing the form of the public service of God here
established, neither in the Doctrine, which appeared to be sincere, nor in the
forms and rites which were justified out of the practice of the primitive
Church.

All which not-withstanding, there are yet some amongst us, who continue still
in their forwardness and way wardnes; of whom we may say, as Saint Austen
did of Caecilian and his confederates. August. Epist. 8.
Noluerunt veritati concedere ne victi quidem. And thus you see that our
Sectaries do resemble your Anabaptists in obstinancie.


The German. The 46. se^blance.
YEa, but our Anabaptists changed sower into sweet, evil into good, vice into
virtue. They did (I mean) Vide Bulling aduers. Anabap. Fol. 78. 224.
call their stubbornenesse and wilfulness by the name of constancy.


The Englishman. The Devil that has ever taught Harlots to cloth themselves
like honest Matrons, and vices to disguise themselves under the habit of
virtues, has also taught our obstinate Sectaries, to call their obstinacy by
the name of constancy.

They will not recant (forsooth) These are their usual speeches.
least their followers should think them to be inconstant.

They are now ashamed to subscribe to the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies of our
Church, because they have ever hitherto constantly withstood them.

But to these may we fi^ly say, as S. Austen said to the like in his time:
August. Epist 48.
Est confusio adducens peccatu^, et est confusio adducens gratiam and gloriam.
Confusio adducit pecc^tum cum errubescit quisth mutare sententiam, ne aut
inconstan^ putetur, aut diu errasse seipso iudice teneatur. Confusio autem
adducit gratiam et gloriam, cum erubescit quisque de propria iniquitate, et
paenitendo in melius co^mutatur. Quid ergo ad huc dubitas tenere quod sentis,
nisi quia ad it quod non sentis, re^aliquando sensisse confunderis, and dum
erubescis corrigere errorem, non erubescis permanere in errore, quod vtique
potius erubescendum fuit?


The German. Your Sectaries did (as it seems by your late speeches) lately
impugn your Book of Common prayer: I will therefore now in the next place
(taking occasion heerby) speak of prayer.


The Englishman. What? did they impugn your prescript form of prayer too?


The German. The 47. se^blance.
YEs, as ye may read in Gastius de ^rr^r. ^atabap.
Gastius, and in other of our Germain-writers.


The Englishman. So do our Sectaries also impugn our prescript form of
prayers: for they complain and cry out, that they Amon. page, 77. sest, 3
are tied to a form of prayers invented by man.


The German. The 48. se^blance.
ALthough our Sectaries disliked our prescript form of prayer, yet they
disliked not other forms of prayers, which they had framed to them selves.


The Englishman. No more do our Sectaries: for albeit they dislike our form
of public service, yet they Se^ the Proclamation for the authorizement of an
Uniformity.
used (and that since his Majesty's entry into the Realm) certain forms of
the public service of God not here allowed.


The German. What a bold attempt was that? how durst they use a form of
public service, whereunto their Sovereigns authorizement was not first
pr^cured? Suppose that his Highness would have allowed their Liturgy, yet what
a point of disorder and confusion was it, that the feet should run without
the head? It was decreed in the Counsel of Council. Carthanuns. can. 23.
Carthage, that no man should use the forms of prayer, which he frames to
himself, without conference with the brethren, which are better learned. How
durst they then use their form of service, before they had conferred with your
learned and obedient Clergy about it?


The Englishman. Well, let that pass, and let us come now to some other matter.


The German. To what other matter?


The Englishman. Having showed their oppugning of your form of public
prayer, it remains that you relate their oppugning of your administration of
the Sacraments.


The German. What Method should I observe in speaking of the Sacraments?


The Englishman. Whereas there are two Sacraments, viz: Baptism, and the Lords
Supper: order requires that you first speak generally of them both together,
and then particularly o^ either of them.


The German. Well, I am content.


The Englishman. Proceed then when you please.


The German. The 49. se^blance.
Our Anabaptists taught, that the word of God must of necessity be preached,
before the administration of the Sacraments: alleging (as Zuinglius d^
Baptism.
Zuinglius reports) Math. 5. 12. to prove the same.


The Englishman. Our Admon. page 4^.
Admonitors do in effect say the same thing, and do quote the selfsame place
of Scripture for the proof thereof. Yea, T. C. reply. page. 125.
T. C. says flatly, that there must of necessity the word of God be (not
read, but) preached unto the people, amongst whom the Sacraments are
ministered.


The German. And do you hold this doctrine to be erroneous?


The Englishman. We hold, that preaching before the administration of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, is not (as T. C. and your Anabaptists would
have it) de necessitate Sacramenti, that is, so necessarily joined with the
administration of these Sacraments, as that they may not be rightly
administered, though the word be not at the same time preached. But to leave
this discourse of the Sacraments in general: let us now speak of either of
them ^n particular. And first of all, let me request you that you would
vouchsafe to relate The 50. se^blance.
their opinions concerning Baptism.


The German. THeir opinions concerning Baptism, were these: 1. they held,
that the Minister is, Zuingli. de Baptismo. and Calui^* de Insti. Lib. 4. cap.
1^ Sect. 16.
de ipsa Baptismi essentia, of the essence of Baptism, that is, that the being
of the Sacrament does so depend upon the Minister, as that it is no Sacrament,
if it be not celebrated by a Minister.


The Englishman. We hold that the Sacrament (to use Master Calvin. in loco
citato.
Caluint words) is not to be esteemed of his hand by whom it is ministered,
but as it were of the hand of God, from whom it certainly comes. And
therefore among men if a Lettter be sent, so that the hand and Seal be known,
it skilleth not who, or what manner of person carries it: even so it is
sufficient for us, to know the hand and Seal of the Lord in his Sacraments,
by whom soever they be delivered. Heerby is the error of the Donatists
confuted, who measured the virtue and worthiness of the Sacrament, by the
worthiness of the Minister.

Heerby also is confuted the error of T. C. who avouches that T. C. page, 113.
on this point, whether he be a Minister or no, depends not only the
dignity, but also the being of the Sacrament.


The German. The 51. se^blance.
THis their forenamed opinion, made our Anabaptists (as M. Calvin says)
Calui^. Insti. 1. L. 4. cap. 15 Sect. 16.
furiously to urge rebaptization, denying us to be rightly baptized, because we
were baptized by wicked and idolatrous persons in the Popes Church.

This also made them to hold, that Baptism ministered by laymen, or by women,
was not effectual.


The Englishman. Our Sectaries hold, that the Baptism of women, is T. C.
page. 113.
no more the holy Sacrament of Baptism, then any other daily or ordinary
washing of the Child: and that those which have been baptized by women, ought
to be rebaptized: against whose folly (to use M. Caluins words) we shall
Ibidem.
sufficiently be defended, if we think that we were baptized, not in the name
of any man, but in the name of the Father, of the Son and of the holy Ghost.

Let not this my speech cause you to think, that women are permitted with us
to baptize, as some slanderous Puritanes have informed some reverend men
beyond the Seas; nor that I go about to prove that women may lawfully
baptize. For God forbid that I should teach them to usurp an office whereunto
they be not called: Only I withstand this error, viz: that baptism
ministered by no women, is no more the holy Sacrament of Baptism, then daily
or ordinary washing: for I hold that although (to use S. Augustines words)
August. lib. 2. contra epist. Parmen. c. 13.
it be usurped without necessity, and is given of any man, to any man: yet
that which is given cannot be said not to be given, albeit it may rightly be
said, not to be rightly given. The 52. Se^blance.



The German. Our Anabaptists by urging these things before named, brought (as
Bucer in his censure upon the com. Book.
Bucer truly reports) Baptism into contempt.


The Englishman. Our Puritanes by their teaching, that Ministers are de ipsa
baptismi essentia, of the being of baptism, by their auouching that the word
of God must of necessity be preached before the Administration of Baptism;
and by their denying the necessity of Baptism, have made men think, that the
external signs of this Sacrament is but a bare ceremony, and in no sense
necessary to salvation. Thus does their Doctrine tend to the derogation of
this holy Sacrament. Therefore I may say of these our factious Teachers, as
Calvin. aduers. Anabapt*
Calvin does of your Anabaptists: Though they say, that the grace of God
toward us, is not diminshed if Infants be not admitted to Baptism: yet I
will show that it is much diminished: for we must esteem the grace of God,
especially by the declaration thereof, which he makes both by his word and
Sacraments. Seeing therefore that Baptism is now ordained, that the promise of
salvation may be sealed in our bodies, as it was in times past in the people of
the Jews: Christians should be deprived of a singular consolation, if their
children should be secluded from this confirmation, which all the faithful
have at all times inioyed, that they should have the visible sign, whereby the
Lord does show and witness, that he receives their children into the
fellowship of the Church.


The Germane. The 53. Se^blance.
ALthough our Anabaptists taught, that Infants ought not to be baptized: yet
before they broached this their heresy, they found fault only with ceremonies
used in Baptism, and namely, they said that Bulling. Fol 10* 214.
interrogatories ministered to sucking Infants, are mere fooleries.


The Englishman. Your Anabaptists then fell from schism, into heresy: for
first (as you say) they scorned interrogatories and other ceremonies used in
baptizing of Infants, and then afterward did utterly condemn baptizing of
them.

I pray God that our Puritanes do not the like: for they have already
requested, that In their petition exhibited to the Kings Majesty.
interrogatories ministered to Infants, etc. as superfluous may be taken away.
Yea T. C. has even in scornful terms uttered against interrogatories,
joined with the Anabaptists. T. C. page: 134. sect vlt.
This questioning (says he) can be little better termed, then a very trifling
and toying.

But far otherwise speaks Master Perkins in his exposition of the cre^d.
fol. 4
Perkins of it: for he says, that this manner of questioning, was used even
from the time of the Apostles.

I wonder then, with what face our Puritanes can term this questioning,
trifling and toying: the which was used both in the days of the Apostles, and
in the next age after them, as appears by the writings of Dyonis, Areopag. de
ecclesiast, Hirarch. lib 7.
Dyonisius Areopagita, Justin. Mart. 1 Apol.
Iusti^^ Martyr, Tertul. de corona militis.
Tertullian, cyprian epist. 6. and 12.
Cyprian, Orig. homil. 5. and 12. in numer.
Origin, Basil. despir. sancto cap. 27.
Basil, Ambros. de Sacram. Lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap, 7. and hexam lib.
1. cap. 4.
Ambrose, Chrysostom. Homil. ^1. a^ populum A^tioch.
Chrysostom, C^s. de incarnat. Lib. ^. cap. 5.
Cassi^nus, August. epist. ad Bonifacium.
Augustine, Gyr^l. in catech^si mystagogica.
Cyrill, Isidor. de officiis ecclesiast. Lib. 1.
Isidore, Raban, de institut. clericorum, cap. 10.
Rabanus and others.

But to leave your administration of Baptism, did your Anabaptists find any
fault with your celebration of the Lords Supper.


The German. The 54. Se^blance.
YEs, they cried out (as Bullinger. Fol. 9. 18.
Bullinger also relates) that the Lords supper was not sincerely ministered in
Germany, according to the custom of the Apostolic Church.


The Englishman. Our Puritanes likewise say, that our Admon. 2 Fol. 42 43
Sacraments are wickedly mangled and profaned, yea and wickedly ministered Yea,
they cry out with your Anabaptists, Admon. 1 page. 95. sect. 3
that things are not reduced to the Apostolic Church: that in the Apostles
time they read not the Nicene creed in their communion, nor fragments of the
Epistle and Gospel: Admon. 95^ sect. r
that they received it sitting: Admon. page 99
that then it was delivered generally and indefinitely, Take ye end eat ye:
not particularly and singularly, Take thou, and eat thou: Admon. page 100
that they ministered the Sacraments plainly, not pompouslie, with Singing,
Piping, Surplesse and Cope wearing Admon. page 103. 104
that they ministered them simply, as they received it from the Lord: we
sinnefully, mixed with man's inventions and devises.

Lo, this is their railing against our sincere administration of the Lords
Supper. Did your Sectaries come near them.


The German. The 55. Se^blance.
Yes, ours said, that we were so far from imitating the Apostles in these
things, as that indeed Bulling. fol, 9, 18,
we conformed our selves to the Papists.


The Englishman. So do our Puritanes too: for they say, that we have Admon.
page 94
an Introite brought in by Pope Celestinus: that Admon. page 97
we minister it with Wafer Cakes, brought in by Pope Alexander* being in
form, fashion, and substance like their God of the Altar: that we Admon. page
95
receive it kneeling, according to Honorius decree: that Admon. page 101
we borrow from Papists these words: the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was given for thee, etc. and that we have Gloria in exceisis brought in by
Telesphorus. But to proceed on in these matters concerning a Admon. page 10. 2.
the Lords Supper, what other opinions held they?


The German. 5 The 56. Se^blance.
THey held that we must not receive the Lords supper with wicked men. And for
proof thereof they alleged 1. Cor. 5. 11. to which place Master Cal^in. ad.
^^^* Anabapt.
Calvin answers thus: Paul does forbid to eat with those that live
dissolutely. That pertains to private conversation, not to the public
Communion. But will some say, if it be not lawful for a Chrictian man to
keep company with him that is wicked, for corporal meat, much less may be
receive with him the Lords bread: I answer, that it is in our power, whether
we^ may be familiarly conversant with the wicked, or no, and therefore ought
every one to ^he from them: but it is not so in our power to receive the
Communion, or not to receive it, therefore the reason is not all one: we must
therefore note, that if the Church do tolerate and suffer an unworthy man, he
shall do well, that (knowing him to be such a one) does abstain from his
company as much as he can: so that his doing make no schism or separation in
the Church.


The Englishman. The Admon. page 102.
Admonitors objected the self same place, to the same end and purpose, that
your Anabaptists did, and our late In his defense of the answer to the Admon,
Page. 603.
Archbishop answerod them, as Master Calvin answered the Anabaptists. But
not to discourse any longer about the administration of the Sacraments, did not
your Anabaptists find fault with your solemnization of Matrimony?


The Germane. Yes they did indeed.


The Englishman, What I pray you?


The Germane. The 57. Se^blance.
SAint Chrisost. in 1. ad Tim. homil. 9.
Chrysostom an ancient Father reports, how that in his days those Maidens
that kept their virginity, used to wear a Garland upon the day of their
marriages, in token that they had overcome the flesh, and the lusts thereof.

This ceremony (as Zanchius de matrim, cap, 2.
Zanchius truly relates, we retain still in Germany, and that for these three
special cause:, viz. 1. Because it is (as has been proved by the testimony
of S. Chrysostom) of great antiquity in the Church of God. 2. Because
experience teaches us, that it does much good in our Country: for Maidens
with us do strive for the Garland: and so consequently, to keep themselves
Virgins, least they should be married without a Garland. 3. Because it has
for a long time been used in our country: and therefore none (our Sectaries
excepted) do speak against it: for (as Ibid,
Zanchius speaks in our behalf) res externae etc. things external which
are not repugnant to the word of God, and which neither are superstitious nor
obsceane: are to be ebserued according to the custom of the Country wherein
we live.



The Englishman. The Ring in Matrimony is as ancient a ceremony, as the
Garland is: for Tertul, in appol. cap. 6.
Tertullian (who lived almost two hundred years before S. Chrysostom his
time) makes mention of it. Yea, I make no question, but that it was in use in
the very days of our Savior Christ: for Christ himself (as S. Iubet annulu^
reddi, desponsationis in sign et nuptiarum pignus, chrysostom. in Homil, de
patre et duobus filiis,
Chrysostom has well observed) alludeth unto it, in that part of the Parable,
Luke. 15. 22. then the Father said to his servant, bring forth the bestrobe and
put it on him, and put a Ring on his hand.

All which notwith-standing our Sectaries do not rest satisfied, but do make
suit See their petition to the King.
that the Ring in Marriage may be corrected.

But to leave the solemnization of Matrimony, what did your Anabaptists teach
concerning excommunication?


The German. THey taught, that Excommunication is a matter of The 58.
Se^blance.
salvation, and that there is no true Church, where no Excommunication is. This
the Anabaptists do urge, says Bullinger lib. 6. aduers. Anabapt.
Bullinger, that there is no true Church acceptable unto God where there is no
Excommunication etc. To these therefore we answer, that the Church of Corinth
was a true Church, and so acknowledged of Saint Paul to be 1. Cor. 1. before
there was any use of Excommunication in it.


The Englishman. Our Puritanes do herein (as it seems little differ from
your Anabaptists: for their chief Doctor T, C. reply. page. 14.
faith, that excommunication, and other censures of the Church, are matters of
salvation. But what other faults found your Anabaptists with the Church of
Germany?


The Germane. The 59. Se^blance.
WHat others truly, they Vide Bulling. fol. 18.
held it to be no Church at all, and said in plain terms, that it was not
the true. Church of Christ.


The Englishman. So have our Sectaries likewise said, that our Church is not
the true Church of Christ. I will acquaint you with their words: Adm. 1. page.
34.
May it please your wisdoms to understand, that we in England are so far off
from having a Church reformed, according to the prescript of Gods word, that as
yet we are not come to the outward face of the same. But tell me I pray you,
had your Sectaries no cause at all to find fault with your Church? was there no
old Popish trash remaining in it? Had you no Relics of superstition amongst
you?


The Germane. The 60. Se^blance.
No, but they construed indeed every thing in the worst part: for which cause
Zuinglius says thus of them: Zuinglius in ecclesiast.
If they were sent of God, they would have construed in the best part these
external things. etc.


The Englishman. The like may we say of our Sectaries: for there is scarce any
thing in our book of common Prayer, which they have not construed in the worst
part.

To acquaint you with some particulars, they make simple people believe, that
we absolve men from their sins; when as indeed we do only in the name of God
according to his Iehn. 20. 23
word, pronounce to a penitent sinner, that he is absolved, pardoned, and
forgiven.

They do also bear the world in hand, that we use confirmation as a Sacrament,
and that we add it to make Baptism perfect; when as they know (I appeal to
their own consciences) that confirmation now used in our Church, is not to make
Baptism perfect, but partly, to try how the suerties have performed that which
was enjoined them, when the children were baptized: and partly, that the
children themselves (being once of discretion) may with their own mouth, and
with their own consent, openly before the Church, confirm the same: and also
promise, that by the Grace of God, they will evermore endeavor themselves
faithfully to observe such things, as they by their own confession have
assented unto.

Again, they say, that we Admon. page 195.
make the married man to make an Idol of his wife; saying with my body I thee
worship: when as our meaning only is, that the man should (as the Apostle
bids him) 1. Peter. 3. 7.
give honor unto the woman as unto the weaker vessel.

To conclude, this construing of things in the worst part, was a thing very
common at the late conference, as appears by these his Majesty's words: See
the Proclamation for the authoriz.
We thought meet^, with the consent of the Bishops and other learned m^n there
present, that some small things might rather be explained, then changed; not
that the same ^ight not very well have been borne with, by men who would have
made reasonable construction of them, etc. But to proceed to some other
matters, what other opinions held your Anababtists?


The German. The 61. Se^blance.
Why do you thus wearyme with relating their opinions? Master Bullinger. fol.
18.
Bullinger tells you that there was no stay in them, but that daily they
invented new opinions, and did run from error to error.


The Englishman. How new-fangle likewise our Nouellists are, it appears by
their often correcting, altering, and amending of their plat-forme of
Discipline.

But what need I produce any arguments to prove this? T. C. and his adherents,
in one of their examinations in the Star Chamber, did confess and avouch it
upon their oaths, See the Survey of pretended holy discipline.
that there were then (after many meetings which they had) some things in their
draught of discipline, wherein they were not resolved. And I verily persuade my
self, that if our obstinate Ministers were pressed upon their oaths, they
would (notwithstanding all their ploddings together) acknowledge that they are
not resolved in all points what they would have.

Yea, this their affectation of novelty was such, as that it moved the Kings
Majesty, to give this admonition to all his Subjects: See the proclamation
before alleged.
We do admonish all men, that hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any
further alteration in the common and public form of Gods service, from this
which is now established: for that neither will we give way to any to presume,
that our judgment having determined in a matter of this weight, shall be
swayed to alteration by the frivolous suggestions of any light spirits: neither
are we ignorant of the inconveniences that do arise in government, by
admitting innovation in things once settled by mature deliberation: and how
necessary it is to use constancy in the upholding of the public
determinations of States: for that such is the unquietness and unsteadfastness of
some dispositions, affecting every year new forms of things, as if they
should, be followed in their inconstancy, would make all actions of states
ridiculous and contemptible. etc.

And thus you see, how that our Sectaries do affect new forms of things,
invent new opinions, and run from error to error, as your Anabaptists did.

But what do you conjecture to be the cause, that these your Sectaries did
thus run from one new opinion to an other, and were not of a more stayed and
settled judgment?


The German. The 62. se^blance.
Truly, it was (as I conjecture) because they contemned and disdained the old
fathers of the church, and thought it the loosing of good hours, to peruse
their writings.


The Englishman. It greeueth me to see how lightly our Sectaries also esteem
of the classical and principal Doctors of the church (next the Apostles of
Christ, and their next succeeders) whom they ought to Ego illos ^^^eror and
ta^^^ nominibus
reverence, and to do a kind of homage to their very names, and to
acknowledge that of them all, which was said of Sencea. lib. 8. Epist. 65
two of the^, viz: that they are even the hammers of Heretics, and the eyes of
the world.


The German. Why? how do they account of these Stars and Ornaments of
learning?


The Englishman. How lightlye they account of them, the very worde^ of T. C.
do make proof: who (when he was urged with the testimonies of Ignatius,
Tertullia^, Cypria^, Jerome, Augustine, and others) cried out, that T. C. lib.
1 page 154
truth was measured by the crooked yard of time, Yea, he terms the seeking
into the Fathers writings T. C. lib. 1: page 114*
araking in Ditches.


The German. And do they make the same reckoning too of ancient Councels
and Synodes?


The Englishman. The 63. se^blance.
YEs, the Council of Nice, of Neosesarea, of Gangren, and of Orleance, being
quoted to prove the authority of the Church in things indifferent: T. C.
complained, T. C. Lib, 1 page 29. 32
that he was pestered with such a kind of authority, instead of Isai,
Jeremy. S. Paul, and S. Peter.


The German. It is likely that they esteemed very lightly of the writings of
heathen writers, seeing that they made so small recconing of ancient Councels
and Synodes.


The Englishman. True, and did your Sectaries make any greater account of them?


The German. Ours? no, there was one John Matthew their principal prophet,
that commanded (as Sleidan testifies) every Sleidan lib, 10,
one of his followers, to bring all his books whatsoever, (saving the Bible)
to be publicly burned, which was accordingly performed.


The Englishman. Belike then they were of opinion, that all Gentile learning
should be abandoned from the lips of Christians.


The German. The 64. se^blance.
YEs, and especially from the lips of Preachers.


The Englishman. Saint Augustine writing against Petilian, tells us, Aug:
lib* 3. contra Petilian cap. 16.
that the said Petilian his aduersatie did accuse him for a L^gi^ian, and did
bring Logic it self to her try all before the people, as the mistress of
forgery and lying* and because he showed some Rhethorike, did note him by the
name of Tertullus the Orator, and charged him with the damnable wit of
Carneades the Academicke. Your Anabaptists (I see) were of Petilian his humor.


The German. True, and are not your Sectaries so too?


The Englishman. Yes, My heart (says one of them, in a certain Schismatical
Intittled, the State of the church of England. page, 25
Book that is very rife amongst our Puritans) waxes cold, and my flesh
trembles to hear you say, that a Preacher should confirm his matter out of
the Fathers and human writers: does preaching consist in quoting of Doctors,
and alleging of Poets and Philosophers? In what part of his commission has a
Minister warrant so to do?


The German. In what part! does not S. Paul himself aledge Act* 17. 28
Aratus, 1, cor, 15, 33
Menander, and Tit, 1, 12
Epimenides, who were all heathen Poets? Is not this a sufficient warrant for a
Minister? But I see the reason, why both your Sectaries and ours, do take such
vehement exceptions against Poets and Philosophers.


The Englishman. What is the reason?


The German. The 65. se^blance.
SVrely, as Vide August: lib. 3. contra P^til cap. 16
Petilian dispraised Logic and Rhethoricke, because he himself was igno^a^t in
those arts: so do our Sectaries contemn all Gentile learning, and blame men
that make use of it, because they themselves are ignorant therein.


The Englishman. Is this the cause think you?


The German. Yes, doubtless: for (as Greg, Nizianz. in M^n^d.
Nazianzene says) non vlla dispicienda disciplina cognitio, cum de genere
bonorum scientia sit omnis etc. There is ^ot any knowledge of learning to be
despised, seeing that all science what-soeuer, is in the nature and kind of
good things. Rather those that Ipsam spermentes rusti^os et plane ignaues
existimare de be^^^.
despise it, we must repute clownish and fluggish altogether, who would be glad
that all men were ignorant, that their own ignorance lying in the common heap
might not be espied.


The Englishman. Well, then they are like the Fox that despises the Grapes,
which himself cannot reach.


The German. Nay, they are rather like that old Fox, V^lpec^l^ (c^^^^
amissa) reliquis ^^lp^bus calli^* p^rsuasit, vt similiter et ipsa ca^das
resecarent, ^^ sola ^^rpis et defor^^^ in su^ gener^ vider^^^r, Melanct.
who having had a mischance and lost his tail, went straight way to the
Beasts of the same kind, and fell to persuade the^ every one to cut of his
tail; pleading the waightines and combersomnes of it, with many the like
circumstances: but the matter coming thoroughly to be examined and scand, it
was found, that the crafty Fox did it* only to cover his own deformity,
which (if to be without tails had once become a fashion) should never have
been ^spied.

But to speak in earnest, there were other reasons besides this, why our
S^ctaries despise all Gentile and Profane learning.


The Englishman. What other?


The German. IT appears by the preface of Luther upon the Epistle The 66.
se^blance.
to the Galathians, that our Anabaptists condemned the graces and works of
God, for the in digni^ie and unworthiness of the persons and subjects in whom
they were found.


The Englishman. So do our Puritanes likewise contemn the writinge^ of the
Gentiles, because the authors thereof were wicked, profane, and superstitious
Idolaters. I speak what I know to be the opinion of some of them.


The German. To such may you fitly say, as Jerome said to Ruffinus in his
time, volo sis api argumentos^ similis. etc. I would have thee like the witty
discoursing Be, which from a nettle gathers honey. But let us leave this
particular, and proceed in order to some other matter.


The Englishman. No* before I leave this particular, let me show you how
greatly they esteem of their own writers.


The German. The 67. se^blance.
What? do they prefer them (as our Anabaptists did theirs) before the
ancient fathers who were the very pillars of Religion and Christianity in
their days?


The Englishman. Yes, and before all the best late writers too. For the
justifying of wha^ I have said, I will acquaint you with the express words of
some of T. C. his proselytes and followers. I thank God (quoth one F. to 1,
A^^^ Dom. 1586
of them) I have satisfied in part my longing with T. C. of whom I think, at
she^ did of Solomon. We want Books F* to G, A^^^ Dom. ^58^
(said an other) whereby we may come to the knowledge of the truth, I mean T. C
his Books. Yea T. C. says the DISPLAYER OF MEN IN THEIR COLOVRS) is a man as
well able to judge, as all the Lord Bishops in Christendom^.

Henserui regnant;
Famuli dominantur;
Asselli
Ornantur phaleris:
de phalarantur equi.
But to proceed, howsoever his Proselites account of his Books, it is most
true, that they are Puritan popish, and tha^ they have indeed been Viru^
eccles. ^t r^i^.
the very poison of Church and Commonwealth.

Not to conceal Doctor Whitaker his judgment touching this point: Quem
C^rtwrightus (says he, speaking of his second reply) ^^per emisit libellum,
(...) magnam partem perlegi. Ne viuamsi quid vnquam viderim dissolutius, ac
paene puerilius. Verboru^ sati^ ille quidem lautam ac nouam supellectilem
habet, reru^ omnino, nullam quantum ^go iudicare poss^m. Deinde no^ modo
per^ersse de Principis in rebus s^cris atque ecclesiasticis authoritate sentit:
sed in papistar^ etiam castra transfugit, a quibus tame^ videri vult idi^
capitali dissidere. Ver^mne in hac causa ferendus, et alijs etiam in partibus
tela a papistis m^t^atur* Denique (vt d^ Ambrosi^ dixit Hi^ronim^s) verbis
^^dit plan^que indignus est, qui a quop* a^ docto confutetur. That is, I have
read over a great part of that Book which Cart wright has lately published. I
pray God I live not, if ever I sa^^ any thing more dissolute and almost more
childish. He has ingreat store of plausible words, but no substance as far
as I can judge. Furthermore, he thinks not only perue^sly of the Princes
authority in ecclesiastical affairs: but he flies into the very tents of
the Papists, from whom he would be thought to dissent with a deadly ha^red.
But he is not to be suffered in* this cause, and in other parts he borrows
weapons from the Papists. To conclude (as Ie^ome said of Ambrose) he plays
with words, and is flatly unworthy to be confuted of any learned man.

Lo, this is the judgment which this learned and judicious divine gave of T.
C. his books, which many now a days do make as great account of as of
Oracles.

And thus much concerning our Puritan-Popish teachers: now let us come to their
Proselytes and followers.


The German. To their Proselytes? what! have they any Proselites?


The Englishman. Yes, they have compassed sea and land, and have made many
their Proselites, and the children of error, as deeply as themsel^es.


The German. And indeed so did our Anabaptists too.


The Englishman. Of what sort I pray you, were their Proselytes and followers?


The German. The 6^. se^blance.
OF what*sorte? Master Bullinger tells you, that such of the vulger sort a^
were of contentious natures* Bullinger ad^ers. ^nab^p.
joined with them* and commended their doings. Amongst the rest, there was one
John of Leyden, a Town in Holland (having none other name, by reason of his
ignobility, being but a Cobbler by his occupation) who came into the City of
Munster, which is the principal City of Westphalia a Pouince in Germany, and
there became an egregious Anabaptist.


The Englishman. What! were your chief Cities pestred with Anabaptists?


The German. The 69. se^blance.
YEs, for our Anabaptists went not to preach, in such places where the Gospel
was not planted; but they insinuated themselves into those places, wherein the
Gospel had been diligently preached: and where godly and quiet men were, there
they made a stir, raised up factions, and bred discord, as you may read at
large in our German writers.


The Englishman. And to tell you the truth, so have our Sectaries likewise
insinuated themselves into those places, where the Gospel, without them, and
before them was planted: and they have disquieted the Church, and sown the
seed of contention even* in our chief Cities, where Godly and quiet men
were, before they broached their opinions amongst them.


The German. But you tell me not of what sort their proselytes ^re.


The Englishman. Truly, they are (for the greatest part of them) Sowters,
Cobblers, and such like mean fellows as your John of Leyden was.


The German. And I pray you, what were the qualities and conditions of these
fellows?


The Englishman. The 70. s^blance.
SVrely, according to that Image of the world which I have seen pictured,
with the feet upwards, ^o nore that all things are turned vpside down, do
their Prosolites and followers behave themselves.

The very Sow^er and Cobbler now a days, though his art goes not above the
latchet, will find fault with the thigh of the picture.

The Butcher though his skill only be in opening an Ox, will take upon him to
cut the Anatomy of a man.

The Tailor, though his art be in shaping of garments, will teach Ministers
how to shape their Sermons to suit his affections.

The Cook, though all his learning be in the Larderhouse, and in the Kitchen,
yet will he be saucing the orders, rites, and ceremonies of the Church, and
speak very saucily against them.

The Smith, though all his learning be in his forge, yet (...) he adventure
to blow the coals of contention in the Church, and to forge new opinions upon
the Anuill of error.

The Farriour, whose greatest skill is in giving a drench to a diseased horse,
will take upon him to minister Physic to a sick patient.

The Harper, if he be not harping upon this string, (the government of the
church) his Harp is quite out of tune.

1. Samuel. 6.
The men of Bethshemesh will pry into the Ark of God though they die for it.

2. Samuel. ^
Vzza will put his hand to hold up the said Arc, though he overthrow
himself by it.

Le^iticus. 10.
Nadab and Abih^ will offer strange fire, thought they burn in the flames of
it.

Numb. 16
Korah and his accomplices, will challenge unto themselves: the calling and
office of Moses: though the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up for it.

Act. 19
The Exorcists will take upon them to conjure evil spirits in the name of
Jesus, though they be overcome by the same spirits.

Mark^. 14.
Peter will go^ beyond the limits of his calling, and warm himself at the
High Priests fire; though he be brought to deny his Master by it.

1. Judges* 1^
Sampson also will go^ beyond the Precincts of his calling, and break the vow
of Nazaret, though he loose his strength for it.

1. Io^ab. 1.
And Jonas will shake of his calling too, though he be shaken, and tossed in a
tempest, and cast out of the Ship for it.

O that our lay-Puritanes, that meddle so much in other men's callings, and so
little in their own, would learn by these fearful examples, how dangerous a
thing it is to go beyond the limits and precincts, of their callings! God will
surely require of the^, for doing more then they should, as he did of the Jews
for doing less Isa^. 1. 12
Who required this of your hands, 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6.
there are diversities of gifts and diversities of operatio^s, though the Ibid*
spirit be but one, and God the same that works al in all. 1. Cor. 12. 29 30
Are al Aposlles? are all Prophets? are all teachers? are all doers of
miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all
interpre^? Romans 12. 4.
We have many members in one body, and all members have one office, 1. Cor. 12.
17
If the whole body were an eye: where were the hearing? or if the whole were
an ear, where were the smelling Romans 2. 6. 7, ^
Seeing the^ that we have gifts which are diverse, according to grace that is
given unto us, whether we have prophecy let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith ^or whether an Office, let us wait on the Office; he that
teaches on teaching; he that exhorts on exhortation.

And thus I conclude this point; beseeching God to give them grace to contain
themselves within the limits and lists of their own duty. Now let me
entreat you that if you have observed the like in your Sectaries, you would
vouchsafe to relate it.


The German. Yes, Sleidan. ^. ^.
Sleidan tells you that our common people too did not keep themselves within
the compass of their callings, but were very hot in seeking of reformation,
and claimed interest in Church Matters.


The Englishman. But what other bad qualities had they?


The German. The 71, se^blance.
THey were so wedded to their own opinions, as that they would not endure to
hear either contradiction or argument to the contrary. Yea John of L^yden,
Vide Sleidan lib. 10.
when he heard one of the Preachers of M^nster begin to speak against his
opinions, he run straight out of the place, where the Preacher was, and
would not vouclisafe to hear what might be said against him.


The Englishman. These eyes have seen many of the Puritan-faction immitate
your John of Leyden; or rather the deaf Adder, which as the Psalmist says)
stops his ^are at the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

They have seen (I say) many run out of the Church when as their Preacher
did but glaunce at the late factious proceedings of factious Ministers:
thinking it belike a tempting of God, to hear what might be faid against them.
God Almighty mollify their prejudicial and obstinate minds, that they may be
content first to try al things: and then to hold fast that which is good, as
the Apostle admonishes them.


The German. Notwithstanding all this, our Sectaries are far worse then
yours.


The Englishman. Why?


The German. Bullinger. ^ol. 77.
Ours would not communicate with them at al, that were not of their sect.


The Englishman. What! neither in the hearing of the word of God, nor in
receiving of the Lords Supper?


The German. YEa, in neither of them both. The 72. se^blance.



The Englishman. No more will some of our Lay-Puritanes. To insist in some
particulars, there was one See the conspi^. page. 4.
Hacket of Oundell in Northamptonshire, who could not endure to frequent the
Sermons which M. Ray the Minister of that Town did preach, because he was
conformable to the orders of the Church; but went to a place called Stoake,
where the Minister fitted his humor better^ and yet, there would not go into
the church, until he had heard the Psalm begun before the Sermon, for fear
he should have been poluted with their prayers. And there are yet many also
now a days, who (to my knowledge) will not vouchsafe to hear their own
preachers, but will go fix or seven miles to hear one of their new fangle
faction.

Yea, some of them, (to my knowledge) have refused to receive the Lords Supper
at the hands of their own Minister, because he would not suffer them to
receive it sitting; but went to an other Q.
Minister that ministered it according to their own liking.


The German. The 73. se^blance.
YEa, but I hope they did not account all men wicked that were not of their
sect, as our Anabaptists Bullinger. Fol. 1.
did.


The Englishman. Yes, our Puritanes contemn and despise all those that be not
of their faction as poluted, and not worthy to be saluted or kept company
with: and therefore some of them (as our late in his defenet of the Answer to
the Ad^o^.
Archbishop testifies) meeting their old acquaintance being Godly
Preachers, have not only refused to salute them, but spit in their faces,
wishing the plagne of God to light upon them, and saying that they were da^^ed,
and that God had taken his spirit from them: and all this because they did were
asquare Cappe.

But what other lewd qualities have you observed in your Anabaptists?


The German. The 74. se^blance.
WHat other? it is not unknown to any that has pe^used the writings of
Germain-writers, how that the Anabaptists have veryfied the old proverb, in
strayning at Gnats; and swallowing down Camels.


The Englishman. And it is not unknown to all the orders and companies of this
Realm, how that our Puritanes have ver^fied the same proverb. For albeit
their throats be sometimes so strait as that they will not swallow down a
Gnat, yet at other times they are so wide as that they will swallowe down a
Camel. But not to insist in a matter so manifest. What other vile qualities had
they?


The German. The 75. se^blance.
Truly this, they did so slander and revile our Ministers, as that they ought
(to use Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
Zuinglius his words) to be suspected and hated of al Godly me^, even for their
slanderous and cursed speaking.


The Englishman. But your Anabaptists come not near our lay-Puritanes, in
abusing of their Ministers.


The German. No!


The Englishman. No verily: for they have imitated the unbelieving Jews in the
Act. 17. 5
Acts, who took unto them a company of wandering companions, such as stood
idle in the marketplace, wicked men, and gathered a multitude, and made an
uproar in the whole City, and came to the house of Jason, to fetch out Paul
and Silas.


The Germaine^. What! have there been any so fauyce with Gods Messengers?


The Englishman. Yes, there are some, who (to my knowledge) did not long since
take unto themselves, a company of idle fellow^s, such as the unbelieving Jews
did, and gathered a multitude of their factious ^rue, and came in^o the v^rye
house of God, there to check and control their Minister, because he had often
preached against their factious proceedings, and other their impieties.

But not to i^sist only in their reuyling of Ministers, have they any thing
else in their mouths, but contumel^^s* slanders, defamations, opprobrious
detractions, supercilious, insolent and uncharitable accusations of all states
and conditions of men that have any way hindered their pretended reformation?

When I consider this, I find that the Epigramme does well beseem them,
which Corneli^s Agrippa wrote of himself.

Inter diuos nullos non carpit Momus;
Inter heroas monstr a quaeque insectatur Hercules;
Inter d^mones rex Herebi Pluton*
Irascitur omnibus vmbris;
Inter Philosophos ridet omnia Democritus;
Contra deflet cuncta Hera^litus;
Nefcit quaeque Pyrhias;
E^ soire sepuiat omnia Aristoteles;
Contemnit cuncta Diogines:
Nullus hic parcit. Agrippa,
Contemnit, scit, ^escit, flet, ridet, irascit^r,
I^sectatur, carpit omnia,

The German. But to interrupt you, and to stay you from uttering the last
ve^se of that Epigrame: I will acquaint you with ^^^ common vice of our
Anabaptists.


The Englishman. What is that I pray you?


The German. Truly this, albeit they speak much of mortification, The 76.
se^blance.
yet were they greatly given to lustful carnalitie and uncleanness. And for
further proof hereof, I refer you to Stanhusius his Book of Meteors, where
he has these words: Stanhusius. Lib. 2. de meteor, tracta^, de C^^etis.
Anabaptiste, omni sublat^ disciplina et honestate, omnia libidinis genera
exe^e^^runt. Now what say you to this matter? do your Puritanes herein
resemble your Anabaptist^?


The Englishman. I say of four Puritanes, as Saint Paul said of the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 5. 1
It is heard certainelye that there is for^ication among them.

But what need I go by hearsay? I have seen the man that laid Hagar in
his bosom, because Sara was barren. Yea, I will not acquaint you with the
tenth part of what I know, and am able to justify.

Let us see what other thing you have observed in your Anabaptists?


The German. The 77. se^blance.
I Have observed, that albeit they were thus vicious, yet they usually objected
against our German* Ministers that Vide Bulling Lib. 1. aduers. Anabap^.
in their congregation there was a manifest amendment of life, but in ours none
at all.


The Englishman. The preaching of the word of God, (praised be his holy name)
has been effectual in England, and has brought multitudes from
superstition, and palpable darkness, to the true knowledge of god, etc. yet
notwithstanding some of our ^, C. Reply. page 34, and 47
Sectaries have used the self ^^me objection against our Church. But to leave
this pa^ticular, how did they cloak these their vices?


The German. The 78. se^blance.
Truly, they did bear the world in hand, as Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.
Zuinglius testifies, that whatsoever they did, they did it being thereunto
moved by the spirit.


The Englishman. So did one of our Sectaries in a lett^^ to Ha^k^^, wherein he
used these speeches: See the Conspir. page. 23.
If his most holy spirit direct you to come, come: if not* stay. And again,
the working of his most holy spirit in m^ since your departure, is mighti^ and
great: yea, ^^ zeal of spirit (...) like fire.

But not to weary ou^ selves any longer, let v^ here (though abruptly) break
off this our conference.


The German. No, give me leave I pray* you to relate the abominable
opinions, detestable qualities* and execrable treacheries of some of our
Anabaptists, and then we will conclude.


The Englishman. Well, proceed.


The German. The 79. se^blance.
THe^e was one Th^m^^ Mu^cer in Germanye, who taught, that God even in these
days does reveal his will by d^eames, visions and revelations Ipseme^ mihi
coram pr^misit etc. Sl^^dan C^^. ^.
God (says he) has wa^^a^ted ^e face to face, he that cannot lie has
commanded me, to attempt the change by these means, even by killing the
Magistr^tes.

And Phifer his lewd companion, did but dream in the night time, of the
killing of many Mice, and present^ye expounded his dream of murdering the
Nobles. Yea, at Sangall^^ a Town in Switherland, one of our Anabaptists, did
(as Suriu^ in coment.
S^^ius reports) cut off the head of his own natural Brother, the Parents to
them both standing by And the reason which he had for doing it, wa^
(forsooth) because it was commanded him from above. Now tell me, was there
ever any such fellows in England?


Englishman. Yes, there was one See the consp^^. Page. 42.
Hacket that told the people that God had revealed his will unto him
extraordinarily; and that he had received an imediate calling from God, to
reform the Church, and to call the whole world to repentance.

There was also a Conspir. page 14.
Puritan preacher, that informed the said Hacket, that God does, and will from
time to time, raise up extraordinary works and helpers to his Church, as
Apostles, Euang elist^, and Prophets, where need requires. And for the proof
of this his opinion, he produced the example of one that cryedvp and down the
streets in Jerusalem before it was besiedged.


The German. Yea, but was this Hacket a Puritan? your Puritanes happily will
not acknowledge him to be one of their side.


The Englishman. Yes, that he was a Puritan, it may appear by these his
Puritan tricks, viz* 1. For the proof of al these particulars following, I
refer you to a Book extant, enti^^led the conspiracy of pretended
reformation page. 4. 1^ 14. 34. 3^.
He followed such Preachers, at did fit his humor, and would not hear
Master Ray the Preacher of the Townew here he dwelt. 2. He burned in desire
of reforming the Church and Commonwealth* 3. He had some of the Brethren to
fast with him, before he attempted his reformation. 4. He purposed to plant in
every congr^gation, an clder ship or consistone of Doctors, Past^rs,
Lay-^lders, and widows. 5 He rayled on the Bishops, and on all other that
withstood this his reformation.


But what need I stand to prove this? who knows not, how that he and his two
counterfeit Prophets, the selfsame day they arose in Cheap Side, told the
said Puritan-preacher in the morning, that reformation and the Lords
discipline, should then forthwith he established? They did also charge him to
put all Christians in comfort, that they should shortly see a joyful
alteration in the state of the Church-gouernment.

Thus you see, how that we have confitentemreum, the confession of his own
lips against himself, so that there needs no more to do; as David spoke to
the young man that brought news of the death of Saul, Os tuum contra te
loqutum est: thine own mouth has spoken against thee.


The German. Yea, but was that Preacher a Puritan, that avouched
extraordinary callings, by the example of him that cried up and down the
streets of Jerusalem, before it was besiedged?


The Englishman. Yes, for he was See the conspir. page 2
Vicar of S^dbergo and Dent in the Northern parts; and for his intolerable
insolences, and contempt of the government of the Church, was both deprived of
that his Benefice, and deposed from the Ministry, by the authority of our
late Sovereigns Commission for causes Ecclesiastical.

But to proceed in order, did there ever arise up amongst the Anabaptists any
such like Prophets as these were?


The German. Yes, in the month of July; Anno Dom. 1533. a new Prophet (being
a Goldsmiths by his trade) arose up amongst them: who called the multitude
together into the marketplace, and signified unto them, that it was the will
of God, that John of L^yden should be Emperor of all the Earth; and that he
should destroy all Princes and Potentates, but spare the common people that
loved sincerity.


The Englishman. As your John of Leyden was Proclaimed Emperor by the
Golde-smith Anno Dom. 1533. so was See the conspir. Page. 66.
Hacket proclaimed King by his counterfeit Prophets, the 33. year of the Reign
of our late Sovereign Queen of famous memory. But proceed on I pray you in
this matter.


The German. IN the said year of our Lord, about the end of December, The 81.
se^blance.
one of our Anabaptists, pretending himself to be divinely inspired, and
ravished in spirit, did go through the street of the City of Munster crying;
Repent, repent, and be again Baptized, or else the judgment and wrath of God
will quickly or suddenly fall upon you.


The Englishman. So in the said year of our late Queens reign, upon the 16.
of July in the morning, did See the consp. page 55. 56. and the Annals of
England, collected by John Stowe, page 1288.
Hackets said Prophets go from one Walkers house near unto Broken-Wharfe in
London, and going from thence by Watlingstreete and Olde-Change, toward
Cheapside, cried out and said: Christ Jesus is come with his Fan in his hand,
to judge the earth: Repent England repent, repent.

But now to conclude this whole discourse, what other outrageous villainy
committed your Anabaptists?


The German. The 82. se^blance.
Truly, they joined their forces together, and made an insurrection, as you
may read in Sleidan and in other of our German writers.


The Englishman. So did Hacket likewise commit Treason against our late Queens
Majesty, in the three and thirtith year of her Reign: and for the same was
arraigned on the 26. of July immediately following, and See the Annals of
England page 1289
by tw^ several inditements found guilty: as to have uttered and spoken
diverse most false and traiterous words against her Majesty, to have raced and
defaced her Majesty's Arms, as also a certain Picture of the Queens
Majesty, and did malicionsly and traitorously, thrust an iron instrument into
that part of the said Picture that did represent the Breast and Heart of the
Queens Majesty.

God Almightle, who preserved her Majesty from the Traiterous stratagems of
all her enemies, and gathered her to her Fathers in peace, Preserve him
likewise that sits on her Throne after her: and when he is gathered to his
Fathers, (the woe whereof fall upon an other age) let him go to rest with
greater tokens of his favor, then ever to fall into the hands of such
Anabaptisticall Puritanes, o^ any other Traiterous enemies.


The German. Even so Lord Jesus: Amen, Amen*


Puritano-papismus: OR A Discovery of Puritan-papisme: made by way of Dialogue
or conference, between a Protestant and a Puritan.
The 1. Dialogue. Wherein is plainly showed, that the Puritanes have in sundry
things joined with the Pharisees, Apostolickes, Aerians, Pepuzians,
Petrobrusians, Florinians, Cerinthians, Nazarens, Beguardines, Ebionites,
Catobabdites, Catharists, Enthusiasts, Donatists, Iouianists, Brownists and
Papists.
The Protestant. COME neighbor, let us shake hands and be friends.


The Puritan. Shake hands with a Formalist?


The Protestant. Why not with a Formalist? you will not stick to shake hands
with a Papist.


The Puritan. Do we shake hands with the Papists? These are T. C. his words,
page 7. sect. S^lt*
Whilst you compare us to the Anabaptists, some friend of yours might think
that you said truly, because such, always seeking dark and solitary places,
might happily have some favorers which are not known. But when you join us
with the Papists, which are commonly known to all men, whose Doctrine we
impugn as well as you, whose marks and badges we can less away with then
you, hose company we fly more then you, whose punishment we have called for
more then you for your part have done: and therefore are condemned of them as
cruel, when you often times carry away in the name of mildenes and moderation,
which for sooth know no commandment in the Scriptures to put Heretics to
death: when I say, you join us thus with the Papist, you do not only loose
your credit, in these untrue surmises (wherein I trust with the indifferent
reader, you never had any) but you make all other things suspected, which you
affirm, so that you give men occasion to take up the common proverb against
you, I WILL TRVSTE YOU NO FVRTHER THEN I SEE YOU.


The Protestant. Pilate and Herod were at great ods about private matters
between themselves, but when they had to deal with Christ, they could then
become friends, and conioyne together for his destruction: the Pharisees and
Saduces were of contrary sects, yet were they both enemies to Christ and his
Doctrine.

The Anabaptists agreed not with the Papists, yet they both sought to deface
the church of Christ, and did clean together in their devises against Christ,
as the Skales of Leuiathan: even so you, though ye be at enmity with the
papists; though you impugn their Doctrine; though ye cannot away with their
marks and badges; though ye fly their company; though ye call for their
punishment; yet, in defacing and deprauing of this Church of England, you fully
join with the^ against us. So that as there was a day, when Herod and Pilate
were made friends, so there is (I see) a day when Papists and Puritanes are
made friends. And for this cause did our reverend Brethren, of the University
of Oxford In their Epist. dedicatory before their answer to the Petition.
observed this seauen-folde semblance betwixt you and the Papists. 1. You both
entitle your selves, the Kings afflicted subjects, and above all other, his
devoted Servants. 2. You both pretend an enforcement of a speedye recourse to
his Majesty, for a present redress and reformation. 3. You both complain, of
being ouer-whelmed with enduring persecution through loss of living and
liberty. 4. You both ground your Doctrine and Discipline upon the sacred Text
of Gods word and Gospel. 5. You both condemn the obedience of us Protestants
to the laws established, to be, not for conscience and zeal: but for moral
honesty, and fear of temporal punishment, say the Papists; for their own
quiet, credit and profit in the world, say you. 6. You both renounce a public
alteration and dissolution of the state ecclesiastical. 7. You both deny,
that you exhibit your petitions, with a tumultuous spirit, or with a disloyal
and schismatic mind.



The Puritan. What tell you me of these things? these are but matters of
circumstance; but have you observed any semblance in any matter of substance?

I tell you plainelye, that we defy the Pope and his Religion: we say that he
is Antichrist, because he aduaunceth himself above all that is called God. For
when Kings and Emperors (to whom the name of God is communicated) do
comeinto the presence of his holiness, they Lib. cerem. 1. sect. 5. cap. 3* and
Lab. 3. sect. 1 cap. 3.
must (forsooth) after obeisance done in three several distances, fall down
before him and kiss his feet.

And if lib. 1. cerim. sect. 2. cap. 3.
they be in presence when he takes horse, the chiefest of them must hold his
right stirrup, and likewise when he lights off do the same.

Take an example of his insolent and Antichrist a^ behavior. Pope Naucler*
generat. 40.
Alexander the third excommunicated the Emperor Fredricke Barbarossa, and
took his Son prisoner in Venice. And when he came into the Church of Saint
Mark there, to the end that he might be absolved, and his Son restored,
the Pope having commanded him to prostrate himself upon the ground, and so to
ask pardon, set his foot in the neck of the said Emperor, saying: it is
written, Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis Leonem and
Dracaonem.


The Protestant. If the Doctrine of your consistorians and disciplinarians
might take place, our Kings of England (I fear) would in short time be
brought to the like slauerye: for do not they teach that Princes ought to
submit themselves to the Seniors of the Church, and that they ought to be
content to be ruled and governed, to be punished and corrected, to be
excommunicated and absolved by their discretion, and at their pleasure?
Christian Princes must remember (says T. C) T. C. page* 144. sect. 1.
to subject themselves unto the Church, to submit their Scepters, to throw
down their Crown before the Church: yea to lick the dust of the feet of the
Church.) Does not this Puritan-popish Doctrine smell of Antichristianisme?

But to proceed, wherein do your chief writers, dissent from the Popish
writers?


The Puritan. Wherein do we not?


The Protestant. Insist in some particulars.


The Puritan. Cardinal Bellar. de council. cap. 12.
Bellarmine, Cardill. in defens. council. Trident. dis. 1.
Cardill, Harding* in confut. apol* Anglic. part 5. cap. 6, sect. ^
Harding and the rest of the Popish Doctors teach, that Councels and Synods may
be assembled without the Knowledge of the Emperor.


The Protestant. Do not your Doctors teach the same Doctrine? have they not
had many assemblies and classical Synodes, whereunto the authorizement of the
Prince was not had? is not their opinion answerable to their practice?


The Puritan. Bellar. lib. 1. de council. cap. 19. Johannes de turre crematae
lib. 3. de ecclcs. cap. 22. cardill. in disput. 2. de concill.
The Papists also teach, that the Emperor ought not to be ouer-ruler, or
determiner in Councels and Synods.


The Protestant. Does not T. C. teach the self same Doctrine? T. C. Lib, 2
page 165. 154
No civil Magestrate (says he) in Councels or Assemblies for Church matters,
can either be chief moderator, ouer-ruler, Judge or determiner.


The Puritan. Yea, but do any of our teachers deny the Kings supremacy, as
the Papists do?


The Protestant. What say you to T. C. who speaks most cleerelye, and
seems to be on the Popes side in this matter. His words are these: lib. 2.
page 48.
The Christian Sovereign ought not to be called the hoad under Christ, of the
particular and visible Churches within his Dominions.


The Puritan. But do any of our writers, spoy le the Civil Magistrate of all
government in Ecclesiastical matters, as the Papists do?


The Protestant. Yes, the Admonitors say in plain terms, that Admon. page
126.
to these three jointly, that is, the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, is the
whole regiment of the Church to be committed.

Now if the whole government of the Church, be to be committed to Ministers,
Seniors, and Deacons, what authority remains to the civil Magistrate in the
government of it?


The Puritan. These are the words of T. C. page. 153.
I answer in the name of the Authors of the Admonition, that the Prince and
civil Magistrate has to see, that the laws of God touching his worship, and
touching all matters and orders of the Church, be executed and duly observed:
and to see that every Ecclesiastical person, do that office whereunto he is
appointed: and to punish those which fail in their office accordingly. As for
the making of the orders and ceremonies of the Church, they do (where there is
a const^^uted and ordered Church) pertain to the Ministers of the Church* etc.


The Protestant. I reply with the words of the late Reverend Archbishop. In
his defense of the answer to the Admon. page. 694. 695. 696.
What? no more but to see them executed? how differs this from Papists? The
Papists give to the Christian Magistrate in Ecclesiasticallmatters, potestatem
facts and noniuris, that is, to see those laws executed and put in practice
that the Pope and his Clergy shall make, and to be as it were their
executioner, but not to make any laws in Ecclesiastical matters: for does not
Saunders a popish writer say the same? saunders fol. 64.
Although I do not deny (says he) that the knowledge of a fact that belongs
to the Ecclesiastical law, may be committed to Kings and Magistrates: and
before the Ecclesiastical cause be determined, the King may use his authority
to this end, that there may be some quiet place prepared, where the Bishops
shall consult, and that the Bishops be called to the same place at a certain
day, and that in the mean time while the matter is in determining, common
peace may be preserved even among the Priests themselves. To conclude, after
the cause be determined and judged by the Priests, the King may punish him
with the sword which he carries not in vain) or by some other corporal
punishment, which shalrefuse to obey the sentence of the Priests.

Muscul. in locis com-titu^: de magistratu.
Musculus also sets out this Popish opinion, touching the authority of the
civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical affairs, very plainly in these words:
Those whom they call Ecclesiastical Persons, and we call them Papists, will
not commit to the Magistrate, any further authority in Religion, then to be
the keeper and revenger of it, and of their Ecclesiastical Laws, that the
Ecclesiastical pollici^ may remain immoouable: wherefore they deny hin to
have authority, in that he is a Magistrate, to make or to publish any
Ecclesiastical laws, because such things pertain to those that do represent
the Church; whose decrees and constitutions must be maintained and defended by
the authority of the Magistrate.

But to leave* this resemblance, what arguments do the Popish Doctors use
against the Princes authority in causes Ecclefiasticall?


The Puritan. Sanders. lib. 2 cap. 1. fol. 27.
Saunders, Harding. against the Apology. fol. 118.
Harding and other of them do quote 2 Chronicles. 198. 11. which place makes
indeed fully against them: for Iehosaphat had chief authority and government
both in things pertaining to the Church, and in things pertaining to the
Commonwealth; but for better execution of them, the one he did commit to be
executed by Amaziah the Priest, the other by Zebadiah a Ruler of the house of
Judah: even as the Kings Majesty, being in all causes, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, within these his Realms and Dominions, supreme governor,
commits the hearing and judging of Ecclesiastical matters to the Reverend
Fathers of the Church, and of Temporal matters, to the Right honorable, the
Lord Chancelour and other Judges.

Now had Iehosaphat nothing to do with Churchmatters, because he made Amaziah
Priest judge in the same? they may as well say, that be had nothing to do in
Temporal affaiers, because he also appointed Zebadiah to hear and determine
them.


The Protestant. True, and yet T. C. quoteth the self same place, to prove
the self same thing, T. C. page. 145. sect. 1.
look (says he) in the second Book of the Cronicles in the 19. Chap. and in
the 8. and 11. verses, and you shall see that there were a number appointed for
the matters of the LORD, which were Priests, and Leuits, and there were other
also appointed for the Kings affayers, and for matters of the Commo^-wealth
etc.


The Puritan. But in what other things agree we with the Papists?


The Protestant. 1. The Papists would not have the scriptures read in the
Church to the people: No more would your Puritane-popish writers: for In their
view of po. Pish abuses remaining. fol. 2.
they blush not to say that reading is no feeding, but as evil as playing upon
a Stage, and worse too.

2. The Papists condemn our Book of common prayers, set out by public
authority, and the whole order of service: so do you.

3. The papists say that our Sacraments are not rightly ministered: so say you
likewise, as has been already showed.

4. The Papists say that we have no right ministry in England, no Pastors,
no Bishops, because they be not rightly and canonically called to these
functions: and the self same do you affirm, as has also been showed.

5. The Papists avouch that we are not the true church, no that we have not so
much as the outward face and show of the true Church: and the self same thing
do your Puritan-popish teachers avouch, in their first Admonition, page 33. and
in their second admonition. page* 6.


The Puritan. All this notwithstanding, we come far short of the Papists:
for Popery is (as ^. B^in his toil for 2. legged Foxes. chap. 3.
one truly says) an hotch-potch and miserable mingle-mangle of all Satan's
forgeries and devilish heresies. With Carpocratian Heretics they set up the
image of Christ, and other Saints; with the Anthropomorphits, they pain^ God
the Father like an old man with a gray beard: with the Pelagian Heretics,
they maintain free will, power to justify our selves, and to fulfill the
commandments: with the Messalians, they mumble their Mattens, Pater nosters,
and seven Psalms by number, upon a pair of Beads: with the Tatians,
Cataphryges, Montanistes, and Ebionites, they seek sanctification in eating
and not eating, in marrying and not marrying. etc.

But not to insist in the enumeration of their Heresies can you show that we
have revived any old Heresies?


The Protestant. I can show, that there was scarce any Heresy invented by
old* Heretics, which either the Papists or the Puritanes have not revived
and renewed with fresh and new colors. And besides their opinions, you have
also their tricks, qualities, and conditions.


The Puritan. Insist I pray you in us, whom you call Puritanes: can you prove
that we have joined with any old Heretics?


The Protestant. Yes, you have joined with the Pharisees, Apostolickes,
Aerians, Pepuzians, Petrobrusians, Florinians, Cerinthians, Nazarens,
Beguardines, Ebionites, Catobabdites, Enthusiasts, Donnatists.


The puritan^. To begin with the Pharisees, wherein have we joined with them?


The Protestant. The Pharisees sewed Pillowes of selfe-liking under their own
arme-holes, and took no knowledge of beams in their own eyes; but evermore
excepted against their brethren, as men not worthy the ground they trod upon.
Why eats your Master (said they to Christ's Disciples) with Publicanes and
Sinners? The like exception (to my knowledge) did some of your faction lately
take against a Minister, that chanced to eat with one that was suspected to be
a Papist. Why eats our Minister (said they) with one that is a Papist?

2 The Pharisees separated themselves from other people as more holy then they,
and therefore Fosterus in dictinar. hebraico.
some think, that they be called Pharisees, quasi segregati, quod vita
sanctimonia, a vulgi moribus and vita seperati essent, non aliter ate que
Monachi, quo^ Carthusianos vocant, as separated from the common sort in
holiness of life and conversation, much like unto the Monks which be called
Carthusians.

And do not you come near the Pharisees herein, when you despise al those that
be not of your sect, as polluted, and not worthy to be saluted, as has
already been showed?

3 Josephus lib. Antiquit. Tom. 2. lib. 18. cap. 2.
Josephus observes this to be an other property of the Pharisees, viz: that
whatsoever their own reason persuaded them; id sequuntur partinaciter, that
they stubbornly followed. And the self same thing have I observed to be the
property of stiff and stubborn Puritanes in these days.

4 The Pharisees were (as the same Tom, 2, lib. 17, cap. 3.
Josephus witnesses) astutum hominum genus, arrogans, and interdum quoque
regibus insestum, etc. that is, a subtle kind of men, arrogant, and sometime
deadly enemies to Kings: and so are you.

For it is not unknown to any that has had any dealing with you in worldly
affairs, how crafty and subtle you are in all your dealing.

As for your arrogancy and contempt of superiority, this is not unknown to
the Kings Majesty himself.

See his Majesty's speech delivered in the Upper house of Parliament March. 19.
(...).
Puritanes (says his Highness) are ever discentented with the present
government and impatient to suffer any superiority, which makes their sect
unable to be suffered in any well gouernd commonwealth.

Thus you see, that we have just cause to term you English Pharisees and to
say with Nazianzen: Gregor. Nazianzen, eis to ret.
Pharisais is ou genos a^^atropos ergasetai, not the nation but the
conversation makes a Pharisie.


The Puritan. But wherein I pray you do we join with the Apostolickes,
Aerians, Petrobrusians, and the rest of those old Heretics before named?


The Protestant. The Apostolickes, neither considering the diversity of times
for Ecclesiastical policy; nor the true liberty of Ch^istian Religion in
things indifferent nor the authority of christian Magistrates, concerning the
same, would have nothing to be used in the Church in these days, which was not
used in the days of the Apostles; Now let it be imagined, whether your
Preachers do not resemble them herein, when they complain, as has been
showed, that we have Surplesses devised by Pope Adryan. etc. which the Church
of God in the Apostles time never knew and therefore they are not to be used.

Aerius (of whom the Aerians took their name) was condemned of Heresy both by
Epiphan haeres. 75.
Epiphanius and Saint Aug. haeres. 53.
Austen, for that he held, that Fasts appointed by the Church were not to be
kept, and next, for saying that a presbyterum ab episcopo, nulla differentia
debere discerni.
Presbyter should not be distinguished from a Bishop by any kind of
difference. How then can you wipe away the blot of Heresy, that reckon (as
has been showed) Saints Eues, and Lent for Romish fasts; Archbishops and
Bishops, for new Ministeries never ordained by God*

The Petrobrusians held, that holy days are Ethelothresceiai, and that no man
has, nor ever had, since Moses, authority to institute them in the old
testament, nor in the new, except the Apostles, who instituted (as they say)
the Sunday only. To this heresy of these Petrobrusians, did our Admonitors
fully subscribe: for they condemned Admon. 1. page 81.
the observing of holy days, as a thing b contrary to the word of God* and as
a piece of the Popes portuise. But to proceed:

There were certain Heretics called Beguardini, who held, that Spriritualem
humane obedient^ae non esse subjectum. Clementin. Lib. 5 tit. 3. cap. 3.
a spiritual man is not subject to human obedience: Now let it therefore be
judged with indifferency, whether you Puritanes have not some touch of this
Heresy, who will not submit your necks and souls to the yoke of humane
obedience in things indifferent.

There were also other Heretics called Acephali ob quam c^^fam dicti suat,
quod sub Episcop^s non faerint Nicephor. Lib. 18. cap 45.
Acephali, or Episcopos soli Cat^bab^it^^ non recip^unt. Nicephor lib. 18. cap.
49.
Catobabditae, who would not suffer any Bishop to have any jurisdiction over
them. Now if these Catobabdites were for this very cause reputed Heretics,
what shall we say of you Puritanes, that do tread in their steps? what reason
can you bring that this should be an Heresy in them and none in you? where got
you that exemption? or if it be an Heresy in both alike, why should you not be
condemned* for Heretics both alike.

The Enthusiasts, Pepuzians, and other old Heretics depended on dreams,
visions, and revelations: and so have some of your Puritan* preachers done, as
has bin already proved.

The Ebionites, Corinthians, Nazarens, and Florinians, were reputed Heretics,
because they tied men ^o a strict observation of Mosaicall ceremonies. Now this
old Heresy was renewed by one of your faction in Oxefordshire, (who as an D*
Houson in his Festiui, ties of the church* of England.
Oxeford Doctor testifies) when his fathers ribs were broken, would not ride
for a bonesetter on the Sabbath day

The Iouinianistes were condemned for Heretics, because they held all sins
to be equal. Now this Heresy have some of your faction beg^inne to revive.
For example sake and for verifying what I have spoken, I will acquaint you with
the very words of some of them.

To insist again in an Oxefordshire man, d there was one that went out of
Oxeford, and preached in a Markettowne b D. Houson. ibid.
in Oxefordshire, that it is as great a sin to do any servile work upon the
Sabbath, as to do murder and commit adultery.

And there was another Iudiniduum vagum, that preached in a market town in
Somersetshire, that it is as great a sin to throw a bowl on the Sabbath day
as to kill a man. Yea some have not blushed to say, that it is as great a sin
to kill a man's Cock, as to kill his Servant.

But let us leave the Iouinianists, and come to the Donatists.


The Puritan. Do we agree with the Donatists?


The Protestant. Yes, the Donatists divided themselves from the congregations
of other men, and had their private conuenticles: so have you.

Again, the Donatists held the minister to be de ipsa baptismi essentia, of
the being of Baptism: and so do you, as has already been showed.

Yea, T. C. came not far short of the Donatists, when he taught, that T. C.
page 137*
children of Heretics and of such as by excommunication, are cut off from the
Church, may not be baptized. But let us come to our Brownists, which are
indeed the very brood of the Donatists,


The Puritan. Do we agree with the Brownists too.


The Protestant. Yes, and that in so many things, as that I can hardly find any
difference betwixt them and you.

To insist in some particulars, the Brownists strive about external matters,
and separate themselves from us: for things ceremonial, as appears by the
very confession of the Overseers, Deacons, and Brethren of the English Church
at Amsterdam in Holland, exiled, (as they falsely In their Epistle to the Kings
Majesty, prefixed before their Apology.
report) for the Gospel of Christ. Their confession is this: See the preface of
their confession of faith. page 7.
We testify by these presents unto all men, and desire them to take knowledge
hereof, that we have not forsaken any one point of the true, ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic faith, professed in our land: but hold the same
grounds of Christian religion with the^ still, agreeing likewise herein with the
Dutch, Scottish, German, French, Heluetian, and all other Christian reformed
Churches round about us, whose confessions published, we call to witness our
agreement with them, in matters of greatest moment, being conferred with these
Articles of our faith, etc. Now, as the Brownists do (by their own
confession) strive about external and ceremonial things: so do you likewise.
And therefore we may fitly say unto you both, as Saint Paul said unto the like
in his time: Cor. 11. 16.
If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God.

2 The Brownists deny our Church to be the true Church of Christ. These are
their impious words: See the confession of faith, exhibited to the K. by the
Brownists of Amsterdam. Article 31.
These Ecclesiastical Assemblies, remaining thus in confusion and bondage,
under this Antichristian ministry, courts, canons, worship, ordinances, etc.
without freedom and power to redress any enormitie among them, cannot be said
in this confusion and subjection, truly to have Christ their Prophet, Priest,
and King, neither can be in this estate, (whilst we judge them by the rule* of
Gods word) esteemed the true, visible, orderly gathered or constituted Churches
of Christ, whereof the faithful may become or stand members. And the like
words have some of your faction likewise uttered against our church. e Admon.
1. page 4.
Wein England (say the Admonitors) are so far off from having a Church
rightly reformed, that ^^t (...) scarce come to the outward face of the same.

3 The blacke-mouthed Brownists do rail thus on our Hierarchy: Confession of
faith art. 29
The present Hierarchy retained and used in England of Arch-bishoppes,
Primates, Lordshippes, Metropolitanes, Suffraganes, Deanes, Prehendaries,
Canons, Peticanons, Archdeacons, Chancelors, Commissaries, Priests, Deacons,
our half Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Hierling reaving-preachers,
Churchwardens, Parish-clarkes: also their Doctors, Proctours, and other
officers of their spiritual courts; together with the whole rabble of the
Prelates and their soruitours, from, and under them, set over these Cathedral
and Parishionall assemblies in this confusion, are a strange and Antichristian
Ministry and offices. And the like lybelling and railing, these and your
Teachers used* Our Bishops ( In the book entitled, the State of the church
of England. page 9.
say they) are Antichristian Prelates, Hay any page 4.
ordinances of the devil, Petty Popes, Petty Antichrists, Martins epist. 37.
cogging and cosoning knaves, Martins sen. B. 4. C. 1.
robbers, wolves, simoniack^* persecutors, sowers of sedition, and
discontentednesse, Martins protest. page 4.
and that the worst Puritan, is an honester man than the best Lord Bishop in
Christen^ome.

4 The forenamed In the preface of their Confession of faith. page 9.
Brownists, have sued to the Prince and Parliament, to have Bishops removed
out of the Church, as being the limbs of Antichrist: so have your Puritan
Preachers likewise done, in their admonitions and supplications to the
Parliament.

5 The Brownists would have Pastors, See their second petition to the King
particul. 5.
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers, in stead of Arch-bishoppes,
Lord-bishops, Suffraganes, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chancelors, etc. and so would
you too. Martin Junior. These. 22
Of necessity says Martin, all Christian Magistrates, are bound to receive
this government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and to abolish all
other Church government.

6 It is an article of the Brownists Creed, that See their confession of faith
art. 23. and their 2. petition to the king particul. 5.
every Congregation has power and commandment, to elect and ordain their
own Ministry, so it is an article of your Creed also, that the common
people of every Congregation should elect their own Ministers.

7 The In their preface of the Confession of faith. page 10.
Brownists cry out against our Cathedral Churches, and complain that we have
Organs, Queresters, singing men and boys, as in times past in popery: so do
your Leaders cry out against our Admon. 1. page 225.
chief chanters, singing men, Organplayers, and squeking Queresters: as they
call them.

8 The absurd In their second petition to the King particul. 13.
Brownists say, that degrees in Theology, inforcement to single life in
Colleges, and the study of heathen Writers, with other like corruptions, (as
they term them) in Schools and Academies, should be removed and redressed:
and the like say you, as has already been showed.

9 The Brownists have exhibited a supplication to the Kings Majesty, and
therein craved, that See their second petition, particul. 9.
no Apocripha writings, but only the Canonical Scriptures be used in the
Church: and so have you.

10 The Confess. art. 30
Brownists would not have Homilies to be read in the Church, no more would you.

11 The Sea their 2. petition particul. 9
Brownists dislike our prescript form of prayer, and so do Admon. 1 page 17.
you.

12 The In the preface to the Confession page 10.
Brownists bear the world in hand, that our Service Book is verbatim gathered
out of the Masse-booke: so do you, that it is Admon. 1 page 16.
culled and picked out of that popish dunghill, the Portuise and Masse-booke.

13 The new-fangle In the preface of the Confession. page 10.
Brownists blame is, for keepieg the old fashion of Psalms, Chapters,
Epistles, Gospells, Versicles, Responds, Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, Nunc
dimittis, Our Father, Lord have mercy upon us, The Lord be with you, O Lord
open thou my lips, Glory be to God on high, Lift up your hearts, O come let
us rejoice, Glory be to the father, Quicunque vult, etc. and the self same do
you.

14 The Ibidem.
Brownists dislike our Letany and Collects: so do you.

15 The Confess. art 30.
Brownists dislike our Prayers over the dead at burial: so do you.

16 The Brownister would not have Preachers to preach at burialls: No more
would you, as appears by your Book of Cap^de Concion bus ad Ecelesiam
habendis.
Discipline, wherein are these express words: Infuneribus desuescendum est
commode, ab habendis concionibus, quod periculum sit; us super stitionem
quorundam foueant, aut vanitati inseruiant: The Preachers must leave off by
little and little, as they may conveniently, to preach at burialis, lest
thereby they nourish the superstition of some men, or give over themselves to
the preservation of vanity: Yea the Adm^nit. page 200
Admonitors were not ashamed to compare funeral Sermons to Trentalls.

17 The In their ^petition to the King particul. 11.
Brownists crave, that the Church be not urged to keep any holie-dayes, save
only to sanctify the Sabbath: so do you, as has already bi^ showed.

18 The In their preface of the conf. page 10
Brownists do reckon Saints Eeues, and Lent, for Romish fasts: so do you.

19 The Ibidem.
Brownists dislike the Ring in marriage: so do (you.

20 The In their preface of the confess page 9.
Brownists would not have women to be churched: no more would you.

21 The Ibidem.
Brownists have slandred our Ministers, and blazed abroad, that they take upon
them to forgive men their sins: and so have you, as has bin showed.

22 The In their conf. art. 30.
Brownists also falsely report, that we permit Midwiues to administer
Baptism: so do you.

23 The In the preface of their confess. page 10
brainsicke Brownists would not have children to be Baptized in Fonts: no more
would you; because Fonts (as you say) were invented by Pope Pius.

24 The Admonit. 1. page 105.
Brownists dislike of Crossing in Baptism: so do you; because (forsooth)
Preface of the conf. p. 10
it is a piece of Popery.

25 The Admonit. 1 page 105.
Brownists dislike that children should have godfathers and godmothers at their
Baptism: so do Preface of the conf. p. 10
you.

26 The Admonit. 1 page 105.
Brownist^s would not have Interrogatories to be ministered to Infants: no more
would Ibidem.
you.

27 The Ibid. Preface page 10.
Brownists blame us for Ministering the communion to the people kneeling: so do
you.

28 The Conf. art. 30
Brownists hold Surplices to be Popish corruption: so holdye them to be known
liueries of Antichrist

29 The In their defencepag. vlt. and in their 2. petition particul. 14.
Brownists would have nothing to be used in these days, which was not used in
the days of the Apostles: no more would you.

30 The In their preface of confess. p. 10. and 13
Brownists think it unlawful for us, to use any rite or ceremony in our
Church, which is used in the Church of Rome: and so do you.

To conclude, the Brownists and the Puritanes do agree together in all things
(their separation only excepted) as even as two pieces of cloth, that are of
the same wool, of the same thread, of the same color, and of the same breadth
and length.


The Puritan. But to put you in mind of one particular, before we make an
end of this our conference: why do you usually call us by the name of
Puritanes?


The Protestant. Why? because you agree with certain old Heretics, which
were so Catharoi.
called in former ages.


The Puritan. Wherein do we agree with them?


The Protestant. The old Puritanes sought for a Church, says master Calvin,
Calvin. aduers. Anabapt.
wherein there should want nothing that might he desired: even so do you as
appears by these words of your chiefest Writer: T. C. Reply pa. 17. sect. 4.
The Church in the whole and general government and outward policy of it, may
be pure and vnspetted.

Secondly we call you Puritanes, not because you are purer than other men are,
no more than were the Puritanes in ancient time; but because yon think your
selves to be Mundiores cateris.
purer than others, as the old Puritanes did.

God almighty give you grace to become Matthew. 5. 8
pure in heart, and 1. Cor. 1. 12
in simplicity and godly pureness, to have your conversation in the world.


The second Dialogue; Treating of their Perseverance in Schism, and of their
ghostly Idolatry.
WEll met good Neighbor, what news I pray you?

The Puritan. I hear none, but that the Bishops have unjustly deprived many
good Ministers of their livings.


The Protestant. I would not have any that bears the name of a loyal subject
to say so. Their Lord-ships do nothing against them, but what by their
authority they may do, and by their charge they should do.


The Puritan. Why should they deprive them of their livings?


The Protestant. They should deprive them of their livings, because they
persist and persevere in an inueterate and old schism.


The Puritan. Is perseverance in schism such a matter, as that it deserves
deprivation?


The Protestants. I would not have you to think it a light matter, for a man
to persist in an old schism. The ancient Fathers of the Church, that
flourished in the prime age thereof, reputed it to be heresy.


The Puritan. Which of them, I pray you does so repute it?


The Protestant. Saint Austen that was haereticorum malleus, The Hammer of
Heretics in his time, does so repute it. For in his second book against
Cresconius, he does define an heresy on this wise: Aug. contra Cresc. Donat.
cap* 7.
Haeresis est schisma inueteratum: an Heresy is an inueterate schism.

And in the chapter following, he thus speaks to the whole crew of the
Donatists: Haeretici estis quod in schismate inueterate remansistis: ye are
Heretics, because you have persisted in an old schism.

And in his Epistle to Emeritus the Donatist, though he called the said
Emeritus Virum probum and liberaliter eruditum. Aug. epist. 1^4 Aug. de civit.
Dei l. 18. ca. 51.
A very learned and an honest man; yet withal, he called him an Heretic,
because he did persist in schism. His words are these: Neque enim vobis
obijcims^^, nisi schismatis crimen, quanquam etiam haeresin male persevere and^
fecistis.

So also in his book do Ciuitate* Des, he speaks luculently enough to the
point, in this manner, Qui in Ecclesia Christi morbidu^ aliqued prouumque
sapiunt, si correpti, vt sanuri rectumque sapiant, resistant contumaciter,
suaque pestifera, and mortifera dogmata emendare nolunt, sed defen are
persistunt: haeretici fiunt.

Many other deadly blows might I give you with this hammer of Heretics, but
I will stay mine hands for a while: Now let us take a view of the later
Writers.


The Puritan. Is there any store of them on your side?


The Protestant. Yes, I dare auerre, that we have as deep men for learning and
judgment, as any you have on your side.

What say you to master Gyfford, Giffard in his plain declaration, that our
Brownists be full Donatists: vide prafat.
who rangeth the Brownists amongst Heretics, because they persisted in an
inueterate schism. Does he not tell them in express words, That inueterate
schism is heresy.

So does also one A. W. in a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, before the
honorable audience and assembly there 1592. upon the first chapter of the
prophecy of Zachary 1, 2, 3, and 4. verses. His words were these: A W. in a
Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, 1592.
These as yet we will vouchsafe the names of Schismatikes. But let them take
heed betime, for if they continue obstinate, their schism will be changed
into heresy.


The Puritan. But you do tell me but of those of this Church of England, that
do happly applaude your opinions: but do any of the learned men beyond the
Seas approve this your opinion?


The Protestant. Yes, Theodore Beza, in his annotations upon the Acts of the
Apostles, does fully subscribe to the same truth. His words are these: Beza in
Act. 5. 17.
Hareticus est, qui a doctrina sana ita aberrat, vt contempto Dei and ecclesiae
iudicio in sententia permaneat, and ecclesiae concordiam violet: He is an
Heretic, which so swarueth from wholesome doctrine, as contemning the
judgment both of God and the Church, persisteth in his opinion, and breaks
the peace of the Church.

Finally, to descend to Danaus, a reverend writer of very good regard, he
also holds, that continuance in schism, makes Heresy. Lambertus Danaus in
annot. in Lib. August. de haresibus ad. Quod^ult deum, in proleg^^^^^, cap. 3.
Exschismate (says he) postea fit haeresis vt docet Augustinus. And speaking
of the Luciferian Heresy, he says thus: Dan. ^^ Aug. de haeres. ca. 81.
Fuit hac secta primum schisma, non ita valde quidem periculosum, vt hic
Augustinus docet and Ambrosius in orat. Funebri, de obitu fratris, estque in
calione adu^cauit 24. quast. i. itemque Ruffinus libr. 1. cap. 30. sedex
schismate facta est haeresi, vt aliae multa, (...) ad sui facti, and
cecessi^mi^ defensi^n^m animo sius quam (...) verbo Dei abutitur, illudq^e
falsa interpretatione (...). Whom would not these sayings of so worthy men,
bring from perseverance in schism?


The Puritan. Although these worthy writers, seem to be on your side; yet I
cannot persuade my self to yield unto you, because I can prove the contrary
by an invincible argument.


The Protestant. I pray you let me hear it.


The Puritan. The Ministers that are deprived, do not differ from you in
matters fundamental and substantial, but only in matters ceremonial and
accidental: therefore they are not to be reputed Heretics.


The Protestant. Call you this an invincible argument? Alas, it is but a silly
shift, and an heretical objection, found in the School of Cresconius the
Donatist, and there first forged upon the Anuill of error; who makes (by the
report of Saint Austen himself in his book against him, the self same
objection. August l. 2, contra Cresco^. Grammatic, Cap, 3*
Quid sibi vult (says he to Saint Austen) quod ais haeriticorum sacrilegum
errorum? (...) haeresis non nisi inter diuersa sequentes fieri s^l^^: ^^c
h^reticus nisi contrariae vel aliter interpretata religionis ast cult^r, vt
sunt Manichaei, Arriani, Marci^^it^, N^uati^^i, caeterique quorum inter se
contra fidem Christianam diuersa sententiastat. Inter nos quidem idem Christus
natus, mortuus et resurgens, vna religio, eadem sacramenta, nihil in Christiana
obseruatione diuersum, schisma factum non haeresis. Siquidem haeresis est
diuersa sequentium secta: schisma vero eadem sectantium seperatio. Quare et in
hoc studio criminandi, quem tu incurris non vides errorem, cum quod schisma est
haeresin vocas. Here you see, how that Cresconius taxes Saint Austen, for
calling him an Heretic, and tells him how that he held the same says,
embraced the same Religion, had the same Sacraments, and used the same
Christian obseruances, which the true Church of Christ did: and that therefore
he could not be an Heretic. Saint Austen replyeth, saying: Inutterate schism
is Herisie. And again, ye are Heretics because you have persisted in an
inueterate schism.

Secondly, I answer you, as the same August. contra crescon. cap. ^
Father answered Cresconius, that they do differ from us in some things that
are fundamental and substantial. To omit sundry things of that nature, let
me press only one particular. Have H. B. H. I. with many others.
they not blazed and diuulged abroad sundry false expositions upon the Article
of Christ's descent into hell* and do they not stiffely and obstinately defend
the same? let it therefore be judged without partiality, whether they agree
with us in all matters of substance, or no.


The Puritan. Admit they do impugn the true sense and meaning of one article
of the Creed, does this bring them within the Compass of Heresy?


The Protestant. Yes, it is not denied by any sort of Divines, ancient or
recent* but that he is an Heretic, which does stiffely and obstinately defend
any error, that does either directlye impugn some article of the says, or the
true sense and meaning of some Article of the faith.

Hear the judgment of Danaus: Danaus in Annot. in lib. Aug. de here is. in
prolog. C. 3
Hareticus est qui falsam de aliquo fidei capite sententiam sequitur, quam
obstinate defendit, sieve ipsa fidei et articuli verba oppugnet, si^^ipsius
vera^ mentem, dian^i in et analogian. And of the same judgment are all other
writer. of note.


The Puritan. Though all other writers be of the same judgment, yet it is to
no purpose to tell me of them: for they will not move me for say what you will
against the Brethren, I will nearer believe that you can bring them within the
compass of Heresy.


The Protestant. Yes, and within the compass of idolatry too*


The Puritan. I would gladly hear that.


The Protestant. That obstinate Puritanes are Idolaters: I trust to make it
plain and evident by this argument.

Those that worship their own opinions, conceits and fancies, and yield
not to the truth, though never so plainly demonstrated, are (...):

But obstinate Puritanes do worship their own opinions, conceits and
fancies, and yield not to the truth, though it has been plainly demonstrated
unto them: therefore they are idolaters.


The Puritan. I deny first your proposition.


The Protestant. That it is Idolatry to worship a man's own opinions, and
not to yield to truth: I prove it by this speech of the Apostle: Coloss. ^. 5
covetousness is idolatry. From which saying of his, I dispute thus: If the
Apostle hold those to be idolaters, that did set their hearts upon their
^i^ches, and were so wedded unto them, as that no persuasion could bring them
from the love of the^: the consequence is not to be rebuked that we infer
upon it; that we may as well term them idolaters, that do set their hearts
upon their opinions, and are so wedded unto them, as that neither the
authority of sacred scriptures, nor the judgment of ancient Fathers, (...)
the consent of late writers, nor the good laws of Christian Princes, can drive
them from them.

My proposition is also confirmed by the judgment of the (...) Fathers* (...).
in l. 1. (...) i^ Habac. cap. 5,
(...) et (...) (says (...)) (...), (...) his (...) in (...). And in (...)
Hieren. in Dan. Cap. 3,
Qui (...) sum dogma (...) faci^nt, et quantum in se (...) idolu^ falsitatis.
Hieron in Hier^m c, ^2.
Again, vs^ (...) in templ^ Dei quae interpretatur ecclesia, sieve in (...)
ponitur idolum, quando (...) And in the pla^^ (...) quoted Hieron in Habacu*
cap. 2
Si (...) credere veritati, ^t (...) in (...) studio perseuerare: cong^^e (...)
discere: sperat (...) et facit (...)

Saint Austen also is of the same judgment with Saint Hierom, as appears in
his book* (...) (...) it a (...) and a bas^^ ^i^de of idolatry, to worship a
man's own fancies* then to worship the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. His
vordes are these:

Aug. de ver^ relig. cap. 38.
Est alius deterior et inferior ^ul^us simulachrorum, quo phantasmata sua
colunt, et quicquid (...) superbia veltimore cogitando imaginati fuerint,
religionis nomine obseruant.

With these ancient Fathers agree some of our best la^e writers. ^. Bilson. in
(...) the true difference of Christian subjection* part. 1. page. 30.
A corrupt and vicious Religion (says a reverend and learned Bishop) i^ an
inward and Ghostly worship of I (...) (says another learned (...) to
worship (...) not to yield to truth (...) so (...)

To him consent^^ Master* D. Sutcliffe in his challe^ge cap. 5.
Perkins, who preventing a secret objection* says thus: Perkins in his Book
entitled, a warning against the idolatry of the last times ^^^ge. 15.
It may be further said that false opinions conceived of Christ (...) not
straight way (...) I (...) Hierome: Even to this (...) set up in the house of
God (...) in the ^ear^^ and souls of the (...) when a new Doctrine is d^uised
Again, a false opinion is an idol of falsehood.


The (...). ^ ^ ^ to the Discipline of the Church? have they been vanquished
in open disputation?


The Protestant. You have heard I am sure of the late conference, whereat our
Princ^ (...) (...) (...) the Emperor Constantine, who (as Eus^b. de ^it^
Constantin lib. 1. cap, 37.
Eusebius records) showed an excellent and especial care toward the Church
of Christ Jesus: calling Counsels of Bishops, when any dissension (...) and
(...) by God: not disdayning to be present and confer with th^^, that so he
might the rather keep them in Christian peace: and, who (as the same writer
Eus^b. de ^ita Co^stantini, ^, 3, cap. 13.
testifies) marked advisedly what every man said, helped either side
disputing, tempered such as kindled too fast, reasoned my ^dly with each part,
and undertook jointly with them, to search out the truth, confirming their
decrees with his seal, least other Judges and Rulers should infringe them.


The Puritan. I have heard of the conference, but I pray you what was the
issue thereof?


The Protestant. Surely, the Agents for the Millinary Plaintiffes, were there
vanquished in disputation, and driven to See the (...) of the conference.
confess that their opinions were mere novelties, and new devised fancies.

All which notwith-standing, many of their Proselytes and followers, do still
continue obstimate. So that we may well say of them, as Saint Austen said of
the like p^^^ish fellows in his time: August de baptis. contr^ donat. lib, 3,
cap. ^2.
mal^^nt peruersis vocibus veritati reluctari, quam confessis erroribus paci
restitu^.

God give them grace to recant their ^rrours, and not to show themselves still
like Pilate, who would not alter any thing he had written, but said; that which
I have written, John 19: 22*
I have written.


The 3. Dialogue.
Wherein is showed, that it does not stand with equity, that some Ministers
should be bound to show their (...), and (...) to (...) and (...), and others
be dispensed with.

The Protestant. WELL ouer-taken Sir, whither travel you?


The Puritan^. I travel toward the Parliament.


The Protestant. What, are you one of the Burgess^s?


The Purita^^. No, I am a Minister.


The Protestant. Are you a Minister? why wear you not then a Priest cloak
with sleeves, as you are enjoined in the late Book^ of (...) and (...)
Ecclesiastical* I took you for one of the Burgesses, because you differ not
from them in ^abit.


The Puritan. What reason is there, that the fashion and (...) of Ministers
(...), should be different from other me^^*


The Protestant. (...), great reason. (...) asked his messengers who^e he had
sent to the God of Ekro^ for ^racle, of what (...) and habit the man was, that
(...) and they answered, 2. King. ^. ^
he was an ^airie man, (...) girded with a girdle of leather about his ^oynes.
Which was a mark of knowledge enough to Ahaziah; though they knew not his
name: It is Elijah the Thes^ite, said he.

Now as the Prophet Elijah did wear a different habit, whereby he was known
from other men: so should Ministers do, that when we meet them, we may know
them to be Ministers, and so give them that reverence which is due to the
Messengers of God. But to let this pass; I pray you what busi^es have you at
the Parliament?


The Puritan. I am the mouth of my Brethren to the Honorable Senate of
Parliament, that some of our Ecclesiastical laws may be repealed and changed.


The Protestant. Were I worthy to be the mouth of my Brethren to that
Honorable Senate; I would make humble suit, that you might be severely
punished, for seeking to repeal and change those laws, which were enacted by
grave and learned men.

You would not be so busy with your Bills at the Parliament, if that law were
of force amongst us, which (as Demost. co^tr^ (...)
Demoste^es testifies) was of force amongst the Locrians, viz: That he that
should offer ^o repeal and change a^^cient laws, and put up new, should come
with a Halter about his Neck to the Parliament, that if there were better
reason against his Laws, he should be hanged up for his ^olde attempt.


The Puritan. I would be (...) a (...) the (...)


The Protestant. Well, follow your own (...), yet let me tell you with a Seneca
in (...)*
Seneca, that it is not good to be busy in a will ordered state. But I pray
you make Auricular confession unto me, tell me in mine ear: have you no other
business at the Parliament?


The Puritan. Yes, if we cannot procure an alteration of the Jews, we will
make suit for a dispensation.


The Protestant. I cannot see how it may stand with equity, that some should
be bound to show their conformity and obedience to Laws, and others be
dispensed with.

It is Seneca his saying: Seneca in Epist*
Acqualitas prima pars aequitatis est. Equality is the first and chief part
of Equity.

Again, such a dispensation, would breed division: For a division in Laws,
makes a division in Kingdoms; and causes partaking among the people, and
choosing of sides: and therwithall strife, envy, emulations, contentions, and a
thousand other such mischiefs.

And as division in Laws, causes division in Kingdoms; so division in
King-domes, causes the overthrow and subversion of King-domes. For it is a
sure principle and maxim which our Savior gives in the Gospel. A kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand.

Now if the Kingdom of Satan divided against it self cannot stand; how can a
Kingdom of flesh and blood, and of motrall men?

But though no such danger were likely to ensue upon such a tolleration and
conniuencie; yet it stands not with any conueniencie, that one people within
the same land, and under the same government, should be under diverse laws. It
is (...) his saying* and it is an Oracle for truth, that they ought to be under
one Law, that are under the government of one King. Curtius lib. 10.
Eiusdem iuris (says he) esse debent quisub eodem rege victuri sunt.

It is also the judgment of ancient fathers, that all those that live in the
same Church together, should be under Law indifferently, and should be
enforced by the Law, to accommodate themselves, to the customs of the place
wherein they live. In his rebus, says Saint August Epist 86.
Augusten de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei, vel
instituta maioru^ pro lege tenenda sunt. And in another place, Aug. Epist. 218.
Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bones mores iniungitur, indifferenter
est habendum, et pro little inter quos viuitur societate seruandum est. And
Saint Jerome holds it very meet, that Ecclesiastical traditions, (namely
such as do not hinder faith) should be observed, as they are delivered of our
Elders; and that the custom of one should not be overthrown with the
contrary customs of others. His words are these: Hieron. ad Luciuium.
Traditiones ecclesiasticas, (praesertim quae fidei non officiunt) ita
obseruandas, vt a maioribus traditae sunt, nec aliorum consuetudinem, aliorum
contrario modo subuerti.

With these ancient Fathers of the Church, our latter writers go hand in hand.

Gwalther writing upon the first to the Corinthians, says thus: Gualther in 1.
Cor. 5.
Let every Church follow the manner of Disciplyne, which does most agree
with the people, place and time. And in the Preface to the same Epistle, he
says, that in rites and ceremonies, there can be no better rule, for a grave
and wise Christian; then that he do after that manner, the which he sees used
of the Church, unto the which he shall paraduenture come.

And Hemmingius holds it an heinous sin to break the ordinances of the
Church. He^mingius in syntag. cap. de adiaphoris.
Qui violat (says he) ecclesiasticam politiam, pec at multis modis.

Zanchius also propounds us this rule to observe; that in external things,
we would apply our selves to the customs of the Countries, where we
converse. I will acquaint you with his words: Zanchius de operibus Dei part.
3. l. 4. c, 2
Tenenda stregula Apostoli de his externis rebus, quae etia^ apud Gentiles
visitate sunt: vt quae non pugnant cum verbo Dei, and nullam redolent vel
superstitionem, vel faeditatem: ea^ pro more and consuetudine regionis vbi
degimus, vna cum alijs obseruemus.

Further, if you please to hear Doctor Whitakers, he is no cold advocate,
and Proctor in this point. He doubts not to say, that the Church has
authority, to make Laws in causes ecclesiastical; and to inioyne men to
observe them: and to punish the refusers. I will give you his express words:
Whitak. controuers, 3. de council: quaest 1.
Habuit Ecclesia semper authoritatem l^ges Ecclesiasticas condendi, and
sanciendi easque alijs imperandi, eos puniendi qui non obseruarent.

As for Master Perkins, he is so far from exempting any from showing their
co^formity and obedience to y^ good laws of the Church; as that he holds
them guilty of sin before God, that do wittingly and willingly, with a
disloyal mind, either break or omit them. His words are these: perkins in
his treatise of conscience.
Wholesome Laws of men, made of things indifferent, so far forth bind
conscience by virtue of the general commandment of God, which ordains the
Magistrates authority: that whosoever shall wittingly and willingly, with a
disloyal mind, either break or omit such Laws, is guilty of sin before
GOD: And in an other place of the same treatise: The Laws which the Church in
proper speech is said to make, are dicrees concerning outward order and
comeliness in the administration of the word and Sacraments, in the meetinges
of the Congregation, etc. And such Laws made according to the general rules
of Gods word (which requires that all things be done to edification, in
comeliness, for the avoiding of offense) are necessary to be observed: and
the word of God binds It dispenses with none.
all men to them, so far forth a^ the keeping of them* maintains decent
order, and preuents open offense*

But what need I draw mine arguments from the Cisternes of humane authority?
It is the Apostles direction, that we should Phil. ^* 16
all proceed by one rule, and mind one thing: that we should 1. Cor. 1. 10.
all be knit together in one mind and in one judgment: and that we should
Phil. 1. 27.
all continue in one spirit, and in one mind.

God Almighty whose work alone it is, that those who dwell together in one
house, shall be of one mind, so magnify his work amongst us, y^ we who dwell
together in one Kingdom, may now at length be of one mind, and live in peace.
And thus I leave you, wishing first of all your conformity: if that cannot be
had, my next wish is, that you were dealt withal, as Phillip of Macedon dealt
with two of his subjects, in whom there was little hope of grace: Alterum ^
Macedonia fugere, alterum persequi iuss^t.
he made one of them to run out of the country, and the other to drive him.
So his people were rid of both.


FINIS.

