THE NEW ARTIFICIAL GAVGING LINE OR ROD: Together with rules concerning the
use thereof: Invented and written by WILLIAM OVGHTRED.

who In all due and respective observance praesenteth the same To the Right
Honorable LL. Sir NICOLAS RAINTON Lord Major of London for this praesent
year, and RALFE FREEMAN Alderman Lord Major elect for the year now ensuing,
and To the Worshipful GEORGE ETHRAGE the late Master, and Captain JOHN MILLER
the praesent Master of the Company of Vinteners.

And to the whole body of that Right Worshipful society.

London Printed by Aug. Mathewes. 1633.

Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful.
I Doubt not, but as every worthy and laudable work is subject to obliquie and
ill construction: So this my good intent and useful invention, which I here
present unto you Right Honorable Lords, and you Right Worshipful, into whose
clientlie I betake both my self and it, shall meet with some overcurious and
supercilious censurers, who will misse-judge and misse-say the same: though not
for the art (against which I persuade my self they shall find little cause to
except) yet in respect of my particular calling: of the height and dignity
whereof, such small and low cogitations may seem to be unworthy. But may it
please them to consider, that Theology is (...), the chief and principal
Lady and Mistress of all other faculties; unto which all callings in this
life, for their just, faithful, and conscionable execution, are to comply, and
be accountable. And seeing God in his sacred word bids not only cease to
do evil, but also learn Esa. ^. 16.
to do well, and seek judgment; that Divine may be thought best to perform
his duty, that shall not only reprove injustice and wrong dealing, but shall
also even in particular actions inform the conscience both what is right, and
how to perform it. This I have herein endeavored to effect. The holy
Scripture is frequent in showing the abomination of false and deceitful
weights, and in forbidding to M^c. 6. 11. ^ev. 19 35. Prove. 16. 11.
do unjustly in line, in weight, or in measure: and tells us that a true
weight, and a just balance are of the Lord, and that all the weights in the
bag are his work. If I therefore by the help of God, and the knowledge he
has been pleased to give me, shall exhibit unto this renowned City, a line
and rule to measure vessels with according to true art, and shall teach how to
reform an error, which has for some time (through ignorance of better)
usurped the place of truth; and that with much more facility, then it is
committed: I hope I shall not justly be thought to wander out of the limits of
my profession and calling. Now the occasion whereby I invented it was this.

Many years ago, I devised for my private use an instrument, which I The
occasion vvherby this gauging instrument was invented.
called the Circles of proportion: which is nothing else but the Logarithmes of
Numbers, Sines, and Tangents set on circles. And I writ in latin the manifold
uses thereof, not only in Arithmetical, Geometrical, and Astronomical
calculations, but also in diverse other accounts, practices, and questions,
which are occurrent in the civil society and conversation of mankind: among
which one was concerning the measuring or Gauging of vessels: wherein taking
the form of them to be spharoide, or like a long sphaere, with the two ends
equally cut off, (as generally both by the ancienter and later writers is
supposed, and in the fabric of such vessels is still aimed at by the Makers) I
delivered out of the grounds and inventions of that most admirable Artist
Archimedes, the true and artificial way of finding their several contents:
and applied it unto the use of that my instrument, with as much ease and
expeditnesse as I could. Neither did I at all discourse upon the Mechanical
waves practiced by other men, much less refute any of their errors, but only
barely and positively delivered the truth. These my notes, and that my
instrument (after many years) at the persuasion of a friend of mine, who
proffered to translate them into English, I was content he should set out and
make common, my self not having any hand in that publication. When now the
translation was ready for the Printer, my friend having perused that which
Master Gunter in his second book of the Cross staff Chapt. 4. writes very
obscurely about Gauging of vessels, asked me what he meant by the mean
Diameter after the usual manner? I answered him that in the usual manner of
art there was no medium or mean, but the mean between the two extreme terms
in some kind of Proportion: and that all proportion being either Arithmetical,
Geometrical, or Musical, he being a Scholar and an Artist, must needs (as I
thought) by the mean understand one of those three: and most likely the mean
arithmetical which is the greatest of them. For supposing the two extreme
terms to be 9 and 4, between these the mean arithmetical is 61/^, which is
half the sum of both: the mean geometrical is 6: and the mean in musical
proportion is 5^/13. And yet said I, the mean arithmetical is too little, as
in the mensuration of tapering timber I proved: much more either of the two
rest. And other mean diameter, which may give the true content of a
sphaeroides, art affords none. My friend replied, Master Gunter is generally
acknowledged to have bin a man of skill, and you utterly unknown: and he that
shall find your book disagreeing from his documents, will without any more
ado reject it; you shall therefore do well to write in a few lines why you
differ from Mr. Gunter, and to show that his way by the mean diameter cannot
stand with art. Which his counsel I seeing not to be unnecessary, especially
in regard of the great pains he had taken in the translation of my notes,
took a pen, and presently in the margin of his translation writ that short
advertisement touching Mr. Gunters mean diameter.

Not long after that translation was in print, word was sent me into the
country, that an old man (that said he was) the Gauger of London came
earnestly inquiring after me, and was very angry; professing he would
vindicate Mr. Gunters credit, and speak for him, that could not answer for
himself: and that I had taught a false way of Gauging vessels: and that both
he and many others, had bought of my books; which much troubled him: and he
was very solicitous how they should come by their money again: and that he
never saw such a book in his life; for he could not tell what to make of it.
The translator told him, that when he, or any other for him, should disprove
that way of measuring vessels, which I had delivered; let him bring his book,
and he should have his money again for it.

At my next coming to London, he hearing of my being in town, came to me,
and expostulated with me, why I would presume to question any thing that Mr.
Gunter writ? I answered him, that it is a fault incident to the students of
these arts, to be very incredulous, especially if they see demonstration to the
contrary. He said I understood not what Mr. Gunter meant by the mean diameter
after the usual manner: For Mr. Gunter (though he said not so much) did
understand the manner usual in London; and that he him self followed in
gauging: which was to half the sum of the diameters at the head and bung,
and to add one quarter of their difference: and that this was a true way, and
a better way then mine: and that if he should use my way, it would require
much more pains, and longer time: and that he had a man, whom he had taught,
which had little or no skill in Arithmetic, and could scarce multiply, yet in
his way he should gauge with any man in England; and that if that his way were
not right, he might do more wrong in a few years then any Aldermans state in
London is worth; and that he was sworn to do justly. I answered, that the
greater tie lay upon him to do justly, and the more hurt he might do by
misgauging, the more thanks he owed me, for showing him the right; and with
the more gladness he should embrace it, notwithstanding it might have some
more difficulty: for though I should hold my peace (as Mr. Gunter it seems
did) yet he were never the more justifiable: and wished him to look to his
conscience: especially seeing now he might inform himself in the truth. He
said he found indeed by his experience, that the adding of a quarter of the
difference was somewhat too much; and therefore that now he began to take one
fifth part thereof: and yet both ways were better then mine; and he would not
learn of me to gauge vessels. And so went his way in great choler and
displeasure. I did indeed wonder at that his assertion; that whether he took
the quarter, or the fifth part of the difference, yet both are better then the
way of art, which I had delivered: for even in that example, which in my book
is set down, of a vessel having the diameter at the bung 32 inches, and the
diameter at the head 18 inches, and the length 40 inches; had he but made
trial, he should have found the content computed by one quarter of the
difference, to have been gallons 110 and almost an half; and by one fifth
part, to have been gallons 1051/10; whereas the true measure by art is gallons
107* and an half and somewhat better; which is almost in the very midst
between both: so that if any man will suppose one of his ways, be it the
former, or the latter, to be right: yet the other must of necessity be
further from the truth, then that which I taught; because it falling between
both, must needs be nearer to each, then one of them is to the other.

Not long after Mr. Elias Allen (a man well known and esteemed by all men of
art for his skilfulnesse in making instruments in metal) being in the company
of some gentlemen of good quality and worth, upon occasion related these former
words of the Gauger, what great detriment he might do by his manner of
Gauging, if it were not true. Which his speech Mr. George Ethrege, then Master
of the right worshipful Company of Vinteners, hearing and observing, said that
indeed he doubted not, but there was much wrong done by misgauging wine
vessels; and that many times they found it to their cost; but they could not
easily remedy it. And therefore invited Mr. Allen to request me to devise a
Gauging instrument, which might be according to true art, and of familiar and
easy performance; that they might examine and try their vessels themselves:
and said it would be an invention very acceptable, and of great use, and a
means to prevent much wrong that many times is done. Which inquisition and
study, to find out a true and perfect instrument for measuring of vessels
(though at first without any hope of effecting any singular thing therein after
such a number of learned artists, and writers in this kind, with the meanest of
which I am not to be compared) I undertook, merely our of my love to the
society of mankind, and my desire of advancing truth and justice; and at last
by the help of God, who is righteous, and loves righteousness, have brought
to pass: And herein withal humble and affectionate serviceablenesse, both
unto you my right honorable LL. upon whom the principal care of all such
admensurations within this most flourishing and illustrious City does rest,
and of you right worshipful the Masters and whole Company of Vintners, and to
as many of this most renowned City as shall have cause to use the same, I
present this my new gauging instrument. Only desiring thus much, that you
would be pleased to vouchsafe it your acceptance with the same loving and
benevolent respect, as I my self had unto you, and the truth, in the
investigation thereof.

Neither indeed may I omit to report the noble favor that the right The trial
made of this gauging instrument: and the certainty of it.
worshipful Company of Vintners did afford, though unknown, unto me. For
when Mr. Elias Allen had finished up one of those my instruments or gauging
rods, and had brought it to their Hall, they presently deputed certain of
their society to see the experience and performance thereof, at the Tavern by
Leaden Hall under the sign of the King's Head: and they took the pains to
examine the truth of it in many and sundry kinds of wine vessels; where, as I
have been told (for I was not there present my self) beyond all expectation
they found such an exact agreement with the measure of water they filled in by
gallons, after the sealed Standard for wine measure, that in most the
difference was scarce sensible; whereas the marks set thereupon exceeded the
same measures by two or three, and sometimes more then four gallons in a
vessel. Whereupon they agreed with Mr. Allen for a price, and bespake of him
threescore of the same my rods or instruments. Which so noble and courteous
respect unto me, to decree the examination of that my invention (though other
benefit or recompense for the same I demand none) I cannot but acknowledge with
much thankfulness.

Neither is the facility of working The facility of working by this new rod,
compared with the troublesomenesse of the other erroneous way.
therewith any whit inferior to the certainty of it: but even in measuring of
vessels by this true rule much less pains is taken, then that other erroneous
and inartificial way does necessarily require.

For therein first the two diameters at the bung, and at the head measured in
inches must be added together, and half the sum of them taken and kept.

Secondly the diameter at the head is to be subducted out of the diameter at
the bung, and the remains to be divided by 4, or else by 5, to find out the
quarter, or fifth part of their difference.

Thirdly that quarter of fifth part of the difference must be added to the
half sum kept; to make up a mean diameter.

Lastly there remains a proportion to be wrought by multiplication and
division; which is this,

As the quadrate of 1715 (which Mr Gunter calls his gauge point) is to the
quadrate of the mean diameter last found,

So is the length of the vessel measured in inches, to the content of the same
vessel in wine gallons.

Such a deal of pains, and such a multiplicitie of work is undergone in
their ordinary gauging: and yet when all is done, the capacity or content of
the vessel so found is merely conjectural, sometimes falser and sometimes
truer, according as the diameters of the vessel are more or less unequal.

But this way of art, which I propose, besides that it is constant and
universal in all kinds of wine vessels, is most easily performed only with
one single addition and multiplication; as shall anon be declared both by
rule, and examples. So that now I hope I have made Mr Gauger amends for the
too much difficulty and pains he thought my book put him to; and that
henceforth he will be as earnest to vindicate my credit also, as he has
egerly traduced it before he rightly knew me. For although I cannot so well
excuse his rashness in impertinent interposing himself in questions he had
small skill in: yet I persuade my self he had no malice against my person, who
was then utterly unknown to him. And for my part (for ought I remember) I had
not so much as heard of any such officer about the City. But I wholly impute
his offense at me partly to the high estimation he had of Mr. Gunter, from
whom to dissent he thought to be a heinous matter: and partly to his dissidence
and distrust of my rule, how it might hold when it came to trial. And therefore
I do willingly return again into favor with him, and recommend this my
invention and my self to his future approbation and friendship; assuring him
that what I have before written was not intented against him: but only to show
the true occasion how I fell upon this search and disquisition: which in regard
of my profession seemed to be very necessary.

The principles whereon the way Two principles or grounds of this gauging
instrument.
that I teach is grounded, are these two. First that a wine vessel is in form
of a perfect sphaeroide with the two ends equally cut off. The truth of which
ground appears both by the general consent of almost all who have written of
gauging: and by the fabric of such kind of vessels; which by the workmen and
makers thereof (so farreforth as in practice they are able) are intended to be
such. And now lately by trial made thereof with the Standard, whereunto it is
found to hold greater correspondence in all kind of those vessels, then could
be hoped for, or almost imagined.

Secondly, that a sphaere, or spharoide contains two third parts of a
cylinder having the same length and thickness; and consequently that the solid
convexitie between two cylinders, one within the sphaeroide, and the other
without touching it, and having the same center and height, is equal to two
third parts of the difference of those two cylinders: which has long since
been taught by the ancient Siracusan Archimedes in his first book of the
Sphaere and Cylinder, and in his book of Cone-like and sphaere-like
magnitudes: and of late by our English Archimedes Mr Henry Briggs, in his
Treatice of Arithmetica logarith mica.

Out of the consideration of these two principles, or grounds, I framed my
rule, which I set down in my book of the Circles of proportion, Chapt. 9. in
these words. Measure The rule of Gauging framed out of those two grounds.
the two diameters of the vessel, in inches, or else in tenth parts of a foot,
the one at the bung hole, the other at the head, and also the length within.
And by the diameters found, find out the circles; then add together two third
parts, of the greater circle, and one third part of the less; Lastly, multiply
the aggregate by the length: so shall you have the content of the vessel,
either in cubic inches, or cubic tenth parts of a foot. Which afterward in the
end of that Chapter (having first inquired the quantity of a gallon both Ale,
and Wine measure in solid inches, the one to be 272 the other 231) I taught
how to reduce into gallons and hundredth parts, by dividing the whole number of
inches contained in the vessel by either of those two numbers respectively.
And this is that very rule, the work and practice of which I have by art, with
an invention not yet thought upon by any other, and with divisions calculated
for that purpose, sitted and applied to this my new gauging line or rod.

It consists of two rulers of brass The gauging rod described: and of the
several parts thereof.
about 32 inches of length, which also are half an ynch broad, and a quarter
of an ynch thick: that being set together they may make half an ynch square.
At one end of both those rulers are two little sockets of brass fastened on
strongly: by which the rulers are held together, and made to move one upon
another, and to be drawn out unto any length, as occasion shall require: and
when you have them at the just length, there is upon one of the sockets a long
Scrue-pin to serve them fast.

These two little sockets encompasse not both rulers quite round: but have each
of them a slit about a quarter of an ynch board: that they may not hinder the
sight of the divisions, which are upon the broad or flat sides of the rulers.
Which divisions are indeed of most principal use: being properly the
gauge-divisions: and are now first of all invented, and accommodated to the
mensuration of vessels.

The gauge-divisions are in all two hundred and thirty: of which every
particular division stands for one hundredth part of a wine gallon: so that
they are in all a wine gallons and 30 hundred parts. And for the more
perspicuous distinguishing of them they are figured by tens thus, 010, 020,
030, 040, 050, 060, 070, 080, 090, 100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150, 160, 170, 180,
190, 200, 210, 220, 230: there being between every one of those figures ten
divisions, or ten hundredth parts.

At the other end of both the rulers is a hook framed into right or square
angles to be scrued on: the one with a Scrue-pin, the other with a matrix or
Scrue-plate. And above these hooks the edge of both rulers is divided into
inches, beginning exactly equal with the ends of the hooks: and figured with
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 27, 30, etc. And each ynch is subdivided into ten equal
parts. Which division of inches, together with the hooks, serve to take the
length of all vessels; that the ends of the barrel boards overreaching the
bottoms, may not be an impediment to the measuring thereof.

Upon the other edge of each ruler is set the the line of Numbers: which is the
very same in both: though some what differently figured. For that on the ruler
next the socket with the long Scrue-pin, is noted with the figures 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, which I therefore call the line of digit numbers: and
that on the other ruler is figured with tens, as 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70,
80, 90, 100, 200, 300: and I call it the line of denarie numbers. Wherein you
are to remember that from 1 to 5, and from 10 to 50, and also above 100, every
space is subdivided into one hundred parts, but above 5 unto 10, and above 50
unto 100, because the spaces are too small to receive an hundred parts, they
are subdivided but into fifty.

Thus having showed the description The use of the gauging rod taught in four
rules.
of the several parts of the gauging rod: I now come to the use thereof in
measuring any kind of vessel by the wine gallon. For which I will set down
these four rules,

Rule I. How to take the length of a Vessel.
HAving first sitted the two hooks upon the ends of the two rulers, so that
the line of inches may be uppermost, draw out the rulers in length, and apply
them to the vessel long wise, so that the two hooks may embrace the two
bottoms thereof: at that length scrue them fast together with the long
Scrue-pin in the socket: then take off the hook, which has the Scrue-pin: and
look how many inches the socket of the ruler which has the hook on does cut
in the ruler without the hook: for that shall be the length of the vessel
from out side to out side in inches: wherefore if out of that measure you take
the thicknes of the two bottoms (which may be easily estimated by a spigot
hole) you shall have the true length of the vessel within.

But if the length of the vessel be less then 27 inches, you cannot use both
hooks, as before was done. Wherefore apply the ruler which has the matrix or
Scrue-plate to the vessel, setting that hook against one of the bottoms: and
where the divisions of inches in that ruler begins, stick up a knife: then
remove that same hook to the other bottom; and the inches, which the knife
cutteth, shall give the length of the vessel from out side to outside.

Rule II. How to take the Diameters of a Vessel at the Bunge, and at the Head.
and how to add them together, that you may find the sum of them.
THe Diameters are not measured by inches, as the length is, but by Wine
gallons, and hundredth parts: in this manner. Take off the hook which has the
scrue-pinne, and dipp that end of the Ruler into the Vessel at the bung; and
look how many parts of the divisions of Gallons the inside of the bung-hole
does cut, the same shall be the Diameter at the bung. In like manner apply the
same end of the Ruler to the head of the Vessel without; and look how many
parts of the divisions of Gallons it is broad over the amidst or center
thereof; the same shall be the Diameter at the head.

But if the Diameter at the bung be greater then that Ruler is long: draw out
the rulers, and scrue them at their whole length: and so measure therewith the
Diameters, as was before showed.

The two Diameters being found out must be added together, thus: Write down
the Diameter at the bung twice, and under it the Diameter at the head only
once, setting like places one under another in the same rows: that is all the
unites in one row; all the tenth parts (which are they next the units) in
another row; and all the hundredth parts in the last row: and draw a long line
between the unites and the parts, then add them all three together into one
sum by the way of ordinary Addition. As in example; Suppose a Vessel that
has the diameter at the bung gallon 1 and 8 hundredth parts, viz. 108; and the
diameter at the head only 96 hundredth parts of a Gallon, viz. 096. you shall
write down ^ the Diameter at the bung twice, and the diameter at the head once
and add them altogether, as you see done in the side: and the sum of the
diameters shall be found 312, that is gallons 3 and 12 hundredth parts. And
thus shall you do in all Vessels.

Rule III. How to multiply the sum of the Diameters of a Vessel by the
length.
THe length of a Vessel being measured in inches and tenth parts, and the
Diameters being found out in Gallons and hundredth parts, and also added
together, as has been declared: The sum of the Diameters is to be reconed
in the line of digit numbers, which is noted with the figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
etc. and the length, in the other line of denarie numbers, which is noted with
the figures 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, etc. In both which lines of numbers you are to
consider, that in the spaces between the figures every tenth division is
distinguished with a long line: and every single division with a short line:
and every fifth with a line of a length between both* and in the line of digit
numbers, they signify so many hundredth parts of a gallon: But in the line of
denarie numbers (as also in the line of digit numbers beyond 10) every tenth
division is for unites; and every single division is for tenth parts. and
beyond 100 every tenth division is for ten; and every single division for one
unite. Where note, that in those spaces, which by reason of their smalnesse
have but 50, yet they are understood to be 100, by imagining every one to
contain two.

The nature and valuation of both the lines of numbers, the digit and the
denarie, being understood, multiplication is thus to be wrought. Set the unite
place of the line of digit numbers marked with 1, to the place of the length of
the Vessel reconed in the line of denary numbers: there scrue the Rulers fast*
then in the line of digit numbers recon the sum of the Diameters found out,
that at the Bung being doubled, as was taught before: and look what space and
division it poynteth out in the line of denary numbers: the same being
reasonably aestimated, shall be the product sought for.

By aestimating reasonably I understand that you consider whether the figure of
that space is to be taken for tenns or for hundreds: which is done very
easily: for no man is so simple, as to mistake a Vessel of ten or twenty
Gallons, for one or two hundred; or of one or two hundred gallons, for one of
ten or twenty. And yet this short rule may be given. That the product is to
be aestimated according to that former valuation of the line of denarie
numbers: unless the Vessel be so small, that the sum of the diameters
amount not to one gallon: for then the figures 100 and 200, are to be taken for
10 and twenty.

And if at any time it chance, that the sum of the diameters falls not
between the unite place in the line of digit numbers, and the socket: divide
the same sum by 2, and then multiply the one half by the length; so shall
you have half the product sought for: which being doubled will give you the
whole.

Rule IIII. How to gauge or measure the content of any Vessel in Wine gallons.
TAke the length of the Vessel proposed in ynch-measure, according to the Rule
I, then take the two diameters in gallon measure, and add them together, that
at the bung being doubled, according to the Rule II. Lastly multiply the sum
of the diameters by the length, according to Rule III: and the product being
reasonably aestimated, shall give the number of Wine gallons contained in that
Vessel.

The performance and practice of this Work by Examples.
Example I.
ANd first I will take the Example Diverse examples showing the use of this
Instrument, and the practice of the former rules.
in my book of the Circles of Proportion, Chap 9, of a Vessel supposed to be
in length 40 inches; and the diameter at the bung 32 inches; and the diameter
at the head 18 inches: which two diameters being taken with my gauging rod in
gallon measure, would have been at the bung gallons 1 and 16 hundredth parts,
and at the head almost 37 hundredth parts of a gallon. Set down the diameter at
the bung twice, and the diameter at the head once, and add them: the sum of
the diameters shall be gallons 2 and almost ^9 hundredth parts, by ^ Rule II.
which being multiplied by 40, the product shall be gallons 107, and better then
an half; which is the true content sought for.

Example II.
Suppose a small Vessel; whose length is inches 45 and 3 tenth parts, viz.
453; and the diameter at the bung 38 hundredth parts of a gallon; and the
diameter at the head 30 hundredth parts. what is the content?

Add the two diameters ^ together, that at the bung being doubled, the sum
is gallons 1 and 6 hundredth parts, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the
length 453: and the product shall be 4812* by Rule III, that is gallons 48 and
almost 12 hundredth parts: which is the true content sought for.

Exam. III.
Suppose another small vessel, whose length is inches 30 and 7 tenth parts,
viz. 307. and the diameter at the bung 34 hundredth parts of a gallon: and the
diameter at the head 28 hundredth parts, what is the content?

Add the two diameters together, that at the bung being doubled: the sum is
only 96 hundredth ^ parts of a gallon, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the
length 307: and the product shall be 2947, by Rule III, that is gallons 29, and
47 hundredth parts, which is almost an half. which is the true content. For the
first figure 2 signifies not 200 (though it be so marked on the line of
denarie numbers) but only 20; as both plain reason, and also the short rule,
at the end of Rule III, will show.

Exam. IIII.
Suppose a great vessel: whose length is inches 70 and an half, viz. 705; and
the diameter at the bung gallons 2 and 3 hundredth parts, viz, 203; and the
diameter at the head gallons 1 and 10 hundredth parts, viz. 110. what is the
content?

Add the two diameters together, that at the bung being doubled; the sum is
gallons 5 and ^ 16 hundredth parts, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the
length 705: but because the unit^ place of the line of digit numbers, being set
to 705 in the line of denarie numbers, the sum of the diameters 516 will
overreach beyond the socket: therefore to help this, take half the sum of
the diameters, viz. gallons 258: and multiply that half sum by the length
705: and the product shall be 1818^, by Rule III, that is gallons 181 and
almost 9 tenth parts: which is half the true content. And being doubled shall
give gallons 36378 for the whole content of that great vessel.

The Examples following are of some vessels measured in the presence of them,
which were deputed by the Company of Vinteners to see the trial of this
Gauging line or rod.

Exam. V.
A Canarie pipe whose length was inches 48 and an half, viz. 485; and the
diameter at the bung 93 hundredth parts of a gallon, viz. 093: and the diameter
at the head 54 hundredth parts, viz. 054. what is the content?

Add the two diameters together, that at the bung being ^ doubled, the sum
is gallons 2 and 4 tenth parts, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the length
485: and the product shall be 1164 by Rule III, that is gallons 116 and 4
tenth parts: which is the content sought for.

Examp. VI.
A Graves-hogshead whose length was inches 31 and 2 tenth parts, viz. 312: And
the diameter at the bung 73 hundredth part^ of a gallon, viz. 073; and the
diameter at the head 57 hundredth parts, viz. 0^7. What is the content?

Add the two diameters ^ together, that at the bung being doubled, the Sum
is gallon ^ and 3 hundredth parts, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the length
312: and the product shall be 6334 by Rule III, that is gallons 63 and 34
hundredth parts: which is the content sought for.

Example VII.
A High-countrey hogshead whose length was inches 30, and 82 hundredth parts,
viz. 3082: And the diameter at the bung 63 hundredth parts of a gallon: viz. 063
and the diameter at the head 51 hundredth parts, viz. 051. What is the content?

Add the two diameters ^ together, that at the bung being doubled, the sum
is gallons 1 and 77 hundredth parts, by Rule II. Multiply this sum by the
length 3082: and the product shall be 5455, by Rule III, that is gallons 54
and 55 hundredth parts: which is the true content sought for.

Although this Gauging instrument is properly framed for measuring The use of
this Instrument in gauging beer vessels.
vessels by the wine gallon: yet it may also fitly be applied to the measuring
of the same vessels by the ale or beer gallon. And for this purpose I have on
the Ruler figured with digit numbers set two little lines or marks, the one at
272, noted with the letter (w); and the other at 231, noted with the letter
(a). The use of which I deliver in this Rule following.

Seek out the content of the vessel proposed in wine gallons, upon the ruler
figured with denarie numbers, as has before been taught: and thereto set the
mark (w): and so shall the other mark (a) point to the number of beer
gallons contained in the same vessel.

I will show the practice of this Rule by the vessels measured in the three
last examples.

First The Canarie pipe, whose length was inches 485: and the diameter at the
bung gallon 093: and the diameter at the head gallon 054: the measure whereof
was by Example V found to be gallons 1164: how many beer gallons will it
contain?

Set the mark (w) unto the wine measure 1164 reconed upon the ruler figured
with denarie numbers, scruing it there fast, and the mark (a) shall in the
same ruler point out 9876 that is gallons 98 and 76 hundredth parts, the content
thereof in beer measure.

Again, The Graves hogshead, whose length was inches 312: and the diameter at
the bung gallon 073: and the diameter at the head gallon 057: the measure
whereof was by Example VI found to be gallons 63^4: how many beer gallons
will it contain?

Set the mark (w) unto the wine measure 6334 reconed upon the ruler figured
with denarie numbers, scruing it there fast: and the mark (a) shall in the
same Ruler point out 5374, that is gallons 53, and 74 hundredth parts, the
content thereof in beer measure.

Lastly the High country hogges-head, whose length was inches 3082: and the
diameter at the bung gallon 063: and the diameter at the head gallon 051: the
measure whereof was by Example VII found to be gallons 5455: how many beer
gallons will it contain?

Set the mark (w) unto the wine measure 54^5 reconed upon the ruler figured
with denarie numbers, scruing it there fast: and the mark (a) shall in the
same ruler point out 4628, that is gallons 46, and ^8 hundredth parts, the
content thereof in beer measure.

And now I have finished what I determined to write concerning the use of this
my new Gauging line or rod: and have made it so plain and easy that I doubt
not but every mean capacity will be able with a little care to apprehend the
meaning and practice: I have also delivered the Rule which I follow, and
whereupon I ground this work: only the manner of computing the Gauge-divisions
I have concealed: both because that speculation is impertinent to the managing
and hand-working therewith: and also that because unto men of art by comparing
the rule with the performance, it will not be difficult to find out the
reason: but especially because I intend and wish the benefit of making and
fabricating this Instrument, unto Mr. Elias Allen, who gave the occasion of it,
and at whose request I invented it. And if it shall be serviceable to this
most illustrious City, as a means of keeping truth and equity in that kind,
and acceptable to you Right Honorable LL, and to you Right Worshipful to whom
I present it, and conducing unto the glory of Almighty God, the author of every
good ability, it has obtained the desired END.

PErlegi hoc opus Mathematicum, cui titulus est, The new artificial Gauging
Line or Rod, in quo nihil reperio quod non cum utilitate publica imprimatur,
modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes Typis mandetur.

Ex aedibus Lambethanis, October. 10. 1633. Guil. Bray.

THese Instruments are made in brass by Elias Allen over against St. Clements
Church without Temple-barre: where also those who are desirous may be
instructed in the practical use thereof: and such as shall have occasion may
have vessels gauged.


