THE CHRISTIAN CONFLICT: A TREATISE, Showing the Difficulties and Duties of
this Conflict, with the Armor, and special Graces to be exercised by
Christian Soldiers.

Particularly applied to MAGISTRATES, MINISTERS, HUSBANDS, WIVES, PARENTS,
CHILDREN, MASTERS, SERVANTS.

The Case of Usury and Depopulation, and the errors of Antinomists
occasionally also discussed.

Preached in the Lecture of Kettering in the County of Northampton, and with
some enlargement published by JOSEPH BENTHAM, Rector of the Church of Broughton
in the same County.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith at the
golden Lion in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD Lord MOUNTAGUE of Boughton in the County of
Northampton, increase of grace in this life, and the full fruition of glory and
happiness in the life to come.
Right Honorable, my very good Lord, and singular good Patron,
IT being an easy and no difficult thing for Momus to pick quarrels in
another man's tale, and tell it worse than himself, it being a less practice
and performance to find faults than to mend them; A strange, savage, and
uncharitable humor, inclining to mis-judge off, and mis-interpret other men's
actions, rather than to give them a Christian and charitable construction, too
much abounding in the world; so that nothing can be so well done, but it shall
be contra(...)d of the evil, it being a thing incident, and almost certain in
all men's natures, to be hold with fore eyes the new grown felicities of
others, and to exact a sharp account of their doings, especially whom they
have seen either inferior, or in equality with themselves: And writing of
Books in this learned and laborious age, being as soldiers in peace,
chimneyes in summer-season, and as setting of corn to sale in the year of
plenty, wherein it was disdained and despised by many, desired but of few: I
thought it frivolous, if not a folly for me once again to adventure upon the
common-stage and the worlds theater in this kind. Yet in regard of that
allowance and approbation my former Book of the Society of Saints has found
amongst grave and godly, learned and judicious men; that the world might not
sinisterly suppose me to be more careless and less diligent at Broughton than
I was at Weekly, like Saint Hieroms zealous Monk, but a lukewarm Abbot; or
like unto such faint or faithless fishers, who having caught that which they
coveted, hang up their ne^s, and leaye off to labor any longer. That I might
manifest mine earnest desire to imitate (although afar off) him whom I
succeed, who living was my pattern I pitched upon for imitation, my famous
predecessor M. Bolton, whose singular rare parts noted in him, have won and
w^dded to him as great reputation and respect as any man living this day
carries or can have of his degree and quality: A man of blessed memory, yea
such a one, that they who knew him, could not sufficiently esteem him, and
they who did not esteem him, did never sufficiently know him; whom living I
loved and admired, and being dead, I desire to follow. That as I do not envy
and repine at other men's rich gifts with an evil eye, so to signify and show
that I do not despise mine own poor mite with a wayward and wicked heart, but
do desire to get and gain something with my small talent unto my good and
gracious Lord, blessed and bountiful Master: That I might a little unwinde my
self out of that so intricate a labyrinth, in which my heart and best thoughts
are and have been a long time much entangled and inthralled, I having often
exactly examined and thoroughly tried and pared my thoughts to the quick; how to
testify and tell abroad my humble and hearty, my true and unfeigned
thankfulness for your Lordships redundant and reduplicated favors,
munificently heaped upon me, (I much abhorring their too bad disposition,
which neither afford love, nor requite it, which neither offer it with
kindness, nor accept it with acknowledgement) not only in placing and
planting me at Weekley, nor only in countenancing me and my Ministry being
there seated and settled, whereby I was much animated and encouraged, and
continually and copiously contributing to me so often and in such abundance,
that I, my no little charge and great family lived with comfort, contentment
and plenty, even to admiration, if not astonishment of all such who did not
advisedly consider Gods secret blessing, multiplying and making to abound a
little meal sensibly and plentifully where and when himself pleases; and who
were not acquainted with the ever-running fountain of your Lordships
liberality flowing over not only to our refreshing, but enriching: But also
after fourteen years trial and experience of me, in transplanting me to
Brought^n to succeed M. Bolton, of whom I may truly say as Saint Augustine did
of Saint Cyprian, Multi erat meriti, multi pectoris, multi oris, multae
virtutis, He was worthy, wise, eloquent and religious. I have presumed to
publish this small Treatise, not expecting by thus doing to gain either riches
or preferment, I having of the former to content me, and of the latter by your
Lordships favor to the utmost pitch (if not further) that I expected: nor
hunting after or hoping hereby to have credit and applause (I usually John 7.
14.
living solitarily and retiredly at home) well knowing that reputation is but a
weak and wavering foundation, and that peoples affections often raise men's
hopes, and ruin their persons, and that wise men are not moved by rumors,
since they grow by reports, and diminish by experience: and since that long
continuance of a thing slakes the wonderment, and makes the wings of report to
flag. But for the aforesaid causes and considerations, as also to do or attempt
the doing of good in the Church and my native Country, well knowing that good
intentions (except from selfe-perswasions against Gods commandments which are
mere impieties) have such a sympathy with Gods own disposition, that he will
both assist them for their better encouragement, and for others example; and
well knowing that as a scout may upon an occasion hear and know what a whole
host has no present notice of; so I (who am no more a stranger in diverse
difficulties and distresses of Christianity, and in many miseries of this
Commonwealth, than he who in a ship as a passenger, when it is in danger
declares the same although no Pilot) have assayed, what in me is, the good of
others, desiring (and yet it is a folly to wish where there is no hope) that
this which I have penned for public profit might please all: But alas to have
expected to please all men, I might rather have wished (as I do no more) than
imagined any possibility. Neither shall I much regard the malevolent bitings of
envious carpers of other men's Writings. May it please your Lordship to take in
good part this unfeigned testimony of mine obsequious love, officious service,
and humble thankfulness unto your Honor (which I hope you will do, since
noble hearts take more thankfully that which a man desires to give, than that
he gives indeed) as also to suffer this Treatise to pass under your Lordships
noble protection and patrocinie. To whom I present with my humble service this
small Treatise.

First, Not only because true Nobility graced with virtue and piety, are all
combined in your Lordship Honors, Authority, and great places the top of the
desires of ambitious men, except they light on a nature of singular moderation,
minister matter to great and grievous vices: to whom it is as little benefit
and true content to have such height of earthly happiness, wanting the use of
them, as for a purblinde man to have goodly pictures, and dim eyes to behold
them. In the midst of their plenty and redundance they wanting the true comfort
of conscience, and the right use of their honor and high places, they are in
the height of misery. For, were they able to drink up the pleasure of the
world in as plentiful manner as Cleopatra (who drunk the value of 50000 pound)
at a draught; yet it is but a draught, and quickly down; themselves being like
to green and goodly boughs and branches, cut down from trees to adorn men's
houses for a time, and then thrown to the dunghill. For, if all the gravel in
their rivers were turned into pearls, and every shower of rain from the
clouds above were a shower of silver and gold into their houses: yet as the
fresh rivers run into and end in the salt sea, so shall all their honor end in
baseness, all their pleasures in bitterness, all their treasure in
emptiness, all their garments in nakedness, and their viands and delicacies
in loathsomeness and rottenness. Were they fastened to their greatness as are
the stony mountains to their foundations; yet are they not of power sufficient
to withstand the power of the heavenly JEHOVAH, who commands the lightening
and sends forth the wind, and is able to shake the world and rend in sunder
the mass of the earth. Yea the fairest and goodliest in body being ungodly,
stand in danger of grievous diseases, or of vile creatures to be consumed: the
soundest of understanding to be tormented in mind: the richest in treasures to
be spoiled in an hour: the best in health to be delivered to many and strong
deaths, not feared or suspected. And therefore as Damocles when he saw nothing
but his golden pots, his princely and magnificent entertainment, his royal
attendants, thought himself most happy; but when he cast up his eyes and saw a
naked sword hanging only by a horse hair ready every minute to fall upon his
head, then he began to tremble. Even so these great and graceless men of the
world, when they only respect their pomp, they think there are none like them.
But when they look up to the great vault of heaven, and see the just God ready
to power down his vials of vengeance on them, then they tremble. Whereas your
Lordships humble deportment in such sublimities, digesting great felicity
without surfeit (a rare virtue in great persons) the many radiant and
resplendent gifts and graces, for which D. Heart, and M. Bolton, and others, in
their Dedicatory Epistles, have spread your honor and renown, yet report was
less than verity, renown far short of desert: for truth does outstrip
fame, and many other I would name, were I not unable to speak of them as they
deserve, and in what I can unworthy; and did I not know how averse such praises
are unto your Honor, accounting personal commendations of living great ones,
in men of our sort, a verbal simony, eternize your memory, and make you
blessed to all eternity.

Secondly, Not only because of your Lordships noble Patronage of all good
learning, so far forth as to be a bountiful and perpetual benefactour to the
breeding and training up of scholars in good literature, in a free and
bountiful bestowing of Church Livings in your Lordships Patronage, but also in
showing singular regard and respect to the Ministers of the Lord, especially to
such who are most painful and industrious in the Church of God.

Thirdly, Not only because of your Honors presence at the preaching of many
of these Sermons in our Lecture much countenanced and encouraged by your
Lordships not only often, but usual and ordinary frequenting the same.

Fourthly, Not only because of your Lordships ingenuity, who will cover such
slips and mistakings which may be in this as in other men's Books, your Honor
well knowing that an error at the press is no calumniation in the Author.

Fifthly, But also because I owe my self and mine utmost abilities to do your
Lordship honor and service, for what I have and do enjoy. Might I therefore be
so happy as to honor and renown your Lordship, or stir up some of your
far more able Chaplains (for not so much is required of a little weak tree
as of a great and strong) to do the same. If your Lordship be pleased to cast a
favorable aspect upon these my poor, yet painful endeavors: May I be an
instrument to benefit, although but a few, and bring glory to God, which ought
to be the end of all ends; I have the chiefest of my aims and desires.

Thus leaving the success of these my laborious endeavors to the Almighty,
with my heartiest prayers to God the Giver of all good, That as your love
toward God does increase, so Gods love toward your Honor may increase also:
So that the best blessings may ever rest upon your Honors Person, your
honorable Lady, on your noble Offspring, whole family, and all your affairs,
to your everlasting honor in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to
come, I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your Lordships Chaplain in all humble service, JOSEPH BERTHAM.

To the Christian Reader.
COurteous Reader, good men have a notable hap and happiness to be borne in
one age rather than another: We in this, wherein we enjoy extraordinary plenty
of profitable excellent means of knowledge, by Pen and Preaching, in Press
and Pulpit: Yea so many and such, that I had not any intention to adventure in
this kind, until by my betters encouragement I published a ^reatise of the
Society of Saints, the approbation of which with judicious men, who perused
the same, has occasioned and animated me to second the same with this of the
Christian Conflict. In which had I meddled with no^e, or only mean men, I
could not but expect rash and uncharitable censurers, since virtuous men
(although men studious of virtue) can scarce find one hand to further them in
working, yet commonly have often a multitude of evil tongues to speak against
their honest doings: much more addressing my self not only against
Antinomists a lawless and licentious kind of evil speakers, but also against
usurers and depopu^atours the devourers of our commonwealth, and other such
like disorderly dealers, which swarm in and swallow up our common weal^h;
cannot lo^ke to escape the scourge of tongues. But, the best is, I am as little
ambitious of such men's good word as guilty of their bad: and I had rather be
dispraised for true speaking, than honored for lying (although I know the most
had rather be comm^nded with lies, than reproved with truth) being persuaded
that he in heart has no true sincerity, which keeps his mouth shut to reprove
vice. Many of these I encounter with have fair and plausible pretenses, but by
that means they are the more pernicious. A foul scarre may be covered with a
fair cloth, Dum gravior sit and magis noxia improbitas: benignita^is obumbrata
velamine. Amb. Hexam. Lib. 5. Cap. 8.
and masked meaning does more harm than barefaced error. I know it is a hard
matter to make them see any thing, which have resolved before hand to close
their eyes: that none are so blind as they who will not see: that no paradox is
so strange but some Philosopher will undertake to defend it: no vice so foul,
but it will have some refuge of apology to maintain it for good: yet will I
speak the truth, not caring if they who brow-beat authority and antiquity,
backbite me. Perhaps some will disparage me to discredit the book: if so, I
shall not marvel; since as virtue, riches, honor, etc. so putting of books to
press, is but a br^nd to light envy to the world, and malice leaves nothing
unsearched that may nourish the venime of the humor. For my self, as I am a
man, so have I written it for men, and as a man I may have erred: For, there is
not so perfect a painter, but another will presume to amend his work: neither
is any man so just or clear of judgment, that does never show himself
frail; especially in matters which concern his own interest. But this is my
comfort, it is better to err ignorantly out of a well-disposed charity, than
peremptorily to affirm any thing out of an ungrounded obstinacy. And of thee
let me entreat this courtesy, not to impute the Printers faults unto me, nor
to let an oversight or slip in me, if any such thou espiest, prejudice the
matter. A good letter should be nothing less esteemed because written with an
evil pen, neither does an angel of gold cease so to be, wanting a grain,
which is allowed to make it current. For my part (in this unhappy age which
overfloweth with numbers of malignant spirits) I am persuaded that the best
course is (and so I do endeavor) through the grace and goodness of God, to
direct our course in such sort, as evill-minded men may rather show their will
through malice, than with just cause by desert say evil, or deface by speech
or writing. In this book I have observed the same method and order as in my
former, with Tables, Chapters, and bare Quotations of Scriptures, without words
generally, that it might not be too voluminous: and upon the advice of a godly,
learned and judicious Divine who perused my copy, I have left out the words of
alleged Authors, taking only the meaning, and referring them to the places
that please to examine them, to keep down the bulk and bigness of the book.
And thus good Christian Reader, hoping thou will take in good part that which
with no little pains I have penned for public good. I commend thee to God and
the Word of his grace, and remain

Thine in him who is the LORD of all. JOSEPH BENTHAM.

The Contents and Method of the ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. I. Shows the drift and occasion of this discourse. Page 1 CHAP. II.
Doct. 1. That Christianity is a warfare, proved and confirmed with Scripture
and reasons. 5 CHAP. III. Doct. 2. That Christianity is a good warfare, and in
what regards it is so. 10 CHAP. IIII. Doct. 3. This good warfare must be
fought, and why. 11 CHAP. V Use 1. Sect, 1. Showing the error of those who
think Christianity to be easy. 14 Sect. 2. Showing the error of those who
think earthly contentments their chiefest glory. 16 Sect. 3. Showing the
error of those who condemn Christianity because of some discords. 17 Sect. 4.
Showing the error of those who submit to Satan, and oppose goodness and
piety. 19
CHAP. VI. Duty. 1. Sect. 1. Christian soldiers must endure hardness. 22
Sect. 2. Motive 1. Drawn from the examples of particular soldiers in this
warfare from the Church in general, and Christ our Captain. 23 Sect. 3. Mot.
2. Drawn from the present condition of Christian soldiers. 31 Sect. 4. Mot.
3. Drawn from the harmelesnesse of afflictions. 32 Sect. 5. Mot. 4. Drawn
from the benefit and profit of afflictions. 32 Sect. 6. Mot. 5. Drawn from the
persons afflicting both principal and isntrumental. 37 Sect. 7. Mot. 6 Drawn
from the several kinds: 1 Loss of goods. 2 Famines. 3 Exile. 4 Death. 5 Want
of burial. 6 Reproaches. 47 Sect. 8. Mot. 7. Drawn from the nature of them,
showing how they are good, how evil. 62
CHAP. VII. Duty 2. Sect. 1. Christian soldiers must be armed. 65 Sect. 2. The
Christians girdle what it is, how put on, its necessity, dignity, and several
parts. 66 Sect. 3. The Christians breast plate delineated, encouragements to
put it on, why, and how. 80 Sect. 4. The Christians shoes what they are, and
how useful. 88 Sect. 5. The Christians shield, its excellency, necessity, and
their duty concerning the same. 92 Sect. 6. The Christians helmet, how its
differenced from faith, and counterfeit hope, Motives to get, and use it. 99
Sect. 7. The Christians sword, its dignity, diverse erroneous opinions about it,
and our duty concerning the same. 107 Sect. 8. The whole armor wholly applied
to the present occasion the pinching dearth. 122 Sect 9. Against the absurd
Antinomists confuting them. 135
CHAP. VIII. Duty. 3. Christian soldiers should be strong, wherein, and why.
149 CHAP. IX. Duty 4. Christian soldiers should be courageous, the necessity
of courage in Magistrates, Ministers, and all other. Motives unto, and means
of Christian valor. 157 CHAP. X. Duty 5. Christian soldiers must take ^^ed
unto some things, and of other things, what they are, and why. 179 CHAP. XI.
Duty. 6. Christian soldiers must be watchful: Always: over their hearts:
against all sin, especially against darling sins: In prosperity: In the works
of their callings: In religious performances, reasons why, and motives to each
particular. 184 CHAP. XII. Duty 7. Sect. 1. Christian soldiers must seek to
God for succor, why, for what, and how they should pray: diverse reprooved,
cavillers objections answered; Motives to pray, how to seek for succor
aright, for what we must pray, for what not. 206 Sect. 2. Why we should pray
for all in authority, and for what: why for Pastors and for what, why for our
children, why for enemies, for whom we must pray, for whom not, and with what
gestures we are to pray. 232
CHAP. XIII. Duty 8. Fasting is a duty belonging to Christian soldiers, what
kind of fasting is required, its necessity, excellency, companions and
occasions. 265 CHAP. XIIII. Duty 9. Sect. 1. Christian soldiers must follow
Christ our Captains directions, standing in those stations wherein he sets
them to war this good warfare. 279 Sect. 2. Parents in their stations and
standings. 245 Sect. 3. Children in theirs, reverencing, obeying, and
gratifying their parents how, and why. 284 Sect 4 Husbands in theirs, loving
their wives, giving them due benevolence, giving them honor, and wisely
guiding of them, how, and why. 292 Sect. 5. Wives in theirs Reverencing their
husbands, being subject unto, as also helpers, after what manner, and why. ^97
Sect. 6. Servants in theirs, Reverencing their Masters, persuading them to
good, obeying of them how, and Motives to the particulars. 304 Sect. 7. Masters
in theirs, In well choosing, and well using their servants and why. 311 Sect.
8. Against Depopulators and Inclosers, showing the hurt and harm they do to
themselves and others. 317 Sect. 9. Against greedy ingrossers of commodities,
hurters of the Common wealth. 327 Sect. 10. Against those who have no lawful
calling. 328 Sect. 11. Against Usurers condemned by 1 Fathers. 2 Counsels. 3
Laws. 4 Their own pretended patrons. 5 Religions of all sorts. 6 And sacred
Scripture in the Old and New Testament. 15 Objections answered, and diverse
disswasives from this sin. 329 Sect. 12. Against changers of Callings
unwarrantably, as to leave trades to turn Manlsters, How change is lawful,
how not. 360

Courteous Reader, pardon I pray smaller faults escaped, and amend these
greater as following.
Page 4. line 10. read wicked ones. p. 26. l. 13. r. five hundred. p. 81. l. 4.
r. possessour. l. 30. r. imputed, wrought for us p. 82. l. 3. r. infused. p.
93. l. 9. r. unbelie^ers. p. 117 l. 20. r. comminations. p. 144 l. 14. r.
enjoining. p. 167. l. 1. r. about you. p. 168. l. 28. r. wicked works. p. 178.
l. 10. r. justice. p. 193. l. 1. r. consort. p. 200. l. 8. r. Idolatry. l. 12
r. abhorred. p. 224. l. 30. r. de^ers. p. 230. l. 34. r. ^arcing. p. 241. l.
11. r. more true. p. 242. l. 11. r. Ambrose brings in. p. 246 l. 16. r.
because. p. 259. l. 1. r. have then. p. 270. l. 20. r. mediately. p. 282. l.
37. r. considerately. p. 289. l. 37. r. Exo. p. 297. l. 27. r. sell. p. 345. l.
35. r. is not necessarily. p. 348. l. 2. r. forbidden.

Marginall faults. Page 2. r. Chap. 8. p. 22. r. (...). p. 160. r. lib. 1. p.
341. r. vi(...). p. 343. r. ilt^. p. 344. r. (...).

Doctrine 1. Christianity is a warfare.. page 5. 2. Christianity is a good
war^are. 10. 3. Christianity is a necessary warfare. 11.
Therefore 1. They who think it an easy matter to be a Christian, and
certain others deceive themselves. 14. 2. Christians must endure hardness.
22. 3. Christians must be armed. 65. 4. They should be strong. 149. 5. They
should be courageous 157. 6. They must take heed. 179. 7. They must be
watchful. 184. 8. They are to pray for help. 206. 9. They must fast and
sight: 265. 10. They must follow Christ's directions and stand in such stations
^e sets them in. 279. 1. Not thrust me^ out o^ their standings as 1.
Depo^ulators 317. 2. Ingrossers 123.
2. Not want lawful callings as Usurers 329. 3. Nor unwarrantably forsake them
as diverse. 360.




THE CHRISTIAN CONFLICT: A TREATISE, Showing the Nature, together with the
Difficulties and Dignity thereof, and the Motives to encourage Christians to
undertake this Warfare.
I. TIM. I. XVIII. That thou by them might war a good warfare.
CHAP. I.
Showing the drift and occasion of this Discourse.
THe life militant, spiritual, or temporal, in former times was neither
disdained, nor dreaded: The Jews went voluntarily to the battle, the
quarrellous Ephraimites contended with Iephta, Judge 12. 1.
because he did not call them to fight against 1 Samuel 17. 13. Diol. p^in. prol.
the children of Ammon: The three eldest sons of Iesse followed Saul to the
battle. Our predecessors (says D^n Antony of Guevara) fought in the field
with their lances, but young men now adays fight at the table with their
tongues. Pythias the Lydian, when he had feasted Xerxes and his whole Army with
great magnificence, proffered moreover to give him treasure, not only for
provision, but also for wages, to have his son discharged of the wars;
which was so d^^pleasantly taken of Xerxes, that he caused the young man i^ h^s
fathers sight to be cut in pieces. Kings and Princes were ^ot backward to
adventure themselves to fight: Witness the many Kings of Canaan against
Joshua: Witness the two and thirty Kings with Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 16.
Witness David, Iehoshaphat, etc. Witness our own and foreign historical
narrations.

In like manner the Primitive Christians (as Ecclesiastical Histories report)
of their own accord did thrust themselves into the hottest brunts of the
Christian sight and combat, where they were sure to meet with bitter, yet
honorable martyrdom. To name but one of many: Lucius a by-stander beholding
the cruel dealing of Vrbicius, said; What is ^. (...). c. 17. p 38.
the cause I pray that thou command ^en to be put to death, not for
adultery, misleading or murder, but only for being Christians? These things do
not beseem an Emperor. Vrbicius answering, and thou seem to be a
Christian: When Lucius had rep^ied, I am indeed: Vrbicius commanded him al^o to
be put to death: to whom Lucius said, I thank thee for releasing me from most
wicked masters, and sending me to God, a good and the best Father and King of
all.

Yea in such honorable repute was the martial man, that all or most of the
titles of honor had their original from the field: Witness the title of
Dukes for their valor in leading: Dux (...). Mar(...) Pr(...) w(...) (...).
B(...), (...). 1. M(...). A(...). G(...) o^ 1. Ar(...). ^.
Of Marquess from defending some bounds and frontiers: O^ Barons, for being
the strength of the war: witness the title of Knight, signifying a soldier:
of Baronet or Banrette, because his father was dubbed in the field under a
banner: Of Esquire, for being an Armor-bearer to a Knight: Of Gentleman, for
puissance and courage. And witness men's Arms, which had their beginning from
bearing arms in the field. And of such honorable esteem likewise was the
Christian There was no word so grievous and injurious to a Citizen of Rome in
ancient time as to say, go, thou have never been brought up i^ the wars.
Di^l. l. 1. c. 1.
warfare, that the glorious names of Christian, Church Militant, Protestant,
etc. had their birth and beginning from the pious courage of the Christian
soldier. Times were once thus, but now alas, as in the former most men are
desirous of, and applaud themselves in the warriors honorable titles, of
Duke, Baron, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman: In hearing their forefathers arms
worthily given them for their valor in the field, and to be pictured like
soldiers in harness when they are dead. Yet partly in regard of the little
respect the soldier has, by means of our long peaceful security; and the
many disorders and outrages acted by that profession, (which cannot probably be
otherwise, whiles election of men for war is used as a dreyne to vent away
the refuse and disordered people) partly in regard of men's womanish
^ffeminatenesse, they have infused into themselves, by their nice and wanton
education; the soldiers magnanimous actions find few loving courageous
practicers; many disdaining, others dreading their condition, accompanied with
great labor, much danger, many miseries, and small esteem. Even so in the
latter, although the greatest number of people, yea all which live within the
verge and pale of the Church, are greedy of, and glory in the honorable names
of Christian, Catholic, Protestant, etc. Yet partly in regard of the base
estimate of the best, and bravest, and most forward spirits: partly in regard
of the many enormous, and unorderly deeds of diverse professors: and in regard
of men's own backewardnesse to any good, the Christian soldiers practices
find few favorers, but many who scorn and flee from teem, they being
attended with little regard, and much reproach.

Concerning the former, I cease to say any more, leaving it to them whom it
concerns to work out of people this inbred cowardice, to infuse into them
courage for Gods and their Countries cause, and to restore the martial men's
esteem (by better choice, discipline and countenance) to its pristine repute,
these being a defense to our lives and livings. But as for the latter, I having
a calling to meddle in the spiritual battle, not only as a Christian, but
more than so; will do mine endeavor to eject faint-hearted pusillanimity out
of the hearts of Christian soldiers, and to animate, and encourage them to
wage war against all the malignant enemies of Christ Jesus with valorous
magnanimity: to endure with patient fortitude the bitter conflicts of the grand
enemy Satan, and the hellish excursions of the Serpents side, to trample under
foot with a holy disdain the taunting reproaches and base usages of wickedness,
and to march victoriously, m^ugre Satan and his co-adjutors, through the
opposite pykes of oppugning temptations, and the utmost villainies of hellish
agents. By giving them a sight of their enemies sleights and sedulity, yet
weakness: instructing them in the true Christian warlike discipline: and
ennobling this so much contemned condition.

For this cause I have selected this portion of Scripture, as the groundwork
whereupon to build the following discourse of the properties and prerogatives,
the graces and glory, the service and solace, the furniture and felicity of the
soldiers of the Lord Jesus. That thou by them must war a good warfare.

Which words contain a charge and commission of war given by the Apostle S.
Paul punctually and personally to Timothy as a Pastor, so to all Gods
messengers and Ministers, likewise as a Christian and consequently to true
believers, namely to war a good warfare. In which general sense I intend to
enlarge my self to all sorts of persons, and occasionally only to speak of
the special.

1. The duty enjoined is to fight or war.

2. The condition or kind of this conflict, a good warfare.

3. The means whereby this good warfare is fought, by them.

CHAP. II.
Christianity is a warfare.
CHristianity is a warfare, wherein the Christian does (as Cor. 10. 3, 4. For
though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh, for the weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, etc. Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. Put you on the whole
armor of God, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against, etc. 2 Timothy 2 3. Thou therefore as a good soldier of Christ. 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have
fought a good fight. Hebr. 10. 32. Fight of afflictions. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Good
fight of faith. Or if you please, I will divide this into three branches.
Christianity is a warfare. 2 Cor. 10. 3. Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.

Those whose condition, calling and profession is to fight

But the condition, calling and profession of Christians is to fight against
the enemies of Christ and his Church.

Therefore the life of Christians is a warfare, and they are soldiers.

The latter proposition is evident by the many sacred injunctions in holy writ,
to fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 3, etc. By the
examples of Gods Saints in all ages: Adam foiled in Paradise: Job tempted and
tried by the utmost of Satan's cruelties: Peter winnowed; Paul buffeted, and
fighting a good fight. And by the admittance of Christians into the Church by
baptism, wherein they receive as it were presse-money, and promise manfully to
fight under the banner of Christ crucified, against sin, the world and the
Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful servants and soldiers to their lives
end.

Those whose Lord is a Lord of hosts, soldiers and armies,

But the Lord of Christians is a Lord of hosts, soldiers and armies,
themselves being part of his host, Psalm. 80, 4, 7, 14, 19. 84. 1, 3, 8, 12.

Therefore they must needs be soldiers, and their life a warfare.

That which agrees with warfare in all respects, is a

But Christianity agrees with warfare in all respects. Because as in warfare,
so in this,

1. There is a place of conflict, namely the Christian Church Militant in this
world, Rev. 12. 7. There was war in heaven. Not in that third and highest
heaven, where God dwells and reigns, the seat and mansion of blessed Angels
and godly men; for there is no fighting, but all peace: and the Dragon was cast
from thence in the beginning. But in the visible Church, the heaven upon earth:
called heaven, it being a lively picture and image of heaven, the habitation of
glorified Saints.

2. There are enemies to fight. For, since the fall of Angels, 1. There have
been, and while the world stands there will be two sides in the Church
militant, the seed of the woman, and the serpents; twixt which there is
constant enmity, Genesis 3. 15. Michael and the Dragon who are always in
combating, Rev. 12. 7. The Spirit and the flesh, 'twixt which there is an
irreconciliable jarre and contrariety, Gal. 6. 7. God and Mammon, both which
none can serve and obey, Matthew. 6. 24. 2. And the true Church upon earth has
always had, and shall always have adversaries and enemies. They not being of
the world, John 5. 19. They being chosen out of the world, John 5. 19. They
reproving the world, testifying that the deeds thereof are evil, John 7. 7.
They being the woman's seed, and borne after the Spirit.

3. There are Generals, Captains and Commanders, under whose conduct and
guidance, at whose appointment and for whose sake the soldiers fight.

First, the Christians Generals and Commanders are

1. God the Father, who is therefore called usually in Scripture, a Lord of
hosts, because all creatures are under his power and disposition, as an host of
soldiers under their Emperor. By him we pull down strong holds, exalting
against God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. And with his armor we fight, Ephesians 6. 11, 13.

2. Christ Jesus who is their courageous Captain, 2 Cor. 10. 5. to the
obedience of Christ. 2 Timothy 2. 3. As a good soldier of Christ. Rev. 12. 7.
Michael,.i. Christ Jesus that strong and mighty Prince and Captain of the host
of God, Josh. 5. 13, 15.

Secondly, the enemies prime leader and commander is the Devil, Iam. 4. 7.
Resist the Devil. Rev. 12. 7. The Dragon fought and his angels:.i. The Devil
(likened to a Dragon in regard of his terrible fierceness) who is the prince
of that army which maintains war against Christ, Rev. 20. 2. The Dragon
which is the Devil. As for the king of those dreadful and hellish locusts,
the angels of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9. 11. the monstrous prevailing beast,
Rev. 13. 1, 2. they are but the Devils substitutes.

4. There are ordinary soldiers in each band, namely every Saint, every wicked
one: there are horsemen and chariots of each side: namely,

1. Able and faithful Magistrates and Ministers; who like valiant horsemen and
commanders put themselves in danger, first running upon the pikes to rout the
enemies and break their ranks; to rescue and deliver, to save and defend Gods
people, are worthily called the chariots and horsemen of Israel, 2 King. 2. 12.

2. And all true professors which are faithful family-governours, who (like
inferior officers) are helpers to the forenamed, Romans 16. 9. 1 Cor. 16. 16.

1. With their prayers ( Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Pray for all Saints and for me. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Pray for Kings and all all that are in authority) in their
Magistracy and Ministry.

2. With their purses in their maintenance, Romans 16. 3, 6.

3. With their pains in preparing and fitting their families.

4. With their advise and counsel, conversation and good example among their
neighbors and families.

So on the contrary,

1. Wicked Magistrates, who by

1. Impunity encourage offenders in mischief, making often kingdoms thereby
guilty of crying crimson si^nes.

2. Which condemn the harmless innocent contrary to charity, justice, the
good of the commonwealth, and God himself.

3. And neglect to rescue the guiltless person out of the claws of the
mighty, it being in their power to save them.

2. Wicked Ministers, who by their

1. Pining, cause Gods people to perish for want of knowledge, Pro. 29 18. Hos.
4 6.

2. Poisoning, making men twofold more the children of hell by their
endeavors, Mat. 23. 15.

3. Neglecting to show men the present danger of their sinful condition, Ezekiel.
35. 6.

4. Evil counsel and bad example.

3. Wicked family-governours,

1. Who by hurting and hindering Gods faithful Ministers,

2. Who by bad counsel and lewd example,

3. And negligence in instructing their families, Glad the bad, make sad the
good, disobey the Lord of life, serve the Prince of darkness, damme up the
current of sound profession, saving practice and knowledge: And open the
floodgates of iniquity to run amain with restless streams and dreadful
overflowings; show themselves perspicuously to be the chariots and horsemen,
that is, the captains and chief strength of the arch-enemy to the Lord of
glory.

5. As in warfare, so in Christianity there is a complete armor for the
Christian soldier, Ephesians 6. 11, 12. Called the Armor of God, Ephesians 6.
11. Of light, Romans 13. 12. Of righteousness, 2 Corinthians. 6. 7. And weapons
defensive and offensive: 2 Corinthians. 10. 3. For the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds.
Neither is the opposite faction wanting of weapons of unrighteousness and
darkness, Romans 6. 12. which the other have cast off.

6. As in a warfare the truly valourous and faithful soldier has or ought to
have an honorable reward, and renowned repute as a requiting remuneration
requisite for his loyal, laudable, and laborious sedulity and services,
conflicts and conquests: But the pernicious and perfidious traitor, who by
base and unworthy cowardice, briberie, or the like, betrays his cause, and
country, condign punishment. Even so the truly valiant magnanimous Christian
soldier, courageous and constant for his God and Christ, their Gospel and
cause, and his own conscience, shall be rewarded with a crown of
righteousness, 2 Timoth. 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, -- -- henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the LORD the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, etc. But the halting treacherous
hypocrite, the downeright profane wretch, yea every one who is against the
Lord and his Christ, with the Devil that deceived them, shall be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone, and tormented for ever and ever, Revelation 20.
10.

CHAP. III.
Christianity is a good warfare.
CHristianity is a good warfare, 1 Timothy 6. 12 Fight the good fight of faith. 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fought a good fight.

That warfare which is with a good warrant, for a good

But Christianity is a warfare, which is

1. With a good warrant, namely Gods own commission, Iam. 4. 7. Resist the
Devil.

2. For a good cause; namely for the faith, Jude 3. therefore called the good
fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12. To obtain an incorruptible crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
But we an incorruptible. To keep a good conscience void of offense to God and
men, Acts 24 16. To please Christ who has chosen us to be soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.
4.

3. After a good manner, Not after the flesh, although they live in the flesh,
2 Cor. 10. 3. Not with carnal weapons, 2 Cor. 10. 4. But spiritual: The
armor of God, the weapons of righteousness.

4. For a good end; namely to glorify God, To obtain the salvation which is
in Christ Jesus with eternal glory, 2 Timothy 2. 10. To stand in the evil day,
Ephesians. 6. 13. And to pull down strong holds -- exalting themselves against the
knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.

That warfare which is the Lords, Christ's, the Spirits, Angels,

But Christianity is a warfare which is the Lords, etc. against the Devil, etc.

Therefore, etc.

That warfare which is good in the five following respects,

But Christianity is a good warfare in those respects, namely,

1. In regard of the Author of it, who is that God which is the Author of all
good, of no evil. Genesis 3. 15. It was he who put enmity between the woman's
blessed seed, and the serpents cursed brood, and that in paradise.

2. In regard of the soldiers, these being all and only the holy ones of God;
these also fighting well the Lords battles in the general calling of
Christianity, and in their personal and particular stations.

3. In opposition to other fights; they being terrene and earthly, this
spiritual and heavenly.

4. In regard of the reward of this combat: namely, the Lord Jesus, Gods
favor, heavens kingdom, and eternal bliss.

5. In regard of the matter of this warfare: It is against the kingdom of the
Devil for that of Christ, and his Father: It is against the flesh, that
unregenerate part of man, which is corrupt, vile, and infected by sin: For
the Spirit that new quality of holiness which is created by the Spirit in the
hearts of the elect: It is against the kingdom of death, darkness, and
damnation, for heavens kingdom, of life, light and salvation.

CHAP. IV.
This good warfare must be fought.
EVery good Christian does, and must of necessity fight this

The Lord of hosts whose we are and whom we serve, although crowns to those
that conquer. Therefore of necessity we ought to fight.

2. The nature of our enemies shows the truth of this: They bear an
irreconciliable hatred against all mankind, especially Christians. To instance
only in the principal and grand enemy the Devil: whose inveterate malice
against the blessed condition of the Lords precious ones: whose insatiable
thirsting after the ruin and perdition of all mankind: and whose incessant
unwearied painfulnesse to devour souls, are plainly and plentifully
decyphered and described in his genuine and proper names expressing to the full
the same.

The Word of truth calls him by the name of

1. A Dragon, Rev. 12. 7. In regard of his terrible fierceness, maintaining
war against the Lord Jesus. Amongst Serpents (says Saint Chrysostom) what
is more fell or cruel Tom. 2. Hom. 15. in Mat.
than a Dragon? And of Dragons, who so outrageous and fierce as the great red
Dragon the Divoll?

2. An old Serpent, Rev. 12 9. In regard of his wiliness and (...) of (...) of
subtle observation finding out by experience.
craft, furthered by the experience of many thousand years, and in regard of
his venomous subtilty exceeding dangerous, and contrary to mankind.

3. A lion, yea a roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. The Devil goes about like a
roaring lion. A lion is a beast excelling others in strength and courage, full
of violence and fierceness, given to devour and destroy, therefore called in
Scripture sometimes Arich,.i. a tearer, renter or plucker, Psalm. 7. 2. Lest he
tear (...) of (...) to pluck off.
my soul [Kearieh] like a lion.

Labi,.i. courageous, valiant, Psalm. 57. 4. My soul is among (...) of (...) an
heart.
[Lebaim] lions.

Shachal,.i. ramping, fierce of nature, Psalm. 91. 13. Thou (...)
shall trample on [Shachal) the Lion.

Kephir,.i. lurking in covert places, Psalm. 91. 13. Thou shall (...)
tread upon [Kephir] the young lion.

Laiish,.i. subduing his prey, Prove. 30. 30. Laiish, a Lion (...)
which is strongest, etc. In all which respects the Devil is truly a lion, he
being given to tear and devour, extreme fierce and cruel, lurking in secret
to destroy, walking, ranging, roaring and devouring.

4. Satan, that is, an especial enemy to God and man, Job (...) of (...)
1. 6. Satan came also among them. 1 Cor. 5. 5. Deliver such a one to Satan.

5. Devil, Shed, a waster, Psalm. 106. 37. They sacrificed -- (...) of (...)
to Devil [Leshedim] to wastiers. A Devil is a waster.

6. The tempter of men to sin, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Lest the tempter (...)
have tempted, etc.

7. A calumniator, Matthew. 4. 1. continually accusing the (...)
Saints before God, Rev. 12 9, 10. maliciously detracting and depraving the
persons, words, actions, not of men only, but even of God himself, Genesis 3. 3.

8. Seghnirim, Levit. 17. 7. rough, rugged, and hairie, for (...)
the horror of their hiew wherein they appeared like Satyrs, Isa. 13. 21. and
other ugly creatures, and wherewith they terrified such as saw them.

9. The wicked or malignant one, 1 Ioh. 2. 13. for molesting, (...)
and with his fierce darts endeavoring men's ruin and misery.

Therefore such being the malice, such the cruelty, so great the craft, and
also the might: yea since such is the nature of our enemy the Devil, that he
is an adversary, an accuser and a tempter of mankind: It cannot be but that a
good Christian does, and must necessarily war this good warfare against this
grand enemy and his cursed instruments: S. Cyprian Cyp. Quod idola non sunt Dei.
speaking of these our enemies, says, These do lurk under detestable idols
and images: these by their inspiration do inspire the hearts of Prophets,
animate the inwards of beasts, do order the flying of birds, do govern lots,
fulfill predictions, do fold in often falsehoods with truths, for they are
deceived and do deceive, they disorder life, disturb sleep, affright also
secretly the spirits of the soul, beginning in the bodies, they wrest aside
members, destroy health, they provoke diseases to compel to their service,
that being fatted with the savor of altars, and the ceased fires of beasts,
they may seem to have cured those things which they had bound fast, themselves
being appointed for pain, they seek to themselves companions of pain.
Therefore necessarily, we must either war this good warfare, or slavishly
submit to these our continual fierce and fighting enemies.

These three ground-works I hope are surely laid, and sufficiently
strengthened, to be a firm and fortified foundation, whereupon I may safely
and surely build the following discourse by way of use and application.

Christianity is a warfare. This shows its inevitable and inseparable dangers,
and uneasy difficulties.

Christianity is a good warfare. This declares its commendable glory and
praisefull dignity.

Christians must fight this good warfare. And this demonstrates our many and
necessary Christian duties.

CHAP. V.
Use 1. Showing the error of those who think Cristianity to be easy.
HOw ridiculous and absurdly foolish, yet much to be lamented is the
groundless fancy and idle conceit of those men, who crown themselves with
pleasant garlands of restfull security, and pleasurefull delights, imagining
they may go to heaven (as it were) in a bed of down and excessive jollity;
thinking it the easiest matter of twenty to go to Church, to receive the
Communion, say over a few prayers, to desie the Devil and all his works, and
to cry God mercy for their prodigious oaths, merciless usury, satanicall
lies, and other their bloody and crimson, constantly committed, and continually
crying impieties; little considering that they are but in a fools paradise,
dreaming altogether of impossibilities. For to pray, hear, receive the
Sacraments, repent, etc. aright, or to be a through sincere Christian, is a
matter of great difficulty, and no little danger, of much hardship and no easy
labor. To profess souldioury, being a wandering runnagado, to enjoy a
soldiers stipend and title with a manumission to solace a man's self with
friends and familiars: to be a billited soldier, or maintained in garrison: to
be intrencht in field far remote from dreadful foes, are easefull, and
neither toylesome nor troublesome conditions. But to be drawn out to march in
battle array, to encounter an impetuous, inexorable, puissant and
bloodthirsty enemy, not only to skirmish a little, but to fight it out pel
mel, each side being forced to employ its best and utmost warlike skill,
strength and valor to vanquish and destroy the other, is (I suppose) an estate
full of dreadful fears, solicitous cares, painful labors, excessive
diligence, and watchful vigilance.

The case is thine, O thou that art a true Christian. Thou have received
presse-money from Christ thy Captain: thy profession is to be his soldier,
than which, what estate more difficill? What condition more painful? What
life more laboursome? Where there are fightings without, and combats within:
where thine enemies are not few, but many: not feeble, but mighty: not meek,
but truculent: not exorable, but implacable: not flesh and blood, but
principalities and powers: not men only, but Devils also. And is it an easy
matter to be a Christian? Are easefull idleness and careless security
congruent consorts for Christianity think you? Surely no. It is a harder matter
to leave and abandon sin, to make progress in piety, to live truly a
Christian life, to mortify the flesh, to crucify the world, and resist the
Devil: to pray for enemies and persecutors, to repay benedictions for
maledictions, to deny our selves, to bear the cross, to forsake all, etc.
than many vain dreamers imagine. I speak not these things to daunt or dismay
any: (for I hope to make it evidently apparent, that the weakest warrior of
the Lord Jesus that will be counseled, shall victoriously vanquish) but to
awake such doting dreamers, who are lulled asleep in Satan's shackles,
preferring a little dangerous ease-seeming security in the Devils slavish
enthralments, before a little happy and saving laborious diligence in the Lords
army.

SECT. 2.
The error of those who think earthly contentments their chiefest glory.
NO less fond and unsound is their brainelesse conceit, who solace themselves
in their noble birth, rich revenewes, large possessions, dainty diet, gay
apparel, personal beauty, corporal health and abilities; deeming these and
such like fading felicities, the greatest glory and most adorning ornaments of
a Christian life. Surely (that I may use the words of a learned Knight) I not
only hold it lawful to rejoice in these good things wherewith God has
blessed us, but a note of much Sr. W(...) R(...). 3. 1 p(...) 21.
unthankefulnesse to entertain them with a fullen and unfeeling disposition.
Yet these being common favors, not those prime, principal and necessary
mercies, which are the proper characters of Christian soldiers. Not these but
those following, are the most glorious adorning ornaments to the Christian
soldier, namely, a patient enduring afflictions for the Lords sake, resisting
unto blood: an impregnable resolution to be faithful in Christ's cause even
unto death: an implacable encountering sin, Satan, the world, and the flesh
with an unvanquished valor not at all moved to entertain with a smiling look
their syrenian and bewitching enchauntments neither appaled a whit by their
threatfull menaces, and terrible assaults; an entertaining of the treacherous
fawnings of this deceitful world, with a loathsome disdainfulnesse; a manfull
marching through its keenest darts of scornful reproaches, base ignominy, and
all ill reports with undaunted courage; being completely clad with the
invincible armor of righteousness, having a dexterity to use the same, with
its several parts and pieces at every turn, to vanquish the enemy, and
safeguard themselves, etc. We do not judge a Philosopher (says S. Chrysostom)
by his bea^d, staff or garment, but by his mind and (...) T(...)n. 5. (...).
manners; nor a soldier by his soldiers garment or arming girdle but by his
courage and magnanimity, etc,

SECT. 3.
The error of those who condemn Christianity because of some discords.
IS Christianity a good warfare? Then the worldlings contumelious conclusion is
vile and ungodly. Who because they lived fellowly in a filthy fraternity, in
all excess of riot before their zealous Preachers came; but since their so
much pains in preaching, their sinful societies (seemingly peaceful) are
marred: for now if they wantonly dance and drink, swear and swagger, or
practice any such like tricks of youth, to grace and glad, to recreate and
refresh themselves and others; they are presently reproved by such meddling
Ministers, and their factious followers (as they call them.) Because many
professors before they forsook their fellowly fraternity, were jocund and
joviall, pert and pleasant companions: But since they are plunged into many
laborious labyrinths of troublesome perplexities, and doubtful distresses.
They presently infer that preaching and Preachers, profession and Professors
are necessarily naught, and inevitably impious. And why? Love is lacking, peace
is perished, unity is vanished, good-fellowship is gone: instead of kindly
concord, and ami^ble amity, behold dissenting discord, and austere averseness.
This O thou world is the most of, yea all thy plea against the Preachers and
Professors of piety. Because we hinder love, we are therefore bad: because we
occasion discord, we therefore are not good. And is there not, O thou infatuated
cavil^er, and intoxicated wrangler, a love which is bad, a hatred which is
good? a pious discord and an impious concord? a godly averseness, and an
ungodly assenting? Sure I am there is a what peace, 2 King. 9. 22. A love not,
1 Ioh. 2. 15. An hating with a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139. 22. And a have no
fellowship, Ephesians. 5. 11. Certain it is that Christ our Captain set fire upon
earth, namely his Gospel, kindling and raising trouble amongst wicked ones
which resi^t it, Luke 12. 49. And it is most certain that there is a peace not
of Christ's, and a variance Nun ^aam bella (...)n^s, nunquam cer^amina desunt,
Et cum quo certet men's pia semper habet. Sp. c. 22 p. 340.
of Gods appointing, Matthew. 10. 34, 35. And without all doubt, this fight of
Christians against fleshly lusts, diabolical temptations, and the worlds
dreadful troubles, and inchaunting vanities, enemies so restless and
laboursome, that a true Christian can have no rest, no quiet, is a holy and
happy, a pious and profitable warfare: for Christianity is a good warfare.

True it is, they hate, but neither God, godliness, nor godly men: but sin,
because it is a breach of Gods sacred Law, Romans 7. 15. the evil that I hate.

True it is, they love not, namely the world, nor the things in the world,
because they are enmity to the love of the father, 1 Ioh. 2. 15.

True it is, they are not sociable, namely with the fruitless works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the fruitless works of
darkness.

True it is, they do resist, but not God, like those that do resist his will,
Romans 9. 19. Nor the lawful powers and ordinance of God, which who so resists,
resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. But the Devil and his Diabolical
subtilties, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

True it is, they are winnowed and sifted, buffeted, and tempted, troubled and
terrified: they have a flesh ever lusting against the Spirit: frailties
without, fightings within. But are they therefore and their profession to be
abhorred as vicked and ungodly? nothing less. The more they hate, the less
they love, the more they resist, the less they are sociable in the former
sense, the better the men: And the greater their combat, the greater their
comfort: for thus doing, they war a good warfare.

SECT. 4.
The error of those who submit to Satan, and oppose goodness and piety.
Does every Christian of duty, and must he of necessity war this good warfare
against the Devil, all his apostate angels and their fiery and infernal
darts; against the wicked world, all vile, vicious, and ungodly men's feared
frowns and fawning flatteries: against the flesh and all its foul and filthy
lusts?

With what a face then (O you sons of Belial) dare you (First, which
slavishly yield without any, yea without your best and utmost resistance to be
led captives by the Devil and his circumventing accomplices. Secondly, and you
which are professed enemies to Christ and his kingdom, to the power and practice
of piety, opposing tooth and nail godliness and godly men) with what face say
I dare you take upon you the honorable name of Christian? use the transcendent
privileges of Christianity? and glory of the Lord Christ Jesus?

1. You are Christians: why then do you not stand in open defiance with,
profess hateful hostility against, and oppose with magnanimous resolutions,
the fawning and fraudulent flatteries of this guilefull, and the fierce and
furious conflicts of this raging world? And those other fleshly and hellish,
impetuous, impious and implacable enemies of your precious souls? If a base
unworthy coward daunted at the first approach of an enemy, without any
resistance: or after some slight velitation or skirmish: o^ a male-contented
miscreant, affecting an enemies slavery more than a Sovereigns servitude,
yielding himself a slavish vassal to a tyrannizing foe, may glory in the
denomination of a soldier, because he has received presse-money, was recorded
in the Generals lists, and ranked and trayn'd by the captain of his hand. Then
may you which cowardly seeing only afar off dangers and difficulties
approaching to assail Christianity, without any opposition, or after some
little conflict: And you who (affecting the ignominious slavery of the world,
the flesh and the Devil, more than the Lords precious service) yield up your
selves to serve the lusts of your flesh, the vanities of this world, and the
suggestions of Satan, may glory of your Christendom, because you are baptized,
your names are recorded and registered amongst Christians, you are taught and
trained by the chariots and horsemen of the Lord Jesus.

2. You are Christians, and very active and busy for to withstand and hinder
what you can with your utmost abilities such and such forward fellows and
their godly fraternity: you endeavor with might and maine to advance
profaneness, Antichristianity and Atheism, therefore you are soldiers: and
being Christians, are therefore Christian soldiers, Alas, you collect
absurdly, and conclude weakly. A rascal rebel may as well argue for his
prodigious villainies, and say he is of English birth, and in continual
combats, although against his anointed Sovereign, his loyal Liegemen, and
faithful subjects, therefore a good English soldier. As such a vipe^ine
traitor is no good soldier in the judgment of that Master in war S. Walter
Rawleigh, who says, It is not the (...)e 3. pa^. 5 17.
punishment that makes a martyr -- nor fighting that declares a ^^liant man,
but fighting in a good cause: Even so such nomina^l Christians, although they
sight, yet are not Christian soldiers, their fighting being against the Lord
and his anointed. Tell me (says S. Chrysostom) how may we discern a
soldier, ^ ^.
whether by that* because as an officer he does defend the King, and is
maintained by him, and is called his: or whether because he does defend his
right, being well affected to him? To show openly in countenance to take his
part, to hold on his side, to bear good will to his business, and to defend
him: but yet to execute or atchieve the enemies affairs, it far worse we
say, than if he having cast off the yoke of loyalty, had wholly given himself
to the enemy, etc. These and all true Christians are soldiers, and both sorts
fight, but under contrary captains and commanders, for ends and causes much
dissenting. Salvian gives a Salv. lib. 8. page 269.
reason of this repugnancy. The chiefest cause of their discord (says he) is
the diversity of will, because either it cannot at all, or scarcely come to
pass that any does love the same thing in another, from which himself does
dissent: It is not therefore without cause that they hate those in whom they
see all things envious and adverse to themselves. For the one live continually
in wickedness, the other in innocence: they in lust, these in ch^stitie: they
in brothell houses, these in solitary places: they almost continually with the
Devil, these without intermission with Christ. They are not therefore to be
esteemed good Christian soldiers although they fight, they not warring this
good warfare.

SECT. 5.
Christianity is a good warfare, which the true Christian does and must war.
BY these three ground-works I having discovered the foolish and absurd
conclusions, the dreadful and desperate condition of many Christians (in
brief thus:

1. Christianity is a warfare: more dangerous difficulties therefore accompany
it than many fondly imagine. Neither is every one fitted for this so
honorable, yet hard profession, it being too harsh for nice and delicate
persons, and effeminate cowards: Neither are worldly rejoycings, as dainty
diet, gay attire, noble birth, rich revenewes, the greatest garnishments of a
Christian, as diverse do idly dream.

2. Christianity is a good warfare. Palpable therefore is the foolish absurdity
of such concluders who condemn Christianity, its profession and professors,
for its discording oppositions, it being so much the better in general, by how
much these are bigger and bitterer.

3. Christians do of duty, and must of necessity fight this good warfare.
Miserable therefore must they needs be which slavishly submit to serve the
enemy: much more they who fiercely fight against, but not this good warfare.) I
will now from the same sure and sacred truths, jointly, or if you will, from
this i^violable threefold cord conjoined, and twisted into o^e, thus,

Christianity is a good warfare, which the true Christian does and must war.
Endeavor to furnish these warriors with profitable directions how to fight
this good fight, so that they may escape and vanquish their violent and
vigilant enemies: how to delight their Sovereign Commander the Lord Jesus: and
how to obtain the crown of glory after this cruel conflict: and also to
consolate and comfort, arm and encourage them against the many disasterous
occurrences this profession does propose.

CHAP. VI.
A Christian soldier must endure hardness.
ALl you which will be good soldiers of Jesus Christ, must resolve with your
selves to endure hardness, 2 Timothy 2. 3. (...). Tu igitur malu^ patere Book 2.
cap. 28. page 635.
Thou therefore as a good soldier of Christ, endure hardness: or suffer
evil. I foretell you of this, because (as says S. Walter Rawleigh) sharp
war and the novelty of sudden violence use to dismay any state or countray,
not inured to the like: but custom of danger hardens even those that are
unwarlike. Sharp war, sudden violences, dreadful dangers are your portion,
you must through ^uch tribulation, Acts 14 22. We must through much tribulation
enter into the kingdom of God. You must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12 All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. You must go
under the cross during your whole life. Y^u must endure battle all your
days. You must proceed from one affliction to another. You have Devils roaring
and raging against you, seeking always your destru^tion, to resist
continually. You have a wicked world always waging war against you, Gal. 6.
14.
which you must crucify, and to which your selves must be crucified. You have
fleshly lusts fighting against your souls, Gal. 5. 24.
which you must mortify. You must be winnowed and buffeted: you must be tried
and tempted: you have continual hostility: you are environed with assaylants:
you are of the Church Militant, and are Christ's soldiers, therefore you must
endure hardness. But what hardness? In labors more abundant, in stripes
above measure, 2 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
in prisons more frequent, in deaths often: in suffering shipwreck. In
journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by
contrymen, in perils by heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren. In
weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst; in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness, etc. In tortures Heb. 11. 35, 36 37.
and temptings, mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, etc. In
suffering all, or any of these; or such like miseries, if they encounter or
environ you for the Lords sake, you must endure hardness as good soldiers of
Jesus Christ.

And that I may the better arm and accommodate you to endure the mouths of
lions, the violence of fire, cruelty of mockings, bitterness of scourgings,
painfulness of stoning, torture of sawing asunder, uncomfortablenesse of
wandering in sheep skins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented,
to suffer any of these or the like, (for we must not be our own carvers or
choosers) I will propound and briefly prosecute some few motives and
inducements.

SECT. 2.
Motive 1. Drawn from examples of particular soldiers in this warfare from
the Church in general, and Christ our Savior.
TAke a view of all those Worthies who have go^e before us.

1. The Church of Israel was put to shame, spoiled of their enemies as sheep
appointed for the slaughter, scattered amongst the Heathen, a reproach to their
neighbors, a scorn and derision to them which were about them, a byword
among the Heathen, a shaking of the head amongst the people, sore broken in the
place of Dragons, covered with the shadow of death, killed all the day long,
counted as sheep for the slaughter, Psalm 44. They were cut off, scattered,
showed hard things, and made to drink the wine of astonishment, Psalm 60. 1,
2, 3. They were prooved, tried as silver, brought into the net, they went
through fire and water, Psalm 66. 10, 11, 12. Their bodies were given to be
meat to the fowls of heaven, and their flesh to the beasts of the earth; their
blood was shed like water, and there was none to bury them, Psalm 79. 2, 3.
They were fed with the bread of tears, and had tears given them to drink in
great measure, they were made a laughing stock to their enemies, and a stri^e
to their neighbors, Psalm 80. 5, 6. They were exceedingly filled with
contempt, with the scorring of those that were at ease, and the contempt of the
proud, Psalm 123. 3, 4. They were afflicted from their youth, the plowers
plowed upon their backs, and made long furrows, Psalm 129. 2, 3. Their bones
lay scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth or heweth wood upon the
earth, Psalm 141. 7. They became tributarie, they wept sore in the night, they
wanted comforters, their friends dealt treacherously with them, they went into
captivity, they found no rest, their gates were desolate, their Priests did
sigh, their virgins were a^f^icted, their adversaries were chief, and their
enemies did prosper, their Princes were like hearts that find no pasture, going
without strength before the pursuer. They sell into the hand of their enemies,
who mocked at their Sabbaths, their adversaries spread out their hand upon all
their pleasant things, and the heathen entered into their Sanctuary. They sighed
and sought bread, yea they gave their pleasant things for meat to relieve the
soul: They were become vile, no sorrow like unto their sorrow, which was done
unto them, wherewith the Lord afflicted them in the day of his fierce anger:
they were made desolate and faint all the day, the Lord delivered them into
their hands, from whom they were not able to rise. Their mighty men were trodden
under foot, their young men were crushed, and the comforter which should
relieve their soul was far from them, etc. Lament. 1. etc. Yet for all this
they did not forget God, nor deal falsely in his covenant; their heart did not
turn back, neither did their steps decline from Gods laws, Psalm 44. 17, 18.

2. Behold the prime and principal particular persons of the Lords band.

1. Jacob, that Israel or Prince of the strong God, one who obtained principal
power from the mighty God: His life was a continued pilgrimage in strange
Countries, accompanied with many evils, namely the malice and threats of Esau,
a tedious and toylesome journey to Mesopotamia, hard service with his uncle
Laban, fear of Esau at his return home, the defiling of his daughter Dinah,
Simeon and Levies tyrannical cruelty, the wickedness of his firstborn
Reuben, the evil tidings of his sons by his best beloved Joseph, and of the
lamentable loss of his darling Joseph, Iudahs marriage with a Canaanitish
woman, and shameless incest with his daughter Thamar, the heavy and hideous
news from Egypt that Simeon was in prison, the money restored, and that
Benjamin must go, etc.

2. David that man after Gods own heart, the sweet singer of Israel, his life
accompanied with much hardness; the distasteful disdain of his brother: Saul's
continual hatred and persecution: the scandalous slanders and false
accusations of Saul's perverse parasites: Merab given from him: Michal given to
ensnare him: his often discomfiting discoveries to Saul by Doeg and the
Ziphims: the malice and wars of enemies: division of his people, and their
destruction by the pestilence: The mocks of Michal, and the revilings of
Shimei: Amnons foul fact and fearful fall: Absoloms prodigious rebellion and
infamous incest; the death of his chief Captains, and revolt of his chief
Counselors: his shameful reproaches, grievous sickness, etc. Yet was he
thankful, confident, hoping, constant and patient.

3. Job like whom there was none upon earth, a perfect and upright man, fearing
God and eschewing evil, endured abundance of hardness, for when God had
opened a gap to Satan, leaving Jobs substance to his merciless cruelty: the
Devil robs him of his fifty yoke of oxen, and fifty she asses by the Sabeans:
spoils him of his seven thousand sheep by fire, takes away his three thousand
cammels by the Caldeans: bereaves him of his seven sons and three daughters
by tempestuous winds overturning the house of banqueting: and depriving him of
his great household (those four messengers of evil tidings and some few other
excepted) by the aforesaid means, and all in one day. And after when the
Devil moved God against him, and gets leave to show his utmost force and fury
against him, his life being saved, his body was smitten and surcharged with
sore and smarting biles and botches from the sole of the foot to the crown of
the head, Chap. 2. 7. his wife tempts him, Ver. 10. His friends were miserable
comforters, 16. 2. His brethren and acquaintance were estranged from him, 19.
13. His inward friends abhorred him, Ver. 19. His wife and servants accounted
him a stranger, Ver. 15, 16, 17. Young children despised him, Ver. 18. Base
fools and unworthy vile ones scorned and derided him: Chap. 30. His grief and
calamity was heavier then the sand: Chap. 6. 2, 3. The arrows of the Almighty
were within him, the poison whereof did drink up his spirits, Ver 4. His flesh
was clothed with worms and clods of dust: his skin was broken and become
loathsome, 7. 5. He was full of tossings too and fro, scared with dreams and
terrified with visions, 4. 14, etc.

I might instance in Jonah, Elijah, and who not? But I will enlarge my self to
name but one more.

2. Christ Jesus our Captain and Commander, whose life was generally
contemptible as a servant, cursed as a sinner: laden with miseries and
accustomed to hardness, from his birth to his burial. His parentage was
poor, his birth without honor, his company being cattle, his chamber a
stable, and his cradle a cratch, Luke 2. 7. His life without ease, persecuted
by Herod being but a babe: driven into exile, being but an infant, Matthew. 2.
13, 16. His body was enfeebled with watching and fasting hunger and thirst, and
his soul afflicted with fears and sorrows, but especially at his death,
besides those terrible conflicts of his with Gods wrath in his agony and
passion: besides his buffetings and scourgings, nayling, piercing and
crucifying, how were his unsupportable sufferings amplified and enlarged in
regard of

1. The persons afflicting, 1 their number being great, uncertain and
indefinite.

2. Their several sorts being various, passengers too and from Jerusalem,
Matthew, 27. 39. Highpriests, Ver. 41. Scribes, 41. Elders 41. Pharisees, 62.
And thieves, 45.

3. Their nature being brutish, barbarous, bloody, cruel, spightfull,
malicious, scornful, and disgraceful, 38. to 45.

4. Their condition being base, Ver. 39. 44. And honorable, 42. bond, 44 and
free, 39. 42. learned, 42. and unlearned; 39. civil, 42 and Ecclesiastical,
42. religious, Ver. 42. and profane, 39. 44.

5. Their drift being to bring into oblivion, hatred and utter contempt the
person, office, doctrine and miracles of our Savior amongst the people: and to
provoke and instigate our Savior Christ to murmuring, impatience and grudging:
to presumptuous tempting of God: to distrustful doubtfullnesse and desperation.

6. And their behavior being 1 unseemely and uncomely in regard of their
places and callings, some of them being Rulers; and profession it being holy
and religious, they being Scribes and Pharisees. And 2 Impious and ungodly, In
regard of their speech it being spightfull and reproachful; and gesture, it
being scornful and disdainefull, Ver. 40, 41, 42, 44. 39.

2. Of the place mount Clavery, the high way, plain field and place of passage
too and fro.

3. Of the time, It being at the hour of dreadful and dismal death in his
greatest and extremest misery: In his heavy passion, last and grievous agony.
When he was wearied, and as it were worn out with Gods sufferings. When he was
wounded with the arrows of Gods wrath, when he was most to be comforted and
pitied.

But did not the miseries and persecutions of Christ and his members expire
upon the Cross, and then cease? No such matter: Peter and John were
imprisoned, threatened, Act. 4. and beaten, 5. 40. The Proto-Martyr Steven was
stoned, 7. Great persecution was raised against the Church, Chap. 8. James is
beheaded and Peter imprisoned, 12. Paul is persecuted from Iconium, and stoned
at Lystra, Chap. 14. Paul and Silas are whipped and imprisoned at Philippi, 16.
Paul is persecuted at Thessalonica, 17. Taken and bound at Jerusalem, 21.
Buffeted and sent prisoner to Felix, 23. Accused falsely by Tortullus and the
Jews, 25. And by him sent a dangerous voyage prisoner to Rome. Descend a
little lower, and from Saint John's time to the end of the world, see the lot of
the godly.

1. The Church of God which is the beloved City and new Jerusalem, Rev. 20. 9.
21. 2. Gods tabernacle and his habitation, 21. 3. The Lambs wife, 19. 7. 21.
9. The woman clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, and upon
her head a crown of twelve stars, 12. 1. led by the Lamb to the fountain
of living waters, 7. 17. Having God and his Christ to rule her, 1. 1. 22. 3.
was to be trodden down, 11. 2. forty months or one thousand two hundred sixty
days: was to slay and escape into the wilderness as the Israelites sleeing
from Pharaoh, 12. 6. where she was to be hid and nourished being persecuted by
the beast and Dragon, 11. 7. And overcome 13. 7. although afterward she
prevails, 17. 14. 19. 19.

2. The Preachers of Christ Jesus, which are stars and Angels 1, 2, 3.
preaching Prophets, 11. 3. 14. 6. Against Babylon, which has made all nations
drink of the wrath of her fornication, 14. 8. And those who worship the beast
and his image, and those which receive his mark, Ver. 9. And exhorting men to
fear God, and worship him, Ver. 7. These are killed, 11. 7. And beheaded, 20.
4.

3. True Christians who are said to dwell in heaven, 13. 6. which worship God,
11. 16. which are without guile, 14. 5. Not defiled with women, 14. 12. who
reverence the voice of Christ's Ministers, 4. 9, 10. 5. 14. follow Gods
Commandments, 14. 12. which are written in the Lambs book of life, 21. 27.
Refuse to take the beasts mark, 15. 2. who have the Lord and his ways in
admiration, 15. 3, 4. who followed the Lamb, 14. 4. having his fathers name in
their foreheads, Ver. 1. which were sealed for assurance, Chap. 7. These were
and are to be afflicted, 11. 7. overcome and killed, 13. 7. How these things
have been verified is related in Ecclesiastical Histories, which record of the
ten bloody and barbarous primitive persecutions, which were so cruel, that
under Trajan (In whose reign Simeon the second Bishop of Jerusalem a man of
120. years old, was tortured and crucified) such a weight of persecutions Eus.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. c. 32. page* 67.
did press the Church, and such infinite number of Martyrs were daily slain,
that Pliny the second which then did govern the province being very much
troubled at the multitude of the slain, declared to the Emperor that
innumerable thousands of men were daily killed, in whom by enquiry there was
found no offense committed nor any thing done against the Roman laws but this
only, that they did sing before day hymns to a God they called Christ. Yea the
number of the persecuted was infinite. so that there was no place empty in the
prisons, and Lib. 8. c. 6. page 186.
that the whole country did seem rather to go to prison, then the guilty to
be led to prison. And as for the torments, they were diverse and intolerable.
Their bodies were torn with Lib. 8. c. 7. page 187.
scourges and then given to beasts: Lions, Bears, Libards, Bulls, and every
kind of cruel beast were used, yea the cruelty of all beasts, men and
elements were armed against the worshippers of God. Some of them after
scourgings and bonds, tortures Ibid. c. 8. p. 188.
and other horrible torments of diverse kinds were burnt. Some cast into the
sea, some slain, some crucified with their feet upward, etc. Some had their
flesh torn of with potsh^ards, some rent in pieces with trees bowed together.
Chap. 9. They were Cap. 9. Cap. 10.
beaten with slaves, with rod^, with whips, etc. They were hanged up their
hands being bound behind them, stretched out with pulleyes, and pulled in
p^eces limme by limme. Yea such and so great were the torments, that the
Historian says, who Lib. 8. c. 11. page 191.
can repeat? who can disclose? who can express how they were slain with
axes, their thighs were broken, they were hanged up like swines flesh, and
smothered with smoke, dismembered, roasted. Yet for all these things, their
courage was undaunted and impregnable, witness the brave and blessed answer of
Policarpus, Lib 4. c. 15 page 84.
fourscore and six years I have served Christ and he never hurt me, how can I
now blaspheme my King which has saved me? Witness the invincible patience of
Blandina and Attalus: Lib. 5. cap. 1, 2. page 103, etc.
Witness the free and voluntary speech of Philoromus, of Phileas, why do you
vainly tempt the constancy of the man? Why would you make him who is a
believer an infidel? Do you not see that his ears hear not your words? His
eyes see not your tears? How can he whose eyes see and steadfastly regard Lib.
8. c. 10. page 189.
heavenly glory be turned with terrene tears? Witness that rich and faithful
Victorianus greatly in favor with his King who answered the messengers from
his Sovereign. Tell my King let him broyle me with fire, let him force me with
beasts, let Lib. 3. De pers^. vand. p. 659.
him torture me with diverse kinds of torments, if I consent I am baptized in
vain in the Catholic Church. Witness all those Primitive Martyrs and our
late blessed brethren of happy memory in those bloody Marian days and since. 1
Did Christ himself our head Master and Governor? Did the Church (the body and
building of Christ) in all ages? (some few short breathings excepted) and its
particular members? Does the Church at this day in other places endure much
hardness as the soldiers of Christ? Are the two witnesses now warred against
overcome and in killing as some probably think? And shall not we the soldiers
of this Captain, the members of this body, the Warriors of the same band
prepare us patience, and resolve to endure hardness as the good soldiers of
Christ?

SECT. 3.
Motive 2. Drawn from our condition.
WE are men, therefore we have few days, many dangers: few years, but many
evils: a short time but much trouble, Job 14. 1. Man that is borne of a woman
is of few days and full of trouble: We are Christian men, therefore to be
hated of all men for Christ's sake, Matthew. 10. 22. Being as sheep amongst
Wolves, and lillies among thorns. Christians are like Merchants in great
perils, before they can enjoy their wished haven; like travelers in an
enemies country abiding much hardship, before they are free from danger: we
must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of heaven, Acts 14. 22.
Yea all that will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12.
We are Gods Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum tendimus ad patriam veram
vitamq* perennem.
wheat which must be threshed: we are Gods grapes which must be pressed: we
are Gods gold which must be tried. As we wash and wring that linen which we
wear next our skin; but let sacks and such like lie without beating: even so
our most wise God wringeth with afflictions those children, which are most
dear and near unto him, even when he lets others whom he makes not such
account of enjoy their rest and quiet. Let us of necessity make a virtue, since
as being men we are subject to innumerable evils, as Christians to many more,
arm we our selves therefore as good Christian soldiers of Christ Jesus to
endure hardness; and as the magnanimity and valor of the Romans was most
admirable and excellent in their greatest adversities; so let ours according
(...). c. c. lib. 2*
to the ancient rule, hardship ennobleth virtue.

SECT. 4.
Motive 3. Drawn from the harmelesnesse of them.
LEt the harmelesnesse of afflictions persuade to suffer them, we being content
with patience, and perseverance to endure that which hurts us not. Although
these are hideous, yet not hurtful; although dreadful yet not
disadvantagious: they are tolerable although terrible. Like the formidable
waves of the overflowing deluge, which tossed the Arc, but drowned it not:
like the fire in the bush, which burned without consuming the same: like Ionahs
whale, which swallowed, yet destroyed him not: like the venomous Viper hanging
on Paul's hand not harming him at all: many a time have they afflicted me from
my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me said Israel long ago, Psalm.
129. 1, 2. upon this rock will I build my Church and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it says our Savior, Matthew. 16. 18. we are troubled on
every side yet not distressed; we are perplexed, yet not in despair:
persecuted but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed, says Saint Paul, 2
Cor. 4. 8, 9. Afflictions do not withdraw from the verity of grace and faith,
but do corroborate or strengthen in grief says Saint Cyprian, who himself
was Cyprian de Mortal.
a Martyr.

SECT. 5.
Motive 4. Drawn from their benefit, and profit.
THe fourth motive shall be drawn from the benefit of such like afflictions;
each man suffers patiently that which he hops may do him good: many
perilous blasts and boisterous storms: much toylesome travail by sea and
land, and abundance of painful labors are endured by ventrous Mariners and
martial men, yea by all sorts of traders and traffiquers to get gain: bitter
pills, piercing plasters, uncomfortable cuttings, and fe^refull launcings are
suffered to obtai^e health. Endure we therefore as the good soldiers of Christ
hardness or afflictions.

1. These being to Christian soldiers as the waves tossing the ark, yet saving
Noah: As the Whale swallowing up, yet preserving Jonah from drowning. As the
Dragon pursuing the woman, Rev. 12. 1. yet procuring her greater preservation.
As the file grating the iron, yet making it clearer and brighter. As the
furnace melting, yet purifying the gold. As the mill grinding, yet making the
wheat more useful. As the cards breaking, yet fitting the wool for commodity.
As the coals heating, yet making perfumes more odoriferous.

2. These are as the red sea, preserving Israel, drowning Pharaoh and his host,
advantageous to the Saints, although hurtful to ungodly men: for although they
procure desperation to these, yet they cause a most certain hope in those.

They being instruments by which the goodness and power of God does appear in
comforting and succouring us: as also occasions of the most excellent good
things: for by these our daily slips are fatherly and favorably corrected: our
pride and arrogance is pressed and pulled down: the flesh and wantonness is
cooled and quailed: our old man is destroyed and new renewed, sloth and
sluggishnesse is shaken off: the confession of faith is expressed; our
weakness is manifested: we are provoked to more earnest and ardent prayer: we
daily understand the fragility and frowardness of our nature, and accustom
our selves to patience.

3. These are spiritual exercises to exercise, precious medicines to cure, and
wholesome balm to heal the soul; to purge us of the dross and relics of some
old sin which we are loath to leave.

4. Without these the rich and radiant graces in Gods Saints are often like
fire covered in a heap of ashes, and ointment stopped into a close box.

5. These sharpen the spirits of Gods children, and make them oftentimes do
things far more excellently and considerately than they do in prosperity.

6. These make trial of our zeal, love and constancy, being to us as the
furnace to the gold, to try and prove us, Prove. 17. 3. and our hope waiting,
Psalm. 123. 2. Romans 8. 24. Faith not seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Heb. 11. 7. 13. 20.
and patience enduring, Iam. 5. 4. Heb. 12. 1.

7. These stir up our zeal, love and devotion in praising and serving God,
and make us more diligent in the same.

8. These are as thorns in our ways, lest we run wrong and stray aside.

9. These often times turn to the enlargement of Gods Church, such being the
riches of his merciful providence, that he turns the weakness of his
children, and wickedness of their enemies to the good of the Church: the
cruelty of the one, and the cowardice of the other to the increase of Religion,
and enlargement of the Church, Acts 8. 1, 4. The Lord works by contraries, and
beats the Devil with his own weapons, he shows that men's wisdom is
foolishness with him: for when they think to put out the name of Christ by
persecution; when they seek to quench the light of the Gospel, by driving
away the Preachers and Professors thereof, then does he most of all publish
it, making those painful Preachers, and pious Professors like fragrant
spices, brayed and pounded, to smell the sweeter, and spread their smell the
further, Acts 11. 19. One Martyrs death often causing many to be converted.

10. These are advantageous beyond expression to the Christian Worthy,
affording him a threefold excellent commodity, namely,

First gainful profit; witness that sacred speech of David that worthy
Warrior of Christ Jesus, Psalm 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. And of that magnanimous soldier of God the Prophet Jeremy, Lament.
3. 27. It is good for a man to bear the yoke from his youth. Namely for a man
which is elected, which is the faithful servant of GOD, and soldier of
CHRIST, who is armed with the armor of GOD, and endued with faith, hope,
patience, meekness, and such like gifts and graces, for this man it is good,
that is, a thing honest, just, right, comely, commendable and of good report,
John 15. 20. Or a blessed and happy, profitable and gainefull thing for him to
bear the yoke, namely of Christ Jesus, both of subjection and obedience, and
of afflictions, crosses, calamities of all sorts, inward temptations and
outward troubles. From his youth, that is, continually and daily: use making
perfect, custom being another nature.

Secondly, Pleasurefull delight. Though this is a mavelous strange paradox to
most men, yet not so strange as true. Acts 5. 41. Peter and John departed
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name, Chap.
16. 25. Paul and Silas sang praises to God after they were beaten with many
stripes, thrust into the inward prison, their feet being made fast in the
stocks. Afflictions (we see) did quicken up the Apostles, making them more
cheerful and lively, they being glad to be so honored, and preferred of God.
Their conscience was to them a continual feast, Proverbs 15. 15. And their
good cause increased their comfort under the cross, yea so that the greater
their cross, the greater was their comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5.

Thirdly, Whether it be true or no (I know not) that is recorded of the
Muscovians, that it is holden for a great grace in Muscovia for a servant to be
stricken of his master, a wife of her husband, or a Noble of the great Duke.
For if any of the Nobles happen to be stricken with a cudgel, he replies,
Health and safety attend you my Lord and great King, who have vouchsafed to
reclaim me by these stripes. Yet I am sure that renownefull honor is from
hence. From hence it was that the Saints did glory in tribulation, Romans 5. 3.
And Saint Paul in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 17. These being
glorious scarres and honorable maimes: These being laudable liveries of a
Christian soldier, making him conformable to Christ his heavenly Captain and
prevailing Conqueror, 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14. By these we glorify the God of all
glory, John 11. 19. Yea the Church and our selves, Ephesians. 3. 13. Yea so far
forth, that the greater the cross, the greater the comfort in this languishing
life, and more illustrious crown in that haven of happiness, and heaven of
bliss, Romans 8. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5

But many of Gods dearest darlings and beloved favorites

True, yet they die not in Gods displeasure, but in his favor.

But persecutions and afflictions cause backsliding apostasy Demas-like fall
away; or like the stony ground, who when persecution or affliction arises for
the Words sake, immediately are offended, Mar. 4. 17.

True in counterfeit, not in current Christians: in timeservers, Ioh. 2. 19.
Though the spuming drossie metals are consumed, yet the pure and precious gold
is purged by the fiery fining furnace. Though the dusty chafe and empty
grains are driven and blown away by the winnowing wind, yet the good and
solid corn is thereby cleansed; although the rotten leaking vessel perishes by
the raging sea: yet the sound Christian like a good ship, governed by a
discreet and wise pilot, the more he is rocked and tossed with these boisterous
billows, the faster he saileth. A ship and ship-man are of great credit after
(but not before) they have endured many sturdy weather-beating storms,
according to that of S. Cyprian, A Pilot is known in a tempest; a soldier is
tried in battle.

SECT. 6.
Motive 5. Drawn from the persons afflicting, both principal and
isntrumental.
THe fifth Motive drawn from the persons afflicting.

First, The prime and principal, the Author and efficient of all our
afflictions is the Lord: of David's reproachful revilings, 2 Samuel 16. 10. of
Jobs extraordinary and unspeakable loss, Job 1. 21. And of all evil, Amos 3.
7. Consider therefore advisedly,

1. What this God is to us, namely a most merciful and tenderhearted Father,
loving us entirely, yea beyond all comparison and expression.

2. Why and for what causes the Lord so gracious does afflict us, namely,

1. Either to make manifest and reveal openly the proper lot and peculiar
portion of the godly, as in Abel.

2. To try and take an experimental proof of the faith, hope, patience,
zeal, love, constancy, and other graces of the righteous, as in Job.

3. To exalt and elevate from contemned baseness, to magnificent glory, as in
Joseph.

4. To manifest and show Gods glory, as in the man who was blind from his
birth, Ioh. 9. 3.

5. To declare and make it evident that Christ his kingdom is not of this
world, as in his Apostles, Ioh. 18. 36.

6. To correct and chastise for sin already committed, as in David, 2 Samuel
12. 14. 24.

7. To preoccupate and prevent sin to come, as in S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

8. To renew and re-establish dying and decaying grace, as in the Israelites,
Hos. 5. 15.

9. To wean and withdraw our doting desires from the sweet and sugared baits and
be witching enticements of this deceitful world, these crucifying us to the
world, and the world to us, Gal. 6. 14. As a nurse uses to anoint her breasts
with some bitter worm wood to weane her child from sucking: so our gracious
God to withdraw us from the poisonous pleasures and delights of this world,
gives us persecutions and afflictions.

10. Or to make mute and put to shameful silence Satan and his cursed
co-adjutours, divellishly cavilling against the Saints, saying, such and such
are religious for sinister respects; gain, favor, or the like: But if
persecution should come, their hypocrisy will be perspicuous. Job 1. 9, 11.
Does Job fear God for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about
his house, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the
work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land: But put forth
thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.
Chap. 2. Verse. 4. Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea all
that a man has will be give for his life: But put forth thine hand now, and
touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. Job and other
sincere servants of God, delivered into the hands of Satan and his cruel
accomplices, have manifested the contrary to these slanderous objecters, that
they serve God faithfully as well in afflicting adversity, as in delighting
prosperity, Job 13. 15. Although he kill me, yet will I trust in him. 2.
Corinthians 6. 4, 5. But in all things approoving our selves as the Ministers
of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings,
etc.

If for either, any, or all these causes the Lord does or shall afflict us, it
is for our own good, and therefore we should with patience endure it.

2. The persons afflicting us, instrumentally being as Gods rods, whereby he
smites; his staff, wherewith he beats in* and having no ability to touch,
smite, or do any thing against us without leave and license from our good and
gracious God, are either

1. Men, such as cruel Cain, scoffing Ishmael, profane Esau, the ungodly
Philistims, Midianites, Moabites, Egyptians, etc. Amongst whom the peculiar
people of God live like lillies amongst thorns, like sheep amongst wolves; yet
not therefore to be daunted or dismayed, but to endure with invincible
resolution, undaunted valor, and all cheerful alacrity, their utmost spite
and extremest oppositions. Which that we may do, let us wisely and advisedly
consider,

1. That they are but Gods rods, Isa. 10. 5. O Assyrian the rod of mine anger.
Psalm. 17. 14 From men which are thine hand O Lord. By which and with which our
heavenly Father does correct us; they not having the least power of themselves
to beat and bustet, to afflict and scourge: for had they, they would swallow us
up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, Psalm. 124 3. 129. 2.

2. That when they do their worst, executing their commission with the keenest
edge of exasperated violence, and bloody cruelty, whetted on, and sharpened by
hellish fury, and humane malice, yet can they only kill our bodies, Luke 12.
4. which must of necessity die, Heb. 9. 27. It being appointed unto all men
once to die.

3. That although they aim at nothing less, yet their scourging of us tends
to our greater good, Romans 8. 28. we knowing that all things work together for
good to them that love God.

4. That these bedlam beasts and barking Belials shall severely smart for
grieving us: for as a tenderhearted father when he has sufficiently corrected
his child, rends and tears the rod in pieces, throws and casts it from him
with indignation, or into the fire to be consumed, even so deals our
compassionate Father with these his rods; witness Pharaoh, Ahab, Iezabel,
Saul, Achitophel, Haman, yea all the savage and bloody persecutors of Gods
people, from their great grandfather Cain, with whom the Lord is sore
displeased, for he was but a little displeased (with his children) and they
helped forward the affliction, Zach. 1. 15. The Lord was wrath with his people,
he gave them into their hands, they showed them no mercy, therefore etc. Isa.
47. 6. Take a view of Gods visible revenge in this life upon the barbarous and
savage persecutors of his people in all ages. The bloody Egyptians which
drowned the newborn babes of the Israel of God, were by him drowned in the red
sea, Exodus 14. 28. Iezabel thirsting after, and greedily drinking the blood of
the Lords Prophets, becomes meat and drink to the dogs of Iezreel, 2 King. 9
36.

I^ash who commanded his servants to slay Zachariah the son of Iehejada, was
slain himself by his servants, 2 Chronicles. 24. 21, 25.

Antiochus that barbarous beast who had tormented other men's bowels with many
and strange torments, was plagued with a pain of the bowels which was
remediless, and sore torments of the inward parts, etc. 2. Maccab. 9. 5, 6.
Yea all the members of his body were much pained, ver. 7. the worms rose up out
of the body of this wicked man, and whiles he lived in sorrow and pain, his
flesh fell away, and the filthiness of his smell was noisome to all his army,
so that no man could endure to carry him for his intolerable stink, 9. 10. And
then this murderer and blasphemer having suffered most grievously, as he
entreated other men, so died he a miserable death in a strange country in the
mountains, 28.

The Herodian family, by whose cruel commandments the harmless infants, John
the Baptist and the Apostle S. James were martyred, plagued with doleful and
dreadful destruction.

Herod the great, besides the many miseries and tragical calamities which
befell his family, he was smitten with a disease so hidcous and horrible that
manifested the Lords wrathful revenge for his bloody and crimson crying
cruelties. From that time sickness did quickly take his whole body, and made it
subject Eus^b. Hist. li^. 1 c. 9. p. 10. ex Joseph.
to sundry griefs, for he had a burning fever, an intolerable itch over the
whole skin, continual pains of the fundament, about his feet as it were
dropsy swellings, an inflammation of the bladder, rottenness of the privy
members, full of worms, besides often and difficult breathing, coivulsions of
all the members: so that they that were inspired from above said that these
sicknesses were a revengement. And this monster of men knowing how he was
hated for his cruelty, commanded that the principal men of the Jews should be
imprisoned, and slain at his death, that so the Jews might be forced to
lament at the same.

2. Herod Antipas that notable hypocrite who beheaded Eusebius. lib. 1. c. 11.
page 12.
John, and derided Christ, an enemy to the Church and truth, was vanquished and
banished with Herodias to Vienna.

3. Herod Agrippa a violent persecutor of the Church, Ibid.
Acts 12. was smitten by the Angel of the Lord and eaten with worms.

Pilate that wicked judge who condemned our blessed Savior Micrel. de Eccl.
mos. page 221.
being called home again to Rome, laid violent hands upon himself, his dead
body was tormented by spirits after a dreadful manner, etc.

N^ro that infernal fury, breathing out rigorous and raging persecutions
against Gods people, after diverse dreadful distresses, hearing that he was
judged by the Senate an enemy, Sueton. Nero 6. page 249.
and was sought for to be punished after the ancient custom, namely his neck
to be put into a gallows, and his body being naked to be beaten to death with
rods, he slew himself.

Domitian as Eusebius reports, a great persecutor of the Sueton. Dom. 12. page
315.
Church of God, was slain in his chamber by his own servants, his wife
Domitia being privy thereunto, and his dead body was contemptuously carried out
by the bearers of dead bodies like a cut-throate.

Trajan, Hadrian and Antoninus, not only tasted of, but also drunk deep of
the Lords cup of plagues and punishments for the blood of his Saints, which
they with such beastly and greedy cruelty and immanity had shed as water upon
the earth. Soc. Eccl. Hist. lib. 1. c. 1 p. 204


Severus betrayed and slain by his own soldiers.

Decius before he had reigned two years was slain with Iuseb. l. 7. c. 1.
page 81.
his children.

Valerianus his fearful end is thus set down by Constantine in his Oration
to the Saints. Also thou Valerianus showing Page 113.
the same cruelty on Gods servants, have determined as it were before all men's
eyes the just and holy judgments of God, when thou being taken captive and
bound wast led clothed in purple, and other like kingly apparel; and after by
Sapores the King of the Persians, wast commanded to have thy skin plucked off,
and thou to be powdered with salt: thou have set up before all men's eyes, an
everlasting sign of thy calamity.

Dioclesians (under whom was the greatest and most grievous Ibid.
persecution) direful and deserved destruction for his cruelty against the
members of the Lord Jesus, is described in the Chapter following in the same
Oration.

Galerius was killed with an ulcer in his privy members (...)rel. p. 12^.
full of worms, and most loathsome with a deadly stink.

Maximinus vanquished by Licinius was plagued of God as follows, Therefore a
torment sent by the special appointment of God did suddenly take him, taking
its beginning from his flesh, and making its progress even to his soul: for a
sudden mattering happened to him in the in most secrets of his body,
afterward in the lowest parts a fistulous ulcer, and from these a certain
raging evil feeding upon the inward bowels, and a hidden multitude of worms
breaking out, and breathing out a deadly stink, the whole rising of the body
being changed through the abundance of meat before the disease into fatness;
which then being mattered yielded an intolerable and horrible spectacle to
those which came near him, therefore some of the Physicians not being able to
endure the intolerable stink were slain: others because the whole body being
swelled, there was no hope of health remaining, and because they could not do
any thing to heal him, were also cruelty slain. At the last when he was
afflicted with (...) lib 9 cap 17. and ^
such evils, he b^gan to think what he had done, causlessely against the pious
worshippers of God, etc.

Maxentius was drowned like Pharaoh, and his army vanquished Eusebius. lib. 9.
cap. 9.
by Constantine.

Afterward the Arrians persecution raged so through the whole Eastern parts,
yea the whole Roman empire, especially Constantinople, that scarce any
bloodthirsty Nero did exercise such cruelty as the Arrians did against
Orthodoxe Christians. Micrel. p. 565.


But behold the revenging eye of God, which sent down first of all hayle like
a bowl in the greatness of hands, like stones in hardness, and smote many
men and cattle, afterward overthrew Nicaea: after that destroyed Phrygia with
a very great famine, and Val^ns himself bing wounded by the Goths in fight,
when he did convay himself into a shepherds Cottage, was burnt with fire
thrown in, and wanted common burial.

Arrius sitting to ease nature his inwards and all his bowels Russin. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 13. p. 189.
did run out, and so in such a place he came to naught and fearfully perished
with a kind of death fitting such a blasphemous and filthy wretch.

Julian the Apostata, and tyrannical persecutor of the Saints, Abrah.
Buc^olcer. p. 650.
warring against the Persi^ns, was wounded with a dart (by a horseman, or as
Theodoret reports, he was sound wounded, uncertain Lib. 4. cap. 25. page 367.
whether by an Angel or man, but certain whosoever did it, he was a Minister
of Gods will) and being thus wounded, he filled his hand with blood, threw it
into the air, uttering these words, O Galilaean thou have ^v^rcome. A little
before the death of this bloody wretch Libanius Iulians teacher in Paganism,
scoffingly asked a Christian Schoolmaster, what the Abrah. Buc^ol^ p. 650.
Carpenters son was doing, he answered, he prepares a coffi^ for Julian,
which was ^^ortly fulfilled.

Julian Uncle to the forenamed Julian, was taken with a grievous diseas^, and
peri^^ed, his bewells rotting, when the excrements were no more convayed out by
their passages, but that cursed mouth, which had been the instrument of
blasphemy, was the passage of them. They report that his wife, a woman singular
Theod. lib. 4. cap. 13. p. 363.
good in says, said to her husband, It is meet (O husband) that thou should
praise Christ the Savior, who by this instruction has showed thee his power:
for thou did not know, against whom thou did contend, etc.

Felix also was assailed with a divine scourge; for shedding I^id*
blood night and day by his mouth, when from all the parts of his body, all his
blood in his body was come out of his mouth he dyed.

Eudoxia the Empress of Constantinople, that wretched Herodias, and implacable
persecutrix of renowned Chrysostom, who always breathed out blood and
bitterness against him, was smitten with death the fourth day after his
banishment for that cause, and both she and other his enraged Cyri^us.
Ars(...). 5
enemies brought Gods judgments upon the city (namely a fearful hayle) and
themselves, as (...). li^. c. 2^. p. (...).
Sozomen and Li^. (...). 17. A^r^b. B(...). p. 6^4.
Socrates report.

Anastasius, terrified with thunder, and lightning, running from chamber to
chamber through fear, was slain by thunder and lightning.

Radagaisus, although he had in his army above two hundred thousand Goths, yet
being terrified from heaven, was taken alive, and slain, and that huge host
miserably scattered, (...) p. 655.
sold or slaughtered.

Gundecius the Vandal was slain by the Devil. Micrel. p. 567.


Hunericus, called sceleratissimus, most wicked in whose days if any shall go
about to show those things which are done in the city of Carthage he cannot
show, no not the names of the torments. This barbarous bloody butcher had Gods
hand so A^rab B(...)ol. p. 663.
upon him, that his body was so putrified with worms crawling and bursting out
of it, that not a body, but the parts of a body were buried.

Attila the King of the Huns, having largely drunk wine at a marriage feast in
the night, by blood coming forth of his own nostrills was choked. Id^m ib p.
661


Alboinus who vowed to root out all Christians, and ragingly began to perform
the same, compelling his wife Rosomond ( being merry in Verona) to drink out
of her fathers skull, whom he had slain, was slain by Helmichild, persuaded
^^lyn. p ^3.
so to do by Rosomond in revenge of that indignity offered to her.

Gilimer a bloody parricide and cruel persecutor of the Abrah* Buchol. p. 667.
faithful being overcome by Bellisarius, and enclosed in a hill desired a
friend of his to send him a harp, a loaf and a sponge, a loaf, because of a
long time he had not seen any baked bread, a harp to assuage his misery, and
a sponge to wipe away his tears.

De Rom^, (a bloody persecutour of them of Merindol) was Act. and M^n.
the most wicked and cruel man and afflicted the poor Christians with most
cruel torments that could be devised, the least pain that ever he tormented
any by, was this: to fill their boots full of boiling grease, and to cause
them to be pulled on, and to be hold^n before a great fire, and so to end their
lives, whereof the King being advertised commanded that he should be cast into
prison and condemned, whereof he having knowledge, withdrew himself to
Avinion, whereas within a short space he fell sick of a terrible disease,
unknown to any Physician, extreme pains and torments were in all his body,
and there was no ointment, nor fomentation that could ease him one minute of an
hour, neither was there any man that could tarry near about him, wherefore he
was carried to the Hospital, and there commanded to be well entreated, but no
man durst come near unto him for the great stinch that came out of his body,
insomuch that the flesh fell away by great pieces and gobbets: his body was
repleate with sores full of vermin, and worms, and oftentimes in great rage
he would say, in what pain and torment am I now? now I remember the great
evils, and oppressions that I have done unto the poor men, and know that for
that only cause I am assaild on every part. Who will kill me? and deliver me
out of this distress that I languish not in these torments? And he himself
not being able to abid^ the stinch of his body, assaied diverse times to kill
himself but he had not the power so to do, thus this cruel Homi-cide and
blasphemer received confusion, as a just reward of his cruelties.

To rehearse only the horrible end of Rockwood the chief^ Act. and M(...).
stirrer up, of all the afflictions before spoken of (against the Protestants in
Callice) when even to the last breath staring and raging, he cried he was
utterly damned, being willed to ask God mercy who was ready to forgive all that
asked mercy of him, he brayed and cried out, all to late, for I have sought
maliciously the deaths of a number of the honestest men in the town, and
though I so thought them in my heart, yet I did that lay in me to bring them
to evil death, all to late therefore all to late.

2. Or Devils. True it is, the devils malice against us is inveterate, and so
exceeding great, that he will not be wanting to do us what mischief soever he
can, although thereby he aggravates his own damnation. Neither is his craft
inferior to his hatred, he being the old subtle Serpent. He is also as cruel
as fraudulent, being the great red Dragon, and the roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour. And as powerful as truculent, being the strong man armed, the
prince of darkness, the God of this world, and daring to contend with Michael.
Yet need we not either faint or fear but must and may encounter his fierce and
fiery darts, with comfort and courage, with patience and puissance. To this end
consider

1. That this devil so potent and politic, so malevolent and mischievous, is
subject and subordinate to God our merciful protector and gracious father,
from whom the evil spirit received a commission to deceive Ahabs false
Prophets, 1 King. 22. 21, 23. Satan had license and liberty given and granted
to afflict Job, Job 1. 12. 2. 6. And without whose leave the Devils could not
enter into swine, Matthew. 8. 31.

2. That as the raging restless Ocean cannot exceed its limited bounds, Job
38. 10, 11. So neither can this raging ravenous lion transcend his permitted
limits: He may sift Saint Peter yet can he not make his faith to fail, Luke
22. 31, 32. He may buffet Saint Paul, but not vanquish him, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
endure we therefore hardness.

SECT. 7.
Motive 6. Drawn from the kinds of them. 1 Loss of riches. 2 Famine. 3
Exile. 4 Death. 5 want of burial. 6 Reproaches.
THe sixth Motive drawn from the kinds of afflictions. Stay a little, pause a
while, examine strictly and seriously, some of those particular pressures which
seem most dreadful and distasteful, ponder punctually and precisely upon
them: search and see if any affliction is so adverse; if any hardness is so
harsh, that a Christian soldier may not endure with patience and piety
constancy and cherfulness.

First, Is the loss of riches incompatible and insufferable in thy conceit and
apprehension, O thou select soldier of Christ. Then

1. Hear what Bias a heathen man, when he lost all by the Omnia mea mecum
porto. Tul. parad.
enemies spoiling his country Priene, said, I carry whatsoever is mine with me
meaning his virtue and learning.

2. Hear what rich and religious Paulinus, Bishop of Nola said, when the
cruel Goths had ruined the city and robbed him of all as well as others, Lord
I am not grieved for gold and Aug. lib. 1. de civit. Dei. cap. 10.
silver, thou know where all my treasure is, namely in heaven, where it
could not be taken from him.

3. Hear how joyfully the primitive Christians took the spoiling of all their
goods, Heb. 10. 34. And took joyfully the spoiling of your goods.

4 Hear how patiently and piously that holy man Job suffered the loss of all,
Job 1. 21. naked came I out of my mothers womb^, and naked shall I return
thither again: the Lord has given and taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord.

5. Hear what Saint Augustine said of Christians stripped and spoiled of their
substance. They have lost all: whether have Aug. lib. 1 De civit. Dei cap. 10.
they lost their piety? whether their faith? whether the good things of the
inward man, which is rich before God? These are the riches of Christians.
Godliness is their gain, loosing therefore these things they cry all with
Job, rich within, poor without, naked came I, etc. blessed be the name, etc.

6. Consider and see that these riches are such, which we neither brought into
this world, neither can we carry them away, 1 Timothy 6. 7. We brought nothing
into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Saint Augustine
would not Ibid.
have Christians grieved for the loss of those things whiles they live, which
they must soon leave when they die.

7. Consider what promises our Savior makes to all such who forsake houses,
lands, or any thing for his sake and the Gospels, Matthew. 19. 28. saying such
shall receive an hundred fold, that is, he shall obtain so much glory, so much
grace, so much wonderful felicity, that shall profit him an hundred fold more
then the thing which he lost. He who has forsaken ^ father, and chosen God to
be his father, it is manifest that he has received more, then an hundred fold
a carnal father. He who forsakes a mother, that he may love more his mother
the Church, has not he an hundred fold more then a carnal mother? He who
forsakes a brother that he may have Christ his brother, Chrysostom. Hom. 33. in
cap. 19. Mat. v. 28.
has not he better then an hundred brothers? says Saint Chrysostom.

And me thinks you cannot but contentedly part with your substance when the
Lord, the right owner of it requires it, and to take joyfully and Christianly
the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that you have in heaven a
better and an enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34.


Secondly, Art thou astonished and affrighted with fear of famine, a misery so
ponderous and insupportable, that David made choice of the destroying
pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. The distressed Lepers of the slaying sword rather then
this, 2 Kin. 7. 4, 5. That it is called one of Gods evil arrows, Ezekiel. 5. 16.
And no marvel, it causing the Israelites to desire Egiptiacall bondage rather
then this, Ex. 16. 3. It constraining tenderhearted mothers to eat their own
children, 2 King. 6. 28, 29. Notwithstanding arm and animate thy self to
endure even this. And that by considering

1. The good that it has done and may do. It brought the riotous lascivious
prodigal to sight and sense of his sin, to true and saving repentance, Luk,
15. 14, 15, 16. It has taken those whom it has killed from the miseries of
this life, as the sicknesses August. lib. 1. De civit. Dei cap. 11.
of the body, whom it has not killed, it has taught to live more sparingly,
to fast more often, says S. Augustine.

2. The hurt it cannot do. It could not cause our Savior to yield to Satan's
suggestions, Matthew, 4. 3, 4. It never could, nor can constrain Gods people to
prove Apostates, Romans 8. 35. What shall separate us from the love of God in
Christ? shall famine? Nay, etc. 2 Cor. 11. 27.

Thirdly, Does the thought of captivity so cruel, which usually is accompanied
with woeful lamentation, spightfull reproaches, unaptnesse to serve God. Psalm.
127. 1, 3, 4. Loss of peculiar inheritance, bitter bondage, and slavish
subjection even to servants, Lam. 5. 2. 5. 8. Yet animate thy self to endure
this also, which indeed is most miserable, if Christians could Aug. l. De
civit. Dei. cap. 14. page 57.
be assigned to any place, where they could not find their God. But since the
earth is the Lords therefore thou can not be captivated out of thy fathers
land and country: since the passage or safe conduct of a Saint or holy one to
heaven is easy and free from every nation. Since while thou art Commorant in
thine own native country, thou art a pilgrim, and a passenger, and when thou
art in captivity thou art but a stranger and forreiner. He is a Christian says
S. Augustine, who acknowledges himself to Aug. Tom. 10. Sermon. 32. de verbis
Domini,
be a stranger in his own house, and in his own country: our country is above,
there we shall not be strangers. For every one here even in his own country is
a guest: if he is not a guest he shall not pass thence: if he is about to
depart he is a guest, let him not deceive himself, will he nill he, he is a
guest. And a certain writer says, Thy country is wheresoever thou art well:
to be well is not in a place, but in a man himself -- short exile shall
translate thee sooner Adrian Carth. page 104.
to thy country, and give thee another country better by far, whence they
shall be banished that wished thee an exile. Since the Lord does never fail to
be a comforter, to leave and forsake his although in excruciating captivity,
although under barbarous Ezekiel. 11. 16.
savages, a though in the bowels of the whale, and bottom of the sea, witness
Joseph, Daniel, and Jonah. Since the Church of God in general, and many the
dearest favorites of God in particular, have drunk deep and often of the
most sharp and aigre ingredient mixtures of this bitter cup: Since heathen
men, having no hope nor promise of future felicity have endured patiently and
willingly, dreadful captivities, for their Tull. Off. lib. 3,
honor and countries sake: witness Marcus A^tilius Regulus, who for his
honors sake promising to return himself, or their Carthaginean Captives: and
for his countries sake, knowing that the prisoners to be exchanged, would be
more perilous, then he could be profitable to his country, did voluntarily
return to captivity in Carthage, to finish his days under horrible tortures.
Let every soldier of Christ Jesus for the glory of God and his Gospel, for
Christ and his conscience sake, having an assured hope of the unperishable
crown of glory, grounded upon the infallible promise of the Lord of glory,
resolve to endure even this also.

Fourthly, Does violent death wholly disquiet and dismay thee, this seeming
insufferable, insupportable: yea so that the very remembrance thereof does
amaze and appale thee? for And why may not thou have the same Christian
resolution to endure, the same pious courage and comfort in suffering, which
the former Martyrs had? you are men and so were they. To them it was given in
the behalf of Christ to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1. 29. and why may it not
be granted to you also? we want those valourous resolutions, that doubtless he
will add abilities, as he adds afflictions* Certainly he will cause our
consolation to abound by Christ, as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 2
Cor. 1. 5. As yet we need not such graces in so great and ample measure, we
therefore want them. But if our gracious God and merciful father has designed
and marked us out for the same sufferings for the same cause, and we use the
same conscionable care and diligence by the same sanctified means to obtain
the self same graces, we need not fear the enjoyment of them. But why O you
Christian soldiers are you afraid to endure and suffer death for Christ and
his Gospels sake? That a man whose chiefest treasure, hearty affections, heaven
and happiness is here upon earthly felicities, should tremble at the sight and
remembrance of death, is no unwonted thing, it marring all his mirth and
merriment: impayring all his joy and jollity: stripping, and making him naked
of all his hopes and happiness. But that you whose God is the Lord, who are
the soldiers of Christ, whose treasure is laid up in heaven, (to whom I only
now speak) should be afraid of death, should not entertain it as a welcome
messenger of gladsome news, is not a little to be wondered at, and much to be
lamented. S. Cyprian says well, To the enemies of Christ it is a plague, to
the servants of God a profitable departure: the righteous are called to
comfort, the wicked are drawn to punishment.

1. This ends our toylesome rigorous race, and brings us to our triumphant
reward.

2. This arrives us out of the surging sea of doleful sorrow, at the gladsome
haven of endless happiness.

3. This finisheth our fatal fight, giving us a most honorable victory over
all our hideous and hurtful foes.

4. This accomplisheth our lassitudinous wearisomenesse and tiring painful
labors, bringing us to perpetual peace, and never-ending rest.

5. By this we are exempted and freed from the corruption of our nature and
inquinating iniquity, offending our good God, and sadding our own souls: to
perfection of grace, and fulness of sanctification: from mournful miseries
and sadding sorrows to immortal glory and incredible solace: from innumerable
sicknesses, inevitable and insupportable diseases, to immutable safety, and
perfect sanity.

6. By this we are taken from doleful pain, to delightful pleasure: from
servile bondage, to joyful liberty: from our wearisome pilgrimage, to our
wished home: from our earthly rotten tabernacles, to our heavenly mansions:
from the society of Saints militant with and mixed amongst beasts and Belials,
absurd and unreasonable men, where we see as in a glass darkely, but a glimpse
and glimmering of the incomprehensible communion of glorified Saints to which
this brings us, namely an immediate fellowship of Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
that holy Trinity, blessed forever, of all those holy and heavenly Angels,
which continued in their first estate, and of the innumerable companies of
godly and pious Patriarks and Prophets, patient and zealous Martyrs: yea and of
all sorts of Saints, whose robes are washed in the blood of the Lamb, and
follow him whethersoever he goes: where we shall see and know Adam, Enoch,
Abraham, Moses, David, Elijah, and other our comfortable consorts, companions
and coheires.

1. Our knowledge there being infinitely more clear and perfect then here,
where yet we know each other.

2. Our knowledge then being like that of Angels, who know each other perfectly.

3. Our knowledge then being abundantly more excellent then Adams in Paradise,
whose then was such, that at the first view and sight he knew all creatures,
and his wife so exactly, as to give names signifying their natures.

4. Our knowledge then without all comparison surpassing that of the Disciples
in the Mount, and of Dives in hell: which was such that by the former they knew
Moses and Elijah, and by the latter he knew Abraham and Lazarus.

5. We being members of that heavenly company, must needs know our head Christ
Jesus and our fellow members.

6. Bruit beasts, having here a kind of knowledge one of another for their
mutual delight: this knowledge in that life, cannot be wanting to our full and
perfect felicity and pleasure.

7. This is necessary to bring to life: we must die that we may be changed, and
that our corruption may put on incorruption, that our mortality may put on
immortality. This is the common condition of all mankind, Hebr. 9. 27. This I
know (says S. Augustine) that no man has died, which must not Aug. lib. 1 de
Civ. Dei. c. 11. (...). Diu. (...)
sometimes have died. Yea the Heathen Poet could say, It is necessary for all
mortal men to die. Endure we therefore this, which all, both good and bad,
just and unjust, have or must suffer. This being a necessary^ pathway to
eternal life; by which we are changed from evil to good, from woe to weal,
for which we shall rejoice when we are departed. By which we shall exchange our
travail into rest, our sickness into health, our earth into heaven, life
transitory into immortal: are we now well, we shall then be better: are we now
happy, we shall then be more happy, being delivered from this evil world, and
exempted from Satan, to live for ever with Christ our Savior.

But it is violent. Care we not what kind of death we suffer. Lib. 1. de Civit.
Dei. c. 11.
What does it matter with what kind of death this life is ended, when he to
whom it is ended, is not compelled to die again I says S. Augustine.

But I am young. Care not how soon it comes; the Heathen (...) Diu (...).
Poet could say, He shall die young whom God loves. And S. Augustine says,
For as much as innumerable deaths in a manner do threaten every man in the
daily perils of this life, as long as it is uncertain which of them shall
come, I pray whether is better, to suffer one by dying, or fear all by living?
Neither am I ignorant, how foolishly men choose to live long under fear of so
many deaths, rather than by once dying to fear Aug. lib. 1. de Civ. Dei. c(...)
none afterward.

But it is an evil shameful death. That death is not to be counted evil
which follows a good life, neither does any thing make death evil save that
which follows death: therefore they who must necessarily die, need not much
care what does happen to cause them to die, but dying whither they are
constrained to go, says S. Augustine. Ibid.


Be you therefore who are good soldiers of Christ Jesus persuaded to arm your
selves, not only to be bound, but to die also for the name of the Lord Jesus.
Bear patiently a few rough and asperate storms, which do but drive you sooner
to your desired haven: a little harsh and currish usage by this churlish
jailer, dragging and violently driving you from this earthly prison to an
heavenly paradise.

5. Art thou daunted and dismayed, fearing that thy dead body shall want
burial, which is a promised blessing, Genesis 15. 15. The denial whereof a
threatened curse, Ier. 22. 19. For which the holy men of God have been so
careful as to provide their sepulchers before their death, 1 King. 13. 30.
Mat. 27. 60. And to take order for their sepulture whiles they lived, Genesis 49.
29. 50. 5. 13. 1 King. 13. 31. Consolate thy self against this, considering,
that although it is a blessing unto the godly, yet only an outward, earthly,
temporal favor, to whom the want thereof is no curse, nor any ways hurtful:
for,

1. Cannot want of burial let or hinder the resurrection of our bodies to
glory and immortal^ty?

2. Has this been the lot and portion of Gods dear and beloved Saints to
want burial? Psalm. 79. 2, 3.

3. Did S. Augustine comfort Christians against this with Aug. 1. 1. ^e C(...).
D(...). 12. p. 55.
such like sayings as these? It is not the fault of the living who could not
give it, nor a punishment of the dead who could not feel it. If honorable
sepulture does any whit profit a wicked man, then vile or no burial does hurt
a good man.

4. Did the heathen men so little regard where they should lie when they died
for their country, or to what beast they were given as meat, that Theodorus
Cyrenaeus answered Lysimachus threatening this to him after death. Let this be
dreadful to thy Peers or States of thy realm, I care not whether I putrisie
under or above ground. And Diogenes, If I shall not feel it, what hurt will
tearing in pieces do me? Yea they had many general consolations against want
of burial, as these and such like. He is covered by the heaven which wants a
grave: nature has given sepuliure unto all: The same wave of water which
causes men to suffer shipwreck, does bury them: the bodies of those which
are fastened unto gibbets consume into burial: a torment does bury those which
are burnt alive.

And shall we fear this which may never come, or if it does come, is no whit
dreadful or hurtful?

6. Do quipping taunts, scornful reproaches, slanderous backbitings, insolent
mocks and flouting nicknames dread thee, thou deeming them so insupportable
that thou can not endure them? these being threatened as a great and grievous
commination, Ier. 24. 9. Ezekiel. 14. 8. These having caused the most patient men
to complain and cry as Job, Chap. 30. 1. But now they that are younger than I,
have me in derision, etc. Verse. 9. And now am I their ^ong and byword. The
Church of God, Psalm. 79. 4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a
scorn and derision to those that are round about us. David, Psalm. 57. 4. My
soul is among lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the
sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword. Jeremy, Chap. 18. 18, 19. Then said they, come and let us smite him
with the tongue, etc. These having urged Gods dearest jewels and peculiar
people to imprecate as Elisha 2 King. 2. 24. And he turned back, and looked on
them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord. David to wish evil to Doeg, and
Jeremy against those who smote him with the tongue, Ier. 18. 21. These being
so keen and cutting, that they are called persecution, Gal. 4. 29. Persecuted
him that was borne after the spirit. Yet let not these discomfort and
dishearten thee, who art a soldier of the Lord Jesus. For although these
forenamed are true theses, yet to infer thence, Therefore it is not
tolerable, not sufferable to induse reviling obtrectations, and opprobrious
upbraidings with bad speeches for Christ and his Gospel, is rash and
ridiculous. For thine encouragement to; and comfort in suffering the scourge of
tongues, consider,

1. That if all the black-mouthed barking bedlam Bellal^ of Satan's kennell in
the whole world, should belch out the most imbittered obloquies and hellish
calumniations against us; deride us with the most scornful mowes, nods,
girings, and divellish grinnings: and vomit out upon us and our good names the
most slanderous maledictions, envenomed back-bitings, pernicious lies, and
malicious cursings, that hell it self can hatch, Satan and his abettors feign
and forge, and his malignant ministers act and execute: yet can they not deal
worse with us in this kind, than their cursed companions have done to our
blessed Savior and his happy Saints, who have been as sharply stung by the
serpents seed, as we can: and have drunk as deep of this distasteful cup of
infamy and disgrace, as is possible; and shall we think much to pledge them?
Job was a song and a byword to base fools, Chap. 30. 9. David a song to
filthy drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. Elijah accounted and called the Kings enemy, 1
Kin. 21. 20. and a troubler of Israel, Chap. 18. 17. S. Paul a pestilent
fellow, a mover of sedition, an heretic, Act. 24. 5. 14. Our Savior blessed
for ever, a blasphemer, Mat. 9. 3. a drunkard and a glutton, 11. 9. a deceiver,
27. 63. Were David, Job, S. Paul the Saints and our blessed Savior falsely
accused, scornefully mocked, etc. and shall we unwillingly walk in those paths
wherein such pious people have usually walked.

2. That the better any man is, the more subject he is to slanderous reports,
and the utmost mischiefs the sons of Belial and their father the Devil can
coin against, and cast upon him. The Devil and divellish men throw most
cudgels of calumny and contempt at the fruitfullest trees in Gods vineyard:
bark most bitterly against the brightest parts of Gods Church militant, like
dogs against the Moon, and labor tooth and nail to obnubilate and obscure
most, the most shining and glorious lights with contumelies and disgraces. And
if any good man (as many have) has the applause and commendation of this
viperine brood, yet it is 1. either to hurt him by bewitching him by these
fawning flatteries, to sip a little of the times corruptions, though he will
not drink a full draught; or tickling and enticing him hereby to desire
earnestly, and affect promiscuous reputation, or wooing him by this means to
wink at their wickedness, and grossly neglect Christian reproves. 2. Or to
harm others: thus the Pharisees opposed Christ by John the Baptist, Mar. 2.
18. John is a good man, he fasts, but thou and thy Disciples fast not. Thus
carpers at godliness and goodness set godly men one against another, little
considering that one man may be more infirm and weak than another; one may do
a thing in some respect lawfully which the other cannot. Thus these subtle
Satanicall tongue-smiters of Saints and sanctity commend some excellent and
eminent men to discredit others more closely, cruelly and cunningly, not out of
any love or liking they have to their rare gifts, or precious graces; not for
their sound profession and sincere piety (these being as repugnant to them as
the bright shining light to obscure darkness: these being a shame to them, and
condemning them to the pit of hell) but by such fawned flatteries to pierce
more cruelly even the self same men, and all the consorts of their blessed
society, including in the end, even these in their black bill of all are
naught. As for example, such and such men are good men, yet they will do so and
so. But such and such are so precise, etc. yea all the company and pack of them
be stark naught.

3. That these railing Rabshakehs, scoffing Ishmaels, and all the infernal
troop and rabble of those who revile and reproach, disgrace and deride men for
godliness sake, are but fools or men destitute of wit, yea men out of their
right minds. Marvel not that I call them fools, or men out of their wits; for
not only does the Word of God term them so in diverse places, but their own
deeds and actions demonstrate them so to be. As for example.

1. Should we see a man tumble and wallow willingly and delightfully in the
mire, we would certainly conclude the man is mad, drunk, out of his right mind:
but these wallow willingly and delightfully in the sink of sin, more soyling
than all the most noisome mud and mire under the Sun.

2. Should we see a man wound and mangle his body, break his bones, and tear
his flesh in pieces, because some who have been grievously wounded, their
joints disjointed, their bones broken, their flesh rent, have obtained perfect
recovery, although with much cost and charge, smart and sorrow: would we not
say, surely the man is mad? But these men do therefore wound and pierce
themselves with sin, the greatest of sores and sicknesses, because David,
Peter* and other the Saints of God, after long labor and seeking after, much
smart and sorrow, were thoroughly healed.

3. Should we see a man all the time of seeding, summer and harvest, when all
good husbands are busily employed to fit and furnish themselves with necessary
livelihood, to run gadding after bables and butterflies, unnecessary,
unusefull, and unfruitful, would we not aver the man to be a fool, if not
mad? But these manner of men in this blessed seeds-time and summer of grace,
when all wise merchants seriously with all sedulity do providently, principally
seek those precious heavenly pearls, trading and trafiquing for the same in
the conscionable use of the meane^, do then with earnestness and eagerness
pursue the fruitless and not needful fading some and froth of this transitory
world.

4. Should we see a man to reject and refuse such a service wherein he might
have fullness of comfort, credit and contentment, and choose to be a
galley-slave to some tyrannical tyrant, from whom nothing could be expected
save terrible tortures, terrors and torments, would we not avouch the man to
be mad? But all wicked men disdainfully (if not despightfully) reject Gods
service accompanied with, and affording all comforts and contentments, for
Satan's slavish servitude, wherein there is not the least show or shadow of
consolation and contentment, but the truth and substance of all kind of
intolerable woe and misery.

5. Should we see a man to exchange pearls for paultry pebbles: refined gold
for stinking dross, would we not affirm the man to be a fool, if not mad?
But all wicked worldlings in effect say, farewell soul and conscience, adieu
holiness and saving graces, so be we may but thrive and grow great in this
world, buy and sell, and get gain.

6. Should we see a man prefer a loathsome prison before a pleasant palace,
would we not say, surely the man is out of his wits. But all the sons of
Beli^l choose rather perpetual hellish tortures and thraldom, than the
matchless peerless crown of glory.

7. Should we see a man for no gain to cast himself into dangers inevitable
and unspeakable, we would not only conjecture, but conclude that the man
wanted wit: But all wicked men throw themselves unavoidably into Gods fore
displeasure, which is unutterably dangerous and dreadful for the enjoyment of
the works of darkness which are not only filthy, but also unfruitful.

8. Should we see a man toyling hard to do that which he must undo again with
hard labor and much pains, or else be hanged, drawn and quartered, we would
without any peradventure infer, surely the man is besides himself. But all
ungodly men endeavor with tooth and nail to do such things by committing of
sin, which they must necessarily undo again, by true, yet bitter repentance,
or else perish eternally. So then, disgraceful deriders of men for godliness,
they are but fools, yea bruit beasts in the Scripture sense, which terms
them, In regard of their ignorance, Oxen, Psalm. 22. 12. Kine, Amos 4. 1. Wild
Asses, Job 24. 5. And M^les, Psalm. 32. 12. Inregard of their luxury, Goats,
Ezekiel. 34. 17. And horses, Ier. 5. 8. In regard of their cruelty, Lions, Psalm.
22. 13. Dragons, Ezekiel. 29. 3. Ram^, 37. 17, 21. Bears, Isa. 11. 7. And Dogs,
Psalm. 22. 16. In regard of their subtilty, Wolves, Isa. 11. 6. And Foxts, Ezekiel.
13. 4. And in regard of their malice, Aspes, Isa. 11. 8. Cockatrices, Spiders,
59. 5. Vipers, Mat. 3. 7. And Scorpions, Rev. 9 3. If a mad man or an ignorant
idiot should revile us, rail at us, scorn, deride and say all manner of evil
against us, we would pity the m^n, and no whit regard his saucy scurrilities,
and scoffing derisions. If snarling dogs bawle and bark, sordid swine grunt
and grumble at us, we mind our business, and slight these as friv^lous
trifles. Why then when these fools, of all sorts the most foolish, gnash their
teeth, nod their heads, make mowes and say all manner of evil against us, do
we not pity the men, and disregard their absurd speeches, and irksome
gestures? Why therefore cannot we endure, yea altogether slight and disregard
the brawling barking of these churlish ^curres, the hissings of these
serpentine aspes and adders, the bleatings and blatterings of thief beasts and
vain bablers, seeing they do but their kind?

4. That the smiting of the tongue does a good man no hurt at all: As Kings and
Potentates, wise and wealthy men sustain no loss of subjection, reverence, or
of any thing they have interest in because mad men, fools and beasts put no
difference twixt them, and other men: so godly men have not their esteem
lessoned with God, and good men, have their prayers as pleasing to God, and
prevailing at the throne of grace, have their graces as radiant and glorious,
and their rightand interest to the blood of Christ and crown of life as
certain and well sealed, when they are laden with the heaviest pressures of
reproachful disgraces, infamous indignities, scurrilous taunts, and hellish
girds for piety sake stom the serpentine tongues and gestures of all deboist
stigmaticall varlets. Excellent is the saying of Titus Vespasian, Since I do
nothing worthy for which I should be slandered, I do nothing regard lies.

2. But much good, so says our Savior, Matthew. 5. 11, 12. Blessed -- when all
men speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. 1 Pet. 4. 14. If you be
reproched for the name of Christ, happy are you, for the spirit of glory and of
God rests upon you.

Say not, how can we endure the scourge of tongues, since by this means, All
true professors, as well as we in particular Doog^ are stirred up and set on
work to snarle and snap at all forward professors: See (say they) what these
precise professors are, behold their practice they are all naught.

2. And our own good names, which are more precious then odoriferous
ointments, and of greater worth and value than all our substance, by these
currish, barking, and envenomed biting Belials, lie wounded and bleeding even
to extreme disgrace, being gored and pierced by the keen and cutting tongues
(more sharp than swords) of stigmaticall Satanists, which being a loss so
invaluable and irrecoverable, who can endure?

For if you give just occasion of offense, either by doing that Matthew. 18. 7. 2 Samuel 12. 14. because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is borne unto thee shall surely
die. But you only scandalizing, why should the men of this world pursue so
enragedly with fierce and furious outcries, all pious Professors of the same
truth? Were all the twelve selected Apostles incarnate Devils, because one of
their number was so? Were all sincere primitive converts liars against the
blessed Spirit of God, because sacrilegious Ananias and Saphira were? Are all
Professors dissembling hypocrites practicing contrary to their profession,
because there are many such? God forbid. Thou blinded world, why wilt not thou
see? You uncharitable sons of men, why will not you understand, but rashly
and reprochfully condemn the unblameable carriages and harmless conversations
of Gods dearest Saints, for the culpable crimson crying impieties of dissolute
dissemblers? You are not so unwise, senseless and uncharitable, as to infer,
much copper glisters, therefore all bright and glittering gold is copper: A
painted counterfeited Sun gives no radiant light, therefore that shining bright
Runner in the firmament is obscure and dark. Judas was a son of perdition,
therefore Peter, James, and John: some men are heirs of damnation, therefore
all men. Be not therefore so maliciously censorious, as to conclude, such and
such are shamefully delinquent, therefore all Professors are so.

2. But if you walk harmlesly and inoffensively, living unblameably and
uprightly, doing such duties which God commands, allows, loves, and will
reward, from a pure heart, and faith unfeigned, to the praise and glory of God,
consequently the works of God, John 6. 28. or good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. In
regard of matter, manner, and end, and shunning the evil you ought to avoid,
and yet are taunted and scorned, as David by scoffing Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 20. for
dancing before the ark: barbarously and bloudily back-bitten, as Abimelech,
for relieving David, 2 Samuel 22. 9. or otherwise wounded by cruel tongues, it
being unjustly, with evils never acted nor intended: or wresting good things to
make them seem evil. What loss of Christian reputation? Surely none.

But we shall be unjustly censured, rashly judged, and sporting

And who was ever free? was Christ? Did they not judge,

SECT. 8.
Motive 7. Drawn from the nature of them, showing how they are evil, how good.
THe seventh and last Motive drawn from the nature of afflictions. True it is,
the uneasy dangers, unpleasant troubles and rough afflictions of Gods
children, Christ's soldiers, are exceeding great: Psalm. 48. 3. horrible pit.
And very many, Psalm. 34. 19. And as boisterous impetuous surging waves
succeeding one another. The Lord our gracious Father having so appointed and
decreed: our conformity with our blessed Savior requiring that it should be
so, and God being more thereby glorified in our deliverance. Yet it is as true,
that there is no danger so de^pe, no grief so great, no temptation so
tumultuous and troublous, no trouble so tempestuous, out of which God cannot or
will not deliver his Church and chosen children, Psalm. 40. 2. He brought me out
of an horrible pit, out of the myrie clay, etc. Psalm 34. 19. But the Lord
delivers him out of all. He being their strong and powerful Redeemer, Isa. 45.
1. He being the mighty rock of their salvation, Psalm. 95. 1. Their impregnable
shield and invincible buckler, Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord of hosts and armies, Psalm.
46. 7. 11. And that great and potent Prince, Dan. 12. 1. And therefore Though
they are dreadful, yet shall they not be durable, Though they are laborious,
yet shall they not be long lasting. Though they are cruel, yet but momentany,
and of short continuance.

But they are evil.

And what patience to endure that which is good? Who cannot? Who will not?
Christ's soldiers being more then ordinary men, must do more then they do.
They must love even those who hate them, Matthew. 5. 44. They must pray for such
who hurt them. They must render a requital of good for evil, They must endure
with comfort and constancy evil.

2. Admit they are evil to some, yet they are not so to all, they were good
for David, Psalm. 119. 71. And are good to be borne of some from their youth,
L^ment. 3. 27. Although in their own nature of themselves properly. As they
are signs and demonstrations of Gods just indignation and anger against any.
As they are plagues and punishments for sin; As they are a part of Gods curse
for the same: As they are lets and hindrances from any pious and holy duty: or
occasions of any sin, namely of murmuring, grudging, impatiency or the like,
they are evil. Yet are they good by Gods grace and blessing, being sanctified
in the Cross of Christ. As they are an argument and evidence of Gods love and
fatherly care: As they are a means of sanctification, mortification,
vivification, conversion, repentance, reformation of life; As they cause us to
know our selves and our sins, Genesis 42. 21. As they show to others the
corruption of nature in the Saints, Ezekiel. 39. 23. As they teach men true
obedience, Job 33. 19. Ier. 31. 18, 19. As they provoke and stir up to
fervent prayer, Psalm. 107. 6. As they show the certainty and equity of Gods
threats; As they purge from sin and corruption, Pro. 20. 30. Mal. 3. 3. As they
preserve from destruction and evil, Isa. 57. 1, 2. As they are a pathway to
the kingdom of heaven, Acts 14. 22. As they conform a man to Christ, and as
they make us compassionate and able to comfort others, They are not evil but
good. Endure them therefore.

Upon these undeniable truths and grounds so certain, reason and resolve as
follows:

1. Has Christ our faultlesse Master, that Lamb without spot and blemish, and
his holiest Saints and members endured afflictions, Christ for our sakes, they
for his?

2. Are they inevitable and unavoidable: we being men, much more we being
sanctified men.

3. Are they harmless neither hurtful nor injurious?

4. Are they beneficial and many ways advantageous?

5. Come they from our gracious fathers love, justice and mercy principally and
primarily: from our hateful enemies instrumentally only and secondarily?

6. Are they most truculent or terrible in countenance of them as namely The
spoiling of outward substance, so sadding; affrighting famine so dreadful:
cruel captivity so uncomfortable: violent death so dismaying: want of burial
so unseemely; and the scourge of tongues so smarting: not so hideous and
terrible as: and more tolerable for Christ's cause then they seem to be?

7. They being but momentany and of no long continuance. Then surely we as the
soldiers of Christ will resolve to endure hardness, undergoing it with
willingness, Heb. 11. 25. submitting our selves to it with readiness, Mat.
26. 39. yea the tartest trials, most rough and cruel calamities and dreadful
persecutions through Gods help and assistance, for the Lords sake: namely,

1. For righteousness, conscience, Christ, and Christianity sake, 1 Pet. 2.
20. 3. 17. 4. 16. Isa. 59. 15. for welldoing suffering for these ends being
thank-worthy, 1 Pet. 2. 19. and acceptable with God, Ver. 20. to which we are
called, Ver. 21. for which we are pronounced blessed and happy, 1 Pet. 3. 14.
4. 14. of which we need not be ashamed, 4. 16. and for which we have cause to
glorify God, ibid. namely

2. We suffering After a right manner, scil. with enduring patience, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 20. Persisting constancy, Luke 22. 28. Heb. 10. 39. Cheerful
rejoicing, Col. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 4. 13. And loving prayer for our afflicting
persecutors according to Christ's commandment, Mat. 5. 44 The pious practice of
our blessed Savior, Luke 23. 34, And his happy Saints, Act. 7. 60. And to
right ends, not for vainglorious ostentation or other carnal respects, but
for the Lords and conscience sake, that is, rather then God should loose his
glory, and we a good conscience toward God, we purpose constantly to endure
grief, hatred, persecution or any manner of afflictions as the soldiers of
Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VII.
The Christians armor. Christian soldiers must be armed.
Knowledge of the parts and pieces of the armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11. so called
because it is prescribed by God in his Word, given of God by his spirit, and
agreeable to the will of God. That divine and spiritual armor, necessary
against the spiritual assaults of spiritual enemies. That panoplia or
complete armor sufficient to defend us in every part, availeable to keep off
and thrust back every assault, and every dart of our spiritual enemies. 2.
And a putting and keeping on, and using of the same, and every part thereof
(God having made none of them in vain, they being all needful and
joynt-companions, so that he that has not all, has none at all) to defend
himself and his own right which Christ has dearly bought with his precious
blood. And to repel and drive away the devil and his instruments. Learn we
all therefore who are the soldiers of Christ, what this armor is, how to put
on and use the same.

The parts of several pieces of which impregnable armor of proof are six in
number, largely deciphered and described by the Lord himself, Ephesians. 6. 14, 15,
etc. namely a girdle, a breast plate, shoes, a shield, a helmet and a sword. A
helmet for the head, a breast plate for the middle, a girdle to knit them
together, shoes for their feet, a shield for their left hand, and a sword for
the right, of each particular somewhat.

SECT. 2. 1 Part of armor.
The Christians girdle.
Their girdle what it is, how put on, its necessity, dignity, and several
parts.
THe first piece of a Christians armor is the girdle of truth. As Martial men
of war have a fair, strong, substantial girdle wherewith they 1 k^it their
armor fast and close unto them, and keep the several pieces together, so
that they cannot shake or loose. 2 Tie and bind their loins thereby holding
the same firm, and their bodies sted lie, that they may be able to stand the
surer and h^ld out the longer. 3 And hide the joints of their armor that they
may not be seen, so using the same for necessity, strength, and ornament, as
we may see, Job 12. 18, 21. 33. 3. Isa. 23. 10. Even so the Christian soldier,
has his girdle of truth, namely

First, Truth of judgment, or a rectified judgment agreeing with the Word of
God, grounded upon it and warranted by it, desirous by it to be reformed,
wherein it has been misinformed, to receive further illumination from it,
and increase of saving knowledge by it, remaining sound in practical faylings,
giving no warrant to any decays, 2 Pet. 1. 12. And therefore the true doctrine
of the Gospel may be called, not only true doctrine, but truth it self, or
the girdle of truth, it being to the soul to strengthen it, as a girdle to the
body of a soldier in war And the word of truth, Col. 1. 5. because all truth
must be learned out of it, as for example.

1. The true worship of God in general, Mic. 6. 8. He has slewed thee O man
what to good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to etc.

2. True holiness and sanctification.

3. True faith, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the substance of things, etc.

4. True love, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity suffers long and is kind, charity
envieth not, charity vaunteth not it self. 1 Ioh. 3 18.


5. True humility, Ioh. 13. 15. For I have given you an example that you should
do as I have done, Phil. 2. 13.

6. True meekness, Matthew. 11. 29. I am meek and lowly in heart.

7. True wisdom, Iam. 3. 17. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be, etc.

8. True knowledge, Ioh. 17 3. It is life eternal to know thee and him whom
thou have sent. Phil. 3. 8. I account. etc.

9. True hope, Romans 8 24 For we are saved by hope, etc.

10. True prayer, almsdeeds and fasting, Mat. 6.

11. True patience, Iam. 5. 10. Take my brethren the Prophets, who have spoken
in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of
patience, Heb. 12. 2.

12. True righteousness, Mat. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

Secondly, Truth of heart or uprightness and sincerity which is void of
deceit and counterfeting, which assures a man that his sins are pardoned,
Psalm 32. 2. That his ways please God, 119. 2. That he is a citizen of the
heavenly Jerusalem, Ps. 15. 2. 24. 4. Mat. 5. 8. Which interesseth a man that
owns and possesses it in all good things. Which covers a multitude of sins,
1 King. 15. 14. ^ Chro. 16. 9. Which makes Gods graces thrive in the soul,
Ioh. 1. 47. And the enjoyer thereof to approve his heart to the searcher of al
hearts. Which is a comfortable cordial at the dismal day of death, Isa. 38.
3. And makes a man acceptable with the Lord, Ps. 51. 6. Without which no true
repentance. Joel 2. 12. No profitable hearing of the Word of God, Luke 8. 12,
13, 14, 15. No prevailing prayer, Psalm. 66 18. And without which the most
glorious and glittering actions are but filthy abominations and odious
hypocritical performances.

Thirdly, Truth of speech, uttering things as they be without guilefull fraud
and falsehood the mouth agreeing with the mind and matter which is uttered, Ps.
15. 2. Ephesians. 4. ^5. which is consonant to the will of God, correspondent to the
end of speech, and use of the tongue the minds interpreter. The contrary
whereof is not of God, 1 Ioh. 2. 21. but of the devil, Ioh. 8. 44. Condemned by
Pagans unacquainted with the mysteries of salvation: Causing the liar to loose
faith and not to be credited when he speaks truth: provoking God to wrath and
indignation, Ps. 5. 6. Depriving of that matchless crown and incomparable
kingdom of glory, Rev. 22. 15. And plunging into that hideous and horrible
insupportable lake of fire and brimstone, Rev, 21. 8.

Fourthly, Truth of action when deeds are just being done truly and uprightly
when there is fidelity and faithfulness between man and man in keeping just
covenants promises and bargains, Psalm. 15. 4. 1 Cor. 13. 6.

This truth of judgment, heart tongue and action is this girdle wherewith the
Christian soldier must be girded. And all these must concur to make up the
strength and beauty of the same. Without the first we run into absurd opinions,
and erroneous heresies: Without the second we are guilty of gross and damnable
hypocrisy, odious and abominable to God and good men. Without the third men
are but loath some liars speaking against their minds and consciences: And
without the last diabolical deceivers and odious dissemblers. But by the first
our opinions are seasoned and made sound: By the second our affections are
reformed and rectified. By the third our communication is ordered and directed:
By the last our conversations are guided and governed. All which conjoined make
up the first piece of the Christian man's armor, the girdle of truth.

1. So great an ornament to the Christian soldier that it honors and
graceth him before God and man: for what greater beauty to religion (which the
more true the more excellent) the^ sound^es and evidence of truth? what greater
ornament to a Saint then truth and singlenes of heart winning approbation and
commendation from God, Act. 13 22. What Angelical eloquence or rhetorical
discoursing so graceful and praiseworthy as to speak truth? yea and what
does crown and commend a man so much as honest plain and faithful dealing.

2. And such an excellent means of strength, that it links, holds fast and
couples other graces of Gods spirit together, and so upholds the Christian
soldier. Nothing so strong as truth to confirm and settle the judgment of
man. Truth of heart was the ground of Jobs courage and constancy, Chap. 27. 5,
6 gave an edge and quickni^g to Hezekiahs prayer, Isa. 38. 3. and made David
bold to appeal from men's, and refer himself to Gods trial and examination,
Ps. 26. 1. Truth in communication flowing from sincerity of heart, not any
by-respects, being in all a man's speeches, concerning matters of greatest
consequence, and those which are slight and trivial. And truth in
conversation, proceeding from a right ground and extending to all and every
action of a man, are notable encouragements, and strong supporters to pious
men, Job 31. 5. And undeniable demonstrations, that the heart is a good
fountain, the sincerity whereof keeps the tongue from lying, and the whole
carriage of a man from deceitful dissimulation. This girdle of truth being both
beautiful and beneficial, honorable and helpful, adorning and assisting, for
strength and ornament.

1. You who are not furnished with this defensive ornament, do you buy it, Pro.
23. 23. Buy the truth: But what must we give? A diligent painful and constant
endeavor, to obtain this holy and heavenly trafique.

1. Search the sacred Scriptures diligently: frequent the Word preached
conscionably with a care to believe and conscience to obey. Is. 55. 1, 2. hide
and treasure up ye word in your hearts carefully, Ps. 119. 11. Let it dwell in
you ple^tifully and richly in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. Let Gods heavenly word be
always a light to your feet and a lantern unto your paths, Psalm. 119. 105.
And your continual constant counselors, Psalm. 119. 24.

That you may be clean through this word, Ioh. 15. 3. Being purged

By the word of ex^ortation, from slothful idleness and negligence in all
holy and sacred duties.

By the word of remembrance from sinful forgetfullnesse.

By the word of consolation from dreadful desp^ration and di^fident
distrustfullnesse in Gods mercies and Christ's merits.

By the word of commination, from presumptuous and obstinate rebellions.

By the word of reprehension from open actual transgressions in word or deed.

By the word of admonition from inclination unto evil or entrance into the
same.

By the word of confutation from dangerous and damnable errors.

By the word of knowledge or instruction, from spiritual blindness, darkness
and ignorance in those things which ought to be known.

That you may be wiser then your enemies, Psalm. 119. 98. have more
understanding then your teachers, Ver. 99. And understand more then the
ancient, Ver, 1^0. And that you may get this truth in judgment, the true
doctrine of holy writ.

This being amiable and lovely beyond expression, Psalm. 119. 97. Sweet and
luscious beyond comparison, Ver. 103. precious and profitable beyond
imagination, 105. 162. comfortable and cordial beyond apprehension, Ver. 143.
This being truth, yea the word of truth, Ioh. 17. 17. 8. 31, 32. Colos. 1. 5.
It containing the firm and sure doctrine, and teaching the true way to attain
eternal salvation. So that.

Would you know what and how to believe? That will instruct you.

Would you know how to live? That will teach you.

Would you discern errors? That will enlighten you.

Would you amend your lives? That will persuade and prescribe how.

Would you find Consolation: That will afford it.

This being the fountain of truth, from whence flow forth the blessed streams
of sacred truth by the Ministry of the Word.

This being also part of this girdle of truth, strengthening and adorning the
soul of a Christian, as a girdle does the body of a soldier in war.

2. Consider how vengeance unconceiveable pursues as his proper guerdon the
glorying hypocrite. He shall not come before God, Job 13. 16, He heaps up
wrath, 36. 13. And he is most, woeful, Matthew. 23. And how mercy inestimable and
ineffable attends the sincere and upright man. See one place for instance,
Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give grace and glory, etc. Where five special
prerogatives and privileges of such men are set down: Two metaphorically, Sun
and Shield, and three other familiarly, Grace and Glory, and every good thing.

The Lord who is resembled to a Sun in regard of

1. The purity of the Sun: for although there be many compound and mixed lights
in the Church; yet is there but one perfect and pure: although many dim and
obscure, yet one only clear and without darkness.

2. The singularity and sovereignty of the Sun compared with the stars: He
being that one and only original, essential, and authentical light and
spiritual Sun, though there be many secondary and inferior, or isntrumental
lights and stars in the Church of God.

3. The sufficiency, He alone and only he being able to give sufficient light
to the whole Church.

4 The liberality of the Sun, He and he alone gives light, or shine to all.

5. The brightness: for though the Sun be more beautiful, bright and glorious
than all other stars: yet the Lord is thousands of degrees brighter than the
Sun.

6. The stability: For although the light of the Sun be of long continuance,
yet the light of the Lord lasts longer, even for ever.

7. The efficacy: For although the Sun have great power over men's bodies, and
works upon them both by his light, heat, and influence, yet the Lord himself
has greater power over their souls. I say, the Lord who thus is resembled to
the Sun, is their Sun; that is, illumination, direction, consolation: therefore,

1. Such cannot want light, either understanding, judgment, knowledge, or
comfort, life, strength, and health.

2. The Lord will guide their ways, and direct their thoughts and counsels.

3. The Lord will comfort them in all their afflictions, tribulations and
persecutions.

2. The Lord is their shield or safety, protection and preservation.

A shield he is, not artificial, natural, or political: but moral,
spiritual, celestial, sovereign, sure and sufficient. Shielding these
forenamed, by his mercy and favor, Psalm. 5. 12. 61. 7. By his powerful right
hand, Psalm. 18 35. By his omnipotent arm, Psalm. 44. 3. By his faithful truth,
Psalm. 91 4. And by his grace, 2 Cor. 12 9.

He is their shield, to bear off the bitter blows, beat back the direful
darts, break the furious force of, and to cover, shadow, and save from the
empoysoned stings of the diabolical assaults of their implacable and hellish
adversaries.

The Lord is their shield, preserving them from destruction, delivering them
from danger and distress: so that no weapons of the wicked, nor darts of Satan
can harm or hurt them, this their Shield being sure, sufficient, present and
perpetual. Great therefore is their happiness in this regard; for, having God
their shield, they have

1. The most bright and glorious shield, which does not only delight, but also
dazzle the eyes of those that do behold it.

2. The most ready shield, always at hand to help, succor and save them.

3. The most durable and lasting shield, which cannot be wasted or worn out.

4. The strongest and surest shield, which will never shrink.

1. Earthly shields can save the body only; this both body and soul.

2. Earthly shields save and shelter from bodily darts only; this from
spiritual also.

3. Earthly shields save and shelter from some kinds of bodily dangers, this
from all.

The Lord will give them (...) of (...) to pity. Noah found grace (...) Genesis
6. 8. that is, grace or mercy, Genesis 19. 19. Thy servant has found grace (...).
grace. Take the word for the actions of assisting grace, as namely,
preservation, conservation and protection. Take the word for faith and
repentance, which amongst saving graces are the most principal. They being
more often, more earnestly, and more universally urged and enforced, than any
other, in the Prophets, by John Baptist, our Savior, and his Apostles. Take it
for those greatest works of grace wrought together at one instant; namely union
with Christ, adoption, justification, conversion. Take it for those other
principal graces of saving knowledge joined with faith, John 17. 3.
Regeneration, John 3. 5. Spiritual regiment, Romans 8. 14. Repressing ill
motions, Gal. 5. 17. Stirring up good, Isa. 11. 2. Which are the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Amongst the which these are in number of the best, sc. an
utter dislike of sin because it is sin, Romans 7. An hungry desire to be at
unity with God in Christ, Psalm. 4. 6. And the gift of hearty prayer, Zach. 12.
10. Romans 8. 26. Sound and saving comfort in distress, as in outward
calamities, and trouble of conscience, Romans 5. 2, 3. Inward, spiritual, sound
and saving strength to do the waightiest duties of a man's calling, as are these
and such like following. 1. At the sight of his sins to lift up the hand of
faith to heaven, and to catch hold of Gods mercy in Christ. 2. In time of
temptation to resist the same, being as hard a matter as for dry wood to
resist the fire. 3. To forsake all for Christ's sake. 4. To acknowledge Gods
providence, to rejoice in it, to rely upon it in the want of ordinary means,
as hard a thing to do (without Gods special assistance) as to shake the whole
earth.

Take it for inward or outward grace with God or men, which the upright man so
far enjoyes. That though he is not gracious with all, yet he is with some
Though he is not great in favor, yet he is in some. Though he is not always,
yet sometime he is, more or less, sooner or later. Though nor with men, yet
with God.

Take it for all or any of these, it shows that God will honor those that
honor him by sincerity and uprightness.

4. The Lord will crown the upright man with unspeakable and immortal glory.
Though therefore they may be abject in vain men's, yet are they most glorious
in Gods eyes. Though they may be vile in the eyes of vile and wicked men, yet
are they not in the eyes of all. Neither are they altogether base, but in part
honorable and glorious. Nor always contemptible, but sometimes (sooner or
later) glorious, exalted, and honored; yea they shall be made glorious
hereafter, and exalted above the heavens.

5. Lastly, the Lord will increase and multiply his blessings upon the
righteous more and more, so that whatsoever good things the godly want, were
not good for them to have, the Lord withholding no good thing from them
totally, finally, without a supply, if it be good for them.

3. Have a continual desire, and a holy unquenchable thirsting after the Word,
to grow, as in other, so in this grace of sincerity or truth of heart, 1 Pet.
2. 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby.

1. Newborn babes desire the milkie nourishing breast.

2. They desire it without mixture or adulteration.

3. So insatiably and uncessantly, that though you chaunt and sing to them as
melodious lullabies the sweetest voices, and most ravishing harmonious
instruments can sound by art and nature: though you give them golden garments,
pearls and precious stones, crowns and kingdoms, yet they regard them not a
rush, neither are they quieted or pacified without the breast, by such golden
and glittering promises or performances.

4. Whereas the fruition and enjoyment of the same stils their lowdest
outcries. and fills their hearts with abundant comforts and contentments, which
they plentifully testify by their smiling countenance:, and other childish
toys, expressions of their no little joy and gladness.

5. By their constant and continual sucking such sweet and savoury nutriment,
they grow in comeliness and courage, in strength and stature. Thus do we

1. Thirst after the nourishing milk of Gods Word.

2. Desire this pure Word without mingling or corrupting.

3. Let no inchaunting syrenian songs of worldly delightful pleasures, nor
golden offers or enjoyments of earthly contentments slake or assuage your
earnest longings after this substantial, sound, and savoury soule-feasting
food.

4. Let the possession and enjoyment of this comfort in the greatest
distresses, ravish your hearts and souls with unperishable and ineffable
consolations. Love it unconceiveably beyond expression, Psalm. 119. 97. Prefer
and prize it above thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119. 72. Rejoice in it
more than in great spoils, Verse. 162. Relish it more savourly and sweetly than
honey and the honey-combe, Verse. 103.

5. Desire it, labor for it, delight in it, to get and increase, as other
graces, so this of sincerity, or truth of heart. For, therefore it is called
the sincere milk, because it is not mixed with errors, traditions, and
heresies: As also, because there is no deceit in it, and because it produces,
and increases sincerity.

4. Daily and diligently examine your own hearts, which are as evil servants
with whom you need often to reckon; and like waters, which (standing) are ready
to corrupt. That by this careful and conscionable searching and sounding of
them, and those other means, you may get this truth of heart.

3. To get truth in speech. Consider with advised circumspection, that,

1. This is the precise precept and commandment of your most absolute
Sovereign Lord, and the direct will of your good God and gracious Father,
Psalm. 15. 2. Ephesians. 4 25.

2. One maine end of speech is to declare and express the meaning of the mind
and heart.

3. That the contrary hereunto, namely lying, is dreadful and damnable.

1. Being the Devils darling daughter, whose father he is, Ioh. 8. 44.

2. Being severely censured and sharply condemned by the light of nature in
merely moral Heathen men.

A sage Garamant in an Oration he made to Alexander reporting his country
laws and customs, said: We ordain Dial. l. 1. c. 34.
that all men and women speak the truth in all things, and if any be taken in
a lie, committing no other fault, that immediately he be put to death.

Amongst the Laws which Periander made for the Corinthians, this was one, We
ordain and command, that if any man Chapter 40.
or woman which to the prejudice of another shall tell any lie, shall for the
space of a month carry a stone in their mouth: for it is not meet that he
which is wont to lie, should always be authorized to speak.

It was sacrilege amongst the Philosophers of Athens to Page 62.
hear a lie.

3. Not being of the truth. No lie is of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2. 21. Namely, not
of God, who is truth it self, and the Author of all truth in his creatures,
Psalm. 31. 5. O Lord God of truth. Not of Christ, who is the way and the truth,
John 14. 6. Not agreeable to true Religion taught and contained in the Gospel
which is truth, Gal. 3. 1. Not consonant to the Word of God containing true
doctrine, therefore called truth, Ioh. 17. 17.

4. Occasioning many formidable fruits and execrable effects, for necessarily
and inevitably a liar

1. Crackes and crusheth so far his credit, that he loses faith when he
speaks truth.

2. Abominably abuses his tongue to wrong and contrary ends.

3. He provokes Gods severe wrath, Psalm. 5. 6. Thou shall destroy them that
speak leasing. Doing that which is abomination to him, Prove. 12. 22. Lying
lips are an abomination to the Lord.

4. He loses all right and interest in the tree of life, shuts himself
without the Church triumphant in heaven, to have part and portion with damned
rebels and reprobates in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death, Rev. 21. 14, 15. and 21. 8.

How like you this you licentious liars? You Will lie for advantage to cozen and
cheat men in buying and bargaining, to defraud your brethren, to cloak your
other horrid impieties: to hide and cover other men's heinous enormities: to
make your selves and others sport, and merriment; or to harm and hurt the
innocent conversations of men better than your selves. Do you like your
infernal father? Do you not blush for shame (professing Christianity) to be
worse than Pagans? Does it please you to have no interest in God, nor yet to be
credited speaking truth? If so, go on: yea if heaven is of little or no worth
with you, and if you so much desire hellish torments. Hear the Poet and
Philosopher speak. Hom I^. 91 (...).
He is as hateful to me as hell, who thinks one thing and speaks another,
says the Poet. E^h. 4. Cap. 7. (...).
A lie in it self is vile and odious, says the Philosopher.

To get truth in carriage and in your outward conversations, set your selves
always in Gods presence, and before his judgment seat. Remember that from his
all-seeing presence (whose eye is in every place, beholding the good and the
bad, Prove. 15. 3. who is the searcher of the heart and reins) nothing can
conceal or cover either your selves or your closest actions: Not any place in
the spacious and splendent heavens: nor any dark or dismal creek or corner in
hell so horrible and hideous; nor yet any nooke or hiding place in the utmost
parts of the whole earth, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9. For he is privy to the many
motions, into and from all places: to every way and passage of these motions:
yea to every step in this way: and to all and every position of downe-sitting,
up-rising or lying down: Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. Yea to every secret thought of the
inmost closet of the heart, 13. 15. 23. Neither can any part or parcel, degree
or distinction of time, hide from him to whom the dreadful darkness, and
gladsome light are both alike, Psalm. 139. 12. and a thousand years gone and
past are but as yesterday; and therefore Cains cruel crimson crime as fresh
with him, as if even now it was in acting. Live therefore always in Gods
presence: approve your selves and your several actions to God, that as Joseph,
so you all may be upright, Genesis 39. 9.
true and honest in your actions.

2. And you who have it, sell it not, Prove. 23. 23. Make not a slight
reckoning of it as men commonly do of such things they sell. Let it not go by
any means, upon any condition, for any respect, let not Satan that subtle
serpent, let no adulterating Priests and Jesuits, nor any other imp or
instrument of that deceitful Devil wrest away by fair enticements, plausible
arguments, or bitter persecution, this girdle of truth from us.

Object. 1. Let them say that truth in judgment is unnecessary and very
dangerous.

2. That truth in heart brings inward disquietings, outward calamities, and
hard and harsh censures of wise and worldly men.

3. Let them say there is no living in this loose and licentious age without
lying.

4. And that plain and honest dealing will die a beggar; and live in
scornful disgrace, and reproachful obloquy.

Yet sell it not, part not with it, let it not go, hold it fast: for,

Answ. 1. The Holy Ghost pronounces them damned, who believe not the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. although these seducers say it is not necessary. And confidently
affirms that it is a note of blessedness, and a matter of rejoicing to
suffer for the truth, Matthew. 5. 10, 11. Though these pronounce it perilous.

2. As for truth of heart, it is the most absolute sovereign antidote and
preservative against disturbing desperation, Job 27. 5, 6. A most strong
supporting prop and pillar to uphold a man in the midst of his manifold
miseries and miscariages: and a most cordial comforter in the most fearful
distresses, Isa. 38. 3. Remember O Lord how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart.

The swaying of the regal Scepter of the commonwealth of the most potent and
politic people of the Jews, Gods peculiar people.

The sovereign rule and command over a nation which was the most warlike and
potent under the cope of heaven.

The safe conduct of many mighty vigilant constant guarders.

The advised policy and deliberate counsels of sage Senators.

The daily and diligent attendance of heroical and princely Servitours.

The art and industry of the most learned and skillful Physicians.

The most curious cates, costly garments, harmonious music, sweet perfumes,
and all other delights of the sons of men, which do most abound in the Courts
of Kings, could not solace Hezekiah so on his bed of sickness, as did the
soundness and sincerity of his pure and perfect heart.

Neither are those many judgments inflicted upon the upright, tokens of Gods
irefull indignation, but of his fatherly love and favor, Heb. 12. 6. And as
for the harsh conceits and rash contumelious censorious conclusions of other
men, they may not dishearten nor cannot dismay an upright man, who has
boldness toward God, when his own heart does not condemn him, 1 Ioh. 3. 21.

3 And as for those pernicious periclitations proposed against plain dealing
and true speaking, they are not real, only pretended, witness the common and
usual practices of most men, desiring to deal and commerce with such whom
they are persuaded will deal truly and plainly. Witness Gods curse against
gain gotten deceitfully, Prove. 20. 17. And Gods many merciful favors
promised to the upright man, Psalm. 1 12. 1, 2, 3, etc. And as for those railing
reproaches, distrustful disgraces, and virulent upbraidings for virtue and
uprightness sake, they are but as so many radiant and refulgent pearls, and
garnishing gemms fastly joined and firmly fixed, to our immortal crown of joy
and glory.

SECT. 3. The Christians Breast Plate.
THe second piece of armor you soldiers of Christ must buckle about you and
keep fast, is, the breast plate of righteousness, or a breast plate which is
righteousness, that is, a study and endeavor to keep a good conscience, and
to lead a holy and upright life, in the general calling of Christianity, and
in your particular vocations This is not righteousness of imputation which is
by faith: but of imitation, an excellent fruit flowing from the former,
consisting in godliness toward God, innocence of private life, neighbourly
love, and a faithful performance of particular duties of personal callings.

Say not beloved brethren, that this righteousness of imitation Luke 1. 75. 1
Cor. 6. 9. No unrighteous person, etc. This being necessary to testify our
obedience, to witness our thankfulness, to evidence our justification and
election, to manifest our faith, and maintain our cause against contradicters
cavills: as that is needful to apply the righteousness of Christ, and support
our selves against our manifold imperfections, defections and wants.

Say not beloved brethren, that this righteousness is nothing Phil. 3. 8. and
our righteousness as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. For work of Gods holy and
blessed Spirit, as it proceeds from a regenerate heart purified by a lively
faith, and as its imperfections are covered with CHRIST'S perfect
righteousness, it pleases the LORD, and profits the Professor.

Say not my beloved brethren, that a man may be too just or righteous,
Ecclesiastes 7. 18. Be not righteous over much: Which words may seem at the
first sight to be

A needless persuasion, in regard of men's cursed corrupt nature, neither prone
nor apt to wisdom and justice.

A causeless admonition, righteous men being geason, Proverbs 28. 6.

A witless exhortation in regard of wise men's judgments, who so highly
commend those virtues of wisdom and righteousness.

A graceless and godless kind of persuasion or precept in regard of the
counsel of the Holy Ghost, which so often and earnestly exhorts, persuades, and
provokes men to the study and practice of wisdom and righteousness.

Yea some strange paradox of a Heathen Philosopher, rather than a parable of a
holy and heavenly Preacher.

Yet in truth the words contain a double dehortation, from a double extremity,
in a double virtue enforced by a double reason drawn from a double danger, or
discommodity depending upon the foresaid extremities.

There is a double righteousness or justice.

First, Theological or celestial, which is also

1. Active, wrought or infused into us, called in the language of holy Writ

1. The justice or righteousness of God, because he reveals it and imputes it,
Romans 3. 21, 22. But now the righteousness of God.

2. The righteousness of Christ, because he has merited or deserved it.

3. The righteousness of faith, because faith apprehends it, and applies it
to the sinful soul of such as shall be saved.

2. Passive, altogether freely bestowed upon us, which is called inherent, and
styled in the Scripture the righteousness of man, of works, of the law. Both
these kinds meeting in one man, are sometimes implied in, and signified by one
word, the same which is here used. Thus was Noah a just man, Genes. 6. Job,
Chap. 1. 8. Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1. Joseph, Matthew. 1. were just men.
And in this sense a just man, a righteous man, a religious man, a godly and
faithful man are all one.

Secondly, Civil or political, which only is not here understood, but both
kinds probably jointly.

1. The words being general, and generally understood, they comprehend the
special.

2. Because piety is the ground of all good policy, celestial is the mother of
civil justice.

3. Because Solomon does often confound precepts of piety and policy.

4. Because the beginning of that wisdom which Solomon commends unto us in all
his books, is the fear of God.

Therefore those words are to be understood of that righteousness also which
reaches to religion.

But if so: How agree these words with Salomons wisdom

Is Solomon contrary to himself? Does he contradict the whole course of
Scripture? For who is he among the Prophets or Apostles, Fathers or
Philosophers, that does not exhort to a contrary course? To grow and increase,
to study and strive for perfection, both in knowledge and practice of honesty,
piety, and godliness?

Solomon neither crosses others nor contradicts himself in

Not from the practice of piety, nor yet of justice and equity, but from the
vain persuasion of them.

Not from the love and liking of the same, but only from the vain opinion.

Not from the inward desire nor outward endeavor to attain this virtue, but
only from the deceiptfull conceit of it.

Not from the practice of righteousness, but from pride in it.

Not from the care, but conceit of it.

Not from travailing for, but from trusting in it.

Not from sound wisdom or justice, but from seeming wisdom, and a seeming
show of justice that is fained and false, Ier. 9. 23.

Not that any selfe-wisedome can be counted too little, or any seeming justice
not overmuch. For, selfewisedome and seeming justice have no mean, but are
themselves the extremes of true and sound wisdom and justice.

First, Some are righteous or religious neither in show nor substance, but
only in name, as vile Belials and profane ungodly men.

Secondly, Some in show, not in deed, as hollow-hearted halting hypocrites, who
are usually too just, being strict in a righteousness they frame and make to
themselves, not grounded on Gods Word, Mark 7. 4 counting such things to be
sin, which by Gods law are not made sin, being censorious busybodies
without just ground or warrant.

Thirdly, Some are righteous or religious in deed, not in show, as weak
believers.

Fourthly, Some both in show and substance, as all sincerehearted and open
Professors. These can never be too just: For, in true righteousness no man
can be over-just, that is, too strict in avoiding sin, all being damnable and
deadly: or in perf^rming any bounden duty, he being to give an account of them
all.

Say not therefore (I say) a man may be too just or righteous: For, although in
palpably profane persons, there is too little righteousness or justice, too
much in Pharisees, Brownists and Papists: yet they who go along by the Word of
God, and hold close to it, the rule of righteousness, cannot be over-just, or
over-righteous. And although scrupulous superstition, Mar. 7. 2. Glozing
hypocrisy, Matthew. 7. 3, 4, 5. And blind preposterous zeal, Romans 10. 2. are
too much justice, by which men are too religious: yet in the sound and
sufficient practice of piety, observing to do all the commandments of the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 6. 25. fearing God and keeping his commandments, Eccles. 12. 13.
Following the Lords direction in his Word, Mica. 6. 8.

No man can be too just, because none can be too much truly religious.

1. You honorable and venerable Magistrates, the Lord Iehovahs and his
Lievetenants, our dread Sovereigns Deputies.

1. Do not you by impunity encourage wicked men to mischief, for thus doing,
you not only incite to iniquity, but also make the Land guilty of sin, and
the inhabitants liable to Gods judgments, Deuteronomy. 19. 10. 20. 1 King. 20. 4.
Numb 35. 31, 32, 33, 34.

2. Do not you (like those corrupt governors of Israel, 1 Kings 21. and
profane perplexed Pilate, John 9. 10, 11.) sit in judgment upon the
righteous, and give sentence of condemnation against the innocent: For, so
doing, you sin against charity, which believes all things. Against justice,
which would have the good preserved and protected. Against the commonwealth,
each good man being a common good. And against God, such being the apple of his
eye, Zach. 2. 8.

3. Do not you by suborning, supporting, or setting others on work, harm the
guiltless: For, so doing, your selves should be chief actors and agents. As
David slew Vriah with the sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10. 11.
15.

4. Do not you suffer others to condemn or kill, to harm ^ ^ so doing you are
accessaries at least, Exodus 2^. 29. Deuteronomy. 22. 8. Io(...) 9. 12, 13, 17. Prove.
2^. 11, 12.

5. D(...) not by inhumanitie and cruelty oppress the inferior helpelesse
men. For so doing, you will fill y(...) h^gh with blood, Isa. 1. 15. Swallow up
the(...) Amos 8. 4* 7. Ear up people like bread, Psalm. 14. 4. 53. 4. And
procure many bitter pitteou^ cries to God and men against you, ^ch. 5 1. 11. 13.

But do you deal justly and uprightly in your jurisdictions.

Loving righteousness and hating iniquity, Exodus 18. 21. Psalm. 45* 7.

Having your ^ares open to the cry of the poor, Proverbs 31. 8, 9.

Regarding (...) although they try (...), (...) 31. 8.

Giving sentence according to tr^th and equity.

Executing judgment according to truth given.

That so you may imitate the Lord Ieho^i^, whose person you represent.

That so you may follow your pi^us for^ (...), Luke 23. 50. and testify your
sincere obedience to Gods sovereign commandments, Zach. ^. 16.

2. You fathers begetting, 1 Cor. 4. 14. Mothers travailing in birth, Gal. 4.
19. And N^^ses, ^ These. ^. Feeding souls to eternal life: You Shepheard^ to
draw w^ter^ ou^ of the We^ of salvation, not for beasts, but men: not for
bodies, but for souls: not for sinners, but for Saints. You Ambassadors of
the Lord of glory, co-workers with, and laborers for God: Angels of the
Churches, salt of the earth* light^ of the world; and men of God. Let us (...)
either*

1. By pining, causing Gods people to be cut off and destroyed for lack of
knowledge, Hos. 4. 6.

2. By pernicious p^^s^^ing* departing out of the way, causing many to stumble
at the law, corrupting the covenant of Levi, Mal. ^. 8. Teaching (...) for
sacred truths. Mi^ing and mingling the dreggy lee^ of our own ^rossie devices,
amidst the delicate divine doctrine of the omnipotent, omniscient, unchangeable
Jehovah.

Like those corrupt glossers, who taught as truth that swearing by the Temple
was nothing, by the gold thereof a great offense, Mat. 13. 18.

3. By slothful negligence, occasioning the keen and glittering sword of
divine displeasure to sweep away obstinate offenders in their iniquities. And
justly incensing the incomprehensible Jehovah to require their blood at our
(his watchmens) hands, Ezekiel. 33 6.

4. By over-lading our faint and feeble brethren with the ^nerous burdens of
unnecessary things, thereby incurring the inevitable woe of the Lord Jesus,
Luke 11. 46. And the sharp check and control of that ancient Primitive
Apostolical Synod, Acts 15. 10. 28.

5. By corrupt contagious counsel and evil example, stumbling, scandalizing
or weakening our brethren, Romans 14. 21. Gal. 2. 13.

1. But let us imitating the Lords holy Prophets, 1 Samuel 12. 19. 23. His
well-beloved blessed Son that great and faithful shepherd, Ioh. 17. And his
pious Apostles, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Pray without c^asing for the Lords people.

2. Let us obeying those sacred injunctions so frequently incul^^ted in sacred
Writ, Feed my lambs, Feed my sheep, ^r^ach in season, and out of season. That
is, preach on times set and appointed: When people are willing and forward to
hear: and when occasion is offered, this being in season. Yea out of season,
namely, at times extraordinary, or when people are backward to hear. For,
their backwardness cannot excuse our negligence. Our labor is with God though
lost with men, Isa. 49. 14: We must speak although they will not hear, Ezekiel.
2. 5. That we may magnify the riches of Gods mercies, justify his righteous
judgments, leave them without excuse, Ezekiel. 2. 5. and save our own souls.

3. Let us be careful of the salvation of all and every one that is committed
to our charge. Being careful to keep our selves free from the blood of all
men, Acts 20. 26. Namely of all with whom we stand charged, to wh^^ we are
sent, and amongst whom we come, keeping back nothing, either Precept or Law,
Promise or Gospel: either words of instruction, exhortation, admonition,
co(...)ion, consolation, or nothing which is necessary or profitable to
salvation: But showing unto them all the counsel of God, namely, his revealed
will in his Word, truly, soundly and sufficiently, although we cannot wholly,
thoroughly, and perfectly.

4. Let us be examples to our flocks, in word, in conversation, in charity,
etc. 1 Timothy 4. 12. That they may be followers of us, and we of Christ, 1 Cor.
11. 1.

3. Yea let every particular Christian in his several calling, faithfully
perform the duties thereof.

That so both they, we, and you may serve God, not only in the general
calling of Christianity, endeavoring therein to live uprightly, walking in the
righteous statutes of God. But also in respect of our particular functions,
Romans 1. 9. Doing the duties of our personal callings to the glory of God, and
the good of his people in Church and commonwealth.

That so we may not only be free from the Devils, (for he arms his soldiers
with oppression, cruelty, deceit, false weights and measures usually, etc.)
but also wear Gods breast plate, which is love, mercy, godly and faithful
dealing to our brethren with a good conscience, as Jacob toward Laban, Genes.
31. 37. And Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 7. Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1 6. Io^ ^1. And
Paul who endeavored to keep a good conscience toward God and all men, Acts
24. 16.

Put therefore this armor into your breasts, that is, your hearts, that so
your hearts being upright, they may teach our eyes to see, our ears to hear,
our tongues to speak, our feet to go, our hands to labor, and all according
to righteousness in the sight of God and man.

That by abstaining from all evil, and doing ^ight every M^t.
good duty, the two essential parts of this breast plate of righteousness.

1. Our mighty Lord and dread Sovereign Jehovah; whose soldiers we are, and
whom we serve, may be honored, Mat. 5. 16.

2. We may beautify and adorn our noble Christian profession thereby.

1. Winning even wicked ones, who as yet are without, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

2. Strengthening and confirming those our brethren which stand, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6,
7.

3. Procuring a good name in Gods Church while we live, 2 Cor. 8. 18. And a
blessed memory after death, Prove. 10. 7.

4. Stopping the mouths of barking Belials, making them ashamed to speak
evil of us, 1 Pet. 3, 16.

3. We may be assured of our effectual calling and spiritual adoption, 1 Job.
2. 9. and ascertained of our eternal election and salvation, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

4. And preserved from being mortally wounded by sin: for where the
breast plate is well put on, sin has no power to kill downeright; this being
as contrary to sin, as water is to fire.

SECT. 4. The Christians shoes.
Their shoes, what they are, and how useful.
THe third piece of this armor is the preparation of the Gospel wherewith you
must have your feet shod.

The feet of the body its lowest members the organs and instruments of motion
of supporting the same, carrying it from place to place, being safe kept and
guided, uphold the body, passing through or over many rough or ragged ways,
hard and harsh passages. Whereas if these are maimed, naked or unfenced
(although the other parts have sufficient furniture) man marches forward
especially if through thorny and craggie paths, and against the keen and
glittering, the sharp and piercing swords, spears and pikes of enraged foes,
limpingly, fearfully, uncomfortably, and dangerously desperately. Hence is it
that we all are careful enough to fence and guard our feet and legs with
shoes, boots, and other such commodious defenses, against such miseries and
inconveniences, hurts and encumbrances those members (and in regard of them our
bodies) are incident and liable unto. And martial men (as we see in Goliath, 1 Samuel 17 6) they have their leg-harnesse to safeguard and protect their legs,
and feet from hurts and wounds, least these being battered and broken, harmed
and hurt, and able to stand no longer themselves should dangerously perish.

The will; affections, desires, cares and endeavors of the soul (its feet,
these being the beginning of our actions as feet are the instruments of motion:
these carrying our minds up and down as feet do our bodies) are to be looked
unto, when we go into the house of the Lord, Eccles. 5. 1. We are to ponder
the path^ of these our feet and remove them from evil, Pr^. 4. 26, 27. To make
Gods Word a light and lamp unto these our feet, Psalm. 119. 105. To desire the
Lord to uphold our going in his paths that these footsteps do not slip, Psalm.
17. 5. And to have them shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. That
like as shoes defend and cover our feet from thor^es, cold, and other
injurious hurts and hindrances to which they are subject, and make them more
apt and able to travail safely and securely in the way. So the Gospel of
peace armeth and prepares the feet, or affections of a Christian soldier, to
pass undauntedly through the manifold sharp dangers and difficulties of the
way: defending* them from the hellish rage and malice of Satan and his cruel
accomplices, and guiding them in the happy and heavenly journey to the kingdom
of God.

What though many careless Christians want this weapon being naked and
barefoot, or too slenderly shod to endure and abide all the galling girds, and
bitter b(...)ts of Satan's side?

What though many are shod by the Devil with his shoes, sc. a preparation
against the Gospel, to afflict Gods Church, punish his children, persecute his
servants, speak evil of them and slander the Gospel?

Yet let us the soldiers of Christ be careful that our feet may be steadfast
and safe; for if our legs be wearied and wounded, bruised and beaten, we cannot
go a soldiers pace, nor fight the Christian warfare. Profess we therefore
the Gospel of God so that if God call us to misery, to death, we may be
prepared to go, and suffer rebukes and taunts, death and distresses, any thing
all things for the Gospells sake. Or be we shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace; so called. Because it works atonement with God: peace with
our brethren, and with our own consciences. Called the preparation, not only
because it prepares and makes us ready for the coming of Christ; but also
because it prepares us to suffer all adversity and trouble for the Gospel.

Is it necessary O you soldiers of Christ to persuade you Motive 1.
to be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace? Sure I am each
reasonable man knowing the feet to be naturally so nice and tender that if we
go abroad barefoot stones will hurt them, thorns will prick them: and
perceiving the necessary use of shoes to cover and keep our feet from such
like incommodious inconveniences, is careful to have these members well
fortified, fenced and shod, that he may go on with boldness and courage
whatsoever the way be. And shall not every soldier of Christ being to pass
through a very hard, harsh, and rough way, full of disgraceful reproaches;
troublesome taunts* variety of vexations, terrible temptations: many times full
of persecutions by tortures and torments, loss of goods, lives and liberties,
and all sorts of afflictions, more harsh and grievous to a naked heart and
soul, then thorne^ and thistles, briars and brambles to bare and unguarded
feet: be as careful to have his soul well armed, and fenced with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace (without which there is no possibility of
going on, much less of holding out in that way) that so he may not only dare
to adventure into, but also endure to hold out in this way so hard and harsh,
passing with undaunted courage through all the tempestuous, and terrible
troubles, of this malicious and maligning world?

Thus armed and shod, the Lords valiant Worthies in all ages have passed
through the piercing pike^ of the most outrageous opposing occurrences, of
their many and maligning enemies, not daunted with nor dreading, but
courageously enduring, the bitter blasts and brunts of scorns and scourges, of
bonds and prisonments, of fire and faggots, and innumerable sundry kinds of
crosses, to which from time to time they have been brought.

2. As the want of shoes in such places where they are of necessary and
important use, and may be had is shameful and unseemely: And as clean and
decent shoes fit for our feet, and thereto closely tied, are an ornament,
docking and adorning our bodies; So (as the Laodicean Church being poor,
blind, and naked, was wretched and miserable, Rev. 3. 17.) it is a shameful
and sordid thing, for us Christian soldiers who have so long and with such
liberty enjoyed the Gospel, not to be shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace. Whereas these spiritual shoes dec^e beautify and adorn our steps
and goings, making our ways and works seemly and right, Cant. 7. 1.

That therefore we may be always really and readily prepared and protected
against all the sorts and several kinds of troubles and temptations.

1. So that they never find us unfitted and unfurnished, Io^ 3. 25.

2. So that we be not dismayed with their dread, nor overwhelmed with their
weight, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.

3. So that we be not distracted nor discomfited in the midst and most of them,
but more then conquerors in all these things, Romans 8. ^7.

4. So that our consolations may abound by Christ as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

5. So that we may be strengthened and enabled to cheer up and consolate
others groaning under like burdensome pressures, 2 Cor. 1. 4 6.

6. So that we may stand out to the end to fight a good fight, to finish our
course and obtain the crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4 7, 8. Let us be
careful to have our f^et sh^d with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

SECT. 5. The Christians shield.
Their shield, its excellency, necessity, and their duty concerning the same.
THe fourth piece of the armor of righteousness, is the shield of faith. A
shield is a defensive instrument of war* to award and keep off the blows of
an enemy, having a fourefold use; namely, 1. To receive and bear blows and
strokes. 2. To beat back darts, arrows, stones, and bullets, etc. 3 To
break the force of swords, halberds, etc. ^4. To cover, save and shadow the
whole body.

Thus good Magistrates are shields ( Psalm. 47. 9. The shields of the earth
belong unto God) being instruments of safety and defense to the good. Thus God
is a shield ( Genesis 15. 1. I am thy buckler. Psalm. 18* 2. The Lord is my
buckler) to those which trust in him, Psalm. 18. 30. Thus is faith a shield
bearing off and beating back the fierce temptations of Satan, as carnal
confidence, presumptuous security, distrustful infidelity, and other fierce
darts of the world, the flesh and the devil.

I having formerly spoken unto you of this most necessary, profitable and
comfortable, of this first and mother grace of graces, most of all setting
forth Gods glory, acknowledging his wisdom, truth, power, holiness, justice
and mercy, in another discourse, namely of the society of Saints, much I will
not, yet some things I must needs speak of this capital grace and head virtue.

First, Although many profane persons and popishly persuaded think and say,
that so much preaching and learning of faith is a let and hinderance to good
works, making men careless of piety and charity. Little considering the
certainty of that irreprehensible divine truth, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God. For

1. Upon whom Gods wrath abides, they cannot please God.

But Gods wrath abi^es upon all mis-beleevers, Ioh. 3. 36. 2 Without Christ it
is impossible to please God.

But without faith no man can have Christ, Ephesians. 3. 12. 17.

3. Without Gods spirit it is impossible to please God.

But without faith no man can have Gods spirit, Gal. 3. 2.

4. Without the root there can be no fruit.

But faith is the root of all acceptable obedience, Heb. 11. 4.

5. They who are in the state of reprobates cannot please God.

But all that have not faith are in that state, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

6. They who are dead in trespasses and sins cannot please God.

But all who want faith are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.

7. Those whose consciences are defiled cannot please God.

But all who want faith even their consciences are defiled, Tit. 1. 15.

Secondly, Although godless Atheists conceive faith to be some fained fiction,
or some unnecessary thing, for discourse and disputation only, little
considering That it is most precious and excellent, 2 Pet. 1. 1.

1. In the account and estimate of the most wise un-erring and omniscient Lord
Jehovah, with whom faith finds favor, Mat. 8 13. 15. 28.

2. In the estimation and judgment of the sanctified and illuminated people of
God affirming, and professing that faith is more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.
7.

3. In regard of the giver, and doner, God himself, Phil. 1. 29.

4. In regard of the worker, Gods sacred and holy Spirit.

5. In regard of the isntrumental means whereby it is wrought, the Word of
God, Romans 10 14. this being a most precious and excellent thing.

1. Containing in it most pure, and precious promises, Heb. 8. 6.

2. Being compared to things most excellent and eminent, namely

A rich treasure, and precious pearl, Mat. 13. 44, 45.

An heritage, and thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 1 9. 111. 72.

6. In regard of the object, Christ Jesus himself blessed for ever, Act. 16.
31.

7. In regard of the ground of faith, the promises in the Gospel; which
promises are of the greatest blessings, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18 1 Timothy 4. 8. 2 Timothy 4.
8. And the surest promises tha^ can be made, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Heb. 10. 23.

8. In regard of the use and end thereof, the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet.
1. 9.

Thirdly, Although sottish, and secure ignorant people, and loose, licentious,
and lewd lossels content themselves with that false, fained, and barren faith
which is fruitless and unworking: yea, and boast, and glory too, that they
believe as well as the best; Although this their faith is only a natural
persuasion which they had from the womb, and sucked from the breasts: not that
extraordinary special gift of God, Phil. 1 29. by the sanctified use of the
ordinary means, Romans 10. 14. Although this their faith is idle, and
unfruitful, neither purifying their hearts, nor sanctifying them throughout,
nor enabling them to resist sin, and Satan. So that although they believe as
well as the best in their own conceit, yet they live as bad as the worst.

1. Little considering, that though faith alone does justify, yet justifying
faith is not alone. Faith without works being a vain, and unprofitable faith,
James 2. 14. A dead and livelesse faith, James 2. 17. 26. A fained and false
faith, Iam. 2. ^0. And the faith of Dive^ls, Iam. 2. 19.

2. Little considering that saving graces are not to be severed each from
other, but carefully and continually to be knit together, 2 Pet. 1. 5. 8.

3. Little considering that saving graces are energeticall, operative, or
stirring, and working graces. So that virtue shows it self in action;
Knowledge practices obedience. Temperance restraines the appetite. Godliness
desires, and endeavors to please God in all things. Brotherly-kindnesse
exercises well-wishing, well-speaking, and well-doing. And faith works by
love.

4. Little considering that saving graces are gainefull and fruitful graces,
gaining glory to God; good to the Church; Sons to the Father; Subjects,
Servants, Sheep, and Souls to Christ, as he is a King, Lord, Shepherd, and
Savior.

5. Little considering that the want of some saving graces, argues the want of
others, yea of all others, 2 Pet. 1. 9. He that lackes these, that is, all or
any of these, always and altogether is blind, and cannot see afar, etc.

6. Little considering that all his popular plausible, and pharisaicall
performances in Gods worship are vain and vacant without that faith unfeigned
of Gods elect. Without which Obedience is not acceptable, Romans 14. 23. Prayer
not prevailing, Romans 10 14. And confession not available, Romans 10. 10. The
fruit not being good which comes not from this root The water being polluted
which streams not from this fountain.

Although I say those fond and foolish forenamed people do fondly and
santastically deceive their own precious and peerless souls: yet let every
true Christian soldier of Christ Jesus highly prise, and labor for that
peerless precious faith which is proper only to Gods chosen children,
therefore called the faith of the elect, Titus 1. 1.

For that faith which is sincere without counterfeting hypocrisy, therefore
called faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5.

For that so excellent faith whereby we obtain precious things, therefore
called precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1.

For that faith which increases from one degree to another, from weaker to
stronger, from a lesser to a greater, Rom 1. 17.

For that faith which relyeth upon Christ and his promises, esteems Christ
above all, more then all; desires Christ before all things; delights in Christ
more then in all things, and looks for the full enjoyment of him, therefore
called the faith of Jesus Christ, James 2. 1.

For that faith which defends the spiritual warrior from all sorts of
temptations cast against him by his spiritual enemies, holding out Christ and
the efficacy and power of his obedience and suffering against all their
viperine and virulent trucu^ent and terrible assaults and temptations, therefore
called the shield of faith.

Above all therefore take the shield of faith* for without this all is nothing
If it were possible to have truth righteousness, etc. and lack faith all
these are nothing.

Take therefore, that is, let it not lie unregarded and (...).
neglected, but take it up. Take it into your defense, sitting it close to your
hearts, using it for your defense and safety against sin and Satan. Take it
again and again, or recover it if through your own weakness, or through
the violence of their blows you let it fall or slip.

That it may be to us, as it is unto others the substance, or (...). Heb. 11.
1 Motive 1.
prop, or tressell, or basis and foundation, a ground, and ankor-hold, a
certainty and assurance of things hoped for; namely, The continuance of Gods
favor for ever, Lev. 26. 11, 12, 44* 45. The victory over all our enemies. The
full, and p^rfect redemption of our souls, and bodies, Titus 2. 13, 14. The
resurrection of the flesh, I^b 19. 26, 27. Act. 24, 15. The life everlasting,
Heb. 12. 23. And the glorification of the Church, ^ C^r. 4. 17.

2. That it may be to us a true, clear, infallible, undoubtfull, (...). Heb.
11. 1.
and undeceiveable evidence or appearance of things not seen, namely, of our
election, adoption, justification, redemption, regeneration, and glorification.

3. That by this we may come to God, Heb. 11. 6. So as To offer acceptable
sacrifices or services in his sight, Micah 6. So as to seek for his favor, or
to be reconciled to him again. So as to please him, drawing near to him,
being again united to him by faith, from whom we were estranged by sin. So as
to apprehend, hold fast, and rest constantly upon the promise of God made in
Christ.

4. That by this we may see him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. and his promises
a far off* 13, 14. Constantly believing them, although we do not presently
receive the same: yea, So that it may work in us.

A thankful acceptance of those promises, though as yet unperformed.

A contempt of this world, acknowledging, and confessing our selves strangers
in it. 13.

An endeavor to come to heaven, their passing excellent celestial country.
14.

An earnest desire after a better life, estate, and condition. 16.

An assurance of Gods everlasting favor toward us. 16.

5. That by this we be invincible and inexpugnable.

So that the God of this world the devil may not blind our understandings, as
he does the minds of them which believe not, ^ Cor. 4 4.

So that That man of sin whose coming is after the working of Satan with all
power, and signs and lying wonders may not bewitch and beguile us as he does
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, nor believed
the same, 2 These. 2. 12.

So that nothing may be to us defiled and polluted* as all things are: to them
that are defiled, and unbeleeving, Titus 1. 15.

So that we may be true Israelites, men having power to prevail with God and
men, Genesis 32. 28. by effectual and forcible, because fervent and faithful
prayers, James 5. 17.

So that we may not only comfortably combat with, but also courageously
conquer, 1. Our guilefull and fraudulent flesh, purifying our hearts by faith,
Act. 15. 9. 2. The insinuating enchantments, and insolent injuries of this
wicked world, opp^sing by faith against this world the world to come; namely,
against its scornful scofs and contumelies, the real, irreversable, and
inutterable tortures of hell; and against its inveigling inticements, and
inamouring charms, the solid, and substantial, incredible and
incomprehensible joys of heaven. Prising and esteeming by faith all the
dunghill dross, and gli^tering glozes of this bewitching world not as they
seem to be, but as they are in truth. They being but dung and dross in
comparison of Christ, although they appear beautiful like the not beneficial
dustie fruit of Sodom, or like the glittering, golden, yet not nourishing
loaves of Caligula.

Thus by our faith we may overcome the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. And be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6. 16.

The Devils temptations with which he fights against us either by himself,
or in our motions and concupiscence, or by wicked men which are his instruments
are Darts, so called because they pierce entering into the heart and soul, and
are dangerous, making great and grievous wounds, leading to damnation: and
Fi^rie, so called because they inflame and set on fire. These fiery darts the
Devil, and his soldiers shoot.

What makes the abominable adulterer, wicked curser, prodigious swearer, lewd
liar, prophaner of the Lords day, and diverse others of the like rank to hear
much, and yet are nothing touched? Satan has stroke them dead with his darts.

What makes many run after sin as if they were mad? They are set on fire by the
Devil.

The danger therefore being so great, take we the shield of faith to protect
and safeguard us from Satan's temptations that they annoy us not.

And to quench and cure the harm and hurt those fiery dart^ have done, if they
do pierce and wound our souls.

SECT. 6. The Christian soldiers helmet.
Their helmet, how differenced from faith and counterfeit hope, motives to get
and use it, etc.
THe fifth piece of this armor is the helmet of salvation, or Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
8. which is a constant desire of the promised happiness, and a cheerful
expectation of the same.

This helmet hope is so like the shield of faith, that they are often put one
for the other, 1 Pet. 1. 5. yea, they work alike, and have many like
properties, privileges and prerogatives. For we are saved by faith, Ephesians. 2. 8.
And by hope, Romans 8. 24. Faith purifieth the heart, Act. 15. 9. And hope
purifieth the heart, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. Faith gives full assurance, Heb. 10. 22. And
hope gives full assurance, Heb. 6. 11. Faith makes patient, Isa. 28. 16. And
hope does the same, Romans 8. 25. Yet is it a grace different and distinct from,
and necessary and needful to be added to faith, to uphold and cherish the same.

Faith believes the truth of Gods Word, and imbraceth Gods promises as true.
Hope ascertaineth and assures the performance thereof in due time.

Faith is the assurance of God^ precious promises.

Hope patiently abides the Lords leisure expecting and looking for the same.

Faith puts us in mind and tells us there is a heaven, and crown of glory.

Hope always looks to receive and enjoy them.

Faith tells us and assures us there are such and such things.

Hope persuades us they shall be ours.

Without faith we cannot believe the truth of Gods promises.

Without hope we cannot appropriate and apply the comforts thereof.

By faith in the promises of God we are strengthened.

By hope in the goodness of God we are comforted in our afflictions.

Faith is of things past, present, and to come.

Hope only of things to come.

Faith is of good and evil.

Hope only of good things.

Faith is the cause of hope, therefore first, as the mother of hop^, Romans 5. 2.
1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Heb. 11. 1.

As by faith the ancient Patriarks were assured that Christ should come.

So by hope they looked for him, and said come.

Faith (says S. Chrysostom) does begin glory: Hope does by Chr^^. Tom ^. cap.
^e fi^e (...), (...) C^art^ate.
supporting finish it.

Faith lays the foundation: Hope does build up the man.

Faith gives the beginning: Hope does lead a Christian to the top, or end.

Faith does begin the entrance of credulity: Hope does practice to the
perfection of virtue.

Faith does believe what is promised. Hope now beholds that which it hops.

And to conclude out of this place of Saint Paul we may see. Faith is the
shield above all to be taken: Hope is the helmet to be added thereunto.

First, what and if Satan armeth his soldiers with a certain kind of hope of
salvation, persuading them to fin under hope of repentance, ascertaining them
that without all doubt they shall go to h^aven, although they live
licentiously; and wickedly wallow in the most dreadful damnable deeds of
darkness. Little considering that this their hope is but a deceitful deluding
mockery of the devil, and a vain hope; for the hope of the hypocrites and of
those that forget God shall be cut off, and their trust like the spid^rs web.
They shall lean upon their house, but it shall not stand, they shall hold it
fast but it shall not endure, Job 8. 13. etc.

Secondly, wha^ and if the most silly and foolish sort of men, the most
senseless and sottish worldlings, and the most sinful and sensual so^s of
Belial think it the easiest matter of a thousand to have a good hope. Little
considering that it is a very hard and difficult thing to have a true and
saving hope in God: Witness David's fervent and frequent forcing himself to
hope in God, and fortifying himself against the contrary, Ps. 42. 2, 5, 6. 43.
5. Witness the many let^ and impediments, which as obstacle^ hinder and keep
many and many men from sound and saving hope, namely, Satan's sly and subtle
guilefull deceipts and falsehoods, the thwart and froward condition of the
flesh, hating purity, without which no true hope, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. Witness the
many selfe-seducing deceits grounded upon vain, groundless, and false hopes,
whereby every man almost, although never so sensual and sinful, hopes to be
saved, Isa. 57. 10 Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet said thou
not There is no hope. Although all such wh^ are without Christ, being aliens
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise
have no hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. And only those, who have grace, have good hope, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.

Thirdly, What and if many delight and please, flatter and fool themselves
with unsound and unsettled hopes, grounding their hope of salvation upon

1. Their own over credulous conceits, and foolish fancies, having no more
evidence for salvation, then he whose deeds are written in water, or he whose
house is built upon the seasands: these building their hope only upon their
bare imaginations, and fond fancies.

2. Upon their forefathers faith, and pious progenitors graces, having
themselves no personal piety, nor saving sanctity; like the proud and
tombe-like Pharisees, who hoped for heaven and happiness because they were
Abraham^ children (as if they could see with other men^ eyes, walk with other
men's feet, and live by another man's eating) Matthew. 3. 9. But they deceived
themselves, and discredited Abraham* Matthew. 5. 20. Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the, etc.

3. Or upon some personal perfunctory performances of some duties of piety,
although only formally for fashion; not faithfully and for conscience sake,
like those boasting braggard^ Matthew. 7. 22. Lord, Lord have we not prophesied
in thy name? and in thy name have cast out Devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful works? Who yet were sent away with this fearful farewell, Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, 23. And like the foolish Virgins, counterfeit,
and hypocritical Christians, which because they did some things as the wise
Virgins or sincere and sound Christians in religion did (being like unto them
in many things, namely, 1 Both having Lamps, Matthew. 25. 3, 4. The lamps of both
giving light, v. 8. Both going forth together to meet Christ, v. 6. Both
waiting for his coming, v. 5. Both slumbering and sleeping, v. 5. Both awaking
at the noise of his coming, v. 6. Both seeking to enter into his bedchamber,
v. 10, 11.) hoped to be saved as well as those other wise virgins, whose lamps
had oil, their faith being true and lively working by love, and who were
ready, v. 10. that is, such who believed, and repented, who were elect,
adopted, justified, who were regenerate and sanctified, who watched, and waited
having their loins girt, and their lamps burning: Although they were
essentially and expressly differenced and distinguished each from other: yea,
so that

The wise have oil in their vessels, to preserve and feed their lamps when
the light begins to diminish and decay. The foolish have none.

The wise are careful and constant in the service and worship of God.

The foolish secure and careless.

The wise build their house upon a rock. The foolish upon the land.

The wise, like the Ant, get and gather in summer, that which may support and
sustain them in winter. The foolish not so.

And therefore

Although they seek and send for those in their sickness when they are ready
to die, whom they regarded not in their welfare, health, and prosperity, as
faithful preachers, and precise professors; Saying, give us of your faith,
hope, soundness, sincerity, and conscience.

Although they be earnest out of time, showing their sorrow, but not sincerity,
Crying, Lord, Lord.

Although they wish to themselves the end of the righteous, and to be partakers
of their portion in the life to come (though they like not to walk in their
steps whilst they live) saying, Open to us.

Although they seemed for the present to be familiarly acquainted with Christ:
yet at the judgment day they shall be shaken off, rejected, and utterly
forsaken, v. 12. I know you not. For why?

They asked irreligiously, impiously, and papistically: at the instrument in
stead of the author, at the servants in stead of the master, at the foot in
stead of the head, at the cisterne in stead of the fountain.

They asked preposterously or disorderly: Righteousness before remission of
sins; Sanctification before sorrow for sin; Pardon before repentance.

They asked unseasonably, too late, when their heart was hardened, of the wise;
when the door was shut, of the Lord.

For why? although they went to buy: yet it was

To buy base metals; copper for gold, false wares for good, as the matter
without the means of salvation. Or means without the matter: Or Saints
merits, relics, and such false and forged trash.

To buy with false coin, counterfeit silver; Having a desire without endeavor:
Having endeavor without desire: Or both cold and careless. Their desires
being faithless; Their requests careless; Prayers pithlesse, and powerless,
and their endeavors negligent, slothful, and idle.

To buy carelessly, slothfully, and lazily; lingering, protracting, differring,
and dallying, being slow in hearing, believing, repenting, and obeying.

What and if I say those three sorts of sottish and seduced souls before
mentioned suffer themselves to be sinfully st^pisied, and satanically
surprised. Yet let all those who have any well-wishes unto their own souls.
And all us who are the servants, and soldiers of our Lord, and Master, King*
and Captain Christ Jesus.

First, Learn to discern and distinguish betwixt

1. That hope, whose Author, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope, etc. and Object,
1 Timothy 6. 17. but in the living God: is God, and his precious promises. And
that whose author is Satan, and Object men, Isa. 20. 5. They shall be afraid
and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation. Uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Charge them that be rich -- not to trust in uncertain riches, etc. Or such
like deceitful props of reed.

2. That hope, whose ground and substance is faith, Heb. 11. 1.

And that whose basis and foundation is only humor and imagination, or the
sight, and sense of their present prosperity.

3. That hope, which is real, right, and religious. And that, which is
reachlesse, ruinous, and reprobate.

1. The one relying on Gods promises, although they seem unlikely, Romans 4. 18.
Who against hope believed in hope, that he, etc.

The other falling, yea falling, when the limber and brittle props and pillars
of humane support (wherewith it is borne up) reele, shrink, and faint.

2. The one being diligent and industrious in the use of sanctified means: The
other slack and sluggish in the means, hoping for happiness without
holiness, glory without grace, salvation without sanctification. Boasting and
bragging of heaven, wholly omitting, or at best sleighting, and securely
neglecting the way directly tending thither.

Secondly, And labor to get and hold fast that hope, which is 1 a Scripture
hope, Romans 15. 4. That we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope. Frame and fashion our lives according to the guidance and direction
therefore of sacred Scripture; for they who lie and live in sin against
Scripture can have no good hope.

2. That hope, whereof we have sound and sufficient evidence, Heb. 11. 1. for
which we can give good reason, 1 Pet. 3. 15. least we be like banckerout
braving braggards, who boast of Lordships, lands, and livings, not having any
evidence to show for the same.

3. That hope, which is fruitful, and effectual, working in the heart

1. Joy unspeakable and glorious from the sense of heavenly blessings present,
and hope of full blessedness to come; joy during, and long lasting, stirring
up to the praises of God, in whom the Saints do joy, Romans 5. 12. 12. 15. 13.

2. Desire instant and insatiable to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8. 19, 20. Or
to be partakers of its hope, 1 Cor. 9. 10.

3 Piety, and purity, purging and purifying the owner and possessour thereof, 1
Ioh. 3. 3.

4. And that hope, which has Gods image and superscription charactred and
engraven on it.

1. It being a lively hope, or an unmovable and certain expectation of Gods
promises, 1 Pet. 1. 3.

2. It being a patient hope, or a quiet and settled waiting for help and
happiness from God with courage and patience, Romans 8 25. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

3. It being a blessed hope, Tit. 2 13.

4. It being a sure and steadfast hope, Heb. 6. 19.

First, This sound and substantial hope procured and obtained

1. By knowledge of God apprehending his mercy, Ps. 9. 10. And they that know
thy Name will put their trust in thee.

2. By humbling our souls within us, Lam. 3. 20, 21. My soul is humbled in
me, this I recall to mind, therefore have I hope.

3. By dreading and reverencing the Lord Jehovah, Psalm. 115. 11. Ye that fear
the Lord trust in the Lord, etc.

4. By shunning evil, and doing good, purifying our selves as he is pure, 1
John 3. 3. The hope of the wicked perishing, Prove. 11. 7.

Secondly, This hope warranted and supported, as by so many props and pillars.

1. By the unalterable Word of the unchangeable Jehovah, Romans 15. 4.

2. By the sacred solemn oath of our good and gracious God, Heb. 6. 18, 19.

3. By the legacy of Christ, bequeathing his to his Father, desiring him, who
promised to grant whatsoever he should ask, to keep his Saints, that they
might be where he is, John 17.

4. B^ the invaluable blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, by which the
promises of God are sealed and subscribed, Heb. 10. 19. 20.

Thirdly, This hope thus procured, and preserved, 1. Keeping us from, and
comforting us against all unkindly fears, and dreadful desperation.

2. This defending us against, and delivering us from backesliding, apostasy,
enabling us to expect and wait for; though we have not presently the thing
promised, assuring us heirs, that though we be not now esteemed, yet time will
come when we shall be some body.

3. This resting and remaining with us, strengthening, and supporting us when
other graces seem to sink and forsake us; this (like the fishers cork)
swimming aloft when other virtues are hidden, and almost overwhelmed; so that
were it not for hope, the heart would often break: agreeable to that saying of
David, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living, this (like an old man's staff)
sustaining us.

4. This being our anchor whereunto we may safely trust, though afflictions and
temptations like storms be raised against us, Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have
as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast.

5. And this being a maine part of the armor of our salvation, with which
headpiece all Gods Saints are and have been armed. We must war likewise
continually, but in hope of victory? What shall move us to endure all troubles?
The hope of salvation. This made patient Paul, the pious Professors;
magnanimous Martyrs, constant Confessors not to be daunted with, nor dread the
utmost hellish rage of barbarous and bloody persecutours: And this is as
necessary for us; for whatsoever we are, we are but in hope; which is our
tenure, and takes up our possession of things to come. If we have all the
members of our body armed, and our-heads unarmed, one blow may kill us. This
hope is our helmet, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Take therefore this helmet of salvation,
hope.

SECT. 7. The Christian soldiers sword.
Their sword, its dignity, diverse erroneous opinions about it, and our duty
concerning the same.
THe sixth and last piece of our armor follows: And the sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God; so called, Psalm. 45. 3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh;
which phrase is taken from the custom and manner of Kings, Captains, and
Soldiers; and shows the means of advancing Christ his gracious and
Spiritual Kingdom, to be the Ministry of his Word, this Spiritual Sword: As
if the Prophet should say: Give thy Word unto thy Ministers, power thy grace
into their hearts and lips; store them with gifts Ministerial, and stir them
up to use the same: Send forth and set up a standing preaching, and powerful
Ministry. Hebr. 4. 12. For the Word of God is quick, and powerful, and
sharper than any two edged sword. Rev. 1. 16. Out of his mouth went a sharp
two edged sword. With this Sword our Captain and Commander Christ Jesus did
defend himself against the Devils darts, and by it he drove away the tempter,
Mat. 4. 4, 10. With this Sword he confronted and confounded his foes, Matthew.
22. and defended himself against their conflict, Matthew. 12. With this sword
Apollos conquered, convincing the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the
Scriptures, Acts 18. 24, 28.

1. This weapon will defend, and maintain that crowned Empress of all
heavenly graces that dwell in a sanctified soul, and that truly victorious,
and invincibly triumphant Conqueror Faith; against infidelity the mother,
root, and fountain of other sins, the greatest, most dangerous, and damnable
of all other sins, John 16. 9. the principal law of the kingdom of
darkness, which the subtle serpent endeavors to make reign most in the
lives of men.

2. This will maintain and defend Hope that comfortable assurer, effectual
expecter, and affable applier of Gods precious promises and comfortable
consolations to come; that sure and steadfast anchor, stay and staff of the
soul, strengthening and supporting the same, making it inexpugnable and
unshaken in the most furious incursions of the raging waves, storms, and
billows of worldly troubles, pressures, persecutions, and reproachful
oppositions: against death, the prince of terrors, the end and sum of feared
evils: against the gates of hell, the power of darkness, and the Devils
fiercest and fieriest darts; and against dreadful desperation, the highest
degree in every kind of distress; the greatest opposite to saving faith,
making all Gods promises false and fained; the mother and fosterer of tumults,
terrors, Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in 6 Mat. 6.
and perplexing anxieties, the Hom. 88. in Mat. 27.
worst of sins, than which nothing is Ser. de pen. 7.
worse, it putting man into a hell upon earth, wherein he must abide torments
beyond all compass of conceit, or expression of tongue.

3. This will protect and preserve Truth, the glory and crown of Religion
(which the more true, the more excellent) invincible truth, which cannot be
Chrysostom. cont. Gent. Tom. 5.
overcome, neither is daunted with the many multitudes of enemies. Against
heresy, which (viper-like) gnawes and eats out the bowels of the Church; which
(Scorpion-like) deceiptfully poysoneth, which (as a canker) is most hurtful,
and (as tares) corrupts good seed. 2 Timothy 2. 17.


Against errors, which are dangerous and damnable, Psalm. 95. 10. Mat. 22. 29.

Against doctrines of men, or such doctrines which have none other than men for
their authors, Col. 2. 22.

Against the doctrine of Devils, or such which come from the Devil, and keep
men (embracing and receiving the same) fast in his snares and fetters, 1 Timothy
4. 1.

Against the unsavory, sour, contagious, corrupt doctrine of false teachers,
or their lying leaven polluting the sweetness of heavenly doctrine by their
glosses, Mat. 16.

Against those deceiptfull doctrines of Balaa^, Rev. 2. 14. damnable heresies,
2 Pet. 2. 1. those lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 2. those perverse things
drawing men from the way of truth, Acts 20. 29. And all other things which
ought not to be taught, Tit. 1 11. Wherefore (says S. Peter) I will not be
negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know
them, and be established in the present truth. And S. Chrysostom says
excellently to this purpose: When you Hom. 49. in Mat. 24. Tom 2
see the abomination of desolation, Matthew. 24. 15. that is, When you see wicked
heresy which is the band of Antichist stand in the holy places of the Church;
let them betake themselves to the mountains, that is, to the Scriptures; the
Mountains are the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. And why to the
Scriptures? Because in that time from which heresy has overcome those
Churches, there can be no other proof of true Christianity, nor any other
refuge of Christians, ^esirous to know the truth of faith, save only the
divine Scriptures.

4. This will maintain Christ the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. The foundation
of the Church, 1 Pet. 2. 4. The Angel of Gods presence, Isa. 63. 9. And of the
covenant, Mal. 3. 1. The consolation and glory of Israel, the salvation of God,
the anointed of the Lord, and the light of the Gentiles, Luke 2. 23. 26. 30.
32. The branch of the Lord, Isa. 11. 1. And of righteousness, Ier. 33. 15. The
soule-refreshing, and strongly sustaining rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4. the Head and
Captain of the Church, Rev. 12. 7. The Lord of life and glory, Acts 3. 15. The
King immortal, 1 Timothy 1. 17. The worlds judge, 2 Timothy 4. 1. The Son of God,
Mat. 3. 17. And God himself.

Against Antichrist that king of pride, Rev. 9. 21. who exalts himself above
all that is called God, as Kings, Emperors, and Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 2. That man
of sin and son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. That sly and subtle adversary of
Christ in sheep clothing, Matthew. 7. 15. having horns like a Lamb, speaking
like a Dragon, Rev. 13. 11. Holding a cup outwardly glittering full of
abominations, Rev. 17. 5. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Calling
himself servant of servants, yet claiming superiority and sovereignty over all
Kings and Emperors. Being Christ's vicar by profession; but his killer,
crucifier, murderer, and robber by practice.

5. This will defend God, the holy One of Israel, Psalm. 71. 22. The mighty God
of Jacob, wonderful in counsel, excellent in works, and faithful, Deuteronomy. 7.
9, 10. The Ruler of the whole earth, Zach. 4 14. and world, Mic. 4. 13. The
living God, Deuteronomy. 3. 26. The revealer of secrets, the Lord God of the spirits
of all flesh, Number. 27. 16. The strong Redeemer, Ier. 50. 34. The great and
mighty, whose name is the Lord, Ier. 32 18. The living and true God, 1 These. 1.
9. And his works which are great, Psalm. 101. 2. and wonderful, Psalm. 8. Romans
11. 33.

Against man, who although he is vain, yea vanity, y(...) less than vanity,
dares beleh, and breathe out blasphemies against the Lord; like those, Mal. 3.
whose mouths were open against the Lord, to grieve, vex, and weary him, Verse
13. speaking with a stiff neck, proudly, presumptuously, insolently, and
blasphemously. Excusing and justifying the same saucy and sinful speeches,
Ver. 13. Charging God with injustice in neglecting the righteous, and caring
for the wicked, Verse. 14, 15. Pleading merit, boasting of their own
righteousness, Verse. 14. Grudging, murmuring, and complaining of Gods dealing
with them, Verse. 14. Counting them blessed, whom God judges accursed: like
hard-hearted Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord, I know not, I will not, etc.

Like railing Rabshakeh, reproching, blaspheming, and exalting their voice
against the Lord, Isa. 37. 23.

Like those profane Belials, Job 21. 15. saying, What is the Almighty that we
should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him?

Like those corrupt cavillers, who dare dispute against Gods just and righteous
proceedings, Romans 11. 20.

Like that seven-headed and ten-horned beast, which speak great things and
blasphemies, Rev. 13. 5.

Or any other ways speak against the God of heaven, either detracting from
God that which of due belongs unto him: ascribing that to him which beseemes
him not: or any ways abusing his sacred names in their chafing, choleric,
fuming distempers, or the like.

1. Further; this keen and piercing sword will cut, and kill the power and
puissance of sin; that deceitful deluder and malicious murderer of mankind,
Romans 11. 7. Sin -- deceived -- slew me: that rerrible tormenting tyrant
rigorously requiting the fealty and fidelity of its most faithful followers
and dutiful observants with death and damnation, Romans 6. 23. That powerful
and forcible body of death, which makes even the best men cry out, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me, Romans 7. 24.

Witness David's practice, hiding the Word in his heart, that he might not
sin, Psalm. 119. 11.

Witness S. Paul's exhortation to hear the Word of God to day, least any of us
be hardened through the deceiptfulnesse of sin, Heb. 37, 13.

2. This warlike weapon will resist and repel the implacable importunity of
Satan that subtle Serpent, Mat. 44. 7. 10. 1 Ioh. 2. 14.

3. This rod of Gods mouth, and breath of his lips will countermine and
confound, batter and beat down the Devils kingdom, Isa. 11. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

4. This piercing powerful axe is sharp, and serviceable to vex and kill, to
oppugn and overthrow the tyranny of the flesh, Luke 3. 9.

5. This will repulse and bring to ruin, confront and conquer the deluding
deceipts, bewitching baits, enchanting inticements, inveigling insnarements, as
also the railings, reproaches, perplexities, persecutions, and the bitterest
blasts of the cunning and cruel world; assuring us

That whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God, Iam. 4. 4.

That if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Ioh.
2. 15.

That the world is crucified to the Saints, they to it, Gal. 6. 14.

And as for the sufferings of this present world, that they are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18.

6. This will frustrate and enfeeble men's inventions, making the man of God
wiser than his enemies, Psalm. 119. 98. So that they are not able to resist the
wisdom and spirit by which he speaks, Acts 6. 10.

1. For this is the hand and arm of the omnipotent Jehovah, Isa. 49. 2^. 53.
1, 2,

2. This is the rod of his power, Psalm. 110 2. sustaining us against the Devils
violence, and forcing him to flee.

3. This is his rod and staff, Psalm. 23. 4. Thy rod and thy staff. Namely,

His chastising rod, wherewith he does correct, and rule his children as a
Father, or a Schoolmasters his scholars.

His revenging rod of iron, to bruise and break in pieces, kill and destroy
the stubborn and rebellious.

4. This is his staff to shield, safeguard, and defend his sheep and
servants; to keep and bear off the bitter blows and buffetings of their
spiritual enemies, dogs, and Devils: And to support and uphold their weak
souls and hearts.

5. This is his axe, Luke 3. 9. Which pierces, pareth, kills, and cutteth
down men of Belial like rotten and barren trees, and tormenteth them before
their time, Revelation 11. 10. Which fitteth and fashioneth every stone in the
spiritual building for his proper place; Which cutteth, and pareth off the
corruption of the soul and conscience.

6. This is a hammer, breaking the rocks in pieces, Ier. 23. 29. namely, the
stony hardness of our hearts, and bruising them as it were to powder, that
they may become soft, humble, and contrit^.

7. This is fire, Ier. 2^. 29. To purge out the filthy dross of man's corrupt
nature; To heat his cold heart with love and zeal: To thaw his frozen
affections: To guide and enlighten his dark and blind mind: to warm and
comfort his sorrowful spirit: to consolidate and bind his broken heart.

8. This is a shaft and arrow in the heart of the Kings, that is, Christ's
enemies, flying and going swiftly, wounding and killing afar off.

9. This is light to drive away darkness, to cleanse the mind, understanding,
and judgment, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

10. This is a sacrificing knife, to cut the throat of sins and corruptions,
Romans 15. 16.

1. What and if those barbarous and bloody soule-murderers, those horrible and
hideous homicides the Papists deal impiously and unjustly with their people,
depriving them (Philistine-like, 1 Samuel 13. 19.) of this weapon wherewith they
should defend themselves and offend their enemies; robbing them of this
forcible, prevailing, sharp, two-edged sword, and giving them in lieu thereof
a weak and wooden sword of men's traditions, and humane inventions, and the
pawltrie painted leaden weapons of unholy water, dirty relics, grains, and
agnus Dei wholly unavaileable: Conspiring with the Devil himself to hinder
people of safety and salvation; and to cross and contradict the Lord himself?
For he says, Take the sword of the Spirit: they say, no.

For the Scriptures are dangerous. True, to discover and dissipate

For Heretics allege Scripture. True, for themselves; and

But what and if the Word of God is many and diverse ways abused, being
mistaken maliciously; misalledged wittingly by purposely omitting, or adding
something to alter the sense and meaning, or overthrow the drift and purpose of
the Holy Ghost: or misapplied purposely, namely, to corrupt the mind or heart,
to prove untruth or error, to persuade to sin, or to some other evil end or
use: shall the abuse of Scripture take away the right use thereof? God forbid.
We all use fire; though some maliciously, others negligently wast therewith,
and consume many excellent and desirable things. We may lawfully and
comfortably enjoy our meats and drinks, though gluttons and drunkards sinfully
and shamefully misuse them. The honest traveller does so much the more fence
and furnish himself with a sword, because thieves and robbers do the same.
The abusing of Gods ordinances by lewd and wicked men should not occasion the
pious and godly man to refuse them, dislike, or less to love them. And Christ
Jesus alleged Scripture, although the Devil did the same.

2. What though many fleering Ishmaels scorn and scoff at that knowledge
which others have in Gods Word, and at those who carry the Scripture to the
Church, to get and increase the same; terming them in reproach Bible-bearers.

3. What though some through covetousness will not help forward: some through
worldlines will not attend unto: some through negligence will not frequent:
some through blindness will not esteem the continual and ordinary, the constant
and conscionable preaching of the Word: and so neglecting to gird the sword
about them, are guilty of their own destruction: adventuring to go naked and
weaponlesse without this sword, amidst so many and such violent enemies.

Yet let us who are the soldiers of Christ Jesus,

1. Not only have Bibles to lie in our houses, and to carry to the Church:
For, what good does a sword hanging on the walls to the soldier in the field?

2. Not only read the Scriptures, regardlesse of the sense: For what
advantageth a sword, if we cannot unsheath it out of the Scabbard?

3. Not only search for the true sense of sacred writ to maintain discourse,
confute gaine-sayers, to determine differences, not caring to have sin thereby
mortifled, and our selves edified in the faith: for what will it avail a
soldier to have a sword only to flourish?

But also.

1. Let us Ministers, who are, or ought to be the chariots and horsemen of
Israel with Apollos, Acts 18. 24. be mighty in the Scriptures: that so we may
not only teach sound and saving doctrine, instruct, and encourage in good
manners: But also refute and refell errors and heresies, kill, and cut down
sin and S^tan; yea depresse and destroy whatsoever makes against Christ, or his
glorious Gospel.

2. Let us all dearely-beloved, fellow-Christian soldiers, desire, and delight
in no book so much as in Gods Word, let us run and resort duly and daily to the
absolute armory of the Scripture, to furnish our selves thence against all our
enemies execrable enterprises, and excursions.

1. Let us be well acquainted with, and verst in the Scripture, that so we may
have it in continual readiness against the exasperate assaults of Satan.

2. Let us be able to judge and discern, as of the Devils terrible
temptations, so of the several sorts of remedies or replies out of Gods Word.

3. Let us be apt and able to convict and convince any, yea all frivolous or
furious gainsaying contradictors, as well by undeniable testimonies, as by
venerable examples.

4. Let us fortify and furnish our selves so with the Word of God,

1. That our dark and blinded understandings may be enlightened with this
light to our feet, and lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119. 105. We taking heed
to it, as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and delighted in the saving
knowledge thereof more than in gold, yea than in fine gold, Ps. 119. 127. more
than in honey and the hony-combe, Psalm. 19. 10.

2. That our wandering and erroneous judgments may be settled and established in
the true way how to attain eternal salvation by this Word of truth, Ioh. 17.
17. Col. 1. 5.

3. That our consciences misled may be convinced; erring may be conducted;
drooping may be comforted; and tormenting may be quieted thereby.

4 That our stubborn wills and rebellious affections exalting themselves against
the knowledge of God, and obedience of Christ, may be subdued, pulled down,
and brought into subjection thereto, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

5. That our cold, frozen, lukewarm, and dead hearts may be warmed, heated,
inflamed, and enlightened with, and made insatiable thereof.

6. That our minds may be satisfied, and content therewith more than with
treasure, Psalm 119. 97. more than with thousands of gold and silver, Ver. 72.

7. That our precious faith, 2 Pet. 1 1. being much more preci^us than gol^, 1
Pet. 1. 7. may be quickened and nourished, strengthened and increased, 1 Pet.
2. 2. this often bringing to our remembrance Gods precious promises, and
frequently renewing the off 1 of them.

8. That our loose and licentious lives, wandering out of the way of Gods
commandments, may be reformed, rectified, and amended, Psalm. 119. 9.

9. And that we may be enabled to vanquish and overcome temptations,
strengthening our selves against sin by hiding this Word in our hearts, Psalm.
119. 11. and overcomming the wicked one by this Word abiding in us, 1 Ioh. 2.
14.

1. This being a warlike rod and staff, Psalm. 23. 4. Mica 6. 9. 7 14. in
regard of its sharpness, strength, straightness, and warlike use. To stay and
support us against the force and violence of the Devil. To beat, buffet, and
put to flight Satan. To correct and cure our souls being delinquent.

2. This being a sharp and piercing, keen and cutting axe, Luke 3 9 To fit and
fashion stones for the Lords building: to vex, kill, and torment gaine-sayers:
to pare and cut off the corruption of the soul and conscience.

3. This being the sword of the Spirit, whereby the wicked are subdued, whereby
our selves are defended, and Satan put to flight.

Say not, beloved brethren, you are not Scholars, not

Although you are not professed fencers, captains, or chief commanders, yet
will you guard and fortify your selves with swords of proof, to safeguard,
and preserve your lives and goods from thieves and murderers. And therefore
although you are not Preachers by profession; yet see that you get sufficient
skill in the Word of God, that may not only deck and garnish, but also defend
and guard your peerless and precious souls.

This being an excellent means to purge and purify Motive 1.


1. Religion, of errors, heresies, profaneness and hypocrisy.

2. Zeal, of ignorance, passion, and self-love: tempering it with charity and
discretion; causing it not to seek its own, but Gods glory.

3. Profession of Christ, and Christianity, of righteousness, and holiness, which
is a necessary fruit of faith, Ps. 116. 10. Romans 10. 9, 10. Isa 44. 5. a thing
not to be ashamed of, Romans 1. 16 tending to Gods glory, Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2.
12. Causing others to give thanks for us to God, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12. And some to
tread in the same steps, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. Having a rich promise to be owned
and acknowledged in the number of Gods elect before his Father which is in
heaven, Mat. 10. 32.

1. Of faint-hearted pusillanimity; this assuring us of the truth of those
cutting condemnations, Mar. 8. 38. Of him shall -- ashamed. Luke 9. 26: Rev.
21. 8. The fearful, etc.

2. Of vicious profaneness, this certifying all forgetters of God, and
contemners of Gods worship, who profess that they know God, but in works deny
him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.
16. Who have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
And who take Gods covenant in their mouths, yet hating to be reformed; that
God will reprove them; set these things in order before their eyes; tear them
in pieces, and none shall deliver them, Psalm. 50. 17, 22.

3. Of vainglorious Pharisaisme, that forbidden fruit, Gal. 5. 26. that
fruitless foam, and brittle blazing bubble, which Christ, Ioh. 8. 50. 54. and
the best Christians disesteemed, Acts 10. 25. 14 14. Rev. 19. 10. and for which
vainglorious persons have severely smarted; Witness Nebuchadnezzar turned
into a beast, Dan. 4. 30, 31. and Herod buried in a moment in the contemptible
intrals of base vermin, Acts 12. 23. This assuring us, that we have nothing in
us whereof to glory, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Ioh. 15. 5. That boasting braggards lose
their reward with God, Mat. 6. 1, 2. whereas secrecy and sincerity procure
acceptance with God, and open reward, Verse. 4.

4. Weldoing, or the doing of good works of all sorts, to God and man, even
the whole practice of godliness, particularly, liberal distributing, and
merciful communicating to needy Christians and painful Preachers of
wearisomnesse, namely, of carelessness, slacknesse, and fainting, Gal. 6. 9.
This Word of truth telling us, that in due season we shall reap if we faint not.

5. And suffering of afflictions (of which we must all look to partake, since
the way to salvation is through suffering, the way to pleasure is through
pain, the way to happiness is through misery, the way to comfort is through
grief, the way to gain is through loss, the way to honor is through
dishonor, the way to exaltation is through humiliation, the way to life is
through death; or in a Word, the way to the crown is the cross, Acts 14. 22.)
of impatience, grudging, fearfulness and f^inting. This persuading us,

1. That though we are in danger and distress, yet we have a Father
omnipotent, almighty, able to rescue and deliver us. Though we are in misery,
our Father is a God of mercies, and of all comforts, who does not only comfort
each of his faithful afflicted children; but also in each of their troubles and
afflictions, 2 Cor. 1. 2, 3. lo. 14. 17, 18. Yea giving the greatest courage to
the greatest conslict, the greatest comfort to the greatest cross. So that
when Joshua is to encounter with those many magnanimous giants, and gyant-like
nations, an Angel of the Lord appeared to him with his sword drawn in his
hand, as a Captain of the host of the Lord, Ios. 5. 13, 14. when Elisha and
his servant were besieged in Dothan, the mountain was full of horses and
chariots of fire round about Elisha, 2 Kin. 6. 16. when the Church was in the
bottom, Christ Jesus is present with them, not only as an idle spectator, or
looker on; but as a valiant, courageous, and powerful Captain prepared to
revenge the wrongs done to his Church, Zac. 1. 8. When Christ was in his agony,
there appeared an Angel from heaven strengthening him, Luke 22. 43. When S.
Paul was in that dreadful danger on the deep, that all hope that they should
be saved was taken away, the Angel of the Lord stood by him, saying, fear not
Paul, God has given thee all that sail with thee, Act. 27. 20, 23, 24. and
when in Asia he was pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that he
despaired even of life, the Lord did then deliver him from so great a death, 2
Cor. 1. 8, 9.

2. That the sufferings of the faithful are counted and called Christ's
sufferings, 2 Cor. 1. 5. not only because they suffer for his sake, cause,
truth, and Gospel, Phil. 1. 29. 1 Pet. 4. 13. but also because Christ suffers
in them, Act 9. 4. Mat. 25. 40. And therefore as the condition of persecutours
of the Saints is woeful, because they persecute Christ in Christians: so, great
is the credit and comfort of the Saints, suffering in such a cause, where
Christ Jesus the Son of God does suffer with them.

3. That the sufferings and afflictions of Gods people are profitable and
commodious:

1. To themselves, God chastising them to win them to repentance: to try them
whether they will bear his loving correction, and endure his service unto
blood for his sake, Genesis 22. 1, 2. To make them triumph over Satan in their
obedience, Job 1. Faith, the more it is sifted the cleaner it is, the more it
is cut, the more it grows; the more it is trodden, the thicker it comes up. To
separate them from the wicked; therefore they are called a fan, a flayle, and
fire to winnow, sift, and sever: to Romans 8. 25. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
conform them to Christ, and to draw them near to himself.

2. To others, Act. 8. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 6. So that all constant Christians which
have gone before us in suffering afflictions, they are witnesses to us, and
give testimony to Gods Word, that it is true, and that his promises are
faithful, Heb. 12. 1. They comfort, confirm, and encourage us to be constant
in the profession of the truth; we being acquainted with their examples, may
thereby receive, as from a cloud, refreshings for the heat of persecutions, Heb.
12. 1. there being no trial, trouble, affliction, or persecution so great, but
the Scripture affords some example or other, as a cloud to qualify and cool
the same. And therefore we show our selves white-livered, and faint-hearted
soldiers if we dare not follow but flee away, or stand at a stay; since the
ice is broken, and the way trodden by others.

4. This calling upon us to look upon our arch-guide Christ Jesus (not his
picture, but his practice or example, his precept or word, his spirit, promise,
and providence, who is not only our Commander, but Coadjutour: Our pattern,
but also partner: our forerunner, but also finisher) Heb. 13. 2. who for the
joy that was set before him endured the Cross, despised the shame, and endured
such contradictions of sinners against himself. Sometimes without replying,
sometimes without rebuking, always without revenging, or resisting, without
cursing or blaspheming, without fainting or falling away.

This Word of God calls upon us to look upon Christ, to fasten our eyes
continually upon him, that we remembering his doctrine, doings, and death may
not sin, nor fear, nor faint, nor fall away in troubles. It being a great
encouragement to soldiers to see and behold their Captain to march valiantly
before them: to passengers over the sea to have a good Pilot: travelers by
land to have a good guide. Such a one, nay far more excellent is Christ to
Christians: for as the examples of the godly in former ages have great force to
encourage us which come after to bear the Cross patiently, and to abide
constantly. So Christ's example has much more force then all others if all were
one: for that he is not only set forth as a pattern to follow, as a mark to
shoot at, but also as the beginner, furtherer, and finisher of our faith, our
fight, and combat. The meditation of whose patience, and perseverance under
the cross armeth us to comfort and confirm us against Apostasy, fear,
fainting, and falling away.

This being a curing corrosive to heal the common corruption Motive 2.
in man's nature, whereby Gods judgments executed upon others (as now extant,
and extended unto the poor by scarsity and famine.)

1. Are fondly mistaken; namely, when they are thought to be for sin only;
When they are thought to befall impenitent sinners only; When they are thought
to be for great and grievous sins only; When they are thought to be greater
then the offenses, or sins punished.

2. Or foolishly misapplyed; namely, When they are applied only to the
offenders, or parties punished; When they are chiefly applied to others, and
not to our selves; When others are thereby condemned for their outward
condition, whereas they should rather be commended for their carriage; When
thereby we our selves are justified.

3. Or wickedly abused; namely, When they are not at all observed, Psalm 10.
5. When they are lightly regarded, Exodus 8. 9, 10. When they are soon
forgott^^, Psalm 106. 13. 21, 22. I^de 5. When men are not humbled at the
sight of them, Dan. 5. 22. When they do not glorify God for them, Dan. 5. 23.
We being enabled by this rightly to use them, which we do, When we mark
and observe them, Psalm 46. 8 9. When we meditate upon them, Psalm 111. 2.
When we continually remember them; When we reverently regard them; When we
are humbled at the sight of them, and when we glorify God for them.

3. This being availeable to discern and destroy The hardening deceitfullnesse
of sin, Heb. 3. 13. The pestiferous poison of errors, 1 Timothy 6. 3. The wily
subtilties of Satan, Rev. 2. 24. And the contagious corruptions of our hearts.

4. This being the two-edged sword of the spirit to defend, justify and
maintain every good thing, when it is opposed against, and to disprove and
repel every evil thing to which we are tempted. To cut our selves with
repentance, killing our corruptions, and kill the enemies of our salvation.

SECT. 8. Their armor wholly applied to the present occasion, the pinching
dearth.
THis, O you Christian soldiers, is your warlike Christian furniture, with
this you must be so armed and apparelled, that with it you must wake, and
sleep, eat and drink, laugh and lament, rest and labor, live and die. You
must not only make an experiment, and take an assay, whether you can go with
this; but you must be so expert, and acquainted with the several pieces of
this impregnable armor of God, and so skillfull to us^ them at all occasions,
and so readily fortified and furnished, that your enemies may not by any
sudden surprisall supplant you, nor by any extemporary skirmishing excursions
repulse you, nor by any violent encounter vanquish you.

Since warlike weapons, skill, and dexterity to handle and manage the same to
divert, or vanquish the violent, and tempestuous assaults of austere, and
active, fierce and formidable foes are then of greatest value, and utility when
the enemies encounters are most effectual.

And since it is the good will and pleasure of our King, and Captain to make
an experiment and proof of us all by this scarcity and scantnesse, for such as
we are upon trial, such we are in truth; the combat differenceth the
courageous from the cowards, the furnace dross from gold, the touchstone pure
metals from counterfeit.

You rich men of the world are now tempted to despise and oppress your poor
brethren, James 2. 6. to tread upon the poor, Amos 5. 11. To swallow up the
needy of the land, to make the poor of the land to fail, -- making the Epha
small and Shekell great, and falsifying the balances by deceit, to buy the
poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes, Am. 8 4, 5, 6. To shut
up bowels of compassion and to hide your selves from your own flesh, Isa. 58.
7.

Quit your selves therefore like men, furnish and fortify your selves with
this furniture, that you be not foiled. For

1. Whence is it that many of your rank and quality Crocodile-like, seemingly
compassionate their brethrens distresses with alas, alas the prices of corn
are too great, and yet cruelly gnaw and devour them by enhauncing the price?
Surely the want of the girdle of truth occasioneth men to concruciate and
consume, when they seem to condole with; and compassionate others.

2. Whence is it that many taking advantage of the extremities of the times use
their utmost abilities, and bend their forces by engrossing of corn to make
greater the price, that they may enrich themselves in the ruins of others, and
so manifest themselves to be, in the judgment of that reverend man of God Mr.
Perkins, as bad as the vilest rascals that be in the land, murderers, thieves,
cursed Idolaters, very Atheists, and stark rebels unto God? Surely from the
want of the breast plate of righteousness.

Consider a fearful example in a dearth, in the days of Henery the 3. when
many dyed with hunger; the rich were so moved with covetousness, that they
would not releeve them, amongst whom Walter Gray Archbishop of York, had corn^
five years old, yet would give none for Gods sake; but commanded Stowe: page
277.
his tenants to take it, to pay so much new corn, who coming to the corn,
saw in the sheaves, heads of worms, serpents, and toads, and heard a voice out
of the mow, saying, lay no hands on the corn; for the Archbishop and all that
he has is the devils, etc.

3. Whence is it that many because their state is not superfluous, and
superabundant, as formerly it has been, grudge, and grumble against the Lord
of heaven and earth, and his righteous dealings? Surely from the not having
their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

4. Whence is it that many, contrary to Moses his pious practice, choose rather
the pleasures, and profits of sin for a season, then to suffer a little
affliction with the people of God, esteeming the trashie treasures of Egypt the
greatest rich^^? Surely from the want of the shield of faith.

5. Whence is it that many rich men of this world are not rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate? Surely from the absence of the
helmet hope, which enables to trust in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy, to do good, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.

6. And whence is it that many rich men are merciless, steeling their iron,
and hardening their flinty adamantine hearts against the grievous groaning, and
doleful lamentations of distressed men crying to them for due, and deserved
wages, for which they have labored, and for necessary relief, of which they
stand in need, and so become like the profane Pagans, Romans 1. 21. And such who
have forsaken the fear of God. Job 6. 14. Thereby manifesting that themselves
are such whose religion is vain, James 1. 27. whose prayers are fruitless,
Pro 21. 13. whose love to God is counterfeit, 1 Ioh. 3. 17. Whose judgment
shall be merciless, James 2. 13. And whose plagues shall be dreadful, Psalm.
109. 16. Surely from the absence of, or ability to manage the sword of the
spirit; which weapon, if well used, will kill and cut down all carnal
corruptions. Ascertaining a man

First, That he may not therefore rob, and oppress others, because some
oppress and wrong him.

Secondly, That he may not therefore sell at unconscionable, and excessive
rates, because others do so, no more (he thereby favoring, and giving
consent to the wickedness of other men) then he may be drunk with drunkards,
or run into all excess of riot with wicked men.

Thirdly, That he must be merciful

1. If he will be like unto God, who is the father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
Luke 6. 36.

2. If he will be truly religious, James 1. 27. Isa. 58. 6. Heb. 13. 16.

3. If he would have his other performances prevailing, Matthew. 23. 23.

4. If he desires blessedness, Matthew. 5. 7.

That therefore you may be religious rich men, take unto you this whole armor
of God, that so

1. You may not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and truth.

2. That so you may not raise your selves by the ruins of others, but rather
relieve them.

3. That so you may not mutter and repine at Gods dealing, but bless God for
taking away.

4. That so you may choose rather to suffer afflictions, with Gods people, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

5. That so you may not trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
doing good, being rich in good works, ready to distribute, etc.

6. That so you may put on bowels of compassion, to commiserate the distresses
of others, and communicate to their necessities.

Give me leave to acquaint you with an excellent passage, I lately read in
Saint Chrysostom, and from his example to speak unto you rich men in behalf
of your poor brethren. His words are these with which he begins his Sermon. I
am risen up to day to execute an embassage which is just, honest, and
profitable Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Sermon. de Ele(...)mos. Tom. 4.
to you in the behalf of no other men then of the poor which dwell in this
your city; They have enjoined me this labor, not by their speech, nor by the
consent and advise of their common appointment; but by their lamentable, and
grievous looks: for when I hastening to this your assembly did pass through
the market place and narrow streets, I did see many lying in the middle of the
two-forked-waies, some their hands cut off, some blind, some full of sores,
etc. I thought it to be a matter of extreme cruelty, not to declare these
things to your charity, especially since I am compelled hereunto by a certain
opportunity from those things which have been spoken. It is convenient to
speak of almesdeeds always, since we also always need mercy from the Lord.
But it is now more needful in regard of the great cold; for truly in summer
the gentleness of the time does much solace the poor, because they are without
danger, although they go naked, when they ar^ clothed with the sunbeams, and
sleep securely upon the bare pavement, neither do they need so much, shoes, or
wine, or such large feeding: they contenting themselves with the fountains of
water; and that time of the year does furnish a sudden table to them of
small herbs of little worth, and a little pulse; To which is added another no
less commodity, for they which build houses, till the earth, and sail on the
sea do much need their service --. But in winter they are diverse ways
afflicted, and vexed; hunger does destroy their bowels within, cold does
consume their flesh without: besides they then need more food, warm^r
clothing, beds, something to lie on, shoes, and many other things; and which
is most grievous, the time does not afford work. Therefore because they need
much, and want work, no man giving to these distressed ones hire, or enjoining
them work, let us at length stretch out our hands to give not only hire, but
almsdeeds, etc.

I should be glad, if the lamentable languishing looks, if the discomfiting
dolourous distresses, if the painful pinching penury, if the asperate
appaling anxieties of our poor people did not parallel those of Antioch; but I
fear me they surpass and surmount them. It is needless, and superfluous, I
suppose, for me to tell you that our pinched, if not pined poor are many, and
much multiplied; or that their present pressures are violently vexing if not
insufferably, and intollerably: for

1. Not only are they constrained in regard of other men's hard-heartednesse,
want of bowels of compassion, and desire of private personal enrichment
(though with the cries and cursings, the ruin and destruction of the
oppressed) to part with their commodities at such low and under rates, that
they may be said rather to give away, then sell the fruits of their labor.

2. But also that which they buy, they purchase at excessive Some barley that
d^y, sc. February 25. ^631. sold for 6 s 2 d a strike in Ketering market.
prices, the scarcity and scantnesse of all sorts of necessary food being so
great, so general, of such timely beginning, and of such long continuance,
that, I think, neither we nor our fathers have seen the like.

3. And that which adds the greatest burden of miseries upon these miserable,
of dolours upon these distressed men is want of work, and employment. For
although a man could sell at a dear rate and buy at a low price; yet wanting
things saleable, and not having money to buy things vendible: he is not at all
benefited by these assisting advantages. I think it far better for a poor
man to give 5 s for a strike of corn, having work to get the same: then to
have liberty to buy the selfsame corn for 5 d, not knowing how to procure
that 5 d to purchase the same.

Say not, beloved brethren, of your distressed neighbors.

Say not, beloved brethren, they are idle, they are idle (as Pharaoh said to
the distressed Israelites, exacting the tale of brickes, not allowing straw to
make them, Exodus 5.) and therefore they must not eat. For some are necessarily
idle, who are unoccupied because they want work, as well as others are
voluntarily idle, who may work and will not, ceasing to labor through love of
ease, of which latter only Saint Paul speaks, saying, If any will not (not,
does not) work, neither should he eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.

Say not, beloved brethren, you want ability to employ the reports are true, we
have more silver, and gold then our forefathers had; we fare more deliciously
then our forefathers did; and our garments are more costly, and gay then our
forefathers were: Spare we therefore some unnecessary superfluities from our
selves; that we may be better enabled to communicate to others.

But since their condition is every way so dreadful, and distressing. If there
be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels, and mercies.

1. Open your eyes, behold, and see the urgent necessities of your brethren:
look upon their pale, and pining countenances, their wan and watery faces; See
how many, and what able bodies are necessarily idle, and thereby enforced; some
to pilfer, some to beg, and all to languish. Cast a few looks into poor men's
houses, many of which I fear are worse provided of necessary comforts for this
life, then rich men's swine, yea dogs.

2. Open your ears to hear the bitter bewailing, the doleful lamentations,
sorrowful sighings of sad and sighing parents, not knowing how or which way to
assuage and mitigate the keen and cutting, the rough and asperate hunger of
themselves, and their condoling children. Open your ears to hear the grievous
groaning, and miserable moanings of pinched, and pining children, complaining,
and crying to their afflicted parents in vain for bread.

3. That by hearing and seeing your brethrens vehement, and urgent extremities,
that by taking notice of, and beholding other men's miseries, you may put on
bowels of compassion, fellow-feeling and pity; and demonstrate, or show your
compassionate, merciful, and pittifu^l hearts, which alone is not sufficient,
by your compassionate, merciful, and pitiful hand, which is also necessary.
That as compassion in God is the cause of comfort toward us: so compassion in
us may be the cause of comfort toward distressed Christians. Motive 1.


That so we may be free from unmercifullnesse, one quality, badge, and
character of mis-beleeving miscreants, Romans 1. 30.

2. That so we may assimulate our selves unto the good and godly man, whose
property is to be gracious, and full of compassion, Psalm. 112. 4. to show
favor, and to lend, v. 5. to disperse, and give to the poor, v. 9.

3. That so we may be followers of Christ Jesus, who is rich in mercy and ready
to comfort, help, and succor all that come unto him, call upon him, trust in
him, and walk in his ways. Who as he is able, so is he willing to help all
those that seek to him for succor: who is full of pity and compassion
toward mankind in misery, especially toward the elect.

4. That so we may obediently practice those pious precepts of our sovereign
Lord, and loving Savior, Luke 6. If thou cloathest the naked, thou cloathest
thy self with righteousness, if thou bring the stranger into thy house, and
receivest the needy, he will procure thee the friendship of the Saint and
eternal mansions; this is no small favor, thou sowest corpo^^ll things, and
rece^^est spiritu^ll -- surely he is blessed out of whose h^use the poor
never goes away empty. Amb. offic. lib. ^ cap. 11.
36. Be you therefore merciful as your father also is merciful, Ephesians. 4.
32. Be you kind one to another, Colos. 3. 12. Put on therefore as the elect
of God holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness.

5. That so we may avoid that doleful, and never enough deplored doom of hard
hearted merciless men, with whom their Lord is wroth, and will deliver them to
the tormentours until they pay that which they are never able to do, because
they have not compassion on their fellow servants, as God has had pity on
them, Mat. 18. 33, 34. Who shall have judgment without mercy, James 2. 13. And
who shall one day hear that dreadful valediction, Depart from me you cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

6. That so we may have propriety in, and participate of those precious
promises of rich reward from the most merciful, and unchangeable Jehovah
recorded and registered, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor,
and need^, the Lord will, etc. Psalm 1125. etc. Surely he shall not be moved
for ever, he shall be in everlasting remembrance: etc?

7. That so we may not come short of other creatures, the nobleness of which
consists in giving, of the Sun in giving light, of the Moon, and Stars in
giving light, of the clouds in giving rain, of the earth in giving grass, of
the herbs in giving flowers, of trees in giving fruit. In this great famine
let us give. For as a spring which breaks from the top of a mountain cannot
but water the lower parts, and the valleys; So if our love be once fixed on
God, we cannot but love, and refresh our neighbors.

To these I will add eight out of Saint Chrysostom.

1. He tells us that works of mercy put to flight the Devil, his ground is,
Psalm 41. the Lord will deliver him in the day (...)m. in Psalm. ^1.
of evil. i. of judgment. He shall be blessed. i. he makes those to whom
he is bountiful, and those which know him to call him blessed. He will not
deliver him to the will of his enemiet. i. Devils.

2. He tells us, that this is more excellent then to build a sumptuous ^om. 5
(...) Muth. 15.
temple, because infidels, and thieves may take away that; But the Devil
cannot take away this treasure which we lay up in heaven by giving to the poor.

3. He tells us that works of mercy cleanse from sin, his ground is, Luke 11.
41. But rather give alms, and behold all (...).
things are clean unto you.

4. He tells us that almsdeeds are better then sacrifice, from (...)
(...)eah 6. 6. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

5. He tells us that this opens heaven, from Acts 10 4. Thy (...).
(...) ^^ine alms are gone up for a memorial before God.

6. He tells us that this is a sacrifice ascending to heaven, and persw^^es us,
when we see the poor, not to slight them, (...) that we should be were we
such, what then (...)
(...) we have ^^hers do for us? He would not have us to re(...) t^em. He
would not have us examine their conversation, but relieve them.

7. He tells us that the poor men's hands build us houses in heaven; almsdeeds
are a good artist, they are the friend of God, (...) ^t i^ pure and sincere it
gives much confidence, it intrea^es (...).
^or them, it has such force that it breaks bonds, dossolves darkness.
extinguisheth fire, kilt the worm, and expels g^ashing of teeth.

8. He tells us that this is the most gainefull and profitable art, because
other arts vanish away with this present life, with sickness, Hom. 32. ad pop.
Antioch.
etc. but this art of mercifullnesse, when the world passes away, does most
appear when we die, does most shine, it is fruitful to a man in his
sickness, in his old age, and goes with him to another life.

Besides I might furnish you with many cutting conclusions out of this sacred
armorie of Gods Word against unmercifullnesse, and with many pressing places to
bountifullnes and mercy. But I will name but one place for both, and so proceed.

Mat. 25. 31. etc. At that last, and dreadful day of judgment, when Jesus
Christ with glorious Majesty shall com with a pompous guard of attending Angels;
with great authority shall gather al nations in a moment of time before him;
with unspeakable wisdom shall sever the chaff^ from the wheat, the sheep from
the goats, the good from the bad, and with perfect equity shall give an
upright sentence of absolution to the good, of condemnation to the bad. From
whose judgment no excuse will exempt, no cave can hide, nor castle hold: our
coming to it not being a matter of liberty, and freedom, but of necessity. In
which last day, when every man must answer for himself, and in his own person,
where no proctour, no advocate, no substitute, no surety, no pledge, no friend
to answer for other, but each man for himself, the husband cannot for the
wife, the father for the son, nor one friend for another. Which shall discover
and difference between hypocrites and true Christians both in regard of their
nature and disposition, and in respect of their state and condition.

1. Those brutish goats, who are separated and secluded to the left hand:
Although they claim an interest in Christ as well as true and faithful
Christians, and call themselves by his name, his servants, and him their Lord,
ver. 24. Although they sooth, and flatter themselves in their sins saying
when saw we? Although they qualify, and justify their wicked doings, not
only in some particular action, but also in whatsoever they are charged
withal, saying, when saw we thee an hungry, etc?

Yet (Christ taking as denied to himself the duties of love which are denied
to Christians, v. 45. H^ having such a tender care of all true Christians, that
he registers all the wrongs which are done unto them, minding in time to right
the same, v. 45. And regarding, registring, and remembering the least injuries
that are done to the least of his brethren, v. 45.) shall have denou^ced
against them that dreadful doom, Depart from me you cursed, etc. Depart from
me a King, a Savior, at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, into
everlasting fire, where their worm never dies, and their fire is not
quenched, with the Devil and his Angels; a departure dol^full, and dreadful
with such consorts into torments so ea^el^sse, endless, hopeless, and
helpless: For you gave me not meat^, etc. you are not without just cause
condemned, the cause of your condemnation is in your selves, and of your selves
you have omitted good duties, and sins of omission are no less dangerous, and
damnable then sins of co^missio^. You have been despisers of the poor,
careless contemners of Christians under the Cross, you did not feed, cloth,
lodge, visit me in my afflicted members, you have been cruel, and cruelty is a
cursed thing, and cruel persons are cursed creatures; you have been
merci^esse men, without compassion, natural affection, and the sin of
u^mercifullnesse comprehends all wickedness, and is contrary to all
righteousness, and the merciless man is gacelesse, and void of all goodness;
because cruelty makes men most unlike to God, Mat. 5. 48 and most like to the
devil, Ioh. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Therefore depart from me you cursed, etc.

2 And those blesse^ sheep standing at Christ's right hand. Although they are to
far from chalenging heaven for their merit, that they dislike and disclaim
al mention made of their good works in the cause of their salvation, or
justification, saying, when saw we thee an hungry, naked, etc. yet Christ does
testifi^ ^is good acceptance of their love showed to others for his sake, they
showing mercy to Christ in his living members, and such as ^ack meat, dri^k
etc in comforting, and commending them for these their works of mercy. Not but
that there are more works of mercy then those six, for according to the
several kinds of miseri^s, so are mercies distinguished.

Not but that Christians shall be commended at the day of judgment for other
performances as well as these. Witness Matthew. 19. 27, 28. You which have
followed (...) in the regeneration shall etc. Witness Matthew. ^4. 46. Blessed
is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. And witness
Matthew. 25. 21. Well done good and faithful servant, etc.

Yet these inferior works of the second Table are only named and preferred,
Because they are such as each man may perform: Because they best discover the
hypocrifie of counterfeit Christians. And they are chosen for their witness,
not their worth.

That we therefore may (when he shall appear) have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming.

That we therefore may stand in the number of those to whom the King shall say,
Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom, etc. Let us show these
works of mercy so far forth as occasion and ability will serve, and so often
as others want and we have.

2. You poor people at such times as these assaulted, and tempted by Satan to
seek succor from, and to ease your smart by means divellish and diabolical;
and to dishonor the Lord by lying, stealing, railing, reviling, murmuring, and
distrust.

Betake your selves therefore to your spiritual weapons, and take unto you the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in these evil days.

1. Let your loins be girt about with truth, whereby you may be guarded and
defended from loathsome lying, and divellish dissimulation.

2. Put upon you the breast plate of righteousness, to shield and safeguard you
against injurious, violent, and unjust dealings, pilfering, and purloining.

3. Let your feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, that
you may pass through comfortably and courageously the many piercing pressures
of pinching penury.

4. Above all take the shield of faith. That will so support you, that you
shall endure, seeing by it him who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27.

5. And take the helmet of salvation Hope, which will comfort and consolate you
against distracting discomfits, and dreadful fears; strengthen and enable you
to depend upon the Lord, and expect with patient waiting (without limiting the
holy One of Israel) help, and deliverance from the Lord, who is the health of
your countenance, and your God, Psalm 42. 11.

6. And the sword of the Spirit, which will defend you, and drive away the
tempter.

1. This will store you with these and such like precious promises. Psalm. 3^.
19. The Lord will keep them alive in the time of famine, who fear him and
hope in his mercy. Psalm. 34. 10. They that fear the Lord shall not want any
good thing. Psalm. 37. 16. A little that the righteous has is better than the
riches of many wicked. Mat. 6. 33. First seek the kingdom of heaven, and etc.

2. This will show you that God feeds the fowls, Luke 12. 24. Yea the most
feeble and filthy ravens, Psalm. 147. 9. the beasts, Psalm. 104. Infants, Psalm.
71. 6. and wicked men, Gen 21. 14, 19.

3. This will certify you that our gracious God did feed the many Israelites
which came out of Egypt in a desolate and barran wilderness, Elijah with
ravens, 1 King. 17. 4, 6. and a poor widow Ver. 9. in the time of famine.

4. This will declare and demonstrate that the Lord is your Shepherd, Psalm.
23. 1. and merciful Father.

From which precious promises and practices of our good and gracious God you
may thus arm and animate your selves, and with this weapon wound the Devil,
dissipate and disanull his direful darts to diffident distrustfulnesse.

1. H^th the true and unchangeable Jehovah, who cannot lie, Tit. 1. 1. whose
promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. made so many, and such merciful
promises?

2. Does he feed, and provide for the fowls of the air, the wild beasts of
the deserts, the wicked and ungodly, the young and helpless infants?

3. Is it undeniably manifest that such who have depended upon God in
extremities, have been sufficiently provided for, Luke 22. 35. When I sent you
without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said,
Nothing. By extraordinary means, the ordinary failing, Exodus 16.

4. Will wicked men feed their wicked, and good children?

Will good men feed their godly and ungodly children?

Will bruit and savage beasts feed and provide for their young?

Will fowls of the air feed and foster theirs?

And shall we distrust, to whom those sure and certain, sweet and precious
promises belong, we being better than beasts, birds, and sons of Belial? The
Lord having been our trust from our youth, by whom we have been holden up
from the womb, Psalm. 71. 6. He being the same to us now, he was to his chosen
formerly: as able and ready to succor and support us now, as he did them in
their extremities. And his care of, and compassion toward us surpassing
infinitely, and beyond all comparison not only that of birds, or beasts
toward their young; but also that of men, good and bad toward their children?
We will not do it.

SECT. 9. Against Antinomists.
THe want of these warlike weapons is a prime and principal cause that so many
doting and deluded, halting and hollow-hearted, weak and wavering, rotten and
relapsed Christians, unsound, and unsettled in the ways of life, are tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14*
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive, of which sort we lately have had some wandering seducers, which
creeping into houses, have led captive some silly (yet selfe-conceipted) men
and women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now as 2 Timothy 3. 6.
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth; whose
folly I have formerly endeavored to manifest in this place, in naming some,
(the very naming being a sufficient consutation of the most, they are so fond
and fantastical) and confuting others of their foolish fancies, in my
discourse of the Society of Saints, in which

First, I have showed that the Saints on earth are sinners, although not such
sinners as dogs, and swine, or sons of Belial; and answered their objections
by which they pretend to prove that the Saints in this life are so pure and
perfect, as that Book 1. Cap. 3. page 54. Book 3. Cap. 8. page 139. Book 5. Cap.
6. page 242.
they are free from sin: For, although it is true that all the sins of the
Saints are pardoned, not only those which are past and present, but also in
some sort those to come; yet hence to infer, therefore the Saints are free
from sin, is absurd and erroneous. All sins of justified persons are
pardoned, yet differently: Sins past by a formal application, sins Am.
Theol. l. 1 c. 27. These. 24.
to come by a virtuall: Sins past in themselves; sins to come in the
subject, or person sinning, says D. Ames.

All their sins are pardoned, yet not so as to free them from sin in this
life; for although the children of God have Perk. Gal. 1. page 186.
the pardon of their sins to come, not only in respect of Gods decree to
pardon: but also in respect of his promise to pardon, and in respect of the
procurement of pardon upon the cross: yet they want the pardon of their
sins, until the Lord does give and communicate Christ unto them, and
applies to their conscience the remission of their sins: and therefore the
pardon of their sins is not fully and absolutely given them until they
recover themselves, and renew their repentance: God does pardon all the sins
of his children, yea their sins to come, not simply, but upon condition of
future repentance, and absolutely, when they repent and renew the same, 2 Samuel
12* 2 Cor. 5. 21. Should a man infer that because in Gods decree all men
shall die and come to judgment, that therefore all men are dead and come to
judgment. Should a man infer that because in respect of Gods promise, in
respect of the procurement the Saints are glorified, that therefore the Saints
who are under trials of cruel mockings, and scourgings; yea moreover, in bonds
and imprisonments, who wander in sheeps skins and goats skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented, and they who as yet are unborne, and never saw the
Sun, are already actually glorified in heaven. I suppose every man would
censure such conclusions as irreligious, if not unreasonable; as unreasonable,
if not senseless; as unsound, if not absurd; as fantastical, if not frantic;
as erroneous, if not heretical.

I therefore (since this their inference is as imprudent and improbable, as
incongruous, and inconsiderate) heartily and humbly wish and desire these silly
deluded souls to lay aside their own selfe-conceiptednesse and selfe-justice,
to discern and deplore their own disabilities, and desist from disturbing the
Church with their dis^onant distractions.

Secondly, I have clearly manifested the differences and agreements between
the justified Jews and Christians to be such, that the covenant between the
Lord, them and us, is one and the same, according to the Doctrine of our
Church, Hom. of faith, B. 1.
which says, Although they were not named Christen men, yet was it a Christian
faith that they had; for they looked for all benefits of God the Father through
the merits of his Son Jesus Christ as we do. This difference is between them
and us; for, they looked when Christ should come, and we be in the time when he
is come: Therefore says S. Augustine, the time is altered, but not the faith:
for we have both one faith in one Christ, the same Holy Ghost also that we
have, had they, says S. Paul; for, as the Holy Ghost does teach us to trust in
God, and to call upon him as our Father: so did he teach them to say as it is
written, Thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, thy Name is without Isa. 43.
beginning, and everlasting. God gave them then grace to be his children, as he
does us now, against the gainesayings of these contradicting cavillers.

Thirdly, I have clearly proved that obedience to Gods precepts Book 3. Cap.
14. page 179.
is one means whereby we keep covenant with God, and therefore a part of the
covenant of grace; which these ignorantly condemn as false, speaking evil of
those things which they know not; for did they but understand what this
covenant is between God and his people; namely Gods contract with them
concerning the obtaining of eternal life: did they but know that this covenant
consists of two parts, Gods promise to them, sc. to give them Christ and his
benefits, as remission of sins and salvation, to be their God, and to save
them, to deal mercifully and truly with them: and theirs to God, sc. to be his
people and to serve him, to repent of their sins, and receive Christ by
faith, to yield obedience to his will; did they but know that universal
obedience is, if not the substance of this covenant on the Saints part, yet the
principal part thereof, as is evident, Exodus 19. 8. Nehem. 10. 28. Ezra 10. 3.
They would not so wickedly and wilfully with such preposterous prejudice
perversely pronounce this orthodoxe truth: The Law of God is part of the
covenant of grace, ungrounded, and erroneous.

Fourthly, I have expressly evidence, that the Saints of Book 3. Cap. 16. page
194. Book 4. Cap. 5. page 230.
God ought to fear, as well as love the Lord, contrary to their perverse
position, that love and fear cannot stand together.

Fifthly, I have delineated and described the inamouring Book 4. Cap. 5. page
237.
excellency, and inevitable necessity of sanctification, against the
irreligious and reproachful, diabolical and blasphemous barkings against the
same, some of their fraternity (as I have heard reported) terming it scurvy
sanctification.

Sixthly, I have showed the extent and excellency of Christian Book 4. Cap. 6.
page 242.
liberty, wherein I have contradicted and confuted their lawless and
licentious liberty.

Seventhly, I have opened and unfolded the doctrine of justification, Book 4
Cap. 5. page 233.
to inform and teach them the truth of that of which they talk, and talk so
much to little purpose, in which they would seem wondrous wise, although they
wander wide of the way.

Eighthly, Although their tenet of Gods not afflicting his children for their
sins is so repugnant to the regal rule of sacred Writ, and so ridiculous to
rectified reason, that the relating is a sufficient refutation thereof: Yet I
much bewailing their err^neous wanderings, and earnestly desiring their
deliverance from their deluding dotage^, will instruct and inform them in the
truth, if they are not intractable, and unteachable.

True it is, that sufferings are not always and only for sin* John 9. 3.
Neither has this man sinned, nor his father. (Great was the error therefore
of Christ's Disciples: In thinking there was no other cause of the man's
blindness but sin. In thinki^g he could not be justly punished with
blindness from his birth, because he had not then committed any actual sin;
and in thinking he could not be justly punished for any sin save his own, or
his parents; for he might be punished for Adams) For although all miseries be
effects of sin, yet sin is not the only cause of man's misery, there being
as well moving and fi^all causes, as that which is the procuring cause: as for
example,

First, There are diverse moving causes of afflictions.

1. In regard of the wicked; the moving cause is Gods just displeasure,
justice, and anger.

2. In regard of the elect; the moving cause is Gods love toward them.

3. In regard of both; the moving cause is Gods good will and pleasure.

Secondly, There are diverse final causes of afflictions.

1. In regard of God; his glory, and the manifestation of his power.

2. In regard of the parties punished; their good, and the exercise of Gods
graces in them.

3. In regard of others; their fore-warning, and making them without excuse.

Notwithstanding sin is the only meritorious cause of punishments temporal
and eternal, Lo^. 3. 39. 2 Sa^. 12. 10. 1 Corinthians. 11. Romans 5. 12. Neither
does our Saviors answer D. Am. l. 2. de Conscientia. cap. 16. These. 13.
contradict the certainty hereof, John 9. 3. This m^^ has not sinned. 1. By
his own sin or the sin of his parents he has not deserved more justly to
be borne blind, than any other sinuer which sees from his birth, or than any
of your selves; for Gods purpose was not by this blindness to punish the
sins of this man, and so to satisfy his justice: but rather thereby to make
way for his mercy, and to prepare matter for his Son Christ to work upon
when he came into the world, and was God manifested in the flesh.

Concerning the word punishment we may say and that truly and warrantably, God
punishes his children for their sins. Though not with satisfactory
punishments to satisfy and make amends for their sins: nor with vindicative
punishment to take vengeance upon them for their transgressions; yet with
chastening punishments, fatherly correcting them for their humbling amendment,
Psalm. 73. 14. Daily have (...)
I been punished, whipped, or scourged, yea the same word is used Ver. 5. and
rightly translated plagued.

Ninthly, I have showed that the law of God does bind the Book 3. Cap. 14. page
183. Book 4. Cap. 6. page 253.
conscience of regenerate Christians to obedience, against their absurd
annihilating of, and profane pratlings against the holy and heavenly law of
our good and gracious God. To prevent all future contradictions, I have set
down the concordant confessions of eight reformed Churches. I have showed the
judgment of some of the ancient Fathers, to which I have added testimonies of
Scriptures, and certain reasons, that they might consider, had they but wit or
will to consider, that in striving to support their rotten, ruinous, and
ridiculous positions, they contradict the ancient Worthies; the most sound and
orthodoxe Churches militant upon earth, and by name this of England, whereof we
are members, and also the most true and undeniable Word of God, not only in
the old, but also in the new Testament.

Yet as the same seed sown by the self same seedsman in a fertile soil,
yields a plentiful increase, falling in stony ground is scorched, in thorny is
choked, and in highways is devoured: As the same wholesome and nourishing
food which cheereth and refreshes, strengthens and supporteth the sound and
healthful man, increases and augmenteth corrupt and vicious humors,
maladies, and miseries in a distempered body: And as the same radiant, and
resplendent rays of that royal majesticall runner in the firmament, which
softeneth wax, hardereth clay, which makes fragrant flowers more odoriferous,
makes corrupt carrion more odious: So the pure and precious Word of God, which
is the savor of life unto life to some, is the savor of death unto death unto
others, 2 Cor. 2. 16. for evil men and seducers will wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3. 13. Acts 13. 10. And these enemies of
righteousness^ will not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord. And
therefore as the Lord gives up Ephraim, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to ido^s,
let him alone, cease to admonish him, for he is incureable. As the Angel said
to John, Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. And as great
Basil said of Eu^omius and his followers, Why Basil adu Eun. lib. 2.
should I contradict mad men? And a little after, I suppose those who cannot b^
cured, will not be benefitted by the multitude of those things which are
spoken. And before, ^ruly I am afraid Lib. 1.
lest by often repeating other men's blasphemi^s I should pollute my self. So I
might say, to what purpose should I confute these fond and fantastical
people? For variety of reasons will do those which are i^ curable no good, etc.
Yet part^y to justify the doctrine of all the reformed Churches, and in
particular of the Church of England (as s^u^d and orthodoxe as any under the
cope of heaven) against a viperine and venomous viperlike brood of lawless and
licentious libertines: partly to strengthen and support those that stand;
partly to uphold and keep from falling those that are weak; pattly to ^eale
(if it be possible) these silly, yet selfe-conceipted s^ctaries: or else to
suppress and supplant (what in me lies) their palpable, yet pernicious
absurdities, that others may the better shun and avoid them, according to that
substantial and pregnant saying of great Basil, Lur^ing impiety is more
dangerous than that Lib. 1.
which is publi^^ed: for when we know detractors, we are wont m^r^ easily to
avoid their impudent tongues, and ungrateful minds. I will o^ce more as^aile
these audacious and awkeard Antinomists. I^ which attempt I will not trouble my
self or you with repctitions of those things which I have formerly delivered,
neither is it needful for me to confirm any of my reasons, because cavilled
at by some, no more than it is necessary to prove that the sun does shine in a
bright noonetide, because some blind people will not believe it.

They say that we Ministers dare not preach the truth through fear of loosing
our livings.

And is the Church of England become a stepmother so rigorous,

2. But admit their impious, and injurious imputations to be true and credible,
as they are fond, false, and fantastical: yet are all other reformed Churches
enemies to the purity of the Gospel, and are all other Divines, which are and
have been famous in the same, cowardly and corrupt, unsound and rotten?

For the Church of England, you have heard her judgment, So^ of Saints, B. 4.
Cap. 6. p. 244. B. 3. Cap. 14 p. 183. Hom. of the misery of mankind. C.
yet hear her speak once again.

For truly there is imperfections in our best works: we do not love God so
much as we are bound to do, with all our heart, mind and power: we do not
fear God so much as we ought to do.

Thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall Hom. of works
^.
not steal -- By which words Christ declared that the laws of God be the very
way that do lead to eternal life. So that this is to be taken for a most
true lesson taught by Christ's own mouth, that the works of the moral
commandments of God be the very true works of faith which load to the
blessed life to come.

Under pretense of obedience to their father in religion -- they Ibid. E. 1.
were exempted by their rules, and canons from the obedience of their natural
father and mother, and from the obedience of Emperor, and King, and from all
temporal power, whom of very Hom. of Obed N. 1.
duty by Gods laws they were bound to obey, etc. Wherefore let us subjects do
our bounden duties, etc.

Here let us learn of Saint Paul the elect vessel of God, that Ibid. N. 111.
all persons having souls do owe of bounden duty, and even in conscience,
obedience, submission, and subjection to the higher powers. Thus we know partly
our bounden duty to common authority, Ibid. P.
etc.

How can we then be free (if not free from, then bound to) from Hom. against
Adultery. P. 11
this commandment, where so great charge is laid upon us?

Our Church Catechism. Q. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe,
and to do as they have promised for thee? A. Yes verily, etc. the things which
they acknowledge themselves bound to do, is to obey Gods law. Answ. before.
Thirdly that I should keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of my life.

The Old Testament is not contrary to the new, although the Artic. 7.
law given from God by Moses as touching ceremonies and rites do not bind
Christian men -- yet notwithstanding no Christian man what soever is free from
(therefore bound to) the obedience of the commandments which are called
moral.

Hear some of our worthy Divines speak.

Dr. Reinolds says, the moral law bound Joseph and David Overthr. of stage.
pl. p. 83.
to love their neighbors and themselves -- equity thereof pertained to the
moral law, and so is perpetually, and simply to be observed.

The moral law remains for ever a rule of obedience to every Ibid. p. 36.
child of God; though he be not bound to bring the same obedience for his
justification before God.

Ecclesiastical Histories mention many such Libertines, Simon Magus and his
disciples, who taught that men might lawfully commit fornication --. Basilides,
Eunomius Gnosticke, who taught that men might live as they list, seeing now
such liberty was procured them; being freed from being under the law any
longer: which sin died not with those cursed heretics, but the Devil has
in these last days revived it, especially Idem in Jude. p 518. 2. d.
in four sorts of men. First the Libertines of this age, who hold with the
former, that being under grace, we are free from the Idem in Jude p. 5 18. 2 d.
Romans 13. 5. p. 1096. Col. 28. p. 33.
obedience of the Moral Law.

M. Wilson. We are bound to be subject, etc.

M. Bifield. But is the whole Law of Moses abrogated, etc.

D. Ames. The matter of our obedience is, etc.

In his confutation of Bellarmine. Whereas the I^suite objects that we place
Christian liberty in this, that we are subject (or bound) to no law in
conscience before God. He answers* So heinous is this liberty of false
accusing, that the author thereof does seem to have no respect of law or
conscience in witness before God; For we do acknowledge that all Christians
are subject to the rule and direction, to the authority and obligation of the
Moral Law, and of all the divine Law enjoying us any duty, etc.

And in his Cases of Conscience he concludes, that the Law of God does bind
the conscience, and shows what it is to bind, namely, To have that power,
that the conscience ought to be subject to it, so that it does sin, if is
does any thing against the Law.

Hear other Writers judgments, and determination.

Peter Martyr says; The Law is the rule or square of Loc. Com. Clas. 2. cap.
2. Bull. D^c. de pers. Legis. d 3. ^. 8. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4.
conscience.

Bullinger. The Law does order and frame the life of men.

The Centuries say. The Scriptures teach, that we are delivered, or freed from
the curse and condemnation, not from the obedience of the Moral Law.

Again they teach, That the Law Moral, which is the immovable judgment of
divine understanding, is not disanulled, P. 184.
but does endure for ever.

Palanus has diverse reasons to prove this. Lib. 6. de Lege Dei. Chapter Hom cap.
105 p. 1496.


Chemnitius a Lutheran says, We are freed from the Law in regard of the curse;
we are freed from the Law in regard of justification -- But we are not freed
from the obedience of the Law: For even the regenerate or justified are
debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh, but to the Spirit, to
mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 12.

Cha^ierus says; It is ^^nifest by the things foregoing, Tom. 3. lib. 1* cap.
6. Th. 4.
that an exceeding great inj^^y i^ d(...) u^, wh^^ w^e are said to deny that
we are b(...) to the Law before God.

Wherefore if Bellarmine does know those which say, that the saithfull are
subject to u^ law before GOD; and that Th. 5.
the Decalogue of Moses does n(...) belong to us, he sha^^ have us not
adversaries, but follo(...) i^ disputing boldly against such.

Again: The fulfilling of the Law can by (...) means be accounted by the
part, but by the whole: For, the whole life, not some one moment thereof, is
bound; and it is bound to all, not to one: Hence the saying of James, He is
Ibid. l. 11. cap. 11. Th. 16.
guilty of all which offends in one: Neither can it otherwise be understood,
because he is not guilty of murder, who does only steal, but of theft
only: Yet he is guilty of the breach of that whole Law, part whereof is,
Th^^ shall not steal, and another part whereof, Tho^ shall not kill.

Now whereas the adverse Antinomist will (I suppose) reply, all this is not
Scripture: I do confess, that these words in so many letters and syllables are
not in the Scripture: Yet I dare avow that this doctrine of the Laws binding
the regenerate to obedience, being the doctrine not only of our Church, but of
all other Christian Churches (some few contentious Sectaries excepted, who
deserve not the name of a Church) and of all sound, solid, and substantial.
Divines, is the express doctrine of sacred Scripture: And that it is so, I
will now manifest, and make perspicuous by pregnant places in the New Testament.

Mat. 5. 18, 19, 21, etc. Christ (...)not to destroy the Law, etc. Yea he
confirms the continuance of it in every iot^ or tittle till the heavens be no
more, and presses punctually to a precise particular observation of it. Romans
3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: yea in establish
the Law. Faith therefore does not evacuate, but establish the Decalogue. Romans 7
7. By the Law we come to the knowledge of our sins. Romans 7. 22. 25. S. Paul
delighted in the Law of God -- with his mind he served the law of God.

1 Cor. 9. 21. Being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ. Ephesians
6. 1, 2. Children obey your parents -- Honor thy father, etc.

1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of ^aith unfeigned.

Iam. 2. 8. If you fulfill the royal law of liberty, etc. S. Iam^s shows what
Law, namely the Decalogue, Do not comm^^ adultery, etc. Verse. 11.

1 Ioh. 2. 4. He that says I know him and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar.

1 John 3. 4. Sin is the transgression of the Law. Hence I conclude,

1. That if ever the Law bound the regenerate to obedience (which I suppose
they will acknowledge) it still does, Mat. 5. 18. Romans 3. 31.

2. That since Christ Jesus the best expounder of Scripture does so copiously
confirm and corroborate the Moral Law in his Sermon on the Mount, does
peremptorily pronounce that the breach thereof does defile a man, Mar. 7. 20,
21, etc. and so often inculcate that the keeping of the commandments is a sure
and infallible sign of our love to him, Ioh. 14. 15. 21. 23. 24. and of his
love to us, Ioh. 15. 10.

3. Since faith does not supplant, but strengthen the law.

4. Since the holy men of God do often urge and press to do the duties
commanded in the Law in their Epistles (which they would not have done, had not
regenerate Christian bee^ bound to the obedience of the same.)

5. Since the Apostle S. Paul acknowledged that he served the Law of God with
his mind, and that he was under the Law to Christ.

6. Since the Law of God has not relinquished its regality and regiment, being
styled by the Holy Ghost the royal Law.

7. Since by the Law we come to the knowledge of sin; yea, and all sin is
the transgression of the Law.

8. Since the careless contemners and transgressors of Gods Law have no
communion with God, not s^ving knowledge of him.

9. Since the end of the commandment i^ charity, etc. therefore the Law is no
enemy to purity of heart, ^^ith unfeigned, or Christian liberty, this being the
royal Law of liberty.

I may warrantably conclude against the absurd, and erroneous ambiguous
Antinomists; That the Law of God does bind the conscience of the regenerate
Christian to obedience.

Furthermore, because I suppose these cavillers will carpe against all these
allegations as insufficient and weak, because in none of them we are said to
be bound by the Law to obedience. I will therefore show them these express
words in sacred Scripture, if that will satisfy and salve their seduced
souls, 1 Corinthians. 7. 15. A brother or sister is not under bondage in such
cases; namely, to perform matrimonial duties to unbelieveing yoke-fellowes
which will depart from, and forsake them, Verse. 27. Art then bound to a wife?
Seek not to be loosed. Verse. 39. The wife is bound by the Law, as long as her
husband lives. Hence I infer, That since the Law of God does bind the
believing husband and wife to perform all manner of matrimonial duties to
their unbelieving yoke-fellowes which are pleased to dwell with them, and that
since the husband and wife being regenerate, are bound by the Law each to other
so long as they live together; therefore that part of the Law which does
comprise and comprehend the duties of husbands and wives each to other, namely
the fifth and seventh commandments, does bind the conscience of the regenerate
to obedience; therefore either all the Moral Law does bind, or else that this
branch of the second Table is more authentical, and of more absolute
authority, not only than all the second Table besides, but also than the first
Table; yet our Savior says the second is but like unto the first, stiling it
the first and great commandment, Mat. 22. 38.

Oh that I could persuade them to take notice how they confront, contradict,
and contend against the concordant confessions of the reformed Churches, the
sound, solid, and substantial truths taught and defended by the ancient and
modern Worthies; and the infallible and unde^iable truth of Gods Word!

Oh that men would cordially consider that such vile and vicious positions make
men unfit, not only for Christian, but also for common commerce and company
with mankind! For, how can Kings and Princes be se^^red from rebellion of such
subjects? How can masters and fathers be assured of reverence and obedience
from such children and servants? How can husbands and wives be persuaded of
conjugall love and fidelity from such yoke-fellowes? How can traders and
traffiquers be ascertained of true and honest dealing from such people, who are
conceited that the Law of God does not bind them to obedience? Oh that these
beguiled and unstable souls would question and confer after this or the like
manner with their consciences. Tell me Conscience, are not murders, adulteries,
thefts, and such like sins, and why? Tell me Conscience, how thou know
that lying, swearing, evil thoughts, concupiscence and the like, are sins?
Tell me Conscience, whence is it that thou will not allow me to steal, kill,
commit adultery, or the like? And their consciences (except they lie in a
lethall lethargy) will answer. Not only are thefts, murders, and adulteries
sins, but also covetous desires, unadvised anger, and lustful thoughts,
because they are a transgression of Gods Law. I know that the forenamed, and
other works of darkness are sins, because the Law of God forbids them. And
I dare not approve of the doing of such like things, because they are contrary
to, and condemned by the most holy and heavenly Law of God. This abject and
absurd foolish fancy therefore of these lawless and licentious Antinomists,
The Law of God does not bind the conscience of the regenerate to obedience,
being contrary and repugnant unto the testimony of all orthodoxe Churches, and
of their learned and pious Worthies: and against the sincere and sacred Word of
God: supplanting and suppressing subtly and sinfully all sorts of societies,
both Christian and common commerce betwixt man and man; and being gainesaid by
their own consciences, if they are but illightened, is a sottish and
sinful, a false and filthy, a ridiculous and rotten, a vile and vicious, an
untrue and unchristian, a faithless and fantastical opinion, position, and
absurdity.

CHAP. VIII.
Christian soldiers must be strong, wherein and why.
Ephesians. 6. 10. As corporal strength, and bodily abilities are necessary for
martial men, and a principal means in such like combats to obtain the
victory. Witness Saul's policy, who when he saw any strong man, he took him
to him, 1 Samuel 14. 52. Witness that matchless mirror of mankind Samson, who
slew a thousand men with the jaw of an ass, Judge. 15. 15. carried away the
gates of Gaza, Verse. 16. And pulled down the house upon three thousand
Philistines, Ver. 17. Witness the commendation of David's Worthies for their
might, 2 Samuel 23. Witness that saying of the Gadites, 1 Chronicles. 12. 8. They
were men of might, men of war, fit for the battel^, that could handle shield
and buckler, whose faces were like the faces of Lions. Witness the name of the
place where the young men of Ioab and Ab^er slew each other, called the field
of strong men, 2 Samuel 2. 16. And witness th^se sayings in the Canticles 3. 7.
Threescore strong men about Salomons bed. 4. 4. The shield of strong men. So in
the spiritual warfare against the enemies of our salvation, spiritual
strength is an excellent and a necessary means and help for Christian
soldiers to guard and defend, to fence, and fortify them against the Devil
and his hellish accomplices.

This made S. Steven so puissant and invincible, Acts 6. 8, 10.

This made Paul so courageous to confront Elimas the sorcerer, Acts 13. 9, 10.
to conflict with the Jews, and Philosophers, Act^ 17. 17. and to contemn
bonds and afflictions, Acts* 24. 26, 27.

5. This enabled him to do all things through Christ tha^ strengthened him,
Phil. 4. 13.

This was one means whereby those young men 1 Ioh. 2. 14. overcame the wicked
one.

Hence it is that the Apostle Saint Paul stirs up the Corinthians to be
strong, 1 Corinthians. 16. 13. persuades the Ephesians to be strong in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6. 10 and incites Timothy to be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus, 2 Timothy 2. 1. And hence it is that the Apostle Saint Peter prays unto
the Lord to strengthen his Church, 1 Pet. 5. 10.

Be we therefore strong in the Spirit, or in the precious prevailing graces of
Gods saving and sanctifying Spirit, set down and specified, Gal* 5. 1^, etc.

1. Be we strong in love, that we may love

First God in Christ for his own sake, yea so, that we may with earnest
ardency desire, and with our utmost endeavors diligently strive in the
frequent and faithful use of the means to have communion with God: And that
we may love his Word, and will above gold, yea above much fine gold, Psalm 119.
129. and beyond expression, Verse. 97.

Secondly, And our neighbor for Gods sake; yea so, that we may show love, and
do good even to them that wrong and abuse us. And that we may love all good
men especially, because God bears a special affection toward them, and
because they have in them whatsoever is amiable and lovely.

And let us strive to be so strong in this Christian love, that the many waters
of the greatest force and violence used by Tyrants and Tormentours to avert and
turn the same from the Lord, may not quench, put out, or overcome it; nor the
floods, or liberal store of the overflowing waters of deep and grievous
afflictions drown, extinguish, or overthrow, Cant. 8 7.

2. Be we strong in joy, that divine joy which comes from the Lord, and is
placed in him, Neh^m. 8. 10. Whereby we may perfectly joy in God, in that
joyful work of our regeneration, in Gods grace, and that blessed hope of
eternal glory with him; yea so, that it may make us to joy and rejoice at the
good and welfare of others, Romans 12. 15. Moderate all our griefs and sorrows,
and enable us to joy even in tri^ulations, Romans 5. 3. They being pledges of
Gods love, and trials of our faith and patience.

3. Be we strong in peace, that so we may walk in the way of peace, Romans 3.
17. Leading quiet and peaceable lives full of unity and good agreement,
avoiding quarrelsome contentions; seeking to edify one another by doing or
taking good, Romans 14. 19. and laboring to live void of offense to God and man,
not willingly taking nor giving offense.

4. Be we strong in long suffering, by which we shall be enabled to mitigate and
moderate our unadvised anger, and diabolical disturbing desires of revenge,
when great and manifold wrongs and injuries are done unto us; and diligently to
discharge the duties of our Christian callings, with painfulness, profit, and
without partiality, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

5. Be we strong in gentleness, that so we may be enabled to give good speech,
and to show good countenance even to them that wrong and abuse us, without
intent and purpose of revenge; so that we may be courteous and tractable, ready
to give mild words, easy to be entreated, and to be spoken to, apt to please,
loath to displease with reason.

6 Be strong in goodness, that so we may become beneficial and helpefull to
others (after Gods example) communicating to them the good things that are in
us for their good and benefit.

7. Be strong in faith toward God, whereby we may be certified of the
remission of our sins, of our reconciliation with God in Christ, and depend
upon the Lords providence for food and raiment in the use of lawful means*
And toward man, whereby we may be faithful and just in observing and keeping
our honest word and promises.

8. Be we strong in meekness that so we may yield with a quiet and willing
submission of our judgments and affections to the rules of Gods Word, James 1.
21. And suffer abuses and injuries from men without desire of revenge, Col. 3.
12, 13.

9. Be we strong in temperance, That so we may be enabled to use the outward
blessings of God with moderation of mind, this holding us back from
superfluity, and excess, and causing us rather to refrain from that we may
do, then in our delights and pleasures to go so far as our abilities,
estates, and time will give us leave. Which moderation is a means to prevent
many evils, both sins, and punishments* For by moderating our appetite in
meats and drinks, which ought to be received with perpetual abstinence,
less then nature desires to refresh it, and to fit man for Gods service; in
apparel, clothing our selves according to our sex, the received and seemly
fashion of our country, and our own ability, in getting goods, so that we
rest content having sufficient to feed, and cloth our selves and ours; And in
spending of the same not wastfully, riotously, prodigally, unthriftily,
unprofitably, injustly, injuriously, and unnecessarily, we prevent many sins,
as gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom, pride, covetousness, prodigality, etc.
and punishments, as disease^ of the body, beggary, infamy, security,
sensuality, curse, and condemnation, Pro. 23. 21. Isa. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14.

First, Although the greatest part of men therefore are wholly regardlesse of,
if not contemners of this spiritual strength, comforting, and contenting
themselves with this, they are mighty in power, Job 21. 7. their breasts are
full of milk, and their bones are moistened with marrow, v. 24. there are no
bands in their death, but their strength is firm; yea and oftentimes are ready
in regard of their corporal force and abilities to disdain, and defy Goliath
like the fervants of the living Lord. Little considering, That although bodily
strength is a blessing (therefore not to be given to wine, or women, Pro. 31.
3. therefore to be employed to the glory of God the giver) yet it is 1 But a
common blessing, whereof Goliath partakes as well as Sampson, Sons of Belial
as well as heirs of bliffe. 2 Yea such a benefit wherein the Vnicorn^ whose
strength is great, Job 39 11. the horse whose neck i^ clothed with thunder,
the glory of whose nostrills is terrible, who p(...) in the val^ey, and
rejoices in his strength, going on to m^^te the arm^d man, who m^^keth at
fear, and is not affright^d, neither turn^th back from the sword, 21. The
B^hemoth whose strength is in his loins, and his force in the navell of his
bel^y, whose bones are as strong pieces of brass, and like bars of iron, Chap.
40. 16. etc. The Leviathan, whose fight is able to cast one down, whom even
the fiercest dares not stir up, in whose neck remains strength, when he
raises up himself the mighty are afraid, who esteems iron as straw, and
brass as rotten wood, Chap. 41. 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. not only equalize but
far excel them. 3 Therefore not amiable to the Lord, who delights not in
the strength of the horse, nor takes pleasure in the legs of a man, Psalm. 147.
10. And therefore no cause of glorying; For thus says the Lord, let not the
mighty man glory in his might, Jeremy 9. 23.

Secondly, Although too too many rest satisfied in their spiritual weakness,
being always babes, such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat,
whereas for their time they ought to be teachers, like those the Apostle
reproves, 1 Cor. 3. 2. etc. Heb. 5. 12.

Little considering, that although in Christ's* Fold there are lambs, in
Christ's Orchard there are plants, in Christ's Family there are babes; yet that

1. Christ's lambs are of his flock, hearing his voice, and following his
precept and practice, Io^. 10. 27. and therefore grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3 18.

2. That Christ's plants are like trees planted by the waters side which bring
forth fruit in their season, Psalm. 1. 3. and still bring forth fruit in old
age, Psalm. 92. 13.

3. That babes in Christ desire the sincere milk of the Word, and grow thereby,
1 Pet. 2. 2.

Little considering that although weak faith, if true, is powerful and
available because it is faith, and the promises are made to it because it is
faith, and it is the same with strong faith. 1 In regard of nature, though not
in regard of the strength, as a babe, and a giant. 2 In regard of quality,
though not quantity, as a drop of water, and a river. 3 In regard of property,
though not proportion; as a little vessel, and a great. 4 In regard of the
use, though not the power, as a palsy hand and a steddie: yet that this faith
is of a growing nature, Romans 1. 17.

Little considering that those desires of grace which are grace, which God will
fulfill and satisfy, Matthew. 5. 6. are constant, lively, operative, growing
from desire to endeavor, from endeavor to action.

Yet all you soldiers of this good warfare

1. Daily and diligently diet, satiate, and satisfy your souls with that
sweet, and wholesome heavenly food, and Manna sweeter then honey, and the
hony-combe, Psalm. 19. by reading, hearing, meditation, and conference; That as,
although we have but few markets in a week, yet with such provision we
provide both there and at home, we duly and daily stablish and strengthen our
bodies vigor and abilities: So although we have not many market days in the
week for our souls, yet with that spiritual repast we then store our selves,
and with such private provision we are furnished withal, let us daily and
diligently fortify and strengthen our souls in the Lord, and in the gifts and
graces of his spirit.

2. Use and exercise is a means to continue, confirm, and augment the vigor,
and forces of soul and body. Use legs, and have them, exercise strength and
have it; So exercise faith, love, peace, joy, patience, etc. and have them
effectual, and increasing.

3. Resist and remove all manner of sins, the souls sickness, hindering and
much hurting its health, strength, and vigor.

4. Pray unto God, from whom all our sufficiency is, 2 Cor. 3. 5. without whom
we can do nothing, Ioh. 15 5. by whom we may do all things, Phil. 4. 13. To
strengthen us; for he gives power to the faint, etc. Isa. 40. 29.

5. And wait upon the Lord. Isa. 40. 31. for they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall r(...), and not be w(...)ie, they shall walk and not faint.

That so we may be strong in the Lord, and the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

That so we may do all things through Christ which strengthens us, Phil. 4.
13.

That so we may be strengthened with all might according to his glorious power
unto all patience, and long-suffering with joyfullnesse, Col. 1. 11.

That so we may be strong in the grace that is in Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 1.

That so we may overcome the wicked one, 1 Ioh. 2. 14.

This being one prime and principal preservative to patronise Motive 1.
and protect our selves against the policies, power, and puissance of our
enraged foes.

2. This being one primarie potent means to prosper and prevail against, to
batter and beat down the furious forces of our formidable and fearful foes.

3. This being the peculiar peerless privilege, and prerogative of Gods
precious ones, not common to bruit beasts and men of this world.

4. This being far more heroical, magnificent, and honorable, far more
profitable, necessary and excellent to a Christian soldier then all bodily
strength and abilities.

For had we the strength of Edol once Earl of Gloucester, Hollinsh. p. 475
who with an hedge stake slew 17 Saxons which subtly had stabbed 460 British
Lords.

Had we the strength of John Courcye, who with one stroke smote through an
helmet into a block that none could pull out the sword again himself excepted.

Had we the strength of Hector, Achilles, and those other Trojan, and Grecian
Worthies, of Hercules, and all other renowned for might.

Had we the strength of Goliath the weight of whose coat was five thousand
shekells of brass, the staff of whose spear was like a weavers beam, and
the head of his spear weighed six hundred shekels of iron, 1 Samuel 17. 5, 7.

Had we the bodily abilities of Sampson, David, and all his mighty Worthies.

Had we the strength of Giants who are called Hannephilim Genesis 6. 4.
because they affright, and astonish men with their faces.

Had we the fained forces of Atlas, who is for his strength fained to bea^e up
the heavens with his shoulders.

Had we the strength of Horses, Lions, Unicorns, Elephants, yea of all the
beasts of power, and men of might that ever the earth did bear, and the sun
saw: yet that spiritual strength does far surpass and surmount these
imaginary bodily forces although they were real.

For what can these avail against the worlds vanities, sins, subtilties, and
Satan's temptations? Nothing at all For our enemies are not flesh and blood, but
spiritual wickednesses; and therefore outward prowess, state policy, warlike
subtilty, troops of armed men, dint of sword, nor strength of body can daunt
or dishearten, appale or annoy them, or keep us safe, and protect us from
them. For to oppose these spiritual enemies with the power of flesh, is to set
parched straw and stubble against the flaming fire.

Heart Saint Chrysostom speak of this matter.

We are not therefore strong because we have lusty and sturdie bodies: But he
only is adorned with this virtue (although he lie upon his bed) who is mighty
in inward graces or virtues, which being wanting although otherwise a man is
furnished with such strength of body that he can pluck up a mountain, yet I
will not say that he is more strong or mighty then a maiden, or a sickly old
woman: for he that is furnished with inward graces does skirmish with
incorporeall or invisible vices and enemies, whereas this man dares not take a
view of them. What can be supposed to be more strong then this woman which
stands against with a valiant mind the tyranny of nature, the force of famine,
the threats of Chrysostom Hom. 19. i^ 2 C^r. 9.
death, and overcommeth them all.

CHAP. IX.
The Christian soldier must be courageous.
Moses therefore charge in the name of the Lord the Israelites, and his
successor Ioshuah who were deputed to the war to be of a good courage, not
to fear, nor to be afraid, Deuteronomy. 31. 6, 7. The same charge the Lord gave to
Ioshuah again, and again, Ioh. 1. 6, 7. Be of a good courage, be not afraid,
neither be thou dis^^id, etc. Men of courage are men for conflict, and for
conquest: The courage of a few valiant men, and valourous minds supplies so
the want of number, that though they be but few they dread not the faces of
many. David achieved many mighty, and great exploits, 2 Samuel 23. by the
courage of his valiant Worthies. Whereas timorous, and trembling soldiers (as
well as faint and feeble) are unfit for military profession. Hence was it that
the Lord himself ordained it for a law, that the fearful, and faint-hearted
should return home from the wars; least by their fainting cowardice they rout
and ruin the rest, Deuteronomy. 20. 8. Therefore it was not without cause that
politic and prudent commanders have ever by notable examples, politic
instructions, and practices endeavored to make their soldiers valiant, and
noble-minded, to advance their courages to attempt and atchieve most high and
honorable things; they well knowing that a few courageous men to great armies
of cowards are like so many Lyon^ to whole herds of dear.

Christian valor, and spiritual courage is much more needful to Christ's
soldiers both in regard of our dulnes, and backwardness, and timorousness to
all pious and good duties, as also in regard of the great and manifold
oppositions which we shall surely meet withal for the rowsing up of our own
dullness to holy and heavenly duties, and that we may fight under Christ's
banner against so many mighty, malicious, and subtle enemies with constancy
and continuance. We must be of a valorous courageous mind against all our
enemies, standing stoutly against them, and bidding defiance to them, 1 Cor.
16. 13. Quit your selves like men. Ephesians. 6. 10. Stand therefore. This being
needful in war against flesh and blood, is much more necessary in war
against spirits and spiritual wickednesses.

1. Whence it it that many faint and flexible, corrupt and cowardly Christians
desert devotion, relinquish religion, corrupt conscience, suppress sacred
sincerity and sanctified strictness, pervert piety, are pliant to profaneness,
forsake their former fervor, and first love, yield themselves vanquished
vassal^ to their vicious conquerours, and slavishly swim down the corrupt
current of the times disorders, making their condition by their wretched
relapses worse then if they had never known the ways of righteousness, ^
Pet. 2. 21.? Is it not for want of courage?

2. Whence is it that many timorous and trembling Christians droop, and dare
not defend, much less dignifie the honorable and noble peerless causes of
Gods precious people, and their Lord Jehovah blessed for ever; dread to repugne
and resist, much more to ruinate and repress the insolent, and insupportable
inordinate abominations of Belials base and hellish brood, thereby unworthily
betraying (so far as in them lies) through their pusillanimous timiditie
(propt and protected with pretenses of moderation and discretion) the
inculpable causes and credits of good men, and inraging and encouraging
infatuated and infernal fools in their extravagant and execrable disorders?
is it not for want of courage?

3. Whence is it that many fearful and formidable Christians are appaled and
affrighted from the propagating and promoting of Christ's cause, and the
practical profession of Christianity, like Salomons sluggard, with the lions
in the way: So that they dread to seem more forward, or to go a step further
in the duties of piety and religion then their negligent, if not profane,
neighbors. Or if they follow Christ, and his faithful flock, yet it is as
the Israelites followed Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 7. trembling?

Surely from the cowardly pusillanimity, and faint-hearted timidity predominant
and prevailing in the faithless hearts of some, and the souls of others who
are but weak and wavering being babes in Christianity.

1. Let me persuade and press you forward, Christian Magistrates, which are as
the generals, and chief Captains in this Christian warfare to be courageous,
Deuteronomy. 31. 6. Do you say with heroical Nehemiah 6. 11. shall such a man as I
am flee? Do not you dread to confront, and control despisers and deriders of
Gods people and religion, although they be such as Sanball^t, Tobiah, or
Geshem, Neh. 2. 19, 20. Do you walk undauntedly in that pious, and
praiseworthy path wherein good King David continually exercised himself, Ps.
101. Do not you bear Gods sword in vain, but, as the Ministers of God, take
vengeance on them that do evil, Romans 13. 4. As therefore you ought not
indifferently to terrify all, good, and evil: or afflict well-doers, this
being an abuse of power; and it is equally abomination unto God to condemn an
innocent, or to justify the wicked: So neither must you through carelessness
or fear neglect to convert your power of punishing to the hinderance of
enormities: for by impunity sin will wax impudent and fruitful; And with
God it is much one whether one be a doer of evil, or no hinderer, and so a
consenter and fosterer. Be you therefore men of courage to suppress evil
deeds, and doers, who with their malice often have might, and potent friends.

2. You Ministers of Gods Word, which are the chariots, and horsemen of Israel,
be you courageous, like Christ, our Master, his Prophets, Ier. 1. 17. Ezekiel. 2.
6. and Apostles, Act. 4. 13. Preaching the sacred Word of God impartially,
without respect of persons sparing neither great nor small; but telling all men
of their duty: Declaring the whole truth of God, concealing no part thereof for
fear, or favor, darger, or reward, Act. 20. 27. reprooving sin with all
authority, so that stubborn and stiff-necked sinners may be made to tremble,
Tit. 2. 15. not daunted with, nor dreading, but disregarding and despising all
reviling reproaches, and shameful disgraces for the pious and profitable
performance of your high and honorable calling. That so you may not by your
timorous faint-heartednes be quailed, much less be trampled under by fierce,
impudent, and violent people. But that by our carriage in declaring our message
from our Master freely, we may daunt the stoutest hearts, and dismay the
proudest opposers.

3. Let us all fellow-Christian soldiers be courageous in Christ's cause in
this our spiritual warfare. And because I know it is more than needful to
kindle, quicken, and increase in you (what I can) this true spiritual valor
and magnanimity; I will propose unto you these following encouragements to
withstand courageously and manfully our spiritual foes.

1. Cowardice has been condemned as odious and opprobrious to all sorts of
people in times past and gone. The Scottish women of Annandale slew their own
husbands (in the time of Corbreid Gald) because they cowardly fled from the
Romans. The Persian women met their husbands and children running away from
Astyages armies, entreating them to return to sight, and to move them, they
uncovered their bodies, and asked whether they would run into the wombes Just
in. lib. 9.
of their wives and mothers. The women of Laconia, their sons going to the
wars, received of them shields with this (...).
inscription, Either this, or upon this; either bring home this, or be brought
home upon it; by no means run away.

That famous Captain Tamerlane did punish nothing so severely as cowardice;
insomuch that if any turned from a wild beast in hunting, or an enemy in fight,
he was sure to die for it.

Hercules (says Sir Walter Rawleigh) liked not the sacrifice P^^. 5. cap. 6.
of a coward. Annibal (being to fight against the Romans in Afrique) commanded
his Captains, that if they saw any fleeing, they should account them as
enemies, and kill them. And the Romans which fled from the slaughter at Canna,
after they came home, were rejected and banished as false-hearted cowards: yea
many famous Captains have refused, though offered for little or no ransom,
such soldiers which suffered themselves to be taken captive. It was an use
among the Spartans that whosoever fled out of the battle were adjudged
infamous, they were to be distinguished from other citizens by their apparel
and beards; it was lawful for any man to beat them passing by; neither was it
lawful for them to marry wives, etc. says Carron. Car. Chron. l. 2. p. 117.


Is cowardice and faint-heartednesse in these combats and conflicts betwixt
men and men (of no great consequence in comparison of this other) so
disdainefull and disgraceful; how much more then in this fight and quarrel
against such enemies, we having a cause so comfortable, a Captain so
courageous and conquering, foes so feeble, and often foiled, armor so
availeable, and approoved, and a reward propounded and promised, which is
incomparable and incomprehensible?

2. Honorable death by valor has been more delightful and acceptable to
worthy warriors, than a base life by cowardice. They had this maxim amongst
magnanimous martial men, That soldier is more glorious which is slain in
war, than he which is saved by flight. Earl S^ward, Holinsh. p. 192.
hearing his son to be slain, asked in what part? Answer being made, in the
forehead: I rejoice (says he) with all my heart; I would not wish to my son
or self a better death. Solomon the Turk having taken Buda in Hungary flew
those 700 perfidious cowardly soldiers, who basely betrayed the city into his
hands; but he offered great honors to the valiant Captain Hadastus whom he
found bound by his soldiers because he would not yield to deliver up the city;
he choosing rather death with honor, then life by cowardice. Prefer we
therefore loss of life, and liberty, loss of reputation and revenue with
courageous Christian constancy in Christ's cause before the highest pitch and
period of worldly felicities with cowardly condiscendi^g to cursed corruptions.
This comfortable and courageous resolution was in Peter and John, Act. 4. 19.
whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey God or man judge you. This
magnanimous mind was in Paul, Act. 21. 13. I am r^ady not to be bound, but to
die, etc. and in all the holy and heavenly Martyrs of Christ Jesus. Be we
therefore men of mighty minds, truly courageous.

Answer we our spiritual enemies (as that famous Cassibelane ^ollin^h. p. 479
a Brittane answered Caesar, I have not yet learned to live in servitude, but
to defend the liberty of my country with weapon in hand) we have not yet
learned to live in hellish slavery, but to defend the rights and liberties of
our heavenly country with our spiritual weapons. Pursue and fight against the
enemies of our souls and salvation as dreadlesse of danger, as regardlesse of
respite, rest, and resistance, as contemptuous of corrupt contentments, as
desirous of victory, and with as courageous magnanimity, as that renowned
Epirot Scanderbeg did who fought so fearelesly and fiercely for his country
sake against their turbulent and truculent enemies the Turks with his arm
bare, till the blood burst out at his lips: That was his honor, This will be
ours.

3. Never did cruel Mahomet exercise such tragical terror (yet he caused
eight principal Commanders of Scanderbeg to be fleyed alive, in which
lamentable and languishing condition they continued 15 days and then died)
Never did savage Selimus execute such tyrannical tortures (yet he contrary to
his covenanted conditions slew all the soldiers of Gynta, and caused the
Captain to be tortured to death in a hogshead of nails.) Never did Turk or
Tartar, or the most savage tigerlike Scithian in the world so terribly torture
and torment with such virulence and violence their captivated foes, as Satan
and his cursed accomplices do those whom they subdue and vanquish by fraud or
force: for what are stranglings and strappadoes, what are poverty and
imprisonment, what are flayings and fires, what are faintness and famines,
what are rackings and rending the flesh joint by joint; yea what are all
earthly tortures and torments deviseable by man or devil in regard of those
unutterable, unconceivable, and therefore more then intolerable (yet must they
be endured) torments, where the worm never dies, and the fire ever burns,
the sure and certain stipend of those whom Satan foileth; Necessity puts
vigor and valor into, adds courage and constancy to the half conquered, and
almost vanquished, hopeless, and desperate man: therefore prudent commanders,
to make their soldiers courageous, have taken away all hope, and means of
flight from their soldiers, placing them so that they should have their
enemies before them, some rivers, deep ditches, or inaccessible mountains
behind them: or placing the most fearful in the forefront, the most valiant
behind to compel them to fight, and hinder their flight. Thus Darius leading
his army into Syria caused the Ingens telu^ necessitas.
bridge by which they passed to be thrown down to take away all hope of
running away. Thus Agathocles having transported his army into Afric burnt
his ships to make them know that they must manfully fight or else die. When all
way of flight is stopped the basest soldier will rather die with glory in the
front of the battle, then fly and be killed with ignominy: So true a
Mistress of hardy resolution is despair.

Behold urgent necessity is laid upon us to cast away cowardice, and to play
the men; yea woe to us if we yield to our exasperate assailants, and unwearied
foes. Those who are overcome are perpetual slaves to Satan that malicious
enemy, who will hold them with everlasting chains under darkness in torture
and torments, easelesse, and endless, merciless and remediless.

4. If we are valiant we shall vanquish, if we are courageous we shall conquer,
if we play the men we shall prevail. The Devil our grand enemy is like a
Woolfe; 1 in fierceness, he more fiercely assailing, more eagerly purfuing,
more easily prevailing, and more greedily devouring, when he is fearfully
shunned and yielded unto, 2 in fearefullnesse, he shamefully flying when
stoutly resisted, Iam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly; stand
therefore courageously, and stand victoriously: All our enemies are daunted,
and dismayed with the stout standing of Christ's soldiers, as well as heartned
with their timorousness. The boldness of Peter and John amassed their potent
persecutors, Act. 4. 13. who would not therefore be valiant in this warfare,
where valor gives victory, where courage quels the adversary, and gives spirit
and vigor to other more faint-hearted, yet fellow soldiers.

5. Call to mind, and cordially consider of (you Christian soldiers) the
sundry and several parts and pieces of the armor of righteousness, wherewith
you are and must be fenced. These our weapons are impregnable: This our armor
is prevailing, they are safe and sure, who will use it, for they shall never
fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. By this they overcome the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. and are more
then conquerours, Romans 8. 37. This our armor it not defective, or
insufficient, but complete, and entire, Ephesians. 6. 13. yet not one piece for the
back parts, to show and signify that armed Christians are courageous, and
that cowardly Christians which turn their backs are naked and unfensed, and
lie open to every divelish dart shot from Satan, and other spiritual enemies
of their souls.

6. And why (O you Christian soldiers of Christ) are you not courageous?

Your cause is good, because it is Gods.

Your guard is great, because Angels and all other creatures.

Your God is omnipotent, because Jehovah.

Your enemies are feeble, because already spoiled.

Your weapons are impregnable, because conquering.

Your encourager is effectual, because the Comforter.

Your Captain is a conqueror, because Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Your crown for which you combat is incorruptible, Because heaven.

Yours is the victory, because it is promised by God, who cannot lie; And will
you be cowards?

1. A just cause does infuse incredible encouragements; Witness Iothams speech
to his base brother Abimelech, and the ungrateful men of Shechem, Judge. 9.
Witness Iepthaes answer to the King of Ammon, 11. 27. thou do me wrong, etc.
Witness Ioabs speech to Abishai, 1 Chronicles. 19. 13. Let us behave our selves
valiantly for our people, and the cities of our God. And Abijahs to Jeroboam,
and his army, 2 Chronicles. 13. 4, 5. etc.

What cause so comfortable, what warfare so warrantable, what conflict so
considerate, what combat so commodious, what battle so blameless, and
blessed as that of the Christian soldiers?

These wage war against the subtle, and seducing serpent, the wily and wicked
world, and the fraudulent and filthy flesh, who cruelly, and unjustly, yet
concordantly and with joint consent conspire to enthrall those whom Christ has
enlarged, to destroy those, whom he has delivered, to ruinate those whom he
has redeemed, to lead captive those whom he has set at liberty.

These contend earnestly for the faith delivered to the Saints, Jude 3.

These, though they live in the flesh, do not war after the flesh. Casting
down imaginations and every high thing which exalts it self against the
knowledge of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.

These wrestle against the wiles of the Devil, against principalities and
powers, Ephesians 6. 11, 12.

These endure a great fight of afflictions, partly while they are made a gazing
stock by reproaches and afflictions, and partly while they become companions of
them that were so used, etc. Heb. 10. 32, 33.

These abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against their souls, 1 Pet. 2.
11.

These put on the whole armor of light, and cast off the works of darkness,
Romans 13. 12.

These are on Christ's side fighting against the Dragon and his Angels, the
Serpent and his seed, the flesh and its lusts.

These fight the battles of the LORD JEHOVAH, of CHRIST their Savior, of his
Church their body, for GODS glory their own graces, for GODS honor their own
happiness. Then which warfare none more warrantable. Then you O Christian
soldiers therefore let none be more courageous.

2. Your safeguard and protection are all Gods hosts and armies: All the
creatures being ready armed for your deliverance and safety at a year, at a
month, at a day, at an hour, at a minute, at a moment: flies, and frogs, lice
and locusts, with other such like vile, yet vanquishing and wasting vermin,
Exodus 8. 9. and 10. Acts 12. Bears, and Lions with other like cruel and
consuming creatures, 2 King. 2. Dan. 6. Thunder and lightning, storms and
tempests, light and darkness, Sun and Stars, earth and waters with other
dreadful and destroying, magnificent and mavelous works of God. The
glorious Angels of our great God, which are great in power; one of which
stopped the mouths of Lions, Dan. 6. 22. delivered Peter out of prison, Act.
12. 7. and slew a hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night, Isa. 37.
38. These are ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. and pitch their tents about them, Psalm. 34. 8.
What greater dignities, what better defense? What greater solace, what better
safety, then this? To be attended, and guarded. Not by men (which we count an
honor, and a happiness) Not by Saints (which is a greater privilege, and
protection.) Not by worshipful, not by honorable men: But by Angels, yea and
the Lord of men and Angels, who also keeps Israel, Ps. 121. 4, 7, 8 shading
them from the smiting both of Sun and Moon, preserving them from evil. The
knowledge, assurance, remembrance, and meditation of which gracious and
gladsome presence of God, and the sense thereof will marvellously comfort and
encourage a godly man. This has freed the faithful from desperate and
faithless fear which is proper to devils and reprobate. This has made them
comfortable and courageous in the valley of the shadow of death, as Joseph in
the pit and prison; Daniel in the den; Jonah in the whale; the three children
in the furnace; the Prophet in Dothan.

You therefore O Christian soldiers having such a powerful puissant guard
ready pressed to preserve and protect, to defend and deliver you, not only of all
those contemptible crawling creatures (which yet consumed proud King Herod,
Acts 12. and greatly wasted and oppressed the fruitful and pleasant land of
Egypt) other inferior, sublunary, and those incorruptible, celestial, and
angelical: But of the Lord of hosts, who is a wall of fire round about, Zach.
2. 5. and therefore you must need^ be invincible, and impregnable: were your
shelter stones, earth, timber; these may be battered: were it walls of lead;
these might be melted, and consumed: were it defenses of waters; these might be
dried up: were it garrisons of mighty men; these might be scattered: were it
engines of war; these might be defeated: were it trenches; these might be
stopped: were it Bullwarkes; these might be overthrown: But you are guarded
with such a defense which cannot be demolished, sc. with fire, with a wall of
fire round about you. Balls of wildfire are a terror and consumption to
enemies; who could quench the fire of Sodom, Genesis 19? Or who can quench the
world, when it shall be all on fire, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11? Surely none. Paradise
was kept with a fiery flaming sword, and none could enter thereinto, Genesis 3.
24. Israel was guided and protected by a pillar of fire, and none could molest
them, Exodus 13. 21. And the Lord of heaven and earth, who is a Lord of hosts
and armies is a wall of fire round about you, to concruciate and consume your
obstinate opposers, and to shelter and succor you. Since therefore O fellow
Christian soldiers we esteem our selves in great safety having walls of
stones, guards of men and other such like defending, supporting, and resisting
warlike munition. Knowing that we have a guard so great and glorious, and that
God is, and will be with us in danger, and distress (which we may do By our
faith, and the fruits thereof, as By our obedience, 2 Chro. 15. 2. Ps 91. 14.
By our love to him, Psalm. 91. 14. By our invocation and calling upon his name,
Psalm. 91. 15. 56. 9. 57. 2. and By our trust and confidence in God, Psalm. 91.
29. 56. 3, 4, 10. 57. 1.) And therefore that we are in great safety and
security. Let us be valiant and courageous.

3. Your God whose you are, and whom you serve, To whom nothing is too hard,
Genesis 18. 14. or impossible, Mat. 19. 26. To whom none is like among the Gods,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. Exodus 15. 11. Who
remooveth mountains, -- shakes the earth, -- commands the Sun, -- seals
the stars, Job 9. 16, etc. and thundereth marvellously, etc. 37. 5. from whom
none can deliver, Isa. 43. 13. without whose leave and license Satan himself
cannot harm or hurt sordid swine much less sanctified Saints, Mar. 5. 12. Job
1. and 2. This omnipotent God who can do what he will, commands and charge
you to fight, and that with courage: And will you be cowardly?

4. Your Captain and Commander the Lord Jesus, that invincible Lion of the
Tribe of Judah has victoriously vanquished his and your enemies, having made
his enemies his footstool, Matthew. 22. 44. Having overcome the world, Ioh. 16.
3^. Having led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. Having spoiled principalities and
powers, Col. 2. 15. Having overcome those that war against him, Rev. 17. 14.
And will not you, the members of this head, the subjects of this King, the
ransomed of this Redeemer, the soldiers of this Captain: For whom he has
combated with, and conquered all your fearful and formidable foes: with whom
he is graciously present, not as an idle spectatour, but as a courageous,
valiant, and powerful Captain to relieve and rescue his Church and chosen,
and to revenge upon their enemies the wrongs intended or inflicted by them upon
his peculiar people, in whom he dwells by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and by whom you may
do all things even through Christ which strengthens you, Phil. 4. 13. will
not you (I say) be courageous?

5. Your foes are foiled, your enemies are spoiled, therefore feeble, not to be
feared. Satan is fallen from heaven like lightning, and made subject to the
Saints, Luke 10. 17, 18. through death, though he had the power of death, is
destroyed, Heb. 2. 14. and his wickedness, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. yea and he has been
overcome by the Saints, 1 Ioh. 2. 13, 14. The world has not only been
overcome by our chief Commander Christ, Ioh. 16. 33. but also by all those who
are borne of God, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. these being crucified to it, and having it
crucified to them, Gal. 6. 14. As for the flesh, with the affections and lusts
thereof, they that are Christ's have crucified, Gal. 5. 24. Casting down
imaginations -- and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4. Are your enemies such whose power is not sovereign and
absolute, but subordinate and limited, whose weapons have been often battered
and blunted: yea such which have been often spoiled and supplanted, not only
by Christ your conquering Captain, but also by Christians your
fellow soldiers, through whom they have been, and we also may be more than
conquerers, Romans 8. 37. And will you degenerate and be discomfited?

6. Your weapons are impenetrable and impregnable, your armor is armor of
proof, complete armor, every way sufficient to defend and keep us
harmless. This, if you put it on, will make you able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 11. This will enable you to withstand in the
evil day, Verse. 13. and to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, Verse. 16.

And will you (which are so well armed out of Gods abundant armorie, with such
weapons, no way deficient, every way defensible) abuse a gift so great and
gratifying, dishonor the doner of a benefit so bountiful and beneficial, and
make your selves (so surely fenced) ridiculous by faint-hearted cowardice?

7. Your encourager is the Comforter which abides with you for ever, John 14.
16. The spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might,
Isa. 11. 2. Which helps your infirmities, Rom 8. 26. Which fights against
the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 17. Who is resembled to fire, Act. 2. 2.
because he kindles and heateth our hearts with love, zeal, and other graces;
comfort our consciences, and consumes our corruptions. To water, John 3. 5.
because he cools, cleanses, comfort, and makes fertile in good works. To
wind, John 3. 8. because he purges our pollutions, drives away and dries up
our drossie and defacing corruptions. And will you (who have this Comforter
continuing in you, sealing you to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. inabling
you to cry Abba Father, helping your infirmities) be disheartened and
discouraged?

8. Yours is the victory. God is not a man that he should lie, neither the
son of man that he should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? Or
has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numbers 23. 19. The Lord who is
unchangeable, James 1. 17. And cannot lie, Titus 1. 2. He has promised (and
therefore will perform) to bruise Satan under your feet, Romans 16. 20. Not to
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation
also make way how to escape, that you may be able to bear it, 1 Corinthians. 10.
13. Since therefore you shall vanquish, if you are valorous: yours is the
conquest, if you are courageous; be not you cowardly, that so you may conquer.

9. Your crown for which you combat is inestimable and uncorruptible, 1 Pet.
1. 4. Where you shall be freed from sin the worst of evils, Rom 6. 22, 23.
From crosses and calamities; so that all tears shall be wiped from your eyes,
Rev. 7. 16, 17. And rest from your labors, Revel. 14. 13. Where you shall be
as the Angels of God in heaven, Matthew. 22. 30. Yea like Christ, 1 John 3. 2.
Yea heirs, and jointheires with the Son of God, Romans 8. 17. Where you shall
know as you are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Have everlasting joy, Isa. 51. 11. 35.
10. and enjoy such goodness, gladness, and glory which is unutterable and
unconceiveable, 1 Cor. 2. 9. And will not you be courageous in a cause so good,
having a guard so great, under God so omnipotent, for Christ so invincible,
against enemies so infeebled, with weapons so impregnable, having the
assistance of the blessed Comforter, in a combat where you are sure to conquer,
for a crown so inestimable? God forbid.

That you may be courageous, Means of courage.


1. Fly from all manner of sin; this is that which brings saintnesse into
the hearts, that the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase men and make them
flee, as fleeing from a sword, and fall when none pursues them, Levit. 26. 36.
This is that which makes men fear where no fear is, and makes the wicked flee
when no man pursues, Prove. 28. 1. And be careful to keep a good conscience
void of offense toward God and toward man, Acts 24. 16. willing to live
honestly, Heb. 13. 18. For this is that which is a continual feast, Pro. 15.
15. This is that which makes the righteous bold as a lion, Pro. 28. 1. This
comforted and encouraged Paul and his companions in their great extremities, 2
Cor. 1. 8, 12. and this makes confident toward God, 1 Ioh. 3. 21.

I know that not only ruffian-like roisters, but many other better qualified
are not only ready to think, but also to say, faithful men are
faint-hearted, mortification kills manhood, religious men are not resolute,
conscience cooles a man's courage.

But I would have them to know, that godly men, and only they are truly
courageous. It Is manners which makes a man, our proverb says. And sure I am,
manhood is one thing, madness is another; a man may be bold, courageous,
stout, and valiant, although he neither stamp nor stare, swagger nor swear,
roar nor revell, brag nor brall: yea, men of best conscience are always men
of most and greatest courage. David dreads not Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. nor thousands
of people, Psalm. 3. 6. Paul fears not to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus, Act. 21. 23. neither was he moved with the bonds and afflictions
which did abide him, 20. 23. And who are more prodigal of their lives,
livelihood, liberty, and good names for Christ, and his Gospels sake? Who are
more dreadlesse of dismal death, dreadful disgraces, trials, troubles,
tortures, and temptations for Christianity and conscience sake than righteous
men? Than which what greater magnanimity?

2. Let us humbly and heartily crave and cry for, petition and pray for valor
and courage of the Lord: For, all our sufficiency is of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
and without him we can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5.

3. Faith fortifieth against fearful faint-heartednesse, Mar. 4. 40. For,
this certifieth the Christian soul that God is graciously present with him;
the assurance whereof makes a man to fear no evil, although he walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm 23. 4. This assures a Saint that all
things are at his Fathers disposing, and that the consideration of Gods
particular prudent providence extending to hairs and sparrowes, should
embolden, animate, and encourage him, he being of more worth than many
sparrowes, Matthew. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. This does appropriate and apply the sure
and certain, the sweet and special promises in Gods Book to the true
believer. All which are as so many prop^ and pillars, to sustain and support;
as so many radical and real refreshings, to recreate and ravish; and as so
many effectual inforcements, to make valiant and victorious a true believer.

4. Necessity is laid upon us by Gods commandment, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Although we
must not do good works enjoined to procure praise with men, Matthew. 6. Yet we
may and must resist and repel (what in us lies) opprobrious reproach, procure
and preserve renown and favor with God and men, Prove. 5. 9. 6 33. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
4. Consider cordially that Christian prowess is not only enjoined, but does
also enable us Christian soldiers in the sight of God and good men.

5. Experience adds expertnesse and efficacy to all and every performance; for,
as they who never attempted action of importance take such things in hand
faintly and fearfully: so those who are much experienced in exploits of danger
and difficulty, enterprise the same more exactly, effectually, and valiantly.
David by his experience of former mercies in combating with, and conquering the
lion and the bear, was enabled with comfort and confidence to encounter the
puissant and unmatchable Philistine, 1 Samuel 17. 34. Paul by experience of
former favors was fortified and made invincible against succeeding assaults, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord
shall deliver me from every evil work. 2 Cor. 1. 10. The Lord delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver. Romans 8. 35. 37, 38, 39. After his rehearsal of particular bitter
calamities which fight against believers, (Namely,

1. Terrible tribulation which wringeth and vexes.

2. Distressefull anguish perplexing the mind, so that the distressed knows
not what to do.

3. Persecution, or extreme violence offered to goods, person, life, or good
name.

4. Famine, or want of victuals to sustain life.

5. Nakedness, or want of clothing to cover and defend the body from cold.

6. Peril, or dangerous distresses, which put men in peril and jeopardie.

7. Sword, or barbarous savage bloodshed.) He does comfort and encourage the
faithful against these terrible things, affirming, Ver. 37. that in all these
we are more than conquerers; from whence he concludes, and upon that blessed
experience he groundeth that comfortable and courageous persuasion, That
neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. And therefore the same Angelical Apostle Romans 5. 4. does ascertaine us
that experience works hope; or true believers do gain much heart, and more
confidence in Gods goodness for hereafter, that he will strengthen and deliver
them by their former trial and experience. Yea the eloquent Orator Cicero
Tusc. quaest. lib. 2. Ethic. l. 3. c. 8.
tells us that an unskilful soldier in comparison of one experienced is as
one unarmed to another armed. And Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers
furnishes me with two causes, why experience does add valor in warfare to
military men.

The one, because soldiers exercised and acquainted with the fleights and
subtilties of enemies, regard not, but reject and contemn their crafty and
deceitful wiles wherewith they are wont to daunt and dismay, appale and
affright causelessly (there being no dread of danger in vain affrightments) men
unexperienced.

The other, because the experienced soldier can best and most advantagiously
handle and manage their weapons, are best acquainted with danger, and how to
dismay and destroy their enemies.

Record, register, and keep in remembrance our sins, and sufferings for the
same, our miseries, and Gods mercies past.

1. The remembrance of our sins past, 1. Is a means to humble us, showing us
our vileness, Psalm. 38. 3, 4. 2. To make us more thankful, 1 Timothy 1. 22, 23.
3. To cause us more to love Christ, Luke 7. 47. 4. To make us pray more
feelingly and fervently, Psalm. 50. 5. To spend the time to come more
diligently, for mispending the time past, 1 Cor. 11. 5. 12. 11. 6 To make us
more compassionate to others, in pitying their condition, praying for them,
helping to free them from Satan's slavery, Gal. 6. 1. 7. To renew our
repentance, Zach. 12. 10.

2. The remembrance of Gods afflictions and chastisements,

1. Is a means to make us merciful and compassionate toward others in
distresses, Exodus 22. 21.

2. To make us more thankful to God who has delivered us from them.

3. To make us more earnest and instant in prayer, Psalm 42.

4. To make us loath and dislike sin more, the cause of so many scourges.

5. To make us more confident in God.

6. And to make us remember our promises made in our distresses, and stir us
up to perform them.

3. The remembrance of Gods mercies and goodness,

1. Is a means to stir up in us thankfulness, Psalm 63. 5, 6.

2. To make us more obedient.

3. And more confident for the time to come.

By the remembrance of these; our sins, and sufferings, and Gods mercies,

1. We shall gain experience of our cursed corruptions, and the pernicious
perverseness of our nature: as also of our weakness, how unable we are to
bear, and how apt to faint under burdens, Psalm. 116. 11. which will humble our
vain aspiring imaginations: as also of our love to God, of our faith and trust
in God; of our meekness and gentleness toward men, of our patience,
fortitude, courage, and other graces which will corroborate and confirm us.

2. We shall gain experience, as of the spightfull hatred of profane Belials
toward us, and of the unconstant and unstable minds of indifferent neutrals,
and of the rottenness of their fained friendship, which will make us more
vigilant. So of the sound and substantial love of Gods peculiar people
manifested to us by their counsels, prayers, and other like duties, which will
make us more valiant.

3. We shall gain experience, not only of Satan's malice and subtilty
intempting, and seeking to hurt and destroy us, which may affright us; but also
of his unablenesse to harm them whom God will preserve; and of his subjection
to our good God, being at his beck for the measure and time of tempting, which
may animate us.

4. We shall gain experience, as of Gods fidelity and faithfulness in his
terrible threats and comminations, and of the severity of his justice,
punishing sin in his Saints and peculiar people, which may make us tremble. So
of his fidelity in his promises, of his great might and omnipotency in that he
can uphold us, 2 Cor. 12. 9. of his singular mercy, in that he will sustain
and strengthen us; of his wonderful wisdom, in that when he has tried and
exercised his children, he knows how to deliver them out of temptations, 2
Pet. 2. 9. which will make us triumphant.

6. Anger does wonderfully animate men; yea this does so warm and inflame the
blood, and add such vigor and valor: this does so incitate and encourage,
exasperate and enforce to encounters, that one man in anger dreads not to
contend with many; and men unarmed, heated and heartened herewith, are often
fearelesse to fight with weaponed men: and bruit beasts which naturally fear
and fly from us, being made angry, regardlesly Cotem fortitudinis. Tusc.
quaest. L. 4. -- Magna se exuscitat ira.
rush upon even deadly and destroying weapons. And as Tully terms anger the
whetstone of fortitude, so humane histories plentifully prove the same by
Aeneas, Vlyss^^, and others, which by anger have been much helped and
heartened to combat courageously: and therefore they have so ennobled Irarum
omnes essun. lit habenas. Nate quid indomitas tantus furor excitat iras?
this affection, that they deny it residence save in generous spirits,

Non cadit in molles nobilis ira viros. Neither is the sacred Scripture silent,
but does produce plentiful proofs for this purpose: witness Moses, whose
anger waxing hot, he took the calfe which the people had made, rebuked Aaron,
and commanded the Levites to execute judgments upon the idolaters, Exodus 32.
19, 20, 26. Witness Phineas, who being zealous for the Lord, took a javelin in
his hand and slew Zimri and Cozbi sinning against the Lord, Number. 25. 8, 11.
Witness Nehemiah, who was very angry, and rebuked the nobles and the rulers,
Neh. 5. 6, 7. Witness Jeremy, who being full of the fury (or anger) of the
Lord, did power it out, Ier. 6. 11. Witness our Savior, Mar. 3. 5. who, when
he had looked upon them with anger, said to the man, Stretch forth thine hand.

Convey into, and cherish in our souls this corroborating anger, which may
make us valiant and courageous against sin and Satan, the world and wicked men.

I do not countenance nor commend all sorts of anger.

There is an anger which God forbids, Ephesians. 4. 31. Let anger be put away from
you.

There is an anger which stirs up strife, Pro. 15. 18. An angry man stirs up
strife.

There is an anger which manifests folly, Eccl. 7. 9. Anger rests in the bosom
of fools.

There is an anger which is a work of the flesh, Galat. 5. 20.

There is an anger which distempers all the body, as great Basil in aliquot
Script. locos.
Basil says, An angry man does lose his comeliness, yea the shape of a man,
and puts on the likeness of a beast: consider a while an angry man; he rages,
he railes like a drunkard, his eyes are changed, and made fierce and bloody, his
heart is inflamed, his blood is moved: thou shall see him filing his teeth like
a wild boar, speaking often foolishly, and leaving words imperfect; he has no
respect of affinity or familiars; he spares none to satisfy his own lust, --
he does continually bark, etc.

There is an anger, which is murder, Mat. 5. 22. namely, sinful or unadvised
anger.

It is unadvised anger which proceeds from self-love, from dislike or hatred
of the person with whom one is angry.

It is unadvised anger which intends private respects, is o^t quickly moved,
continues long, and is desirous of revenge.

It is unadvised anger, when men are angry with God, his doings, corrections,
and dealings, as Jonah was, Ion. 4 3.

It is unadvised anger, when men are angry for any thing, save for sin, and so
causlesly.

It is unadvised anger, when men are angry more for small sins than great;
for petty offenses against themselves, more than great transgressions against
God.

It is unadvised anger, if it exceeds, although the cause be just, Genesis 49. 7.

It is unadvised anger, which does not aim at the glory of God, the restraint
of sin: but its own glory and profit, Pro. 21. 24.

It is unadvised anger, which breaks out into execrations, curses, and makes
men unfit for the discharging of the duties of their calling.

It is unadvised anger, which is not moderated in convenient time, Ephesians. 4. 26.

This vile and vicious anger ought so to be abhorred of us: that we should not
make any friendship with such angry men, Pro. 22. 24.

But there is an anger which is good: for God is often angry; Christ was angry;
and good men have been commendably angry.

1. Let therefore the occasions of our anger be just and weighty: like those of
Moses, who was angry for the reservation of Manna, Exodus 16. 20. the making of
the golden calfe, Exodus 32. 19. and the rebellion of the people, Number. 16. 13.
Like that of Phineas, who was angry for the shameful fornication, Number. 25. 8,
11. Like that of David, who was angry for the shameful incest of Amnon, 2 Samuel
13. 2. Like that of Elias, who was angry for the cruelty and apostasy of
Israel, 1 King. 19. 4. Like that of Nehemiah, who was angry for their ^^ury and
oppression, Neh. 5. 6. Like that of Jeremy, who was angry for their
impenitency and contempt of the Word, Ier. 6. 11. Like that of our Savior, who
was angry for the hardness of their hearts, Mar. 3 5.

2. Let the motives, or moving causes of our anger be an earnest desire to
maintain the glory of God, Exo. 16 20. Fervent love of necessity and virtue,
Psalm. 119 39. utter hatred and detestation of vice; an industrious care to
pacify Gods wrathful displeasure, Josh. 7. 8. And a careful endeavor to
save the party with whom we are angry.

3. Let the proper, and principal object of our anger be sin only, offending
our good and gracio is God, namely our own, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and others. Number. 25.
By accident, consequent, secondary, and less principal the sinner.

4. Let the proportion, and measure of our anger be more for sins against
God; less for sins, wrongs, and trespasses against our selves.

5. Let the manner be deliberate, advised, charitable, merciful, moderate, and
compassionate, Iam. 1. 19.

6. Let the continuance be short, Ephesians. 4. 26.

Then our anger thus qualified, it being not against the person, but sin of our
neighbor, or of our selves: it proceeding from love of the party with whom we
are angry: it being against sin, for Gods glory, because he is thereby
dishonored: it is not sinful, but a holy affection, very helpful, and much
avail^ble for u^ Christian soldiers; as great Basil says excellently. For the
irascible part of the soul (says h^) is necessary to u^ for many vortuotes
works: for as a soldier taking weapons from his Captain is prepared to be
helpful at his command; so anger has been helpful to reason against sin.
Verily anger is the sinew of the soul^, yielding fortitude, constancy, and
strength to do things well and orderly; which does restore the soul allured,
and waxing wa^ton with pleasure; restraining it as with a certain weapon more
sovere, and valiant, from effeminate, and remiss. Neither can thou pursue
sin with sufficient hatred as thou ought, if there be wanting in thee an
indignation and anger against it; wherefore I suppose that we ought as well to
have a love to the study of virtue, and to retain hatred against vice, to the
which anger is most profitable: for as a dog to the shepherd, so anger obeying
reason is mild and gentle to its assistants, and is revocable, or called back
again with reason; for as a dog is grim and rough at a strangers voice, and
looks if he sees his help and care to be declared; and is seen to fear and
dread his assistant, and those that pertain to the household, In like manner
most blessed and good anger does defend the wisdom of the soul, and afford
help to the work of virtue: Moreover it is not easily reconciled with
deceiptfulnesse, neither has it familiarity therewith: Moreover it does not
maintain any good will toward those things which are hurtful; but is seen
continually to bark against deceiptfull sensuality as against a wolf. So
therefore anger Basil Sermon. de ^a page 119.
being disposed with reason when it ought, and as it ought, does procure
courage, patience, and constancy.

CHAP. X.
Soldiers ought to take heed.
Soldiers are or ought to be circumspect and very cautelous, Dionysius
regaining his former losses from the secure Syracusians; the Romans theirs from
the careless Carthaginians, and diverse other memorable victorious exploits
enterprised and effected by sudden surprises: but also in sacred Writ by the
terrible and tragical execution upon the host of Midian by Gideon, Judge. 8.
11. of Amalek by David, 1 Samuel 30. 16, 17. and upon the careless inhabitants
of Laish by the tribe of Dan, Judge. 18. 27, 28. Hence was it that Christ our
Captain and Commander, and the blessed Apostles our fellow servants and
soldiers do so often urge, and frequently charge and command us to take heed,
to be wary or circumspect; spy, foresee, beware, or take heed, Mar. 8. 15.
12. 38. 5. 9. 23. 33. Luke 8. 18. 1 Cor. 8 9. Gal. 5 15. Heb. 3. 12. 2 Ioh. 8.
Attentively mark (...)
and take heed, Mat. 6. 1. 7. 15. 10. 17. 16. 6. 11. 12. Luke 17. (...)
3. 20. 46. Act. 5. 35. 16. 14. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Heb. 2. 1. (...)
2 Pet. 1. 19. Diligently observe, or take heed, 1 Timothy 4. 16.

Exactly consider and take heed, Heb. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 2. (...)


Carnal and cursed security, occasioned and increased in the sons of men by
the glittering pomp and dazzling prosperity of Belials brood, who wickedly
wallow in all swinish, sensual, or sinful security, Psalm. 37. By the abuse of
Gods patience and long-suffering, and forbearance, Eccl. 8. 11. And their own
irreligious infidelity, causing them neither to credit, nor care for the
inevitable and intolerable menaces threatened; nor the ineffable and inestimable
promised mercies by the immutable and unchangeable Jehovah in his sure, sacred,
and celestial Word, Heb. 4. 2. they esteeming these dreadful comminations
therein threatened, and the gracious and gladsome favors and franchises therein
promised mere foolishnes, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 21, 25. This pernicious and
pestiferous poysonfull offspring of damnable unbelief causing men to go on, and
live in sin, nothing fearing dangers and damnation, causing men not to regard
at all the means of their salvation, but to give themselves wholly or
principally to the vain, though plausible, pleasures and profits of the world;
making men to distrust in God, (who yet is just and faithful, 1 Ioh. 1. 9 and
whose promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.) and to trust in the abundance
of their own riches, Psalm. 52. 7. and to strengthen themselves in their
wickedness; and yet these are not to be trusted in, they being but uncertain
riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. making men harden their own hearts by resisting the
Word, by not profiting by the works, by not yielding to the motions of the
Spirit of God: And this making a man's condition more incurable, and therefore
more desperate than of many who are in doleful desperation.

These beholding their sins, and being sensible of them; they not seeing, and
remaining senseless of them. These groaning and grieving for their misspent
time, cursed and crooked bypath, and desiring better; they pleasing
themselves in their way ward and wicked wanderings, and therefore desiring no
better; These earnestly desiring good counsel, and that they could embrace it;
they neither asking nor admitting pious and godly counsel and instruction.

Let us who are the soldiers of Christ Jesus therefore take heed. But to what
must we take heed? Of what must we beware?

Some things there are to which, other things there are of which we must beware.

First, the things which must be taken heed unto, are

1. Our selves, Luke 17. 3. Take heed unto your selves.

2. Our selves, and these ^ver which the Lord has made us overseers, Acts 20.
28.

3. Our souls, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Only take heed unto thy self, and keep thy soul
diligently.

4. The Word of God, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self and to the
doctrine. Heb. 2. 1. Therefore we ought to take the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, least at any time we should let them slip. 2 Pet.
1. 19. We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that you
take (...)d.

Secondly, The things which must be taken heed of, are

1. Sin it self in general: Some particular sins in special, as the most
dreadful and dangerous, namely,

1. Induration, or hardness of heart, Psalm. 9. 5, 6, 7.

2. Apostasy, Hebr. 3. 12. Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you a^
evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.

3. Unbelief, Hebr. 3. 12. Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you a^
evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.

4. Hypocrisy, Mat. 6. 1. 16. Mar. 8. 15. Luke 12. 1.

5. Covetousness, Luke 12. 15. 21. 34.

6. Surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21. 34.

7. Fornication, Heb. 12. 15, 16. Take heed lest there be any fornicatour, or
prophan^ person, as Esa^.

8. Profaneness, Heb. 12. 15, 16. Take heed lest there be any fornicatour, or
prophan^ person, as Esa^.

These and other sins are the chiefest things we should take heed of.

1. Sin being an evil way, Iona^ 3. 8. Yea exceeding evil. It being an
uncomfortable way of darkness, leading to insupportable, and infernal
darkness, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. It misleading out of the right and royal way of Gods
commandments, 1 Ioh. 3. 4. and It leading unto perdition, Psalm. 1. 1. 6.

2. Sin (although few feel its burden, either because they know it not, or they
judge it not to be sin, or so grievous, or they believe not Gods Word, or their
hearts are hardened, or they are not tempted, or because it, being in them, is
in its proper place like water in the sea, or because themselves are dead, so
not sensible of weights and burdens) being a terrible oppressing tyrant, Luke
21. 34 and intolerable insupportable burden.

1. To wicked men, and Angels, weighing and pressing them to that bottomless
pit and burning lake, where there is weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and
gnawing of flesh for ever and ever,

2. To the sanctified soul, Psalm. 38. 4. forcing him to fly amain to the
Lord Jesus for ease and succor, shelter and supportation, Mat. 11. 28.

3. To the whole creation, causing it to groan and travail in pain together
until now, Romans 8. 22.

4. To the Lord himself, he being weary to bear it, Isa. 1^ 14. and pressed
under it as a cart is pressed that is full o^ sheaves, Amos 2. 13.

Sin being a burden too heavy for heaven to bear, pressing the Devils thence:
Too heavy for Paradise, expelling Adam thence: Too heavy for the earth, making
it reele to and fro like a drunkard, Isa. 24. 10. Only hell must bear it.

3. Sin is shameful, shame being a subsequent of sin: either,

1. Shame, a fruit and sign of repentance, Ier. 31. 19. Zach. 13. 4. Romans 6.
21.

2. Or shame, a punishment for sin upon the wicked and ungodly, although not
always here, Ier. 33. 6. 15. 8. 12. but only sometimes, Ier. 2. 26. yet
everlasting shame and confusion are certain confequents of sins unrepented
of by Gods ordinance and justice.

2. The occasions of sin are to be taken heed of. E^e, Genesis 3. 6. Dinah Genesis
34. 1. sinned, not shunning the occasions. Joseph Genesis 39. 10. and Job, Job 31.
1. avoided the occasions, to avoid the sin: agreeable whereunto are those
divine directions, Pro. 1. 15. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent not.
5. 8. Come not nigh the door of her house. 23. 31. Look not on the wine, etc.
To avoid and decline the occasions of these, whoredom and drunkenness; it
being as possible to keep dry wood laid upon the fire from burning, as to
preserve our selves from sin without declining its occasions.

3. The instruments of sin are to be taken heed of: namely, carnal friends,
evil company, corrupt and false teachers. Mat. 7 15. Beware of false Prophets.
Mat. 10. 17. Beware of men. Mar. 13. 5. Take heed least any man deceive you.
Romans 16. 17. Mark them and avoid them. Col. 2. 4, 8. Beware least any man
spoil you. Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers. We are so to
beware of these instruments of sin and Satan, as that we mark and observe,
shun and avoid them; and that they do not deceive and delude us.

4. Satan that subtle serpent, the author of sin is to be taken heed of:
For the Devil, like a cunning cleaver of wood, who puts in first a little
wedge, that it may make room for a greater, until it be cloven into shivers,
first striving to enter into men's hearts by a little sin, then by a greater,
until he has divided their souls between God and Belial, and so shivered
them, that they are made fit fuel for the infernal fire of hell: Take heed
therefore of him.

1. Sin is the work of that wicked one, John 8. 44. You are of your father
the Devil -- and the works of your father ye will do. 1 John 3. 8. Christ
came to destroy the works of the Devil. Take heed therefore of Satan, least he
work in our hearts as he does in the hearts of the children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 2. 2.

2. Take heed of Satan, who is the enemy of mankind, Mat. 13. 39. And our
adversary, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Yea that wily old serpent which deceives the whole
world, Rev. 12. 9. therefore a sly and subtle enemy which will leave no
ways unattempted, make use of all advantages, and fit his ensnaring
temptations to all occasions. That strong man, Mat. 12. 29. who has mightily
shaken the best men that ever breathed, Christ Jesus only excepted, therefore
a potent, and powerful enemy. That roaring Lion walking about seeking whom he
may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and ravenous red Dragon, Rev. 12. 13. therefore a
cursed, cruel adversary.

3. Take heed of Satan, he being such an enemy. That no man can master with
might, or destroy with strength; That no man can circumvent with policy, or
match with subtilty; Whom no man can allure by eloquence, or persuade by
flattery; Whom no man can escape from by flight, or eschew by fleeing.

4. Take heed of Satan, who can behold and see us, and our most privy,
secret, and retired words and actions. Who cannot be secluded from our privy
chambers, or secret closets by locks, doors, or all such like fortifications;
he being spiritual, and therefore quickly in any place: Who is never weary,
nor needs any refreshing by eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. as we do and
therefore has opportunity to husband, and manage even these occasions, as he
does, to harm and hurt us, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Seeking always to devour.

CHAP. XI.
Soldiers must be watchful.
WAtchfullnesse Hercules, the hardiness of Hector, the nobleness of
Alexander, the policy of Pirrhus, and the good success of Scipio are to
little purpose.

Scanderbeg that terror to Turks, and mirror for martial men, (who with
15000 discomfited the army of Alis Bassa being 40000: who with the loss of 20
horse, and 50 foot slew 5000 of Mustaphaes forces. Who with 4000 horse, and
2000 foot encounted Mustapha, and with the loss of 300 men slew 10000, took
15 ensigns, Mustapha himself, and 12 others. Who with 6000 horse encountered
Debre^s with 14000, slew him hand to hand, and 4120 of his soldiers. Who with
the loss of 100 Christians, and 80 wounded slew 11000 Turks under the Command
of Moses a traitorous revolter. Who with the loss of 60 Christians slew some
say 30000, some say 20000 under the command of Isaac and Amesa invading Epirus
with 55000. Who with 8000 horse and 4000 foot encountered at once Iacup with
16000, and Baladine with 20000 horse and 4000 foot, put them both to slight,
slew Iacup with his own hands, slaughtered 24000 Turks, took 6000 prisoners,
and might have taken Baladine; but, wearied with fight, he said, O let some of
our enemies live to report their own slaughter, and our victory. Who with his
own hands at several times slew 3000 Turks) by the negligence of his watch
at one time lost 2000 horse, and 3000 foot.

It has been ever therefore the constant and continual care of Cities,
Commonwealths, chief Captains and Commanders to prevent the subtle, and
deceitful circumventings of their enemies by daily and diligent, constant and
continual watchfullnesse. Witness not only the practices of particular
persons, as of Scanderbeg, who slept but two hours in the night until he had
delivered his country, and of particular places, as of the famous city of
Thebes, which in each of its 100 strong and sumptuous gates had a watch of 200
horse: But also of all both places and persons, who in their cities, and
armies (especially in times of war) keep watch and ward ordinary and
extraordinary, to warn them of danger if any be. Therefore we have need to
watch much, or of great watchfullnesse; Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Genesis 1. Tom. 1. page
13.
because we have always war, and no truce, says Chrysostom. The Scripture
therefore does strictly press, and enjoyne with sovereign commandments,
sweetly persuade, and induce with serious allurements all Christian combatants
to watchfullnesse. Matthew. 24. 4^, 43. Watch therefore for you know not, etc.
25. 13. Watch therefore, etc. 26 41. Watch and pray, that you enter not into
temptation. Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he
comes, shall find watching. 21. 36. Wach ye therefore, and pray always, etc.
1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand fast, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Let us watch, and be
sober. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Watch thou in all things. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Be ye therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your
adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks, etc. In which Scriptures, and
diverse more, which use this military word, Christ Jesus, and his blessed
Apostles, like wise and warlike Captains, instruct us Christian soldiers to
behave our selves like those who in war are appointed continually to watch in
some sconce, watchtower, or other eminent place, where they must rowse up
themselves thoroughly that they sleep not: pryingly view up and down Ezekiel. 3.
17. 2 Samuel 13. 34. 2 Reg. 9. 17.
every where, and descrie what may be helpful or hurtful to the army or city.

The word in Hebrew signifying a watchman is derived of (...)
a word signifying to see a far, to epsy, to consider diligently: So that a
watchman is an espiall, a considerer, a viewer, an observer.

The Greek words signifying watchmen, and watchfullnesse, (...) of (...).
Vigil^a, a vigeo; est enim vigere vali lum and robuslum esse, quasi v^m agere;
quare vigiles non segnes non torpentes quales sunt dormientes, sed qui vigore
suo sunt.
and to watch, some of them signify an abstaining from sleep, to awake out of
sleep. Some a keeping guard, seeing to, an observing.

In the Latin tongue the word signifying watchfullnesse is derived by some of
a verb which signifies to be strong and lusty, to have force, and power,
wherefore watchmen ought not to be slothful, faint, and lazy, as sleepers
are; but such who are in liveliness strength and vigor.

By which particulars it is easy to be seen that watchfullnesse is a military
word, a daily duty for martial men (and therefore for us Christian soldiers)
and what it is; namely,

An earnest care to live every day as one would live upon his dying day, or
upon his judgment day.

A diligent observing of all such things as may help or hinder us in our
Christian warfare.

A wary diligence whereby we look to our selves, to those offices we take in
hand, and those things which appertain unto them.

A careful observing of our hearts, and a diligent looking to our ways, that
they may be pleasing and acceptable to God.

A diligent observing of our dangers, and our duties therein to be performed.

1. This watchfullnesse is often and ordinarily, frequently and Mark 13. 37.
Watch: 37. What I say to you I say to all, Watch.

2. This is a duty of important, and urgent necessity.

Both in regard of our enemies wi^h whom we must encounter, who are for number
innumerable, for malice implacable, for labor unwearied; for condition and
quality spiritual, invisible, merciless; for diligence incessant, leaving no
stone unrolled, no means unattempted to harm and destroy us.

As also in regard of sin, against which we must combat, and of which we must
heedfully beware: This being of so subtle, deceitful, bewitching, insinuating
nature, that where these find entrance, and can get admittance they do not
solitarily, and without company surprise the secure seduced soul; but with
their overflowing troops furiously flocking together strive to surcharge the
same. Witness Cains unadvised anger, Genesis 4. which produced inveterate wrath,
that barbarous and bloody murder, that desperation. Witness David's idleness,
which occasioned lust, adultery, murder, 2 Samuel 11. And that it may the more
easily ensnare and inveigle us with its bewitching guiles, it fawnes, and
fleeres upon us with a painted face polishing over its pestiferous pollutions
with plausible and pleasing pretenses of piety, of providence, good husbandry,
good fellowship, of decency, devotion, etc. Watchfullnesse therefore is very
needful. For the greater danger we are in, or subject unto; the more
watchful and careful we must be for our own and other^ safety.

3. This is a special private help to the public exercises of religion. It
is the first and principal private help by good and right reason, this being
as an eye to see them all well, and rightly done and used: Yea this must be a
continued conjoined companion to all Christian performances. We are to watch
unto prayer, Ephesians. 6. 18. namely, to get ability to pray, and that aright, to
the occasions, and opportunity of prayer, to the success and event of prayer.
We are to watch unto prayer, that we be not seen of men like hypocrites, that
we use not vain repetitions as the heathen, Matthew. 6. 5, 7.

We are to watch unto hearing, Luke 8. 18. namely, that we hear with faith,
and confidence, with submission, willing assent, and purpose to obey.

We are to watch in our works of mercy, that we do them not to be seen of
men, that our left hand do not know what our right hand does, Matthew. 6. 1, 2, 3.

We are to watch unto fasting, that in this we approve our selves to our father
in secret, that he may reward us openly, Matthew. 6. 18.

4. The best, and bravest, the most wise, and worthy soldiers in this our
warfare neglecting or securely sleighting their Christian watch, have
fearfully fallen, shamefully been foiled, and supplanted, and dangerously
deceived through the sudden sallies and surprisalls, the vigilant
underminings, and violent encounters of our virulent and unwearied assailants.
Witness Adam and Eve, Genesis 3. 6. David, that man after Gods own heart, 2 Samuel
12. Solomon, the blessed of the Lord, and many more.

Be we not therefore careless, and negligent in this important

Is it not a wonder to see how extraordinary vigilant men are for the
procuring, protecting, and preservation of the fond and fading transeunt
temporary trashy trifles (I speak comparatively) of this life: So that if a
city or country is in danger, we neglect not, but carefully keep constant,
and continual watch and ward to prevent inrodes, inundations, or any other
imminent perils. If our houses are in danger of rifling and robbing; if our
bodies are in danger of dreadful diseases, and dismal death we double our
diligence to preserve our goods from pilferers, and to secure our bodies from
sadding sicknesses, and dreadful death. Is it not I say a wonder to consider
how watchful we all are for the preservation of these impotent and inferior
favors, and how careless and negligent the most are to keep this spiritual
watch which concerns our immortal, and inestimable welfare or woe, the
everlasting happiness or horror of our precious souls?

Would we not judge that man a mirror of madness which would closely keep,
and safely guard his windows to shut out silly feeble neglected flies, and
leave his doors and gates wide open and unregarded; So that fierce and
formidable, cursed and cruel, savage and unmercifull ravenous beasts; barbarous
and bloody men might have free ingredience to rent, and tear, to consume and
devour?

Would we not deem that man a fool of all fools which would diligently guard
and defend dung and dross; and disregard gold, pearls, and precious stones;
yea so that with little difficulty, if not with great facility, every
fraudulent felon, and purloining pilferer might steal away, and at his
pleasure spoil him of them? Certainly yes.

And are not the greatest number of men such frantic bedlams, and witless
fools, keeping constant, and diligent watch against frail and feeble mortal
men for the safe keeping of their goods, bodies, and other like of less
avail, and giving free liberty to Satan, and his adherents to ransacke and
rifle, to dispoile and destroy their precious, yea peerless souls? I would
they were not.

This want of watchfullnesse has been, and therefore still is a prime and
principal cause of much evil, many sins, great shame, bitter grief and
sorrow to our first parents, to David, and to whom not?

Labor we to know, and learn, strive to be rightly prevailing and important
duty of watchfullnesse.

1. This adding vigor and victory to our petitions, enabling Mat. 26. 41.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

2. This being a means to obtain constancy, certainty, resolution, and
perseverance in well-doing, Ephesians. 6. 18. Watching thereunto with all
perseverance.

3. This disposing, and setting the soul in order to do all things aright in
regard of manner, and end, in sincerity, with delight, with our hearts to the
Lord, cheerfully.

4. This enabling us to discern and know (it discovering unto us) our own
particular estate and condition. Then which knowledge what more useful? Then
which ignorance what more uncomfortable, what more unprofitable?

5. This fashioning and fitting us to receive and entertain the Lord Jesus at
his coming, and whatsoever he sends in the mean time, Matthew. 24. 46.

6. This fortifying us against spiritual dangers: So that hereby we are
prepared for temptations, Luke 21. 36. enabled to encounter with them, Ephesians.
6. and procure a good issue out of them, Luke 21. 34. So that hereby we may
foresee the better to slay from and prevent the furious and fawning assaults of
our deceitful and dreadful enemies. So that by this we may be freed from
spiritual dreams and fancies, enabled to weaken the body of sin, to cleanse
our ways, to avoid or cover our infirmities.

7. This has special promises of bliss proposed, to provoke and prick us
forward to the performance hereof, Rev. 16. 15. Blessed is he that watches.
Matthew. 24 46. Blessed is the serv^nt, etc.

8. This duty being of absolute necessity. Not only in regard of the infirmity
of our flesh, Matthew. 26. 41. the snaring sl^ights and subtilties of the world
and Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and the uncertain coming of Christ to judgment,
Mar. 13. 33. But also to s^^in and avoid those terrible, and dreadful
menacing comminations threatened by the unchangeable irefull sin revenging
Jehovah against the sleighters and neglecters of this so notable and needful
duty, Rev. 3. 3. If therefore thou shall not watch I will come on thee as a
thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come on thee. Matthew. 24 50,
51. The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him him in sunder, and
appoint him his portion with hypocrites.

Be we all (f^llow soldiers) watchful Christians,

1. Such whose delight is in the sacred shining Word of God, Signs.
which is a light to our feet, and a lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119. 105.
Taking heed unto our ways according unto the same, Psalm, 119. 9. As they who
are watchful, and willing so to continue, take pleasure in, make great account
of, and have a continual constant eye unto gladsome lights, and unerring
directions.

2. Such whose desire is insatiable to insinuate, and insert our selves
inseparably into the sincere society of wise and wary Christians, who may help
and avail us much to keep us watchful. Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25. Not forsaking
the assembling together as the manner of ^ome is, etc. No whit affecting evil
companions, sleepie, and dead-hearted Christians. As they who are vigilant, and
careful so to persist, love, and like well, desire, and delight in the company
of watchful and waking companions, whose association affords much help and
assistance. Little regarding, much less requiring the fruitless fellowship,
and unprofitable presence of snorting sleepers, or dead men, the fruition of
these affording no furtherance unto, but rather frustrating their intentions.

3. Such whose hearts, and affections are set upon things above, not on things
below, being assured that our life is hid with Christ in God, and that when
Christ our life shall appear we also shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.
2, 3, 4. having our conversation in heaven, looking for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus, Phil. 3. 20.

Such who are careful to curb, and keep out the occasions, and beginnings of
sin, taking strict notice, as watchmen do, what we admit, or permit to pass
by our outward members into, or from out of our hearts. For without all doubt.

If we do not affect, and delight in the Word of God, which is a light to our
feet, and a lantern unto our paths.

If we affect corrupt companions, and can comfortably endure to be with evil
men, and dead-hearted Christians.

If our hearts are wholly carried away with the world, after our callings.

If we keep not out the beginnings, and occasions of sin. We do not watch.

Watch we therefore. But over what should we Ov^^ what we must watch, and how.
watch?

First, Over all, and every of our thoughts, words, and actions, Psalm. 39. 1. I
said I will take heed unto my ways. David did, we therefore ought to keep a
constant, and continual watch over all our ways.

Because the dreadful, and disadvantageous dangers, to

No place can patronize or protect, safeguard or secure us from the sly, and
subtle, direful and dangerous darts of the Devil. Witness paradise that
peculiar peerless pavillion of this world, that dainty, and delightful Eden,
and garden of God, that immaculate inamouring pleasant place decked, and
invested with innocent integrity, wherein our first parents were strongly
assailed by the subtle serpent, and shamefully foiled.

No company, no manner of consorts, or confederates can conserve, and confirm
against the contagious circumventings; and confronting conflicts of the red
Dragon. Witness the ^earefull, yea final and damnable fall of Judas, a
coadjutour with the Apostles, a companion in their labors, a comfort of their
communion, and a selected servant in Christ's family.

No condition, calling, or estate of life can exclude, or keep out, exempt or
privilege us from the execrable excursions of the evil one. Witness that
patheticall pious prayer of Agur, Pro. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty, nor
riches least, etc.

No d^gree of Christianity can divert, or turn from us, defend, and free us
from the dreadful, diabolical, and tempestuous temptati^ns of Satan.
Witness Adam assaulted in his spotless innocence. Witness David a man after
Gods own heart, provoked by Satan to number Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Witness
Peter a valiant and courageous Champion of Christ, winnowed by the wicked one,
Luke 12. 31. Witness Paul a victorious and vigilan^, and unwearied, and
laborious workman in the Lords vineyard, buffeted by the messenger of Satan, 2
Cor. 12. 7. Witness Christ Jesus the only begotten Son of God, the only
Savior of man, and mediator between God, and man, the Lamb without spot and
blemish, 1 Pet. 3. 18. who never did any thing amiss, Isa. 53. 9. Luke 23. 41.
was set upon with terrible, and treble temptations, Mat. 4. Yea the dearest of
Gods children, and servants, who are the most eminent for parts and graces,
being fitted, and called out for the highest, and most honorable services must
look for greatest tentations, and most of all to be molested with the Devil.
For as tyrannizing tyrants offer not violence to the vast and vanquished, but
to the resisting cities, and corporations, which are replete and replenished
with riches and revenues. As pillaging pirates assail, and set upon not
evacuated and empty, but the wealthy and richly laden ships. As theevish
robbers will not mind to meddle with rogues and beggars but the well-monied
travelers: So Satan, the worst and vilest of pirates, thieves, and tyrants will
be dealing with them who have rich booties of spiritual treasure; rages and
takes on most against such who are rescued out of his slavery by the power of
Christ. Laboring with all his fraud, and force to retain and recover his
prey. When did the devil tempt Adam, but when he was like the image of God?
When did he tempt Iakob, but when he had his fathers blessing, inciting Esau
against him? When did he tempt Abell, but when his sacrifice pleased the Lord?
and then he stirred up Cain to kill him. When did he tempt Job, but when God
said he was a good man? As long as Paul was among the highpriests, he was in
great authority, credit, and countenance, but when he was turned to Christ, he
was many ways assaulted by the sleights of Satan. These are special eye-sores
to Satan, and a fair mark for the arrows of his tentations. These do most
of all seek the ruin, and do most of all harm and hurt the Devils kingdom,
seeking the impayring and ruining thereof with their utmost endeavors; and
therefore he cannot but hate, and seek to hurt these most. Since therefore no
place, no company, no estate of life, nor degree of Christianity can secure us,
but we are, and must be in continual danger we must necessarily be careful
to keep a constant, and continual watch.

Because we are to serve God all the days of our lives, Luke 1. ^
75. yea with all the parts and faculties of our souls and bodies, 1 Cor. 6.
20. It is therefore a matter of urgent necessity to be watchful over all our
thoughts, words, and actions, that so we may savingly serve our good and
gracious God, yiedling unto him absolute obedience without any exception of any
his commandments, Mat. 28. 20. total obeisance with soul and body, serving
him solely, 1 Cor. 8. 6. not him, and sin, or Satan; for his sacred service
cannot subsist and stand with the service of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20. With the
service of sin, Romans 6. 17, 18. With the service of Antichrist, 1 Ioh. 4. 3.
With the service of Idols, 1 King. 18. 21. With the service of riches, Mat. 6.
24. or with the service of the belly, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

Because we must be countable for all our thoughts, words, Romans 2. 6. For every
idle word that men shall speak, they must give account thereof in the day of
judgment, Mat. 12. 36. And God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
Romans 2. 16. It stands us in hand therefore to keep a continued constant watch
over all our thoughts, words, and actions.

Be we not therefore in the number of those unwise, unwary, and careless
Christians, who watch by fits, and flashes, at a Communion, on a Lords day, in
some men's company, or some such special occasion only; bu^ take full liberty
to wallow in worldliness, and other wickedness, to live licentiously at other
times, and occasions. For to watch, and ward warily, and vigilantly, and after
to give free entrance and admittance to an enraged enemy is to little or no
purpose; yea it does aggravate the exasperated foe, frustrate and annihilate
all future and former performances.

But let us carefully, and constantly keep a continual watch.

1. This directly differencing us from hollow hearted halting

2. This assuredly ascertaining us, that we are in that holy, and happy
condition, in that blessed, and beneficial state of grace, a fruitful
forerunner of immortal glory.

3. This making us to be punctually, and precisely pressed, and prepared always
to receive, and entertain Christ Jesus our Sovereign and Supreme Lord, Mat.
24. 46. our blessed and beneficial Bridegroom, Mat. 25. 10. And to be always
ready to undergo voluntarily with vigor, and victory whatsoever odious
obstacles, and offensive oppressing occurrences oppose us in the mean time in
this our warring pilgrimage.

4. This unwearied vigilance securing, and freeing us from an innumerable
intricate insnarements, and a numberless sort of fraudulent guiles, and
subtle Satanicall sleights of the Divill, 1 Pet 5. 8.

5. This strengthening, and enabling us to keep always a good conscience void
of offense toward God, and man, Act. 24. 16 By which our precious faith is
confirmed, and conserved, 1 Ioh. 3. 21. By which we claspe hold upon, and
conjoyne our selves in a comfortable communion with Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17.

6. This wary and continual watchfullnesse over our selves in, and to the end
assuring us that the Lord of hosts will always watch over us for our good,
Psalm. 37. 32, 33, 34.

Let us therefore be always watchful in all our ways, and actions, that we
think, speak, and do good, Seasonably in time sitting, and convenient, Mat
25. 3, 11. Constantly, without ceasing, and intermission, Luke 21. 36.

Secondly, Over our hearts we ought to be watchful, yea so as to guide, and
guard them with double diligence, with special strictness, and our best and
utmost endeavors, Deuteronomy 4 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul
diligently. Pro. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, etc.

These are the wellspring, and beginning of good or evil, all Mat. 12. 35.
Mar. 7. 21. Luk, 6. 45. Heb. 12. 15. These are the wombes wherein sin is
conceived, hatched, and harbored, Luke 22. 3. Act. 5. 3. Iam. 1. 14. yea from
hence are the issues of life, Pro 4. 23. So that hell, or heaven, life or death
is from the heart.

These are the most precious, and unmatchable things which Mar. 8 36, 37. Hence
is it that the Lord our God, whose we are, and whom we ought to serve, likes,
and loves best, beholds and looks at especially, commends, and calls for most
the heart, and its sincere service, Pro, 23. 26. Hence is it likewise that
Satan labors with tooth and nail, seeks for with might and maine to pilfer
a way, possess, and captivate the heart of man; this being the chiefest castle
and citadell in us little worlds to sway and overruled, to cheek and command
the rest: yea and the prime, and principal possessour and preserver of the
most choice, and chiefest gifts, graces, and good things we do or can enjoy.
Yea and hence it is, that that malicious enemy of mankind cares not how much,
and often men pray, hear, etc. but is well enough content that men be
frequent in all such like performances (and therefore he little molests such
men, which satisfy themselves in outward forms) so be their hearts be
rotten, and naught, and so his own.

These are exposed to very many, and diverse dangers in regard Ier. 17. 9. These
being ready to run away from God, and good, from godliness and gracious
performances, Isa. 29. 13. These being easily stolen away by the vanities of
this world, the deceitful delusions of Satan, and the guilefull sleights of
our own sinful flesh.

These are they that bring all into order, and good frame,

Its therefore a matter of greatest moment, and chiefest consequence to guide
and guard, to watch and ward our hearts.

That these our precious pearls be not stolen away, and we dispoiled of them.

That these be not d^stained and defiled: that so we may preserve and present
them chaste virgins to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2.

That these fountains, and storehouses of our thoughts, words, and actions be
not annoyed: that so out of the good treasury of our hearts we may bring forth
good things, Mat. 12. 35.

That these be not stony, thornie, highway, and so graceless grounds, and
barren fields: that so they may be fertile fields, and good ground, Mar. 4. 20.

That these forts and holds formerly possessed by the strong man of mischief
the devil, as his principal palaces, and prime places of residence being
recovered out of his rigorous and hellish slavery by Christ Jesus that
victorious, and invincible Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Mar. 3 27. be not
regained by Satan, reduced, and reclaimed to his Satanicall slavery, and
reestablished under his tyrannical regiment: for which ends, and purposes,
that he may reenter, rule, and reign again, yea, and with seven other spirits
more wicked then himself, Mat. 12. 44, 45. he does continually beleaguer,
begirt, and besiege, and always assail us with terrible temptations his most
forcible batteries. That so they may be rich, and royal treasuries replenished
with, and reserving the pure precious, and peerless graces of Gods spirit,
and his sacred Word, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Col. 3. 16. yea and that so they may be holy
habitations of the Godhead, the father dwelling and abiding in them by his
son, the son by the spirit, and the spirit by his graces, 1 Cor. 3. 16. ^ Cor.
6. 16. M^^ves and M^^nes. Na^ar^ humanus. (...) agi^^ es^, and pro^^s a^l
motus. Sen de tra^quil an^me c. 2. page 523.


Which if (and that we may) do.

1. Ever, and always, earnestly, and incessantly without intermission employ
them well, not suffering them to be at any time idle, or ill employed. These
are in continual agitation, and constant motion and meditation; carefully
therefore keep them close earnestly to mind, and muse upon things good and
godly, pious and profitable: For as the Mill in motion turning, and rolling
about in its swiftest volubility, and turning motion does forcibly and
effectually work upon such materials men load it with, exquisitely grinding
grists of all sorts of grain for the behoof and benefit of mankind: Or
sordidly soiling it self, breaking, and bruising in pieces with fury and
violence foul and filthy rubbish if put and powered into it, or being emptied
and evacuated of objects from without, does heat and harm, fire and inflame,
gnawing and grating upon it self incommodiously and incessantly: Even so the
mind of man in motion always does either earnestly mind and think upon divine
and fruitful meditations; tire and trouble it self with disturbing
disquieting discontents, with conc^uciating carking cares, with trivial, yet
turbulent trifies, or other such like vicious and vitiating vanities: Or else
does waste, wear, and weary it self with fruitless some and froth, fondly
and fruitlesly feeding it self upon imaginary fictions, and fantastical
fancies. Be we therefore frequent and fertile in spiritual and sacred
considerations and meditations, remembering Gods name, Psalm. 119. 55. Thinking
on our ways, 59. meditating on Gods law all the day, 97. etc. preventing and
suppressing betimes evil thoughts, which alienate from, and make enemies to
the Lord, Col. 1. 21. Cherishing and maintaining good and gracious
imagi^ations, causing Gods Word to dwell in them richly in all wisdom, etc.
Col. 3. 16. Psalm. 119. 11. Establishing them by counsel, Prove. 20. 18. namely
of the delightful testimonies of our good God, Psalm. 119. 24. bringing them
into obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. So that we may think upon such
things which are good -- of good report, etc, Phil. 4. 8. and keeping them to
an universal obedience of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 128.

2. We are, and must be continually careful of, and looking unto our outward
senses of seeing and hearing. As vigilant watchmen, who guard, and keep some
fort of note, or place of importance examine exactly and diligently enquire
after all manner of comers in, and goers out, and to this end and purpose are
continually ready pressed to mark and view especially all places of passage to
and fro, the better to prevent sudden surprisings, and violent assaults: Even
so we who are to watch and ward our hearts and souls those worthy precious
parts of greatest importance must providently and precisely rectify and
regulate, refrain and restrain, and laboriously look unto these perfidious
and perilous ways and passages of egresse or forthgoing, and ingresse or
entrance into our souls.

That the Devil and death climb not in by these windows, Ier 9. 21.

That Sin and Satan rush not in by these to ruinate us. Make therefore, as Job
did a covenant with your eyes, Job 31. 1. That these give not entrance or
admission.

To cursed and and care carking Covetousness. Eccclesiast. 4 8. His eye not
satisfied.

To pernicious and Luciserian Pride, Psalm 131. 1. Mine eye is not haug^ty,
Isa. 31. 6.

To damnable deforming Drunkenness, Pro. 23. 31. Look not on the wine, etc.

To insatiable greedy Gluttony, Genesis 3. 6. She saw, -- She took and eat.

To envenomed virulent Envi^, 1 Samuel 18. 9. Saul eyed David. Mat. 20. 13. Eye
evil.

To impious irreligious Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. You saw no, etc. Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8.

To pilfering and abominable Theeveries, Josh. 7. 21. Saw, coveted, took.

To abhor odious Adulteries, Mat. 5. 28. committed adultery. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Eyes, etc.

Or to any dreadful and damnable deeds of darkness, Isa. 33 15,

Stop and safe guide our ears, the tasters of our words, Job 34. 3. the doors
and portals of our hearts from the hearing of blood, Isa. 35. 15. And from all
the entisements of sin, and sinne^s, Pro. 1. 10.

3. We do, and must often call our hearts to a reckoning. They who have a
vigilant eye, over and upon faithless fraudulent fellows, deceitful and
subtle servants are ever and anon pressing, persuading, and calling upon them
to a through consideration, and praiseworthy performance of their duty, and
will daily and diligently reckon and account with them. Our hearts are
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know them? Ier.
17. 9. Its therefore more then needful that we should, and the more watchful
we are over them, the more urgent we are earnestly calling upon, and forcing
them to a faithful, fruitful, firm, and frequent discharge of their duties;
and the more we will strive to bring and keep them close to holy
p^rformances, to make conscience of them, to shun and avoid secret sins; The
more careful and considerate we are, or will be ordinarily and often to reckon
with them: and the more laborious in looking unto them continually, not by fits
and starts, it being a constant conscionable course that makes us good and
acceptable to the Lord, Deuteronom. 5. 29.

4. We do, and must look to our hearts at special occasions. They who are
diligent watchmen, although they always stand upon their guard, yet at some
times, and certain occasions, they double their diligence upon some serious
service, and against some special danger. We also, although we are constantly
and resolutely to persist without pausing or interruption in an officious
observing of our hearts, yet are we to enlarge our endeavors, and with more
caution to combine our care and circumspection over our hearts, looking to them
most heedfully and warily in some particular times of trials by dangerous,
deceiptfull, faithless, fawning fellows: by disheartening adversity, by be
witching, and often besotting prosperity; or otherwise, when we are most provoked
and pricked forward to offend our good and gracious God by resisting and
resolving against the temptations. Thus let us dutifully and diligently look
to our hearts, that they be sound and right. That we may be sensible of, and
see our own corruptions, that we may heal them. And that we may perform and
practice good duties sincerely with a good and honest heart.

3. Watch, as against all sin in general, so especially against our personal
and proper, which are our most powerful corruptions, whereunto we are most
prompt and prone, and against the sundry and several occurrences and occasions
of the same sins: We do and must endeavor daily more and more to know and
curb our darling and delightful sins. As we are thoroughly acquainted with,
yea so that we directly discern and know the disposition of those with whom we
are continualy conversant, we perceive and see their faults more than strangers
do or can: So if we are vigilant viewers of our own hearts, and thoroughly
acquainted with our own ways, we cannot but perceive and see more errors and
aberrations in our selves than others can; we cannot but find and feel our
delightful Dalilahs, our darling sins. And as duti^ull and diligent watchmen
use most sedulity, severity, and strictnes to subvert and suppress secret and
lurking homebred traitors: so we being watchful Christians, must, and will
be sure to curb and keep under especially our darling sins, those to which
our hearts are most addicted, and after which they hanker most, Psalm. 18. 23.
These personal particular pollutions, to which we are naturally most inclined,
or to which we are most incitated or provoked by our callings or conditions,
are to be abhorred and avoided, as turbulent trouble^ome treacherous persons in
a town, as noisome, smoakie and dangerous chimneyes in a house. In these we
are commonly corrupt judges, extenuating and excusing those we ought wholly to
extirpate and expulse; pleading for, and patronizing those we ought to
prosecute and pervert; mitigating and mincing those we ought to malign and
massacre. In these is the greatest danger, these winding and scruing into our
souls almost insensibly, partly in regard of our own inclination to give them
entertainment, partly in regard of their infatuating insinuations by means of
their fawning, sleering, seeming sweet and favourie bewitching enchantments.
And the breach made by these must be repaired by renewed repentance. It is
therefore of absolute necessity that we should watch and ward especially
against these our personal pollutions.

4. Wisely and warily watch we over our selves in times of peace, plenty, and
prosperity, when we have eaten and are full, we must then beware that we forget
not the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11. Such is the infirmity of man's nature,
^ar. Chron. lib 2. pa^. 125.
that in prosperity delight does occasion negligence in bridling of hurtful
affections.

For then we are most prone, and provoked to careless corrupting Lux(...)
security, Psalm. 30. 6. In my prosperity I said I shall never be removed.

For we are then much inclined and very subject to abuse the same.

By deceiptfully doting on the^, setting our hearts upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. If
riches increase, set not your hearts upon them.

Confidently trusting in them, and boastingly bragging of them, Psalm^ 49. 6.
They that trust in their wealth, and boast, etc.

Wantonly wasting, vainly and viciously consuming the same. Luke 12. 19. Eat,
drink, and be me^ry. Luke 15. 13. Iam. 5. 5. Ye have eaten, etc.

Slavishly serving Mammon as our God, placing our hearts upon it as our
chiefest treasure, Mat. 6. 21.

Carelessly neglecting and cursedly contemning the poor and needy members of
our dear Savior, 1 Timoth. 6. 18. James 2. 6.

For we are ready wretchlesly then to forget and fors^ke the Lord, who has
been so bountiful and beneficial to us, Deuteronomy. 8. 11, 14. Lest I be full and
deny thee, etc. Prove. 30. 9. Yea, and to sacrifice to our own net -- because
our portion is fat, Hab. 1. 16. Saying in our heart, our own power and might
has gotten us this wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 17.

As therefore the stag in the fairest green, and most pleasant pasture looks
most about him, and fears danger: so should we in our greatest pleasures, and
prosperous preferments in our most honorable happiness here on earth.

5. In the doing of things warrantable and lawful, as the works and duties of
our personal and particular callings, we must be advisedly circumspect, and
very vigilant, Luke 3. 11, 13, 14. That we be not slaves and drudges unto the
same; but that we manage them, as with industry and diligence, so with
discretion and piety, that we may according to our Masters direction and
precept first seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33.
giving and gaining from them time to our selves for the sincere service of God.
That we conscionably employ our selves to labor in these our lawful vocations
and callings lawfully, christianly, namely,

Testifying hereby our son-like filial obedience to the most just and
irreprehensible injunctions of our good God and gracious Father, Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. moderating our inordinate desires after, and immoderate love unto
these vain and vanishing, fickle and fading things.

Depending upon Gods all-seeing and all-sufficient providence, and upon his
sure and certain, great and gracious promises, not upon these limber and
brittle slaves of reed.

Religiously sanctifying them by the Word of God, and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5.

Comfortably contenting our selves with whatsoever success, either prosperous
or adverse, it shall please the Lord to appoint, and allot upon our endeavors.

Learning in whatsoever estate to be content, Phil. 4. 11.

Seeking the fruition and enjoyment of these not long lasting transitory
riches, not by sinister, corrupt, and indirect means, but piously, lawfully
and warrantably. Not as prime, principal, and necessary, but as secondary
blessings and benefits, not needful to our salvation, nor the peculiar
privilege of Gods precious people.

Possessing and using the same thankfully, being grateful to a God so good and
gracious to us so vile and undeserving, Charitably, compassionately
communicating to the needy distressed members of our blessed Savior.

6. In our religious actions, our most pious and best performances we must be
very vigilant: for in these the Devil will be maliciously meddling to mar and
poison such like duties.

Striving to insuse, put, and power in fond, foolish, and faithless fancies
into our minds to withdraw and dishearten them from such like pious practices,
and sacred actions.

Endeavoring to distract, and so disable and interrupt us by his injurious
insinuating injections, and divellish temptations in the present time, and very
act of performing them.

And laboring with his utmost abilities to swell and puff up with privy, if
not palpable, pride, parasitically soothing and slatteringly applauding us
after the deed duly and dutif^lly done; purposing thereby to pollute and
putrify our purest, exactest, and precisest performances.

It is not therefore only convenient and of some consequence, but of great
importance and urgent necessity for us to be very wary and watchful that we
do good and sacred actions well and holily: things commanded so, as we are
commanded; practices of piety so, that they may be acceptable and pleasing unto
the Lord. And therefore be we persuaded with care and circumspection so to
ponder, premeditate, and consider of the matter.

That before the doing of such duties, we resist and remove all letts and
impediments, which as obstacles may hinder: we lay hold upon, take, and improve
all opportunities and fitting occasions which may help forward and further,
that so we may be more apt and able, prompt and prepared, fit and furnished to
do our duty.

That in the doing of them we behave our selves well and wisely, performing
them rightly and religiously.

That after all is done, through our own vileness and viciousness all our
labor be not lost, and all our endeavors made void and frustrate, being
impoysoned and corrupted by pride, 1 Cor. 4. 7. or oppressed and overwhelmed
by lightness and inconstancy, Ier. 34. 11.

And thus to conclude this important duty of the Christian warrior,

1. Let the many patheticall premonitions of perils and Motives*
dangers to which we are prone, especially if we omit or neglect our watch,
Luke 22. 32.

2. Let the many peremptory precepts of our absolute and sovereign Lord and
Commander Christ Jesus, Mar. 13. 37. 14. 34.

3. Let the many precious promises of peculiar privileges to Christian
vigilance.

4. Let the many pious and praiseworthy practices of Christ Jesus our
Captain, and of former Christians our fellow soldiers in this particular
duty, Mar. 14. 37.

5. Let the many present pressures of anguish and affliction, of trials,
troubles and temptations.

6. Let the many prerogatives of this puissant and prevailing duty agitate and
animate, persuade and press us forward to this divine duty of diligent
watchfulness.

That so we may prevent those many perils.

That so we may obe^ those many precepts.

That so we may possess those many promises.

That so we may imitate those many presidents.

That so we may pass through those many pressures.

That so we may have interest in those many privileges.

That so we may evidence our selves true and loyal soldiers of the Lord
Christ Jesus. And

That so we may not only descrie and discern, but also disanull and disable,
yea and disperse and dispoile the many disguised disadvantagious tentations of
the sly and subtle tempter.

That so we may courageously and comfortably conquer; Vigilan ^um est ^t qui
^upit vincere.
for, as want of watchfulness makes men of valor and validity vincible, and
often vanquished vassals: So watchful vigilance adds vigor, makes often
invincible and victorious.

CHAP. XII.
Christian soldiers must fly to God for succor.
Martial men ought not, and Christian warriors do not Psalm. 33. 16, 17.
Therefore David acknowledged that by the Lord he had run through a troop, and
by his God he had leaped over a wall, Psalm. 18. 29. That it was God who girded
him with strength, Ver. 31. Being therefore to encounter that exasperated
execrable Philistine who defied the armies of the living God, 1 Samuel 17. 26.
Who disdained David. V. 42. Cursed him by his God, Verse. 43. And threatened to
give his flesh to the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field, Verse.
44. He publicly proclaimed that he came to him in the name of the Lord of
hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, Ver. 45. And confidently concluded that
the Lord would deliver him (mangre all his puissant prowess and military
munition) into his hands to smite, to take off his head from him, to give not
only his, but the carcasses of the host of the Philistines unto the fowls of
the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth might know
that there is a God in Israel, and all that assembly might know that the Lord
saves not with sword and spear, Verse 46, 47. Hence was it that Gideon
commanded his soldiers to cry, the sword of the Lord, Judges 7. 18. That Ioab
encouraging his brother Abishai, said, the Lord do that which seems him
good, 2 Samuel 10. 12. And Iahaziel encouraged Iehosaphat and all Judah after
this manner: Thus says the Lord unto you; Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason
of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but Gods: -- ye shall
not need to fight in this battle: Set your selves, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord with you, etc. 2 Chronicl. 20. 14, 15, 17. Hence is it
that although some trust in chariots, and some in horses: Yet the Church and
chosen of God will remember the name of the Lord our God; and for this cause
they rise and stand upright, when those other are brought down and fallen,
Psalm. 20. 8.

1. For the Lord our God is a Lord of hosts, Psalm. 80. 19. 84. 1, 3, 8, 12. 46.
7, 12. having Angels, Elements, Sun, Moon, Stars, Wind, Rain, storms,
tempests, clouds, darkness, lice, locusts, flies, frogs, and whatsoever has
breath or being, at hi^ check and command, at his ordering and disposing.

2. From him safety and security, defense and deliverance in and from dangers
and distresses of all sorts are, 2 Timothy 4. 18.

3. Those whom he will defend and deliver, all the tyrants in the world cannot
harm and hurt, no not Satan, Job 1. Luke 22. 32. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Rev. 2. 10.

4. The welfare and safety of Christ's Church and Kingdom consists not in
chariots, in horses, or such like warlike furniture, Zach. 9. 10. For no such
can prevail against God, Pro. 21. 30. And all such hopes and helps without
him are vain and vanishing, Psalm. 60. 11. 108. 12*

5. For he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the
chariot in the fire, Psalm. 46 9.

6. As no power and policy can prevail against him, so no activity nor ability
without him, Psalm* 144. 1. Zach. 9. 13.

7. It is he who does all the parts of a valiant and victorious warrior for
his Church and chosen, Zach. 9. 14. For he is sensibly seen as a supreme and
sovereign Captain is wont to be. He as a soldier does fight with his arrows
against his and their enemies. He as a Centurion, or leader of a band, does
march before them in battle accompanied with whirle-winds. He, as a
Trumpeter, does sound so shrill and sadding a voice, which shall dismay and
dishearten the enemy.

8. It is the Lord which is all matter of munition and defense unto them,
namely,

A buckler to hold off blows and batteries, Genesis 15. 1.

A fortress, rock, tower, horn, strength, Ps. 18 1, 2, 30, 31, 32

A help and shield, Psalm. 33. 20. 115. 9 10, 11.

A battell-bow, Zach. 10 4. A wall of fire, 2. 5. And an en^amping about his
Church because of the army, Zach. 9. 8.

He is the corner by whom we are upholden, Zach. 10. 4.

He is the nail by which we are fastened, Ibid.

He is the battell-bow by which we are defended.

Hence is it that his Saints and servants formerly have done, and still ought

1. To repose their trust, and wholly rest upon the Lord, and not say in their
hearts, our power, and the might of our hands has done this, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. But
with us is the Lord our God to help us, and fight our battles, 2 Chronicles. 32. 8.
For the Lord will have mercy upon them, and save them by the Lord their God,
and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by
horsemen, Hos. 1. 7.

2. To praise his name for deliverance from dangers past, saying, We will
rejoice in thy salvation, and in thy name, etc. Psalm 20. 5. Be thou exalted O
God, etc. 21. 13. Therefore will I give thanks, etc. Psalm 18. 49, 50. Exodus
15. 1, 2, 3, 4. I will sing, etc. Judges 5. 2.

3. To pray to him for help, succor, safety and defense. Plead my cause O
Lord with them that strive with me, fight against them that fight against me;
take hold of shield and buckler and stand up for mine help; draw out also the
spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me, and say unto my soul
I am thy salvation, Psalm. 35. 1, 2, 3. Thus Jacob when Esau came against him,
prayed to God for protection, and prevailed, Genesis 32. Thus Iehosaphat prayed,
saying, O our God -- we have no might against this great company that comes
against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles.
20. 6, 7, 10, 11, 12. Thus Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying, O Lord of
hosts, God of Israel, etc. Is^. 37. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Thus while Joshua and
Israel fought with Amalek, Moses prayed, Exodus 17. 9.

If in such concordant conflicts, wherein men and men combat together, like in
nature, and for number, instature, and for strength, in prowess, and for
policy; being equally instructed in martial discipline to manage their warlike
proceedings, being equally furnished with all manner furniture needful and
fitting for fight. If (I say) in fighting against frail and feeble flesh and
blood, prayer must be added unto, and accompany other preparations; and the
people of God have with care and conscience continually conjoined prayer to
other: Witness Moses, Exodus 17. 9. Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. 5. Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
20. 3, etc. and diverse others. They well knowing, that means, although many;
preparations, although profitable and puissant, to be of no use, Psalm. 127. 2.
Except the Lord build, etc. Therefore they would not trust in their bows,
knowing that their swords could not save them, Psalm. 44. 6. and that through
God they could push dow^e their enemies, and tread them under, etc. V. 5, 7, 8,
9. And they well knowing that prayer is sanctified by God to obtain his help
and blessing: that prayer is exceeding powerful and prevailing; yea so that
whether other means failed or abounded, they would never neglect this: which
makes supply where and when they are wanting, and makes them powerful and
successful, if fervently used. When one told Numa saying, O Num^, the enemies
prepare war against thee, he cheerfully answered, but I sacrifice, implying
that the forces of enemies are withstood and overcome more by the help of God
than our own forces. How much more I say ought we to pray in our spiritual
combats against enemies which are innumerable, namely, the world, and all
wicked men; the flesh, and all its filthy lusts; the Devil, and all evil
angels. The world being malicious, cruel, crafty, vain, and evil; the flesh
being rebellious, wanton, and deceiptfull; and the Devil malignant, mighty,
fierce, and fraudulent; and our selves being such whose weaknes^es are
wonderful, whose wants are many, whose miseries are great, and whose
necessities are continual. Pray therefore that we may prevail.

1. For without God we can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. It is God Phi. 2. 13. We can
do all things through Christ strengthening us, Phil. 4. 13. All our hope is in,
and help from God, and Aug. ^e lib. a^^. cap. 6.
Gods help is obtained by prayer. There is nothing so hard, but with Gods help
it may be made easy; on him therefore let us depend, of him let us seek help,
and so accomplish our purposes, says S. Augustine. Hence it is that S.
Chrysostom has these pregnant passages. Chrysostom. a^ Pop. A(...) 71.
There is nothing stronger than a man rightly praying: for if a woman could
appease that furious governor, which neither feared God, nor reverenced man,
much more shall he provoke God to love who does stand by him continually. He
does over-master the bell^, and chase away delights, etc. Again, There is
nothing more powerful Id(...) Hon. 58. ^n M^^. 1^.
than a man wisely praying; for if a woman could turn the cruel judge which
neither feared God, nor honored man, much more shall he make God favorable to
him, who sticks to continual prayer; he does overcome the belly, and contemn
delicious dainties.

2. For prayer is of such force and efficacy in this our Christian warfare,
that S. Chrysostom says, Prayers are weighty weapons if they be established
with necessary wisdom; and that you may understand the force thereof,
continual prayer does vanquish shamelesnes, wrong, cruelty, and rashness, and
that which friendship has not done, prayer does perform; and constant prayer
has delivered her worthy which was unworthy. For these are great weapons if
they be founded with fervency of spirit, if without Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. Sponte
pe^* cantib. Tom. 4.
false, and vain glory, if with a sincere mind, and a contrite heart. This
does break off wars, this has made an unacceptable and unworthy nation
delectable and grateful. Again, Although God moved with mercy does something,
yet here also prayer does afford much help -- you helping together in prayer
-- neither does he attribute the whole to them lest he should puff up their
minds: neither again does he wholly remove them from the praise of this
benefit, that he might encourage them and make them more cheerful, and that
he might bind them fast in friendship amongst themselves -- prayer was made
without ceasing by the Church to God for him, Acts 10. And it had such force,
that Idem Hom. 1. i^ 2 Cor. 1.
although the doors were shut, and chains did bind the Apostle, and the
keepers did sleep on both sides at his side, yet it brought him out, and
delivered him from all perils. Again, Truly all kinds of heavenly weapons are
comprised in divine Hom. de pre^. Tom. 5.
prayers, which alone are able to preserve those which have committed
themselves to God -- But prayer is an invincible dart, a secure fortress,
which does put to flight as well as one soldier many thousands: for honorable
David beat down that Goliath furiously running upon him like some formidable
Devil, not with weapons, not with sword, but with prayer. Prayer is the most
necessary Tom. 5. de incompreh. Dei not.
weapon. That which riches nor the multitude of helpers, nor physical skill,
nor Prince-like haughtiness of mind could not effect, that the prayer of one
poor and needy one was able to do: prayer I say, not that slender and
slothful, but that which is earnest, and does come from a mind grieving, and a
contrite heart. The force of prayer has quenched the force of fire, has
repressed Ibid.
the rage of lions, has appeased wars, has removed battles, has taken away
tempests, has chased away Devils, has opened the doors of heaven, broken the
chains of death, turned away sicknesses, removed displeasures, made strong
cities shaking by means of earthquakes, abolished or removed judgments falling
from heaven, the subtilties of men, and all evils. Again, Such force as Tom.
5. d^ pre^.
waters have in trees, the same have the prayers of holy men in this life; S.
Paul with these by night did refresh his mind, did easily vanquish dangers, did
offer his back as a stone to stripes, in such sort he shook the prison in
Macedonia, even so as a li^n he brake the fetters by prayers: so he delivered
the Iailor from error, so he destroyed and dissolved the tyranny of Devils by
prayer. And that which this grave, godly and golden-mouthed Father does avouch
of prayer; namely, that nothing is stronger than him who rightly prays, that
nothing is more powerful than a pious man praying. That prayers are great
weapons, yea the fittest weapons, have great force, yea such, that they easily
vanquish the Devil. The same does the unerring Word of God aver as
authentical, and of allowed authority, Exodus 17. 11. When Moses held up his
hands Israel prevailed, etc. Israel cease to conq^er when Moses cease to
pray, but by his prayer they conq^er and obtain the victory. Samuels prayer
discomfited the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7. 8, 9, 10. The prayer of Isaiah 2 King.
19. 4. Of Hezekiah, ver. 15. and the people of God discomfited the huge and
haughty host of the Assyrians, ver. 35. The prayer of the Church delivered
Peter, Act. 12. 5. Therefore the Apostle S. Paul being in great danger of his
contrymen the Jews, desires the Romans to encounter them and rescue him,
not with swords, spears, and such like warlike weapons, but by fighting with
God by prayer for his safety, wherein lies more security than in all force of
arms, by how much Gods power exceeds all earthly might, Romans 15. 30. And
acknowledges that the prayers of the faithful were effectual, and a forcible
means to procure his peace, safety, and good success, 2 Cor. 1. 11.

Hence was it that when Satan that execrable and exasperated enemy to goodness,
grace, good actions, and godly men, diligent to do mischief, ready to watch
and wait for advantages against the righteous, restless in resisting, and
busiest in bickering with the blessed people of God when they are best
employed. When Satan full of subtilty and sedulity in opposing and endeavoring
to overmatch the strongest, when I say this bold, stout, malicious, and proud
miscreant rigorously resisted Joshua the high Priest, Christ Jesus the
Mediator of intercession as well as of salvation, with vehement instancy and
reiterated reproves does repel and repulse him with prayer, saying. The Lord
rebuke thee O Satan, Zach. 3. 2. When he desired diligently to sift and winnow
Peter as wheat, Christ likewise prayed that his faith might not fail, Luke 22.
31. And when Paul was buffeted by the Devil, he likewise besought the Lord,
and obtained that Gods grace should be sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 1* 2. 8. When
Morton Aureli^s (as E^sebius) or Lib. 5. cap. 5. Lib. 3.
Antonius Piu^ (as Carr^^) was distressed with thirst, the Christian legion,
which fought not only with weapons but prayer also, prayed unto God, and
presently a great tempest arose, in which God gave refreshing to the Romans,
and discomfited their enemies with lightening, which victory obtained by the
Christians prayers, the Emperor gave that legion the name of thundering legion.
When Theodosius a Christ an Emperor perceived Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 24.
the war to be difficult and dangerous because of the numbers and strength of
enemies, and his Captains disswasives from fighting in the streights of the
Alps: he having spent the night in prayer, and received comfortable
exhortation to war, led out his army in a most fierce war did overcome the
enemy being helped from heaven with great winds which were contrary to the
enemies. Carolus Magn^^ is highly commended Carr. lib. 4.
as a pattern for all the world, in that going to fight standing in the Temple,
he did commend himself, the Church and Empire to God, and did join with all
pious people in prayer.

3. Prayer is of that force and efficacy, that S. Chrysostom calls Tom. 5.
Orat. de precat.
it a well fortified guard, the safest fortification, a great bulwark of the
Church which cannot be b^ttered down, on unshaken munition or rampire, and
dreadful to the Devil. And warrantably, for prayer is as an impenetrable
bulwark which cannot be prejudiced by Satan's pernicious and perilous,
diabolical diteful darts, Mat. 26. 41. Pray that ye enter not into temptation.
It is an impregnable fortress and tower of defense, safely succouring and
shielding against the force and fury of the most puissant p^ors and policies,
the extremest rage and rigom, the most barbaro^* and bloody combinations of
Satan and his hellish accomplices, Act. 12. 5 It is an invincible rampire, and
irresistible engine recoiling back with redundant and redoubled strength, and
puissance the malicious and manifold machination^ of the most inflexible and
enraged furious opposers of Gods people upon their own pates. The prayer of
David turns the oracle-like wisdom of Achitophel into foolishness, 2 Samuel
15. 31. For his counsel was overthrown, and he hanged himself, 2 Samuel 17. 14.
23. The prayer of the Jews lifted Haman upon the same gallows he had prepared
for Mordecai, Est. 7. 9. pressed him and his into the same pit he had provided
for others, and turned the keen and cutting force and fury of enraged and
exasperated authority upon the heads of their enemies, Est. 8. 9. The prayer of
Daniel not only mitigated the rage, and stopped the ravenous mouths of the
greedy lions, but also brought his cruel, crafty, and malicious accusers into
the dreadful and destroying den of those grim and bloody creatures, Dan 6. 22.

4. Prayer must be joined to our Christian armor, Ephesians. 6. 18. We cannot
furnish our selves with, nor fitly use the same with out prayer. We must pray
for our armor, and this our armor must be fitted and exercised by prayer; we
must pray for strength, courage, will, wisdom and ability to use it, and we
must pray for a blessing upon the using of it. Pray we must that our loins may
be girt about with truth, that we may have the brestplate of righteousness,
our feet shod, etc. and having these we must pray. Be righteous and pray. Be
patient and pray. Believe and pray. Hope and pray Use the sword of the Spirit
and pray, and that we may have these, pray. Prayer is therefore necessary for
us Christian soldiers, yea of such importance, that we must before the fight
pray for armor, abilities, and assistance to accommodate and make us fit and
sufficiently furnished for the combat: we must also fight and pray: for by
prayer we may be assured of succor and assistance: without prayer no good
success can be expected. We must fight (says Hillarie) against the Devil
Hill. in Psalm. 65
and his weapons by our prayers, and the victory of our warfare is to be
manifested by our rejoicing. And, Prayer is a good buckler, says S. Ambrose.
Am. Epist. lib. 10 1 p. 82. Use 1.


Let therefore the men of this world so busily employ themselves in the
trafficks and negotiations of this life, that they neither will nor can spare
time from the service of their idol Mammon for the special, sacred,
sovereign service of God, judging this weighty and worthy work needless and
unnecessary. Let abject Atheists deluded by the Devil that deceiver abdicate
and abandon (in heart abhorring, if not desperately deriding) this duty of
divine dignity, as averse to their palpably profane, though pleasing paths of
irreligious atheism and ungodliness. Let sottish and secure, yea all corrupt
and careless Christians seized upon and seduced by Satan, sensually slight
this serious service, using it as a matter of no moment, and as a customary
complement, cursorily mumbling over a few words when they have nothing else to
do, or pattering over some certain sentences dreamingly betwixt sleeping and
waking. Let deluding and deceiptfull dissemblers preposterously pretermit this
pious performance to our Father in secret, practicing it only proudly and
pharisaically in public to be seen of men, as an engine to scrue themselves
into peoples affections, as a stalking horse to catch and enclose popular
applause, and as a ladder to mount themselves aloft, that they may seem to be
men of singular and surpassing devotion. Thus manifesting themselves in the
judgment of S. Chrysostom men dead in sins and trespasses, and not well in
their wits; his words are these: Whosoever does not pray unto God daily,
neither does desire Tom 5. de pr^cat.
to use this heavenly communication, it dead, and does wholly want soul and
sense; for that is the greatest conjecture of foolishness and unsensiblenesse,
seeing that the nobleness of the dignity of this is not known, seeing that
prayer is not loved, seeing that it is not esteemed the death of the soul not
to honor God by prayer; for as this our body I ween, when the soul is absent
is dead and stinking; so the soul, except it does raise up it self, to
prayer, is dead, miserable and stinking. And that we are to judge it more
grievous than death to be berearved of prayer. The Prophet Daniel teaches us,
who was more willing to die than to be hindered three days from prayer; for
neither did the King of the Persians command to do any thing against piety, but
did endeavor to get a rest of three days: when therefore I see any to fail
from the exercise of prayer, neither to be delighted with a vehement and
earnest love hereof, I know for a surety forthwith that nothing honorable or
p^ssing excellent is possessed by him.

And these his sayings are authe^ticall, and of avowable authority, being
consonant to that ^^erring ca(...) of sovereign, and absolute authority the
Word of God, this openly publishing and proclaiming such perverse and profane
persons to be those fools who say in their he^rts there is no God, -- workers
of iniquity which have no knowledge, -- they not calling upon the Lord, Psalm.
14. 1, 4. and therefore godless and irreligious Atheists. To cast off the
fear of God, Job 15. 4 therefore they have forsaken the Lord, which is an
evil and bi^ter thing, Ier. 2. 19. and therefore the Lord will come to them to
judgment, and be a swift witness against them, Mal. 3. 5. To want the spirit
of grace, Zach 12. 10. or the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15. and therefore not
to belong to Christ, Romans 8. 9.

2. Yet let us fellow Christian soldiers Pray.

First, But to whom should we pray?

God only blessed for ever ought to be the object of our prayers, minely,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

1. For he only is omniscient, searching and trying the hearts and reins,
and therefore he only can discern, and distinguish whether our prayers be
sincere, sound, and from the heart or not, Ier. 17. 10.

2. For he only is omnipresent at all times, and in all places, Psalm. 139. 7.
to hear the suites and supplications of all pious petitioners.

3. For he only is omnipotent, able to give and grant whatsoever we ask, to
gratify and glad those which pray unto him, Genesis 17. 1.

4. For he only is the object of our faith, Ioh. 14. 1. therefore of our
prayer, Romans 10. 14.

5. For religious worship is due only to him, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Mat. 4. 10.

But such is prayer, Mat. 15. 25.

6. For we must pray according to Gods spirit, Romans 8. 16. which teaches
us only to pray unto the Father, Galat. 4. 6.

Away therefore with saint prayer.

1. Which robs God of that divine honor which is only due to him, Mat 6. 9.

2. Which robs Christ of that office of Mediatorship which is peculiar and
proper to him, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6, 8. 1 Io^. 2. 1, 2. for he only is Mediator of
intercession as well as salvation.

3. Which is frivilous, and fruitless, for they can neither hear our prayers,
know our wants and wishes, Isa. 63. 16. nor give and grant what we desire, Iam.
1. 17.

4. Which is idle, and superfluous, Christ being a merciful High Priest, Heb.
2 17. touched with our infirmities, 16. to whom we may go boldly, 7. 25. and
God through the alone mediation of Christ being reconciled, and exceeding
merciful unto us, 2 Cor. 1. 3.

5. Which is no where warranted in sacred writ, either by divine precept,
practice, or promise, all which directly cross and thwart this Antichristian
doctrine.

And pray we to God.

1. Which is the searcher of the hearts and reins, Psalm. 139. 23. a divine
spiritual effence, declaring unto man his thoughts, Amos 4. 13. privy to all
our steps and stations, ways and wanderings, Psalm. 139. 2. and therefore
acquainted with the secret plots and projects of Satan's cursed accomplices. And
therefore he knows how to frustrate their intendments, to turn their
consultations into foolishness, or cause them to work our greater good.

2. Who is almighty and all-sufficient, for he removes the mountains,
commands the Sun, shakes the earth, etc. Job 9. 5, 6, 7, 8. for he created
all things with his word of nothing, Genesis 1. to him nothing is impossible, Genesis
18. 14. to him all things are as nothing, the inhabitants of the ^^rth as
grasse-hoppers, etc. Isa. 40. 12, 17. from him none can deliver, Isa. 43. 13.
Like to him there is none amongst the mighty, Ex. 15. 11. Therefore able to
defend and deliver, save and succor in the depth of danger, and from the most
dreadful distresses.

3. Who is faithful, standing to his words, and performing his promises made
to us, 1 Cor. 1. 9. 10. 13. Being unchangeable, Iam. 1. 17. and always the
same. Therefore ready to perform all his promises made for our protection,
preservation, and the like.

Secondly, To this God therefore let us pray.

For what?

1. Not for such things (in general) which are against Gods glory, the good
and edification of Gods Church, or the salvation of our own souls and bodies.

2. Not for such things, which are noisome and naught, being evil by nature,
or accident. Such was the petition of the Israelites to Samuel for a King, 1 Samuel 8. 5. To the Lord for flesh, Psalm. 78 30.

3. Not for things unseemely for God to grant, or contrary to his nature.

4. Not for things already obtained and enjoyed, except

1. To have those good things in possession, which we have already in
persuasion; re which we have spe.

2. To have those in fuller measure, which we have already in some part.

3. To have that inuse, which we have in possession.

4. To have those good things in sense and feeling, which we have in knowledge,
and understanding.

5. To have them sensibly, which we have certainly. Thus of right we may, and
of duty we ought to pray for that we have, Ioh. 14. 17.

5. Not for things altogether impossible, and for ever to be obtained, namely
such which are contrary to Gods everlasting, and unchangeable decree, as for
example,

1. To have Christ, and Antichrist made friends.

2. To obtain life without death, the crown of immort^lity without the
Cross, Act. 14. 22.

3. To have sin pardoned without faith and repentance, Luke 13. 3.

4. To have salvation, or glorification without, or before sanctification, and
grace, Heb. 12. 14.

5. To know the times and seasons, which the father has put in his own power,
Mar. 13. 32. Act. 1. 7.

6. To prevent or put off the appointed time of death, Job 7. 1. Mar. 13. 32.

Not but that a man may and ought to pray for many things, which cannot be had
in this life, as namely, whatsoever good things God has promised to his Church
and chosen; namely, we may and ought to pray

1. For the fulness of Gods grace, and spirit.

2. For the perfection of those graces, which are begun in us.

3. For the utter abolishing of Satan's kingdom, of Antichrist, Heresy,
Idolatry.

4. For the universal establishment, and flourishing estate of Gods Church,
Truth, Gospel, Religion.

5. For answerable obedience to Gods will in earth and in heaven, in men and in
Angels, which though it is impossible for a time, yet not for ever, neither in
all respects though in some, Phil. 3. 12, 15.

But for things needful, profitable, possible, lawful, good, and holy we must
pray, Mat. 7. 11. Some of them absolutely, namely, such which tend to Gods
glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and our own and others salvation, as for hope, faith,
remission of sins, and such like. Some of them only conditionally, namely so
far forth as the enjoyment, and possession of them may be to the glory of
God, the good of the Church, and our own; thus for health, wealth, peace,
riches, children, and such like not necessary, but secundary, yet good
blessings.

1. Want we wisdom, whereby to consider our latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. To shun
every evil way, Pro. 2. To frame our lives according to the Word of God, 2 Timothy 3 5. To live precisely, Ephesians. 4. 15. To improve all occasions of doing
good, Col 4. 5. Pray, 1 King. 3. 9. Psalm. 90. 12. Iam. 1. 5. Does any want
wisdom, let him ask, etc.

2. Would we have the creatures of God, and all our courses sanctified,
seasoned, and sweetened to us, that in the use of them Satan may not surprise,
and supplant us? Pray, 1 Tom. 4. 5. every creature of God is sanctified by the
Word and prayer.

3. Would we have remission of sins, and the same certainly assured to us,
and thereby our reconciliation with God? Pray. Hos. 14. 2. Turn unto the Lord,
and say. Take away iniquity, and receive us graciously, Mat. 7. 7.

4. Would we be sufficiently fortified and furnished against the force, and
fraud, and fury of all infernal fiends; yea so that, although they sift us,
our faith may not fail; although they buffet us, Gods grace may be sufficient
for us? Pray. Luke 22. 31. I have prayed, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 8. I besought, etc.

5. Would we be furnished with the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom,
understanding, the spirit of counsel, and might, Isa. 11. 2? Pray. Luke 11.
13. How much more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to them that
ask him.

6. Would we remove judgments inflicted, or prevent them being threatened?
Pray. Iam. 3 13. Is any afflicted lot him pray. Jeremy 26. 19. H^zekiah be
sought, etc.

7. Would we have the power and predominance of sin, and the same subdued and
suppressed in us, and our corruptions conquered? Pray. Psalm. 9 13. Cleanse me
from secret sins, keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me. 119.
133. Let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

8 Would we have our daily wants supplied, or recompensed to us? Pray. Iam. 1.
5. If any lack, etc. and it shall be given him.

9. Would we have our whole life continually sanctified, and we comfortably
prepared for a better? Pray. Phil. 1. 19, 20.

10. Would we preserve, cherish, and strengthen all spiritual graces in us?
Pray. Col. 1. 9 We do not cease to pray and desire that you might be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

11. Would we obtain, and enjoy and good? Pray. Ioh. 16. 23. Whatsoever you
shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you.

Secondly, This is a sovereign salve for every sore.

1. It stopped, and stayed those many dreadful, and distressing plagues in Egypt.

2. It took away, and turned the contagious incurable leprosy of Miriam into
perfect sanity, Number. 12. 13.

3. It effectually healed the weak, and withered hand of wicked Jeroboam, 1
King. 13 6.

4. It restored Publius to former health when he lay sick of a fever, and of a
bloody flixe, Act. 28. 8.

Thirdly, This has effected, and brought to pass wonderful, and
extraordinary things.

1. It has obtained victory in battle, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. 20. 6.

2. It caused those two great lights in the firmament, which continually run
with incredible swiftness, and celerity to stand still, Josh. 10. 13. in the
midst of heaven about a whole day, that Gods people might be avenged of their
enemies.

3. It occasioned the solid and stable earth to shake; as a sign and testimony
of Gods love and favor of his loving and gracious presence to his children,
Act. 4. 31. 16. 26.

4. It quenched that raging and furious fire, which was kindled by the fierce
anger of the Lord by means of their sins, and wastingly consumed the people
in Taberah, Numb. 11. 3.

Fourthly, This is of extraordinary efficacy and power in all things, as an
Unicorns horn to expel, and take away the pollution and poison, the harm
and hurt from every thing; a Physician in sickness, in every strife a Lawyer.

Fifthly, This is of such force and strength, that nothing is, or can be more
powerful, it prevails over men, over Angels, Hos. 12. 4. over Devils, Matthew.
17. 21. and with God, 2 Kin. 20. 3.

Sixthly, This is a sure messenger, which will not, cannot be hindered: a sure
friend, which will never fail, and a puissant prevailer in the courts of
heaven, Zach. 13. 9. Lament. 3. 56. Matthew. 7. 8.

1. For the Lord our God is a hearer of prayers, if pious, and rightly
performed, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear prayers. He has pawned
and plighted his word and promise, which is yea and Amen, to grant the
petitions of gracious suitors, Psalm. 50. 15.

2. For the Lord Jesus who offered himself for us will certainly offer our
prayers for us.

3. For the spirit of God helps our prayers, we by him crying Abba Father.

1. We therefore having the aid and assistance of Gods spirit to frame our
petitions, we being not able to be our own Messengers.

2. We having the intercession of our blessed Savior, who seals our prayers
with his own.

3. We having the gracious, and gladsome promise of our good God, with whom is
no variableness, nor the least shadow of changing.

4. And it being the nature of God to hear prayers. Prayer must needs be
successful and speeding, powerful and prevailing.

Say not beloved brethren; wicked men, and profane persons, Psalm 73.

For their favors, and felicities are but fickle, and fading,

1. Admit they are cunning and skillfull men, furnished with all indowments of
art, and nature to manage with dexterity, and discretion even to admiration,
and astonishment the great and weightiest policies, and employments of a state
like Achitophel wonderful in such wisdom, 2 Samuel 16. 23.

To discourse, dispute, and determine learnedly and profoundly of knotty
Elenches, and subtle Sophismes, of matters Ethicall, Physical, Metaphysicall,
of all created beings having breath or being in the great universal world: of
the earths center and circumference, its massines and magnitude, its variety of
fruits and flowers, mines, metals, corn, and cattle; inhabited, and
unhabitable places; of the seas spatiousnesse, and profundity, of its storming
surges, its intricate ebbing and flowing; of the number and nature of many, if
not the most of those supreme starry bodies; of the spheres and planets; of
the first moover, the first matter, the being of beings, and the chiefest good
with Aristotle, that prime, and principal of Philosophers.

To frame ordinarily as eloquent speech decked with all the necessary and
garnishing ingredients of rhetorical oratory, as ever did admired Cicero. Yet
what is all this without the saving knowledge of God, and Christ, wherewith
Gods pious petitioners are enriched, 1 Cor. 1. 5. you are enriched in all
knowledge, etc. and abound, 2 Cor. 8. 7? Even dung, and dross, Phil. 3. 8.

1. That so delightful, and desired knowledge differenceth not from wicked
men, Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 26.

This, though deformed and defaced, does. Mark 4. 11.

2. That is no solid, and substantial, comfortable and cordial cause of
rejoicing.

This is, Ier. 9. 24.

3. That is not life eternal.

This is. Ioh. 17. 3.

2. Admit their bodies were decked with beauty, and loveliness far
surpassing that of Joseph, and Absalom, yea of all the forms and faces which
ever man fancied, or God fashione^; were furnished with the strength and
abilities of Goliath and Sampson endued with the utmost heroical fortitude and
valor of the worlds Worthies; clad with the most curious, and costly clothing
the art of man can frame or fashion; fed with the choicest cates of art, and
nature, and every ways as happy in such respects as heart can wish; yet all
these are but fond felicities, beautifying, and delighting only the
tabernacles, and temples of their fordid and sinful, poor and pined,
loathsome, and unlovely souls; the matter of these tabernacles being base
dust, earth, and ashes; the state mutable, and the continuance short, and
momentany: for they must be dissolved, and then all their pomp will take her
leave, leaving them helpless, and unlovely to turn to rottenness, and
corruption, and their poor neglected souls to never ending, and easelesse
torments of tormenting Tophet, where their worm never dies, and their fire is
not quenched, etc.

Whereas those who are sincere suitors, and suppliants to the God of heaven.

Their souls are beautified and made blessed with the rich robes of Christ's
righteousness, the saving graces of Gods spirit, which are necessary to
salvation, far more adorning then all outward ornaments whatsoever, Psalm
49. 8. 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

Their souls are strengthened, enriched, cleansed, and fed to life eternal;
yea so that they live, and die comfortably, and contentedly; and after their
earthly tabernacles are dissolved, they have a building in heaven not made with
hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

Say not beloved brethren, many good men have prayed, David for his child;
Samuel for Saul; Paul for the removing the messenger of Satan which buffeted
him, and did not prevail; therefore prayer is not availeable, not fruitful.

For prayer rightly performed is ever prosperous and successful Cor. 12. or
something else which is equivalent, if not far surpassing. David lost indeed
the child, but the Lord sent him in lieu thereof a Solomon.

The Lord does not deny because he differs: the petitions ^
of his people are not denied because it is the good will and pleasure of God
to defer to give the full enjoyment of things prayed for. But the causes
wherefore he does delay our desires, defer and put off, our petitions are

First, Either in regard of the wicked, to astonish and affright ungodly men
from their presumptuous persuasions of late repentance, and their abominable
abuse of Gods patience, and forbearance; and so to make them the more
inexcusable at the last day: for by this dealing with his dearest darlings the
LORD does manifest that a slight and slender LORD have mercy on me; or LORD
open to us, is not availeable at the throne of grace, but assiduous attendance,
constancy, and continuance in crying and calling unto GOD, Luke 18. 1.

Secondly, In regard of his children themselves

1. Sometimes to chasten, and correct their wants and weaknesses in prayer, as
namely their want of knowledge, Matthew. 20. 22. for they should pray with
understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 14. Their want of faith, James 1. 6, 7. Their want of
fervency, James 5. 16. Their want of humility, Luke 18. 11, 12. Want of
constancy, Luke 11. Their want of obedience, Zach. 7. 11, 12. Their want of
sincerity, Psalm. 66. 18. And so to make them fitter for such favors and
mercies they pray for.

2. Or to make his gifts more acceptable to us, and us better esteem, and more
highly to prise Gods peculiar mercies, and prayer by which they are procured:
things dearly bought, are dearly beloved; things hardly procured are highly
prised; the rarity of favors makes them remarkable, the commonnesse of
comforts causes too often contempt; peace after war, a sunshine day after
tempestuous troublesome weather, plenty after scarcity, how welcome? whereas
when they have long time continued they are little regarded, if not much
contemned, we too much thirsting after variety and change; and loathing too
much (for the least is too much) long lasting benefits. That therefore we may
not deem and estimate such blessings to be of course, and not of kindness,
but might the more honor God the giver, and highly value the benefits
bestowed, it is the good will, and pleasure of our gracious God to have us
wait when we have prayed for his gracious performance.

3. To exercise our graces; faith, patience, hope, and constancy are tried,
employed, and improved by Gods delaying, and our expecting. These make us cry
louder, and knock harder at the gates of mercy, and pray more unto our
heavenly father. He holds off to give, that we his frail and feeble, weak
and stammering children by often petitioning may by exercise become more
expert: that his gifts and graces in us may be more manifested to our selves,
and others, Matthew. 15. And because he loves and likes, desires and delights in
the prayers of his people: As therefore those, who are delighted in, and
ravished with harmonious melody, pay not presently least they should be gone,
but defer to reward the musicians that they might delight them longer; Even
so the LORD of heaven and earth, much delighting in the humble and hearty,
faithful and fervent prayers of his people, deferres to grant, yet so that we
are no loosers by our waiting: Hannah, Elizabeth, and Sarah prayed earnestly,
and waited long, the first had a Samuel, the second a John Baptist, and the
third an Isaac, for her staying. Jacob wrestled all night, and in the end he
got a blessing.

4. To prove our faith, whether we will seek unlawful means, by gadding to
the witch at Endor, or the Idol of Ekron.

5. To make us thoroughly privy to our own infirmities, that we may the more
heartily embrace his strength.

6. To strengthen our devotion toward him, for delay extends our desires.

Thirdly, Or in regard of God himself, namely, to make known, and manifest his

1. Wisdom, as best knowing what is fittest for us.

2. Justice, being offended, and correcting us hereby for our transgressions.

3. Love, denying that we demand, that he may give us better; or when we are
better fitted for such favors.

4. Liberty, he not being bound, but free to give what, and when himself
pleases.

Say not, beloved brethren, God is not ignorant, therefore

For Though he is not ignorant, yet he will have us tell him

Though he is not forgetful, yet he will have us put him in remembrance,
that so we may acknowledge his mindfullnesse of us, and stir us up to
remember his promises.

Though he is continually careful of us, yet he will be often, and earnestly
called upon, and solicited with our suits, that so we may exercise our faith,
hope, patience, and other like gladsome graces.

Say not, beloved brethren, God has determined what

1. For we are to walk according to the revealed will

2. Though his decrees are not changeable; yet we see, and sensibly know that
his dealings are changeable in diverse things, as in turning of blessings into
curses, etc.

3. Though his everlasting decree is unchangeable, yet his temporary
conditional decree may be altered.

4. Though we cannot perhaps obtain the benefit we desire; yet we shall get
as good, or a better, and so be no loosers but gainers.

But reason, and resolve thus, or after the like manner.

1. Is our GOD so good and gracious as to give good things to them that ask
him, Matthew. 7. 11. Is he so omnipotent and almighty, that he can do what he
will, Psalm^ 115. 3. Does his providence dispose and order all things, even to
the hairs of our heads, and the falling of Sparrowes? Has he strictly
enjoined, and straightly commanded us to pray, Psalm 50. 15. Has he
graciously promised, that those who ask shall have, seek shall find, Matthew.
7. 7. Is he so willing to grant, that his ears are open to hear the cry of
the righteous, Psalm. 34. 15. And is he ready to grant before we ask? Isa. 65.
24.

2. Is prayer acceptable with GOD in the courts of heaven, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Is it availeable even so to admiration, that it shields, and succors, and
safe-guards us against the Devil, Ephesians 6. That it obtained victories,
remooved Leprosies, cured Plagues, recovered health, stayed the Sun in the
firmament, etc. That it sanctifies every thing, takes away the hurt of evil,
sweetneth all distresses, is a sure refuge in time of danger, and brings
salvation.

First, Then surely we will not with the profane praverlesse Atheist neglect
this sweet, and sovereign sacrifice of profitable, and prevailing prayer; for
in so doing we should leave our selves without excuse, we should demonstrate
an absence of grace, and GODS spirit in our hearts, we should loose all
faculty of prayer, and deprive our selves of innumerable comforts in troubles,
and of conquests over our corruptions and Satan's conflicts.

Secondly, Then surely we will not dare to perplexe and persecute GODS
peculiar people, whose prayers, yea whose groans and sighs are so forcible
and effectual with the LORD of heaven, who is both able, willing, and ready
pressed to deliver and defend them from the depth of distresses, and to execute
vengeance upon their persecutours.

Thirdly, Then surely we will not dread, nor be dismayed with the terrible
assaults, furious attempts, and dreadful temptations of Satan; nor with the
frowns, furious rage, and irefull menaces of his instruments; Since prayer is
so powerful, find we a heart to pray, God has an ear to hear, and a hand
to help. He heard rebellious and disobedient Israel asking a King. Egiptian 1 Samuel 8.
Hagar for her scoffing Ishmael. Moses his servant, entreating Genesis 21. 17.
for rebellious, slubborne, and hard-hearted Pharaoh. The Prophet praying for
cruel, contradicting, Exodus 7. 8.
and contemning Jeroboam. And will he not hear me 1 King. 13.
a Saint? a Son? and for my self? Certainly he will.

Fourthly, Then surely we will be careful, and circumspect that we pray not
amiss; for otherwise we may ask, and not receive, James 4. 3. What man,
except strangely foolish, if not strongly frantique, knowing that a petition
rightly penned, or pronounced to his dread Sovereign was of force to frustrate
all his enemies malicious machinations against him; to procure and purchase
more mercies then his tongue could crave, or his heart wish; to wind himself
into, and link himself fast for ever in his Princes favor, would not prepare
to put up the same with premeditation and advisement, least by his precipitate
inconsiderateness he not only loose all those transcendently excellent
expected clemencies and kindnesses, but also incense with insatiable rage and
fury his displeased Sovereign? And shall we carelessely and customarily,
formally and for fashion only, idly, or indecently, faintly or faithlessely,
sinfully and not sincerely pray? Since God hears not sinners, John 9. 31.
neither can abide their prayers who live in their sins, Isa. 1. 15. Since the
prayers of wicked men are abomination to the Lord, Pro. 15. 8. And if we
regard iniquity in our hearts, God will not hear us, Psalm 66. 18. Shall we
I say so slightly, superficially, and sinfully, so carelessely, corruptly, and
unconscionably practice this pious duty of prayer, as to displease, and
dishonor God; to disgrace, and damnisie our selves; and not rather by a
serious, sound, and sincere performance of the same purchase, and procure
honor to God, happiness to our selves, glory to God, grace, and goodness to
our own souls?

5. Pray we therefore

First, With premeditation, taking unto us words, H^s. 14. 2. and pouring out
our meditations before the Lord, Psalm. 102. 1. As meditation ought to go
before speech in preaching; so ought it in prayer also. The heart ought to
proceed and go before the mouth in pious performances, Psalm. 19. 14. Let the
words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, etc. Matthew. 12. 25. A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. As
filling goes before emptying of vessels, so the heart, soul, mind, and
spirit in prayer must first be filled with good thoughts, motions, desires,
meditations, and affections. Prayer therefore is no lip labor, nor a lasie
work; but painful, even a breaking up of a man's heart, and a pouring out of
his soul. Whether we pray, or preach (says one) we ought not to come
wildly, and unadvisedly to those sacred works, beating the a(...) with empty
words, and seeking our matter up and down, as Saul his fathers asses; but
furnished, and prepared to our business with sufficient meditation. I never
shall persuade my self that the exactest industry which either tongue or pen
can tak^ in the handling of his work^s can displease God.

Have we therefore such fore-hand thinking meditations which concern

1. Our miseries, pressures, and distresses.

2. Our manifold sins and iniquities, occasioning the same, yea deserving all
Gods judgments threatened or inflicted, That from these two may flow contrition
for sin, hatred and indignation against the same.

3. Gods anger arising of them, and his strict justice provoked by the same,
these meditations procuring and producing fear, dread, and reverence of the
divine Majesty.

4. Gods merciful promises, and gracious properties, these forcing and filling
the faithful and feeble soul with faith, hope, joy, and comfort, Psalm. 77. 6,
7, 8.

Secondly, With those necessary ingredients of purity, Society of Saints, p.
141.
etc. (for tainted affections will mar good Orisons) of which I have spoken
in my Discourse of the Society of Saints.

Thirdly, And with a dutiful and diligent marking and observing the fruit, and
event of our prayers: not dealing with our petitions as fools and children do
with stones and such like toys darting and slinging them into the air, not
regarding what becomes of them, or how they fall: But like wise, and wary
suitors in Kings courts, who often renew again and again their petitions, and
always wait and expect whether they shall speed, And if not, why

1. That not finding such desired success as we wished and expected, our
prayers not prevailing as we supposed, we may imitating the Saints of God in
like case

1. Be feelingly sensible of such repulse, and mournefully grieve and sorrow
for the same. Psalm. 28. ^. least if thou hear^ not I become, etc.

2. Submissively discuss, and humbly desire to know the cause of the Lords
forsaking us, Psalm. ^2. 1. My God, my God, why, etc.

3. Diligently si^t our selves, and search out the cause (with Saul imitable in
this) why God does not graciously answer us, 1. Sam 14. 28.

4. Resolutely resolving to renounce and for ever to relinquish that makebate
between God and us, though it be a darling delightful Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 39.

5. And having found out this troubler of our peace, and hinderer of our
prayers mortify the same without mercy or compassion, v. 44. Josh. 7. 25.

Thus searching, and trying our ways, as to turn again to the Lord, Lament.
3. 40.

And that perceiving by experience our poor petitions and weak prayers to
find gracious and favorable acceptance at the throne of grace, and to have
prospering success, we may be instigated, enlivened, and inflamed

1. To glorify, and give honor to our good and gracious God, Psalm. 50. 15.

2. To forsake, and for ever to abandon the service, yea slavery of sin, and
the Satanicall society of sinful sons of Beliall, Psalm. 6. 8. the professed
enemies of the Lord Jehovah.

3. To love the Lord, who has been so favorable as to hear our voice and
our supplications, Psalm. 116. 1.

4. And to be more resolute, and ready to pray: good pay encourages to work
cheerfully and constantly. Liberal, and bountiful benefactours win, and
allure constant, and continual cravers. The Lords readiness to hear did
animate David, and should us likewise to persist resolutely and constantly in
prayer, Psalm. 116. 2.

SECT. 2.
Why we should pray for Kings and all that are in authority, and for what, why
for Pastors and for what, why for our Children, and why also for enemies.
THus pray we not only for our selves, but also for all men, 1. Tim. 2. 1.
namely which are capable of such gifts, graces, and good things which we pray
for: Three sorts are incapable of the graces Gods people petition principally
for. To wit, The damned in hell. The dead in Christ, and the desperate
impenitent sinner, who sins the sin against the Holy Ghost, and therefore these
are not to be prayed for.

1. The damned are capable of no grace, no good, no mercy, no favor. Dives
desired but one drop of water to comfort and cool his tongue burning and
broiling in those intolerable and infernal flames, and could not obtain so
small a favor.

2. The dead in Christ are destitute of no grace, goodness, freedom, favor,
honor, or happiness, they enjoying to all eternity such and so many glorious
blessednesses, that the heart of man cannot conceive or imagine, much less can
the tongue of men and Angels express, and declare the same.

To pray for the first sort of these is frivolous, and fruitless. To pray for
the latter is needless, and unnecessary; and impossible to do good to either.

To pray therefore for either is sinful, and unlawful; because unnecessary
and unprofitable, because it is not of faith: for faith, and every article of
faith must be grounded upon Gods Word and Canonical Scripture. But to believe
that the dead are to be prayed for is not grounded on the sacred Word of God,
there being in the Canonical Scripture to warrant the same neither Testimony
or precept, Example or practice, Promise of reward, nor punishment threatened
for the neglect thereof.

Therefore such prayer is Impious, because no where warrantable. Hurtful
(because sinful) to the petitioner. Needless if in heaven. Unprofitable if in
hell. Impossible to do good wheresoever therefore not of faith, and utterly
unlawful.

3. The desperate living capable of some earthly, corporal, temporal favors:
but of no heavenly, spiritual, or eternal grace, we may not pray for any such
in their behalf, but only for those other whereof they are capable: thus
Moses for Pharaoh, the Prophet for Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. 6. Moses was so far
from praying for, that he prayed against the cursed conspiratours, Numb. 16.
15. The Lord forbids Samuel to mourn for Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 1. David prays
against the wicked, Psalm. 5. 10. 59. 5. And Saint John tells us there are
sinners for whom we should not pray, 1 Ioh. 5. 16. But it being Gods
prerogative to know who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and although they do oppose,
God may give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and to recover
themselves, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

Take we heed that we pray not against, no not wicked men.

1. Pray we may against the cause of a wicked man, not his person, he being a
brother.

2. Pray we may against the plots of private enemies against us, not against
themselves, 2 Samuel 15. 31.

3. Pray we may, and must against the whole body of Satan, Judge. 5. 31. Psalm.
129. 5.

4. Pray we may against some notorious member of Satan, namely

1. If not as our, but Gods enemies, shunning carnal desire of revenge.

2. If they are known to be incurable.

3. We aiming at Gods glory, that it may shine; his children be bettered; not
simply wishing the destruction of the person.

5. Pray we may against them conditionally, namely, rather that they may
perish, then any longer reproach God by malice, and hinder the salvation of
many.

But to return, and proceed.

Pray we for Kings, Princes, and all such who are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

1. That they may have Gods gracious favor, and needful protection from all
evil.

2. That they may have his good guidance, and divine direction in all their
ways.

3. That they may abound in knowledge, prudence, wisdom, and discretion to
know how to go in, and out before their people; to understand how to judge
them, and to discern between good, and bad, 1 King. 3. 7, 8. 9.

4. That they may be furnished, and fitted to do judgment, and justice, Deuteronomy.
1. 13. Psalm. 2. 10. 72. 1. Give the King thy judgments O God, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings Son.

5. That they may have fortitude, courage, and upright severity to punish
transgressors with fit penalties, Psalm. 101. 8. Pro. 20 8.

6. That they may have temperance, and not be given too much to pleasures, nor
to profits, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. Pro. 31. 4. for these two have perverted many, 1
King. 12. 10.

7. That they may have disereet elemency to rule, and reign over their people
as their head, doing them good, and behaving themselves humbly toward them.

8. That they may be careful of their subjects good, ruling over them for God,
as deputies under another King; and therefore according to the will of God,
that great King commanding good, forbidding evil; being careful not only of
their bodies and estates, Genesis 41. 49. but also and especially of their souls
and salvation. And therefore that they would,

1. Pray to God for their subjects, 2 Samuel 14. 17. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18.

2. As also exhort, provoke, and stir them up to religion, and pious
performances, Josh. 3 2, 6, 8, 11.

9. That they may be zealous for Gods glory, truth, and word, such who fear
God; practicing it themselves, and seeing that it be practiced in their Courts
and Countries.

For as well the knowledge as the practice of a righteous life is the special
gift of God, and therefore to be begged of, and prayed for from him.

Likewise the knowledge and the practice of civil justice is a singular gift
of God, by prayer therefore to be obtained.

And all Christian people are bound to pray for their Princes and Governors,
that God would give them the forenamed kinds of judgment and righteousness,
celestial and civil, Psalm. 7^, 1. For justice is so necessary in Governors
supreme and subordinate, that S. Augustine says, Justice being August. lib.
4. cap. 4. de Civit. Dei.
removed, what are kingdoms save great robberies? -- A certain Pirate being
taken, answered Alexander the great elegantly and truly; For when the King had
asked the man wherefore he was so noisome to the seas? He with a bold
stontnesse answered, and why are you so dangerous to the world? But because I
do it with a little ship am called a thief; because you with a great fleet are
called an Emperor. And S. Ambrose Ambros. de paradiso. cap. 3.
makes this equivalent to all other virtues, saying, Where wisdom is, there
oftentimes is malice* Where fortitude, there often times is anger. Where
temperance, there is envy. Where upright dealing or justice is, there are all
virtues.

The reasons to enforce people thus to pray in the behalf of Motives.
their Kings, Princes, and others in authority, are of great variety and
validity, plentiful and prevalent, many and of great moment.

1. Thus to do is the prescript and command of our good A praecept^
and gracious God, our supreme and sovereign Lord, Jer. 29. 7. Seek the peace
of Babylon, and pray unto the Lord for it. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Pray for Kings, and all
in authority, etc.

2. Thus doing we imitate the pious practices of Gods holy Ab exemplo.
ones whom we ought to follow as they followed Christ. We all (says
Tertullian) pray always for all Emperors, that they Tertul. Apol. cap. 30. p.
60 1.
may have a long life, a quiet government, a safe family, strong armies, a
faithful counsel, an honest people, a quiet country, and whatsoever are
desired of men and Caesar. Yet were Emperors in those times tyrannical
persecutours. How unlike are the unchristian tenets and diabolical damnable
practices of our adversaries the Papists to these of the ancient Fathers and
the Primitive Christians. Hear one of them speak, Ioannes Marian. de Rege and
Reganstat cap. 6. page 33, 34.
Mariana in a book of his dedicated to Philip the third King of Spain,
printed by authority. He commends the fact of James Clement a Dominican Friar
killing Henry the third King of France, calling it a renowned constancy of
heart, a memorable noble act -- again, the King being slain, he raised to
himself an excellent name -- again, speaking of the weakness of his body, he
says, a greater power did strengthen his forces and courage. Before he says,
that the Monk was resolved by their Divines with whom he consulted, that a
tyrant may lawfully be destroyed. And he himself says in the same Chapter,
that if Princes oppress the commonwealth, if they are intolerable with vices
and filthiness, they may not only lawfully, but also with praise and honor
be destroyed. Excellently therefore says our Church in a prayer, to be said on
the fifth of November, Whose religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction,
whose practice is murdering of souls and bodies.

3. This is a matter of important weight and urgent necessity; A necessary.
for,

1. No King, Prince, or Potentate has these gifts or graces of himself, but
by grace and inspiration from above, Job 32. 8, 9. The inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding, great men are not always wise, Eccl. 3. 16. 5.
8. 10. 5. Ier. 15. 17. Every man is brutish by his knowledge.

2. None can give these graces and excellent endowments but God only, who
bestows them upon those who ask him, Job 38. 36. Who has put wisdom in the
inward parts, or who has given understanding to the heart! 28. 12. Where shall
wisdom be found? etc. Whence then comes wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding? Verse. 20. God understands the way thereof, etc. 23. It is Gods
blessing which makes all thing prosperous and successful, Ps. 127. 1. It is
he that gives salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144. 10. It is he who leads in the
way of righteousness in the midst of the paths of judgment, Prove. 8. 20. A
just weight and balance are the Lords, all the waights of the bag are his
work, 16. 11. Man's goings are of the Lord, Prove. 20. 24. The Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord as rivers of waters, he turns it whithersoever he will,
Prove. 21. 1. Yea every man's judgment comes from the Lord, 29. 26.

3. After he has given he often takes away again, as from Saul, from whom the
Spirit of the Lord departed, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him, 1 Samuel 16. 14. and withholds his grace of assistance, Job 12. 20. He removes
away the speech of the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged,
he powers contempt upon Princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.
Ier. 51. 57. I will make drunk her princes and her wise men, her captains,
and her rulers, and her mighty men, says the King whose name is the Lord of
hoasts.

4. When these and such like graces are wanting in the government of Kings and
Princes, subjects dare not complain, check, control or reprove them, Job 54.
^8. Is it fit to say to a King thou art wicked? or to Princes ye are ungodly?
Nec valent nec debent castigare.
Subjects neither can nor ought to correct their Princes.

5. Where they be wanting, Kings and great men are wicked, and all things go to
wrack and ruin in a country and commonwealth, Prove. 11. 11, 14. By the
blessing of the upright the city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth
of the wicked. Where no counsel is the people fall. 29. 4. The King by
judgment establishes the land, but he that receives gifts overthrows it.
31. 5. Lest they drink and forget the law, and pervert judgment of any of the
afflicted. Eccles. 10. 16. Woe to thee O land when thy King is a child, and thy
Princes eat in the morning. Lewd Governors are like leaking ships which drown
all.

4. These and such like gifts and gracious endowments Ab utili.
do inestimably enrich and ennoble the parties themselves with God and man:
confirm and establish their Thrones and Scepters, and make their subjects
unspeakably gladsome and grateful. For,

1. A King that sits in the throne of judgment chaseth away evil with his
eye, Pro. 20 8.

2. The throne is established by righteousness, Pro. 16. 12. Yea
righteousness exalts a nation, 14. 34. Take away the wicked from before the
King, and his Throne shall be established in righteousness. Prove. 25. 5. The
King by judgment establishes the land, Pro. 29. 14.

3. To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice,
Proverbs 21. 3. In these things, namely, in exercising loving kindness,
judgment and righteousness in the earth, I delight, says the Lord, Jeremy
9. 24.

4. These bring shelter, succor and safety to subjects, Isa 32. 16, 17, 18.
Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in
the fruitful field, and the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the
effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever; and my people shall
dwell in a peaceable habitation, in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places, Jeremy 7. 5, 7. 22. 15, 16. Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do
judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of
the poor and needy, and then it was well with him, etc.

5. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, he shall not transgress in
judgment, Prove. 16. 10.

6. A King that sits in the throne of judgment scatters away all evils
with his eyes, Proverbs 20. 8. A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings
the wheel over them, Pro. 20. 26.

7. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy,
Pro. 20. 28.

8. Where these gifts and graces are, there is health, strength, safety,
delight, and the blessing of goodness, Prove. 24. 5, 6, 25.

9. And so they are a means likewise to prop up and preserve the
commonwealth: For, By a man of understanding and knowledge the state of the
land shall be prolonged, Proverbs 28. 2. Whereas, The Prince that wants
understanding is a great oppressor, Proverbs 28. 16.

10. From these do flow the constant and comfortable continuance of a country,
the majesty and maintenance of a kingdom, Pro. 28. 2. 29. 4.

11. By means of these Princes and Potentates prolong their days, Pro, 28.
16. procure health, Pro. 24. 6. and prosperity, Ier. 22. 15, 16.

12. Subjects live joyfully (as we do this day) rejoicing when the righteous
are in authority, Pro. 19. 2. In peace, piety, and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

5. Diverse and dreadful are the effects and consequents of Ab inutili.
evil and unjust government.

1. In regard of the Governors. For,

1. They will keep evil servants, Pro. 29. 12.

2. They will transgress for a trifle, Pro. 28. 21.

3. They will pervert judgment, Pro. 17. 23. 31. 5.

4. They oppress the poor, Pro. 28. 15, 16.

5. They are in danger of cursing, Pro. 24. 24.

6. They will be contemned, Pro. 18. 3.

2. In regard of the people or subjects. For,

1. They shall sigh and mourn, Pro. 29. 2*

2. They shall fear and fly, Pro. 28. 28.

3. They will hate and curse, so miserably offend. Pro. 24. 24.

4. They will despise and contemn, so miserably offend. Pro. 18. 3.

3. In regard of the country.

1. It shall be woeful, Eccl. 10. 16.

2. It shall be destroyed, Pro. 29. 4.

3. It shall be consumed, Ier. 21. 12. Amos 5. 6, 7.

4. It shall be desolate, Mica 3. 9, 10, 11. Sion for your sake shall beplowed,
etc.

6. Such as the Princes and principal men are, such will the people themselves
be, either in truth, or in semblance and show. If not in practice, yet in
profession. For as all inferior bodies are ruled by the Moon, all the Stars
are lightened or darkened by the Sun; all celestial bodies carried as the first
mover, so subjects generally as their Princes. As the rivers taste of their
fountains or springs, so people of their Princes properties. As members are
ruled by their head, so people by their Princes. As children by their parents,
as servants by their masters, Scilicet and vulgus manant exempla regentum.
so subjects by their Sovereigns. Such as is the Prince, such will the people
be, is an ancient saying.

Tales solentesse in Republica cives, quales sunt principes. Plato in Epist.
Citizens are wont to be such in the commonwealth, as are their Princes, says
Plato.

Solent plerunque homines vitam princ^pis intueri. Herodian.
Men for the most part do usually look upon the conversation of their Prince,
says Herodian.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur or^is. Claudian.
The whole world is disposed to the example of Kings, says Claudian. It is
therefore more than needful, of extraordinary weight and moment, and of urgent
necessity, that we should pray for Kings and all in authority over us.

1. Not only if they were vile and wicked, Genesis 20. 7, 17. 47. 7. Exodus 8. 30.
1 Samuel 16. 1. Dan. 6. 21. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

2. But also that we should power out our hearts and souls unto the Lord, that
we should be constant, continual and importunate petitioners at the throne of
grace for our godly kings and governors, Ios. 1. 17. 1 Kin. 1. 3. Psalm. 20. 1.
72. 1, 15. and that fervently, instantly with zeal and earnestnes, for even the
strongest, the wisest, wealthiest and most godly Princes and Rulers have need
of their peoples prayers for the safety of their persons, souls and bodies, as
also for the good success of their government, Psalm. 72. 1, 15. 118. 25.

What and if therefore not only diverse deboist and licentious, riotous and
tosse-pot swinish drunkards who often times drink their wit out of their heads,
their health out of their bodies, and God out of their souls, had rather
drink day after day, and night after night a whole month together the Kings
Majesty's health, than pray in fervency and privacy one hour for the same: But
also many more moderate men deem it true devotion to drink hourly and openly
beyond excess for the Kings health and welfare, and a part of preciseness to
make a conscience of praying constantly and privately for the same, and
therefore they for their parts make drinking of healths a principal part of
their devotion and piety toward higher Powers, and to go in lieu of their
prayers in private for them, thinking they have manifested more really and
truly their love, piety, service and duty unto them, and done them more and
real good honor and service in carousing and quaffing of their healths, than
if they had prayed for them: As if great men had more need of healthings than
of prayers, or as if healths were the best prayers they could put up for them,
or the best and most acceptable sacrifices they could offer up to God in their
behalf. When as in truth (although many vilify and upbraid, deforme and
deride, scorn and scoff at, disparage and disgrace all such who will not
roar and revell, quaffe and carouse, play the good fellows, in the worlds
language, and health it, they being reformed and reclaimed from their drunken
courses and company, taunting and taxing them of unmannerly unsociablenesse,
singular stoicisme and surlinesse, disdainful and discontented discourtesie
and degenerousnesse, proud and pragmaticall peevishness, rusticall rudeness,
coy and uncomplementall clownishnesse, humourous and scrupulous perverseness,
of factious indiscreet over-scrupulous preciseness) these heathenish healths
are but the panders, bawds and attendants to intemperance, excess and
drunkenness. These were a part of the Devils homage, sacrifice and service at
the first, and had him for their Author, as says S. Augustine and S. Basil.

I entreat you (says S. Augustine) and adjure you by the Aug. de Tempore Sermon.
231.
dreadful day of judgment, that you would banish when you feast together that
filthy custom of drinking, by which in a large measure without measure three
by three willing or unwilling are wont to drink, as being the poison of the
Devil: for that unhappy custom does yet remain as a relic of Pagans; and
whosoever shall practice this at his own or other men's feasts, let him not
doubt but he has sacrificed to the Devil. S. Basil also in his Sermon against
surfeiting and drunkenness, showing the drunken healths and rounds which were
in use among the pot-companions of his times, not much differing from ours,
says a little before: They have the Devil the author of that law, and sin
the reward of the victory. These are condemned, and long since cried down by
the ancient Fathers and others, Augustine, Basil, Ambrose, and others. S.
Ambrose, the corrupt, cursed, and common custom of swaggering Belials in their
hellish humors. Let us drink to the health of the Emperor, say Amb. cap. 17.
de Helia and Jejunie.
they, and whosoever pledgeth not his health, let him be guilty of devotion. A
fantasy of pious devotion. Let us drink for the health of the armies, the
prowess of the Earls, for the health of children, etc.

These are such an indignity to good and holy men, that they desire not to have
others drink or pledge their healths. For, (as Saint Augustine says) None can
offer Aug. Sermon. 23. de Tempore.
a greater indignity to the holy Angels and holy men, than they who by drinking
in their names do assay to kill their souls. For, in so doing, they do make
such the patrons, causes, and occasions of their drunkenness and riot. Yea,
their healths and names are made a common prologue and passage, an ordinary
shoe-horne and usual inlet unto, and a frequent plea and patronage to bear
out, and a not unusual apology to extenuate, if not excuse the excess,
intemperance and drunkenness of roaring ruffians, and of loose and beastly
drunkards.

Yet (these being supreme and sovereign supporters in this our warfare to
stablish and sustain the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, the woman's seed, and to
supplant and subvert the Serpents side or Satan's kingdom) let us like loyal,
loving, religious and obedient subjects, drink for our own health, and never
surcease to solicit, but with all sedulity and diligence petition at the
throne of grace, and heartily pray for his Majesty's health and happy reign,
and for all that are in authority, that they may not be weaker or worse than
in former times and ages, that they may not be wanton and wilful, secure and
careless, but valiant and warlike ruling with strength, virtuous and wise,
ruling by reason and righteousness. Pray therefore and say, Give the King thy
judgment O Lord, and thy righteousness to the Kings son, etc. Psalm 72. 2.
And for all that are in authority, that under them we may (as indeed we do)
lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. These who are
in authority being of great use, and in place to do most good.

2. Pray we for Pastors and Preachers, the Messengers of God and Ministers of
his Word.

1. Before their ordination, power out our petitions before the Lord to send
faithful laborers, not lither and licentious loyterers into his vineyard,
Matthew. 9. 23. Hence was it that the Church ordained Ember Weeks immediately
before the times of ordination, that people should fast and pray for able and
approved, pious and painful, good and gracious guides to be set over the
Church of Christ which he has so dearly bought.

2. At the ordination and when they are admitted we are to pray: Thus the
Apostles Paul and Bar^abas were separated for this weighty work by fasting,
prayer, and laying on of hands, Acts 13. 3.

3. After their ordaining also we ought to pray for them, Ephesians. 6. 19. Pray
for me. Col. 4. 3. Withal praying for us. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Brethren pray for
us. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Brethren pray for us, that we may be fitted and furnished
with all abilities, gifts and gracious endowments needful for our so
excellent, eminent and difficult calling: for we watch for men's souls, Heb. 13
17. And who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16. As also with fidelity
and painfulness in the use and employment of the same.

Pray for us, that our greatest desires may be store of spiritual gifts, 1
Cor. 14. 1. to do good in profiting the people, saving our own souls and those
who hear us, 1 Timoth. 4. 16.

Pray for us, that we may esteem it our greatest dignity to do service to the
Church and people of God, 1 Corinthians. 14. 3. Ephesians. 4 11, 12.

Pray for us, that we may be assured our best service we can do to our people
is to preach the Word aright, admonish, reprove, exhort and comfort them: to
pray for them, to administer the Sacraments, to catechize, to confer with
them, to give them good example: and therefore that we may stir up our selves
to be most painful, patient, constant and cheerful in these pious and
principal performances, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

Pray for us, our calling being very difficult in regard of our weighty work;
which is to quicken such as are dead in sin, to strengthen the weak,
encourage the feeble and faint-hearted, to comfort those that are troubled in
conscience, to stand against all adverse power. And we being men subject to
like passions that other are, Acts 14. 15. And we having no ability nor
aptness to perform our ministerial function, except it be given us, 2 Cor.
3. 5, 6.

Pray for us, that we may be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2, being furnished with
matter worthy to be uttered, and with a faculty and facility well to utter the
same.

Pray for us, that such gifts and graces as God has bestowed on us may be
bettered, continued, and successful.

For if we be faithful in our functions, we must be sure most of all to be
opposed by Satan and his accomplices, Zac. 3. 1. Luke 2^. 31. Satan well knowing
that the way to scatter the sheep is to smite the shepherd, Zach. 13. 7. that
the way to rout the army is to discomfit and put to flight the chariots and
horsemen. And our failings are so dangerous, that those amongst us that perish,
perish not alone, 2 Pet. 1. 1, 2. many being drawn into perdition with
Ministers who are corrupt in life or doctrine

3. Pray we for our children, Gen 9. 27. 27. 27, 28. 48. 15, 16. 2 Sa^. 12. 16.
1 Chro. 29. 19. Give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart. Job 1. 5. Job
sanctified his children, etc. Would Cornelia visit ye temples for her sons
Tiberius and Caius, and offer sacrifices to the gods, for such was the
miserable blindness of those profane people bereft of the comfortable knowledge
of the ways of life, and groping grossly in those dangerous and deceitful
paths of paganism) they being in the wars of Africa. For thus she says in an
epistle she wrote to them. Your father bequeathed you nothing but weapons, and
from me you shall inherit nothing but books, for I had rather leave my children
good doctrine whereby they may live (mark this we who are Christian parents)
than evilriches whereby they may perish, I (...) not cease to visit the temples
for your own health, nor yet to offer sacrifice to the gods for your honor. If
therefore (I say) Cornelia a poor seduced Heathen, led by the dark and du^kish
light of nature only, would constantly and carefully visit the temples for the
health and happiness of her sons, would continually and incessantly sacrifice
to the gods for her childrens honor, when alas all her performances were not
only frivolous and fruitless, but also vile and vicious: for the temples which
she visited were the temples of the Devil, and those sacrifices which she
offered were likewise to the Devil. How much more should we stir up our
selves to solicit the Lord of hosts for our children by fervent, frequent, and
faithful petitions, they incountring with, and being environed about with such
like fierce and fraudulent foes, themselves being so frail and flexible, and
prayer to our good and gracious God being so powerful and prevailing.

1. You therefore who resolve to enter into the honorable estate of marriage,
let your first entrance into the same be seasoned and sanctified by prayer to
God. For,

1. This is just and equal in regard of the precept, not only in general,
Col. 3. 17. to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. but also in special,
marriage being one of those things which are sanctified and seasoned hereby, 1 Timothy 4. 5. But also in regard of the pious practices of Abraham's religious
servant, Genesis 24. 12. Rebekahs friends, V. 60. Isaac, Genesis 28 2, 3. the elders
of Ephrata, Ruth 4. 11, 12. and of God himself who blessed Adam and Eve when he
joined them together in this communion, Genesis 1. 28.

2. This is of important and urgent necessity, all things being vain without
Gods blessing, Psalm. 127. and children being his free gift.

3. This being very forcible and availing, Ps. 128. A good beginning makes way
for a good ending. If the first fruits are holy so are the branches. A love
principium, could the Heathen say.

4. Grace and nature requiring this, marriages are monstrous, and they are
headless weddings where prayer is wanting.

2. Bearing of children being a blessing of God, it is to be begged at his
hands in prayer, Ruth 4. 11. like Rahel and Leah, namely in readiness to yield
to their husbands in all good things, in fruitfulness and bearing of children
to God, Genesis 1. 28. and 15. 3. and 24. 60. Psalm. 127. 3, 5. and 128. 3. Zach. 8
15.

1. These being as grapes to vines, grass to meadows, flowers to a garden,
corn to fields, and fishes to the sea.

2. These being the building of a man's house, Genesis 16. ^. Deuteronomy. 25 9. Ruth 4.
11. 2 Samuel 7. 11, 12, 27. and therefore the Hebrews derive Ben of Banah to
build. Loving children are (...)
the building of their parents.

3. These being the prime possession of parents, their chief (...) of (...) of
(...)
heritage and inheritance, Genesis 4. 1. I have possessed a man of the Lord. Psalm.
127. 3. An inheritance.

4. These being an ornament to their parents, being

1. As arrows keen and sharp in the hands of a mighty man: And therefore as a
quiver of arrows did adorn and accommodate an archer and a man of war, so
do children their parents, Psalm. 127.

2. As olive plants, some higher some lower, some lesser some bigger, some
younger some elder, deck and beautify a seminary, so children are a glorious
ornament to those families from whence they are as from nurseries bestowed into
the world.

3. As carved and polished stones and pillars of the Temple, which were not
only profitable to uphold the whole fabric, but being finely hewn, curiously
and cunningly wrought, did deck, adorn, and beautify the material Temple,
so children well brought up and educated, did build up and polish the
spiritual Church of God: and as it is a credit to a gentleman to have a
company of tall fellows to wait on him, so it is an ornament and credit to a
man to have a company of wellnurtur'd children.

5. These being as fruit to trees, therefore called the fruit of the womb,
Deuteronomy. 28. 4. Psalm. 28. 3. and 132. 11. Fruit they are, because they are derived
and descended from the bodies of parents, as fruit springs from a tree. They
are also delightful to parents as fruit is to our taste and mouth. The more
fruitful a tree, the more blessed in our esteem. So children and childrens
children are a great blessing, Psalm. 128. 6.

6. These being such favors that the having of them is a blessing.

1. In nature, which teaches all creatures to seek the procreation of their
kind, men naturally desiring them when they are wanting, greatly affecting them
if enjoyed, and much lamenting the loss of them, these being the works of
nature in us.

2. In grace, whether they are good or bad grace teaches us to esteem them a
blessing,

1. If good and gracious, for then not only a man's name is hereby continued
upon earth, his substance remains in his name, the commonwealth by him is
furnished with good members, but also the mystical body of Christ is hereby
enlarged and augmented.

2. If evil, for then the justice of God is glorified in their destruction,
and they may be the progenitors of pious persons. This nature teaches not.

Yea these are such a blessing, that the want of them was esteemed formerly a
curse and a reproach, Genesis 30. 23. and 20. 18. 1 Samuel 1. 6. Judge. 11. 38. Luke
1. 25. Men should not murmr at, or mislike the increase of children as a
burden, for thus to do is an evident argument of a distrustful and desperate
mind, 2 Kin. 4. 43. Ps. 147. 9. Mat. 6. 26 and 16. 31. But wanting they are to
beg them of God who opens the barren womb, Genesis 15. 1. and 25 21 and 30. 22.
1 Samuel 1. 10. Luke ^. 13.

3. All married folk chiefly and principally ought to desire children for the
increase of Gods Church and Kingdom. Pray they must that they may bring forth
and train up many children to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 11. Ps. 128. 3. and 144. 12.
one pearl is more worth and far better then many pebbles. One lamb than
many wolves, one Isaac then many Ishmaels, one Jacob then many Esaus.

Desire we children therefore not only to preserve and propagate our name and
memory on earth which sinners may do, Genesis 11. 4. 2 Samuel 18. 18. Matthew. 5 46.
but to build the house of Israel, to amplify and enlarge the Church of God

1. And therefore men and women should be careful conscionably to marry in
the Lord, Genesis 6 2, 4. Nehem. 13. 24. 1 Cor. 7, 14, 39. The profanation of
marriage is the fountain of pollution, sin and wickedness, and consequently
of shame and confusion both in Church and Commonwealth, in religion and
policy. And one special profanation is when choice is made according to lust
rather then law, reason, wisdom, discretion* Religion, Genesis 6 2.

2. They should use sobriety and chastity in marriage, Heb. 13. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 5.

3. They should train up and teach their children true religion timely, Pro.
22. 6.

4. As also pray without ceasing to God for them. This was a means which being
prescribed and practiced by Monica Saint Augustines Mother, freed him from
those sottish seducements and horrible heresies of the Manichees into which he
was deeply plunged, for thus he writes. For almost nine August. confess. lib.
4. cap. 11.
years were finished in which I was tumbled in that mudde of that bottomless
pit, and in the darkness of false-hood, when I attempted to arise I was more
dangerously hurt. But when that chaste, pious, and well advised widow, such as
thou do love, being now doubtless, more cheerful in hope, yet not more
unfruitful in mourning, did not cease at all times of her prayers to bewail
to thee of me, her prayers came before thee, and yet thou did as yet suffer
me to be rolled and enwrapped in that darkness. When afterward as he says,
his Mother entreated a certain Bishop to vouchsafe to talk with her son to
refute his errors, to show him the evils he had learned, and teach him good;
the Bishop refused, telling her I was yet unteachable, Chap. 12.
because I was as yet puffed up with the novelty of the heresy, and had
disquieted many unlearned with very many doubts. But let him alone (says he)
and continue praying to God for him, and he himself by reading will find what
that error is, and how great that wickedness is -- she not resting herewith
satisfied, but still urging him by entreating him more and plentifully weeping,
that he would see me and reason with me, he being forthwith displeased with
weariness. Depart from me (says he) as sure as thou live it cannot be that
a son of such tears should perish.

What and if many blackmouthd Belials and Bedlam parents, breath and belch out
against their children in rage and fury, yea often times with

1. Much bitterness and blasphemy cruel cursings; Little considering that
such evil speeches are the badge and brand of wicked men, Psalm. 10. 7. his
mouth is full of cursing, etc. who shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9. 17.

2. Little considering that as they love cursing so it shall come unto them,
and as they delight not in blessing so it shall be far from them, Psalm. 109. 18.

3. Little considering that not only cursing of God himself, Levit. 24. 11,
15. an horrible blasphemy. Kings Gods deputies on earth, Eccl. 10. 20. Rich
men, Ibid. Rulers, Judges and Magistrates, Exodus 2^. 28. Act. 23. 4, 5.
Parents, Exodus 21. 17. Pro. 20. 20. The deaf, Levit. 19. 14. Enemies, Job 31.
30. and of all others in particular: But that all manner of cursing is
forbidden, and condemned in the word of God, Romans 12. 14. Bless but curse not.
Iam. 3. 9, 10. Curse, etc. these things ought not so to be.

4. Little considering that such hideous and hellish language manifestly
declares, not only their barbarous and bloody cursed cruelty toward their
own children, whom they have not only poisoned and polluted with original
corruption, but also with many actual transgressions, by their noisome
negligence and execrable example. But also their own diabolical and divellish
disposition and condition, their filthy hearts fuming up such infernal fury
and their graceless and godless speeches, smelling and favoring of the fire
and brimstone of the bottomless pit.

What and if diverse careless parents satisfy themselves as having
sufficiently if not superabundantly done their devour in this particular
toward their children, if they now and then cursorily and carelessly, idly and
inconsiderately give them a concise formal and complementall God bless thee
Mistake me not I pray, as if I disallowed of children asking parents blessing,
or of parents blessing their children, either of that kind of blessing whereby
they bestow temporal and transitory favors on them, like Calebs blessing his
daughter, Judge. 1. 15. or of that other when they wish and pray for good things
to them, so as Isaac, Jacob, Job, and others blessed their children. It is the
thing I press and persuade unto. Only I desire that men would not make that a
matter of complement which is of great consequence and should be a matter of
conscience: that they would not slubber over and slight duties requiring our
most select and serious sedulity: that they would not frivolously trifle over
such duties for form and fashion sake, which crave our most instant and
intentive fidelity, frequency, and fervency and our exactest endeavors: that
they would not reachlesly rest satisfied in giving now and then a God bless
thee more out of custom then conscience to them for whom they ought to
supplicate and solicit without ceasing: power out their most pious and
patheticall petitions and importune the Lord Jehovah with fervor and
frequency. For

1. Must we pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. how much more for our children whom
we have infected and poisoned, distained and defiled with the contagious
loathsome leprosy of sin, which nothing can cure; with the foul and filthy
abominations which nothing can wash away save the precious blood of that
immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ.

2. Must we endeavor to do them all the good we possibly may and can.

First, Not only concerning bodily and temporal blessings and benefits.

First, by feeding and fostering, protecting and preserving, clothing and
comforting, lodging and defending them, Genesis 21. 7, 9. Deuteronomy. 1. 31. 1 Samuel 1.
23. 1 King 17 12. Job 31. 18 Psalm. 22. 9. Isa. 66. 12, 13. Cant. 8. 10. Luke
11. 11, 12. and 15. 22. Heb. 11. 23.

Secondly, by providing aforehand with foreseeing provident consideration.

1. Means of maintenance, Genesis 25. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 8. and therefore ought to teach
and train them up in some honest art, science, trade or occupation whereby to
live and profit the Church or Commonwealth, 1 Samuel 17. 33. Zach. 13. 5. Mat.
4. 21. and in such whereunto they are fittest, being most suitable to their
natural inclination and personal endowments: appropriating and applying the
best guifted to the most selected service, Exodus 13. 2. 1 Samuel 1. 11.
preferring the eldest before the rest in regard of patrimony or inheritance,
except they be riotous wicked and stubborn, Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16, 17. 2 Chronicles.
21. 3. Luke 15. 31. Yet not so far forth as to bequeath bountifully to them,
to support their state, and maintain their greatness and gentility, and
leaving to the rest little or nothing, save some light title as Master or
Mistrisse to live withal.

2. Comfortable commodious and convenient marriages, Genesis 21. 21. and 24. 3, 4.
and 28. 1. and 34. 4. and 38. 6. Judge. 14. 3. Ruth 3. 1. yet with their own
mutual consent and agreement, Genesis 24. 57, 58. Number. 36. 6.

Secondly, But also yea and infinitely much more concerning the procuring,
possessing, and preserving those holy and heavenly, sacred and sanctifying
spiritual soule-saving gifts: Gleefull and gladsome garnishing graces of Gods
spirit.

1. By teaching them true religion and the saving sacred knowledge of our God,
Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and 6. 7. and 11. 19* Exodus 10. 2. and 12. 26, 27. Genesis 18. 19. and
28. 1, 2, 3. and 48. 3, 4. and 49. 1, 2. and 50. 24. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. 2 Timothy 3.
15.

First, This being a matter of moment and importance, and of urgent necessity
in regard of them, for

1. They are borne blind, Ioh. 3. 6.

2. They naturally cannot see the kingdom of God, Psalm. 119. 18. Rev. 3. 17.

3. They cannot perceive the things that be of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

4. They may be compared to the beasts that perish, Job 11. 12. Psalm. 32. 9.
and 49. 20.

Secondly, This being a means much to honor, advance, and dignifie them.

1. Knowledge being part of Gods image, Col. 3. 10.

2. And a chain or ornament about their necks, Pro. 1. 9. and 4. 8, 9.

Thirdly, And wonderful commodious, profitable and advantageous.

1. This giving light unto their eyes, Psalm 19. 8. and 119. 130.

2. This making them wiser then their elders, Psalm. 119. 100.

3. This preserving them from errors and every evil way, Pro. 2. 10, 12, 13.
and 4. 6. and 6. 22.

4. This being a matter of rejoicing unto them, Jeremy 9. 24.

5. This being and bringing life eternal, Ioh. 17. 3.

6. This so far excelling other knowledge, that in comparison thereof it is
but dung and dross, Phil. 3. 8.

And therefore although many if not the most parents teach not, or if at all,
yet teach slightly and sloathfully too too carelessly and and negligently their
children.

1. Either in regard of the want of knowledge and ignorance of true religion
which swarms and abounds in them.

2. Or in regard of fond and false persuasions touching this duty wherewith
they are possessed, that this and other soulesaving duties peculiarly properly
and only do belong to the Minister.

3. Either in regard of Ministers negligence and ignorance in not incitating
and exhorting them hereunto.

4. Or because of their own sloathfullnesse, negligence or idleness.

Yet let us all beloved brethren teach our children, and that

1 Timely 1. That being timely seasoned herewith it may not depart from them,
Pro. 22. 6. 2. That mortality may not prevent them and us. 3. That we may gain
comfort to our consciences upon the discharge of our duties. 4. That delays
may not damnifie nor endanger them.
2 Truly, for 1. Gods religion can abide no mixture, it being pure and perfect.
2. The Arc and Dagon cannot stand together. 3. God and Baal cannot be
worshipped together aright. 4. Christ and Belial have no agreement, 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15, 16.
3 Discretely 1. Least they be dalled, dulled, amazed or confounded, through
overmuch, overhard or overlong instructions. 2. Least they be discouraged or
dismayed from going forward through difficulties disclosed unto them.

4 Diligently, for their wits are wandering and gadding, and their memories
fi^le and slippery.

5. And the nearer our end approaches, the more let us apply our selves to
instruct them carefully, Deuteronomy. 31. and 32. and 33. Josh. 23. and 24. cordially
and continually. Considering

1. The great and unspeakable loss of our misspent time past and gone, 1 Pet.
4. 3.

2. The invaluable and inestimable gain of time present, and precious in
redeeming the same by enriching our selves and others, Psalm. 90. 12 Gal. 6. 10.

3. The lamentable lack of time to come, the day of our life being worn and
wasted, and the night of our death come when we cannot work, Pro 6. 8. Ioh. 9.
4.

4. The constant and conscionable care that should be in us to continue in
well-doing, Matthew. 24. 46. Romans 2. 7.

5. The privileges and profits of our perseverance in piety and pious
performances, Rev. 2. 10.

6. The incessant and incredible growth in grace which should be, yea and is in
us if we be such we seem to be: as the Saints of God are and have been, Psalm.
92. 12. Rev. 2. 19.

All which expressly and earnestly incitate and exhort us hereunto.

Secondly, By counsel and advising, exhorting and persuading them to good
things, Genesis 19. 14. and 49. 2. Ruth 3. 3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 22. 3. Pro. 31 1, 2, 3.
and earnestly without ceasing, calling upon them to continue and proceed in the
true service of God, 1 King. 2. 2, 3. 1 Chro. 28. 9, 10. for as it is
impossible to keep flesh well savoured without seasoning, as it is impossible
for fish to live without water; as it is impossible but that the rose should
wither which is overgrown of thorns. So it is impossible that children which
with many vices are assaulted and not succored, but in the end they should be
infamed and to the dishonor of parents most wickedly overcome, and it is
impossible for parents to have any comfort of their children in their age,
unless they have instructed them in virtue and godliness in their youth.

Thirdly, By correcting them, Genesis 34. 30. Pro. 3. 12. and 4. 3. and 19. 18.
and 22. 15. and 23. 13, 14. and 29. 15, 17. Heb. 12. 5.

First, Although many parents in regard

1. Either of their fond and foolish pity, preposterous love and carnal
kindness.

2. Or of their blindness and blockishnesse in looking on their childrens
faults.

3. Or of the grudging and murmuring of their children, Pro. 19 18.

4. Or of the childish or careless fear of hurting or marring them.

5. Or in regard of trifling and frivolons fear of ill report in being
accounted and reputed cruel and tyrannical

1. Either rebuke and correct not at all like David, 1 King. 1. 6.

2. Or lightly and tenderly when the fault is great like Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 13.

3. Or for some faults not for others.

4. If not, sooth them up in their sinful ways, justifying and bearing them
out in evil, or praising and commending them for the same.

Secondly, As diverse on the other hand,

1. Either rebuke and correct them sharply and severely, when the fault is
light or little.

2. Or punish, or rebuke at all when no offense is done.

3. Or rebuke and correct for weldoing.

4. Or without admonition and instruction.

Yet this unpleasant and unsavory duty

1. Is not only consonant to the office and duty of parents, for what son is
there whom the father chasteneth not: no chastening argues bastardy but
sonship, Heb. 12. 8.

2. But also of necessary importance, and inconceaveable vtility; If with
moderation, council, and according to the quality of the offense, Ephesians. 6. 4.
Col. 3. 21.

1. For foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, this is a means to
drive it out, Pro. 22. 15.

2. Therefore it must not be withholden, Pro. 23. 13.

3. This being a means to deliver from hell, Pro. 23. 14,

4. This giving wisdom to the corrected, Pro. 29. 15.

5. And rest with delight to the father correcting, Prove. 29. 17.

6. This teaching and learning them obedience, Heb. 5. 8.

7. Whereas impunity incourageth in evil, hasteneth and helps forward their
destruction: Publicly proclaims parents hatred, Pro. 13. 24. and openly
does prognosticate their shame succeeding, Pro. 29. 15.

8. And this being so pleasing to God, whose we are, and whom we serve; that
Saint Augustine affirms, that they who August. in Abra sacrif.
crucify their childrens youthful affections offer to God such a sacrifice as
Abraham did who offered his son.

Fourthly, By praying for them; for ought we to pray for all men, how much more
for our children, bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, whom we have
impoysoned and polluted with diverse defiling distainings of original and
actual contagious sins and transgressions. They being also to encounter, not
some effeminate and womanish forces, nor only some forcible and furious foes
with a few short skirmishing excursions. But to enter Pel Mel into this
Christian warfare without any exception or truce. In which they must
continually conflict with and confront enemies unparaleld for power, puissance
and policy, for cruelty, craft and cunning without intermission and
interruption until at death they having conquered shall be crowned.

Fourthly, Pray we not only for friends and favorites, kindred and
acquaintance, neighbors and near allies, whom God has linked to us by
natural and civil bonds and ligaments. The Lord having knit and conjoined us
by these outward ties for the mutual good one of another, and that we might
be helpefull each to other. But also for strangers, with whom we have no
acquaintance, whom we never saw or knew, yea and for enemies who hate and
hurt, curse and calumniate, plague, and persecute us even unto death. Thus
Abraham piously prayed for the wicked Sodomites, Genesis 18. 23. Thus to do was
expressly enjoined by our Sovereign Lord and Savior, Matthew. 5. 44. and
piously practiced by himself when his enemies devised against and did him all
the hurt they possibly could, Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them for they know
not what they do. Thus doing, we shall pass on in these peerless paths
prescribed and pattern'd out unto us by the holy men of God, Romans 12. 14.
Bless them that persecute you. 1 Cor. 4. 12. being reviled we bless. Act. 7.
60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge, was the sweet swan-like song and
patheticall petition for, and the friend-like favorable and fertile farewell
of Saint Steven unto his barbarous and bloudthirsty persecutors, when they
injuriously, injustly, enragedly, and inhumanely, savagely, and satanically
stoned him; even then as he breathed out and bequeathed his spirit into the
indissoluble, incorruptible, incomprehensible, and incredibly gladsome
embracings of his blessed Savior whom he saw standing on the right hand of
God. So for them that benign and beneficial benediction. Thus doing we shall
demonstrate and manifestly show the abiding and abounding of true Christian
love in our hearts, this teaching and enabling us thus to overcome, and
recompense, and repay evil with goodness, Romans 12. 21. Thus doing we may be a
means of their happy conversion, so of enlarging the kingdom of Christ, of
weakening the power and lessening the number of Satan's side, so of our enemies.
Saint Ambrose thinks that Saint Stevens prayer was a means of Saint Paul's
comfortable and Christian change: saying, therefore was Paul lifted up from
Ambros. lib. 1. cap. 9. de paenitentia.
the earth, because Steven was bowed down on earth and heard.

And why may not we more probably conjecture, if not conclude, that Christ's
pitiful and patheticall prayer on the Cross was the cause of the conversion
and calling of many thousand Jews after his death and resurrection.

Fifthly, Pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. of what estate, degree, condition, or
calling soever, be they friends or foes, good or bad, pious or profane; If
bad, that they may be called and converted; If good, that they may be
strengthened and established in this warfare. Col. 1. 9. We must not despair
of those that August. in Psalm. 36.
be evil, but we must more earnestly pray that they may be made good, for
always the number of Saints is enlarged out of the number of the wicked, says
Saint Augustine.

6. Pray extraordinarily, with more then ordinary ardency of affection, so as
to cry mightily unto God, Jonah 3. 8. more earnestly then at other times, Luke
22. 44. with strong crying, Hebrews 5. 7. so as to wrestle with God in prayer,
Genesis 32. 24.

1. At the point of death. Thus that pious Proto-martyr Saint Steven, Acts 7.
60. cried with a loud voice. Thus that unparaleld Convert the penitent thief
upon the Cross, Luke 23. 42. And our blessed Savior, Matthew. 27. 46. cried
with a loud voice; for usually the tempter is then most troublesome, and
truculent with his last encounters, and most laborious onsets. Then are we our
selves most disabled and unfitted to hold up head, and hold out against those
direful, and dismal darts of the destroyer. And then our night hastingly
approaches when we cannot work any longer, but we must rest from our labors,
Rev. 14. 13. when we cannot so praise God, Ps. 6. 5. as to benefit the Church
and chosen of God by our prayers and other performances. It therefore behooves
us; That God may have the greater honor, and glory; our selves obtain more
solace, strength, and support against the fierce and formidable farwells of our
furious foes: and that we may do all the good we possibly may or can, before we
rest from our labors, then to double our diligence in praying unto our good,
and gracious God, with vehement and violent vigor, with earnest and
unexpressable desires of the heart.

2. In the time of dreadful desertions, disasterous distresses, direful
discomfitings, or any more then ordinary and usual dolorous occurrences. The
fittest time for prayer being, when men are in the greatest necessities,
agonies, and perplexities: And amongst all other duties of afflicted and
assaulted souls, this of prayer being the most needful. This is the first,
the last, the best and surest weapon for weak saints, soldiers, and
Christians; and the most sovereign salve for all sores, and saddings of body
and soul. Hence was it that those pious pilgrims accompanied with many
miseries and diverse dangerous difficulties as weariness, wandering, and want of
harbor: hunger, thirst, faintness, trouble and distress, Psalm. 107. 4, 5, 6.
Hence was it that those many perplexed prisoners, who sat in darkness, and
in the shadow of death being bound in affliction, and iron -- whose hearts were
brought down with labor, so that they fell down without any to help them,
v. 10, 11, 12. Hence was it that sick folk, whose soul abhorred all manner of
meats, and themselves drawing near to the gates of death, v. 18. Hence was it
that seafaring men whose soul melted in them because of trouble, they reeling
to and fro, staggering like a drunken man being at their wits end, v. 26* 27.
Cried unto the Lord in their troubles, v. 6. 13, 19 28. and obtained
deliverance. Hence is it that the Lord commands us to call upon him in the time
of trouble, Ps. 50. 15. James 5. 15. Is any afflicted le^ him pray. And the
people of God have powered out their souls, and meditations before the Lord
Jehovah, Psalm. 102. 1.

The time being then fittest, and most seasonable for man to power out his
heart in prayer when he is in the greatest griefs, pinching pressures, and
oppressing necessities.

1. For then he is most sensible, and has the greatest feeling of Gods
wrathful displeasure, and his dreadful indignation.

2. For then, he therefore will be more fervent with the Lord in prayer to
have those great and grievous fadding and suppressing burdens released,
remooved, or sweemed, and sanctified.

3. For then is prayer most needful, most seasonable, Ps. 50. 15. and usually
most fervent, Josh. 7. 6 2 Samuel 12. 16. 1 Samuel 1. 10

4. For then is Gods help nearest at hand to his people in mercy, to minister
unto them the greatest hope and assurance of safety and salvation, when they
are in the most dreadful and dangerous distresses, Jonah 2. Dan. 3. and 6.
Exodus 14. Ester 4. for God is with them, Ps. 2^. 4 His eyes are upon them, He
watches over them, He also keeps and preserves them.

5. For then deliverances are of a sweeter relish, more acceptable and amiable
to the faithful petitioners, who after the feeling of Gods rod and ferula upon
themselves and others, have faithfully and fervently fled to the throne of
grace, and not been like to wicked and graceless men, senseless, sullen, or
swallowed up of sorrow, Job 14. ^2. Pro. 23. 35.

Thirdly, In the time of the Church her misery, and the Saints calamities, we
ought to lament their languishing, to bewail their ruins, and pray
continually, confidently, and compassionately for their solace and safety.

Say not beloved brethren the time is not yet come, It is not

Say not beloved brethren, The enemies of the Church are Church and chosen of
God then against them, namely all the blessed Saints and holy Angels, yea the
Lord of hosts himself, and all his armies which are innumerable.

Say not beloved brethren, The Church cannot be in such

1. For God is merciful, pitiful, and tenderly affected toward his Church,
and chosen, even as a father toward his only son: as a mother toward her
sucking infant, yea and infinitely much more.

2. For God is faithful and true in all his promises, who also has promised
to repair the ruins, and build up the breaches of his Church.

3. For God is the only wise God, best knowing when, and what to do.

4. For God is jealous of his own glory, and of his Church, which is his
Spouse.

He therefore neither can, nor will forever bear the wrongs and injuries done
unto the same.

But reason, and resolve thus, or after the like manner as follows:

1. Is it a sin against the Lord to cease to pray for his peculiar people, 1 Samuel 12. 23.

2. Do the Prophets and Apostles press, and persuade, exhort, and excitate,
to lay to heart and lament, bitterly to bewail and bemoane the miseries, and
maladies of his Church and chosen: yea to pray, and petition in their behalf
to our good, and gracious God, Lam. 2. 18, 19. Romans 12. 15. Ephesians. 6. 18. And
shall we neglect it?

3. If Jacob sorrowed so much for his son Joseph a long season, and would not
be comforted, although all his sons and daughters labored to consolate him:
How much more ought we to bewail and lament; yea and labor to remove the
miserable and grievous pressures, and persecutions, not of one Joseph, but of
many thousands, Genesis 37. 34, 35.

4. Have good, and gracious men, been continually, and commendably conversant
in such Christian courses, Psalm. 123. 2, 3. Lam. 3. 48, 49, 50. and shall we
degenerate and digress out of a way so pious, and a path so trodden in?

5. Is constancy and importunity so important and prevailing, Luke 11. 5, 6, 7,
8. 18. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8. and shall we surcease to solicit our gracious and
good God?

6. Have the faithful, and fervent, the sincere and zealous prayers of pious
people procured liberty and enlargement to Saint Peter, although bound with two
chains, and kept with four quaternions of soldiers, Acts 12. 2, 10.
Refreshing rain and fruitful seasons to the distressed Israelites, when the
heavens were as iron, and the earth as brass, the rain having been
restrained the space of three years, and six months, James 5. 17. And has a
refreshing rain to the Roman army, whose men and horses died with thirst: and
thunder with lightning by which the Marcomanni or Moravians, and Quadi, or
Silesians were discomfited, and had a successful and unexpected victory; for
which cause, the Emperor Marcus Antonius called the legion of Christian
soldiers, the thundering (...).
legion, and did abrogate the many bloody, and barbarous decrees, which then
were of force against Christians. And shall we omit a duty so prevalent and
prevailing?

7. Is it the will of God that we should pray always, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. And
shall not we dutifully and obediently do this, it being so just and equal?
God forbid.

March we on therefore being armed with prayer: we can never pray truly except
we be armed, neither can we rightly use our weapons without prayer. A soldier
of the Lord harnesseth himself, and goes on praying, beseeching God for
help, assistance, and continuance.

First, Pray therefore with our hearts, like Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. 27.
like that man of God Moses, Exodus 14. 15. like gracious Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 13.
good Nehemiah, Noh. 2. 4. and distressed Jonah, Jonah 2. for God is not only
Deus non vocis sed cordis auditor.
a hearer of the voice but of the heart. He searching and seeing the secrets of
the same.

Secondly, Pray with our voice, this being necessarily required, except there
be some cause of weight, and importance to the contrary.

1. For our tongues are given and granted to us to praise and glorify God as
well as our hearts, and they are of all other parts of the body the most proper
and excellent instruments of Gods glory, Psalm. 57. 8. 108. 1.

2. For words are not only declarers, demonstrating and showing, but also
stirrers up: strengtheners and increasers of the affections of the heart; for
as the reflection of heat coming from the chimney makes the fire hotter,
which before has heated it, even so words in prayer makes the heart more
fervent, the ardency whereof having before occasioned the same.

3. For words in prayer are a prime and principal prop, a markable and
special means to prevent interruptions and distractions, to keep the mind
from wavering, and wandering, and to hold, and keep it close to the matter in
hand.

Pray in public with the Church or Congregation.

1. For such prayers which are most public, are most powerful, united
prayers make a louder cry, and moove God sooner to open his ears.

2. For such prayers manifest our mutual communion, and are an effectual
means of mutual edification, stirring up the zeal, and inflaming the
affections of each other.

3. For such prayers are most honorable, and acceptable to God, the Lord most
delighting in the joint consent of his people praying unto, and worshipping him.

Pray in, and with our families like good Cornelius, Act. 10. 30. for, not only
is it needful thus to do, to sanctify our callings, and Gods creatures, but
also this brings both honor and profit to our householdes.

Pray in secret, thus may we pray in the field, Genesis 24. 63. in our journey,
Genesis 28. 20. in a prison, etc. But the most secret place is for this the most
convenient, Mat. 6. 6. such places being freest from fleshly inticements,
agreeable, and answerable to Christ's precept and practice. Pray therefore in
secret, this being a good trial and touchstone of our sincerity and
uprightness. This arguing, and augmenting our familiarity with God. This
bringing most comfort and consolation: And in these we most freely and plainly
may make known our whole mind to the Lord.

Pray we whenever we enterprise or go about any thing. This sanctifying
every thing, place, person, and performances; neither can we expect a blessing
in any thing except we crave it by prayer, Psalm. 127. 2.

Pray without failing, and intermission morning and evening. Let this be our
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of our actions, Psalm. 55. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Dan. 6. 10.

1. For as the Jews solemn sacrifices were both morning and evening, so
should this of ours.

2* The day and night ought to be, and by this they are seasoned and
sanctified, 1 Timothy 4. 4.

3. Each of these needs a supply of fresh favors and mercies.

4. And in both day and night we want Gods gracious and special protection, to
support and strengthen, to preserve and protect us against the assaults of our
spiritual enemies, who are never weary, nor wanting to do mischief.

Pray in private, with such gestures which are fittest to moove, and enforce
our hearts to feeling, and fervency, and which argue

First, A zealous right and reverent faith, such as are

1. The lifting up of the hands, Ex. 9 29. 17. 11. La. ^. 17. 3. 41

2. The lifting up of the eyes, Psalm. 121. 1. 123. 1. Ioh. 17. 1.

3. Standing upright as waiters, Genesis 18. 22. 1 King. 8 21.

4. Sitting upright, Genesis 48. 2. Judge. 20. 26. 1 Samuel 1. 10.

Secondly, or a sincere, sound and zealous repentance, such as are

1. Bowing the body, Genesis 22. 33. Ester 3. 5. Micah 6. 6.

2. Bending the knee, 1 King. 8. 54. Dan. 6. 10. Luke 22. 4. Act. 7. 60. 9. 40.
Ephesians. 3. 14.

3. Looking downward, Luke 18. 13.

4. Smiting on the breast or thigh, Ier. 31. 19. Ezekiel. 21. 12. Luke 8* 13.

5. Kneeling on both knees, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. Dan. 6. 10. Luke 22 41. Act 7. 60.
9. 40.

6. Falling on the face, Number. 16 4 Josh. 7 6. 1 Cor. 14. 25.

7. Thrusting the mouth into the dust, Lam. 3. 29.

8. Sitting abjectly clothed in dust, Neh 9 1.

9. Hanging down the hands, Ier. 31. 19. Ezekiel. 21. 12.

Pray in public with unanimous uniformity in regard of our outward carriage
and gesture, keeping, using and observing public gestures prescribed and
practiced as commendable and warrantable by our Church: not breaking the bounds
of comeliness and order, Neh. 8. 5, 6. this being a principal preventing
preposterous censuring and condemning of others; whereas diversity of gestures
causes distractions, and hinders devotion. I do therefore heartily wish, and
unfainedly desire, that all persons in public performances of prayer with the
Congregation, would fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker; this being
enjoined, and that rightly, religiously, and warrantably, Psalm. 95. 6, 7.

Mine answer to these interrogatories was it demanded should be as follows.

Quest. 1. Is bodily worship always needful?

Answ. In public assemblies, and in the Congregation it is, although not in
private or secret.

Quest. 2. Is it sufficient in the great Congregation: or ought it to be first
and principally performed?

Answ. 1. Neither is it sufficient, for God requires the soul, heart, mind,
and spirit.

2. Neither ought it to go before the worship of the soul, for that is both
preposterous, and hypocritical.

Quest. 3. Is kneeling always needful in Gods public worship and service?

Ans. It is needful always because commanded, Ps. 75. 6, 7. Isa. 45. 23. and
consonant to the practice of the most pious people, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.

Quest. 4. Is kneeling needful in all public service of God, and in all the
parts thereof?

Answ. No, but in invocation or prayer as appears by precept and practice.

Quest. 5. Is it needful all the time of public prayer, and in all persons?

Answ. No, for in some it may be injurious and hurtful, in others
inconvenient, and unprofitable.

1. Hurtful to the impotent, lame, sick, sore, etc. and then it is contrary to
that authentical commandment, and pious precept, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice.

2. Inconvenient when the Ministers voice in prayer is thereby drowned, so as
that it cannot be he heard, and then it is repugnant to that royal rule, let
all be done to edification.

Quest. 6. Is kneeling first or most to be used in Gods public service?

Answ. Yes, because humiliation is chiefly required, and prayer also oftenest
to be used, whereupon Gods house is called a house of prayer.

Eusebius reports of Saint James the brother of the Lord, that Lib. 2. cap. 23*
his knees had lost the sense of feeling, like unto a camels, with continual
kneeling upon them in worshipping of God, and praying for the pardon of sin for
the people.

CHAP. XIII.
Fasting is another duty of Christian soldiers, what kind of fasting is
required, its necessity, excellency, companions, and occasions.
TO our extraordinary prayers join we often watchfullnesse and fasting, Col.
4. 2. watch in prayer. 1 Cor. 7. 5. give your selves to fasting and prayer.

First, Thus doing we shall testify our officious, dutiful, and diligent
obedience to the holy and heavenly precepts of our Sovereign Lord God and
blessed Savior, Joel 1. 1^. 1 Cor. 1. 7

Secondly, Thus doing we shall manifest our Christian conformity to the pious
and praiseworthy practices of good men, in times and ages past and gone, as of
David, Cornelius, Acts 10. and diverse other.

Thirdly, This combination of fasting with prayer, comfortably crowning with
correspondent compensation, and excellently enriching with extraordinary
effects: for

1. Hereby great and gladsome blessings have been purchased, and procured.
Witness the Jews marvailous and miraculous deliverances from that malignant,
and mischievous massacre of their cruel and capital enemy, that wicked
misbeleeving miscreant Haman and his cursed accomplices, Ester 4 16. 8. 14, 15.
Witness that confirming conference, and comfortable command of an holy and
heavenly Angel unto Cornelius, that charitable and devout Captain and
Centurion of the the Italian band, when he was fasting in his house, Acts 10.
30.

2. Hereby former favors, and memorable mercies have been confirmed, and
continued, reestablished, and reduplicated: witness Gods being entreated of
the Jews when they fasted and besought the Lord, Ez^a 8. 22, 23.

3. Hereby fearefu^l and formidable judgments have been respited, and removed,
witness the prolonging and putting off, the pouring out of Gods wrath upon the
people of the Jews, until Josiah was gathered to his fathers in peace, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27, 28. Witness that remarkable victory of the Israelites against
the Benjamites, after two terrible and dreadful discomfitings, in which they
lost forty thousand valiant men, Judge. 20. 26. They fasted, and the Lord smote
Benjamin, v. 35. and witness the Lord repealing and repenting him of the evil
that he said he would do to the Ninivites, Jonah 3. 10.

4. Hereby plagues, and punishments, crosses, and calamities have been
changed, and converted into incredible and inestimable profits, and promotions,
comforts and contentments. Witness that invaluable spoil of riches, and
precious jewels which Iehosaphat, and the people of the Jews found amongst
their slaughtered enemies: that extraordinary joy wherewith the Lord had made
them to rejoice: and the peaceable rest, quietness, and tranquillity which God
gave to the Realm of Iehosaphat, after that, by this pio(...) (...)lent
performance he had obtained an unheard of victorious vanquishing of the
Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, who were compacted in a cursed confederacy,
and unjustly invaded the Realm of Judah with an astonishing, and affrighting,
with an impregnable, and invincible army, 2 Chronicles. 20.

5. Hereby the Saints and holy ones of God have interessed themselves in the
promised reward, Matthew. 6. 18. have been more confidently confirmed, and
certainly assured of their own salvation, 1 Cor. 9. 23, 27. fitly therefore,
and excellently does Saint Chrysostom call fasting the tranquillity of our Hom.
2. in Genesis
souls, the beauty of old men, the Schoolmaster of young men, the teacher of
the continent, which adorneth every age, and sex as with a diadem.

6. Herby the Saints of God have been and are better enabled to all holy, and
heavenly pious practices, and divine duties, Matthew. 17. 21. by fasting and
prayer, 2 Cor. 7. 6. Saint Chrysostom Hom. 15. in Matthew.
therefore calls it the mother of all good works, the mistress of modesty,
and all other virtues, the helper of prayer, because prayer without fasting is
slender and weak, for that prayer is strong which is made with an humble
spirit, and a contrite heart -- but he cannot have a lowly spirit, and a broken
heart, who eats, and drinks, and enjoyes his pleasures, whereas fasting adds
fervous and force; gives wings unto, and nourishes prayer. Our Homilies
excellently make three ends of fasting. The chastising of the flesh. To
testify our humble submission: and That the spirit may be more servent in
prayer.

7. Hereby we may be encouraged against Satan's execrable exploits and
encounters, this being a means to extirpate and expel the Devil, Matthew. 17.
21. Upon which place Saint Hom. 58. i^ Matthew.
Chrysostom says, He who prays fasting has two wings, by which, in flying
he is carried over the winds, for he neither does sle^pily gasp, neither does
he defer, neither is he dull or slow in prayer, which things many endure, but
he is more burning then fire, above the earth, and therefore is made a terrible
enemy to the devil. The same holy Father calls fasting our armor, and
weapons against our adversaries, saying, They who go to battle, Hom. 13. in
Mark.
do diligently furnish themselves before hand, he sees that he has his
helmet if he has his sword, if he has his spear, if he has his arrows, if
his horse be refreshed, and that he may fight, before hand he makes ready his
armor, your weapons Sermon de uno legislatore. Tom. 1.
are fastings. Again he says, It is better to ^ast the fast of affection than
of hunger. The fast of love is better than of necessity. Our Savior says of
Devils, this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting: Prayer and fasting
do put to fl^ght the Devils, and shall they not overthrow churlish Barbarians?
The same Father in a Sermon of fasting alleging the same Sermon. 2. de ^ejunio.
Scripture, says: Fasting ought not to be terrible to you; for it is ordained
against the nature of Devils. So that if any be possessed with an unclean
spirit, and shall behold the countenance of fasting, if he were an unmovable
stone, he shall be quickened. But if thou addest to it the sister of fasting,
that is, if he shall behold its companion prayer with it, therefore Christ
says, this kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting. Since therefore it
does weaken and repel the enemy of our salvation, and smite fear of such
terror in our enemies -- where fasting has been affected, the difficulties
of cruelty are released, the bonds of captivity are loosed, the rights of
liberty are restored wholly. Since therefore fasting does resist our
adversaries, will reject the yokes of bondage, and restore the security of
freedom -- will thou hear what a safety, how great a succor is brought forth
to mankind by fasting? -- And since abstinence has been a necessary buckler
to us before the conflict to resist our wilful sensualities, much more must we
desire the help of fasting in our fight it self to our victory. 2 Samuel 11.
12, 26. Dan. 9. 3. Esther. 4. 16. Mar. 9. 29. Luke 2. 37. Acts 10. 13. 13. 3.
14. 23.


This duty of fasting therefore being (although not an essential property of
prayer, yet) often necessarily to be joined with, and accompany the same as a
prime and principal means to protect and safeguard our selves against the
asperate assaults and sharp attempts of our assiduous adversaries, and
audacious enemies; and to propugne and prostrate the fierce and furious fraud
and force of Satan and his assistants. We therefore fellow Christian soldiers
ought to our other pious performances to add and conjoyne this of fasting.

1. I do not mean that natural or physical fast which is for healths sake,
and therefore often prescribed by learned Physicians for the recovery and
continuing of bodily health.

2. Nor that civil abstinence whereby men forbear meats and drinks, the
better to accommodate themselves to accomplish some work of weight, or
business of special importance, more seriously setting, and more firmly
hereby fastening their minds to prosecute and effect with greater earnestness
and forwardness the business intended, 1 Samuel 14. 24. Acts 23. 14.

3. Nor a constrained fast, when men's for bearance of food is from a forcible
compulsion, they would eat, but either want meat or appetite, Mat. 15. 32. 2
Cor. 11. 27.

4. Nor that Christian sobriety, whereby men use the good creatures of God
soberly and temperately, not so often, nor so plentifully as is usual, 1 Cor.
9. 27. Which is pious, praiseworthy, and profitable for the poor, the
commonwealth, the health of our bodies, the good of our souls. This deading
and diminishing fleshly and filthy lusts, bridling and battering down unruly
affections, and fitting and framing the mind to holy and heavenly duties.

5. Nor that spiritual fast whereby we abstain from sin, Isa. 58. 6. This
abstinence and freedom from filthiness and vice, as to have our eyes fast
from wantonness and vanity, our ears from fables, fraud, and flattery: our
tongues from wicked words and all evil speaking: our hands from godless works
and graceless actions: our souls from sinful thoughts and vain
imaginations, ought to be constantly continued in the whole course of our lives.

6. Not that miraculous fast whereby Moses, Eliah, and Deuteronomy. 9. 9. 1 King. 19.
^. Matthew. 4. 1.
our Savior Christ abstained from all manner of fustenance for many days
together without being at all hungry. For this fact of our Savior is not for
our imitation, we may not presume to do miraculous works and acts because our
Savior did such. Christ was baptized, so ought we. Christ confuted Satan with
the Scripture, so ought we. Christ lasted, so ought we. But as we do not
therefore desire to be baptized in Jordan: as we do not desire to be placed on
the pinnacle of the Temple to resist Satan: so neither in all circumstances Hom.
48. in Mat.
must we imagine in our fasting to imitate our Savior Christ. Thus S.
Chrysostom says: Our Savior does not say his fast is to be imitated,
although he might have propounded those forty days: But learn of me because I
am meek and lowly in heart.

Neither do those Papists who press so much their ungrounded fasts,
consisting in an abstinence from certain kinds of meats prohibited by the
Roman Church; as our learned Page 68. (...) to ^^llict the soul with
abstinence. (...) ^ ^asting nothing at all.
Bishop White, Although they glut themselves with others, yea, as some of their
own astirme, that their fasts are mere gluttony, epicure-like, as the
forenamed Doctor shows: These I say do not imitate our Savior Christ, who
fasted so but once in his whole life, they every year: He abstaining from all
food, they only from certain kinds of food.

7. But that religious fast whereby men seasonably abstain from refreshing
their bodies, to make them fitter for religious duties: This pious and godly
exercise by which God is immediately served, and being joined with prayer and
inward humiliation, is an adjuvant means to appease and deprecate Gods anger:
to impetrate and obtain sundry benefits, and to resist and repel Satan that
subtle serpent. This is an abstinence commanded by the Lord to make solemn
profession of our repentance. It is a total (...) whole abstinence from meats
and drinks, or 2 Samuel 3. 35. 12. 7, 20. Ezra 106. ^st r 4. 16. ^onah 3 7.
all kind of sustenance or nourishment, (difference of meats therefore makes
not this fast, Matthew. 15. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 25, 27. 8. 8. Heb. 13. 9.) and all
other pleasurefull delights, profitable and gainefull things of this life.
Namely 2 Samuel 12. 20 1 King 21. 27. 1 Chronicles. 21. 16. Ester 4. 3. Psalm 69. 11.
Ier. 6. 26. Ezekiel. 7. 18. Dan. 9. 3. Joel 1. 13. Jonah 3. 6. Mat. 11. 21.
costly and curious apparel; Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Deuteronomy. 24. 3. 2 Samuel 11.
11. Exodus 19 15. 2 Samuel 12. 16. Joel 1. 13.
Matrimonial benevolence, or the marriage bed: Dan. 6. 18. 2 Cor. 6. 5.
part of our ordinary sleep: Neh. 1. 4. Dan. 6. 18.
all mirth, music, pleasures and pastimes (this being a time of weeping and
wailing, of sadness and sorrow) and all bodily works of profit and pleasure,
and therefore from the ordinary works of our callings, such times being days
of rest to be kept as Sabbaths, without doing Levit. 16. 29, 30, 31. 23. 27,
28, 30, 31, 32. Heb. 29. 7.
any worldly works for a certain time: namely Lev. 23. 32. Judge. 20. 26. 1 Samuel 14. 24. 7. 6. 2 Samuel 1. 12. 3. 35. Acts 10. 30.
a day at the least: except necessity enforce some weak and impotent persons
so far forth to refresh themselves as their need and weakness does require:
For God will have mercy, and not sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6. Excellently says S.
Chrysostom to this purpose: Beloved, if Hom. 10. in Genesis
through bodily weakness thou can not fast a whole day, none that is wise
can therefore reprove thee for this; for we have a mild and gracious Lord,
requiring nothing of us above our strength -- if therefore there are any
present, whom the feeblenes of body does forbid to fast, and to remain without
dining: I exhort such to regard the weakness of the body -- therefore he who
receives meat, and cannot fast, let him give the more liberal alms, let him
be more fervent in prayer, let him have the more readiness in hearing divine
speeches, in which the feebleness of the body cannot hinder, let him be
reconciled to his enemies, let him shun all hatred and desire of revenge. He
who does these things will fast a true fast, which the Lord does principally
require of us. Sometimes for a larger and longer time, the occasions being more
urgent and forcing, N^h. 1. 4. Esther 4. 16. Acts 9. 9. extraordinary
occasions, and special occurrences, private, public or particular, earnestly
calling upon us for more than ordinary humiliation and prayer.

Mistake me not I pray, as if I deemed it lawful or allowable for private
persons to appoint or approve of public fasts without authority of Sovereign
and supreme Magistrates, 1 King. 21. 8, 9 2 Chronicles. 20 3 Ezra 8. 21. Ester 4.
10. Ion 3 2.
to whom it does belong to authorize and command, to publish and proclaim the
same. Judge. 20. 26. Ierem. 36. 6. Joel 1. 14.
Which divine duties ought then to be performed and practiced in the temple or
house of God. And the persons to be present and participate are 2 Chronicles. 20.
13. Neh. 9. 38. 10. 28. Joel 2. 16.
all sorts of people, high and low, rich and poor, young and old.

1. Rulers and regents who have the guidance and government upon their
shoulders, should then and there accommodate themselves to accompany the people.

1. Because the guilt and cry of their sins is as great, loud, and clamorous,
if not more than of other men, both in regard of their age, offices,
provocations, tentations and allurements to erroneous ways and wanderings.

2. Because their examples are more beneficial or obnoxious, being more
observed and followed.

3. Because also their helping hand, council, and countenance is of great and
urgent importance for the discovery and discountenancing, ^urbing and
countermining, punishing and preventing capital and crying offenses, causing
and occasioning evils of all sorts.

2. Yea even harmless and helplsse, tender and irreprehensible children and
infants have not often and usually formerly been excluded nor exempted from
these public performances.

1. Not only because they are defiled with their own sins and their parents,
and so are liable to the dreadful displeasure and irefull judgments of God,
Hos. 13. 16.

2. But also because the seeing and hearing the mournful and sadding ru^ull
tears and doleful cries of such perplexed persons will much move, press, and
provoke others to mournful lamentations.

3. And lastly, because this is a notable and special means timely to train
them up in holy and pious services to our gracious God.

4. Lastly, the seasons, times, occasions and ends of these extraordinary
duties have been and ought to be

1. The preventing of some future and fearful eminent dangers and distresses,
the obtaining deliverance from, and defense against our mighty and malicious,
fierce and furious foes, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Est. 4. 1, 2, 3. Io^ah 3.

2. The removing and remitting some present pinching pressure and calamity,
Io^. 7. 6. Judge. 20. 20. I^el 1. 4. Thus we were enjoined by public authority
in those dangerous days of war, 1628. for ^he perservation of his Majesty's
Realms, and all reformed Churches to fast. Thus by the same authority we were
enjoined to fast every wednesday during that heavy visitation of the
pestilence, 1625. and also in the time of the dearth, 1626.

3. The preventing and pacifying of Gods wrath justly feared, and conceived by
some shameful reigning sins in a land, Ezra 9. 1, 2, 3.

4. The comforting, succouring and supporting neighbour-Churches in their
miseries and calamities, Gods people in their persecutions and pressures, Acts
13. 2.

5. The recovery and regaining of Gods favors which may seem to be lost and
ecclipsed by sensible signs of his indignation, Est. 4. Dan. 9. Mat. 9. 15, 16.

6. The furthering and forwarding of some special work or enterprise
undertaken and in hand, Ester 4. 16. Acts 13. 3. 1. 14, 15.

It is the private and particular which I now press and persuade all Christian
soldiers to perform and practice, much differing from the former. For,

1. This is free and voluntary. That is necessary and enjoined, Lev. 23. 29.

2. This is performed and practiced by one person or family at the most, 2 Samuel
3. 35. 12. 16. Ester 4. 16. Psalm. 35. 13. 69 10. Neh. 1. 4. Dan 9. 10. Acts 10.
2, 3. Luke 2 8, 36. That by a kingdom or country jointly.

3. This in the most private and retired place, 2 Samuel 12. 16. Zach. 7. 3.
Matthew. 6. 18. That in the public congregation. For in this as in other
Christian exercises we must not desire to be seen of men, only to our Father
in secret: this differencing ours from hypocritical performances: and such
fequestring from company, fitting us more freely and servently to mourn,
meditate, fast and pray.

4. This may be appointed by any man who has power of himself, consent of
superious, Number. 36. 4, 13. or convenient opportunity, Neh. 1. 4. That only by
Kings and such like authority.

5. This for more ends and causes, namely, not only public, Psalm. 53. 13.
Dan. 10* 2, 3. But also private, 2 Samuel 12. 2 Cor. 11. 22. That only for ends
and causes which are public and general.

First, The public occasions of private ^astings are

1. The loss of the Church or commonwealth in the death of good governors,
worthy and valiant Warriors, or other such like props, pillars, and patriots
of the same, 1 Samuel 31. 13. 2 Samuel 1. 14. 12. 30, 35. And that God would give a
good supply.

2. The sorrows and sicknesses of other men, yea of enemies, Psalm. 35. 13.
Romans 12. 15. Iam 5. 5.

3. The height and hideousness of sin reigning in a republique through
impunity and connivence, Josh. 7. 16. Ezra 9 3, 4. Psalm. 119. 136.

4. The sense and suffering of some j^dgement befallen, Neh. 1. 4. Dan 9. 3.

5. The protection, safety, and securing of Kings, and others in authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.

6. The purchasing and procuring of some blessings and benefits for Church and
Commonwealth.

Secondly, The private opportunities for this private performance are these and
such like.

1. The taming of the flesh, the better to practice the particular duties of
our personal callings fervently and faithfully, 1 Cor. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 23.

2. The fitting and furnishing of a man's self in time of persecution to bear
the cross more piously and patiently, comfortably and courageously, Matthew. 9.
13. Zach. 7. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 5, 6. 11. 27. By this means many Martyrs became so
mighty and magnanimous.

3. The stirring up, reviving, and renewing of our repentance, Job 41. 5. Psalm.
69. 11. 109. 24.

4. The adding and augmenting frequency and fervor unto our prayers and
petitions, Zach. 12. 10. Luke 2. 37. This gives wings and vigor unto prayer
after our hearts have been exceeding frozen, barren and unfruitful, Joel 1.
17. Exra 8. 20. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

5. The obtaining, and more powerful possessing the spiritual and
soule-ravishing presence of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 9. 14.

6. The recovery or receiving of some blessings wanting to us in particular, 1 Samuel 1. 7, 10.

7. The averting or turning away of some personal judgment threatened or
inflicted, 1 Samuel 12. 16. 1 Kings 21. 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. 33. 18, 19.

8. The sense and suffering of some present and particular loss, Genesis 37. 34.

9. The sitting and furnishing a man's self more preparedly and profitably to
hear the Word, and to receive the communion. Thus many good, and gracious
people before such divine duties do often eat sparingly, or fast, this being
a pressing, and powerful preparative to that needful preparation August. in
Joan. 11. 55. What does it profit to abstain from meat, and to wander in sin,
to chastise the body with hunger, and to occupy the mind in wickedness? we
appoint abstinence to the body, that we may the more abstain from vice,
whosoever fasteth and lives in sinen, seems to have made advantage of
meats, not of salvation says Saint Ambrose Sermon. 33. Levit. 16. 29. 1 King.
21. 29. 2 Chronicles. 12. 6, 7. Ezra 8. 21. Number. 29. 7. Joel 2. 12. 13.
which ought to precede our communicating at the Lords Table. They came to
Jerusalem to sanctify themselves with prayer, how much more ought we says
Saint Augustine prepare our selves for our passover, according to those
precepts, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20, 21. 35. 6. and practices, John 11. 55. 12. 1.

This private and particular fast consists as the public, not only in bodily
abstinence, but also

First, In an absolute abstinence, a careful cessation, and true turning from
all manner of sin and iniquity, Isa. 58. 6. especially from such heinous
abominations which help forward the affliction, hasten Gods judgments, hinder
and withhold his mercies and favors. Abstinence from meats, and not from
maliciousness: from pleasures, and not from profaneness: from food, and not
from filthiness: from sleep, and not from sin is a diabolical, and not a
divine fast for which God often rejected and reproved the Jews, Isa. 58. 3.
Zach. 7. 5, 6. The Ninivites therefore whose fast was pleasing to the Lord, and
profitable to themselves, was accompanied with a turning from all their evil
ways, Jonah 3. 8. And a general turning from all sin has been prescribed to,
and practiced by Gods people as a principal, and powerful, as a necessary and
never failing means to avert and keep away judgments presaged, and posting
apace, Ezra 8 and 9. and to avoke, and take away plagues and punishments
pursuing, perceived, and perplexing, Joel 2. 12.

Secondly, In an holy humbling of the soul for Gods displeasure felt, or
seared, and for sin occasioning the same. Fasting therefore has this name of
humbling the soul almost, and altogether appropriated to it self. Abstinence
is therefore We ought to know brethren, that fasting is acceptable to God, not
only that we cover our souls, with abstinence but also with humility. A^ib.
Ser. 33.
appointed of God that as a means it may moove, and make us fitter to humble
our souls; for although God is a spirit, and to be worshipped in spirit and
truth, Yet this bodily exercise of fasting is enjoined, and is extraordinary
availeable to fit, furnish, and fortify us to wrestle with, and war against
the flesh, Psalm 69. 0. to make us apter to humble our souls for sin incensing
and displeasing God.

This humiliation consists primarily and principally.

First, In casting down, and abasing of our selves before the dreadful and
offended might and Majesty of our great and glorious God, Ezra 8. 21. Psalm. 35.
13.

1. So that we may have a sensible feeling of our own sins, calling to mind
the vileness and viciousness of all si^, especially our own, and principally
our most inbred, indeard, intimate and inabling iniquities, being debts we can
no ways discharge, making us liable to all plagues and punishments denounced
in Gods book against offenders, and occasioning our present perplexing
pressures.

2. So that we may groan, and grieve, sigh and sorrow, Psalm. 6. 2, 3, 6. 13.
2. 25. 17. 22. 14. 42. 3, 7, 10. 38. 1. Joel 2. 12, 13.
mourn and lament under the intolerable and insupportable weight and burden
of the same; yea this bewailing and bemoaning of our sins ought to be like the
sorrows of a woman in travail, of one lamenting the death of his mother, as
for the loss of a son, yea an only son, Zach. 12. 10. as the lamentation of
Dragons and the mourning of Ostriches, Micab 1. 8.

As David for his Absalom, and Rahel for her children. To this end

1. Recount and call to mind the number of Gods bestowed benefits to provoke
and win us to obedience.

2. Weigh and consider the measure, greatness, and excellency of them,
especially which concern the soul.

3. Mark and meditate how easily and freely they were given, and granted,
unasked and undeserved.

4. Ponder and remember upon whom they have been conferd, on us, vile and
miserable earth, and ashes, worms and not men, Psalm. 73. 5, 6, 10, 11, 12. who
have abused and neglected the many mercies of our good God, Lam. 3. 21. who
have multiplied and manifested our rebellions, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 22, 40, 43, 61,
63. who have deserved of due therefore, to have direful judgments denounced
against, and executed upon us, Lam. 1. 8, 9. 3. 19, 20.

Our ingratitude, disobedience, and offenses, notwithstanding such and so many
mercies, being great and grievous: our due desert for the same: the danger
wherein we stand in regard of the same; and the dreadfullnesse of judgments
due to us, should the Lord deal with us according to the same, ought to break
and bruise our hard and stony hearts, so as to take down our courage and
confidence, our pride and presumption, so as to make us meek* and mortified,
to drive us out of our selves, to have confidence in God, 2 Cro^. 7. 13.

3. So that we may acknowledge and confess our sins and rebellions, Dan. 9. 6,
7. Psalm. 32. 3, 4. with bleeding, believing and honest hearts.

Secondly, In the assurance of the full and free forgiveness of our sins; as
also of the procuring and obtaining of our requests, so far forth as is for
Gods glory, Ezra 10. 3. Hope of pardon, assurance of remission and obtaining of
our requests being necessary companions of true humiliation, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
For where there is no hope to expect reconciliation with God, there it will be
impossible and unprofitable to endeavor and enterprise true repentance,
neither can there be save a desperate aversenensse to all good, and a
promptness and prones to cry out with those, Mal. 3. 14. It is in vain to
serve God. Besides, without this none can please God, Heb. 11. 6. and
whatsoever is without it, is but sin, Romans 14. 23.

Thirdly, In a renewed resolution against all sin, resigning and renouncing
sin, so as never to revive, revoke, or resume the same; and so as ever
hereafter to walk in newness of life. This renovation in minding and meaning
to mend our lives, is of absolute necessity to accommodate and accompany a
right religious fast. Fasting without this being but a contaminating and
counterfeit hypocritical fast, neither appointed by, nor approved of God, Isa.
58. 3, 4, 5, 6. for the Lord chooses, commands, and delights in fasting,
which is accompanied with a renewed life, Isa. 58. 6. Zach. 7. 7, 9, 10. Thus
doing we imitate and walk after our pious patterns and predecessors, the
holy ones of God, Ezra 9. 10. 3. etc. whereas otherwise we do but mock God so
far forth as in us lies, for God is not mocked.

Fourthly, In crying mightily to God, Ever 4. v. 3. Joel 1. 14. Dan. 9. 19
wrestling with God like Iakob until he bless us, importuning the Lord like
Abraham for the Sodomites until he hear us, Nehem. 1. 5. Psalm 35. 15. Acts
9 9. 10. 30.

Fifthly, In pardoning, and passing by, forgiving and forgetting injuries and
indignities against our selves, Isa. 58 6. Zach 7. 9, 10. As also in giving
gladly and bountifully to those who are in want or penury, Isa. 58. Acts 10. 4,
30.

1. For as the Jews had sacrifices in their fasts, Zach. 7. 9. so must we,
namely such as are works of mercy, Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16.

2. Giving of almsdeeds, works of charity, are signs At this time let us
give before hand our dinner to the poor -- he who fasts and gives not
liberally to the poor, makes his fasting a gain, for he did not fast to
please God, but that he might not spend largely, says S. Ambrose. Sermon. 33.
and tokens of our true repentance, conversion from sin, turning to God, of our
gratitude and gladness for such reconciliation with God.

3. These two go hand in hand together, are linkes of the same chain,
inseparably united together in the sacred Scripture, Act. 10. 1, 4, 30.

4. Except we join alms to fasting, making the humbling of our selves a
means to refresh and rejoice others, giving so much at the least more to the
poor as we should have spent upon our own bellies: we do but make religion a
cloak to clad and cover covetousness. To fast that we may spare, or augment
our substance, is not for Gods glory, but for covetousness.

5. And such fasting as the aforementioned is injurious, not only to the poor,
but also to all a man's family, who gain not by their abstinence, only the
master if he does not rightly and religiously part with and employ so much at
least as is spared, to feast and foster others.

Sixthly, In a reverend and right exercising our selves in the Word of God read
and preached, if it may be reading and hearing the same, Neh. 8. 9. 9. 3. Ier.
36. 6.

This being a means to moove men to repentance, and humiliation of mind. It
is therefore most safe and seasonable, The whole day is to be spent in
reading, praycer, etc. Amb. Ser. 33.
comfortable and convenient, profitable, and praiseworthy for such private
persons, who for their own private, or the public good, desire by this
laudable and long continued exercise, to keen and edge their devotions, to
give wings unto, and cause their prayers to mount aloft with more fervor,
force, and fruitfullnesse, to select, and set apart such days which our Church
not only approves of, but also appoints for the reading of the Word and
Prayer: to which enjoined excellent exercises, many preachers of good note do
join exposition of some part of the Scriptures: for by these public
ordinances they shall be much furthered, and made more fervent and fertile in
their intended service.

CHAP. XIIII.
Christian soldiers must follow Christ our Captains directions, standing in
those stations wherein he sets us to war this good warfare.
Soldiers continually comply unto, and always follow the Z^zom. Hist. Eccl.
lib. 6. Chap. 6.
and other military proceedings. Answerable hereunto was the speech of valiant
Valentinian. It was O you soldiers (says he) in your power to choose me to
govern, but n^w I am chosen of you, it is in my power only to elect, not in
yours to choose him partner of the Empire whom you desire. Moreover, it is
meet that you who are now subject to my government to be quiet: and for me,
who am Emperor to consider what is to be done. Aemilius the Roman General
likewise Car. Chro^. lib. 2.
said publicly to the people, that had they chosen a man more fit, he would
have obeyed, but if they would have him to be Captain, he desired that the
army would obey him, and not take the office of the General to themselves, nor
hinder him with their curiosity and fables. The soldiers of Tamerlane durst
not turn their backs in fight, it being contrary to his leave, and liking.
The soldiers of the famous Roman Scipio, were so obsequious, and obedient to
him their General; that at his wish, and willing, charge and commanding, they
would adventure upon, and attempt imminent, yea unconceaveable difficulties,
and dangers, so as not only to encounter with much hazard, and little hope,
upon uneven and unequal terms, fierce and furious foes; but also violently to
throw and tumble themselves from of the tops of steep and cragg^ rocks and
mountains. -- Atto(...)s actor (...)esse (...) Spem retulit (...) plures
serva(...) ^.
The Persian soldiers were so faithful to Zerxes, that many of them speedily
and voluntarily cast themselves into the sea to safeguard and preserve him.
Hector Mochint^s^h a Scottish rebel, had two hundred such faithful Captains,
that life and liberty being offered to them, after their apprehension and
arraignement as they were going to the gallows, conditionally that they would
declare ^.
and tell where Hector was, they answered they could not tell, and if they
could yet they would not by any pain or terror of death, be induced to
break their faith or betray their Marian Franc. de ^^ri.
master. Those licentious Locusts, and luxurious Loyalists, the Jesuits at the
will and command of their barbarous, and bloody unnatural and irreligious
Superiors, murder Facinus (...) Marian. lib. 1. c. ^.
and massacre the Lords anointed ones, Kings and Princes as a most memorable
enterprise. The servants of Absalom, and the soulders of Abimelech do as they
are directed, put in execution what by them as their commanders was enjoined,
Judge. 9 49. 2 Samuel 13. 27. The young men of Ioab and Abner, at their assigning
and appointment, arose and acted such sad and sorrowful parts in that terrible
and cruel tragedy, where each man sheathed his sword in his fellows side, so
that they fell down dead together, 2 Samuel 2. 16. Yea disobedience and
unfaithfullnesse of soldiers to their Chiefetaines and Leaders is so odious
and opprobrious, so criminous and culpable, that by the law of arms such are
to suffer even death it self; which has been executed upon delinquents, not
only by renowned Commanders for faults oftentimes Knol. T^rk. Hist.
not many and mean. Witness, Charles Count Maunsfelt, who in his wars against
the Turks, hanged an Hungarian horseman, because he refused to carry a faggot
to damn up the trenches at Stragoniam. Flens Tamerlano queritur pauper^ula
ma^no Vnum e militibus lac rapuisse sibi Innumer as jubet ille slatim
consistere tu^mas Raptorem lactis qu crat ut illasui Intento at tetricus
rescindit pectora ferro Qud justa an fuerit neone querela sciat. Dick. Spec.
Frag. Knols Turk. Hist. Moris. Hist. of Ireland, Stowe.
And Tamerlane the great, who put a soldier to death for stealing a little
milk from a maid at her complaint, contrary to his military precepts. But also
by enemies themselves, who having made use of, and taken advantage by the
trecheries and treasons of such unfaithful and fraudulent fellows, have
rightly repayed them with loss of life, as a condign, and convenient
recompense for such falsehearted execrable and abhorred persons. Witness the
strange and dreadful death of Nicholas Kereischen, who by the commandment of
Selimus, was put into a hogshead of nails with this inscription: Here receive
the reward of thy avarice, and treason, Gynto thou have sold for gold, if thou
be not faithful to Maximilian thy Lord, neither will thou be to me. Witness
the death of Parese Foster-brother to Kildare, who having the custody of
Mainoth in Ireland betrayed it to Breretan for reward, which was faithfully
paid, and then presently the untrusty traitor beheaded. Canute the Dane
commanded the traitor Edrike of Stroton Earl of Mercia to be put to death, who
by flight had purposely betrayed Edmund the King, with the English into his
hands, according to his treacherous promise. In the Barons wars against King
John, they sent into France for Lewis the son of the French King, to whom they
Stowe in King John.
joined against their Sovereign, etc. The Vicount of Melin, who came with the
Prince into England, before his death at London, told the Barons, that if Lewis
did get the Kingdom, he would banish out of the Realm for ever all those
which now do take his part and persecute King John, as Traitors to their King.
Thomas Gourney, and John Maltravers, the more Stowe R. 3.
then barbarous murderers of Edward the second, had also a condign reward for
their treachery. Banister who betrayed Stowe.
his master the Duke of Buckingham to Richard the third: His son and heir
waxed mad, died in a boare-stie, his eldest daughter was stricken with
leprosy, his second son made lame, his youngest drowned in a small puddle,
himself in his old age arraigned for murder, and for a thousand pound promised
by King Richard, received not one farthing, the King telling him that he which
would be so untrue to so good a master, would be false to all other. Worthy to
this purpose is the saying of Philip King of Macedon. If any Athenian living in
Athens, does say that he prefers me before his country, him verily would I buy
with much money but not think him worthy my friendship. But if any for his
country sake shall hate me, him will I impugn as a castle, a strong wall, and
bulwark, yet admire his virtue, and reckon the city happy in having such a
one. Be we therefore who are the servants and soldiers of the Lord Jesus,
dutiful, and diligent, observant, and obedient, firm, and faithful in our
general and particular stations, and standings to the precepts and
prescriptions, the doctrines, and directions, the instructions and injunctions
to the royal rules, and divine commandments of our Supreme Sovereign and
chief Commander Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 6. 14. Stand therefore. The word there
used is a word of conflict, implying not one only, but many and diverse duties,
as namely, A souldier-like courage in standing stoutly against every brunt,
choosing rather to stand and die, then stir and yield. A watchful vigilance
by which heedfull soldiers stand to receive their enemies whenever they
assault, Perseverance, standing still with armor firmly fastened, expecting
fresh assaults, and more conflicts. And a constant abiding in ones proper
place, and a settled standing in ones rank, not going or gadding into each
others place, not starting aside or straggling abroad; art, experience, and
w^rlike discipline, teaching that it is a shelter and safeguard to have the
ranks well kept; expert Captains therefore, and experienced soldiers, are
confidently careful that neither themselves nor other step aside; but that
every soldier keep his rank and sile as they are ranged. Stand we therefore
steadfast, remain without removing, rest without retiring in the true Church
whereof we are members, wherein the Lords banner is blessedly, and bountifully,
peaceably and plentifully displayed: confidently and courageously continuing
constant in retaining our pious profession, not starting or straggling from the
same, for gain or grief, for fear or favor, for profit or peril, by
schismatic or heretical separations, by timorous and temerarious
temporizing, by apostaticall revolts and backslidings; straggling soldiers
loosing the succor and safeguard of their captains, and the aidefull
assistance of their fellow soldiers. Stand we also stable, and studiously
observe; resolutely rest upon, and religiously obey we Christ Jesus our
Commander in those stations, and standing places, performing in them such
particular duties which are prescribed to our several and special functions
by our gracious General, and supreme Sovereign: of whom we may say more
truly, then was said of Cyrus, whose diligence Car. Chron. lib. 2.
was such, that he did not like a negligent family governor to give
commandments in general, saying, let some fetch water, let some cut wood, but
that he give commandments to particular persons by name, and remembered their
names. Thus Christ our Captain in his holy and heavenly Word has assigned and
appointed select and special duties to all, and every one of his servants and
soldiers severally in his proper and particular place, and station in which we
must assiduously abide, 1 Cor. 7. 20. carefully and conscionably, dutifully and
diligently serving the Ser. 89. de Barbar. non tim.
Lord in the several functions of our particular callings, Christ's precepts
and Christians defense says Saint Ambrose.

1. For we must every one be accountable to our Lord for such duties which
belong and appertain to our particular places.

2. In these the gifts and graces bestowed upon us are best exercised, and
manifestly revealed.

3. For thus doing we deck, adorn, and beautify the Church and body of
Christ, we stablish and strengthen the same.

4. And we have the Lords peculiar promise of protection in our distinct and
proper places, Psalm. 91. 11.

SECT. 2.
Parents in their places.
1. PArents, obey we the charge and command of Christ our Chiefetaine and
Captain in our particular callings. Of these duties see before, page

SECT. 3.
Children in their reverencing, and obeying, gratify their Parents, how and
why.
2. CHildren do you carefully and Christianly carry your selves in this your
calling, wherein Christ has ranged, and ranked you.

First, In reverencing your parents, thus did Joseph bowing himself to his
sick, and aged father, Genesis 48. 12. Thus did reachlesse and rebellious
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 33. as well as wise and virtuous Solomon, 1 King. 2 19.
This being of absolute necessity enjoined by the Lord himself, Levit. 19 3.
and generally practiced by the best and most, Mal. 1. 6. Heb. 12. 9. A son
honors his father, etc. We give them reverence.

First, put away therefore far from you O you children, all manner of
irreverent and irreligious thoughts, speeches, and gestures toward your
parents, and be not you

1. Mockers and deriders of them, for in so doing you are certainly accursed,
Pro. 30. 17. Genesis 9. 21. 27. 2. The eye that mocketh his father, etc.

2. Be not despisers and contemners of them, this being a capital, crimson,
and crying abomination, Ezekiel. 22. 7. In thee they, etc. Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed,
etc.

3. Be not you cursers of your parents, for they who are such are children of
death, Exodus 21. 17. Levit. 20. 9. every one that curses, etc. Pro. 20. 20.
His lamp^, etc.

Considering that such or any the like cursed and contemptible unchristian, and
unreverent behavior of children toward parents.

1. Is not only occasioned by parents lack of often, and earnest prayer for
their children: by their light, lascivious, and lewd behavior in words and
gestures: and by their lack of correction, their indulgence, dandling, and
cockering them as we see in Adonijah, Absalom, and Elies sons.

Secondly, But also it is occasioned by, and argues in children,

1. Much pernicious privy pride, sinful and shameful self-love.

2. And abundance of ignorance of Gods ordinance, and unacquaintednesse with
the meaning of Gods law.

Secondly, And be persuaded to reverence, and rightly respect your parents.

1. For the very countenance of parents ought to be reverent, amiable, yea and
terrible if we offend them.

2. For they are your betters, yea so much that no image so represents to a man
God in a family as a father.

3. For whosoever will not reverence their parents, will hardly honor any
other superior.

4. Yea the dimne and duskie eye of nature presses and Contra mare.
persuades hereunto; Witness Tertullians testimony of the people of Pontus
their love to be such, that they did eat the dead carkesses of their parents,
thinking their own bellies to be the fittest sepulchers for them. Witness the
precise practice of the Lacedaemonians reverencing age and authority by all
means: and Ciceroes council in his offices to youth; to honor and reverence
the more ancient.

5. And in the fifth Commandment natural parents are specified, and specially
named rather then other superiors, although they are intended.

1. Not only to show and signify that all governors should be fatherly
affected toward their inferiors.

2. Not only because they were first in planting of policy, and propagating
posterity.

3. Not only because to this rule the rest should be fashioned.

4. But also because this is most acceptable and amiable.

5. And because the contempt and careless keeping hereof is most against
nature.

Reverence therefore and respect your parents. If you be rich your parents
poor, releeve them, yet with reverence, not as if you gave an alms to a
beggar with an high heart, but as a termer or tenant holding in Knights service
pays relief unto his Lord, not of benevolence but of duty. If you be wise,
learned, and politic, your parents simple unlearned and ignorant, counsel,
advise, instruct, and admonish them, yet with reverence, practice all your
performances, do all your duties unto your parents with reverence. Gods gifts
and goodness to you may not cause or encourage you to vitiate and violate, to
infring or break the loyal laws of nature.

For this end and purpose.

1. As parents should conscionably and continually be careful to procure
honor, and esteem in their children toward them. By often and earnest, sound
and sincere prayer to God for them and for that virtue. By due and discreet,
safe and seasonable correction. And by grave and sober carriage and behavior.

2. So that you may procure, purchase and preserve this righteous, religious,
and remarkable grace in your selves.

1. Ply the throne of grace for, and labor incessantly to plant and preserve,
to compass and cherish that difficult but divine grace, true humility.

2. And accurately acquaint your selves with, and acquire with all assiduity
the knowledge of Gods ordinance, and of that authority which parents have from
God, whose command and charge it is that you should honor your parents.

First, I know that all superiors are meant, and called by the name father.

1. Both to incitate and entice all inferiors to obedience by a name so sweet
and favoury, so amiable and authentical, nature having taught to obey fathers.

2. As also to give superiors an inkling to behave themselves like fathers,
and not like raging bedlams.

Secondly, I know that superiors or parents duties are included in that
commandment although not expressed, as in the fourth precept.

1. For superiors are or ought to be observers and keepers of both tables, and
therefore their duties are implied in each.

2. And the enjoining of duties to inferiors inforceth a charge upon them, the
law being two edged by the nature of relation, they therefore are commanded to
honor inferiors although not with reverence, yet with good usage.

Thirdly, yet the duties of inferiors of children are rather named and
expressed then of superiors and parents.

1. Not only because inferiors and underlings are more skillfull, and
mindful of their parents duties then their own, this being a common sin to be
skillfull in other men's duties, and not our own.

2. Not only because greater inconveniences may accrue, and discommodities
grow by neglect of inferiors duties, as by their unrulinesse, stubbornenesse
and rebellion, then by the tartness and tyranny of superiors.

3. But also because inferiors are more hardly, and with more difficulty
brought either to the knowledge or practice of their offices then superiors.

4. Or to teach them precisely to practice and perform their duties diligently
to their betters, although they should frustrate their expectation and fail in
theirs to them.

5. As also to manifest and make known that all sins committed against
fellows, or inferiors, equals, or underlings, are not so noisome and
notorious, not so great and grievous, but far less then against superiors,
the defacing of whom is a defacing of the image of God: the overthrowing and
overturning the order and ornament, the state and stability of the world.

Secondly, In yielding obedience unto your parents, thus did Isaac, Genesis 22.
7, 8. thus did Joseph, Genesis 37. 13. thus did the daughters of Revel, Exodus 2.
16. thus all wise and virtuous children do, Pro. 13. 1. and thus all of you
are bound to do, Pro. 6. 20. 21. 23. ^2. Ephesians. 6. 1.

First, Take heed therefore unto your selves

That you do not refuse or despise their instructions.

That you do not deny them service, and observance, Matthew. 21. 27.

That you rest not in saying without doing, Matthew. 21. 30.

That you do not obey them unwillingly, retchlessely and deceitfully.

That you do not undertake or enterprise any thing in matters of weight as in
marriage without their consent, council, advice, authority, leave, and liking,
Judge. 14. 2.

That you do not refuse, resist, or withstand their chastisements and
corrections, Deuteronomy. 21. 18.

For in dealing thus undutifully, and disobediently

1. To your parents prejudice you should promulgate, and proclaim, That their
example was evil, and behavior bad in the sight of you their children. That
their lack of instruction, Eccles. 30. 2. their lack of correction, Eccles.
30. from v. 1. to 14. Pro. 29 15, 17. and lack of care and conscience toward
you was great, and grievous. That their license, and over much liberty given,
and granted to you, Eccles. 30. 7, 9, 10, 11. their sloth, ease, and idleness,
and your nice, dainty, and tender education, 1 Samuel 2. 23. 1 King. 1. 5, 6.
has been insufferable and intolerable.

2. And to your own disgrace and disadvantage, you manifest and make known,
That you too much accommodate your selves to the counsel, and company of vile,
and wicked men. And that you shamefully and sinfully, wittingly and wilfully,
erroniously, and irreligiously are ignorant of mistaking, and misunderstanding
the Word of God, especially such Scriptures as these, Genesis 2. 24. which is
meant in regard of cohabitation, Luke 14. 26. which is only a comparative
speech showing that we must love them less, etc.

2. And be persuaded in things lawful to obey your parents

1. Commandments, although they may seem unpleasing, and unprofitable; you
owing your selves, much more your service unto them, you being in regard of
your bodies the goods of your parents, Ex. 21. 7. Job 1. 12, 18. And although
your parents prefer you above servans, yet while you are under age, you are
in condition as servants, and put as directly* (if not more) under your
parents, as servants are, Gal. 4. 1, 2.

2. Counsels, be content to eat, drink, wear, lodge, and be employed in any
trade of life your parents will, for if parents are to order their children
concerning their vows, and marriages, much more their callings. But they are
to order their children in marriage, Ex. 34. 16. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 38. so
that

1. Parents may in some case command and charge their children to take in
marriage parties thus or thus qualified, Ge^. 28. 1, 2

2. Yea frustrate, and make void contracts secretly made by children without
or against their consent, leave or good liking, Exodus 22. 17. Numb. 30. 6.
Deuteronomy. 22. 28.

3. And marriages made without or against the same (although they are civil)
are not divine, being repugnant to, and against Gods commandment.

Children are to have their choice to their content, yet not without parents
direction, in being their own carvers, for in so doing

1. They often commit adultery in not being able to wait and expect a good
election for lust.

2. And they are guilty of rebellion in a high degree.

3. And corrections yielding obedience to the same without rebellion, or
resistance, not standing at the staves end with them, Heb. 12. 9. The parties
corrected were to lie down in token of their patience submitting to their
deserved chastisements, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. Children obey therefore your parents.

1. Whether they be natural, and you their sons, for thus did Saul, 1 Samuel 9.
3, 4, 5. thus did David, 1 Samuel 17. 15, 20, 22, 34. and thus did the sons of
Rechab, Ier. 35. 6. or daughters, for thus did Rebekah, Genesis 24. 15. and the
daughters of Revel. Genesis 2. 16

2. Whether they be parents by marriage and you their sons. For thus did
Jacob, Genesis 31. 6, 38. And Moses, Exodus 3. 1. Or daughters, for thus did Ruth,
Ruth 3. 5, 6.

3. Or whether they be parents by adoption, for thus did Queen Ester, Ester 2.
10, 20.

1. For thus to do is advantageous and gainefull: Witness the prophetical
and patheticall blessing of Sem and Iaphet, Genesis 9. 26, ^7. by Noah: Of Ruth by
Boaz, Ruth 2. 11, 12. And the Lords merciful and manifold, great and gracious
promises, Pro. 1. 8, 9. 6. 20, 21, 22.

2. Yea just and equal, Ephesians. 6. 1 This is right. Colos. 3. 20. This is
well-pleasing to the Lord.

3. Whereas the contrary is not only unfruitful and unprofitable, but also
dangerous and dreadful, Deuteron. 21. 18. 27. 16.

4. Being exceedingly and extraordinarily shameful and sinful, Pro. 19. 16.
Ezekiel. 2^. 7. Romans 1. 30.

3. In gratitude and thankfulness to your parents.

1. In heart and mind acknowledging Gods mercy in giving them, and by them
breath and being to you, joying and rejoicing in them, desiring and wishing
well unto them, and truly loving them, Ruth 4. 5.

2. In tongue and word, praising God for them, praying unto the Lord for them,
speaking well of them, thanking them for their benefits, and comforting of
them, 1 Samuel 9. 5. Pro. 10. 1.

3. In deed and really, by cherishing, relieving, and maintaining, delivering
and defending your parents, for thus did Joseph, Genesis 47. 11, 12. Thus did
Rahab, Josh. 2. 12, 13. Thus did Ruth, Ruth 2. 17, 18. And thus ought all to
do, Mar. 7. 12. Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 5. 4.

You therefore who are the Lords servants and soldiers, do you abominate and
abandon such irreligious and intolerable ingratitude which is or has been in
the members of Satan, and sons of Belial toward their parents, and be not
like those monsters of mankind,

1. Who rejoice at their parents disgrace and dishonor, Eccl. 3. 11.

2. Who grieve, make them sad and pensive, Prove. 17. 21, 25. Eccl. 3. 33.

3. Who disclose and discover their shame, Genesis 9. 22. 35. 22. 49. 3, 4. Lev.
18. 7. Deuteronomy. 27. 20.

4. Who fraudulently forsake them.

5. Who rob and spoil them, Genesis 31. 30. Prove. 28. 24.

6. Who rebuke, check, and control them, Isa. 45. 10. Luke 15. 29.

7. Who grudge and grumble at their large and liberal dealing with the rest of
their children, Luke 15. 29, 30.

8. Who cruelly curse them, Pro. 30. 11.

9. Who deny them relief and maintenance, Mat. 15.

10. Who shamefully and sinfully smite them, Exodus 21. 15.

11. Who currishly chase or divellishly drive them away, Prove. 19. 26.

12. Who cursedly and cruelly kill and destroy them, Pro 19 26.

2. And be enticed and entreated to glad and gratify your parents.

1. This being an honest thing and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5. 4.

2. This purchasing and procuring praise and good report, credit, fame and
commendation from men, Ruth 2. 11, 12.

3. This obtaining the prayers of parents and others to God for you, Ruth 1. 9.
2. 12.

4. Considering that good and gracious, yea kind and natural children are as
the staff and stay of their parents. Witness not only the forementioned
particulars in the Scripture, but also the practice of Aeneas, who carried his
father A^chises Virg. Aenead. lib. 1.
upon his shoulders out of the overthrow of Troy: And the constant care of
young Storkes toward the old, carrying them to food when through age they are
disabled from flight, as Aelian testifies. Lib. 3. cap. 23.


5. Considering that you were born of them, and can never recompense them the
things they have done for you, Eccl. 7. 25

6. Considering that parents are or should be childrens joy and glory, Pro. 17.
6.

7. Considering that by thus doing you shall glad and rejoice your parents,
Pro. 23. 24, 25.

8. The want of thankfulness, noting out an irreligious and reprobate mind,
Ezekiel. 22. 7. Romans 1. 30.

9. And arguing and averring men to be sinful and shameless children, Prove
19. ^6. Behave your selves O children like children toward your parents while
you have them, no limitation of age or marriage can or may exempt you. Job kept
his authority over his children when they were married, and exercised his
discipline over them so long as they lived, so long therefore as you have
parents, reverence, obey, and gratify them.

SECT. 4.
Husbands must follow Christ their Captains directions in loving their wives,
giving them due benevolence, giving them honor, and wisely guiding of them.
How and why.
HVsbands be we conscionable and circumspect, resolutely and religiously to
serve and obey Christ our Captain and Commander in our proper and peculiar
place and station. Which that we may do,

We ought with all affectionate amiablenesse to love our wives, for thus doing
we imitate the holy ones of God, as Isaac who loved Rebekah, Genesis 24. 6, 7.
Jacob who loved Ra^el, Genesis 29. 8, 20. Samson who loved the Timnite, Judge. 14.
Elkannah who loved Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 5. And dutifully obey those many pious
precepts of our gracious God, Prove. 5. 18, 19. Be thou always ravished with her
love. Eccl. 9. 9. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love, etc. Ephesians. 5.
25. Husbands love your wives. Verse. 28. So ought men to love their wives. Ver.
33. Let every one in particular so love his wife even as himself. Col. 3. 19.
Husbands love your wives, etc.

To love is to be so affected toward another, that we covet well to him,
according to our power and possibility do well unto him for his own sake. Thus
you should love your wives O husbands, yea as Christ loved the Church, whose
love was true, sincere, chaste, and perpetual: so likewise should your love be
to your wives. Whose love was such, that he gave himself for his Church;
answerably your love should not consist only in words, but in giving and
granting things necessary for their estate and condition.

1. Thou O husband art the male, thy wife the female, therefore Motives.
thou ought to love her.

2. Thy wife is thine own, every thing loves that which is its own: such is
thy wife, she is thine own flesh, body, bone of thy bones, and thou art her
head, Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.

3. She is the next in worthiness to thy self, committed Non es dominus sed
maritus: Non ancillam sortitus es, sed uxorem. Amb. Hexam. lib. 5. cap. 7.
into thy hand by the Lord of heaven and earth, she is almost one person with
thee, and will thou not honorably and lovingly use such an excellent creature
committed to thee by the Almighty?

4. Thou art fastly and friendly chained and combined with many couplings and
combinations unto thy wife. As for example.

1. Thy wife is a means peradventure to continue and conserve thy life.

2. She is an helper to thee, Genesis 2. 6. to repel and rid thee from many
toils and troubles.

3. She continues to thee progeny and posterity.

4. She has left friend and father, made choice of thee before all, married
her self, soul and affections unto thee, and will thou not love her?

5. Thy wife is a good thing, Prove. 18. 22. Who so finds a wife, finds a
good thing.

6. She is thy companion, Mal. 2. 14. yea so as to be flesh of thy flesh, and
so is not any else, yea she is so a companion to thee, that without her thou
could not live but combersomly; whereas by her thou art freed from many cares
and combers to which thou have neither skill nor will.

7. She has committed to thee and thy trust her goods, person, life.

8. By her thy infirmity is relieved, by her thou have continual and constant
remedy for a continual imperfection: without whom Satan might abuse
concupiscence to damnation, and therefore thou may say of thy wife as David
in another sense of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. 33. Blessed be my wife who has
preserved me from filthiness and fornication.

Love therefore your wives O husbands as your selves, in desiring, seeking, and
procuring, in preserving, maintaining and defending, in delighting, joying and
taking pleasure in their weal and welfare, the health and happiness of their
souls and bodies, in their credit, countenance and comfort, as in your own.

Object. 1. Say not beloved brethren, we are forbidden to love our selves,
therefore our wives.

Answ. For (...) is allowed and approved, wherein as no man can go too far in
liking and loving his neighbor: so cannot he love himself too much with true
love. He who makes an idol of himself, loves not himself. He who makes an
idol of his wit, loves not his wit. He who makes an idol of his back and
belly, loves neither. He who makes an idol of his wife, loves her not. Because
in all these men harm and hurt themselves and their wives, and so walk
contrary to the nature and property of love, Romans 13. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Neither
is (...) self-love simply either commanded or forbidden, save only as it
secludes and separates from the love of God or our neighbor.

Object. 2. Say not beloved brethren many men do preposterously, inordinately,
and immoderately love themselves, and must they therefore so dotingly and
fondly love their wives?

Answ. For such is rather lust than love, rage and indulgence, not from the law
but lust, not from rectified nature or grace, but rather from vice and impiety.

Object. 3. Say not beloved brethren, we must love our wives more than our
selves because Christ loved his Church more than himself.

Answ. For Christ in loving of his Church which is his body, loved himself.

Object. 4. Say not beloved, we must love our wives more than servants,
children, and neighbors, therefore more than our selves, since we must love
our neighbors as our selves.

Answ. For although we are to love our neighbors as our selves, yet it is
only in regard of the manner of love, not in regard of the measure thereof; or
with a general love common to all Christians, as Christians: But we must love
our wives as our selves in regard of the measure, or with a certain special,
proper, singular, and conjugall love.

2. Give we to our wives due benevolence, 1 Cor. 7. 3. all marriage duties
especially, bed company for just ends, in chaste and sober manner, expressed by
such like phrases in the Book of God as these. To embrace, Eccl. 3. 5. To
bruise the brease of virginity, Ezekiel. 23. 3. To sleep with, To lie with, 1 Samuel 13. 11. To lie by, Genesis 37. 10. To touch a woman, Prove. 6. 29. 1 Cor. 7.
1. To know a woman, Genesis 4. 1. To humble her, Deu. 21. 14. To drink waters,
Pro. 5. 15. To go in unto, Genesis 28 8. To take their fill of love, Pro. 7. 18.
Which act as it is not at any time to be done by some men and women, namely
Hermophrodites, such who are insufficient, and know themselves so to be for
generation and conception: such who have infections and incurable diseases, and
such who be mixed and mingled in blood so near, that Gods Law forbids them
marriage. So there are times and seasons wherein husbands cannot perform this
duty either seemly, healthfully and lawfully, as there are when they may both
seemly, healthfully, and lawfully.

Not seemly in the sight or light of others: But in secret, and by themselves.

Not healthfully in old age, or when impotent, weakened, wasted or consumed
with sickness. But when they are young, strong, and healthful.

Not lawfully all the time they be single, and not joined together in lawful
matrimony.

After consummation, when it is with the wife according to the custom of women.

When they give themselves to prayer and fasting, Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

When either of them shall be legally and lawfully separated from the other.

3. Give honor to your wives as to the weaker vessels, 1 Pet. 3. 7. By an
honest care and respectfull regard of them and for them according to your
conditions and callings.

1. In defending, delivering, safe-keeping, safe-conducting, protecting and
preserving them: You therefore are called the vale of their eyes, Genesis 20. 16.
And the wings of your garments are to be their covering, shadow, and shelter,
Ruth 3. 9.

2. In procuring providently and cheerfully for them, and allowing them all
manner of necessaries, comforts and conveniences, Exodus 21 10. Isa. 4 1. 1 Samuel
1. 8. No goods are so well spent, or more to the comfort and contentation of
good men, than those which are bestowed upon, and employed for the supply and
support of loyal and loving wives. Whereas those who rigidly restrain them,
are little better than thieves, depriving the right owners of Gods blessings
and benefits. Granting and giving their honest, right and reasonable requests,
Ester 7. 2, 3. 1 King. 1. 29. Allowing and approving of their vows, if godly,
Numb. 30. 7, 8, 9.

3. In bearing with and tolerating their infirmities and Epist. lib. 10. Ep. 8^.
imperfections, ( She is unfit for wedlock, says S. Ambrose, who deserves
chiding.) they being such as may be winked at, and so that you be not cause of
sin to your selves or others. For you must be apt and able to rule and regulate
their affections, and not sinfully and shamefully yield to them, else many
inconveniences will unfortunately follow. In reprehending their infirmities
look not on them without a sight of your own and your wives virtues, and do
not delightfully blaze abroad your wives faults and frailties, for in so doing
you conspire against Numb. 30. 7, 8. 13. Job 2* 10. 1 Cor. 11. 3, 7. 14. 35.
Ephesians. 5. 23. 1 P^t. 3. 7.
your own houses.

4. You ought to guide and govern, instruct and direct them in all actions and
affairs, not childishly, fondly, and indiscreetly, behaving your selves with
them toyishly as with babies: nor basely and bitterly, currishly and churlishly
with harshnesse and rigor. You must therefore behave your selves as well
fatherly as familiarly toward your wives, governing and guiding your houses,
especially your wives; as preachers of piety, not like beadles of beggars. Such
men only are furnished and fitted for marriage, who are fit for government in
a family.

SECT. 5.
Wives in their duty, reveren^ing their husbands, being subject unto, and
helpers to them, after what manner, and why.
WIves, although you are not, neither is it expected or expedient that you
should be for martial matters, or warlike employments, like the ancient
Amazones those valiant viragoes in Anatolia, two of which women Hippolite and
Heil. page 538.
Menalippe sisters to Antiopa their Queen, challenged Hercules and Theseus to
single combat. A troop and train of which warlike women with their renowned
Queen Penthesilea were present at the wars of Troy to the aid of Priamus
against the Greeks, whose virtue and valor is set forth and celebrated by the
famous Historian Iustine with much honor. Or like unto Camilla Queen of the
Volscians who came to aid Turnus, whose power, prowess and valor were Virg.
lib. 7. Aenead.
to admiration described by Virgil in the close of the seventh Book of his
Aeneads. Or like unto Tomyris Queen of the Massagetes, whose invincible and
unbroken fortitude and honorable conquest of so potent an enemy as Cyrus, with
whom full two hundred thousand soldiers are described by Herodotus at the
latter end of his Clio. Or to Artemisia Herod. Clio.
Queen of Caria, whose excellency of Spirit and undaunted courage to the
admiration of Xerxes is set down at large by In Urania.
Herodotus. Or to those stout and souldier-like women of Bohemia which under
the leading of their brave and bold Valasca, redeemed themselves and their sex
from the tyranny of men. Slaughtering their barbarous Lords and husbands,
possessing themselves of their horses, arms, treasure, and places of strength.
Or like unto those ancient Scottish women, who Holinsh.
would keep rank and files, and be ranged in battle array with men, or like
Bunduica of Britain, a woman of noble birth, Stow.
who not only with much honor ruled amongst the Britans, but also was the
Sovereign in their wars, and had indeed a stomach more manly than
woman-like. Yet you being the soldiers of Christ Jesus, do you do service to
Christ your Cheiftaine; stand you stable and steadfast, and fight the Lords
battles in your select and special stations and standings.

1. In reverencing your husbands both in thought, word, and gesture. This being
the charge and commandment of our great and good, of our gracious and glorious
God, Ephesians. 5. ^3. The wife see that she reverence her husband. Psalm. 45. 11.
Worship thou him. He is thy head and governor, therefore reverence him. This
having been the custom and commendable carriage not only of the most modest
matrons, but even of many of the most loose and licentious women amidst the
profane paynims and idolaters. Witness the wife of Potiphar, Genesis 37. 16. Who
although audaciously adulterous, yet respectively reverenced her husband as her
Lord, Genesis 37. 16. And witness amongst others the wives of Turkey, who (as
Heilin affirms) live in such great respect of their husbands, that they never
sit with them at the table, but wait until they have done, and then withdraw
themselves into some byroome. If their husbands have been abroad, at their
coming home they rise from the stools whereon they sat, kiss their husbands
hands, make obeisance, and stand so long as they are in presence. This having
been the pious and praiseworthy practice of chaste and Christian, of holy and
heavenly-minded women in all ages. Witness Abishag who ministered, 1 King. 1.
6. Bathsheba who bowed and did obeisance, 1 King. 1. 20. 31. and Sarah who
obeyed and reverenced Abraham, calling him Lord, Genesis 18. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 2, 6.
Not like many domineering dames who are content to glad and gratify their
heads and husbands with some verbal titles of reverence and respect, in the
mean time rustically, ridiculously and rudely ruling over them; hers being in
heart, and therefore unfeigned, testified by her submissive, humble and lowly
speeches and dutiful observance. This being not only fitting and convenient,
profitable to man and pleasing to God, but also of urgent, and important
necessity, man being the wives head, Ephesians 5. 23. 1 Cor. 11. 3. the woman being
the glory of the man as he of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7. She having her being from man,
Ver. 8. being the weaker vessel, and therefore more imperfect. And your
husbands (O you wives) are to be in your eyes as the father in the daughters,
under which name you are comprised in the fifth commandment, and by which you
are called, Prove. 31. 29. Many daughters, etc. Your husbands must estimate,
prize and value you as helpers; but you your selves must think and esteem your
selves as daughters, and be willingly subject unto, and respectively
reverencing them. Not that they should hide their love from you as from
children, for they are to show it. Not that they are to correct you with
stripes as children, this being unwarrantable.

Far be it from you O you Christian women to walk in those cursed and
crooked, false and filthy, sinful and shameful bypath traced and trodden in
by many irreligious and unreverent wives, denying or disdaining to give
reverence unto their husbands, or doing that which is contrary or repugnant
hereunto: disgracefully disdaining their husbands. Disloyally discovering their
shame: Ridiculously reproaching them, maliciously and immorigerously mocking
them, or currishly checking and controlling of them. The carriage of such not
only odiously oppugning this forenamed duty, but also tending and turning to
their own ignominy, shame and disgrace: for whereas and when they sawcily and
peevishly befoole and nickname their husbands, they reproach themselves,
acknowledging that they are the wives of such abject and disdainefull persons.

Ob. Say not beloved sisters that Abigail befooled her husband, 1 Samuel 25. 25.
Folly is with him, and that for it she is commended.

An. 1. For neither was she praised or commended for her so doing, but for her
witty policy and her wonderful wisdom in finding out means to deliver her
husband from inevitable dangers he had brought upon himself, by his wicked and
dogged answers to David's servants.

2. Neither does she call him fool, but only alleges his simplicity for
his defense, and therefore gives no show of favoring sawey speeches or
contemptuous carriage.

But do you reverence your own husbands, highly esteeming of them, framing
your affections unto their mind as to your superiors, and being unto them as
delightful stars arising over them to calm and quiet them at all times, and
to refresh and renew their spirits.

Secondly, In being subject unto your husbands, Genesis 3. 16. thy desire shall be
subject to thy husband. Ephesians. 5 22. Wives submit your selves to your own
husbands as unto the Lord. 1 Timothy 2. 12. I suffer not a woman to usurp
authority over the man. 1 Pet. 3. 1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your
own husbands. This your subjection should be sincere, holy, and from the heart
as unto the Lord, that is, to Christ; not as to man, not as to the eye
compelled, but as to the Lord sincerely from the heart, and in things according
to the Lord with all fear, even to such husbands which are evil, 1 Pet. 3. 1.
2. 19.

Away therefore with such proud conceits which possess the hearts, and fondly
feed the foolish fancies of diverse disorderly and selfe-conceited women, who
persuade themselves that might they be let alone, they could rule and govern
better then their husbands: for the Lord who knows all things, and is the God
of order, has showed and signified that it is not their place to guide and
govern, but to submit and obey.

Away therefore with such preposterous and topsi turvy practices and disorderly
doings of those women who command their husbands, for although such women
think it their happiness and honor; yet in truth it is nothing less, such
women being accounted vain, and men foolish, such men being feminine men,
women masculine women, such women being insolent and irreligious leading the
life of Achaia, as the proverb says, where the gray mare is the better horse,
and the master or good man wears not the breeches.

Away with that peevish and perverse disposition, which in many women denies
submission and obedience, for a woman's wisdom does show it self most, in
enduring patiently a rash husband. A woman's sagenesse in obeying a foolish
husband, a woman's worthiness in bearing with an unworthy husband. Be you
therefore subject and wise in obeying, even that which they often foolishly
command.

Ob. Say not beloved that you excel your husbands, therefore you will not be
subject.

Answ. For so sometimes do children excel their parents, servants their
masters, subjects their Princes, yet may they not therefore intrude themselves
into their betters places.

Ob. Say not beloved we are their companions, therefore will not be subject.

Answ. For you are but the left side of the yoke, not fellow heads, only
fellow-helpers.

Ob. Say not beloved we are one flesh with our husbands, we will not submit
therefore.

Answ. For so is the Church with Christ, yet subject unto him, Ephesians. 5. 22.

But reason and resolve thus.

1. Does that proud disposition which is in many of our sex, and their
impatiency to be subject, bewray their foolishnes and folly, overthrowing and
overturning the order of nature and of Gods ordinance, running out of their
proper places into dreadful disorders; deserve reprehension, yea and more: for
hereby Gods ordinance is profaned, and polluted, and so that which should be a
blessing, becomes a curse, the ordinance changed, as if God were the author of
confusion, and many disorders spreading themselves so hereby that children
which should be a blessing, often times prove a curse, and that holy form of
government in a family, which should resemble heaven, is become a lively
representation of hell, confusion, and disorder.

2. Does nature, reason, and religion strive for, and give priority, and
pre-eminence unto the man, and only the corruption of nature enforce women to
exalt themselves. Witness such like sage sayings of the most grave and moral
naturalists. That house pleases not me wherein the hen crows, the Non mihi
placet dom^s in quo ^all^n^ canta^, galius tacet.
cock is silent: of Socrates who being demanded to show how to govern a
family, went home, and commanded his wife to throw down certain vessels full
of oil and honey, saying, If you have such power in your houses, you need not
doubt but to lead and live a peaceable and quiet life. And their practices
correspondent unto the same. The Persian princes ordered and decreed the
punishment of Vashti for her disobedience, and the subjection of women, Ester
1. 9. And the Roman Senate banished a Knight, and imprisoned his Lady, only
because she said her husband should not go to the wars with Silla. Witness
the rectified and religious sentences of ancient and Dial. princ. lib. 2.
chap. 6. Aug. in Psalm. 143.
orthodoxe divines. Saint Augustine says, If the husband is in subjection, and
the wife does rule, the peace is perverse, if the wife does submit to the
husband ruling, the peace is right; again, woman is not made of the feet, nor
of the head but of the side, so that she is almost equal, signifying that
women should neither bear rule, nor be in great or slavish subjection. And
witness the many pious precepts of our good God, and the practices of his
peculiar people.

3. Is it equal and just that we should be subject.

1. Because of our sex we being more imperfect then men who are better, and
perfecter then we by Gods ordinance, we being inferior to our husbands by the
order of Creation, at the beginning whereof, before the fall, woman was
inferior to man, the cause of her substance, and she therefore called Isha,
shee-man, or weaker man, receiving her being from man, Genesis 2. 23. 1 Cor. 11.
8. and owing subjection to man.

2. Because we wives are created by the Lord for others, women for men, Genesis 2.
20. 1 Cor. 11. 8.

3. Because we are weaker vessels, 1 Pet. 3. 7. our wits being slenderer then
men's, we therefore are unfitter for common affairs, and our bodies weaker: we
are therefore called helpers or assistants, which are not principalls: and
those good parts which are in us, not being so good without a guide; men's
direction who are our heads, whose part and place it is to guide and govern us
and our family, as it is the property of the head to give to the body life,
motion, and feeling; there being an excellency in them surpassing ours, as gold
does silver.

4. Because we are to be subject to them as to the Lord, not by man's law, but
Gods, we are to be subject to the Lord, then for the Lord to our husbands,
and in our husbands to the Lord.

Then surely we will submissively be subject to our own husbands according
to the good will and pleasure of our good God.

Thirdly, In being helpers unto your husbands; therefore you were created,
therefore was marriage ordained, Genesis 2. 18. that man might have one to help,
to pass away his life honestly, sweetly, godlily. Be not you therefore like
Evah, who persuaded Adam to rebel against God: wherefore the Apostle says,
Adam was not deceived, but the woman, 1 Timothy 2. 14. namely, Not first, not
immediately. Not by Satan, but his second self. Not by the Serpent, but his
Spouse. Not by the devil, but a woman. Not by a beast, but a reasonable
creature. Not by a stranger, but a familiar. Not by an enemy, but by a friend.
Not by a lie, but by love. Be not you like Jobs wife, tempters to evil, Job 2.
9. Not like the wives of Sal^mon who turned his heart from God, 1 Kings 11. 4.
Nor like the wife of Ahab who enticed him to evil, 1 King. 21. 25.

But be you helpers unto your husbands all you can.

1. As against their natural infirmity, 1 Cor. 7. 1.

2. So for the generation and education of children, 1 Timothy* 5. 14.

3. Principally in piety, in things concerning a better life, 1 Cor. 7. 5. 1
Pet. 3. 2. winning, and woing them to the obedience of the Word, as by
seasonable and pious persuasions, so by your chaste and godly conversations.

4. As also in matters of thrist, in ordering and taking care for household
affairs, thus did Sarah, Geneses 18. 6. thus the Apostle advises, 1 Timothy 5.
14. and therefore commands wives to keep at home, Titus 2. 5, 6. to be like
snailes carrying their house on their heads. For this the good women is
commended, and by this described. Pro. 31. 11. The heart of her husband does
trust in her, so that he never doubts of her chastity, secrecy, or care in
looking to her family. He shall have no need of spoil, for she will furnish
and fill his house with things needful, and delightsome, so that he shall
want no necessaries, for which he needs to rob or spoil, she will do him
good. For she is constant in her love to him in youth, age, prosperity,
adversity, sickness and health, and will do him what good she can in his
body, soul, goods, and estate; she providing such food which may nourish him,
she stirring him up to serve God, she saving his goods as much as is
possible; she not lowering on him with her looks; she not crossing him in her
words; she not vexing him by her deeds: If she know any thing please or
profit him, she going about it speedily: If she perceive ought to offend him,
she carefully avoiding it.

SECT. 6.
Servants in theirs, reverencing their masters persuading them to good, obeying
of them, how, and motives to the particulars.
SErvants be you continually careful, conscionably in your proper and peculiar
places to serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3. 14. and to war this good warfare.

1. Reverencing and respecting, honoring and highly esteeming of your masters,
whether they be poor or rich, good or bad. Thus did Iakobs servants, Genesis 33.
6, 7. Naamant servants, 2 King. 5. 3, 13. Ahashuerus his servants, Ester 3. 2.
and this is the will and command of our good and gracious God, Genesis 16. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 1. Mal. 1. 6.

2. Pressing and persuading your masters to things honest and necessary, pious
and praiseworthy, 1 Samuel 28. 23. 2 Samuel 19. 5. 24. 3. 2 King. 5. 13.

3. Serving and obeying them in all things, Col. 3. 22. namely which are
lawful, Genesis 39. 7. which are possible, Genesis 24. 7, 8. which are profitable, 1 Chronicles. 11. 17. and proportionable to your abilities, Exodus 5. 7. or in a word,
in all things wherein you are to be subject and ought to obey. Impious
injunctions of masters man not, 1 Samuel 22. 17. impossible need not to be
obeyed; serve therefore you Christian servants your masters.

1. Whether they be good and gracious, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. for as such masters are
more worthy of reverence, respect, submission and service, so are you more
obliged to be obsequious and officious unto them, not only by their charitable,
and Christian usage of you, but also by the Lords precise precept, 1 Timothy 6. 2.

2. Or bad, cruel, cross and unconscionable, 1 Pet. 2. 18. the ordination of
God, and not the worthiness of your masters being the prim^ and primary
fountain and foundation of this your service, and office.

And do you serve and obey them

1. With all diligence. Thus did Iakob serve Laban with all his power, Genesis 31.
6, 18, 40, 41. and thus should all do service, Pro. 31. 15, 18. and with all
carefullnesse. Thus did Abraham's servant obey him, Genesis 24. 33. 18. 7. Thus the
Centurions servant, Mat. 8. 9. And thus ought all to serve their masters, Ps.
123. 2. Romans 12. 11. not being slothful in business.

1. For thus doing you shall enrich your masters, Prove. 10. 4.

2. You shall be profitable and advantageous unto them, Pro 14. 23.

3. Which you ought to be, you being wholly your masters.

4. And by so doing, your masters although cursedly covetous, and miserable
muck-wormes, will be loath and unwilling to forgo you being gainefull and
thrifty, 1 Kings 2. 40. Acts 16. 19.

5. Neither can you your selves be loosers in so doing, Pro. 13. 4.

6. Whereas on the contrary, by corrupt and cursed idleness, sloth, and
negligence, servants.

1. Become brethren to those who are great wasters, Pro. 18. 9.

2. They make themselves to suffer penury, Pro. 13. 4. 19. 15.

3. They are ever kept low, Pro. 12. 24. their course of life being as an
hedge of thorns, slow and hard, they being pricked, and stayed with fears and
griefs as with thorns and briars, Pro. 15. 19.

4. They occasion also unto their masters continual grief and vexation, like
tart viniger to the teeth, and smothering smoke unto the eyes, Pro. 10. 26.

Secondly, with all fealty and fidelity. Truly and faithfully doing service.
Thus did Abraham servant obey his masters repast, giving place to
faithfulness, Genesis 24. 33. so Luke 17. 7, 8. Thus did David serve Saul, 1 Samuel 22. 14. 26. 8, 9, 10. 11. Thus di^ Ioab serve David, 2 Samuel 12. 27, 28.
Daniel the King, Dan. 6. 4 and thus should all you obey your masters, Number. 12.
7. Ephesians. 6. 5. Titus 2. 10.

1. Abhorring and avoiding all fawning flattery and direful dissimulation.

2. Shunning and eschewing all loathsome lying, and diabolical deceitful
dealing, 2 Samuel 16. 1, 2, 3. 19. 26, 27. 2 King. 5. 22.

3. Not being wicked wasters of your masters substance, Mat. 24. 40. Luke 16. 1.

4. Nor theevish and untrusty, pilferers and purloyners from your masters,
Titus 2. 10.

1. Such unfaithful servants being of their father the devil, Ioh. 8. 44.

2. Being worse then highway robbers, cheating and cousening those, who
confidently commit their substance into their hands.

3. And taking the ready road, and traced way to blast their other substance,
beggar their posterity (such goods of fraud wanting a blessing to thrive unto
posterity) and damn their own souls.

Object. Perhaps the subtle serpent and your cursed corrupt nature sollicites,
and persuades you to proceed in such pestilent and pestiferous pilfering
courses, by such like serpentine seducements and supplanting sophistications as
these following.

1. None knows of, or is privy unto your fraudulent and guilefull cursed
conveyances of your masters wealth into your own purses, for you may sell of
your masters goods, and reserve part to your selves, they nor any else taking
notice thereof.

2. You may take these and those things which may well be spared, there being
water enough in the sea; your masters having so great abundance, may well part
with such trivial and trifling matters without any great detriment or damage,
if any at all unto them.

3. And although (they being but light matters) the loss of them, (^eing so
little as not to be missed in such abundance) damnifieth little or nothing your
rich masters, yet they much advantage and profit you who want abundance.

4. Besides, such and such things are but trifles, and of no great moment: go
on therefore and walk in these gai^efull and advantageous paths leading to
profit and enriching: and be not discouraged or disheartened from the same by
the practice or persuasion of the preciser sort of people.

Answ. Yet be not you misled by these or such like sirenian, and sinful
enchantments.

1. For admit that no mortal eye beholds, neither does any man take notice of,
or is acquainted with these damnable dissimulations, deceitful dealings, lies,
frauds, and forgeries, yet all these cursed carriages are open and apparent to
the thought searching Jehovah, whose eye is in every place, Pro. 15. 3. and to
their own consciences, which if they condemn them God is greater, 1 Ioh. 3. 20.

2. Neither may any man's abundance encourage and excitate others by fraud or
force to appropriate their allowance unto themselves.

1. For you are not able, neither does it belong to you to judge what other men
may well spare.

2. Should every man, who may as lawfully take from your wealthy masters such
like things, they would be disabled from much or any sparing.

3. And although rich men may spare much, yet this makes it not lawful for
others to apply and appropriate their substance to themselves, in whole or in
part, indirectly, and unjustly.

4. Neither should men be their own carvers, no not of those superfluities
which may well be spared.

5. Achan might well have pleaded this plea, affirming that he took nothing but
that which might well be spared, yet he and his perished, and worthily, Josh. 7.

6. Neither can any man's substance be resembled rightly to the sea: The water
of it being common; And there being no possibility for all the world to
evacuate and exhaust the same.

3. As for the gain they get, the profit they procure by such accursed
additions, its like the Eagles stolen sacrifice from the altar, which cruelly
consumed both nest and young: like an infected garment stolen out of a plagued
pesthouse, suddenly sickning, and sweeping away the whole family: or like a
flaming firebrand thrust into the thatch, which presently runs over, and ruins
a beautiful and well built house, Zach. 5. 3.

4. And whereas some think them toys and trifling matters.

1. They are trifles only comparatively, as for example, a shilling with some
is but a trifle, with others great treasure: thus Achans theft, although the
gold and silver was an 100l, was but a trifle in comparison of the
extraordinary abundance that was in Ierich^, yet for this trifle he and his did
miserably perish, Josh. 7. 25, 26.

2. Are they but trifles? And will you for trifles offend and dishonor God?
will you for trifles wound your own consciences? will you for trifles hazard
the loss of your own souls? monstrous and barbarous baseness.

3. Such who stick not unjustly to take trifles, will not be squeamish and
scrupulous to steal greater matters when opportunity offers occasion of so
doing, Luke 16. 10, 11, 12.

4. Such surreptitious seazing on other men's substance, is theft, therefore
sin, and cannot be a trifle, all sin being infinite.

Whereas on the contrary, faithfulness of servants toward their masters.

1. Makes them as health, Pro. 13. 17.

2. And will establish them for ever, Pro. 12. 19.

Thirdly, with chearefullnesse, readiness, and willingness. Thus did David's
servants, 2 Samuel 15. 15. Thus did Ionathans lad, 1 Samuel 20. 39, 40. Thus the
Centurions servants, Mat. 8. 7, 8. And thus should all do service, Ephesians. 6.
7, 8. Col. 3. 23.

Fourthly, with wisdom, prudence and discretion, wisely doing service. Thus,
Genesis 41. 33. Let Pharaoh look out a wise and discreet man. Matthew. 24. 45. Who
is a wise and faithful servant? Be not therefore like such sottish servants
who can do nothing but what is commanded them: but so wise as to prevent your
masters, Psalm. 123. 2. acquainting your selves with, and well knowing your
masters inclination, Luke 16. 3. Doing their business in due season, Genesis 31.
38, 39. like unto Joseph, Genesis 39. 3.

1. For such shall find favor, Pro. 14 35.

2. Such shall find much good, Pro. 16. 20.

3. And bear rule yea over sons which cause shame, Pro. 17. 2.

Fifthly, with patience, mildness, and much meekness, Titus 2. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 20.

1. Thus doing you shall appease and assuage wrath, Pro. 15. 1, ^8.

2. Such obedience being acceptable unto and approved of the Lord, 1 Pet. 2.
20. Sixthly, With mind and body both, so that

1. You must love your masters more then other ordinary men.

2. Your mind must be toward the persons, goods, credit, comfort, and welfare
of your masters and their families.

3. And your memories must be employed to put your masters matters in.

Seventhly, Not with eye service or for wages only, but for conscience sake,
Col. 3. 22. as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 6, 5, 6. eye servants who will do nothing
longer then they are looked on, the masters eye feeding the horse; or who
slubber over things for the eye only: 1 Are unfaithful and evil servants. 2
Rebelling against Gods most holy will.

Be persuaded O you who are servants, thus to do service. Motives.


First, Since our good and gracious God does so fatherly and favorably regard
you, as to order and appoint

1. That you may sometimes rest from toylesome labor, sweetly and savingly to
enjoy and use the gracious, and gladsome, savoury and soule-ravishing means of
reconciliation, spiritual repast, reparation and refection.

2. That you may be guided and governed without harshnesse and horror, with
all comfort and conveniences concerning the good and welfare of your souls,
and bodies, Lev. 25. 6, 7, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 46, 53. Deuteronomy. 23. 15, 16.

Secondly, Since in so doing, you shall purchase and procure credit, honor,
and estimation unto your selves, Pro. 17, 2.

Thirdly, Since such servants have many sweet and soule-ravishing promises
annexed and ascertained unto them, Matthew. 24. 46. 25. 21.

Fourthly, Since also in thus doing you are the Lords freemen, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
and in your stations and standings, you fight the battles of Christ, doing him
service, Col. 3. 24. for which he will richly reward you, Ephesians. 6. 8.

SECT. 7.
Masters in theirs, In well choosing, and well using their servants.
MAsters you are or ought to be the Lords servants, 1 Cor. 7. 22. The Lord
has set you higher then your brethren, that you should the more honor him.
Do you therefore in this place wherein you are called, abide with God, doing
the Lord service, and fighting his battles in your particular stations and
standings.

First, In making a wise and wary choice of servants, to martial and manage
as Christ's soldiers in your families, respecting, regarding, and requiring.

1. Not only aptness and ability to execute their office and perform that
service whereunto they shall be put, although this is necessary, Genesis 47. 6. 1 Samuel 14. 52. 16. 16, 17. 17. 33, 39.

2. Not only wisdom, discretion, truth, fidelity, diligence, and such other
praiseworthy properties and commendable qualities in service, although these
are convenient, expedient, and to be desired, Genesis 41. 33, 38, 39. 1 Samuel 18. 5.

3. But also if not chiefly, principally and above all the fear of God, true,
and sound religion, not only in regard of profession, but also in regard of
practice, Genesis 24. such was Abraham's servant, such Joseph's, 43. 23. thus were
the Jews servants to be qualified, Exodus 12. 44. such servants only would
David have, and harbor, Psalm. 101. 6. such were the servants of Cornelius,
Act. 10. 7. and faithful men are such as you should, and ought to choose,
namely

1. Not only men loyal true and trusty, Proverbes 11. 13. 25. 13.

1. These being always careful like Joseph, Genesis 42. 40.

2. And painful ever as Iakob, Genesis 31. 38, 39, 40.

Secondly, But also men who are religious fearing God, of sound judgment, and
sincere affection, Pro. 20. 6. Hos. 11. 12. Acts 16. 15.

1. For faithful in that place are opposed to so many several sorts of
sinful men.

2. The general comprehends the special.

3. And these who are religious are said to walk in the perfect way.

Ob. 1. Say not beloved brethren, Godly servants are hard to come by, for who
can find a faithful man? Pro. 20. 6. Mat. 24. 25. therefore we will not seek
them.

Answ. 1. For although it is true, quae chara rara, precious things are hard to
come by, yet they who seek them may find them.

2. The fewer there be of such manner of men, the more we should seek them.

3. Do you who are parents and masters your duty in teaching and instructing of
your families, and then there would be greater plenty: Bad masters and fathers
causing scarcity of good and godly servants.

Ob. 2. Say not beloved brethren, that profane servants are profitable, and
more gainefull then others.

Answ. 1. For godliness is the greatest and best gain, and therefore godly
men are most gainefull.

2. And as for others, although they seem to be, yet they are not so
gainefull: for how can they who are not faithful to God be faithful or
gainefull to you?

Ob. 3. Say not beloved brethren, a dear friend commended such and such a
servant to me.

Answ. 1. For the commendations of men will not justify those whom God
condemns.

2. We ought to please one another to edification, Romans 15. 1.

3. And we are to gratify our friends in the Lord.

Object. 4. Say not beloved brethren, I must take such and such, because they
were and have been old servants to my father.

Answ. For being bad, the elder the worse. It is apparent they are the more
incurable continuing corrupt. And the elder they are the more hurt they will
do by their bad and evil example.

Ob. 5. Say not beloved brethren, we will choose such who are tall and proper
fellows, lusty and able men, who can fight for, and defend us if need be.

Answ. For such excuses might well serve for rogues, amongst whom in prisons
and at the gallows a man may find much manhood.

Ob. 6. Say not beloved brethren that religious men are not resolute,
mortification kills a man's manhood, and conscience cooles men's courage.

Answ. 1. For religion and manners make a man.

2. A man may have manhood, although he neither swagger nor swear, stamp nor
stare, manhood is one thing, madness another.

3. Men of conscience are men of greatest courage, Phil. 3. 6. Pro. 28. 1.
witness David encountering Golia^, 1 Samuel 17. when none of Saul's army durst.

But reason and resolve as follows.

1. Have godly men ever been careful to have religious servants, Genesis 13. 14.
17. 23. 15. 2. Josh. 24. 15. Ester 4. 16. Psalm. 101. 6.

2. Is every good man's house Gods house, Col. 4. 15. therefore an habitation
for Christ, his spirit, his servants, and not for the limnes of Satan?

3. Is every man's family his body, whereof himself is the head, and will no
man willingly be pestered with lame, rotten, putrified, stinking and corrupt
members, 1 Cor. 6. 15.

4. Does the choice of servants show the nature and disposition of masters, for
like will to like, birds of a feather will fly and flock together, therefore
religious men will desire religious servants.

5. Does the curse of God hang over the heads of wicked men, and therefore over
the house where ungodly men do dwell, one Achan being a trouble to all Israel.

6. It is not probable that they will ever be faithful to men who are not
faithful to God, Genesis 21. 11. 39. 7.

1. For, how can he fear to offend him who can only hurt the body, who fears
not him who can destroy both soul and body?

2. How can he make conscience of the second table who is careless of the
first? Romans 2.

3. And certainly no band does hold and tie so strong as that of grace and
godliness.

1. Not of children toward parents, as we see in Absolon and Adonijah to David.

2. Not of friend to friend, as in Achitophel to David, also Psalm. 55. 13.

3. Not of wives to husbands, as in Potiphars wife, Genesis 39. 12. and the
harlot, Pro. 7. 19.

7. Is it a credit for a man to have godly men and gracious to serve him? Yea
such, than which what greater? these excelling and out-stripping other men in
regard of qualities, for what are comparable to Gods graces? And in regard of
parentage; for, who is to be compared to the Lord, whose children these are?

8. Is it a great comfort to have such servants with whom a man may confer of
the way to heaven, and with whom he may walk in the way of godliness?

9. Is it a great commodity and advantage to be served by such selected ones,
Labans sheep prospering for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30. 27, 29, 30. Potiphars
affairs for Joseph, Genesis 39. 1, 2, etc. And Saul's army for David's, 1 Samuel 18.
14.

10. Are all men continually careful not to plant their orchards with briars
and brambles, but with the best trees they can procure or purchase? Not to
store their commons with scabbed, rotten and infected, but with the best and
soundest cattle? Not to furnish their fish ponds with newts and frogs, but
with the best fishes? And are not families more to be regarded than these?

11. Are wicked and ungodly servants exceedingly hurtful, as scab'd sheep,
ready to infect all, as firebrarnds to set all on fire, and as deadly poison
and plague-sick persons ready to impoyson and infect a family with evil
counsel, with cursed and diabolical deeds and practices?

12. Does Gods curse hang over the heads of all wicked men, and is it a
discredit to be served by the Devils favorites?

Then surely we will either wholly keep out of our houses and families such
sin-sicke persons, as swearers, swaggerers, and other profane people from
being members of our oiconomicall body: Or after trial made, and finding our
endeavors frustrate and fruitless to their amendment and reformation, we will
rid our selves of all manner of railing Rabshakehs, profane Esaus, scoffing
Ishmaels, and all others who will not serve God: neither will we much regard if
for weeding out of our houses such noisome or hurtful brambles and stinking
dung, we should be censured and condemned.

1. Since paying them their covenanted due we do them no wrong.

2. Since no man is bound to keep a servant longer than the covenanted time.

3. Since such servants by their vicious and ungodly actions wrong themselves,
constraining and compelling their careful and conscionable masters to be rid
of them.

4. Since no man would keep a traitor, a cutpurse or highway side robber, or
such like miscreants, because he would not be counted and called cruel in
expelling them out of his family as is expedient. Neither will we continue, and
cherish in our houses and families the limbs of Satan, traitors against the
most high God, who rob him of his glory and service upon such poor and peccant
pretenses.

Then surely we will make diligent inquiry and search after, we will make much
of, countenance, encourage and entertain such who are faithful.

1. Since these being obedient to God, will be obsequious to us.

2. Since for such manner of men we may be countable with joy.

2. In using your servants be you also circumspect, careful, vigilant and
watchful.

1. Not only to command things lawful, possible, Genesis 24 8. Profitable and
proportionable, Exodus 5. 7. Not overcharging their strength, but respecting
their willingness.

2. Not only to do them right, Job 31. 13, 14, 15, 38, 39, 40. Col. 4. 1.

1. Providing them fitting and convenient food, Prove. 27. 26, 27. And wages,
30. 21. Or answerable and equivalent to either, or both, paying them duly their
wages and hire, Genesis ^0. 28. Deuteronomy. 24. 14. Lev. 19 13. 1 King. 5. 6.

2. Defending them and their right, Job 31. 13, 14, 15.

3. Correcting them doing amiss with Christian counsel for their amendment,
Pro. 20 30. 29 13.

4. Preferring and commending them doing well, Levit. 19. 13. Deuteronomy. 15. 13.
Pro. 17. 2.

5. Taking notice of their gifts of mind and body, to employ and improve them:
of their weaknesses and wants, to salve and supply them.

3. Not only that you do not rule rigorously and tyrannically over them, Lev.
19. 33.

1. Remembering that they are men, and of the same nature with you, Job 31. 15.
Masters command your servants Lib. 10. Epist. Epist. 82. Contubernales humiles
anici conservi. Senec.
as subject to you in condition, but so that you remember that they are of the
same nature with you, says S. Ambrose.

2. Remembering that they are humble friends, and your selves servants, you
having a Master in heaven, Job 31. 15. Ephesians. 6. 9.

3. Remembering that you must be countable to their and your Master, as for
other things, so for your carriage toward them, Job 30. 14.

4. Remembering that you should do as you would be done to.

5. Remembering that to handle them gently, seeking rather to be beloved than
feared, is the testimony of a good nature.

6. Remembering that God will revenge injuries done to them.

4. But also that they continue in true religion, Genesis 18. 19. Josh. 24. 15.
Ester 4. 16. Acts 10. 2. Frequenting and favoring the means, sanctifying the
Christian Sabbath, Exodus 20. 8, 10. Praying privately, and with you in your
families, praising God at meals, both before and after meat, living holily,
righteously, and blamelesly, you dissuading, dehorting, and withholding them
from wickedness and sin, 1 Samuel 24. 7, 8. 2 Samuel 16. 11. 19. 22.

Thus doing, you also serve the Lord Jesus, fighting his battles in this your
proper place and particular station.

SECT. 8.
Against depopulators and inclosers: the hurt and harm they do to themselves
and others, etc.
FVrther must we continue fighting the Lords battles in our peculiar and
particular callings? Then woe 1. To all such who thrust men out of the same. 2.
To all such who neither have nor will have any. 3. And to all such who through
pride, self-love and discontent run out of, forsake and leave them.

1. Woe to all such who tragically thrust men out of those stations and
standings wherein the Lord has set them to fight this good warfare.

1. To those savage supplanters of the solacing societies of mankind. Those
dreadful desolating depopulators, which like stupefied, if not M. R. of C.
being certified by a familiar friend of his, that the people said he would go
to the Devil for enclosing, replied, If I do, I shall go for as good ground as
is in England. Related to me by M. F. H. a Preacher. When M. D. of C. had
consented to enclose C. she and her husband heard (as they conceived) a
fearful and hideous noise of men, women, and children bitterly bewailing,
which wrought much in her, but could not restrain the man from his evil
enterprise to his own and others ruin. The relater, M. S. a near* kinsman to
her.
irreligious and besotted Mammonists, heedlesly and foole-hardily rush upon
those keen and cutting judgments of God which inevitably have consumed most
of those who have formerly erred in these their wicked wanderings, yet these
incredulously and inconsiderately will not by other men's harms learn to
beware, no not although the Lord has precisely presaged by pensive predictions
his irefull indignation and dreadful displeasure against such pernicious and
perilous plots and projects, such perverse and perverting, profane and peevish
practices?

O you misbeli^ving and misled men into those cruel courses accursed by God
and men, consider,

1. That as you are guilty of the want of so many multitudes of people which in
probability might and would have been, had your ruined towns still been
populous, which then as well set orchards caused their inhabitants to fructify
and spread, which being transplanted into other and wanting room, smother up
themselves and other.

2. As you are guilty of much dishonor to almighty God, B. Town and Church
gone.
hindering him of much service and worship, which pristinely has been
performed, you leaving few people, and them often times scarce a Church to
assemble in for this end and purpose.

3. As you are enemies to the Church, driving it as much as in you is out of
our coasts and country.

4. As you are enemies to our dread Sovereign, depriving him of the honor of
many subjects, of profit and protection.

5. As you are enemies to your selves and your posterity, haling and hastening
Gods fearful plagues denounced in Isa. 5. 8. upon your selves and them.

6. So are you a plague and pest to the commonwealth.

1. Exposing it to sorrowful subversion and utter overthrow, for what can your
sheep-coats and hedges do against an enemy?

2. Procuring upon every scarcity and scantnesse dearth and penury.

3. Occasioning racking and raising of rents by means of your thrust out
inhabitants shouldering abroad to live, which makes the subjects lives more
uncomfortable to themselves, and more uncharitable to others.

4. Furthering whoredom and uncleanness, for people multiplying, and
habitations decaying, diverse people who would cannot live in lawful wedlock,
and so the land is polluted with sin, and too much peopled with base and
bastardly slips.

5. Occasioning much beggary and want, for usually your selves or yours are
presently plunged into penury, and your ancient inhabitants crowding into other
populous places, impoverish themselves and others.

6. And depriving the inhabitants of employment: I am verily persuaded that the
town wherein I live, has more shepherds in the same, than both our
depopulated neighboring towns, and yet the least of them was formerly as
great, the other greater by far, if not as big as both: yet are shepherds
the principal people employed in such desolate and decayed places. And I
verily think that some one thrust out farmer has formerly employed and set to
work as many people constantly, as the greedy depopulatour does with his
decayed Lordship. An ancient credible man not many days since certified T. C.
me that (being a young man) he was an inhabitant in a neighboring decayed
enclosed town before it was enclosed, at which time he thinks there were two
hundred persons more in it than now there are (and how meanly the most of them
live many of us know) he affirmed to me that there were then six or seven and
thirty farmers in the same: Twenty of which farmers he was persuaded did
constantly keep as good houses and hospitality as he who after ruined himself
and the town.

Instead therefore of instigating unto, or justifying these injurious and
inhumane inclosings after this or the like manner with these or the like
polishing and plausible, yet preposterous pretexts and pretenses. For I not
only conceive and conjecture, but know what can be and is said by these
enemies of mankind, which in truth by daily experience are convinced and
confuted, being manifested to be but false and fained glozings, and deceitful
deludings to deceive and defraud such who either will not or cannot dive into
and discern their fraud and forgery.

1. Whereas they affirm that the champion is bleake and enclosed towns for
the general are worse fenced with wood and firing against storms, cold and
tempests, the champion men planting and preserving orchards and other wood in
fit and convenient places for ornament, shelter and profit. Whereas the other
wanting men and means to do the same, satisfy themselves with bramble bushes,
and briarly thorny hedges, having little other wood, which are no good
ornament, nor any great shelter, neither do they afford such plenty of fuel
unto the inhabitants, but that they would willingly warm themselves with the
champ(...) man's straw as with good firing if they had it.

2. Whereas they affirm the champion to be nothing so commodious or
profitable, the ground by means of the many ditches being well dreyned and
much bettered, one acre in the enclosed ground with one tillae yielding as
much, often more increase than two in the champion with many times plowing. The
enclosed ground being freer from rotting of sheep, by which means the champion
farmer is much impoverished. The enclosing, preventing unneighbourly
incroaching upon one another by plowing, mowing, and that unmercifull and
uncharitable eating up of poor men, who cannot store their commons by rich
neighbors, which is usual and common in the champion field. As also that
enclosure imployes the laboring men in winter as well as summer, in hedging
and ditching. Rectified reason and grounded experience manifests these to be
but frivolous and trifling flourishes without validity. For are not the
champion towns abundantly more commodious to the commonwealth, breeding,
maintaining and employing multitudes of families more than the other? Are not
the champion fields (especially where good husbands are) as well dreyned and
dressed with plough and spade? As for the abundance of corn they boast of, it
is only after long resting, not if it be continually seeded as the champion
is: for then it could not compare with it, wanting sheep and other helps the
champion has. As for their freedom from rotting, no marvel, for either lay
down the plough or part with their sheep. As for incroachings, there are
better and more blessed means to order and remedy the same, than by such a
medicine far worse than the malady. Neither are poor men oppressed so by
rich men, but that they have their bit, or money for the same. And I wonder
with what a face any man can say, that by means of these hedges and ditches,
the enclosure does employ more than the champion does, want of employment being
one of the greatest mischiefs they occasion to the commonwealth.

3 Lastly, whereas they say, experience in all enclosed countries shows, that
there men live more richly and far better than in the champion. I do not
wonder, such towns maintaining now two or three men of fashion, whereas
formerly they maintained for the same twenty. I know that continuance of time
has skinned the skarre and healed the scab, so that we see them what they are,
not what they were formerly, far more populous than now they be. But show me
who can in the memory of man an enclosed town wherein so many (I think I may
say half so many) able householders do now live and so richly as they did then
when it was champion. If in a neighboring town in which are two hundred
people less, in which are three or four ploughs where were formerly six or
seven and thirty, those few live more richly (and it is well if they do) and
far better than formerly, is (I think) no great matter.

Instead of thus pleading for and patronizing such a cursed and cruel consumer
of the commonwealth as enclosure is, I desire all men to consider,

1. How by this means whole Lordships are converted from tillage to pasturing:
farme-houses decayed: husbandmen turned cottagers or shepherds, are driven to
seek habitations elsewhere. Towns utterly depopulated and unpeopled, or those
who remain to live for the general in great misery.

2. How such and so many pleasant and commodious habitations for men, are
tragically turned into rude and ruinous heaps, and the many delicate and
delightful fields plentifully abounding formerly with folds and flocks, with
rich and rejoicing fruits; deformed and defaced, laid languishing like deplored
and desolate deserts, haunted and inhabited only by bruit beasts and a few
solitary mansions remaining, where there is little help in time of necessity,
comfort in time of doubt, or society in time of peace.

3. How the disasterous and dreadful judgments of God have like an inviolable
inundation and irrevocable irruption seized upon and consumed these insatiable
minded men. I might here tell you what our Chronicles relate of New Forest in
Hamshire, for the making whereof King William overthrew towns and villages by
the space of thirty miles or more, to bring the same into a chase for dear: In
the said Forest William his son with an arrow in his breast, Richard his
son gored and spoiled by the dear, and Richard his nephew the son of
Robert Duke of Normandy having his neck broke, or (as some say) hanged in the
boughs of a tree, lost their lives. I could descend to our own times, and our
fathers, and show you how Gods curse has lighted upon the principal actors in
this truculent and tyrannizing tragedy. I have a catalogue of many in this
kind, as C. enclosed by M. R. K. enclosed by S. R. O. The two R. and H.
enclosed by S. F. F. W. enclosed by S. E. A. H. enclosed by M. S. C. enclosed
by M. E. B. and M. E. D. P. enclosed by S. E. I. V. enclosed by S. R. W. W. by
M. L. H. enclosed by M. A. L. enclosed by M. K. and others, but I spare to name
them: which towns have vomited out and unburdened themselves of their former
desolating and depopulating owners.

4 How carefully our forefathers did continually prevent such inconveniences,
not only by mixing and intermingling their grounds together, but by strict and
severe laws against enclosure, begun in the fourth year of K. Henry the
seventh, which have been corroborated and confirmed by his successors in
sundry Parliaments since.

5. What an unconceiveable difference there is between the town of tillage
and the enclosed.

1. Look into their towns. In the one you may see houses builded, beautified
and inhabited, people multiplying, increasing, and neighbourly conversing,
corn, cattle, and other country commodities plentifully abounding. In the
other you shall behold torn and tottering houses without inhabitants, rude and
ragged ruins of ancient habitations, people daily The Clerk of a neighboring
town enclosed told me, that his wages are ten groats yearly less than it was
in very few years.
diminishing and decaying, living for the general a deplored and disconsolate
life, being forced abroad to neighboring towns to work, to gleane, to gather
pease, and often to beg.

2. Look into the fields of the one, there shall you see cattle of all sorts
friendly and familiarly feeding together, not only the meadows, but also the
slades and lands ends fatted from the land laden with grass; the lands laden
and varnished with variety of garnishing and gladding increase; and the people
from the new-going stripling to the decrepite and neare-dying old man, in their
seedestimes, harvests, and other seasons, like painful and industrious
pismires, laboring in their several employments with much solacing rejoicing,
and delightsome gladness. Look into the pastures of the other, there shall
you behold dry, mossie, barren, and parched grounds, a sad and solitary
silence through want of employment for men: and a few scattering sheep and
other cattle, not so many (I suppose) as is in the other quantity for
quantity, although well near two parts in three is for a certain time exempt
for grain. And no marvel: For, besides Gods curse on the one, and blessing
upon the other, Tillage maintains (with straw, chafe, and such like) many
cattle, who reciprocally requite it again with abundance of manure, which so
feeds and fatteneth their ground, that not only their grass ground is more
fertile helped from the lands, but even their tillage in its time affoordeth
great plenty of young and cherishing feeding.

3. Look into their highways, where you may behold the former traced up and
down by reason of their continual commerce with all sorts of bordering
neighbors, men carrying and recarying to and from faires and markets, and the
ways themselves (except the inconvenience of the situation occasioneth the
contrary) very good, or (at the worst) passable.

First, By reason of their yearly reparations, which cost and charges is
richly requited, not only in the better and safer passage, but also in their
land, unburdened hereby of many unprofi^able stones, and much unnecessary
rubbish.

Secondly, By reason of the open fields, which aff^rding so many helps to the
passenger on bawlkes and lands in the depth of winter (no whit or little
prejudicial to the owner) the eased way by this means is never so tedious and
toyl^some as otherwise it would be: by which means also it timely recovers its
fastness and firmness.

Thirdly and lastly, In regard they are so fully and freely exposed to Sun and
wind, whereby their disadvantagious dirt is soon dried and dispersed.

Look into the other, and you shall behold the highways not much by themselves
frequented, yet so foul and filthy, so mirie and mischievous, so incompatible
and incommodious,

1. In regard that usually their repaires belong to private and particular
persons, who seldom (except compelled) commiserate and compassionate the
common people: or if to the inhabitants, they usually are but few, and the most
of them also poor and penurious, wanting teames and other means to renew and
restore those desperate decays.

2. Partly, in regard that necessity inforceth all sorts of passengers with
cart, carriages and cattle into those narrow and noisome lanes, coping them
in, and compelling them to keep within those abhorred hedges, by which
surcharging without surceasing

3. As also by means of those bramble and briarly hedges they are so sheltered
from wind and Sun, that they are seldom safe and sufferable, but generally so
intolerable and insufferable, that if the curses and cries of poor wayfaring
men forced to frequent those formidable and filthy ways: in which they are not
only soyled like unto the disconsolated cattle they drive before them, but
also often impoverished with loss of their faint and feeble beasts, wanting
strength to help themselves and their burdens out of those (...)sive and
oppressing paths. If they (I say) are of force, then surely such men who are
occasioners hereof cannot be blessed. But whither am I gone? Zeal has
transported me (and I hope that which is according to knowledge) against these
pillagings and pullings down of our populous and puissant commonwealth. And
oh that such persons whom it concern^s, would in time look into this our state
much disparaged and disj^^nted, much diseased and disabled by these manner of
men, so as to help and heal it. If not by forcing the purchasers (for I take
it for granted that the actors in this tragedy or their heirs are or will be
forced through want and penury to forsake the stage and standing in which they
have acted such tragical parts) to re-edifie the ancient habitations, and
re-establish farms and farmers (which were to be wished) yet by damming and
stopping up this inordinate inundation.

1. That our ancient gentility may not by the curse of God dogging at the
heels and devouring such sadding supplanters be ruined and rooted out

2. That our famous and flourishing commonwealth be not em^tied and evacuated
of people, and so inevitably exposed ^o ^usupportable irruptions of insulting
foes.

3. That our active and able men may not be forced for want of employment to
turn pilferers and way-beaters: to seek into other climates, or beggar
themselves and others by crouding into such places which necessarily must give
harbor to too many.

4. That those silly and harmless sheep may no longer devour men, houses
and towns as formerly they have done.

Obj^ct. I know they are ready to pretend a good to the commonwealth* not
intending to depopulate or destroy ti^lage, but onel^ to improve their lands to
the tena^ts advantage, enriching his grounds with wood, and with a more
peaceable and quiet enjoying of his own without any molestation or trouble
from cross and corrupt neighbors.

Answ. 1. But admit that their deeds were correspondent to these their fair,
but usually fained promises. I cannot see in reason (and I think the
experience of such who have made trial does witness for me) how this course
can be to the farmers enriching: For, not only is he forced to pay a greater
rent, not having so good commodities as before, or to be at the cost and
charges of ditching and hedging. Not only is he deprived of his commons, and
allotted to his stint acreridge, but also being penned up into his poor
parcels, he is forced either to lay down tillage, or to keep few or no
cattle in summer season, by which means his fallow ground is scanted of
compass, and much annoyed with grass and weeds, he wanting sheep to supply
the one, and destroy the other; whereas when he intermingled commons in the
champion field, he kept many cattle of all sorts, which he cannot being
pounded into his proper pen: It being easier to dine many at one table
together, than fewer severally and by themselves. The number of hedges and
ditches taking away much ground which would pasture many cattle. And he being
usually deprived of his bit in the common ground.

2. Howbeit experience generally explaneth expressly these to be but
pretenses, for either the unsatiable and unmercifull incloser does presently
dispossess the ancient inhabitants, or else by little and little weary and
wear them out, or wait until they are taken away by death: and being once
rid of them, he either pulls down the ancient habitations to mend walls,
walks and ways, or suffers them to fall down, but no more to be inhabited.
And so enclosing is commonly the mother of depopulation.

SECT. 9.
Against greedy ingrossers of commodities.
GReedy ingrossers of commodities, who not contented with competent and
convenient employments, insatiably thirst after, greedily graspe, and
inhumanely heap to themselves farm unto farm, living unto living.

1. Hereby incumbring themselves with many inevitable, unconceiveable, and
innumerable swarms of anxious perpl^xities, disquieting thoughts, and carking
cares.

2. Hereby much hindering hospitality and relief to poor people, disabling
many others from distributing, and themselves keeping but one house (or if
more, by a restrained servant or two only) for diverse livings.

3. Hereby accasioning the hoising of rents to this height and greatness, that
except commodities are dear and plentiful, the tenant usually well knows not
how to pay his rent: for these manner of men care not to give intolerable and
unreasonable rates, well knowing that for such and such additions, they need
not any greater number of servants and cattle, and for greater a small number
more will serve the turn, by which means the poor man who lives laboriously
on his farm, is forced to pay such rents (or else these gaping cormorants will
swallow up what he possesses) that he and his are but uncomfortable drudges
for other men.

4. Hereby thrusting and keeping many out of such employments to which they
have been apted and f^tted, and in which they have been trained up from their
youth. I know my self who in old age wanting employment has been forced to
forsake the plough by means of such ingurgitating ingrossers.

SECT. 10.
Against those who have no calling.
WOe then to such who neither have nor will have any convenient callings,
proper and peculiar standings; for how can you do service and homage to Christ
our Lord and Master? How will you fight the battles of Christ our King and
Captain who have no calling, station or standing allowed, allotted and
approved of by him?

1. Sure I am the Word of God exactly enjoynes all men to live and labor in
some certain calling, Genesis 3. 19. 2. 15. Job 5. 7. 2 These. 3. 10.

2. Sure I am the light of nature exquisitely inforceth the sa^e, Ion. 1. 8.

3. Sure I am the glorious Angels have their assigned actions and appointed
employments, Psalm. 103. 20.

4. Sure I am that Christ our Chieftaine and Commander from the cradle to the
cross was continually conversant in and about his calling, Mar. 6. 3.

5. Sure I am that God himself created the first six days, and that he has
preserved, supported, and governed the universal world ever since.

6. Sure I am that the Lord our God does sharply and severely plague and punish
idle and unprofitable servants, Mat. 26. 30. and that he does richly
remunerate, and abundantly reward only painful and loyal laborers in his
vinyard, Mat. 20. 8

And do thou a man made to labor, taught by the light of nature, and the
Word of God to labor: and pressed hereunto by the extant examples of
creatures, men and Angels, and the unparaleld examples of Christ and his
Father, live in slothful lithernesse and lawless idleness? And do not thou
professing thy self to be Christ's servant and soldier, labor, serve, and
fight in some sel^ct station and standing under such a Lord, Captain and
Commander? Every man is appointed his vocation, to one this, to another that,
says Bishop Hooper, and of callings says he, that is unlawful that Hooper o^
Jonah 1. Se^ 2.
fights and repugneth with the Word of God, as the vocation of baudes,
Idolaters, masse-mongers, common receivers, and maintainers of dicers and
dice-houses, with such like. The other is lawful which stands with the Word
of God, which we transgress when we bear the name of the vocation and do
nothing appertaining thereto: and when we do in the vocation that we should
not do. Magistrates they have their standings: Ministers of Gods Word theirs:
yea the most poor and penurious heardsmen theirs, wherein they do or ought to
fight this good warfare.

SECT. 11.
Against Usurers, condemned by Fathers, Counsels, Laws, their own pretended
Patrons, religions of all sorts, and sacred Scripture in the Old and New
Testament, 15. objections answered, and diverse disswasives.
But thou cruel griping Usurer, who eatest the bread of the starving orphane,
of the careful and comfortless man, who live on the sweat of other men's
brows, unconscionably and unchristianly eating the bread which is not thine
own; what is thy calling, what is thy station, and standing in this Christian
warfare. Certainly

First, If the ancient authentical, and much admired fathers, as Saint
Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basil, and others did not delude and deceive
us.

Secondly, If the Convocations and Counsels of learned and religious men in
all ages did not err.

Thirdly, If the laudable laws of all sorts, Canon, civil; and of all times
are right and regular.

Fourthly, If your own authors upon whom for this particular you so much dote,
and depend; of whom you so much talk and triumph, being well weighed, rightly
understood, be suffered to signify and set down their own minds and
meanings, are found not to favor but to fight against you.

Fifthly, If universally all sorts of religions, paganish, popish and pure:
heathenish, heretical and heavenly, with Centur. 5 de bares^^^^.
unity and unanimity (the heretical Manichees only (that I know of except)
who wickedly said it is better to be an Usurer then an husbandman, because an
Usurer does not tear the members of God which are in trees, etc. as the
husbandman does) Cry out against and condemn usury as unlawful.

Sixthly, If the express testimonies of sacred Scripture being rightly
understood, and interpreted by the most Orthodoxe, yea almost all Divines, do
condemn as accursed, usury of all sorts.

Then are not you in any warrantable way: comfortable or Christian course of
life, or in any safe or saint-like station, prescribed and appointed by Christ
our General, regulated, and ranged under the rule and regiment of Christ our
Commander, or appropriated and assigned to this station and standing by Christ
our Captain. How therefore dare you call Christ Lord and Master, you not
departing from iniquity? Why do you malepertly march under the enobling
ensign of Christian religion, you treacherously and terribly trampling under
foot the faint and feeble, the weak and languishing soldiers of our God, your
selves often causing their penury and poverty? Why do you not quake and tremble
Iudas-like, to cry all hail to Christ our Commander, you being against him, in
wretchedly refusing to be martialled in any of these Christian and comfortable
ranks and files of his faithful and loyal soldiers? How can you look for
or expect the rich and redundant reward of Christian warriors, you having no
station or standing in this warfare: or if it is any, yet such as is
unchristian and unlawful: If Fathers, Counsels, Laws, your own Authors,
Religions of all sorts, and the Word of God the ground and pillar of truth may
be credited.

1. For the Fathers. Epist. lib. 9. Epist. 10.

Saint Ambrose says, Thou shall not put thy money to usury, because it is
written, He that puts not his money to usury, shall dwell in the Tabernacle
of God; for he is a supplanter, who takes the profit gotten of usury,
therefore let a Christian man if he has, give money as not expecting to
receive it, or without fail receiving only the principal which he gave.
Again, The Lib. offic. 3. Chap. 3.
Lord forbids us to hurt each other, when he forbids to defraud the hireling of
his wages, and when he does determine that money should be restored without
usury. If any man takes usury, says the same Father, he does commit theft.
The same Lib. de bono mort is* Chap. 12. Chap. 12. Ibid. and Chap. 9. Chap. 14.
Father has diverse Chapters upon Tobie against usury, saying, An Usurer is a
Devil, Nothing is more horrible then an Usurer, he is an odious man, and his
money is a viper, which brings forth and conceives all evil. Moses does show
in Exodus what is to kill, namely to impose usury, for it does strangle, and
which is worse, it does choke the soul of the creditour.

Saint Augustine has many notable passages against usury. In Psalm. 36*
I would not says he, that you should be Usurers, and therefore I would not,
because God would not, for if I would not, and God would, do it: but if God
would not, although I was willing, he should do it to his own hurt, who
should do it. But whence is it manifest that God is against this? It is said
in a certain place, he that puts not his money to usury, and how
detestable, hateful and execrable this is, I consider because the Usurers
themselves do also know. Again, If thou shall lend out to In the same Psalm.
usury to a man, that is, shall give thy money lent to him, of whom thou do
expect to receive something more then thou gave, not only money, but any
thing more then thou gave, whether the same be wheat, or whether it be wine
or oil, or any thing else, if thou expectest to receive more then thou gave
thou art an Usurer, and in this to be condemned and not commended. Again,
what are those usuries but sins which In Psalm. 71,
are called debts. Again, what shall I say of moneys gotten by Epist. 54*
Mared.
usury, which the laws themselves, and judges, command to be restored, whether
is he more cruel which steals, or by force takes something from a rich
man, or who cruelly slays a poor man with usury?

Saint Basil is hotter against usury, saying, Ezekiel places In. Is^l. 14.
with us 15.
usury amongst the greatest evils, and to receive more then the principal, --
dogs receiving more, wax gentle; an Usurer receiving is provoked -- art thou
rich do not take, art thou poor do not take. He terms Usurers Dogs,
monsters, vipers and devils.

Saint Chrysostom says, There is nothing more filthy or cruel Hom. 5. ^n
M^tth. ^*
th^n usury, for such do gain by other men's perils, and obtains greater
profits by the misfortune of others. He goes on, showing what usury he would
have them seek for, namely heaven, and before he says, such usury as he
wishes unto, namely in being merciful, brings a kingdom, but this hell,
that is a sign of piety, this of covetousness. Again, Christ says he,
commands us to lend money, not by usury, because he who lends his money to
usury, seems at the first to give his own, Hom. 12. ^n M(...). ^.
but in truth he does not give his own, but takes that which is another, he
seems to succor necessity, but in truth he sends a greater necessity, he
l^oseth from one band, and binds in many bands, and he does not give for the
justice of God, but for his own gain: usury m^ney is like the biting of an
aspe, for as he who is smitten with an aspe falls a sleep pleasantly, and so
in the sweetness of sleep dies, so he who receives of usury is delighted
for the present, as if he had received a good turn^, and so in the delight of
a benefit perceives not how he is Hom. 41. i^ Genesis 17.
made captive. Again, In these sensible moneys the Lord forbids that any
should take usury, why and for what cause? Because both is damnified, the
borrower is consumed with penury, and the lender increasing his riches does
heap together to himself a multitude of sins.

2. Counsels.
The Counsels condemning usury, are very many. In the Council. ^libert.
f^ure hundred year after Christ, it was in Counsels decreed, That if any
Clergy man was detected to take usury, he should be d^graded. If any lay man
was proved to have taken usury, and being reprooved, promised to leave it, and
to exact it no more, that he should be pardoned, but if he continued in that
iniquity, that he should be cast out of the Church. That Ministers who
Arelatens. 1. Council. Arelatens. 2.
did take usury according to the divine rule should abstain from the
Communion. That if any Clergy man did give his money to usury -- he being
deposed from his office should be debarred from the Communion. That no Clergy
man should take usury, Carthag. 1.
because that which is faulty in lay men ought to be condemned in Laodicen:
Carthag. 3. Carth. 4. Cen. 4. cap. 9. Nicen. council. Aurelianens. council.
Clergy men. That it is not lawful for any in priestly orders to take usury.
That Clergy men should exercise no kind of usury. That Clerks should not be
usurers.

In the fifth hundred year after Christ, it was decreed, That no Clergy man
should take usury. Can. 18. If any Clergy man do take usury he should be
thrust out of the Clergy.

In the sixth hundred year after Christ, it was decreed, That Aurelian Council.
Clergy men should not at all lend to usury. That a Clergy man should not lend
his money to usury, either in his own name, or in another man's, nor that he
should expect any more then was given, and if any did presume to do otherwise,
that he should be degraded.

In the ninth hundred year after Christ, it was decreed, Cubilones. council.
That not only Clergy men should abstain from filthy gains and usury, but
that they should instruct the people committed to them, to abstain from the
same. That a Clergy man from Moguntin.
a Deacon and upwards should not lend money to usury. That Aquisgranens.
neither lay Christians, nor Clergy men in their own names or in any others
should lend to usury. That David describing Parisiens.
an evangelicall man in the 15. Psalm does forbid usury in all, and our Lord
and Master Christ did not give to usury, but did with a pious bounty give to
the needy man.

In the twelfth hundred year after Christ, it was decreed, Later^nens. council.
That manifest Usurers should not be admitted to the Communion, nor to receive
Christian burial if they dyed in this sin, that their offerings should not
be taken, and whosoever took them, or buried them, he should be compelled to
restore those things he had taken, and be suspended from the execution of his
place until he had satisfied his Bishop. That Usurers should be constrained
with strict punishments to restore their usury money to those they had wronged,
or their heirs, or if these be not alive, to the poor, while they have
ability to restore, that possessions gotten by usury ought to be sold, and the
price to make restitution, that so they might be freed from punishment and
sin. That if any Clergy man is an usurer he should suffer the loss of his
Ecclesiastical benefice, since the name of usury is so abominable to God and
men -- that all Usurers until they do fully satisfy for their usury, should
be debarred from the Communion, their alms should not be taken, and their
wills should not be of force.

In the thirteenth hundred year after Christ, it was decreed, Colon. Council.
Canon 109.
That Usurers should be excommunicated every Lords day -- not admitted to the
communion -- that none should receive alms of them and that they should not
have any Christian burial.

The Canons of our Church agreed upon in the year of our Lord, 1603. enjoyne
Churchwardens and sidesmen, to present Adultery, Whoredom, Iucest,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Ribauldry, Usury or any other wickedness of life, that
they may be punished with the severity of the laws -- and not admitted to the
Communion until they be reformed.

For Laws.
3. I am not verst in foreign Laws, nor in the civil or Canon laws, and
therefore I cannot allege them of mine own reading, or upon mine own
knowledge, for these therefore I depend upon, and direct you unto the
rhetorical and religious discourse of the right revered Bishop Jewel against
usury, on 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. where he says, that no good man ever used it, all
that fear Gods judgments, abhor it, He says it is filthy gain, a work of
darkness, a monster in nature, a plague of the world, and the misery of the
people. He says it is not of God, nor sound amongst Gods children. He says
it comes from the devil, that it is theft and murder. That there was never any
religion, nor sect, nor state, nor degree nor profession of men but have
disliked it: and that all laws civil, canon, temporal and natural condemn
it. Yet this I know that Linwood in his Constitutions about tithes, allows
not tithe, of use-money; because of goods only Linw. Constable it. lib. 3. de
decimis.
lawfully gotten: and this I know, that as our Canons, so our Acts of
Parliament are directly against usury. The Statutes in the 20. year of King
Henery the third, in the third year of King Henery the seventh were made
against usury.

A Statute in the eleventh year of King Henery the seventh, forbids to take
loan of money, any thing more besides or above the money lent, by way of
contract or covenant, for the time of the same loan, saving lawful penalties
for non-payment of the same money lent. A Statute made in the thirty seventh
year of King Henery the eight, says, That usury is a thing unlawful, that
diverse Acts have been made in this Realm for the avoiding and punishing of
it. Yet they thought it expedient to tolerate 10 in the 100. And least some
should think that this tolleration was an approbation. The Parliament
assembled in the fifth and sixth years of King Edward the sixth, say, That the
Act of King Henery the eight, which permitted 10 in the 100, was not meant or
intended for the maintenance and allowance of usury, but rather made and
intended against all sorts of usury, as a thing unlawful, as by the title and
preamble of the said Act it does appear -- But for as much as usury is by the
the Word of God utterly prohibited, as a vice most odious and detestable, as in
diverse places of the holy Scriptures it is evident to be seen: which though
no godly teaching and persuasions can sink into the hearts of diverse greedy
uncharitable and covetous persons of this Realm, nor yet by any terrible
threatenings of Gods wrath, and vengeance which hangs justly over this Realm
for the great and open usury therein daily used and practiced, they will forsake
such filthy gain and lucr^, etc. for reformation they prohibited not only the
10 in the 100, but also any thing above the principal lent, upon pain of
forfeiture of the money lent, and the interest, imprisonment of the body, and
fine and ransom at the Kings will and pleasure. Although this law was
repealed, and that of King Henery the eight for 10 in the 100, revived in the
thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, and continued Parliament after
Parliament. Yet in the said Act for 10 in the 100, they say, for as much as all
usury being forbidden by the law of God is sin, and detestable. And our last
law allowing 8 in the 100, is called a law against usury.

For Authors produced as patrons of usury.
4. I have searched with a careful sedulity some of those Authors of greatest
note, of whom usurers are so glad, whereof they so much glory, on whom they
rely, as upon a safe and sure refuge, and to whom they have recourse as to an
impregnable rampart and receptacle: neither can I find them fautors, favorers
and furtherers of this fraternity.

D. Ames says, all usury is not unlawful, yet he also says, that An(...) de
conscient lib. 5. ^e contract^ usu(...).
such kind of usury which Usurers ordinarily practice, is justly condemned by
all.

Then showing what usury he thinks is lawful, he sets down these cautions,
and conditions, which give no allowance or encouragement to Usurers.

1. Nothing, says he, must be taken of poor men, more then the principal,
but they must be lent to freely.

2. Every man must take heed that through hope of gain he does not hinder
any, and therefore that he does not neglect to lend and give freely.

3. A man must shun excess, and therefore it is safest not to take so much as
is permitted by the laws or custom of a place.

4. He must have respect to the party of whom he takes, that he brings not
loss, but profit to him.

5. He must observe the rule of equity and charity, so that he takes no more
of another then he would willingly give in such cases himself.

6. He must take heed that he gives no offense.

Mr. Perkins is alleged as a favourer of usury, yet Mr. Perkins defining usury
to be a gain exacted by covenant above Perk. on Com. 8.
the principal, only in lieu and recompense of the lending, says it is quite
contrary to Gods Word: and in the place alleged, namely, Matthew. 5. 42. He
only allows of taking increase for lending, of courtesy. 1 In way of
thankfulness, 2 When a man sustaineth damage by his lending, 3 And when a
man is contented to hazard his principal. How justly they deal with this
author all men may judge.

Amandus Pol^nus is pressed as a patron of usury. He says Polan. in Psalm. 15.
there are three kinds of usury.

First, Compensatory is that which is given to recompense the just loss which
the creditor has or does sustain for want of the money lent. This is says he
lawful.

1. Because it is not gain exacted above the principal for the office of
lending.

2. Because it is agreeable with the office of humanity, which command^th thee
so to help another, that thou save thy self harmless.

3. Because it is permitted by the constitutions of Christian Emperors.

4 Because common necessity and the commodity of traffic requires it.

5. Because it recompenceth the loss of the creditour which no reason
prohibiteth.

Secondly, Punitory is that which is inflicted by man, or by law for a pain,
not for the gain of them that desire it, but for the delay of them that pay it
not, which cannot be disallowed.

1. Because it recompenseth the loss which the creditour has sustained, for
that the money was not paid at the appointed time.

2. Because it is a just punishment of the delay, which is counted for a fault,
worthily therefore inflicted on the debtor.

Thirdly, Lucratory is that which makes gain by the m^ere office of lending
against the nature of a contract, a kind whereof is usury of usuries, which
even by the Gentiles opinion is infamous, also all usury which oppresses poor
men, or makes men peore. This kind of usury he says is unlawful.

1. Because this is forbidden by God.

2 Because it is against the office of humanity which forbids to exact a
reward for that which is to be done freely.

3. Because it is not a lawful means of getting wealth approved by the law of
nations, or by the eivill law, but an Art altogether disallowed by consent of
all people, seeing it is a gain made of another man without a just cause.

4. Because it is against the nature of lending which ought to be free.

5. Because it is against the nature of indifferent use of money which was
sound to help the difficulties of exchange, not to make a gain, or be hired
for reward.

6. Because it is an unjust thing, seeing thereby the Usurer seeks gain out
of that thing, the loss and peril whereof belongs not to him, but to the
debtor.

They have great need of Patrons, who fly for protection and patronage to
such, who do so sharply and peremptorily condemn them.

Hemingius on James the fifth is alleged. In that place he propundeth this
question, whether it is lawful to covenant for part of the gain? And
answers that a man may indeed do so, so that he likewise take part of the
danger upon himself. A man may demand 5 l for an 100 l by the year as part of
the gain, so that in like manner he be contented to abate 5 l of the 100 l
principal, if loss be made, for he which bargaineth for so much, with
condition of gain, and would suffer no loss, does indeed commit usury. He
speaks also of thankefullnesse, and making good the loss the creditour
suffers by delay of payment. But what is this to justify usury.

Zanchy on Ephesians. 4. 29. is as they think an impregnable bulwark, and an
invincible fortification, yet he there brings usury amongst the kinds of theft.
True it is he does reject the ordinary definition of usury: and allows of
some kind of usury. But little to the comfort and encouragement of usurers. He
says usury condemned is a gain which is exacted or taken above the principal
with the damage of the debtor for the money lent. But that which is without
damage he thinks is lawful and to this purpose he has eight reasons. Then he
answers this question whether it be lawful to agree upon a certain sum,
affirming it to be lawful, provided that if a man does certainly find that
the debtor has made little or no gain, and that not by his own fault or
negligence, but by evil success, or because God would not bless his labor,
then the creditor must take little or less then was b^^gained, for otherwise
the gain is a defrauding of the debtour, and it cannot be taken without his
loss, and so is not lawful usury -- And if the debtour not only make no
gain, but also receives loss, then the creditor must suffer with him some
part of the loss, for equity and charity requires this. Then setting down
certain circumstances to be observed, these are three:

1. The money ought to be to his profit that receives it, and not to his hurt.

2. Gratitude must be observed by the borrower.

3. And charity must be present on both sides.

Then he says it flows from three fountains that men lend unto others.

1. From covetousness by which wicked men are led.

2. From natural humanity conjoined with equity by which civell honest men
lend.

3. From mere charity for Gods sake, by which Christians and mere godly men
are led.

And then he says, seeing it is a part of humanity and equity to requite
benefit for benefit, and it is no common benefit that I have lent thee my money
whereof thou have made great gain. Christ condemns not this, If thou take
part of that gain and communicates the same to the benefactor in taken of a
thankful mind and of equity.

But the maine is M Calvin, a man of peerless gifts, profound judgment, and
holy life. He is alleged as a protector of these pernicious practices. But how
justly let all men judge.

He says, in a well ordered Commonwealth no usury is tolerable Calvin in
Ezekiel. 18. 8.
-- That usury is an illiberall and dishonest gain unbeseeming as well a godly
as an honest man. He says that an Usurer is a murderer and a thief, he says,
it is scarce possible that he which takes usury should not damnifie his
brother. In his epistle concerning Calv. Epist.
usury he says, It were to be wished that all Usurers and the name of them
were banished out of the world. That commonly when money is put forth to usury,
cruel^y, innumerable d^ceits, and circumventions accompany the same. That
amongst the practices of Godly men this is one, He has not given his mon^y to
usury, In D^ut 2^.
That it is more then rare that the same man should be an honest man and an
Usurer. On Deuteronomy. 23 He says, it can hardly be avoided but that Usurers like
horseleeches will suck the peoples blood. That since profane writers have
reckoned the practice of usury amongst filthy gains, much less is it
tolerable amongst the sons of God. On the 15. Psalm, He says, In Psalm. 15.
It can hardly be that in the world there can be found an Usurer which is not
ravenous, and not given to filthy and unjust gain. He says, it is against
reason that while husbandmen, handycrafts m^n, etc. labor and offer themselves
to many troubles for the common good, only these should reap gain by the
fruits of all sorts of men.

If Usurers rightly read Calvin, they will not think themselves much
beholding to him.

Ob. But Calvin allows of usury, and affirms it to be lawful.

Answ. 1. Did Calvin do so indeed, I should think that exc^llent men have
their errors, least we should make them more then men, and too much depend
upon them.

2. True it is, in some sort he does

1. Provided that the lender does not make a common or perpetual practice of
this kind of lending, but only for some spare money wherewith he has
pleasured his friend, being able and willing to show himself thankful, does
for the present accept of his thankefullnesse and requital.

2. Provided that nothing be taken above the principal of men in need, and
necessity, or in any calamity.

3. Provided that none be so cautelous about the safety of his money as not to
lend to the poor.

4. Provided that nothing be received that is not agreeable with natural
equity, according to that rule whatsoever you would, etc.

5. Provided that the borrower should gain as much or more then the lender.

3. Whereas he names lawful and unlawful usury, he no whit contradicts that
which the strictest opposites to usury teach and affirm: for, That which they
call partnership, recompense for damage, and thankfulness he calls lawful
usury, taking the word in a larger sense then they do, not accounting these
any usury at all. That which they term usury, he calls unlawful usury. So
that Calvin is with us, and not against us.

Religions condemning usury.
5. All sorts of religions concordantly condemn usury, both heathenish,
heretical, and orthodoxe.

For Heathens it is well known and usually alleged, Tul. offi^ lib. 2. cap
ul^im.
that Cato heing demanded what it was to take usury, asked what it was to kill
a man; as if he had said, it is cruelty, Lib. 2. de re rust. Arist pol. 1.
cap. 6, 7. Polit. 4. cap. 1.
yea very murder. And the same Cato said, our Ancestors punished a thief
twofold, and an Usurer fourefold. Also those usual places of Aristotle in the
first book of his politikes, Chap. 6. and 7. condemning usury as an execrable
vice: as also his reckoning Usurers in the rank of notoriously naughty men:
do sufficiently show his detestation of the same. Agis his burning all Usurers
bonds: and Agesilaus saying he never saw a clearer fire. Ciceroes saying, that
usury is more against nature then death, and that Usurers are as those who kill
a man; do manifest how Philosophers, and other Heathens did abominate, and
abhor this trade of usury. To these I will add the Mahumetans, who are so
direct and downright, that their Alcaron says, Those who De soenore
viventes, non-nist quasi Daemoniac^ resurgent. Alcaron. Azoara. 4.
live of usury shall rise like men possessed of devils, and that every one who
fears God, must especially take heed that he does not live by usury.

Omni timenti Deum sum cavendum est ne de foenore vivet. Azoara. 6. For
Papists, it is well known that they condemn usury, as Bellarmine in diverse
places on the eight Commandment Bell. Tom. 2. lib. 2. de monach. Bell. explic.
Christianae doct. cap. 18. Gerson de contract cap. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. B(...)
li^. 3. did. 37. Tollet l^b. 5. cap 28. Lumbard lib. 3. did. 37. N(...)ol. de
or^el. did. 15. q. 111. N^v^r. Man. in lege o^ta^.
(the seventh with him speaking) of thefts forbidden in the Commandment, in
the second place he names all usury. Gerson has diverse Chapters against
usury, wherein he affirms it to be a mortal sin, unlawful. Bonaventure
speaking of the second Table says, here also usury is forbidden. Tollet
affirms usury to be a mortal sin. Lumbard says, usury is forbidden in
the eight Commandment. Nicolaus de Orbellis, handling many things about
restitution and usury, propounds this question: What do you think of those
laws which permit usury? and answers, they are of no force, because they are
against the divine law, they are against the law of nature -- and they are
abrogated by the Canon law. Petrus Alogius has diverse questions about usury
and restitution, commending the one as necessary, condemning the other as
unlawful. Cent. 4. Cap. 6. Cent. 12. Cap. 3


The Orthodoxe primitive Christians accounted usury unlawful, an Usurer worse
then the devil, because the devil uses his own talent to do mischief, the
Usurer not his own, but Gods.

Luther says thus, Usurers are the cruel devourers of the Luther tom 7. de
usur. Vsurar^j sunt immanes totius orbis voratores, dederunt se Diabolo, n(...)
qui^quam morantur nostros clamores quantum vis sonoros; d^ his locutus sum quod
si^t t^m vivi quam mortui tra^end^ Satan^ (nam ejus esse volunt) ^ec quicquam
Christiani commercij cum illis habendum. Dic (Paroche) tibi esse inter^ictum a
Deo ne ullum usurarium ^abeas pro homine Christiano, nec Sacramenta porrigere,
nec honest sepelire. Non ideo sum Concionater (dic) ut ad inferos (...) me
praecipitem, abi tu and descend sol^s ad inferos -- vos ergo Parochos admoneo,
(...) vestrum sinite illos ins^ar canum mori: ut Diabolus devoret cu^
corporibus, and animabus, nec ullo cae^ui Christiano intersint, nam si aliquae
plaga Germany suerit immissa; id quod brevi s^turum metuo: Maxim id fiet
propter avaritiam and usuras, propterea quod execrandos and damnatos istos
homines inter nos passi sumus vivere, and quod commercium cum ijs habuimus,
praecipue Magistratus rationem reddituri sunt Deo, and graviter punientur,
quodtam sceleratos latrones passi sunt in ditionibus suis impune grassari, and
soencrando depraedari. Luther Tom. 7. de usur. Fol. 424. Fol. 426. Fol. 437. p.
2.
whole world, they have given themselves wholly to the Devil, neither do they
any thing esteem our speeches, although ringing; of these I have spoken that
they are to be delivered to Satan whether living or dead, for his they would
be; and that no Christian commerce be kept with them: say O Curate that it is
straightly forbidden to thee by the law of God to esteem any Usurer for a
Christian man, to offer him the Sacraments, or honestly to bury him. Say O
Preacher, I may not throw my self headlong to hell with thee, go thou and
descend into hell alone -- I admonish therefore you Preachers that you do your
duty, let them die like dogs, that the devil may devour their souls and
bodies: neither let them be present in any Christian Congregation, for if any
plague shall be sent into Germany, which I fear will be shortly, it will
come to pass principally for covetousness and usury, because we suffer those
execrable and damned men to live amongst us, and because we have commerce with
them, especially Magistrates shall answer for this to God, and shall be more
grievously punished, because they suffer such wicked thieves without punishment
to rob, and to destroy by usury in their dominions.

Concerning our Church as pure and Orthodoxe as any under the cope of heaven,
we may boldly affirm that it is altogether opposite to usury: Witness her
109 Canon. Witness many of her worthy Prelates, and other grave and godly
Divines, who have written at large against this sin: as Bishop Jewel, B.
Downam, D. Fenton and others: and witness her pious Homilies, in one of them,
calling goods gotten 3d part against peril of idol. For Rog. week
by usury, unjust gotten goods: and in another, goods of the devils gift, and
them worshippers of the devil. I will conclude this with M. Ainsworths
relation of the opinion of some of the chiefest Jews concerning usury. Usury
and Ainsworth, on Exodus 22. 25. out of Moimony, Treatise of the lender and
borrower, Chap. 1. Sect. 2.
increase are both one thing, Levit. 25. 37. Deuteronomy. 23. 19. and why is the name
of it called neshek biting usury? because noshek it biteth, for it nippeth thy
neighbor, and eats his flesh -- likewise it is unlawful to have ought to do
between the borrower and the lender upon usury: and whosoever is either
surety, or scribe, or witness between them, he transgresses against this
prohibition. Ex. 22. 25. -- He that lends upon usury transgresses against this
prohibition. Exodus 22. 25. Levit. 25. 37. etc. and the borrower against two.
Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Levit. 19 14. It is unlawful to take usury before or after. As
one intending to borrow of a man sends him a gift, to the end that he may lend
unto him, this is usurie aforehand; or he has borrowed of a man, and paid him
again, and sends him a gift for his money which he had of him for naught,
this is after-usurie.

Scriptures against usury.
6. In the sixth and last place, the places of Scripture prohibiting usury are
plentiful, plain and pregnant.

Exodus 22. 25. Thou shall not lay on him usury.

Lev. ^5 36. Take no usury, but fear thy God, as if an usurer did not fear
God.

Deuteronomy. 23 19. Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, that God may
bless thee.

Ne^em. 5. 7, 10, 11, 12, 13 The Jews are reprooved for their usury, persuaded
and enjoined to make restitution.

Psalm. 15. 5. He that puts not his money to usury. (...) Mutuo a(...)
im(...)s and non resi(...)et.


Psalm. 37. 21. The wicked takes for lending, and will not restore. If the words
carry this sense as they will, and the antithesis or contrary description of
the godly, (Ver. 21. 26. But the righteous shows mercy and gives, he is ever
merciful and lends) seem to import. Then it is a note of a wicked man to
exact for lending, and not to restore.

Psalm. 55. 12. Usury (or deceit) and guile depart not from (...)
her streets. The Septuagint read it usury, so do S. Augustine and Theodoret on
this place. The same word is used Psalm. 72. 14. He shall redeem their soul
from usury (or deceit) and (...)
violence. Usury therefore is a lamentable note of a sinful place.

Psalm 89. 22. The enemy shall not exact upon him as an usurer, (...)
neither shall etc. Noting usurers as enemies, and sons of wickednes^e.

Psalm. 109. 11. Let the usurer catch all that he has. The (...)
same word is used Exodus 22. 25. and here by Pagnine and Montanus it is
translated usurer. Usurers therefore are grievous oppressors, catchers and
consumers of men's substance.

Prove. 22. 7. The borrower is servant to the usurer. Thus (...)
Pagnine affirms S. Hierom to read it, and the word is so used, Neh. 5. 4.
Which place (if in that sense it may be read) shows two evil effects of
usury, impoverishing the borrower, and bringing him into slavish bondage.

Prove. 29. 13. The poor and the usurer, our translation reads (...)
it, The deceitful man or usurer meet together. That is, he impoverisheth them
who by borrowing meet with him. The Lord inlighteneth both their eyes. The eyes
of the poor are enlightened to see his folly being impoverished, the usurers
so, as often they are convinced of their crime, yea so that some of them are
converted.

Ezekiel. 18. 8, 13, 17. Thrice does the Lord reprehend this sin, and ranks it
with the greatest sins, as idolatry, murder, oppression, and affirms that
such sinners shall not live. So, Ezekiel. 22. 7. to 12. there is a catalogue of
capital and crimson abominations, in which number usury is one.

Thus, oh you mis-knowing and miserably deluded usurers, may manifestly see and
perceive, that the ancient Fathers, that Councels and Convocations, that pious
and wholesome Laws, that your own patrons and protectours, as you have been
misinformed, that religions, good and bad, and the sacred sanctifying Word of
God do abominate and abhor as accursed, do confute and condemn as execrable,
do dissuade from and denounce judgments against this vicious and unwarrantable
way, wherein you so unadvisedly and inconsiderately do wander.

Object. 1. Say not therefore (pleading perversely for Baal, as alas too many
do) beloved brethren, that usury is forbidden only to the poor, not to the
rich, Exodus 22. 25.

Answ. But carefully and conscionably consider,

1. That in the forenamed place there is a double object, the one general, my
people: the other special, the poor: and that the ingemination of the
preposition ETH cannot properly be a qualification of one subject, and
therefore may well be read thus: If thou lend money to any of my people, or to
the poor by thee.

1. For the Lord forbids to take any increase of the poor stranger, Lev. 25.
36.

2. Also of any brother, Deuteronomy. 23. 19.

2. The word used in that place does not signify one always (...)
desiring, wanting, and extreme needy, as pa^ Deuteronomy. 15. 4, 11. does. But such
a one who is neither very rich, nor extreme poor, 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. I in my
poverty have prepared, etc. (...)


3. That rich and wealthy men are to be accounted aliens and strangers, and not
to be esteemed brethren, if this cousequence is not criminous and culpable,
Deuteronomy. 23. 19.

4. That this is no good, or well grounded inference, take not of the poor,
therefore thou may take of the rich: for, by the same reason we may delude
and defraud, wrong and oppress married women, children having parents, our
neighbors and rich men, as these following Scriptures do sufficiently show.
Exodus 22. 22. You shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. Deuteronomy. 24.
17. Thou shall not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless, nor take a widows raiment to pledge. Deuteronomy. 27. 19. Cursed be he
that perverteth the judgment of the fatherless, stranger and widow. Prove. 22.
22. Rob not the poor -- nor oppress the afflicted. Prove. 23. 10. Enter not
into the field of the fatherless. Ier. 22. 3. Do no violence to the stranger,
fatherless and widow. Zach. 7. 10. Oppress not the stranger, fatherless and
widow, which sacred injunctions give not the least allowance to wrong and
oppress any at all, yet particularly and specially nominates these,

1. Because of all others they are most subject to violence and wrong, and
least able to make resistance.

2. Because that oppressing of these is an addition unto, and aggravating the
miseries of those who are already abundantly miserable.

3. Because the good of such is very little (if at all) regarded or respected.

4. Because these cannot set forward and further their own business by bribes
and friends.

5. Because these cannot acquit and recompense those who favor, help and
further them.

Object. 2. Say not beloved brethren that biting usury is only forbidden, or
that usury of money to buy necessary food or the like, is only prohibited.

Answ. 1. For Marbith and Neshek are Synonima, Levit. 23. 36.

2. For all usury is biting.

1. Not only in regard of the borrower, as these and other Creditor mordet cum
exigit quod non debet: debtor mordetur cum reddit quod non accepit: mordet
usura; mordetur qui accipit; facit mordere qui dat
Scriptures demonstrate, Psalm. 72. 14. 89. 22, 23. Prove. 22. 7.

2. Not only in regard of the commonwealth, as B. Jewel excellently shows,

3. But also in regard of the usurer himself, whose soul and conscience in
the end is thereby bitten.

3. And as for that distinction of meats, etc. Deuteronomy. 23 19. the Lord does there
flatly forbid all the diverse and distinct kinds of usury of what sort soever.

Object. 3. Say not beloved brethren, the Lord allows of some kind of usury,
therefore it is not simply unlawful, Deuteronomy. 23. 20.

Ans. 1. For by this reason usurers make themselves strangers to the Church and
people of God, of whom they take usury.

2. For now this partition wall is broken down.

3. And as for the Lords allowing the Jews to take usury of strangers (they
being such whom they were to destroy without showing them mercy, Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
20. 17.) it neither does nor can prove usury lawful, against the whole scope
and current of the Scripture, which does lively delineate, and largely
demonstrate the diabolical deformity of this cursed, cruel, corroding and
Satanicall abomination, no more than Gods allowing the Israelites to spoil the
Egyptians, Exodus 12. 36. can prove theft lawful, or Moses permitting divorce,
can prove it legitimate. I know that some say, that divorce and usurie are not
alike, because that was forbidden before the law, whereas usury was not so. But
let such consider, that usury being against the Moral law and the law of
nature, was forbridden in all ages, before Moses as well as since, as other
kinds of theft, murder and adultery are and were forbidden.

Object. 4. Say not beloved brethren that the prohibition of usury was only
Mosaicall and Judicial, not being once named in the New Testament, but rather
approved by our Savior himself, Mat. 25. 27. Mine own with usury.

Answ. 1. For the Scripture brancheth this amongst the breaches of the Moral
Law, yea amongst most gross and grievous abominations, as murder, idolatry,
incest, and such like, Ezekiel. 22. 7, 12.

2. The Scripture excludes these offenders out of Gods tabernacle and holy
hill, Psalm. 15. therefore is usury a breach of the Moral, not of the Judicial
Law.

3. The argument is not accommodate and good which is drawn from one part of
Scripture negatively, it is sufficient that it is forbidden in the Old
Testament, and reckoned amongst the dreadful and most odious transgressions of
the Moral Law.

4. Usury is expressly forbidden in the New Testament, namely.

Matthew. 5. 42. From him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away: In which
words there is a precept of free lending.

1. For there needs no command to lend for gain and advantage, men being
naturally too prone hereunto

2. The comparing that place in Luke 6. 35. Look for nothing again, namely
for lending, manifestly demonstrates as much, and that this is the meaning of
the place, is clear.

1. For if the principal was not to be expected, it was giving, and not
lending.

2. For free lending is a fruit of love and mercy, which are here enjoined.

3. For if men lend for advantage, what thank have they? Do not sinners, do
not usurers the same, Verse* 34.

4. For this lending ought to be to all whom we ought to love and do good unto.

Mat. 21. 12, 13. Overthrew the tables of the money changers (...). Numulariorum
or usurers. The same Ioh. 2. 15, 16. When Christ scourged them out of the
Temple, and called them thieves, saying, you have made it a den of thieves, and
that money changers are usurers is clear, Mat. 25. 27. Money to the exchangers
-- mine own with usurie. Money changers are usurers, and such are called
thieves by our blessed Savior.

1 Cor. 6. 10. Nor covetous, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven: Usurers are covetous for they greedily (...).
covet, and unjustly take increase: they are also extortioners, for they exact
usury.

Gal. 5. 15. If you bite and devonre one another, etc. usurers (...).
bite (as before) the borrowers, 1 Samuel 22. 2. Every one that (...)
was in debt, namely to the usurer, and devour the borrowers and what they
have, 2 King. 4. 1. The usurer came to take sons and all* Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
And such like, implying this and other breaches of the Moral Law elsewhere
implied and expressed.

5. And as for that alleged place, Matthew. 25. 26. Luke 19. 22.

1. Take it as approving usury, yet then it concludes that usurers are cruel,
hard, unmercifull and unjust men; for the unprofitable, evil and slothful
servant accusing God wonderfully unjustly (for the Lord gives talents and
increase to the well users of them) the Lord from this false accusation
confutes this wayward wretch, wounding him with his own weapons, as thus; thou
say that I am an hard man, grant so much (which yet is false) why then did
thou not do for me as for hard and unjust men who are usurers, etc. which
supposition makes nothing for usury.

2. The words are a parable taken from an evil thing, and we are to know and
understand,

1. That all things from which Scripture borrowes similitudes are not lawful,
Psalm. 58. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 10.

2. That all things are not good from which we are to learn, for as from
unjust stewards, Luke 16. so from usurers we should learn spiritual usury,
edifying our selves and others what we can.

3. The meaning is that men should be as industrious and diligent to do good,
to increase their gifts and graces, as usurers are to do evil, and to increase
their wealth.

4. For it cannot be meant of usury literally, because the Lord takes not away
from, but gives more and more to all that have and practice the usury here
meant, Ver. 29. whereas it is clear that he does soon blast and consume that
other diabolical increase of usurie.

Object. 5. Say not beloved brethren, we may do with our own what we will.

Answ. For we may not murder our brother because our weapons are our own, nor
oppress our neighbor because our money is our own.

Object. 6. Say not beloved brethren, that Christian commonwealths allow of
usury, and ours in particular.

Answ. 1. For suppose they did, and should make it a trade without control,
yet could it not be lawful God forbidding the same: the inferior cannot
abrogate or take away the law of the superior; the best, yea all
commonwealths under the frame and fabric of heaven are subject and
subordinate to God, and therefore cannot annihilate and abrogate his loyal Law.

2. But what if all laws in all commonwealths are against it, as B. Jewel
shows.

3. As for our laws, they affirm usury to be unlawful: they are styled laws
against usury, to limit and restrain it, not to allow or approve of the same,
and our 109 Canon commands Churchwardens to present usurers, and enjoynes to
keep them from the Communion until they be reformed.

Object. 7. Say not beloved brethren, that many good Divines and Preachers
think usury to be lawful.

Answ. 1. Since all the learned and renowned Heathens condemn it, as
Aristotle, Cicero, Cato, etc.

2. Since all the ancient Fathers cry out against it as accursed, as S.
Augustine, Ambrose, Basil, etc.

3. Since modern Writers have written unanswerably against it, as B. Jewel,
D. Downam, etc.

4. Since Judas and Demas were Preachers approved of by the best, yet evil
practitioners.

5. Since the best men have had, and may have their errors.

6. Since the allowance of man cannot make that lawful which God forbids.

7. Since it would be more charitable and Christianlike for those worthy
Divines to show and signify their grounds and reasons, to confute all
antiquity, and orthodoxe modern Writers, rather than to whisper in corners,
and mutter in secret by word or letters, that so we also who are contrary
minded, if we see it warrantable, may give them the right hand of fellowship.

8. Since such Divines who are allowed by and in our Church cannot be much
commended for good Divines, if they approve of or practice usury, they
subscribing to our Homilies which say, that goods of usury are from the Devil,
and that usurers do worship the Devil.

9. Since (as I have showed you) Divines are much wrested and wronged in this
particular by this fraternity, their fautors and factours.

10. Since (I verily think) no one Divine can be produced to justify and
account as good, the present practice of these pecuniary and peccant people.
This is but a ruinous and tottering prop and pillar to bear up and support a
matter so solid and substantial, of such weight and importance.

Object. 8. Say not beloved brethren, that usury does good in the
commonwealth, it helps and relieves many poor and penurious men who
otherwise could not borrow, yea it is so useful, serviceable and beneficial,
that commonwealths could not stand without it.

Ans. 1. For thus some do and may as well defend the beastlike stews, it is
good to permit them to prevent greater evils. Thus Saul pleaded for his
disobedience as a good deed to save some of the beasts for sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.

2. How did commonwealths before they used that wicked art of usury? Did they
not then live far better, did they not flourish? Why else did they so cry out
against it, and condemn it as unnatural? thus Cicero, Cato, Aristotle and
others, as unequal, a man receiving more than he lends: receiving gains by
another loss, as repugnant to good manners. The Germans (says Aretius) said
they were happy before they knew that wicked art, and why? Because since they
lived in gluttony, delights, on other men's goods -- this occasioneth idleness,
to live like drones on other men's labors.

3. The good it does in commonwealths is easier pretended than proved. It
devoureth and desolateth whole families, on whom (I think) depends the good of
the commonwealth. Beside lamentable and continual experience, the Statute
against usury in the 13 year of Queen Elizabeth says, the utter undoing of
many gentlemen, merchants, occupiers, and others, has come from the cunning
practices of usurers. And I am sure the Word of God abounds in this kind, Neh.
5. 11. shows that they were no good effects that came from usury, but
dreadful and accursed.

There was a great cry of the people, the husbandmen were bitten and devoured,
in them the commonwealth, which cannot subsist without them, Eccl. 5. 9.

This occasioned an addition to the present pinching dearth, and all this while
the usurers hearts were hardened against their brethren as against strangers,
Psalm. 89. 23. The enemy shall not exact as an usurer. 109. 11. Let the u^urer
catch all 2 Kin. 4. 1, 2. and other Scriptures show, that if making men to cry
out because of poverty, if to impoverish people and bring them into slavery, if
to catch and consume all that men have are good for commonwealths, then are
usurers to be ^s^eemed as doers of good in the same.

4. Concerning the inevitable necessity of this notorious and noisome
annoyance, if truly there is any, I suppose it is a needless, and I am
persuaded it is a crucil necessity which these greedy money-mongers have pulled
upon many commonwealths, having almost wholly eaten up charitable and
Christian free lending, yea so far forth, that within this week I saw one pay
9 d. for the forbearance of 3 l. 6 sh. 8 d. for about six weeks time; and a man
complained to me that his sister constrained him to pay usury for the
forbearance of 17 l. being her legacy, for hal^e a years time.

5. And to averte or affirm that commonwealths could not stand without this
sinful supporter is much derogatory to the wisdom and providence of God in
disposing of all things.

Ob. 9. Say not beloved brethren, that borrowers confess a good turn in
having money of Usurers, they are very desirous of it, very joyful of, and
thankful for the same; and therefore you may safely and securely go on in
this condemned course and kind of life.

Answ. 1. For it is such a good turn says Bishop Jewel as to give cold water
in an ague fit, to cure a finger by cutting of an arm, as to cure a blemish in
the eye by plucking of it out.

2. Neither does the willing and joyful acceptance prove the lawfullnesse of
usury, necessity urging some, and foolish desire carrying headlong many others
to their own ruin, and although no man is willing to receive manifest wrong,
yet many willingly receive a destroying hook covered over with a fair bait,
rushing headlong as their blind affection leads them. Besides there is a
miserable will, as for a man to give his purse to a thief, to save his life,
to cast his goods into the sea, to prevent shipwreck. Lastly the poor debtour
is usually like a horse, which once having taken the bit, although he often
changes his rider has ever one or other on his back, or like a poor
prisoner remooved from jailer to jailer but seldom or never free.

Ob. 10. Say not beloved brethren, that both borrower and lender are gainers,
therefore is usury charitable and lawful.

Answ. 1. For by the same reason officious lies may be defended, yet are they
sinful because forbidden: and circumstances cannot make things simply evil to
be good: one thief is helpefull to another thief, yet this cannot justify
or make theft lawful.

2. Admit that both be gainers, yet the covenant made between them is
unequal and uncharitable, turning an act of charity namely lending into an act
of self-love and covetousness, and so charity is broken.

3. Admit they are both gainers, yet that gain is to the endammaging of the
Commonwealth, people being compelled to buy at dearer rates, and so the act is
unjust and uncharitable.

Ob. 11. Say not beloved brethren, we have no other trade whereby to live, and
you would not beg.

Answ. 1. For thus may bawdes, cut-purses, and thieves plead for themselves,
yet are they not hereby justified.

2. But rather you and they are worthy double punishment, making choice of such
unwarrantable and unlawful kinds of living, and yet would gain as much or
more then others do by honest diligence and painful labor.

Ob. 12. Say not beloved brethren, you do to your debtors as you would be done
unto in the like case, and this is according to the rule of our Savior Christ.

Answ. 1. For it is an easy matter for men who know not wants, and intend not
to borrow to say thus, as if a rich man should say to a poor man craving an
alms, I will give thee none, and thus doing I do as I would be done unto, when
I crave an alms let me be denied.

2. But is an Usurer contented that as he has gained hundreds, and thousands
of pounds from others by usury, so that they or others should regaine so much
from him?

3. For this rule is not always to be followed, Abimlech and Saul might not
kill, because they desired others to kill them, Judge. 9. 54. 1 Samuel 31.

4. And the Usurer who says thus knows that he speaks falsely, desiring
rather to borrow freely, then upon usury if he stood in need of money.

Object. 13. Say not beloved brethren, that none speak against usury but poor
beggarly fellows who stand in need of money.

Answ. 1. For God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles
speak against it* Do they do so for such ends? monstrous blasphemy.

2. The ancient Fathers, Cou^cells, Lawmakers, confidently condemn it. Did
they do thus for such carnal and cursed ends? monstrous impiety.

3. Many of our learned and r^verend Prelates, and famous Divines, men of
eminency and note, much honored and advanced in our Church, have preached and
written learnedly and unanswerably against this venomous viper. Did they do
thus because they needed money? monstrous uncharitableness.

4. The Church of England, the Acts of Parliaments concluded with consent of
Kings, Nobles, and Commons have in many Kings reigns condemned usury. Did they
do so because they needed money? monstrous irreligion.

5. As for us Ministers, could we find it to be lawful, we would practice it
to choose, as most be fitting us who want skill, time, and other conveniences
to trade and traffic in the world.

Ob. 14. Say not beloved brethren, what shall become of widows, and orphans
if usury is unlawful? What shall they do to preserve their stocks, and to have
lively hood?

Answ. 1. For what is this to common Usurers who are not any such?

2. What shall become of such who have no stocks, for whom, yet God provideth
although they use no unlawful means.

3. How did the orphans and widows amongst the Jews, did God forget them
when he made so strict a law against usury?

4. Usury being simply unlawful, how can it be lawful for them?

5. Are there no more trees in the garden, but the forbidden fruit to meddle
withal?

6. Is not usury less lawful for them then for others?

1. Because they have more special promises of protection and preservation,
Ps. 68 5. Ier. 49. 11. And. 2 Because the Lord denounces more dreadful
judgments against those who wrong and hurt them? Exodus 22. 22, 23. Zach. 7. 10.

7. Let them therefore depend on Gods providence, and promises in the use of
lawful means.

8. For since all men's goods in the world depend on Gods blessing and
providence, all men stand to it, and are subject thereunto. Who are you who
will exempt them from being subject to Gods providence and disposing? Shall
they only be exempted that God should not have to do with their stocks, but
bless he or curse he, they shall be surely provided for to have the principal
secured, and yearly so much certain, especially considering they have so many
excellent particular promises made unto them.

Ob. 15. Say not beloved brethren, why may we not as well take for money as for
houses and land, etc?

Answ. 1. For thus doing you do not examine your lives by Gods law, whether
they be consonant thereunto, but you examine Gods law whether it be agreeable
to reason which is absurd, and impious.

2. For the Lord forbids usury, denounces dreadful judgments against it, but
allows of taking money for houses, and land, Lev. 25. Cant. 8. 11.

3. The Scripture never denounces judgments against taking reasonable rents
for houses and lands.

4. Philosophers, Lawgivers, and all authors condemning usury allow of the
other.

5. Usurers themselves who affirm that usury may not be taken of the poor,
will I suppose take rent of them for house and land.

6. There is not the same reason for the one as for the other.

1. For house and land yield a fruitful use arising from the nature of the
thing, as the benefit of dwelling, trading, etc. but money has no fruitful
use of it self, and if it is fruitful, its wholly by the skill and industry
of him who uses it, and therefore to him the gain ought to belong.

2. In these things the use and not the property is alienated, and usually they
are the worse for letting: in money the same money is not received but so much
in value, and for the lending it is not the worse.

3. In things let, the hazard is the owners not the tenants or takers if they
miscarry not through the hirers default, they are only to pay for the time,
Exodus 22. 14. and the hire is part of the price for the hazard, but the Usurer
does not hazard any thing.

4. In things let, as house and land, the owner is usually and often at charges
and cost about the same, the Usurer at none about his money.

5. Land and houses are not usually wasted and spent in the using as money most
commonly is.

6. The use of land is separable from the propriety, so that he who pays rent
for it, pays rent for that which is another man's, but he who pays rent for
money, pays rent for that which is his own, the property being his, and he
bearing all the hazard, yet (which is strange) the Usurer for his 100 l, will
have 81 yearly, which 100 l in land, will not give above 5l yearly.

But reason and resolve after this or the like manner.

1. Is usury which is a gain exacted by covenant above the principal only in
respect of lending (as Saint Augustine defines it) universally unjust,
demanding a sure and certain gain and benefit of the borrower, it being
unconceaveable and uncertain whether he shall gain or loose, or if he do get
and advantage himself, it is out of the fruit of his painful industry and
laborious endeavors, accompanied with the blessing of God, not out of the
fruit and fertility of the money.

2. Is usury, exacting gain for the very act of lending, not only undecent
but vicious, not only uncourteous but uncharitable and unchristian-li(...)
selling a work of charity, turning lending which is an act of charity, and
therefore ought to be free, into letting or hiring, an act of covetousness.

3. Are there so many places in the book of God punctual and precise, direct
and downright against this savage and supplanting sin of usury, and not any
one Text in holy writ, allowing or approving of, countenancing or in the least
measure crediting any kind of usury.

4. Was it permitted to be done (when it was) as a plague and punishment, as a
dispoyling destruction of the cursed Cananites (usury therefore is no brotherly
part, no kind and friendly office, neither do Usurers deal with borrowers as
with sons of Abraham and of God, but as with cursed Cananites, Idolatrous
Egyptians and such like) being absolutely, when thy were rooted out, forbidden
without exception or limitation, as Psalm. 15. Ezekiel. 18. and other Scriptures do
testify.

5. Is the prohibition of usury a perpetual rule, a moral duty, and not a
judicial law of Moses, as David and Ezekiel manifest and make plain.

6. Must we according to that Christian command, and undeniable precept of our
blessed Savior, lend, looking for nothing again.

First, Lending either to those of whom we cannot hope to receive our own, no
not the principal again, as Calvin, Beza, Downam, Zanchy, and others. Then
they who lend to receive more again are worse then those sinners, etc. and all
usurious bargains and practices are by this condemned, which lend not except
they may receive above the principal says Beza. If a neighbor is to be
helped, no regard being had Beza in Luc. 35.
of receiving again the principal, much more are usurious bargains forbidden.

Secondly, Or lend, looking for no benefit, gain, or increase for so doing,
sinners lending where they may receive like kindness again.

7. Is usury an effect and fruit of cankred covetousness, and of dreadful
distrust of divine providence, and therefore Idolatry and infidelity.

8. Does the Usurer sin against his neighbor by injustice, uncharitableness,
oppression, and cruelty?

9. Do Usurers sin against themselves and their posterity, leaving Gods curse
upon their riches, and wealth of wickedness which they have raked and scraped
together?

10. Is the sin of usury joined, and coupled with gross and grievous
abominations, Psalm 15. Ezekiel. 22. 12. and is it the order of the Holy Ghost
aptly to knit, link, couple and conjoyne together things which are suitable and
of one sort?

11. Do humane Authors, Philosophers, and other Heathen men censure, and
condemn usury as an execrable vice, as Cato, Cicero, and Aristotle, which last
in the forenamed place says, men neglected honest profitable arts, by means
of this easy and false kind of gain. He affirms, that usury it far from
equality. He says, it wastes and burdeneth others, for the private advantage
of moneyed men, and therefore that it was pernicious to private men's estates
and the Commonwealth. He saw reason why houses, lands, and labor of men
should yield money, none why money should yield money. He thought it unfit that
money the matter of permutation should be matter of merchandise.

12. Did the ancient Fathers with unanimous consent not only preach against
usury as against a most obominable and damnable sin, but also resemble Usurers
to thieves which rob and steal when they sleep, calling them latrones
pulvinari^s. To the poison of aspes which so stingeth that a man feels present
delight, and so brings him a sleep, in which he dies. To the most execrable
and abhorred things, there being nothing (says Saint Ambrose) more horrible
then an Usurer, he is an odious man and his money is a viper.

13. Are those few authors which are alleeged as patrons and supporters of
usury lamentably abused, wrested, and wronged, yea and forced to speak
contrary to themselves. They so stinting and limiting the same with cautions,
that it cease to be usury, and speaking of lawful usury, they manifest their
meaning to be of that increase which others call partnership, thankfulness
and recompense for loss.

14. Has God ordained and appointed that every man should live in some lawful
condition, and calling, not to eat the bread of idleness, living on other men's
labors, and to fight his battles in some warranted station and standing, and
is not usury any of this sort and society. Then surely we who are and have
been Usurers will hye and hasten amain from this so dreadful and diabolical
course of life; make our peace with God by true repentance, and testify the
same like good Zacheus by restitution. And we who as yet have been preserved
from this uncharitable and unchristian kind of life will more and more forsake
and flee from the same, that by this we be not let or hindered from fighting the
Lords battles in some pious and praiseworthy stations and standings. When one
had spoken to Robert Grost head Bishop of Lincoln, to advance a poor kinsman
of his, he thereupon enquiring what course of life he followed, and receiving
answer, that he was an husbandman, answered, why then if his plough be broken,
I will repair it, or rather then fail, bostow a new upon him whereby he may
go on in his course of life: but so to advance him, as to make him forsake his
trade or condition in which he was brought up, that mean I not to do. Sr. G.
Paul in the life of Archbishop White page 85.


SECT. 12.
Against changers of callings unwarrantably to leave trades to turn Maulsters,
how lawful, and how not.
3. THen lastly woe to such who through pride, self-love, and discontent, run
out of, forsake and leave those particular places and select stations wherein
Christ our Commander has settled them to war this good warfare.

Mistake me not, I pray, as if I thought or taught it altogether, and
absolutely unlawful to divert from this or that particular calling: for
changes may lawfully be made, otherwise Amos an heardsman by calling had never
been a Prophet, Amos 7. 14. Christ's Disciples who were fishermen, and of such
like occupations had never been Apostles. Mar. 1. 18. David had never come
from the sheephooke to the Scepter.

1. Change of callings upon private necessity, when a man cannot by his calling
maintain himself and those who rely and depend upon him, is I think approved
of by Saint Paul's practice, who herewith enforced, returned to tent-making, not
relinquishing the other of more excellency, weight and importance.

2. Change of callings for the weale-publique and a common good, to benefit
more the Church and Commonwealth is not to be disproved, contradicted or
condemned, but commendable: as for a private man to become a Magistrate, this
being warranted by Moses leaving Iethrees sheep to govern and conduct the
Israelites.

3. For a man utterly and altogether disabled by want of gifts, and abilities,
by incurable discases or the like, to leave and forsake his calling, is I take
it not to be disallowed of and discommended, for even Moses disabled through
old age resigned his office to Ioshuah, Deuteronomy. 31. 2, 7.

4 For a man legally deposed, Ezekiel. 44. 13. or having such a calling which is
imposed for a certain season only, these must resign according to the
appointment and will of superior powers.

But as in the field for soldiers to leave and forsake their callings and
standings at their own will and liking, without the will and warrant of their
Captains and Commanders. 1 Argues much stubbornenesse, pride, disobedience
and rebellion. 2 Is a means and occasion to disranke and disorder the whole
host and army. 3 Disioynts and dissevers each from other, exposing themselves
and others to ruin and overthrowe: so in this our Christian warfare, for men
who by profession are Christ's servants and soldiers, and by him ranked in some
particular stations and standings, without good warrant from the good will and
pleasure of God, merely upon their own wills and liking, for the attainement
of greater wealth, pleasure and preferment, or to live more idly, lazily and
unprofitably. 1 Argues much disobedience and disloyalty. 2 Is a means to
disorder the Church and Commonwealth. 3 And to expose themselves and others
what in them lies to ruin and destruction: as for example,

1. For Ministers of Gods Word through idleness, covetousness, fearefullnesse
or other sinful and sinister respects, by ends and aims Demas-like to forsake
the Gospel, and their profession.

2. For decayed and decrepit serving men or tradesmen to creep into the
Ministry for living sake, for although the change is to the better and more
excellent estate and calling, yet how can these more glorify God, and bring
greater benefit to the Church and Commonwealth (which men must aim at in
change of callings) these wanting gifts if not of nature, yet of art and
learning to do the same.

3. For idle discontented people to part with farms and livings to be Usurers
or Maulsters. The former of which being generally and groundedly condemned as
unlawful and unwarrantable. And as for the latter although the commodity they
deal withal be necessary and useful in the Commonwealth; and although the
disorderly and dissolute drunkenness of these times makes these manner of men
to multiply, and grow rich, yet whether this be a calling allowed by our State,
or whether it is warrantable for a man wholly to apply himself unto the same
(this being as I take it an appertinent appendix belonging to the husbandman,
who by this sort of people is much abridged, and abbreviated of one of his
maine commodities to his disadvantage and discouragement (and yet he ought to
have all manner of countenancing, and fitting respect the King himself being
served by the field, Eccl. 5. 9.) to the enriching, and advancing of men
usually idle if not licentious, I much doubt.

4. For men whose trayning up has been in husbandry, or in some other honest
and commendable arts or callings, to forsake the same through love of
idleness, and for such other sinful respects to turn ale-house-keepers. For
although necessarily there must be houses of resort and receipt for travelers
and traffiquers: although the excessive and extraordinary extravagant
exorbitances too much abounding and overflowing in such places, by means of
the superabundant and unnecessary number of these kind of people, and the
dissolute dispositions of the most of them are rather the faults of the persons
then of the places: although men may be honest (though with much difficulty
these having not mean, and many temptations to innumerable inconveniences) in
this trade of life, and it were to be wished that none but honest, well
qualified, and conditioned men might be tolerated unto the same: yet for men
to relinquish and renounce other courses of life and callings, far more
needful to the Commonwealth, and more free unto themselves, that they may
live epicure-like, idly, and unprofitably, cannot but be condemned as
shameful and sinful.

5. For men whose education and breeding has been to the needle, shuttle,
anvile, or other inferior yet commendable Christian and laudable kinds of
living, out of a disdain of the baseness of these callings, self-conceitednes
of their own worth and wit to work wonders, and to manage matters of greater
importance, out of a desire to grow great, to gain wealth, and get preferment,
or to live more idly, and easily: for these men to forsake these callings to
turn grasiers, and husbandmen is not in my apprehension warrantable; and to my
knowledge usually attended with sad successes, with evil, unlooked for, and
unwelcome events.

Although therefore there is nothing more common (I suppose I may say dangerous
also) among mortal men then to believe and bear themselves in hand that the
estate of others is far more beneficial and better then their own: we being
througly acquainted with the diverse disheartening, and disadvantageous
discommodities of our own callings, little or not at all seen into, or
perceiving the same in other men's.

Although male-contented, yea the most of mortal men are continually
complaining, seldom content, never satisfied, but always desirous to change
their condition and exchange their estates, so that the shepherd would be a
husbandman, the husbandman a gentleman, the gentleman a squire, etc. Little
considering that this is no small cause of great decays in Commonwealths, that
dry and withered oaks and shrubs which have been nourished upon the sharp and
craggy mountains would seem to be dainty date trees cherished in pleasant
gardens. Yet beloved brethren and fellow Christian soldiers, let us persist
in, and piously practice the duties of our personal and particular callings
without fainting, or forsaking them.

1. Considering that as there is no kind of life in the world but therein vile,
and wicked men may slander their persons, and loose their souls: so there is
no state or station in the Church of God but men may therein (if they will)
serve God, profit themselves and others: for as the state of Princes and of
other prime men having precedence, predominance, pre-eminence, and prerogatives
is good if they abuse it not: so is the estate of people of inferious ranks
and orders if they behave themselves dutifully, and obediently. As the
condition of rich men is good if they do graciously and godlily use the same,
so is that of the poor also if they have piety and patience. Mr. Perkins says
excellently Treatise of callings, page 757.
to this purpose, Men of mean place and calling may comfort themselves in
serving men, by performance of some poor and base duties they serve God, and
therefore that their service is not base in his sight, and although the reward
from men be little, yet the reward at Gods hand shall not be wanting. And S.
Ambrose speaking of Joseph's humility in doing service, says, Ambros. Epist.
lib. 7. Epist. 44.
He advisedly considering that it matters nothing in what condition any man may
show himself praise worthy: but that the purpose of good men is, that they
might be approved in whatsoever estate: and that to be singular and excellent,
if the behavior does commend the condition, rather then the estate the
behavior, for by how much the condition is more base, by so much the desert is
more excellent.

2. Considering that during the time of our miserable mortality, our limber and
languishing life in every condition and calling there is both trouble and
danger.

3. Considering lastly, that we all are, or ought to be the Lords servants and
soldiers, to fight this good warfare he has appointed us under Christ our
Captain and Commander, without straggling and starting out of those select
stations and standings wherein he has set us, and to which he has
appropriated and allotted us; not deeming the places too vile and abject, or
our selves too great or good in them to war this good warfare. When a field is
lost, the Captains blame the soldiers, the soldiers the Captains, the
foreward, the rereward, the battle the wings, etc. whereas if every one who
blamed his fellow had done his duty all had been well. Even so if Gentlemen,
Preachers, Farmers, Artificers, rich and poor, and all such others which blame
each other, would do his own duty in this Christian warfare, all would do well.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index.
A.
AFfections the feet of the soul. page 88. Afflictions must be endured.
22-118. They are harmless and good to the good. 32. 119. How they are from
God, how from others. 37. How they are good, how evil. 62. How they are for
sin. 138. Anger evil to be avoided, good to be cherished as a furtherer of
courage. 175. Antichrist what. 109. Antinomists errors confuted. 135. Armor
of a Christian soldier, what it is, its parts, dignity, and necessity. 65. It
is impregnable. 169.
B.
Babes their good properties in true believers 75. Breast Plate of Christian
soldiers. 80. Burial a blessing how, and why. 54.
C.
Cause good makes courageous. 164. Callings lawful should be had, 285 wanters
of Callings censured, and forsakers of Callings unwarrantably. 360 We are to
watch over our selves in our Callings. 103. Captivity dreadful, yet
tolerable. 49. Children are a blessing to be prayed for. 246. they should be
taught. 251. as also corrected. 254. their duties to their parents. 284. Christ
what he is. 109. Christ is our Captain. 168. The sufferings of Christ
described. 27. Christians must follow Christ's directions. 279. Christianity is
a warfare. 5. It is a good warfare. 10. Christians must war this warfare. 11.
Christians lazy and licentious censured. 14. Courage necessary and excellent.
157. Cowardice odious and dangerous. 160 Crown of Christians inestimable. 170
D.
David's sufferings. 25. Dearth dreadful: the faults, and duties of rich and
poor in time of Dearth. 122. Deaths advantage. 50. Depopulators hurtful men
why and to whom. 317. Diet strengthens. 154. Discords may be with true
Christianity. 16. Devils their names and nature. 12.
E.
Earthly favors though good, are not a Christians chief good and glory. 16.
Exercise strengthens. 154. Experience makes courageous. 171. Eye unguarded
dangerous. 199.
F.
Faith a shield necessary, and excellent. 93 It fortifieth, and makes
co^ragious, 171 Famine how dreadful and profitable. 48 Fasting its necessity,
profit, what it is, and how to be performed. 265. Fearefullnesse in Christian
soldiers whence. 158. Feet of the soul what they are and how to be shod. 88.
Feet of Christians feeble, soiled. 168. Fools of all fools are all wicked
men, and why. 57.
G.
Gentleness strong in gentleness. 151 Girdle of Christians described
dignified. 66. God is the Christians munition. 208. He is a sun to the upright,
their shield also how, and why. 71. He afflicts his children and why. 37. He is
the object of prayer. 216. Goodness, strong in goodness, 151. Grace to whom
given. 73. Graces go together. 95. Guard of Gods children what, 165.
H.
Healthings to be avoided. 236. Heart of man to be watched. 196. Heedfullnesse
of, and to what, and why 179. Helmet of a Christian described. 99. Help to be
sought of God. 206. Holy Ghost the Christian soldiers encourager. 169. Hope is
his helmet, how it differs from faith, how from false hopes. 99. Husbands
duties in this warfare. 292. Hypocrisy dr(...)dfull. 71.
I.
Iakobs sufferings. 25. Idleness evil, to be avoided. 328. Ingrossers
censured. 123. Instruments of sin to be taken heed of. 183. Joy, strong in
joy. 150. Isreal's sufferings. 24. Judgments misused how. 1^0. Judgment day.
131. Just overmuch who* 52.
K.
Kneeling to be used in public prayer. 264. Knowledge particular in heaven.
52.
L.
Law binds to obedience. 140. Long- suffering strong in it. 151. Liars and
lying odi^us. 76.
M.
Magistrates should be righteous, how, and why. 84. They should be courageous.
159. Masters d^ty in this warfare. 311. Married persons duties. 245. Martial
men honorable. 2. Maulsters censured. 360. Meekness, strong in meekness.
152. Mercifullnesse its excellency and profit 124. 129. 136. Ministers of the
Word, their duty. 85. They should be courageous. 159.
N.
Necessity makes courageous. 163. 172.
O.
Occasions of sin to be taken heed of. 182 Offense a taken an gi^en. 61. We
should not give offense. 61.
P.
Parents duty in thi^ warfare. 245. Papists take away Scripture unj(...)ly from
people. 113. Peace, strong in peace. 151. People pray for Pastors. 243.
Personal sins to be witched against. 201 Persecutours* are Gods rode, the
fearful end* of divert such: 39. Poor men's duty in dearth: 123. Prayer
needful for Christian soldiers. 206. To whom we must pray. 216. For what we
must pray, for what not, how for things already enjoyed. 218. How we must pray,
why, and for whom. 227. Gestures used in prayer. 263. Extraordinary times of
prayer. 257. Profession its faults. 117. Prosperity to be taken heed of. 201.
Punishments on good men for sin, and other causes* 138*
R.
Religious actions to be perf(...)d with watchfullnesse. 204. Remembrance of
things p^st pro(...)ble. 173. Reproach a great cross, yet for Christ^ sake to
be endured. 55. Riches their loss. 47. Rich men's duty in dearth. 123.
Righteousness the Christians breastplate: what it is, its necessity and
dignity. 80.
S.
Satan to be taken heed of. 181. Scatsity se^ Dearth and Famine. Security
carnal dangerous* 180. Senses to be watched over. 199. Servants duty in this
war. 304. Shields diverse. 7* 9^. Christians shield wh^, and what, 72. 9^* Shoes
of Christian soldiers. 88. Sincerity makes ha^py. 73. Sin enfeebleth. 170. It
is to be taken heed of* 18^. It is an evil way. 181. It is a burden. 182. And
very sham^full. 18^. It is in good men-while they live in this world. 136. How
all sin is pardoned in good men. 136. It is the cause of afflictions which
befall Gods children, although not the sole cause. 138. Strength of Christian
soldiers dignified. 149. Subjects ought to pray for all in authority* (...)*
Suffering (...) Christ, and Christians. 23 Su^ pr^g^retes, how the Lord is a
sun is the upright. 71. S(...) of Christian soldiers described, dignified.
207.
T.
Temperance, strong in temperance. 152. Temptations to be expected. 193. Titles
of ho(...) their original from m^re. 2. Tongue smiting a bitter affliction,
yet to be endured. 55. Truth whence learned. 67. It is the Christian soldiers
girdle, its diverse kinds, excellency, and necessity. 66.
V.
Valor vanquisheth. 163. Victory belongs to Christian soldiers. 169. Virgins
wise and foolish, wherein they agree, and differ. 102. Unmerciful men
miserable. 124. 129. 131. Voice in prayer needful. 262. Usury c^nsured,
confuted, and Usurers objections answered. 329.
W.
Warfare of the Christian soldier i^ excellent and needful. 5. Watchfullnesse
a necessary duty always, and why. 184. Weak believers who. 153. Weapons see
Armor. Welding not wearisome. 118. Wicked men fools of all fools. 36. Wives
duties in this war. 297. Wise ^ver much who. 81. Word of God our sword. 107. It
cleanses. 69. It is the ground of truth. 67.
Z.
Zeal. 117.
FINIS.

