A Dialogue and complaint made upon the siedge of Oastend, made by the King of
Spain, the Archduke, the Infanta, the Pope, the Prince Morris, and the eldest
son of Sauoye.

Translated out of French.

Also a true discourse of that which is happened in the same town of Oastend,
from the fourth day of the month of February 1602.

With certain news written toward London, from Italy, France, Hungary, and
other places.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for Matthew Law. 1602.

A Dialogue and complaint upon the siedge of Oastend, made by the King of
Spain, the Archduke, the Infanta, the Pope, the Prince Morris, and the eldest
son of Sauoye.
The Archduke. O Mighty God, what misfortune, O what cruel mishap it is to
see this small place which has stayed the valor of so many good soldiers,
and cause an army to be consumed before this petty place. Alas it was well
told me what discommoditie I should endure before this city: A city I may
^erme it, for Caesar before Munda: howbeit much good was lost, yet not such
store of people, as I have lost before this: for I may with truth say, that I
have within these four months lost five thousand men, or little less, and
among them many valiant Colonels and Captains, and yet I see not appearance to
get the same.


The Infanta. My brother is strong enough to bear all, both men and money
required to this war.


The King of Spain. Sister, whatsoever I could do for the preservation of this
Flemish country, I swear I have effected to my power.


The Archduke. Sir, your majesty has sufficiently satisfied the promise of
the late Catholic king.


The king of Spain. To my Father I have promised for ever to maintain the
Apostolic siege, and that which he gave to you.


The Archduke. Sir your greatness is sufficiently known in persuing of this
with so great charges.


The king of Spain. I must keep this country in awe, least if in France came
troubles, I might hereof possess my self.


The Archduke. That shall never be seen? No Frenchmen has desire to see (as
they have seen) the Spaniards in their towns.


The king of Spain. Some fool will be found among so many unfit, who for
gould will advance my power.


The Archduke. The Frenchmen have a king, who is not to be provided, and I do
more fear that they will enter in this country whilst I am busy here, and
cause the country wholly to rebel.


The king of Spain. This king was at Calls, whereat I greatly marvel: for I
cannot conceive what he had to do there.


The Archduke. He was at Calls not without having some affairs, but it has
troubled my brains to think what it should be.


The king of Spain. Do you think that this king would have falsefied his
faith, and he would endeavor to get his country by craft.


The Archduke. The falcifying of his promise imported not so, he thereby may
get good profit.


The King of Spain. There never was french king who would so wrong himself as
to break the promise of France.


The Archduke. It has little been seen, that any heretofore such, have such
recompense as this king should have by falcifying his oath.


The King of Spain. I do greatly wonder to what purpose the Duke of Biron went
to England.


The Archduke. I durst lay, that it is about war and nothing else that he made
that voyage.


The King of Spain. And the Duke of Anguillon who came toward you, of what
did he speak to you of peace or of war.


The Archduke. He was sent to yield, such as he has done by the great master
of my horse.


The King of Spain. Then to this peace let us not repose, but it is requisite
that every one be ready to resist.


The Archduke. It is well the right mean to prevent that no ill hap come to
us, but men cannot resist every where.


The King of Spain. What is then to be done? you must answer to this point?
do you hope shortly to be master of this place.


The Archduke. It does consist in God to effect such wonder and not in any
human power.


The King of Spain. What do you then hope? that in looking on the same it
will through wearysomnesse it will yield it self.


The Archduke. If it had not been for your majesty, I durst not have
undertaken to come near the same by half a leage.


The King of Spain. It has been Spingnola who caused me to be commanded
quickly to take the same, to the end there to place galleys.


The Archduke. Your majesty ought not to have promised to take this place, or
at the least not so soon.


The King of Spain. We have to much spoke thereof tell me I pray you son,
whether you mean to take it, or else to depart from thence.


The Archduke. If it had not been for shame, I would before this time have
gone away from thence, for I through obstinacy have wholly ruyned my camp.


The King of Spain. Seeing you cannot get it, leave off your will which you
have so bent against the same place.


The Archduke. Flaunders has furnished all which my army would have, therefore
I cannot from hence depart without dishonor? but they would be weary I know
their humor. And then when they would, they are at such great charges that
they have not yt power to support the same. And though I should yet remain
here four months, expecting good succes* I never shall have hope to take the
same, I did well think at the first what would become hereof.


The King of Spain. Do you believe that this Morris would make peace if he
were thereto requested by some mighty prince.


The Archduke. I have heretofore promised him the province of Holland, so he
would yield to be my subject.


The King of Spain. Well seeing he had refused the same, what shall we then
do to get him with us.


The Archduke. To pray the Pope to be a means therein, for perchance he may
persuade him thereto.


The King of Spain. That cannot be so, for it is (...) them to frequent him by
reason of their belief.


The Archduke. This peace may be concluded like that of France for he does
only fight for liberty.


The King of Spain to the Pope. Holy father I am now come to your holiness with
prayers unto you, to take so much pains as to persuade (if it be in your
power) the estates to yield themselves, and to promise unto Morris and them
that yielding themselves to me, they shall be most happy for I will promise
them liberty of their conscience.


The Pope to the King of Spain. My son you have wrong, For all my skill do
I employ to draw those people from their erroneous way, wherein they do
persist, and will you have me suffer them to continue therein.


The King of Spain. Holy father pardon him, who with grief do not know what
to say, I speak it for a truth.


The Pope. I would satisfy you, if it did consist in my power and that I had
authority over them but the esteem not of me.


The King of Spain. Holy father you have the one half of the shame and I have
the other half, and all the damage.


The Pope. Son, it is very difficult to find an end, I know that you have
received great loss and damage, and loss against those people many regiments
of Spanish soldiers, and eke many armies of other nations, but all those which
there do dye, have full forgiveness of their sins, which cannot choose but to
be a great comfort to you.


The King of Spain. I do fear that in time they will press me so sore
placed in Embassage, tell me I pray you from whence come those words.

Truly from Madrill toward this troublesome repose, who seeing he cannot get
us by the way of arms, does go about to entice us with his flattering
charms, but let him not trust to it, he shall effect nothing therein. Men
shall sooner see the decease of us all, then a Spaniard command in this
country of Holland. Therefore trouble not your self any more about this
peace, but rather pray to God for the decease of the king of Castile, that you
may repair thither and succeed him, and of his crown possess your self.
And touching the Archduke, fear not, for I do hope that he will not long live,
and then that it shall be my fortune to be married with your Aunte, so you may
pray to God for her and me together, and I hope we shall well agree.


FINIS.
A true discourse of that which is happened in the Town of Ostend since the
fourth of February. 1602.
SIthence the general assault done upon Ostend last by the Archdukes forces,
there has not been any great matter attempted, for in the Camp was some
mutiny for pay, but with money and with severe punishment suppressed again,
and more forces were sent for some help of money, of five hundredth thousand
duccats out of Spain, are apaying at Antwarp, and they say, that there was
hope of some millions should be destinated thetherward, for to furnish monthly
two hundredth and fifty thousand duccates, so that by the natural obstinacy of
the house Austria, the siedge is resolved to continue, yet the Artchduke is
said to be subject to the falling sickness, and that he has fallen upon his
sword and somewhat hurt his left side.

The united provinces are likewise resolved to defend the town, and do send
more men, and change the old garrison for new, and some two companies out of
the town had their mast shotten off, and so did drive upon the strand a
ground, and taken, and are all carried to Bridges, but it is thought they shall
pass by ransom as they do accustom, they within have made of late some
notable sallies with great victory, and distroyed likewise some platform a
making without, by the which their ships upon the coast of Britayne, some
seven Spanish ships vittelars which meant to go to Kensall, and more other
nations, it is said some eight or nine hundredth men to be drowned there on
shore.

In In Scotland the Queen is delivered of another son.

In the united Netherlandes is made an association for to trade in the East
Indies, wherein be comprehended all the citizens of Amsterdame for a half,
they of Zealand for a quarter part, they of Enckuysen and they of Rotterdame
for another quarter part. In which company every man is admitted that brings
in his money, so that the same trade will be of a great consequence.

From Ostend.

Since the day aforesaid is reported that some 32. companies are of late entered
into the town, also how that the Archduke is gone to Brussell, being sickly,
and how that the Infant his wife should be minded to leave the Netherlands, and
become Queen of Sicilly or Portugal.

FINIS.

