THE FIVE Books of the Famous, learned, and eloquent man, Hieronimus Osorius,
contayninge a discourse of Civil, and Christian Nobility.

A WORK NO LESS pleasant then profitable for all, but especially the noble
Gentlemen of England, to view their lives, their estates, and conditions in.

Translated out of Latin into English by William Blandie late of the
University of Oxeford, and now fellovv of the middle Temple in London.

Imprinted at London in Fleete-streate by Thomas Marsh.

ANNO 1576. Cum Priuilegio.

decorative border incorporating the monogram of Thomas Marsh, printer (TM)

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord Roberte Dudley, Earl of Leycester, Baron of
Denbigh, Master of the Horse to the Queens Majesty, Knighte of the noble
order of the Garter, high Chauncelour of the University of Oxeforde, and one
of her highness most Honorable privy Counsel: William Blandie wishes perfect
health with increase of honor.
THe Historyes of ancient memory do give sufficient testimony (right noble
Earl) that many have been for their manifold gifts, and noble virtues right
worthily commended to posterity. Some, for that they were the first inuentours
and finders out of Arts and Sciences: some, for that they ordained good Laws
and statutes, for the restrayning the unbridled desiers of men, and the
abandoning all barbarous cruelty: some, for their magnificence, bounty, and
frank nature: some for their invincible mind, exceeding great prowess,
puissaunce, and magnanimity. But how much praise, how great honor and renown
has been in all well governed commonwealthes given to such as have been
patrones of Justice, mainteynours of learning, defendours of truth and
honesty. For why, the fame of many worthy writers, the credit and estimation
of learning, the love and honor due unto virtue it self and Godliness, had
long ere this time ben utterly put out, and rakte up with their cinders, had
not the patronage of Princes propt up their painful labors, had not some
immovable and royal rock been a sure defense and bullwarke of liberal
Arts, had not the gracious countenance of most worthy and noble men
puissauntlye repelled the force and rage of impiety. In like manner the fames
of mighty Kings had died and been intumbed with their bodies, the very
Crowns and Scepters of the most famous and noble Monarchs, had been rustie
and warpte with oblivion, had not learned men (yelding courteous acceptaunce to
labors full of peril) celebrated and painted forth their memorable acts and
noble enterprices. So that it may appear most manifest, that neither Princes
may live clear and known to posterity without the pen and helping hand
of learneds Art: neither men excelling in learning, would be either in life
reputed or spoken of after death, without the countenance, defense, and
patronage of noble Peers. Wherefore since no small praise has been given in
all ages to patrones of learning, and also whereas learned men have yielded to
their patrones such duty and obseruaunce as might be required at their
hands: I do as little doubt, that your honor will refuse to entertain
Osorius, who would become familiar with us English men, as it is most certain
that this Ge^tlema^ for his part in these his books of Nobility, has most
highlye commended you. For though Osorius do treat of Nobility in general,
yet principallye and as the Greeks term it, (...) he seems to describe the
worthiness of your excellent nature and noble mind. So although there is no
doubt but that all noble me^ will take the Patronage of him, yet he in this
kind of argument being very precise and making as it were great choice of the
excellency and surpassinge clearenes of many noble natures, seems to rest
in your worthiness, and therefore coueteth greatly to creep under the ba^ner of
your protection. And verily it were an unseemly thing, that whereas Osorius is
in Portugale highely priced, in all Spain praised, in Germany generally
commended, in Italy honorably reported of, that he arriving in England (the
inhabitaunts whereof being of all other Nations especially praised for their
singular humanity, and great courtesy) that he (I say) arriving in a strau^g
country, and turned as it were out of his coat, should masterlesse gad
abroad, and not be harbored by some noble personage, and especially of such,
of whom undoubtedly he has well deserved. With which stain of dishonor, no
gentle and noble nature will be blemished, much less those which are placed in
the top of honor and dignity. This being so, I most humbly crave of your
Honor that not only Osorius himself for his own sake, may be welcome unto
you, but also his guide, conductour, and interpretour, who has (if not trimly,
yet truly, if not finely, yet faithfully) expounded his learned and grave
inventions. Which office of safe conduct, since it is happened unto me, I do
in our mother tongue most humbly recommende unto your Honor so well my charge
as my self: hoping that as messengers of evil tidings are excusable, so he
that happily brings to light any secret and hidden treasure, may
accordingly be well entreated.

At Newberie the vi. day of Ap^^^ 1576. By your Honors most humble and daily
Orator. Willaim Blandie.

Henricus Ferrarius Badisleius Guilielmo Blandeio suo.
QVam prope Romanos super abat Osorius omnes,
Dum sua Romano dat monumenta stylo:
Tam prope te vicit nuper Blandeius Osori,
Dum tua de Latijs scripta Britanna facit.
Ampla quidem sunt haec verae praeconia laudis,
Quam simul interpres, quam simul author habet.
Si tamen in veris, fas est mihi dicere verum,
Interpres verae plus prope laudis habet.
Author vt inuentum, sic libera verba tenebat,
Arbitrij interpres non erat ipse sui.
Eiusdem.
Multi sunt apinas, quibus, trichasque
Et nugas, volupe est, meraciores
Omni scribere temporis minuto.
Hinc est cernere, tot librariorum
Plenas vndique semper officinas
Chartis, non obolo, nec ass dignis,
Nec flocco, aut nuce putrida aestimandis.
Illas vix foricis suis libenter
Quisquis munditiem appetit, receptet.
Vix thure institor ornet, atque scombris,
Tanta spurcitie scatent priori.
At multo melius suos labores
Blandeius modo noster elocauit,
Rem scitu satis arduam, satisque
Dignam, dexterit (...)
Scribens: Nobilitas quid? vnde? qualis?
Queis authoribus orta? quos recuset?
Per quos culta? quibusque debeatur:
Perscite duplici docens libello.
Vis plura? inuenies satis disertum,
Et (quae laus fuerit perennis) illi
Hic, quem transtulit esse comparandum.
Leonardus Louelaceus.
ARdua in excelsi defixa cacumine montis
Nobilitas, radijs, vndique clara suis,
Aurea, inauratos attollit in alta capillos:
Foemina de toto corpore, front Dea.
Spirant mortales habitus and pectora, parts:
Vires diuinas, frons animusque docent.
Diuinis igitur, been qui mortalia iungit,
Et disiuncta vno corpore iuncta facit,
Hunc recolas, huius sacrata volumina voluas,
Nobilitare solet Nobilitatis opus.
Tantos Blandaei tu Lector blande labores
Accipe, sint loculis scrinia sacra tuis.
Ioannes Butterwike.
ET merito Blandaee tuos, tua dona, libellos
Qui reserant verae nobilitatis iter,
Vouisti egregio Comiti, cui tempus in omne
Debetur verae Nobilitatis honos.
Materia ille tui est operis Comes inclytus, ille
Cui semper cordi Pegasis vnda fuit.
Et sibi sic animos deuincit amabilis omnes,
Temporis vt nostri iure vocetur honos.
Perpetuos igitur superare laboris honores
Possis, and tua post fata superstes eris.
Non video quid plus tua dent tibi secula, viues
Eternum, foelix pectoris art tui.
Richardus VVarnefordus.
NOn dubito Osorij de Nobilitate libellos
Tam been materno qui facis ore loqui:
Quin Blandaee suo te afflauit numine totum
Nobilitas, studijs nobilitata tuis.
Ioannis VVakemani
Distichon.
NE metuas (Blandaee) tuos ne blenna labores
Obscuret, non est blittea vena tibi.
Aliud.
^atta solet fatuas Blateronum rodere chartas,
Blandaei blandum non morietur opus.
Thomas Newtonus.
MAgna est Nobilibus laus esse parentib^s ortum,
Estudijs maius stemma decusque fluit.
Maxima sed Pietas and vera insignia laudis
Vendicat, haud vna concelebranda chely.
Qui tribus his claret titulis, ter maximus ille,
Ter merito foelix, ter venerandus erit.
Percitus Aonio facundus Osorius ^estro,
Haec panxit, calami dexteritate sui.
Diuite quem vena Glaucopis Athena beauit,
Quique ardet Clarij totus amore chori.
Quem iuga Parnassi lambentia vertice stellas,
Quem capit alati fons pede factus equi.
Grandisono cuius splendent monumenta cothurno,
Praecipuumque tenent a Cicerone locum.
Cuius voce loqui cupiunt, si voce latina
Quicquam efferre velint, ipsae Heliconiades.
Quo tellus tanto Lusitanica iactat alumno,
Qui Tartessiaco condecoratur agro.
Romulidis, Gallis, Germanis, notus and Anglis,
Pannonijs, Dacis, atque Caledonijs.
Verborum phaleris, Phrasibusque vberrimus, omnes
Aequiparat veteres, exuperatque nouos.
Nec sapit obscurum genus aut ignobile stemma
Sermo suus, suamens, docta Thaliasua.
Ille, ille est nostri Phaenix and Tullius ^ui,
Alpha disertorum dicier ille potest.
Numine Blandaeus Phoebaeo concitus, huius
Scripta Latina docet verba Britanna loqui.
Perspicue, nitide, succincte and Apolline digne,
Cunctaque plectro agili and blandisonante tuba.
Cuius melliflua celebratur Osorius art,
Namque etiam hunc fouit Diua Minerua sinu.
Viuite vterque igitur foelices, pergite plures
Omine tam fausto scribere vterque libros.
Thomas Newton.

William Foster.
AS no man's else, but Caesar's pen could Caesar's deeds indite:
Who was himself right well enur'de both well to do and write.
So no man but of noble price, Nobilities acts may blase,
The vulgar sort of creeping worms, cannot come nie her grace.
How happens then that Blandie durst so great attempt to try,
Where many are of greater birth, that could not soar so hie?
The cause is this (as I suppose) look what he wants in blood,
His courteous manners, learned skill, and virtues makes good.
When these gaie gifts of Blandies breast this Goddess once did see,
She cher'de him on and friendly said, thou art a trumpe for me.
Let Nobles do as thou prescribes, their blood shall never fall,
Do thou thy self, and be assur'de thy blood shall rise withal.
THE EPISTLE DEdicatorie of Hieronimus Osorius, written to the most noble and
virtuous Prince Lewis, son to Emanuell king of Portugale.
AFter I had obtained through your good means, and favorable help (Jews
most renowned Prince) to have recourse again, unto my accustomed exercises of
study, I employed my self more dillige^tlye then I did before in the search
of knowledge and wisdom. For in my first entry being moved only with the
instincte of nature, I moderately followed my studies, whereby reaping at the
length some fruit, I might imparte part thereof, to the profit and
commodity of my native country. But now whereas I have already proved
sufficientlye your bountefull heart and clemency, and therefore am always
mindful of your honor and worthiness: it lies me upon, to bend thereunto all
the force and vehement intention of my mind, that I may in some case seem
worthy to be reckoned of and esteemed, for knowledge and learning. Neither do I
seek herein the praise of mine own wit, but that I may if not render due
thanks, yet declare my great good will, and dutiful heart, ready always and
glad to accomplish your good desire. Wherefore I will in no wise (...) to set
forth in this kind of writing the full meaning of my good disposition, and
will bring to pass, that my obseruaunce toward you, shall be known in all
places. And I am fully persuaded, that whatsoever I do in showing my singular
love toward you, wherewith I am maruelyously inflamed, it is notwithstanding
in it self but smally to be accounted of. But it behooves them not to be
squemish in geuinge a small and simple gift, who may not, through want of
ability bestow of greater valewe and estimation: and they which in matters of
greater importance cannot stand their sovereigns in steed, should not
therefore by not giving a trifle, slack their duty toward such, whom they
above all other honor and reverence: especially whereas in every kind of duty
and courtesy, not so much the valewe of the reward, as the bountifulnes of a
true meaning mind is generally allowed of, and accepted. Whereas therefore
the rather to discharge my duty toward you (most noble and renowned Prince) I
have taken in hand for exercise of my style, after the manner and fashion of
Aristotle to dispute of many questions, I thought principally to entreat of
true Nobility. And because that so high and stately an argument, seemed unto
me most meet for a worthy and noble personage, and for that these my
discourses, and treatises of Nobility, were more curiously compyled, and with
more labored study, I determined to present the^ unto your majesty. And so
much the more readily was I induced so to do, by how much the more emine^tly
appeared in you, the glistering gleames of true, and ancient (...) deserve due
praise and commendation, then there is nothing among men more honorable then
the title and name of a king: and of them especially, which according to the
will and pleasure of God uses their auctoritye and jurisdiction, such as were
truly the predecessors, from whom issues the fountain of your Genealogy. If
renown be obtained by virtue, who is more valiant then you, who more
bountefull, who more endued with wisdom and policy? I omit to speak of
the great love and amity betwixt your brother, and you, a king endued with much
honor and Nobility, a just Prince and lover of his country: again of your
great courtesy toward all men, and lastly (which is principal) of the rest,
of your fervent and most earnest desire to set forth and advance Christian
relligion. But I will here stay my self. For I think it not at this present
meet, the goodly gifts and indume^ts of your mind to set forth and describe
with due praise and comme^dation. Now therefore I am to beseech you (most
valiant and renowned Prince) that you will vouchsafe to take these my
trauayles courteously, and most graciously bestow some leisure and time in
readi^g my doings (such as they are) according to your accustomed gentleness
and clemency. Which if I may understand to be favorably received, I shall
enforce my self t^ wade farther, neither shall I with any manner toil be
wearied, so that I may be assuredly persuaded, these my endeavors unto your
highness not to be unpleasant.

THE FIRST BOOK of Hieronimus Osorius, containing a treatise of Nobility,
ordained by man, maintained and established by civil Policy.
WHereas sondrie seditious controversies arise between them who have received
the like discipline, and are bound to observe one Law, no one broile is
found more pestilent and hurtful, to any weal public then that, which is
betwixt the Nobility and Comminaltie. For this fire brand has so wasted many
flourishing and noble Cities, that the estate of the common wealth has been
thereby miserably mangled, then the which nothing can be imagined more
hurtful, and poisonous to ye common society of man. For if we call to memory
what is reported in Histories of antiquity, we shall find no one City so
happily founded and begone, which has not ben shaken and rent in sonder
through civil dissension, risen between men of ancient Nobility, and the
meanest sort of the rascal and peuish people. In so mutch that sometimes but
very few had the government of the whole, again some other time, the
multitude having violentlye excluded those few, furiously abused the Empire,
and place of majesty. Which alterations, and utter confusion of al Estates,
could not be without bloudye, and cruel slaughter of many, neither yet without
the pestilent and ruthful overthrow of Noble Peers. For what is he if he
were more folish hardy then the rest, which durst not attempt bou^olye the
breach of laws, which durst not wickedly violate the ordinances of the
forefathers, whose conscience would be any thing moved, if he saw the sodayn
change and alteration of all estates, if he might be persuaded thereby to be
advanced to higher estate. I let to show in this place what mischief and
miserye this kind of sedition betwixt the nobility and the people has
wrought: whereas it is apparante that many worthy cities has been through
sedicio^ and civil discord utterly wasted and confounded. For while the
subjects have enterprysed to displace the rulers and Magistrates, as though
their gouerme^t were rigorous and proud: on the other side while their Lords
and Princes sought with all extremity to suppress the outrageous furye of
the people: there is no fact so horrible, cruel, and odious, which has not of
both parties been practiced, and having conceived great rancker and malice
against each other, have been at such defiance, that to be revenged, they have
to the enemy be traied their common safety, and peculiar liberty. And for this
it is the more to be merueyled at, that they live under one law, and are
diversely affected: so that there seems to be no occasion of their eygre
strife and contentious dealinge. For in this one poincte which merueylously
increases mutual love and amity, both of them, accord together, that is in
defendinge their country, and they altogether want that which causes great
discord and enmity in the common wealth. For all displeasure, and deadly
debate proceadinge from envy and malice, is commonly found among such as
profess the same art, and are entangled with the desire of ye self same
things. But there is no cause why men of high Estate should stomach such as
are more base and of viler condition whereas their endeavors be contrary, and
their minds not led with the like affection. For Noble men are inflamed
with the desire of renomne and glory, but ye multitude desire not so mutch to
exceed other, in worship, as in wealth, in pomp, as in power, and ability.
Therefore whereas they stand not for the like promotio^, there is no cause why
they should contentiouslye strive against each other: especially seeinge that
neither of them may attain his purpose and desire without each others aid
and furtherance. For neither may the subjects live in safty except they be
defended by Rulers and Princes, neither may men of Honor and high degree,
maintain their countenance without the people, which live under their winge
and jurisdiction. So that the multitude is allwaies preserved through the
defense and power of Nobility: Likewise the Estate of Noblemen is of the People
both through their travel amplyfied, and also through praise and admiration
exceedingely magnified. Whereas therefore these both Estates should by the law
of nature and man principally embrace the league of amity and co^corde: yet
notwithstanding as it appears by the testymonies of aunciente writers, there
has been no debate more spiteful and deadly, neither that has more sought
the utter ruin and subversion of many commo^wealthes, then that which arises
oftentimes betwixt the Nobilitye and comminalty. Wherefore so often as I consider
with my self so great and common misery. I am somewhat persuaded, that all
these seditions for the most part do proceed from the intolerable pride of
such, as have the prerogative of government. For albeit the head of the
multitude is fraighte with fury, and their imaginations tends to owtrage and
madness: yet notwithstanding whatsoever mischieue they imagine, or take in
ha^be, is to be imputed to Rulers and Magistrates. For whereas the common and
baser sort of men are folowers of the ma^ners and conversation of their Rulers
and Princes, no doubt the people would not be entangled with such lewd
liberty, licentious lust, and wilful desires, except they saw Noble
Personages immoderately delyghted therewt. Herehence it comes to pass that
the wicked life of subjects, which Noble men might by the example only of good
living repress, is through their loose life, mutch more increased. And when
the peoples minds are poisoned with all kind of mischife, riot, and excess, no
laws, no authority, no fear of punisheme^t may stay their furious, and heady
enterprices: neither any reason may persuade them, but that one time or other,
they will desperately break out to the utter undoing of their Native
Country. All kind of mischief therefore as from a fountain first springs
from the Peers and Noblemen, in whose power it rested to stay such unbridled
desires both by severity of laws and ordinances, and by the good example of
their innocent life. I cannot but marvel in the mean while, what moves many
men to make so great account of their gentilitye, that they think them
selves worthy of such honor and estimation. For either Nobility by nature
has no renown, or pre-eminence annexed thereunto, or else ye greater part of
those who commonly are termed Noble and of gentle blood (whose minds are
infected with many maladies) come nothing near to true Nobilitye. For it
were not to be doubted the^, but if Nobility were known by exercisinge it
self in some notable exploite deserving due praise and commendation, it would
stir up the minds of a great many to embrace and love the excellencye
thereof: in so mutch that all men would willingely obey the laws, and submit
theymselues to the aucthoritye of their superiors. For there is no man which
would not exceedingely be inflamed with the love of virtue, and all men would
think themselves most happy and blessed, to be governed by the wisdom and
virtue of Noble Personages. I have thought it therefore must appertynent to my
purpose, to search out diligently the nature, original, right rule, and
foundation of true Nobilitye, and the virtues which be incident th^^^unto, in
the inquisition whereof, it will eftsoon appear how mutch it avails to
dignity and worthiness, and what odds there is betwixt the counterfayt, and
lively image of perfect Noblenes. But whereas this name of Nobility is, many
and sundry ways to be interpreted, that only will I touch, which imports
the worthiness and dignity of Noble Parentage.

THe first thing that may be questioned of, is to know whether that Nobilitye
may be accounted amongst those things, with deserve honor and estimation. For
we may allege many arguments, which may seem to prove, that the Noblenes
of birth and worthiness of Parentage, may neither contain in it self any
superioritye, neither by any means to be reduced to those things, which in
the^ selus are termed good. For as mutch as apperteineth to our nature, and
the common course of wordly wealth, we cannot conceive what gain may grow, by
this wonderful show and admiration of Princelye port. For as soon as we
enter into this life full of lamentation and miserye, we are all ruled and
governed by the same kind of laws, neither is any man exempted and set free
from an infinite heap of miseries, wherewith the condition and estate of
mortal men is afflicted, we therefore make our first entry into life, with
blubberinge tears, and bitterness of sorrow, we from our nativity are wrapped
in woe and misery, we sighe in sobbes, and live in lamentation, and we in the
end dolefully draw to death, through the continual affliction of mutch
perturbation. But so far of from Nobility is it to be preserved from such
plagues and scourges, ye mutch more slippery and dangerous is that estate, and
the end more intermedled with mischief and misery, then any other estate of
mankind whatsoever. For as every vapor ascends more na^^^ally to the
highest places: even so sicknesses, murders, subtle vndermininges, perilles,
poisons and a number other intolerable plagues and myschiues do always
pursue them, which are placed in highest rooms. But if any man ponder and
weyghe in his mind the natural qualities of the body, in the same truly shall
he find nothing why noble blood should be preferred before base
Parentage. For neither is he which is of gentle blood more valiant then he,
which is of low degree, neither in his race more swyfte, neither yet in health
more lusty, and of greater force. Nay rather the more daintily be feeds, the
weaker is his body made, the more apt to be troubled with extreme pain, in
any kind of infirmity. If then the case stands thus, that neither the favor
of fortune, nor the comely feature of the body distinguissheth man from man,
and as it were by distinct offices deuideth them, then no doubt the diversity
of man his estate is known manifestlye by the qualities of the mind, or else
it is no place else where to be found. For the perfect show of Nobility is to
be seen by one of these three virtues, besides ye which there is none whereby
it may be perceived. But whereas we see the pathwaye to virtue open unto al
men, and that Gentlemen descendinge of honorable families give themselves to
all impietye, and other of low and simple parentage excels the rest in
honesty, virtue, and integritye of life: me thinks therefore that, that
Nobility which is generally so mutch aduau^ced is but vain, and grounded only
upon the vnconstancye of peoples fantasy. These things no doubt may be
objected against the worthiness of noble Parentage. But yet we must think it
to be for some great cause, that all men willingly do yield the Souerainty to
someone house and progeny so that the general consent and agremente of all
countries is to be taken for ye law of nature. Which thing that we may
perceive more plainly, I will begin with nature her self.

Whosoever therefore will intentiuelye behoulde the wonderful woorcke of
Nature, and the degree of al living creatures, shall find that every thing is
not of like qualitye, but that some one thing in excelle^cye of nature
exceeds other, and some other thing yields unto other, in estimation and
dignity. For so merueilously nature has wrought in her creatures, that even as
they one in form and shape differ from a another, so they should in like manner
be disposed diversely, and not endued with the like power and virtue: in so
mutche that some should move, other be moved, some rule, other willingely
obey. Pri^cipally therefore if you will more deapely ponder this matter, and
advisedly waygh the glorious hue of Heavenly constitution, you shall
understand the parts thereof not to be of like worthiness, or endued with ye
self same beauty and seemelynes. For it is most apparent that the Stars
observe not the some course, neither are of like proportion, neither of like
operation, in so mutch that by their influences we see the one as it were to
have domynion over the other, and to receive of the parts more excellent and
predomina^t light, power, and virtue. Further we may find the Element of fire
which for the ex^ellentcy of his nature right worthtly has the higher place,
to rule the bodies mouinge upon the face of the Earth, whose properties are
diverse, and dislike each to other. To descend to the Earth and the creatures
thereof, what needs it to discourse how diversely they are disposed? Are they
of one nature, are they all endued with the same quality and virtue? Neither is
this difference to be noted in those creatures alone which are of contrary
natures, but also in those which are of one kind and qualytye. For trees which
are of one kind spreads not their branches in like fayrenes, nor every
Stead does his carrire wtih the like loftines, neither every Lion is of like
strength. Finally in all the worckes of nature, there is to be noted some
variety and alteration of degree, place, and dignity. This excellency of nature
never decays in the things that be everlasting, but in the things which
for a time do florishe, nature most secretly through the quality of the
parent conueigheth to posterity according to ye saying of that worthy Poet.

Good men and strong by course of kind, like issue do require,
The Stere, the Stead, most times we see mutch like unto his sire.
THerefore whereas the force of nature is such, and that ye inclination thereof
so mutche preuayeleth that it is seen in brutishe things and creatures mere
void of reason and understanding may not we think it has imprinted in
man some thing of greater excellencye, who is made by God his provision
reasonable, and lord of al other Creatures? I pray you is it not for great
good cause that many are car^ful and have an especial regard from what Tree
they pluck their plant, of what kind they choose their whelpe, or their
horse? And shall we think it a thing little to be considered, of what
Parentage a man takes his ofspringe? In good sooth if we would obstinately
deny it, the thing it self would eftsoon appear, and convince us of error,
For it is most clear and evident that every Region and Country does keep the
same accustomed manner and facion. A note whereof may hereby be gathered, that
nature has so fastened her foot in every Nation, that it is not possible to
withdraw them from ye, whereunto they ar^ (...), and that the ma^ners of men
are conueighed even to posterity. For example we see the Frenchmen with what
fury and rage they run upon their enemies: again how quickly they are
qualified, and found most courteous to their countrymen. This therefore is ^he
nature and property of that nation hasty to be revenged, and easy to be
entreated. The Germans have been evermore accounted a most cruel and a
fearce people, who nothing dismayed die desperately. The Spaniards at this
present as heretofore, are noted above other Nations to excel, for their
diligence and industry in martial affairs, who evermore with a iollye
stomach and good courage wageth battle. The Italians are preferred before
all other in finenes of wit, and pureness of eloquence. So yt there is no
country which is not through the inclination and instinct of nature more apt to
excel in virtue, or more prone to al impiety, with is through generation in all
places continued. A more evident and clear proof whereof may be gathered out of
some one stock and familye. For this almost every where is seen and
experienced, that those which are descended of a noble line, do embrace those
virtues, which chieflye brought to their auncestores great renown and glory.
So that as many as are of that lineage, are most commendable for their valiant
stomache, other are notable for their liberalitye, some other atchiue to great
glory for their knowledge, wisdom, and policy. Wherevpo^ it follows that
virtue is not obtained so much by study and industrye, as gotten by nature and
by the good blood of Noble pare^tage. And that we call true Nobility, for as
mutche as it is nothing else then the glorious sparcke of virtue ingraffed in
some Noble and renomned familye.

IT has been sufficientlye declared that the (...) true Nobilitye co^^^ceth
not in the opinion of man but comes by natural descence. Which is to be
understood in this manner: even as good grounds and fruitful fyeldes are
had in gerat estimation, not for that they are fyeldes, but that they bring
through their fertilitye great gain and commoditye to the owner of the soil:
even so we prefer that kindred especially, which yeldeth abou^dante fruit of
virtue and godliness. But who so now lists to behold the perfect nature of
true Nobility may look thereon with little labor. For gentility is a most
glorious, and lively image of auncent progeny, most commonly garnished with
excellent virtues. and for as much as every one which excels in all virtue
add honestye, cannot attain the title of honor and Nobilitye, this large
definition is to be restrained by limitation, for neither may they, which the
rather to attayn knowledge and wysedom have abandoned all company and live in
continual study be thought most worthy and honorable, although they be
fornished with rare and singular virtues, and for profou^d knowledge in
deepeste matters be had in admiration, for that they do not earnestly employ ye
benefit of their arts and sciences to the avail and commoditye of the
commonwealth. Neither yet any Noble family has been able at any time to win
unto it self the title of honor and soueranty, for that many of that Noble
line excellinge in qualities of wit, to a void a Courtiers life, have
addicted them selves to the dimensions of Geometry, or the rules of Physic,
or the records and sweet Harmony of Music. If this be true, what kind of
virtue is that through the clear shininge whereof the Noblenes of any Kindred,
the Dignity and Honor of any family may be known? Forsooth even that kind of
virtue which extends it self to the common profit of al men, which a
voydinge idleness is altogether occupied about the maintenance, and
preservation of a Commonwealth: as for example puissance, and valiantnes in
warlike affairs, in time of peace the execution of Justice and Equity, add to
these the study of Oratorie, the knowledge of the Civil laws, and whatsoever
is of force, and apperteineth to the government of a Commonwealth. Nobility
therefore is an high and honorable degree of ancient progeny from whence
has issued out such virtues as the Estate of the hole country has been by
them established, and the safeguard of all men kept and maynteined. Of this
honorable order there are two kinds. The one is general, apperteininge to a
whole City, the other special and concerns any private family. In this
manner we accounte Athens to be honorable, for yt in that famous commonwealth
were bredde many wise sages, and valiant captains, which through their
counsel and wisdom did rule and preserve the weal public, by whose
puissance the enemy was repelled, by whose unconquerable prowes and virtue
their dominions were enlarged, by whom the country was with i^numerable
benefits endowed. In this manner Sparta is honorably reported of, by this
only means wanne Carthage so great reno^me, and for this cause Room the
noblest City that ever was, marvelously tryumphed. The self same rule is
observed in every private familye. For that house excedeth other in honor and
nobility, from whence has issued and descended a greater company of renoumed
personages. Whereby it follows that the force of virtue is found as exceeding
in ye one, as in the other: only this is the difference, the one is private,
the other is public. To exemplefie this second poincte we have read of the
Noble house of the Fabians, of the Claudians, of the Scipioes, and Cornelians,
all which have been honored in all posterity for their prowes and
magnanimity. So ought we notwithstanding weigh both these parts before
severed, that he is in no wise to be deemed noble and honouble and honorable,
which wants either of them, ye perfet is. It may not be therefore that in a
blind, and obscure City there should be a family of any fame (for were it not
a thing incredible, that such a commonwealth should be obscure and as it were
ouershadowed with darkness, wherein there dwells such a one, as may be
termed a light of most divine and resplendent virtue, for so it should be
accoumted not barbarous but famous) neither if there were in that commonwealth
a member never so exceadinge freight with especial virtues, yet could he come
forth to light, and challenge due deserved dignity and commendation, shakinge
of the cloudy mistines, wherewith ye whole country was overwhelmed. Therefore
the chyefest benefit that nature can bestow on us, is to be borne and
brought up in a country in fame and glory, the next good gift of nature is to
bring owr descent from some noble lineage and worthy parentage. Themistocles
his answer to Tymodeus Aphydneus, most fitely agrees to this matter: To whom
it was disdainfully objected that he was not through his own virtues so mutch
honored of the Lacedaemonians, but only for that he was borne an Athenian.
Thowe have said, quod Themistocles for neither I my self if I had been borne
in thy country Aphydnum, could ever attain so great renoume and glory,
neither thou if Athens had been thy country could thereby atchiue to the
title of honor and dignity. Which may in this manner be applied. For he which
is obscurely borne and of low degree may not through the worthiness of any
place be made noble, neither any of gentle blood shall have yielded unto him
estymation dew to his birth and estate in a barbarous and obscure City.
Noble men therefore have their due honors, in their own manor houses and
country. But perfect and true nobility is not chaungeable through the
alteration of place, but wheresoever it has his being, and is deeply rooted
and printed in men's minds, it is of all men honored and magnified a like. For
what is he amongst the Romans (at what time the estate of that renoumed
City flourished in all prowes and Nobilitye) that had in admiration, or made
any account of the Princes of Sicilie, or Bythinia? On the other side ye
Barbarians did magnify the Romans as Gods. Therefore nobility may also be
divided in this manner. The one most absolute and florishinge in all nations, the
other tied to the place from whence it first proceeded. This nobility therefore
shows her self no farther forth then the bounds of his native country will
streach, rather vaynely of the people commended, then deseruedlye honored: But
that nobility beautified with the glory of Princely parentage every where and
among al men shall have deserved reverence. This caused Helena to think, that
she being among strange people might use her accustomed liberty in
speakinge, who in this manner vaunteth her self.

Who will as captive coumpte, or servile her assign,
who by desce^t does come from Gods, and sacred line?
IT is a thing most surely ingraffed in true nobility, not to faynte for any
trouble, not to despair in any peril, not to languish in any woe, and grievous
misery. Yea if fortune froune, if danger and death ensue, a noble mind will
not be forgetful: So that nothing may a like show a gentle and valiant
heart, then not to be vanquished: which is seen in sorrow, tried in trouble
proved in persecution. Which thing Virgill wittely notes unto us, where
Queen Dido commends exceedingly thus, Aeneas.

Forsooth I think, ne am beguilde, from Gods descends his line. There is no
labor lost in examininge the cause why he deemed Eneas to be allied unto the
Gods in birth and co^sanguinity. See what reason he yields.

A bastard borne of base degree, by dastardnes is known. Nothing might have
been said more truly or with better proof. For even as patience in persecution
proves a noble nature, as valiantnes in adversity argue than vnco^querable
mind. So truly timerousnes in terroure and danger, evidently sheeweth a man
to be base, and of vile condition. Now finisheth he the commendations and
prayeses of Eneas.

A grief it is to tell
how he was tossed by cruel fates, what wars to him befell.
IT seems a thing far passinge the reach of reason ye such a one, who
abode stoutlye so great a brunt, who valia^tly ouerstoode so many dangerous
skirmiches, to be no gentleman borne: whereas he declared before that baseness
of birth and lineage, was known by fear, and cowardlines. Whereas then (to
return again from whence we have digressed) Nobility is diversely sorted, that
is the one more general, absolute, and principal, which not only receives
his light from a country flourishing in all virtue, but takes his ofspringe of
a familye, famous and much spoken of for equitye, justice, and magnanimity
the force whereof may be nowhere abased and deminished, grounded and fixed
surely on some unspeakable virtue: The other not of such excellency, only
professed in some one particular province and country, where is decayed the
study of noble qualityes, My meaning therefore is to descrybe the nature of
the most principal and chief nobilitye. And to the intent that I may leave no
one part thero^ ^^^^^^hed, I will speak of the original and beginning thereof
grounding my argument on some other principle.

What time nature took in hand to make man, and to frame in him a spirit
much like to ye divine nature, it apeareth with what prouidente, foresight, and
judgment she finished so hard and great an enterprice. not for this cause and
consideration only that mankind was endued with the self same gifts and
qualities of the mind, and so knit and united together through the likeness of
their nature, that amongst al other living creatures, none was so fit to
keep and maintain society: but in this also that in disposinge their
affections diversely it was brought to pass that those which were by nature
ordained to live in love and amity, should be thereunto forced by necessity: for
whereas innumerable sorts of arts has been devised, to maintain the common
societye of man, and no one may excel in all, it was not without the providence
and divine decree of nature appointed, that some should seek out ye hydden
secrets of scyences, other some should bestow themselves busely in their
faculty, whereby every one laboring in his calling earnestly might by the
travail of other atchiue to that, which by his own industry he should never
attain. It may not be, because Hippias most arrogantly gloried of him self,
that he through the sharpenes of his wit, and quycknes of his capacitye,
could understand all things, that therefore every other man should stand in
like manner in his own con^eit: who besides that he attributed to himself the
skill of al such sciences which contain all learning and wisdom, was not
ashamed also to say, that in every vile and servile occupation he had an
especial gift, that he through ^^^ninge did make the ring that he woare, the
(...) that courted him, and ye sockes that served his necessity. I say it were
hard for any man were his wit never so quick and pregnante, to take upon
him so many intricat labors: In so much that I think that Hippias could not
acquit himself in ye entermingling so many contrary sciences, who besides yt
he irreverently joined liberal arts, and servile occupations together,
omitted ye knowledge and skill of some things, whereby the estate of a common
wealth is kept and maintained. To pass over many which might be spoken of, I
find not where he makes mention of chivalry, which is ye only defense and
safeguard of a common wealth. But it could not be that Hippias, now cutting out
his cloak* the^ grauing his ring, and sowing his sockes, could have any
leisure to learn ye feats of war, and points of a good soldier. It is a
thing therefore most needful that some should bear rule and sit in the
place of majesty, by whose wisdom and pollicye the multitude should be
governed, other some should give them selves to warlike practices, or to be
co^ning in some science through the perfection whereof they might in distress
and danger be a stay to their country, other till the ground, other work at
annile, all to the commodity of their native country. Whereas then it is very
requisite that men should differ in degree* and dignity, in labor and
industry, Nature has prouide^tly wrought the variety of wits, of
dispositions, and qualities. Herehence the sharp wit and deep judgment,
the high and lofty mind proceeds, wherewith some are especially through
Natures benefit endued. Who through their good constellacion may both wisely
forsee danger, and courageously repel imminente mischief. Socrates in the
Book entitled Phaedro, calls this excellency of Nature the gould of the
Gods, whereby he is endured to think that they whose minds are thus
beautifyed, are unto them allied, and fit of all other to be placed on the
earth in the Throne of Majesty. Dame Nature therefore the mother of all
things, has placed them principally in highest room of dignity. Other some
she has not framed in such perfect wise, either for wit, prowess, and
valiauntnes, yet has she imparted unto them great strength and much courage,
in so much they will not easly fainte, but manfully obseruinge laws and
ordinances, and aid their country in time of danger. Other she has made
more simple of understanding, more could of courage, and therefore justly
has appointed them to toil in servile Arts, of which sort are they whom we
term men of occupation. For so it is brought to pass by the wonderful
providence of God, that whereas each man helps an other, and labors in the
Vocation whereunto he is called, the estate of man kind is thereby happily
preserved. And the diversity of man his inclination and disposition was known
even from that time when men as Barbarians wandered in woods and desolate
places, void of reason and all good civility. For at that time some one,
beside the rest excelling in wit, knowledge, and industry, withdrew them
through great perswasio^s from rudenes, to civil government, from
barbarousnes, to all manner of gentleness. The which thing the best learned have
declared unto us under fictions and Poets tales. As when Orpheus is fained to
have drawn unto him, the woods and wild beasts by his sweet sound and
pleasant Harmony. Amphion in like manner is said to drive at his pleasure
whither him listed stones, and sensles things through the swetnes of his song.
Whereby, it is given us to understand, that those men which for want of
understanding were as blunte as blocks, were won by wisdom, and brought by
the policy of other to much ciuility. By such a deed Theseus wanne great
fame and immortal memory. Who first assembled into one place the people of
Athens miserablye divided, geeuinge them profitable laws and good ordinances.
I will in mean time let to speak of those, who were long before Theseus,
which erected and builded many Cities. Then was it to be seen how much the
gentlemanlike and Princely mind was preferred before the base and abiecte
courage. In those virtue was so much loved and merueyled at, that they which
had received so great benefit by such which excelled in virtue and honestye,
yielded themselves with all submission to be ruled by their wisdom, in so much
that when they were dead, they gave unto them divine honors, and embraced
with entyre love, their children and offspring. Principally they were moved
thereunto, for that their benefits were fresh in memory, which were so great
and many, that of deutye they thought to render thanckes to their posteritye.
When afterward they found, and had experiensed, that there was in the issue
the true and lively image of the parente, not to be seen so much in the
feature and making of the body, as in the qualitye and disposition of the
mind, then they were styrred up excedingly, not only for the love that they
bare to their ancestors, as for the especial regard that they had to the
Noble dispositions of their progeny, to honor that stock and family, to whom
they did offer the swaye and government of the common wealth most wilinglye. If
then any man will demand at what time Gentilitye first began, he is to
learn, that then it first entered, when men out of order were reduced to good
order, by the persuasion and policy of such, as were endued with the
excellency of good Nature and noble blood. Which degree of honor was given for
two causes. First for the just deserts of parents, then for the great
expectation and hope which they had in their ofspringe and progeny. For it was
imprinted in the minds of men in time paste that the father which did excel in
virtue, could not but leave a son endued with the like gifts: and the
behauour, manners, and disposition to declare the worthiness of noble birth and
parentage which is most wisely noted by Euripides.

In tender years a Princely grace,
Is token sure of noble race.
The opinion whereof so much prevailed with our forefathers, that who so
descended from a worthy stock, him they hoped to see in process of time
adourned with noble virtues. If so then the worthiness and virtue of any one man
was had in such admiration, that he might challe^ge unto himself as his own
right, the superiority, the same man little regarding these vain and
transitory pleasures, derived the first original cause of his birthe and
Generation from the Divine Nature of the Gods. The cause why the common people
was induced and brought to this opinion, proceeded not so much from ignorance
and superstition, as from the great show of virtue which appeared in their life
and conversation. For it seemed unto them a thing very likely and probable,
that those sprang of a Divine Nature, which were endued with the excellency of
virtue and honesty. Herehence arose those worthy wighes which Homer sets
out in his Ilias, among whom no one was found, which fotte not his petegree,
from the Imperial throne of Majesty. As for example, Hector ye noble Trojan,
who while he lived was the very strength and stay of his country, of whom
Neptune warns the Greecians.

Aie me, I fear the enmies force the Grecians to retire
Will cause, for Hector raging wood, like flaks of flami^g fire
Did hither train his band of men, and says, Jove is his sire.
Who after he was cruelly slain by the Greeks, Priamus pinched with extreme
pain, excedingly commends to all men the manhood and valiantnes of his
son Hector, in so much that he made the Troyans constantly to believe that
he was not begotten by any mortal creature, but that he was a God by kind. It
were in vain to report how greatly some men of noble blood have contended of
their lineage and petegree, only to raise unto themselves a name and glorious
title of immortality. Much like unto that which Achilles says of Asteropeus
the nephew of Axeus the flood.

Asteropeus, I sigh to see thy doleful end,
May Neptunes brood in field, with blood of Jove contend?
Admit Axeus floode did yield thee life: yet thou
(Since Gods me gat) of force to us must yield and bow.
My father Peleus hight, whom Aeacus begot,
Who eke from mighty Jove, his noble line has fot.
What may be gathered of this also that Tlepolemus did with such bitter nippes
revile Sarpedon of Lycia, being daungerously assaulted in the front of his
enemies, because he feigned himself falsely to be the son of Jupiter: who
cleared himself of that vain vaunte not only in word but in deed also,
when as he vanquished and slew Tlepolemus, a valiant and worthy wight the
son of Hercules. For there was no such way for him to supporte his
countenance, and to show the worthiness of his birth, as by vanquishing so
strong and valiaunte a Captain. But some man will say, whereto serves it
that you tell us so many and sundry descents of Gods, and to mingle your
matter with so many feigned inventions, and forged fables of Poets in a case
that requires naught else to be alleged but simple trothe. In all that Homer
wrote (that we leave other untouched) there is no thing to be seen or read,
that may not be thought very ridiculous, and worthy to be rejected of all men
utterly: In whom you shall find the Gods lamenting and howlinge miserably,
great vprores and seditions stirred in heaven it self, great mischiefs
committed, many as the Gods appointed, nay rather in despite of the Gods,
cruelly wounded, pitifully plagued, and slain. It may seem therefore to some
me^, a thing most unfit to enterlace the vain fantasies of Poets with the
simple and plain reasons of Philosophers. This I say may be objected unto
me. But if I may be suffered some thing to digress and go from the matter,
I will answer easlie, by disputinge briefly of the study of humanity,
these weak and unlearned assertions. And so much the rather I am moved
thereunto, for that I often use the authority of Homer. I am truly of this
opinion, that all Poets are sworn enemies to lies, and do utterly detest
falsehode: but amongst the rest Homer especially was the searcher and lover of
all truth and veritye. Which opinion the most noble and wise sages of Greece
have ratifyed, what time as by following the counsel of Homer contained in two
Verses, they yielded up a right unto the men of Athens being then at great
strife with the Megarenses about the title and possession of Salaminia. Men of
great learning and judgment were of this mind, whose monumentes and
works are garnished with the high and stately style of Homers invention: I
say all such which excelled the rest in wit, in eloquence and learning
fully accorded in this opinion. Neither is it expediente (which those most
wise, good, and expert men knew right well) that in the Historian and Poet,
the like evidence of troth is to be looked for. For in Histories are only set
out the worthy acts of valiant men, that they should thereby live in
perpetual memory. But Poets whose manner of writing is far unlike, many times
applies themselves to the ears delight and pleasure. The chiefeste thing
therefore that commends an Historian is to describe plainly, all superfluity
being set a part, the act of what Nature soever it be, limited with
circumstaunce of place, person, and time. But a Poetical description as it is
most tied to number and feet, so the discourse thereof has a greater license
and liberty. And yet there is a kind of truth looked for at their hands,
which if they do not conningly declare, they are not only of the learned
judged ignoraunte, but of all men condemned and cried out upon. The duty
therefore and part of a Poet is no less truly, then trimly, not less
unfeignedly, then finely, no less approuedly, then pikedly, as with a pensile
to describe the manners of men, to descrie the fromphes of Fortune, and the
whole estate and condition of man's life. Again, to set forth elegantly and in
most decent sort, the Nature of honesty and virtue, the deformity of sin
and impiety, what is to be embraced and followed, what to be detested utterly
and abhorred. Whosoever then will take upon him so great and hard an enterprise,
and can so acquit himself thereof that he may be thought to have omitted
no one point of a good Poet, the same is not to be condemned as an untrue
speaker, but commended highly as a Divine and learned writer. For who is he of
so simple a wit and judgment that in reading the wandringes and doubtful
viages of Ulysses, six hundred shipwracks, the great golfe and swallowing
sourge of Charibdis, the roaring of Scilla, the danger in avoiding Antiphates,
the grievous conflict which he had with Polyphemus: who is he, (I say) so
beside himself that will think those things so set down and described by
Homer, as if they were to be believed or might come to pass by any
possibility. And yet men excellently well learned have wondered at him for his
deep iudgmente and divine wit, who did express so lively the true and
perfect image of Virtue, which would be vanquished by no terror, allured by no
wanton entisements, pine for no peril, languish and faynte for no woe and
miserye. In this manner Achilles is gazed on as the glorious image of puissance
and magnanimity. In this wise Nestor is accounted most noble for his wisdom
and policy. Neither has he described these things roughly, or in a crabbed
style, thereby to tire and loath the reader, which manner of wrytinge
Philosophers use, but with a wonderful, or rather with a philed phrase of
divine eloquence, the rather to allure men to the study and exercise of virtue
and honesty. What is he then that can charge or steine Homer with the blot of
vntrothe, whereas he has performed with such perfection the thing, which
was at his hands in that matter required. If then at any time we allege him
for auctority, we do it wholly for this intent, to imitate as near as we
may him, who through the sharpenes of his divine wit and understanding was
able fully to consider of every matter, and perce the secrets of all things.
Truly not for that end, that I did believe those things to be true, as they
were set down by him, but that such in deed I supposed to be the manners of
men, such to be the Laws and ordinances of Countries, such to be the nature
and force of things, and al other matters to be of the like sort and
condition, as they were by him in wrytinge declared. Wherefore (to come to my
former treatise of Nobility) in that he does by writing express Achilles to
be the son of Thetis, Memnon of Aurora, and Sarpedon of Jupiter: his meaning
no doubt agrees with the mind and opinion of all wise men of that time, that
they who for wisdom and virtue, did far excel the rest, might be judged
not without the especial providence of the Gods to have been bore, and
therefore to have been of their lineage, and consanguinity. And this was the
chief cause that Theseus was thought to have been the son of Neptune, and
Romulus borne of the God Mars. Alexander also the great did long time since
delight to be called the son of Jupiter, which opinion also grue of Scipio
Affrican. For the self same rumor which was raised before of Alexander, was
vainly bruted of Scipio, which was, that a Serpent in shape monstrous, was
oftentimes seen in his mothers chamber. Which being once of many men
evidently noted, suddenly vanished, and was seen no more. Herehence arose this
opinion, that many did think that Scipio his mother was great and conceived
by the Serpente a child. But you will say, O notable and shameless lie. I pray
you is there any man so void of wit, reason, and understanding, or so far
from the faith of Christ, which will be persuaded that these things are true?
But yet this lie is grounded on a true and good opinyon, which is, to think
that the nobilitye of blood issues from the excellency of good nature, and
that the worthiness of virtue proceadeth from some noble and Princely parentage.
Hereby it is evident, and most plain, and manifest, how greatly men of
ancient memory did esteem gentle and noble families. Verily not without good
cause. For if any thing were, that for the worthiness thereof deserved
perpetual and everlasting memory, it issued from those noble personages for
the most part: As it is a thing most clear and evident to him, that lists to
read the reports and commentaries of antiquity. Who knows not yt the stock
of Hercules so far excelled other in prowes and virtue, yt it did easily
subdue the force and power of the Pelopidanes and wonderfully strengthened the
state of Athens, ready to be ouerronne and destroyed utterly. So greatly was
any noble familye esteemed, that who so were descended by them, did think they
were protected by the power of some heavenly garrison. What avails it to show
you of ye stock and noble line of Perseus? Or what should it skill to recite
the worthy Acts and famous enterprises of such, as have been of the race of
Aeacus? If any one would call to mind how many and how great affairs, how
strange and how dangerous enterprices have been done and wrought by the
Athenians, should understand for the most part that nothing has been among
the^ either attempted, or accomplished, but by such, whose progenitors were in
their life honorable, whose progenye after their death were honored of the
people. To omit to speak of Kings and Princes whom every man knows to have
been of singular virtues, whose fame was sounded far and wide, truly
Clisthenes, who first wrought the ruin and utter subversion of tyrannous
government, Myltiades, Cimon, Themistocles, Pericles, and many more, whom to
recite were over tedious, who took upon them most weighty affairs and
hard enterprices, as well against the Grecians, as Barbarians, all those for
the most part came of some noble line and princely parentage. The like is to
be found amongst the Thebanes, the men of Sparta and a number of other
nations and countries besides. But let us leave these foraigne and strange
examples, and search the Histories of our own time. If you give your self to
the readinge of holy scripture, you shall have therein contained what great
odds there is betwixt man and man, and find many testimonies there specified
in confirmation, and commendation of true nobility. And that I leave other
unspoken of it is apparent that the stock of Judah did far excel the Hebrew
Nation in virtue, honor, and dignity. Who from the time they were happily
delivered from the thraldom and slauerye they sustained amongst the
Egiptians, have been well approved for their great virtue and godliness.
Amongst whom I will only note unto you certain. What time the Egiptian
King did grievously torment the Hebrews, neither would upon any condition
release them as God had given them commandment, but rather increased their
misery daily more and more: At the length according to his desert suffered
just punishment, at what time God him self appeared unto him. For their lands
were wasted, their fruicts consumed through a great and terrible plague, then
by the very appoyntmente of God mutch blood shed, great cruelty committed,
all tyra^nie practiced. In conclusion the king being as it did appear well
reclaimed by so many grievous and bitter scourges, permitted the Hebrews to
depart to offer sacrifice. The Hebrews then departinge therehence, and
pitchinge their tents near the read sea, perceived some mischife imagined
against them, otherwise then they looked for. For as soon as they passed the
bounds of Egypt, it repented the king much, yt he had set them at liberty.
For he being puffed up with great pride did persevere in his former wickedness,
in so mutch he purposed to pursue them with great force, notwithstanding
knowinge them to be protected by the hand of Almighty God. For whereas he was
utterly overwhelmed with the outrage of his fury, could not perceive what
plagues were appoincted ready to confound him and his people, he prepares
therefore a great troop of horsemen, multitudes of footeme^ are mustered, and
all delay being set a side he bends his main force against the Hebrews. At
that instante Moses besought God with earnest prayer and petition for the
peace, and the happy deliverance of his people, and with that rod which
represented the omnipotent power of Almighty God, which he always carried
about with him stryketh the Sea, and immediately he made a wide and open way for
them through the midst thereof. For the Sea being subject and obedient to
the will and power of God, was unto them in both sides as a strong wall, and
mighty fortress, whereby they did securely pass witho^ fear of imminente
danger. Notwythstandynge so great was the fear of those Hebrews (as it is
reported in certain histories of the Jews, for holy scripture makes thereof
at al no mention) they report therefore yt such was their horror and dread, ye
albeit they were assisted by ye power of God, yet with great ado were they
brought to commit them selves to the dangerous passage of water. Moreover it
is verified, that they which descended from Judah, did manifestly show forth
a great experiment of puissance and valia^tnes, who lingered not or drew back,
but by the example of Moses with merueylous constancye adventured first the
Sea, and by their stout stomach encouraged the rest to follow them. But what
followed that great and notable confusion, wherein the wicked and damnable
King, having his mind poisoned with most deadely rancoure, and being
blinded with most horrible impiety rashely adventured to pass through the
Sea, and was with all his army swallowed up with the surges and gulfes of the
same. Was not this people of Judah ever afterward more honored then the rest,
for their manly courage and valiant heart? therevppon it was decreed that
among the twelve rulers and Princes (for out of several trybes were elected
diverse Captains) he should have the soueraignetie which descended from the
Trybe of Judah, he should conducte the hooste, he should make peace, he
should first offer sacrifice, his rule and aucthority the rest did obey.
Whereby it is most plainly and euidentlye gathered that Moses had consideration
of the noblenes of blood and nature, in that he assigns unto one peculiar
people the title and prerogative of honor and dignity. Out of this stock of
Judah sprange one Caleb who first wan great glory, for that he gainesayd the
most shameful oration of such as would again return into Egypt and had
rather live in bondage and slauerye under the Egiptians, then try theymselues
l^ke me^ in the field. This worth ye wighte Caleb did spread far and wide
the glorious renoune of his virtue and constancy, by great exclamations
working so effectuously in the hearts of the souldiars, that whereas through
their former conceit their hope failed, and their hearts faynted through
fear, yet he made them with a good stomache and iollie courage wage again
battle, and excedingly styrred them up to al virtue and manlines, whereas he
might paraduenture in that wicked and dastardlye, assembly, been most
undeservedly torn and dismembered with cruel torments. This Caleb under ye noble
captain Joshua, being the^ four score and five years of age, behaved him self
so valiantly that no one might be compared unto him in handlinge his weapon, or
for his great skill in martial affairs. He was of that mind that he would
bestow his daughter (being very bewtifull) upon no man in marriage, except on
him which could subdue a strong and mighty city of his enemies: and in fine,
his brothers son vanquished the same. Herby it may evidently appear that
virtue is accompaned with nobilitye. This glorious and perelesse p rsonage had
in choosing his son, no respect to the kindred, but to the virtue of the man.
For ye name of ge^tilitie takes his beginning from no other thing then from
the praise and due commendation of virtue. Yet this often times happens, that
the glory and renoune of virtue is surely knitte and tied to the worthiness of
birth and parentage. So that none could imitate so well or com so near unto
Caleb in prowes and virtue, as he which was nearest unto him through
cousanguinity. What happened after the death of Iosue? was not the whole charge
of martial affairs, the swaie, and gouerme^t of the whole nation appointed to
the trybe of Judah? Time would not su^fyce me to recite and speak of
particularly, each noble wight of this familye that by his virtue merited
everlasting memory. If then the definition and nature of true noblenes which
I have set down, be evident and true, there is no doubt then, but that the
stock and trybe of Judah have attained the perfection of honor and
sovereignty. From thence sprang up a nombre of noble captains, from thence
issued out most wise and prudent fathers, from thence proceeded many excellent
men for equitye and justice, fromthence has descended kings and princes
right worthy and honorable, and amongst the rest (who^ I pass over with
silence) the most noble and holy King David, a myrroure and spectacle of all
virtue and godliness. To conclude only for the excellency of their virtue, as
long as the estate of the Jews flourished and continued prosperous the kingdom
remained in this stock and family, but to omit these matters of antiquity,
truly it is most clear and manifest that in holy scripture where the glorious
works of our savior Christ are regestred, there is regard made of honor and
nobility, whereas in entringe to speak to any on, their is mention made of
his excellency and worthynes, as apperteynynge to him with whom we have
communication. As for example when the Angel and heavenly messenger of God
speaks thus. Joseph the son of David fear not: and again. Jesus the sone
of David have mercy upon us. Moreover Paul speaking to the Romans, what
time he would set forth the honor and glory of Christ as well touching
his divine as humayne nature does say that he in respect of his humanity is
descended from the stock and house of a king. I have of a great many picked
out a few examples only to avoid yrksome tediousnes. Yet notwithstanding it
may appear by these few parcells, that noblenes of birth, and distinction of
blood is by auctority of holy scripture allowed and confyrmed.

Now I have to my simple skill showed sufficientlye the first ground and
original of nobility, deriuynge the foundation thereof from that good
inclination which is through the benefit of nature printed in haughty minds
which if it happily grew and by continuance of time come to perfection, it
brings forth that noblenes of birth and parentage, which every where is so
much esteemed and honored. For it is a thing worthy to be noted (that we
speak some thing of this also) how much antiquitye sets forth the glory
and dignitye of true nobility as a great proof and confirmation, through ye
testimony wherof-al worthy acts and noble enterpryses are committed and
commended to posterity. For those things which for want of memory have almost
been forgotten, are most highlye of us esteemed, so that we do much more admire
them for their prowes and vallantnes, then that we suppose many of our time not
able with al labor and industry to ensue and imitate. Herehence does arise
that great emulation recorded in ancient historys) between nation and nation,
while some do vaunt themselves to have been beyond all memory, again other
seek to draw al renown of antiquitye to themselves. The Egyptians did
willingly yield the antiquity to the Phrigianes, and only exceptinge the^ they
vaunte themselves more ancient then any other nation. The people of Arcadia
proceaded to fictions, and feigned fables. They affirmed the^selus in auncienty
of birth to exceed the Moon. What shall I say of the Athenians? who did
attribute so much unto themselves for the glory and title of antiquity, that
they thought themselus only by that name of right most worthy to rule all
Greece. For whereas the first beginninges of other parts of Greece were
regestred either in some memorable Chronicle, either in some worthy monumente:
only the beginning and original of the Athenians could by no steps of
ancient descente evidently be traced out. Afterward when they knew that they
were beyond all the memory of man, they were of this opinion, yt they sprang
first of the soil of that land, and came not together through the assembling
and meeting of any other people, but evermore from their generation enhabited
their own and native country. And for that cause they adorn their head with
fine nets or caules garnished and wroughte with Grasshoppers of Gould: signifyinge
that as Grasshoppers are engendered of the soil where they are first found, so
ye Athenians came naturally from the place they do inhabit. For which cause
they were called the offspring of their own land. They were therefore desirous
of two names, as well to show and manifest that there was nothing to be
found in their ancestors that was borrowed of Barbarians and strangers, as
also to the end, they would be known to excel all other Nations for the
prerogative of their antiquity. We also see in private stocks and families
how greatly it avails them which stand on the point of their petegree to
show the Records of their Seignorie. For it seems a thing most reasonable,
and cannot be denied that those families are of more honor, who have a
longer time supported their countenance by virtue and honesty. And this is
the cause that vpstarte gentlemen are so little regarded. Which opprobrious
disdain commonly proceeds from a contemptuous and proud stomach, and an
intolerable loftines, and yet not altogether void of good reason. For albeit
Gentlemen which have been lately promoted, excel in virtue, wit, and policy,
yet do not they carry with them such credit, yet have they not that hoar head,
which especially in great families, and noble blood is to be esteemed and
honored. For even as we do chiefly reverence graye hears, and elder years,
even so the ancient race of nobility should bear the sway, port, and
aucthority. In which opinion notwithstanding certain bonds and limittes are
to be pitched. For as feeble and weak old age does impair the force of
reason, of memory, and understanding, and breeds a disparageme^t of honor
and dignity: so the true nature of glory and renoume is with long time
beautified, but with over mutch continuance bereued of his accustomed light and
beauty. Which how it happens I will hereafter show, now I am forthwith
addressed to follow orderly my intended purpose.

Whereas the glory and dignity of true nobilitye has been declared by me with
many excellent and worthy ornaments annexed thereunto, it remains to be
considered whether it be expedient and profitable for the people to be governed
by the will and auctority of noble men. For it may seem unto many a thing
most unjust and besides reason, that whereas all men are by nature desirous of
liberty, and void of the yoke of bondage, they should be restreined of their
freedom, and should be forced by laws to obey others, and not follow their
own will and pleasure: especially whereas men of honor and high degree for
the most part do most insolently abuse their calling, both through pride, and
ambition, and are found captains to all mischief and cruelty. But that I
may more plainly express the same, it is to be considered not so mutch that
which may augment the weal of any private person, but rather that which may
enrich the state of mankind, and preserve the same in wealth and felicity. For
look what thing soever apperteineth to the preservation and welfare of all
men, must needs be thought profitable to every singular man and peculiar person
For it may not be that any one part or member of a common weal should be
sound and perfect, where the whole body thereof is grievously afflicted and
annoyed. But if any one part and member of a commonweal be greatly oppressed,
so long as the estate of ye whole be sou^de and perfect, it may the souer be
restored to his former felicity. But that we may the more plainly behold the
pyth hereof, it is requisite to vewe the estate of those Cities, which have
been accounted most noble and honorable. Athens, after the death of King
Codrus was happily preserved by the laws and ordinances which Solon made, who
notwithstanding was reprehe^ded of many excelling in wit and learni^g, for yt
he made ye people peers, and gave to subjects soueraignety and unto the
multitude over much liberty. The estate of that commonweal was sufficientely
hereby argued of what time within the compass of xl years the government was
spoiled by the wilfulnes of the people, and yielded it self subject to the
tyranny of Pysistratus. But after that they had set them selves at liberty
again, and were no more subject to the tyranny of Princes, a great number of
years both in Greece, and in the greatest part of Asia they held the
soueraignety, rule, and government. Which power, and principality was sone
tottered and brought to ruin, through the intolerable pride and ambition of
some who sought to feed ye humors of others, and to be accoumpted people
pleasers. Amongst whom Pericles is named, who although he did excel in
Oratorie, and was wondered at for his sweet tongue and fine vtterau^ce, and was
skyllfull in government, yet notwithstanding did not see what mischief he
brought to the country when he made equal the Prince which the people, the
subjects with Nobility, and by that means confoundinge estates together, did
violate and break the authority of Areopagus. For no other thing is it, to
make equal in liberty, the Nobles and common fort of men, then to give weapons
to unbridled rage and lust, whereby it may work all manner of mischief. But
will you see what evil and misery ensued, when the commonwealth was ruled
according to the will and pleasure of the people? First a terrible scourge and
miserable destruction was said on the necks of men for life and virtue
approved, (which had preserved and increased the weal public) by obscure
men and disposed to al kind of villanny. For in the whole commonwealth of
Athens after the estate thereof was miserably rent in pieces, no one was to be
found, which was moved with the love of virtue, again which did not conceive
hatred and indignation, against his wretched, and ungrateful country. Where at
length the myserye grew so great and violent, that some were openly damnified
and utterly spoiled of their goods and possessions, other some banished, many
slain and put to cruel death, who had in their lives through great virtue
and puissance, victoriously conquered the enemy, nobly defended their country.
This calamity was great and intolerable, that the body of the weal public
should be bereued of his principal and most excellent parts, that the
authority of ye nobles was abolished, who would have wrought the remedy and
preservation of their wounded country. Therefore whereas sage heads might
not prevail, where cutthrotes were counselors, where fury and madness ietted
up and down unpunished, no mischtefe could be imagined, no misery devised,
wherewith that country was not overwhelmed and clean overflowed. For when the
city of Athens was assaulted with most terrible and cruel wars, and that
all Greece had conspired against them, it came to pass by the furye and
outrage of the people, that at the same time they proclaimed battle with no
less danger against Sicilia, Nycias notwithstanding with many peers and
noble counselors persuadinge the contrary. Wherefore they worthily sustained
in that lamentable siege of Syracusa, not only the loss of their honor, but
the ruin of their houses, lands, and possessions and fell pitefully into
great wo^ and misery: and being at the length through sedition and civil
battle utterly wasted and consumed with many bitter scourges and terrible
afflictions, lost with great languor and heaviness miserably their former
liberty. But after the thirty Tyrants were for their sharp and tirannous
gouernmente displaced, what was it that did scatter those goods carefully
gathered, but the loose life, and immoderate desire of the frentike people?
Whose fury and madness was such, that by no force or restreint of law, they
could be endued to have any care or regard of the common estate. For when it
was lawful for every odd fellow to robb the co^monweale, thereby to augmente
his private gain, then fell they from labor, and worldely business to a
slouthful and loyteringe life, they repaired to stageplayes and commodies, and
used other vain pleasures, which decayed the love of vert^e, and did utterly
extinguish and put out the memory of the Athenian renoume, and their aunciente
dignity. Wherefore not many years after, that nation which had foiled so many
armies of the Persians, which wrought some any noble acts, which obtained the
Empire over all Greece, was by the Macedonians (an obscure, and unknown people
at that time) subdued utterly, and confounded. The first and principal cause
of this so great a calamity was the leude, and licentious life of the people.
Amongst the men of Sparta also (to speak some thing of them) many worthy and
noble acts have been wrought by their Kings and Princes, as well against
their enemies, as also with their subjects, profitable to their commonwealth,
and meritinge everlasting fame and memory. On the other side the Ephori who
by the election of ye people came to their office of dignity, did greatly annoy
and impouerishe the inhabytauntes of their country, while they seekinge
greedely their own private gain and commodity, did procure the utter ruin and
undoing to their native country. For what other thing do they which violate
and infring the positive ^awes, whereupon the safeguard of all men depends,
then utterly ouerturne the common wealths estat^* And whereas Lycurgus had
ordained many good laws and profitable statutes, only to bring them to labor,
honesty, and virtue: the Ephori many years after his time corrupted with
voluptuousnes and filthye lucre (which two are pestiferous and most hurtful
to any common wealth) abolished his most excellent decrees, and caused his
laws to be of none effect. Which fact caused their honor and dignity suddenly
to fall to the ground. And when certain kings would establishe a new the
laws of Lycurgus, which were abrogated, and took counsel how to reform
their dissolute life, immediately they were of the Ephori dispatched and cruelly
murdered. So it came to pass that the common wealth of Athens which for a
long time flourished in honor, pomp, and nobility, and was furnished with
many fathers excelling all other in the world in wit, learning, and
judgment, and had defended it with great glory, was now through the furye of
the subjects, made subject to all villainy and slavery.

What should I need in this place speak of the Romans? whereas it is
confessed of all men that nothing did so much overthrow the florishinge
estate of that noble City as when the subictes rebelled against their rulers
and princes. That Empire therefore which was first by the puisance of princes
purchased, then maintained and amplefied by the Senate and Elders, was
shortelye brought to confusion through the seditious and troblesom people. For
when the insatiable desire of the frentike people waxed so extreme and
outrageous, that it could be kept under by no lawful government and pollitike
counsel and was given in hope of pray to vprores through the seditious orations
of people pleasers, they feared not (so they might content and satisfy their
unlawful lust and appetyte) to violate and break the Law of God and man. This
caused the Tribunes to be seditious, this encouraged the^ to the great
detriment and ^ur^ of the co^mo^wele: to make laws touching distribution of
grounds, even to the time of Gracchi which were ye chief authors of those
calamityes wherewith after that time the common wealth was overflowed. All
whith stir and hurliburly as it were by fatal desteny grew daily more and
more until the time of Marius, whose reign although it was very lamentable,
yet did it open a way to much more mischife beside, until the gouernmente
came to Julius Caesar. You see the commonwealth of Athens some time most
flourishing, the kingdom of Sparta earste noble, the City of Rome a long time
much renoumed to have been happily begone, kept and maintened by princes and
noble personages, which again were through the rash and unruly multitude
miserably spoiled utterly wasted and confounded, Which great misery and
intolerable mischief is not only seen in those Cities, but also in other
places, for where the people has least to do in a common wealth, there the
estate of that country is found most stable and parmanente. Whereupon it
follows that the government of the vulgar and common people is very easily
overthrown, and scarcely endurth the time of one generation. But the rule of a
king is not subject to often alteration, and does as it were continue for ever.
Some men will here object against me Alcibiades and Critias, who were the utter
subversion and overthrow of their native country or else Pausainas who
traitorously conspyred against all Gre ce, or Silla and Caesar with many such
like who were renomned for their honor and nobylity, but yet being entangled
with ambition and out of measure Enflamed with the desire of rule, and
aucthoritye, spared not to spoil crueltye their friends and countrymen. I
must truly of force confess that many heinous acts have been enterprysed, much
mischief committed and wrought by such as were of high degree and
aucthoritye. Neither the high and loftye stomache which is ingendre^ through
nobilitye of b^^^d, have been always encl^ned to equity and justice. Yet do I
defend^ this opinyon that no common wealth ^ath been at any time well governed
by the people. For every noble wighte has always weapons in readiness either
t^ defend, either to spoil his country, as wisdom, wealth, knowledge, and
fortitude. Contrariwyse the multitude for the mo^^ part is headlong, unskillful,
fearful, and ^^orous. They may therefore through their furye and madness hurt
and wound their country, but being out in danger of utter undoing, they are
able by no means to save it, or restore it being once lost and decayed to his
for^^^ honor, and dignity. It is therefore, most clear and evident, that the
estat of that country is lamentable, where people are preferred before their
peers, and the ignoble and ^^l^born before the honorable. But when the case
stands thus that noble men do flow and abound in all virtue and noblenes, and
are not only through ye good inclination of th^yr noble natures, but also
through the love of virtue inflamed with justice and temperance, and daily
study to do good to all men, and to knit (up al in one word) do depely
consider the office and duty of a noble personage, what is he were he never so
vilanos a verlet or cursed caytiue with would not willi^gly obey their will and
autoriti. Nay who will not rather persuade ye body of a co^mo^wealth to be
geuerned by so worthi and noble a counsel. For who soever is of so a le^^
mind, as to think it not a thing most needful and profitable, to yield
himself conformable to the protection of some one most wise and modeste
governor, who for his wisdom and modesty only deserves commendation, is
not to be thought a lover of liberty, but rather corrupted with the lust of
licentiousnes, and would by his riot and foul demeanor molest the quiet estat
of the country. For there is nothing in the universal world that is more apt
to preserve the common societye of men then good laws with out the which no
familye, no nation, no country is ^^l, to stand and have any contynuance. But
you will say it is grievous and intolerable burden to become servile. Truly
I am of that mind that no evil may be compared to servitude: but it is one
thing to serve, and another to obey. For there is great odds between a lord
and a guardian. The guardian is careful for the safeguard of those who are
committed to him to be defended, the lord only does respect his private
commodity. Even so the loyalty and obedience of him that is free greatly
dyfferethe from the bondage of him that is seruyle. For servitude is thus,
when the slave wanting will and free election follows the commandment and
beck of his lord, and having no choice repyneth at his lords auctoritye.
But it is the propertye of a liberal nature to yield all duty and reverence
to them which does excel other in knowledge and wisdom, and to whom for a
long time have been committed the care and custodye of many people. And as the
sick man does no manner of service to the Physician, but willinglye follows
his advise and council, because he shall thereby be restored to health: and as
the passenger obeys the master of the ship, and the soldier his captain:
so it behooves a multitude well disposed to yield them selves wholly into the
hands of right noble and worthy personages. For the people through their dull
wits and brutish nature cannot perceive what is profitable either to
themselves, or for their country: on the other side ye noble mind is not only
the worker of present profit, but also through great foresight preuents
imminent danger. Furthermore the people has no taste or feelinge of honor
and renoume, and glory, except they be by some straight law brydeled, and
therefore are most covetous and given to al impyetie, and in the defense of
their country are of no stout and hardye stomache. On the other side the
noble blood is inflamed with the love of renoume, and abhors dastardlines
as a most foul and ugly vice, and in defense of a common profitt accompteth
great and dangerous enterpryces. Which by Homer (whose grave sentences I do
often recite and willinglye repete) is in many places most plainly declared.
For after such sort he brings in the king with sundry and diverse kinds
of oracions perswadinge with the people, as though thereby his meaning were to
give notice and intelligence to al worthy and noble personages by the recital
of Agamemnon his praise, and worthiness, that they in like manner ought to excite
and stir up themselves to strive with him for fame, and glory. But unto the
rude and barbarous people if they turn their backs in battle, scourginge
and killinge he denounces. Therefore as the stomach and courage of a lusty
horse does most appear, when he yields to be guided by the will of a
skillfull rider: And as we suppose our mind to be best settled, when will to
reason gives the sovereignty: And as we think a houshoulde to be well
ordered, when it leans to the advised disposition of a wise and careful
householder: So must we persuade our selves that the good estate of the people
is then best ordered and established, when they yield the free administration,
and as it were the sway of gouernmente to true Nobility.

THE SECOND Book of civil Nobility.
WHat the nature, force, order, and efficacy of true Nobility is ( Lewis most
noble and famous Prince) and how first being bred and fostered by worthiness of
wit, and excellency of virtue, it attained the highest place of honor and
soueraingtie: and how the people in all antiquity was fully persuaded that
noble birthe and worthiness of parentage by blood and aliaunce, was joined and
linked to the Gods, and how great and honorable titles and ensigns in all well
governed common wealths were attributed and given thereunto: I have already
not only by testimonies of excellent Poets, and manifest presidents of
aunciente Records, but also by authority of holy Scripture abundantly
declared and confirmed sufficiently. And after I had put down in writing how
much antiquity might prevail for the furtheraunce and settinge forth of true
Nobility, I declared consequentlye that they who were of high degree and
noble parentage were not only borne to bear rule, and sit in the place of
Majesty, but also that the security, safegarde, and preservation of the
people was then best kept and maintained, when the whole gouernmente was
yielded unto worthy and noble personages. But for as much as there is nothing in
this world certain, stable, and permanent, but al things are frail, mutable,
and much subject to alteration, it may not be that Nobility, and the glory
thereof, should continue always and be everlasting. Nobility therefore (as
most part of other things to the state and condition of man) is subject to
mortality. Wherefore (...) ^f ^ll (...) things, ^o o^ nobility, there is a
certain prime and youthly Estate, then riper years ensue, and old age
follows, last of all death wastes and consumes all utterly, so that no
printe or sign appears of ancient Nobility. We see therefore that many
families which were in time past barbarous, obscure, and little reckoned of, are
excedi^glye stirred up and enkindled to purchase praise and win glory.
Again other we see scarcely uphold the renown of their ancestors, other
daily crack their credit more and more, and being thrown headlonge down at
length are extinguished utterly, which Glaucus by the mouth of Homer notes
unto us in this manner.

O stoutest of the Grecian camp, why searchest our degree?
Since that each mortal race most like is to the leaves in spring:
Some, smallest breath and blast of wi^ds the^ skattreth from the tree.
Some eke amid the groves do grow, when trees their branches bring,
So chance does now men's state advance, now down does headlong fling.
I pray you does there at this present appear in any place any small token of
the progeny of old and ancient families? all those which have descended from
Fabius, Julius, Paulus, Metellus, and Scipio are together with the glory and
pomp of the Romans so vanished, and as it were buried in the pit of
oblivion, that if any man which now lives will affirm himself to be of their
race, or joined to them in birthe and consanguinitie is a like skoffed at, as
if he did defend the dream, and peuishe fantasy of Pythagoras. After those
noble and worthy wightes whom I have already spoken of were extinguished,
succeeded many other of like fame and estimation, who also through trace of
time, and continuance of many years were utterly forgotten, again other after
their time were advanced to honor, of who^ no writer reports. Which thing
happens for two causes especially. The first and chiefeste cause is the
britle and frail condition of nature, through the mutabilitie whereof it
comes to pass that the estate of worldly things may in no wise be
perpetual and everlasting: but all things as I have before declared are full
of chau^ges and alterations: In so much that they either before they come to
perfection are cut of through the malice and frowardnes of Fortune, either
through old age withered, wasted and brought to nothing. The second cause
may be imputed to impiety it self and abundaunce of vices, which utterly
extinguisheth the clear shyning brightness of ancient families, before the
course of nature does so require. As exp^rience teaches in those who by
overmuch winebibbinges impair their bodies health, and through superfluity,
and immoderatenes of belly cheer (as it were with a deadlye poison) procure
their own bane and utter destruction. Wherefore it is requisite and necessary
to search out diligently the qualities and virtues whereby we attain
nobility, so will the vices whereby it is lost and bereued of his wonted grace
and accustomed brightness, eftsoon appear. But here I may something doubt
least yt this my discourse may seem to deserve just reprehension, because it
may at the first show appear contrary to it self, whereas in our first entry
this assertion we mainteyned, yt no man was to be accounted honorable, except
he did first descend from some noble line and family. Which if it be true,
neither he which is borne of low degree and base parentage may by any means be
honorable, neither he who descends from noble race, may through his own
industry attain renown and glory, but defend only and maintain carefully
the Nobility gotten and purchased by the manhood and puissaunce of his
ancestors. These are the scruples and doubts wherewith some may be led
to argue me of lightness and inconstancy.

But I in good sooth am not he, which do believe those only which are commonly
called Gentlemen to be by natural inclination apt to virtue and valiauntnes,
whereas the pathwaye to prowess and virtue is open to all them, that do desire
things in their nature most excellent and commendable. Notwithstanding to that
end tended the drifte of all my disputation that the gentle and noble blood
is more then the other, by nature enclyned to dignity and commendable acts,
the worthiness whereof notwithstanding is surely grounded on virtue. For like
as we attribute to the seed and carnell in the ground the cause and generation
of the Tree: so we deem the worthy and noble parent, through generation, to
pour on his posterity some part of true Nobilitye, which then appears most
lively and flourishing, when it is through good studies and exercises brought
to perfection. And where we would have nobility to be highlye esteemed and
honored, because it does commonly excel in virtue: truly our meaning is,
that Virtue which is worker and causer of so noble a quality, does deserve
great honor and estimation, which many times we see of noble men, let pass
and forsaken, and of such exceedinglye embraced, who are not commended unto us
for their noble progeny. For no doubt it is not found true in all, that the
lofty and hautie mind which is seen in Nobility does eftsoon stir them
up to the love of Virtue, neither would we have established that opinion, but
that we chiefly meant, that was found most usual and general.
Notwithstanding Virtue from Nobility fraighte and beautifyed with virtue,
differs in this one point: that the praise and commendation of virtue
belongs to every private and singular person, but noblenes is found more
ample and large, and concerns the honor and magnificence, of a whole stock
and family. Therefore there may happelye arise some late and new made
gentleman endued with all kind of virtue, who also through his worthiness may
bear such a countenance, that among all men he may only excel: yet
notwithstanding because he is the first of that lineage, may not be reckoned
among noble men. But after that many of the same family shall be found by
his ensample to be inflamed with the love of honor and glory, then at the
length that exceeding brightness of true and perfect Noblenes shall shine, and
glister most gloriously. Therefore at the first he is called a man endued with
much gentleness and courtesy, in no wise a noble man. That, that may be the
difference which the Grecians make between one that is a noble Gentleman, and
a gentleman. For the latter has relation to the worthiness of the mind, and
the other signifies the honor and dignity of the race and family. Therefore
as one we term not a number, but the beginning of a number: so that first man
we suppose and judge worthy of chiefest honor, but yet no noble man, but
rather an author and beginner of Nobility unto his race and ofspringe. Which
name and title I my self know not, whither I may esteem far and in many
degrees to exceed and pass the other. Wherefore that is most clear and
manifest, that neither that is false which we before put down in writing,
and this also which we now take in hand to explicate and set forth, does bear
with it credit of undoubted trothe. For that famous man who through the
excellency of his nature applied himself first to the study of renown and
glory, albeit commonly he be not termed noble, when notwithstanding he has
attained great fame and commendation, and has left to his progenye the tokens
and ensigns of virtue does seem to have laid a notable foundation of
Nobility, and with his virtuous acts to have given a clear light, and
purchased true fame to his posterity. Now therefore it remains that we know
by what means this so noble aduau^sing of his stock and kindred may happen
to him who is the first rayser of his family to the high and princely place of
honor and Nobility. No doubt (that I may answer briefly) by the same means
whereby it is mainteyned and preserved. But it is said before, that Nobility
is a kindred excelling in most rare and principal virtues. And those according
to the opinion of Aristotle the most learned Philosopher, I account principal
virtues which are occupied about the preservation of common society, through
which also the safety and security of men is best kept and maintained. But he
which through private education is very well trained, and well instructed with
precepts of morality, may of good right be termed a good and virtuous man:
but yet by other qualities he shall never procure great praise, and worthynes,
except he apply them to the profit and commodity of the weal public. For
if we were borne only for our own sakes and our own commodities, it were
sufficient that we sought the advancement of our own selves, and the
preferment of those which are contained within our own family. But whereas we
are moved by the instinct of Nature to help and profit other, he seems
best to have discharged the duty to him assigned, whose labor, study, and
diligence has bin employed in matters of great weight and importance to the
benefit and wealth of his native country. Not for that truly yt the virtue of
any private man should be despised and set at naught: for by his good advise
and counsel if not all, yet some part of the common wealth as his own house
and family is well ruled and ordered. But whereas the virtue and wisdom of
this private and peculiar man is contained within the bound and walls of his
own house, and extends it self no further, it seems good reason that the
like honor and dignity should not be due to him, that is to some other, whose
virtues are found more universal and general, and whose mind is more
occupied with the careful cause of his common wealth. For all men would not
generally accord to honor and reverence a few, except they did all manifestly
perceive themselves, in cases of great extremity by their great pains and
travail to be assisted. Therefore by knowledge of civil affairs and
experience, there was made a certain entry to this kind of gentilitie.

THe chiefest and most principal part therefore of civil government is
justice, which has in it self the greatest and most apparaunt show of virtue.
The admiration whereof did in the beginning so greatly excite, and stir up
the minds of men, that they surrendered their goods and possessions, into the
hands of some especial peers, whom above all other they did honor and
reverence. For thus, when we treat of virtue, we use to dispute. The time has
bin when men like barbarians have lived in woods, open fields, and desolate
places, without politic rule, and civil government: neither embracinge
religion nor by mutual love and duty showing their humanity. Nothing was done
in those days, by due order of reason and discipline but most matters were
executed violently, whereas frantique and furious headines had the upper hand.
When then robberies were rife, murders infinite, and those who in force and
sturdines passed other, would afflict and trouble injuriously the weaker sort,
and their whole life compassed with innumerable mischiefs, all they which had
received the greater and more grievous iniuryes besought the assistaunce of
some one man in wit and policy exceeding other, whom they perceived to be
unto the rest as it were a lantern of Justice, a myrroure of myldnes and
courtesy. This Patron and supporter of right, when he had taken on him the
charge of those seely souls miserably and suppliantly yelding themselves, and
declared unto them the earnest desire he had to take away pillages and
robberies, and to repress violent murders, and valiantly to reueng wrongful
oppressions, and to sincke under like laws both the mighty men and simplet
sort: it came to pass that as many as tenderd their peculiar liberty, and
sought their own security and quietness, supposed him to be the defense and
bulwark of their safety and prosperous estate, whose fame most flourished for
justice and equity. From this fountain therefore and head spring of justice,
issued out the power and auctority of Kings, and the prerogative of princely
government: herehence proceeded the high degree of Nobility: herehence
soueraingtie and the cause of all renown and glory was derived: so that there
is no one stock more aunciente or more excellent, then the petegree of
Kings, which through their own virtue and valiauntnes abandoned al barbarous
cruelty, reducing the people to good order and civility. Whose most divine
nature Hesiodus having in great admiration, in his Book entitled the
Genealogy of the Gods, fetches the live and descent of Princes, from Jupiter
himself. Which opinion and judgment of his, has been also received of many,
in so much that they did most certainly surmise, that he could not but
descend from the Gods, which most of all other excelled in virtue. For it is
reported that AEacus, Minos and Rhadamanthus, were judged to be the sons of
Jupiter, they were so much of all men for their justice magnifyed: who as the
Poets do feign are said to appointe laws to the infernal spirits. So much
did antiquity, yea even among the devils and hellishe hounds believe, yt
severity of Laws and force of justice was expedient and necessary to
restrain the unbridled desires of a disordered multitude. Pittacus of Mytilene
was through his perfect skill and experience in justice, advanced to the high
estate of a ruler. Which thing also befell to Numa Po^pilius being at Rome,
for by upright dealing and supportinge of justice, he was thought and
proclaimed by the whole consent of the Romans worthily to succeed Romulus in
the state of royal majesty. What needs me here to speak of Lycurgus, Draco,
and Solon, that I omit in mean while to make any mention of Mercury,
Phoroneus, and diverse other, who have been long time before, which have
wrought the safegarde and preservation of their Citizens, by prescribinge laws
and ordinances, and have thereby been advanced to great honor, and have
purchased to their posterity perpetual fame and memory. Therefore to persuade
our selves that no one virtue deserves the like pre-eminence, either is a like
to be honored, it is hereby to be seen, that each kind of virtue being
void of Justice has lost his honor and estimation, whereas Justice alone,
secluded from other virtues, reteineth still his especial grace and dignity.
For proof whereof I might allege a number of examples, but because I mean to
use breuity, I will stand only upon two. Aratus of Sicyon although him self
held no Empire, yet through commendation of Justice got such renoume that by
the judgment of al men he might be compared with the chiefest of all that ever
reigned or ruled. He in his life time was ever pressed to wage battle against
tyrants and wicked and disordered Citizens, neither refused he in the defense
of the laws of his Cittye at any time to venture his life. Aristides who was
also long before the time of Aratus, was so highely esteemed and honored for
his preservation of Justice, that Themistocles, though famous for his valiant
Acts, was never more highly reverenced then he. Whereby it is evident and
plain that there is no way more certain then this, to enlarge our honor and
glory: Or no way ye more readilye commends our posterity to famous memory.

NExt and immediately after Justice, a valiaunte courage, which consists in
dangerous attemptes, is lifted up right worthily to the highest step of
honor and dignity. For it is a matter of no small importance so little to
esteem of life as to bestow it willingely and cherefully for the safegarde
and preservation of all men, and to refuse or fear for the wealth of our
country no danger or terror of the enemy. Wherefore almost every man which
is inflamed with the love of glory, and desires greatly renomne, does employ
his labor most earnestly to the study of chiualry and martial affairs. For
the records and ordenaunces of antiquity do plainly and manifestly show,
that there has been no glory so great, no renomne so honorable in any well
governed commonwealth, as that which has been attributed to valiauntnes and
fortitude: Of purpose to provoke and prick forewardes each manly wight
willingely to take weapon in hand and to repel the injury and force of the
enemy. On the other side there were for dastardes even by very good
ordinances most bitter tau^tes and reproaches most justly appoincted. There
was in old time among the Macedonians a law ordained, that he who had not
in fight of battle overcame one, should in the sight of all men be trust up
with a halter. The Scythians at their sacred and solemn feasts, would not
have any man touch a golden cup, that was carried about, which had not in
battle showed some sign of a warlike and valiant courage. To none of the
Amazones was granted liberty to marry, except she had in war valiauntly
vanquished an enemy. Solon also made this decree, that their children, whose
fathers had lost their lives fightinge in the defense of their commonwealth,
should be brought up at the charge of the common treasurye. Which was most
wisely used and practiced in many other great and famous Cities. For most
wisely was it thought of Solon, the wisest of the Grecians, that the security
and preservation of a common wealth did consist in prefermente, and punishment.
For by this, wicked and desperate persons are restrained, and by the other
noble natures and flourishing wits are more vehemently stirred up, to the
embracinge of virtue, and honesty. It has been the refore by divine providence
established of our forefathers yt in what kind of men so ever this virtue
eminently appeared, the same should be with many worthy and noble ensigns and
titles honored: one the other side, want of courage, and dastardlines should
be after the shamefullest manner as might be taunted, and reviled. Therefore
whereas this was by law ordained, they seemed to have been of this mind and
opynion, that all men which were endued with a more excellent nature and Noble
mind, might be stirred up to the worthiness of renomne and glory: again
hereby they purposed to disgrace cowardes and white lyuered men, yea albeit
they were by birth honorable and of a noble line. But what should I speak of
the Romans? For can any man be able to recite so many images of men of arms?
So many garlandes either given to them that first f^aled the walls, or first
entered their enemies Tentis, or to them yt by main force saved the life of
some citizen, or to the^ that triumphed over their enemies? Is any man able to
recoumpt so many ensigns of virtue, so many prices of praise, as to prowes
and puissaunce were by the the Roman laws assigned? Therefore it is the
less to be meruailed at, if that City grew to her great, and large in
Empire, wherein prowes and valiantnes was so well and honorable rewarded, that
not only noble men, but also very many of the people were so inflamed with
desire of renomne, that they in defense of their country never refused to
venture both limbs, and life. And that I may of a great and inf^nite number
call a few to memory, the two Decij by race and birth no gentlemen, yet for
their rare and singular fortitude they aspired in the commonwealth to the
highest degree of honor and dygnity: And in the end in the defense of their
country consecrated themselves, as valiant and vo^^d vessels to glory and
immortality. Lucius Martius even he which in Spain recovered the Roman
Empire, then sore shaken and fallen ^owne to the ground, was borne of simple
and poor parentage, yet through puissaunce obtained in his country great
honor and a principal dignity. What should I recite Mar: Portius Cato, a man
much commended for his wisdom and pollice? To what end should I speak of
Marcus Marcellus, who first gave Annibal the overthrow, and showed plainly
that the way to overcome was by prowes and valiantnes? Again why should I omit
Marius that worthy wight, and a thousand (...) being no gentle men borne,
which notwithstanding: through their passinge skill and experience in feats
of arms, were advanced to honor, and promoted to high estate, leaninge to
their posterity fame and immortality. Here hence the arms and cognizances of
honor and noblenes, which even in these our days are borne, and had right
worthily in great honor and estimation, did fetch their original, and first
beginning. For when any man had in battle showed some notable poyncte of a
good and valiant soldier, he was by the General made a gentleman, and had
some badge or token thereof assigned unto him, whereby his blood might be
enobled, through the praise and glory whereof his ofspringe might be in like
manner pricked with the desire of fame and commendation. Therefore some have in
their scochin so many Castle l^es engraven, as were by them in war won and
vanquished, other some Ringes, or Bands, or any other thing for the number of
enemies, which they had in some doutfull and dangerous battle subdued. Other
have in their scochyns stars signifiynge percase that they brought light
and comfort to the miserable afflycted estate of their country, other some
have other Cognizaunces representinge puissance mannehoode, and valyauntnes.
All these things we have alleged to this end, and purpose that we may
understand plainly that fortitude opens the way to worship and brings us
to the beholding of the exceeding bright, and clear nature of true nobilitye.

Many also through their liberalitye and francke magnificence, have as it were
laid worthy fundations of honor and nobility: as by giving largely and
byndinge unto them their neighbors and Cityzens, by bestowinge on them
bountifullye, most ample rewards and great benefytes. By this only way
Tarquyne of ancient memory, being a banished and obscure man, won great
fame and honor in Rome, and at length obtained there the auctority of a King.
By this kind of courteous dealing Pelops long before his time, being a mere
stranger and barbarian, came to bear rule in that part of Greece wc he alluding
to his own name called Peloponesus. And that I may show you an history of
later time Cosmus Medices and Laurence his nephewe weere so much for their
liberal and francke natures commended, that they thereby were made chief
gouernoures of Florence and were in all nations besides excedingelye magnifyed.
Neither truly is their any virtue which does more become a noble mind, or
sets for the more a worthy wight, either that wins more praise and
commendation, and gets more goodwill, love and reverence: without which no
man may maintain his own estate, or attain to live in any worshipful
calling. And this seems to be their drift who by distinction say, nobilitye
is a noblenes of birth and parentage joined with abundance and store of
riches. For whereas the virtue of magnificence and liberalitye is chieflye seen
in noble men) for most part of them are above other found most curtious
and liberal and no man may be therefore commended, except he be furnished with
worldly substance, most learned and wise men have though treasuer it self and
the abundance of riches to be the very ground and foundatyon of lyberalytye,
and therefore as terms necessary to be included wyth^e in ye defynition of
true nobilitye. Whether the force and true nature thereof, be fully therein
declared, it is a thing whereon I mean not to stand, so that by that
definition this may be granted, that the virtue of liberalitye to the
enhauncinge of men to honor and dignitye and the setting forth of their
posteritye is most expediente and necessary

Many not of our time only but also of aunciente memory has both
through the excellencye of eloquence, and their perfect knowledge of the
civil Law, atayned wonderful fame and glory. For these sciences are right
worthily reckoned among those, that have been not without great cause
accounted the principallest stay in the common wealth, without which ye estate
of Policy, and the safegarde of common societye, may in no wise long
continewe. For to no purpose and in vain do we abroad bid battle to the
enemies, except our affairs at home be governed by the sound advise of
prudent counselors. Besides those who^ we have already spoken of, many are
made gentlemen either through the grace and favor of the Prince, or through
the common consent of a free Cittye. But this kind of promotion seems at the
first show, not to be agreeable either to truethe, or to the right and
perfect nature of true nobility. For nobilitye either rests upon opinion of
men or is obtained by virtue, and the qualityes, of the mind: either
consists in nature and is derived from puisance and valiantnes. Wise and
grave me^ have always made little accoumpt of wavering opynion and the
inconstancy of peoples Fantasy, But the comme^dation of virtue rests
especyally in our selves, neither can by any means be borrowed abroad. Again
the force of gentle blood deryued from our ancestors, and apperteyninge to us
by natural desce^t, cannot be wrested hither and thither, by the jurisdiction
and auctoritye of Princes. For no easyer matter is it for any man by the
assignement and benefit of Princes to become of baseborn a gentleman by birth
then to be suddenly changed from a fool, to a wyseman, from on that wants
utterance, to an eloquente orator, from a whyteliuered and fayntharted cowarde,
to a venturous and valiant champion. Which also in bestowing the freedom of a
City may be evidently known and considered. For if he (as many suppose) be
taken and termed a Citizen which is bred and borne in a city: no reason is,
why into a City should be received an alian and stranger. Thence it proceeded
that Gorgias Leontinus skoffing at the rulers of Larissa, because they had
received into their City many strangers, was wont to say that even as
plastereres of any kind of stuff, would make mortar, or any thing of like
sort: so there were some so cunning craftesmen in Larissa which of any kind
of people were able to make Cityzens to inhabit Larissa. But I for my part do
neither like of Gorgias his oppynio^, nor of any other men's judgment which in
like manner would stay the cause of aduauncing subectes through the kings and
Princes most gracious favor, and clemency. For whereas all men which are of a
more haughty mind and so^^y stomache, are merueylously inflamed with the
desire of virtue, honor, and renoune: if then you would frustrate the hope and
expectation imprinted in men's minds of promotion, no doubt you shall make men
slacklye, and sclenderlye endeavor to become puissant and venturous, whose
mynds should rather be inflamed and set on fire. Then the which nothing can
be devised more hurtful to civil government and disciplyne. For this has
been the purposed meaning of Laws and ordinances, and all well governed
common wealths ought to have in them this practysed and published, that men
desirous to show their valiant hearts by dangerous attemptes, albeeit they are
of their own nature apt to defend the rights and lybertyes of the common
wealth, yet notwithstanding, they should stir them thereunto, through an
earnest and ardente desire of fame and glory. For by this means the wealth of
their country is most strongely defended, and the indifferency of Laws and
ordinances best maynteyned. For what fowler shame, what greater dishonor can
there be imagined then to have in the common wealth appointed unto famous men,
for their exceeding great and worthy exploytes, no reward at all? Either what
reward may in any one point fully aunsweere and satisfy a noble mind, then to
be received triumphantly of the people? Furthermore what is in it self more
princely and more glorious, then to give unto virtue his due desert, and to
yield to worthiness, honorable titles, and to true nobilite the principallity?
that justice might not only by this means be happily kept and preserved, but
also many thereby moughte be allured to bend themselves to the study of vereue.
For it is not in the power of the Prince (that now I may answer that which
might be objected before) to bring to pass that a bile and abiecte mind
should be noble and honorable, which comes not by grace and favor, but
proceadinge from nature, is fully made and perfected by ye exercises of most
worthy and lawdable sciences. And yet a Prince may adourne and set forth
excedingly a noble and invincible mind with worthy and honorable titles.
Which thing is not only right good and expedient, but also so requisite and
necessary, yt in the performing thereof there seems to rest the safete and
security of the commonwealths estate. To approve this my opinion I could use
the authority of most excellent men, and most skillful in the government of a
common wealth, but I will allege only Plato, in whom, in his third book
entreating of a common wealth Socrates by a certain fable, wherein many armed
men were feined, to arise out of the earth, persuaded the Cityzens to mutual
love and concord. And then immediately proceeds in his talk in this manner.
Give ear (quoth he) to the rest of the fable. All ye that live in one City
are brothers, being straightly linked, and united together. But yet when God
created you, he gave not to every one, the same property, and virtue. For they
that were most meet to rule, were tempered with gould: Again those who in the
defense of their country would valiauntly assist the Peers of the realm,
he mingled with silver: And upon such as applied them selves to tillage and
other base occupations, he bestowed brass, and Iron. So it falls out yt you
that have like beginninges commonly engendre children like to your selves.
Notwithstanding many times t^ happens, that a golden father has a child of
silver, sometimes a silver father a golden child. Which thing in like manner
is in the other kinds experienced. God therefore commands that Princes
themselves should have such an ^speciall regard to search and inquire, with
what metal their childrens minds are tempered, that they should take heed
to no one thing more diligently then that. So that if they found any Brass
or Iron in their childrens senses, they should not be by folish pity hindered
to assign them a trade conuenyent and agreeable to their gross and rude
nature: In so much they should make the^ handicraftesmen, or clounes of the
country. But if they find in them any gold and sil^er, they should bestow on
them honorable rooms and vocations: in so mutch that some they should
assign to ye g^uerenme^t and ruling of Cities, some other they should
appoyncte to aid and assiste them, and train them up in the knowledge of
m^rtial affairs. And that they should bear always this in mind, that this
was long since foresheewen by an oracle, that then the commonwealth should
be utterly wasted and destroyed, when Iron and Brass did guide the stearne.
Plato in the person of Socrates disputes in this manner, of the office and
duty of a king. Who in all he has said, utters great wisdom, but this
latter part proceeds no doubt from a more deep, and divine consideration:
Which is, that all commonwealthes shall fall to utter ruin and decay, where
Brass and Iron, that is, where a gross and dull wit, destitute of judgment
and wisdom bears the chiefest sway in the commonwealth. And therefore he
has thought it expediente and profitable, that such as excelled the rest in
wit, industry, and experience should be called from the carte, to the Court,
from their private places, to govern the weal public. Again such as were
honorably borne, if they did degenerate, should be disgraced utterly, and
reputed as part of the people. And he thought this ordinance to be of such
force, for the maintenance of a commonwealth, that he would have it kept with
all reverence of all men, but especially of Princes, as a law made and
ordained by God, for the establishment and preservation of common society.
Which if it be true that the worthiness and excellency of virtue is to be
magnified i^ as ample manner as any wit is able to devise, that Princ^ that will
give ear to Socrates, must decree that those me^ must be forced to husbandry
and tillage, which repine a^ the promotion of those, in whom virtue
abundantly appears. For if the honor, safty, and security of any common
wealth is through virtue both preserved, and ampl^fied, undoubtedly he which is
an enemy to virtue, both decays the wealth of the country, and impaireth the
honor belonginge to the city, or place where he dwells* Therefore to
return to our former purpose, a Prince can not bring to pass, that a base
and abject mind should aspire to glory purchased by matters of greatest
importance. Notwithstanding he may to a noble and valiant courage yield
honor, by him duly deserved. Therefore a King does not in any one poyncte so
mutche make a gentleman, as cause a noble gentlemanlike nature, and a passinge
valiauntnes of mind, through his bountefulnes and courtesy to be famous and
honorable. Therefore when any man has by some great exployt shown his
courageous and valiant heart, and when deserts and merits go before, then
the Prince deapely pouderinge his approved prowes and manlynes, gives to him
some title of honor and dignity. Otherwise that shall in no wise be demed true
and perfect nobility, but a counterfayt show of nobility finely colored,
one^y confirmed by opinion, and inconstancy of peoples fantasy.

THerefore whereas it is clear and evident, that any stock and familye is
ennobled and made honorable by commendation of courtesy, and liberalitye, and
also by the knowleadge of such sciences, as has been in all florishinge
commonwealthes had in great honor and estimation: It will easily appear by
what kind of vice the worthynes of blood and parentage, is utterly extinct
and disparaged. Truly by these which are opposite and contrary to the virtues
a fore recited. For although (as it was before declared) it happeeneth often
times that they that come of an honest stock have no small aptnes, and
disposition to virtue, yet sometime it salleth out, and more often truly then
it is behouefull for the good estate and condition of men, that either the most
virtuous and noblest men's sons degenerate: Or to speak the least, that good
inclination that is ingraffed in their Noble minds, by the hurt, and
infection they take in lewd and euel company does perish, and is steined
with all kind of dissolute behavior. Therefore when any one is of vile
condition, and invreth him self to so loose a life that he makes no account
of virtue and honesty: he does as it it were cast him self into a dongeon of
darkness, and as mutch as in him lies, steineth his blood, and utterly
disgraceth the nobility of his auncestry. For like as many has been through
equity and Justice advanced to great honor, even so injurious invasions,
oppressions, cursed speakinges, and cruelty has been the overthrow of many
great gentlemen, and honorable Peers, whereof the wretched ends almost of
all cruel tyrants, may give sufficient testimony. For not only they were
bereued of their lives and dignities, but they all that were joined unto them by
blood and consanguinity: In so mutch that the greater part of them died the
like death, and the rest beeinge spoiled of their goods and possessions,
escaped death by banishment, yet sclaunder and shameful obliquie they could not
avoid. And that I may in this place let to speak of Phalaris the most
boucherliest bloudsucker, and cruellest tyrante that ever was, against whom
rebelled the whole multitude of the City Agrigentum, that I also pass over
all other with silence whose manners were infected with the like barbarous
cruelty: Truly all the blood and race of Pisistratus lost by this only way
their government and principality. For Armodius and Aristogiton attempted that
so great and notable an enterprice, not so mutch to redeem their country from
tyranny as to be revenged of a notorious injury. For when the son of
Pisistratus, could neither by his sweet, and sugared entisementes, nor by his
large, and fair promises, allure Armodius, being a passinge five, and proper
young gentleman, on whom he extremely doted in love, to sarisefye his more then
beastly appetite: he devised with him self how he might be revenged of so
proud, and scornful refusal. In mean season, ye day came when at Athens
there should be solemnised a great festival day, wherein certain virgins
piked out for the purpose, should carrye upon their heads after the manner
and facion of the country certain things of great holiness, contained in
fine Wicker baskettes. Hipparchus thinkinge that now he might have fit
occasion to wreak his malice on Armodius, procured his sister to be one of
that company. Afterward when this solemn show was setting forth Hipparchus
removed ye sister of Armodius, as if she were unworthy of ye place, that it
might be known to al men, that she was not for any other purpose appointed in
that room, but only that she by her displacinge might receive an open
rebuke, and grievous contumely, which boiled in his breast against her
brother Armodius. But this was no small dishoner among ye Athenians which thing
being taken very displeasauntly by Armodius he brake his mind to Aristogiton
his louinge and trustye frynde, and to other also, and conspired against
Hippias Hipparchus his elder brother, whithe was then their king and
governor, and flewe Hipparchus him self. Although this conspyracie took not
effect then presently, yet it anymated and stirred up the Athenians, in so
much not long after Hippias lost the kingdom, and they were restored to
their former lybertye. What should I speak of the Tarquines? were not they for
ye self same cause banished Rome, because they dealte nothing by right but
wrought all by vyolence, extremity, and crueltye. And therefore whereas Sextus
Tarquinius following the soul and abominable steps and wickedness of his
father, had after many iniuryes wherewith he had wronged the Romans, by force
committed with chaste Lucrece a ruthful rape, he lived with his father, and
brethren, as an outcast in a strange country. After the same manner Dionisius
the later, when he was for his abominable life banished Siracusa, through the
virtue and justice first of Dion then of Timoleon lived at Corinth with great
shame, and no le^^e misery. So there are a number besides that have through
their leude life and dishonest demeanoure, lost their honor and their Empire
withal, gotten of their ancestors through great virtue and thereby have cast
a cloud of Darkness over al their posteritye. I will not any longer stay in
this matter, whereas nothing is so plain and euidente as that the heinous
blott, and crime of Injustice makes the whole kindred obscure, ville, and of no
reputaio^. Furthermore, what thing is more detestable and dishotnourable then
dastardly fear? what thing more absurd, and unsitting with the nature of a
gentleman? what thing I pray you proves so much a wretch and a dastarde, as
that any man should so fear that he should step aside from constancy, or
forget his estate and dignity, nor have his mind so well settled, that he shall
seem to have a stayed advise and judgment? I shall not need to prove this by
many examples, whereas it does appear sufficientlye that the honor of many
nations through fear and inconstancy, has been wrested out of their
hands. And to what purpose should I declare the foul and unseemly vice of
avarice, and other great blottes and inormityes of the mind? through the
which many right honorable and of high degree procure to themselves perpetual
shame and infamye: and so shake and overthrow the worthiness of their stock and
kindred that they seem to be desirous of nothing so much as to be made mates
and companions of the vilest raskalles that may be. Whereas it is therefore
manifest that nobilitye does both rise and fall, and is much subject to
mutabilitie, truly as they deserve with praise to be lifted up even to the
skies, through whose virtue, glory and renomne to the whole racei^ purchased,
eue^ so are they right worthy of the hatred and indignation of all men, by
whose blotte and shame so great honor and worthiness is extinguished: for as
much as they could neither through their good inclinations, neither by the
laudable example of their ancestors, be stirred up to the love of virtue,
being as it were wrapped within ye bands of shame and volupte. Wherefore the
folly of certain is to be pityed (if compassion may be hadd on pride and
folly) who whereas they are not famous for commendatio^ of wit, and have
never in their life deserved any thing, and have never to any fruit or
commodity born the estates of noble personages: yet they so flatter themse^lues
with the bare name of nobility, as though they descended from Heaven above. I
say they are greatly to be lamented, and their case is pitiful, who think
them selves so happy and fortunate, when they are vexed with so many
miseryes of the mind, and some times of the body also. But it is a world to
see their intolerable insolency, and then especially when they are in the
Palaces of Princes. There servants, some go before, some in a great train
follow, they themselves in their gate use a certain number much like as if
they did move by meausre. But when they are let in of the porters, and that
they cry round about, room for the noble men, then think they themselves
more happy, then ca^ne by words be uttered. No man is ignorante, what a
solemn matter it is made if any one of them, that take themselves great
worthies, and not so borne, but I ween made of some of ye Gods, happen
familiarly to go in company with some one no gentleman borne, they cry out,
all the solempnitye is defaced, and the sacred order of nobilitye is violated
and utterly decaid. Why should not I (says he) stand on my pantable and
delight in my self being borne as I am of a noble house? why have you not then
a mind worthy that noble race from whence you come? thou have through thy
beastly life, and overmuch licentiousnes steined the honor of they
ancestors, which they through virtue wo^ne. They were advanced to an high and
^cr^^table place in the common wealth, for that they excelled in valiantes of
the mind, integrity of life, liberalitye and bountifulnes: i^ o^ ^n ye other
side, through thy cowardlin^s, thy vicious and filthy life, through thy
slendernes of skill and knowledge in every matter have made thy self equal with
ye people. To conclude therefore what is in thee, wherein we may perceive any
show and resemblance of aunciente nobilitye: Sir (says he) whatsoever your
make of me, I am a ge^tlema^ borne. Did thou never understand, thou
ignorant and peuishe person, that any stock or lineage is set forth and
beutified by virtue, and virtue not beutified and set forth by lineage, and that
all nobilitye proceeds from the excellency of virtue and honestye? but what
thing is more vain, then the bare and naked name of nobilitye, if you take
away the ornamente of virtue, and the fruit that is reaped of true glory? but
though virtue be separated from worthiness of birth, notwithstanding there is
nothing in the whole life of man mor excellent, nothing better to maynteyne
common societye, nothing more co^sona^t and agreeable to nature which is
always of it self most amiable and beutiful, and wheresoever it is placed
remains co^stante, nor at any time can lose his worthiness and dignity. But I
pray you let us understand how this gentleman by name only would bestirre
himself if his country were in great danger of the enemy, or afflicted
cruelly with civil dissension. In this cause valiantnes and pollecie
preuaylethe, and not ye vain ostentation of cognizance and arms. I am sure,
you must of force yield and give place to gentlemanshippe latelye made, which
you so much disdayn, if with long experience in common affairs and singular
virtues, you se it defended and underpropped. Nay says he I will maintain the
same countenance honor, and estimation, wherein my ancestors lived with great
fame and commendation, and let these vpstartes keep their own houses and aplye
themselves to those occuptions which their parents professed, and their
fathers before them followed. Assuredly you have spoken full wyselye and
pleasau^tly. Your meani^g is yt we should in a te^pestuous and perilous time,
and when ye estate of the common wealth is dau^gerously assaulted, follow the
folly of certain ge^tleme^ delighting always in Feathers and feasti^gs, and
neglect ye advise and counsel of right worthy and valiaunte men. But I could
wish you were persuaded of this opinion, that you do a great and wonderful
reproach to your ancestors, from whom has descended to you, this so great a
show of honor and Nobility. For truly he that was first rayser of your
royalty, and the chiefest cause that you are in this estate and countenance,
was an vpstarte and new made gentleman. Therefore whereas you in this manner
taunt and revile them which are most like to your predecessors, and do
disdainfully rippe up those reproaches against them, which may be turned
back upon your own friends, you do not only bring that to pass ye through
your shameful behavior you stain and deminishe the praise of your
ancestors, but also ungratefully and most unkindly you demean your self,
whilste that with scorneful speeches you debase and extenuate the worthy
renown of them, of whom you first received this outward show of honor and
dignity. But I will omit to speak any more of those lusty and lofty
gentlemen, who having nothing in them worthy of praise and honor, stands so
much upon their worship and gentilitie: to whom fitly may be applied that
saying of Dionisiodorus of Trezene in Greece, who oftentimes was wont to
utter this sentence of great efficacy. Who braggeth so much of their line and
petegree, as a foolish and untoward progeny. Notwithstanding I would have
the greatest reverence and duty that may be, given to true Nobility, which is
through the excellency of virtue advanced to high degree, which also in
virtue reposeth the chiefest stay and only felicity. Again I could wish
that those who so coldly follow the steps of their ancestors, and play
the parts of gentlemen foolishly, should be plucte down the stage, and as
they are most worthy, to be hissed, and skoffed at of all the company.

AFter that I have reproved their brainsicke dealinge, who utter bitter and
contumelious taunts against such, as are of late through their wisdom and
virtue preferred to the estate of gentlemen, they themselves notwtstanding
being defiled with all kind of wickedness, now it remains to be called in
question, whether of them are to be preferred, or more commended of all men.
They, who have through their virtue and honesty purchased to themselves great
renown, praise, and commendation, being stirred thereunto by no example of
their ancestors: or they, who do earnestly follow and embrace those virtues,
which chiefly shined, and were highly commended in their forefathers. For it is
a doubtful and perplexed question, and probable truly on either side, in so
much that either of them may be defended by argument. For the new made
gentleman may defend his cause arguing in this manner. I have applied my mind
to the love of virtue, I have bin inflamed with the desire of renown, not
stirred thereunto through the example of my forefathers, or provoked by the fame
and glory of any auncestour. Again, I have atchiued to the place of dignity,
not by the help and furtherance of any other, but by mine own industry. I
have advanced to honor my name and blood, which was before obscure and little
reckoned of, and I have given an example and light to my posterity. But you
sir, who are descended of an honorable line, and came of a right gentleman's
house, have had great furtherau^ce to ye attayni^g of renown and glory. First
examples at home pricked the forward, so did that countenance and estate that
thy ancestors had: then thy education and trayninge up gentlemanlike, last of
all the expectation of men, which joined together forced the as it were by
necessity to embrace virtue. Neither is the comme^dation so great which you
have gotten through the imitation and following the acts of your ancestors,
as the reproach and rebuke would have bin, if you had not manfully endeavored
to be like unto them in glory and renown, which were of your own house and
kindred. Therefore you have done nothing with praise and commendation, whereas
you were thereunto brought and forced by necessity. On the other side, I had by
no means stained my blood, if I had remained base and obscure, especially
whereas I wanted all those helps and ordinary means, wherewith you were
greatly furthered to the attayning whatsoever you took in hand. Whereas
therefore I being urged with no necessity, but allured with sincere love of
virtue, disposed my mind to do things of great importance, soundinge to my
great credit and honor, and that I performed with no small praise and
commendation, being hindered, and as it were intrapped with many lettes and
impediments: and I passed through the pikes of envy, which is a common enemy
to them that raise themselves to honor, through my honest and virtuous usage:
I see no cause at all why I should give place to aunciente Nobility. And this
is the language of a lately spronge gentleman. But what on the other side says
the gentleman borne? Will thou then contrary to all law and equity
dispossess me, of praise and commendation, which in so many ages of men has
bin confirmed? Do thou well perceive and consider that the inheritance of
yt worthy renown, which my ancestors obtained does no less belong and
apperteine to me, then ye ma^ners, ye lordships, the farms* and the residue of
their te^porall goods, which to me as the true heir, has fallen by law?
what should the^ hi^der me, why I should not account ye fruit and benefit of
this dignity and worthiness among mine own proper goods? and that I should
with all earnest en^euour keep possession thereof? That if the case so stand,
now thou see, how many and sundry times this inheritance of praise has bin
increased before it came to me. For as often as it has happened that any one
of my stock and progeny brought to happy end any worthy exploite, so
often know thou well that this portion of praise and inheritance of honor,
was increased and amplifyed. Therefore I may challenge unto my self as mine
own right all the valiau^t acts of my predecessors, for as much as tracing
their footesteppes I earnestly bent by self to be like unto any of my
ancestors in those things which tended to fame and glory. Thou art
therefore to be commended only for thine own virtue, I am not only through
mine own industry to be honored, but also to be preferred for the puissaunce
and magnanimity wherein my forefathers excelled. But concerning domestical
glory, in that you say gentlemen are necessarilye stirred and forced to the
attayning of virtue, nay truly we see very many contented with the honor
attained by their parents, and there to rest seeking no further, because they
account it sufficient to enjoy praise and commendation gotten by other men's
travail. Whose purpose and intent although I mislike, yet this I set down as
a clear ground, that noble men are stirred up by no means so much to worthy
attemptes, as by hautines of mind, and loftines of courage. These arguments,
and many more may be brought to confirm either opinion: so that it is a matter
very difficulte to judge, whether should be preferred before other, if their
virtues in equality match each other. For if we compare honesties, and examine
and wayghe their virtues in fit and equal balances, his virtue seems to
deserve greater admiracion, which first by his own means grew to some estate
and countenance, creepinge out of a bie corner and obscure family. But if
there be somewhat to be given and attributed to men departed, and their
memory, who have well deserved of the common wealth, as reason requires and
laws command, be after their death to be kept with all heedeful care and
diligence: they who following the examples of their ancestors, and are
wonderfully bent to excel other in prowes and manlines, are before the other
and not without good cause preferred. For not only their own industrious
travail, but their predecessors good demerits are to be pondered. This is
therefore a doubtful controversy, which I leave to be decided of other. To
me it is sufficient, to have declared, which may perhaps seem without my
discourse most manifest and euidente, that the noblenes of birthe, and the
worthy estimation of any stooke and familye, issues from the clear fountain
and welspringe of Virtue.

THE FIRST BOOK of Hieronimus Osorius entreating of true Nobility, to them
only incidente, that profess the faith, and true Religion of Christ.
I Was right sure (Lewis most mighty and victorious Prince) when I had fully
appointed to publishe and put in writing these my inventions, that it might
be, that this my travail would highly offend the learned. For some men will
judge me over bold and presumptuous, that I do descriue or handle a matter of
so great valewe and importance, as the like men of excellent learning and
iudgeme^te has hitherunto scarcely taken in hand or enterprised: and it will be
no less offense and grief unto other, that I shall not in any point, neither
for the majesty of matter, neither for the excellency of philed phrase, and
gorgeousnes of style, be able to deck and beautifye an argument in his Nature
both high and stately. To conclude, some find in me the lack of experience,
other require a finer head, other could wish more ripenes of understanding.
Whom I will briefly shape an answer, before I enter into the discussing of
any question. Truly for my own part, although I was never so far in love
with my self, or so pricked with the desire of praise, that I have challenged
any commendation, for that I have by wit compassed, or through the
excellency of any learning achieved: yet I thought it the part and property
of a noble natured young man, earnestly bent to the study of most worthy
knowledges, not to rest contented with things of mean account, but desirously
to pursue and hunt after the highest matters, and those which are entangled
with greateste difficulty. For no man ought to think it impossible to be the
best learned, and to attain the second place, to them only it is granted,
which with a jolly stomach, and lofty mind, purpose to be peerless. For
this lesson we learn by an old Proverb. The short shooter never hitteth the
marcke. For if men might enterprice no kind of study, but that which they
deemed might with small labor be obtained, I think no man at any time should
have bin but meanly learned, much less endued with the perfection of
knowledge. For, neither do I thinck Plato himself, when first he set his hand
to paper, to have thought his labor should have had such happy success, as
afterward he got through great practice, and daily exercise. Neither
Demosthenes in his first entry, had any such confidence in his wit and
learning, that he thought, he should afterward excel Pericles. Neither
Cicero, when he first applied his mind to the study of Rhetoric was of this
opinion, yt he thought he should be a father of eloquence, a light of
learning, and such a one which for the grace and wonderful gift of Oratorie,
might triumph as one that had won the victory. But when they were stirred up
by the instincte of an excellent nature and noble mind, that they should
attempt studies more great, then were at that time agreeable to their reach and
capacity, they got by this mean to be exquisitely learned, and attained
thereby the highest and principal point of knowledge. And what may be said
of those to whom is granted but a mean measure of learning? Could they (I
pray you) have retained that place, except they had hardily presumed to follow
and trace the steps of them, which in learning were of deepest judgment?
Otherwise truly it would not have bin so well with us, that we could attain so
easily knowledge of us desiered, or so happily discharge things of us
attempted. Wherefore it stands greatly upon all such which are as it were
through love, enamoured with the excellency of any one science, not only to
endeavor earnestlye for that which is chiefly desired, but also to centinue
their study further, yt they may with less pain, and labor be brought to
the attayning their intended purpose. Now therefore whereas it is diligently
discussed and tried out, that there is no man esteemed or reckoned of, except
he does endeavor with all study to attain things in their nature most
excellent and commendable, they are not to be aroused of boldness, which bestow
their labor in the search of high causes, nay rather their lithernes, and
vnmanlye courage is greatly to be reproved, who dare not venture to do the
like. Neither their talk withdraws me from writing, who peradventure do
look for any other kind of eloquence, then that, which the nature of the
argument will require, and the slendernes of my knowledge will permit me in this
dispute to follow. For if no matter should be discussed and entreated of, but
that which might be learnedly amplifyed, plentifully enlarged, and eloquently
declared, there should have bin no monument exta^t at all, of any such things
(which I say not) could be by any tongue uttered, no not by reason comprysed,
or by the imagination of man, but in part conceived. For there is no man endued
with that excellency of wit, and judgment, with that wonderful gift of
eloquence, that can dispute worthily or exactly speak of piety, true
religion, of the holy, hidden, and secret mysteries of Christianity, lastly
of the unspeakable Majesty, and omnipotency of God almighty, of which we
shall for the most part entreat. And truly there is no cause or reason, that
those should deserve the name of modest and discreet men, which are through
the greatness of any argument at the first discouraged, and therefore through
such conceit fayntinge, take rather in hand other matters, then such, which
should concern the worthiness and honor of Christian relligion: there is not
only reason why they should not purchase praise of modesty, but also why
they should justly incur the blame of impiety. And therefore al learned men
who have earnestly embraced true godliness and integrity of life, has fully
accorded in this opinion, that they have thought it an intolerable offense,
to bestow their study upon any other thing then that, which should set forth
the glory and dignity of true religyon, when notwithstanding they knew for a
certenty, that no man's eloquence, were it never so exceeding wonderful, could
effectuously declare so high knowledge, most ample matter importinge. They
have therefore wrote many books, whereof some are finely and curiouslye penned,
other in rude and barbarous Phrase, yet greatly to be had in estimation, for
the substance of profounde matter, and most fervent zeal of piety and
godlynes. Furthermore many of those writers have utterly despised all manner of
picked eloquence, and figures of Rhetorique, as triflinge and childishe toies,
and nothing confine or agreeable with the worthiness and dignity of Christian
religion. Wherefore we must the rather be contented if we do not perfect any
thing as we would, either may not attain that with we have long desired:
Whereas the examples of other excelle^tly well learned, may in this case satisfy
us, and also ye exceeding deapnes of knowledge may be unto us no small occasion
of let and impediment. Neither is it any whit impertine^t to forewarn you, that
such matter happens in handlinge holy write, in dyscussing whereof the
pureness of the latin speech is not observed: especially among such, which
bind them selves to no straight law, and had rather open the meaning of any
hard and obscure matter plainly although not so smoothly, as darckely and
elegantly. Neither doubt I at all, if any thing be set down of us in these
books improperly or grosely, which notwithstanding shall be avouched out of
holy scripture, that I shall thereby deserve reprehension, if men not
affectionate may judge therein. But I show herein my imperfection ( Lewis most
renoumed Prince) in that I do at all fear the censure of other, in these
things which on your majesty I bestow alone. For I do assure my self, that
your highness will take in good part these my doings (such as they are) more
for the great good will, which especially moved me to write, then for any skill
therein contained. And that I do so mutch presume, the excellency of your good
nature, the noblenes of your bou^tefull heart always to be remembered, does give
me no small occasion. For when I wrote unto you my book entitled of Nobility
established by civil policy, which was of me compiled nothing learnedly,
wherein no elegancy, or fine poinct of skill was showed, I found that my
goodwill and earnest desire was unto your grace acceptable, not only by the
plentiful rewards and great gifts abou^dantly on me bestowed, but also by
that which you spoke very honorably soundinge to my great praise and
commendation, which I in deed have more, then of any other, by a great deal
accounted of. For I assure you, though least of any thing I desire praise,
yet I was therewith moved with exceedinge joy, whereas I hold this as an
infallible truth, that the good opinion of a prince so great and virtuous, does
surmounte al titles of dignity which might redounde to man's glory. I have now
therefore compiled a new work, more ample, and of greater force, then that
which was in ye other two books disputed: principally moved thereunto through
an ardente and earnest zeal, which I bear unto godliness, then especial to
declare my diligence, and dutiful heart to your royal majesty. And albeit
they have one name, and bear the like inscription, yet the argument which we
at this present do handle, is far differinge from that, which was uttered,
in that our breife instruction. For we disputed there, how some linages
through a good disposition of nature, embraces virtue, which if it happily
grew, and by continual and daily practice come to perfection, it brings
forth that excellency of nature, which we call noblenes of birth. In which
discourse truly, when first after the manner and order of Logicians, we
defininge nobility, and deuidinge the same into certain parts, endeavored to
express and declare the force and nature thereof, then we spoke of the first
beginning and antiquitye thereof, not omitting whatsoever is in any old
monument reported of such, who has sustained any labor or peril, for the
love and true honor of virtue. Lastly whereas the estate of Nobility, (as of
all other things incidente and apperteyninge to the estate of man, is variable
and much subject to alteration, we have there taught, by what means honor is
obtained, and contrariwise, by what vices it is blemished and bereued of his
accustomed light and beautye. And the dryfte of all our disputation and
reasoninge was this, to make it known unto all men that nobility as upon a
chief Pyllour rests on virtue, and that the Pillour of virtue being shaken
and overthrown, nobilitye it self falls to the ground. But because all
that virtue whereof then especially we did entreat, although it have at the
first a great and glorious show, yet does it not reach unto that absolute
perfection of virtue that we would gladlye attain, but wholye consists in
the practice of Policy, rather by the opinion of men vpholde^ and aduau^ced,
then set forth through the true, clear, and divine light of perfect holiness, I
have thought good, the ground and beginning thereof more deeply considered,
by diligent study to search and trace out, what is the full force, and nature
of true and perfect virtue: that, that being considered, and manifestly
known, we might evidently behold the figure and image of that noblenes, whose
substance is pure, whose qualities perfect, whose figure most delicate and
exceedinge beautiful. For seeinge that noblenes of birth proceeds from
virtue, it stands with good reason, that we should take those to be the
worthiest and noblest houses, which has spronge of that co^sta^cie, and
inuiolate godliness, which is not through vain pomp, and glorious ostentation
ratified, but through sinceritye of good life, and vpholdinge justice,
generally allowed and confirmed. In this work therefore distinguishinge that
virtue which consists in opinion, from that which is true and perfect, we
purpose verily to describe the excellent qualities of that nobility, which by
the benefit and ordinance of Almighty God is given to them, that profess
Christianity. But forasmuch as virtue in his right nature may not be known,
except it be fully agreed upon, what is that sovereign good and chief
felicity, whereunto duringe our lives we direct all our devises and dooinges
(forasmutch as virtue is nothing else but a ready way guidinge us to the
chiefest and perfectest end of all those things, which possibly we can in
man's life desire:) therefore whereas the last end must be known, before we
may understand what virtue is: first of all we w^ll endeavor to declare, what
is that last end purposed to man, unto the which we are by nature ordained,
and from whence all honor and dignity has flowen, and wherein chiefly is put
the state of man's felicity. For we cannot so mutch as by imagination seclude
nobility from virtue, and except virtue work to some good end and purpose it
ought not to be called properly by that name: It remains therefore that
without the knowledge of man's felicity no kind of nobility can in any wise be
found or perceived. Furthermore whereas it is the property of a Noble mind
and excellent nature to clime higher, and to advance his mind to the
beholdinge of things in Heaven, and not regard the vain sheewe, of
transitory pleasures: it is apparent that he is most noble and worthiest of
honor, which desires some one thing most principal and excellent. Therefore
I am determined in this first book to declare what felicity, is also to tret
of ye estate and dignity of man, lastly of his decay, fall and great misery: yt
by this mea^s I may have occasion to declare unto what dignity and worthiness
he is restored, and what honor through Christianity he has attained. But
now I am insta^tly to beseech you (most renoumed Prince) that you will tender
these my doings with like gentleness and clemency as you have always most
graciously favored such which have born toward you a faithful and loial heart.
For I shall think my labor well and sufficiently rewarded, if I may understand
that this my good will was unto you acceptable offered in dilatyng this kind
of argument.

Wherefore that we may repete this matter from the beginning, it is manifest
that all men has fyxed before their eyes some certain mark or end, unto
which they direct their doings, and whatsoever is intended in this life. And
al men with one voice call this last end a life blessed, florishinge and
happy, deuoyde of all kind of misery, and abounding with all kind of
felicity. But where in this felicitye consists, there has been always among
mortal men a very great and a continual dissension, in so much the most
part of me^ has not accorded in one opynion. For such as every man's Fantasy
is, such an opinion touching the chiefest and sovereign good does he
embrace. For at the beginning they that gave themselves over wholly to carnal
and sensual delights, nether could with their eyes behold the most
excellent part of theymselues: they either in riches, or lustefull pleasures*
supposed that last desired end of man to be reposed. For some of them did
verily think that in abundance of all external commodities felicitye was
contained, and those commodityes which (only their understanding was able to
reach unto) by store of wealth they saw procured. Some other when they were not
able to conceive any greater delight, then that which with a sweet pleasure
moves the senses, supposed felicity to be replete with all kind of joy and
pleasure, and therefore did with all earnest endeavor seek to embrace the
pleasure of the body. But they which were afflicted with any grievous calamity,
either tormented and shaken with an incurable malady of the body or weer
vehementlye oppressed with adverse fortune, such placed the whole perfection
of blesed life and chief happiness in the sound and perfect health of the
body, and in such means as could rid and dispache them from all such
distress and misery. But the intolerable error, and exceedinge folly of
such seems rather with banninges and curses, then with words and arguments
to be refelled, as a thing more worthy of condemnation then confutation. For
who sees not their furious madness, who, since we consist of body and soul
only make accou^pt of one part of themselus, and that truly which is in
nature far inferior to the other, and that which is common to us with brute
and savage beasts: But the other part they do neglecte which is everlasting,
and has in it imprinted the figure and true Charecter of ye divine nature.
Again other there are (that we leave this abiecte and vile kind of people)
who being endued with more understanding, and conceiuinge much more of the
works of nature do covet with all care and industry to atchiue to the
titles of honor and dygnyty, for there is by nature engendered in us a certain
sparcle of excellency and noble courage kindling in us a desire of honor and
principality, which in those men that are of a princely mind does most
evidently appear and show it self. And yet these in this one point are much
deceived and greatly miss the mark, for they frame their life according to
the opinion of the unlearned people, and repose ye chief point of true praise
and commendation on the vain brute and estimation, of the foolish and rascal
multitude. Lastly they are greatly to be reproved for that they desire
pre-eminence and auctority, as the last reward of al their life. For that last
and sovereign good whereunto we should direct all our acts, ought to be
constante, certain, and permane^t, not variable britle and of small continuance,
neither such as the common people, shall determine, or confirm by their
sottish reason, and brutishe testimonye. Again by what reason may we deem
that the marcke, and end of al our doings, which for it self sake is never
desired, but is ever referred to some other more absolute and perfect end.
And truly it is daily experienced, that al they that desire excedingly to be
in aucthority, and to be placed in an honorable seat in the common wealth,
do ambitiously seek such office and promotion especially for three causes.
For some desire high estate for that when they are of a great power, they may
have a free recourse to al kind of pleasures, and want no other co^modityes
necessary, and incident to the life of man. Secondely other covet ye place of a
magistrate that they may thereby be thought good and endued with some notable
virtue. For commonly good opinion is conceived of his prude^te policy, and
excellent virtue, which sits in place of great auctority. For the vulgar
people suppose that honorable offices are not bestowed on any man, but for
some especial virtue and singular honesty. Lastly, they which are of more
wisdom desire to have the rule and government of other for this only
consideration that they might in their office and gouerme^t show forth
magnificente bou^tefulnes, and in part such virtues unto other as with which
their minds are frayght, and singularly furnished. For he that desires to
reap that fruit that he ought to do of Justice, integritye, and constancy
can by no means purchase the same in more ample wise, then by that high degree
of honor and dignity, in which he may not only much benefyte and profit
himself, but in greatest affairs may be a great aid and assistance to all
those citizens and neighbors with whom he is conuersante. Therefore whereas
some wait for a place of honor to the end they may live licenciously, either
that they might in deed through pre-eminence show the true pattern of
perfection, they of al other are most ignorante which suppose in either of
their desires accomplished that to be contained, yt of us only is, and ought
to be desired. For as much the last desired end has no further relation, but
each thing for that ends sake is desired and labored for. Wherefore all
kind of pleasure, perfett health, and such like are to be numbered among the
lowest and baseste sort of good things, if they deserve such name or title
at all. For we may moderately sometimes desire auctority, more moved thereunto
through reason then provoked by ambition: that we may further the weal and
profit of other, not that we should think them the reward of all our well
living. But I leave to speak any more of the Fantastical opynions of the
people, that I may march on apace toward them which have professed
theymselues guydes and instructoures of other in matters touching honestye,
and the good conversation of life. Yet I promise not to cite all, for it weere
an endless labor to recou^te so many opinions as are in the mounments and
works of Philosophers delivered unto us. But I will pass over them with
silence, whose judgment has nothing differed from the opinion of the common
people. For truly whereas they had defiled theymselues with all kind of
abomination they having their sight dusked with a dark cloud of filthiness and
shame were able to see nothing but that which apperteined to the lust and
pleasure of the body, or to outward gain and external commodity. Wherefore I
will let to speak of Cyrenaickes, an obscure sect of philosophers Hierome of
Rhodes, Aristippus, and the Epicure in whose books are contained both their
opinions. For it is unmeet that they should by any means be accounted among
them that are famous and renowned for their wit and learning.

THerefore that we may understand what the opinion of the most renowned
Philosophers has bin, it is apparante that the Academickes and Peripatetickes
have said and affirmed that the nature of good things are divided into three
kinds. In the first part they account those things which poolishe and
adourne the mind: which again is sorted into two parts. For one sort
furnishes the mind and prepares it to the search and knowledge of many
things: the other instruct and inform the will of man to all kind of
virtues, whereunto we are led and induced by wysedomes prescription and
moderation. In the second place they account health and whatsoever may
keep and preserve the body in his good estate and perfection. Lastly all
those things that happen unto us by fortune and casual adventure, they place
in the last and lowest degree. But when all these good things are happened
upon some one man, they thinck then, that blessed life is complete and
perfect. But so that virtue be embraced, and the same continually exercised,
and put in ure: but the good gifts either of the body or of fortune, they
should to that end retain, to make them servants and handmaids of virtue,
which should wait upon her at every beck, without the necessary helps
whereof virtue (for all that) could not commodiously, and well discharge her
duty. And Aristotle the best learned, and Prince of Philosophers does after
this manner declare by definition what felicity is. It is (says he) an action
of the mind, consonant and agreeing to the prescript rule, of the most
excellent virtue, exercised all the whole term and space of the life of man.
And this opinion is likewise that, that great and excellent virtue can in no
wise shine and show forth his force, if the body be either afflicted with any
grievous calamity, or the mind disquieted through the injury and malice of
froward Fortune. Neither is he by any means so to be persuaded, that he
may suppose that life worthily termed a happy life, which in process of time
may drive a man to woeful waylinge, and fall into miserable estate and extreme
calamity. He has therefore determined that whatsoever we shall do and take
in hand in this life, shall be to this purpose that first the most excellent
virtues of the mind should be sought for, and embraced, then he that
desires to obtain felicity should be so well provided of worldly
substance, that both he may in this life maintain his countenance with
credit, and that the continual practice of virtue do not cease by the means
of poverty and miserable penury. And that the power and ability, which the
qualities of the body and fortune do yield, should to no other thing have more
especial relation, then to the maintenance of true worship and honesty.
And verily these things, because they seem to be so said, that they may
most fitly be applied to the life of man: they are almost so generally by
every man's opinion allowed, that no man's judgment at this day is more
universally received. For he gives to virtue the prorogatiue, by the shyninge
and clear brightness whereof, all men well trained and brought up, are
chiefly guided. But when he says that other good things both belonginge to
the body, and depending on fortune are not to be despised, then he seems to
be one that fawneth on the people, and pleases their humor and fond
delighte. In which opinion notwithstanding how many gross errors be, he may
easily perceive which with dilligent and deep consideration will ponder this
matter. By the exercise (says he) of the most excellent virtue, blessed life
is perfectly accomplished. If the case stand thus, then let us understand
what manner a thing that virtue is, the cause efficient of so wonderful and
great blessedn^s, either by what means it is obtained, or how we may
distinguish honesty which is perfect and absolute, from the false and
pretended color of honesty. For I could never yet guess how virtue could be
understood, except the nature of the last and soueraygne good be first
plainly and manifestly known. For virtue is nothing else but a perfection of
reason, leadinge us to the attayninge the last desired end of blessedness and
felicity. And then reason (say they) is most perfect, when like as one that
leueleth his shafte or darte at some mark: so reason beholds some purposed
end, as it were a marcke, whither it directs every action. Therefore the
excellency of true virtue by no means can be perceived, except the end
unto the which it should readely bring us, be perfectly known. The which
thing Aristotle himself has taught: forasmuch as before he would any thing
at all entreat of virtue, he took in hand to express and declare what
felicity was, that that being known, the nature power, and efficacy of true
virtue might eftsoon appear, the which notwythstandinge he could in no wise
perform. For I would willingly learn of him, what manner a thing that
felicity is, for the attayning whereof, I should refuse no labor and travail.

Here he reckons the virtues of the mind, the qualities of the body, the
goods of Fortune, the which being obtained, felicity is attained. And in the
first place he reposeth the duties that proceed from Virtue. Now truly
manifest it is that this is a strange and preposterous order that the last
desired end should be known by Virtue, not Virtue by the last desired end.

But let us grant him that, that at length we moughte perfectly see into the
nature of Virtue. Virtue (says Aristotle) is a constante affection of the
mind, obtained by free election, consistinge in a certain mediocritie, and
the same being directed by the right rule of reason. But I pray you proceed a
little further in this matter, for as yet I perceive not what virtue is. What
mean you then by the right rule of reason, which is to us by you delivered in
the definition of virtue. That is it (says he) in another place, which being
obscured by no kind of darcknes without any difficulty sees that last end
unto the which all the doings and actions of our life ought to be referred.
Now thou do turn me over again to the searchinge out of ye last desired
end, which that I might plainly perceive from the searching out of the same,
thou did put me over to the consideration of virtue. I pray you what other
thing is it to turn round in a circle, if this be not? First you say that
virtue brings us to felicity. Then again you so describe felicity, that
except first we perfectly understand the nature of virtue, what felicity is,
we cannot so much as by conjecture imagine. This therefore makes me to stand
in a muse: for neither do I understand what virtue is, neither whither it
tends. But to leave these crabbed and difficult matters, it shall be very
profitable to know whether that felicity which Aristotle would frame, be such
a thing as we might happily at any time attain. For if it be of that nature
that it cannot be obtained, neither that any may possibly compass, because
of the inconstancy and frailty of man's estate and condition, what shall that
description of happy life profit the common society of man? Moreover whereas
all things in the whole universal world do commonly at the length come to
their end and perfection, no doubt it were an error intolerable to think,
that only man, for whose sake all things which we see with our eyes were
ordained, should never come to his prefixed felicity, which Aristotle must
confess, being thereunto driven by necessity. For whereas his opinion is that
felicity is to be obtained in this life, and withal gives such power and
pre-eminence to Fortune, that with a boisterous blaste of her displeasure, our
happy estate may be shaken in sonder and utterly overwhelmed, he seems
thereby to make men ever in a wretched and miserable case. For who is he to
whom any privilege or immunitie is granted from those mischieues, wherewith
we see this life oppressed and continually afflicted? Is there (say I) any
man so free and exempted from misery, but that sometimes, will he, or nill
he, he tastes of the cup of calamity, or at the least may not dread
such discomfitures with the which the happy life (if it may be so called) may
be both obscured and utterly lost? For all men which live on the face of the
earth took life chiefly to this end and purpose, that they should consume
their days in tears and mourninge, and spend the greateste part of their
life lamentably, languishinge in great woe and miserye. Neither in any age or
memory of man could there ever so much as one man be found, unto whom by
many degrees there did not more evil, then good betide. Solon for his wisdom
the most renowned Grecian, being demanded of Craesus King of Lydia, whom
he judged to be of all other most happy, aunsweared, one Tellus an Athenian
which had begotten in a Country aboundinge with all commodities, children
excelling in goodlines of personage, and strength of body: and afterward
defendinge his Country manfullye, ended his life with great glory. Also he
added to Tellus, Cleobis, and Biton, borne in the City of Argos, who when
they had marvelously showed their good nature and dutiful obedience to their
mother departed this life. For their (...) of their friends with dancing and
singinge. For they thought it most convenient to weep and mourn at their
nativity, being the beginning of all misery: and contrariwyse to death as to
the end of all wretchedness, they thought reioysinge was most agreeable. But
what need I to this effect and purpose discourse any more examples? For not
only by the testimonies of aunciente writers, but also by infinite examples
within the time of our own remembrance it may be clearly perceived, that no
man has ever lived that has not bin very often times distressed with cares,
vexations, dangers, and an infinite sort of diseases and calamities. Yet
there are some recorded by learned writers, not many, which have bin of the
common people thought happy: Such as Metellus of Macedonia, Caesar Octauius,
Lucius Silla were: and one or two more, which might be reckoned with these.
But they that write of the misfortunes which diversely happened unto them, they
that make report of their adverse and crooked fortunes wherewythall they were
oftentimes tossed from post to pillar, give us most certain and euidente
notice of the intolerable burden of man's miserye. For they that in their
worldly affairs had very good and prosperous success, could not escape
those hard brunts and inevitable calamities wherwyth man's life is compassed on
every side, what may we think of all the residew, which by all men's
confession were unhappy and miserable. But admit Fortune were unto any man so
favorable, and bountiful, that she would heap upon him all commodities
that possibly he could in his life require: commonly we shall see him have
some Tragical end, being either forlorn as a Caytife, or trussed up like
a Trayter. The which thing happened to Polycrates of the I Will of Samos, who
when he had lived in great prosperity, during the space and term of all his
life, was at length taken of his enemy, bereued of his life, and spoiled of
all his goods. What should I here speak of the death of Cyrus? What should I
make mention of the ruthful end of Cambyses? What should I call to memory the
heavy, lamentable, and doleful death of Po^peie the great? To what end should
I recite a number of other, who have yielded sufficient matter of most pityfull
lamentations in tragedies and other solemn stageplaies? Whereas daily the
course of common life gives us to understand that there is in the whole earth
no kind of living creature more subject to al kind of miseries, the^ man. If
therefore according to Aristotle's opinion these good things either of the
body, or fortune, to the full furniture of a blessed life are required: And the
euelles contrary to them, make our life wretched and miserable, no man (I
assure you) can be accoumpted happy. For their is no man but is sometimes
greatly disquieted with horrible mischiues, or at least (which is to ye same
effect) dreadeth not day and night al misadue^tures that may happen to man,
much like unto those, which are said to be in hellishe torment.

Above whose heads great stones of flinte most ready still to fall
do hang, and seems falling aie to crush their pates with all.
Therefore that man of so great judgment has bestowed all his diligence in
vain, by settinge forth unto us such a felicity, which al men would wish for
willingely, but no man can attain possibly. If so be that he, that excelled
all other in wit, in industry, in judgment could not redely see what was to
be desired in this life: What may we think of the rest, whose judgment was
far unlike, whose conninge and knowledge in the searchinge out of high and
subtle qestions was far differinge, such as the Stoikes were.

ANd the chief of this Stoike sect was Zeno, a man both sage and continente,
who thought him self through virtue sufficiently able both to withstand ye
prickinge griefs of sorrow, and to escape ye threatninge thu^derboltes of
froward fortune, because he was very well armed with only virtue, for the
body he set at naught, and measured felicity only by the qualities of the
mind. Notwithstanding he taught such kind of doctrine, which no wise man will
believe, except he be wedded unto his opinion (for often times many do stand
in argument more that they might seem constante, then being thereunto
induced by reason and understanding) I say he mainteyneth such kind of
learning, which may in no wise of the learned be defended, and is skofte at
of the ignorant. For he would that the mind of man should be so firmly stayed
and grounded upon constancy, that it should at no time so mutch as one iotte
be moved. For he thinks it an heinous fault to be tormented with grief or
care, to be inclined to gracious favor and mercy, to be inflamed with any
desire, to be provoked with wrath, hatred or any perturbation of the mind. In
this condition of life, void of all affection, which the Greeks call
impassibilitye, he thinks the sovereign good contained: so that he which
has attained it, may be taken for a man absolutely wise, a King, a blessed
and happy man. Again as touching the rest, them as sottes, as servile men
steyned with all kind of dishonestye he contemns and nothing regards.
First and principally therefore whereas he places felicity in the dignitye
and worthiness of the soul of man, so that the virtue thereof can by no grief
of the body or pinchinge pain and calamity severed from that blessed and happy
estate of life: Herein he has disputed more stoutly and valiantly, then wisely
and truly. For whereas the mind is through the conjunction of mutual love
fast tied and united to the body, truly it can sincke into no wise man's head,
as long as they remain one, if the body be through calamity afflicted, but
that the mind eftsoons languisheth and is disquieted. If therefore the
Stoikes opinion is to be followed, teachinge us that the heaviness and dolor of
the mind works man's miserye, then must it follow consequently, except they
will wrest the truth from us by violence, and tell us that senses are deceived
in things most clear and evident, that no man were he never so wise can
attain felicity, in trouble and vexation of body. For if we wanted our senses,
and that our body it self were not of our nature, then a man of mean
perceyueraunce might be persuaded, that he whose body were tormented with
fire, were nevertheless happy. But where as we consist of body and soul, how
can we duringe this life suppose that to be felicity, which has regard only
to one part of us, and in miserable distresses leaves the other? Especially
whereas by the necessary operation of nature when the body feels pain, the
mind suffers the same. Therefore men of great wisdom and Judgment has
not affirmed without great consideration, that the appetite of anger and desire
has been ingraffed in our minds for two causes: that ye minds themselves
should have good regard to preserve those bodies whose guides and keepers they
ought to be. That is to wit that they should by desire for bodily sustenaunce
covet things meet and convenient, and by anger should eschew and avoid
things hurtefull and dangerous. Therefore whereas wrath and desire are in us
by nature, it cannot be againesaide, when there is a show of any exceedinge
good fortune, or great evil imminent or likely to follow, but that our minds
stirred up with a kind of more vehemence are either more ready with joy and
pleasure to gratulate that which happily comes to pass, either more still and
pensive to bewail that, which has unfortunate y chanced. And whereas this
terror of fear (that I omit to speak of any other passion) has once by the
wrestlinge of nature assailed the mind, it has straight ways utterly
overthrown the Stoikes felicity which consists chiefly in security. And that
they conclude all matters with their own arguments, what can be showed out of
their writings which may profit us at all? no dought nothing. For they bereue
us of the use of reason: Whereas they do utterly abandon, and as it were pluck
up by the roots all kinds of affections given us by nature wherewith
sometimes we are quickened to the exercise of virtue. How clear and apparent
that is, I leave at this time to speak. For there is no man so very a dolt,
but sees how contrary it is to man's nature: and they that would drive into our
minds that astonishment, which the Stoikes call tranquillity do not determine
man's felicity, but do utterly extinguish and bury in us all kind of humanity.
That therefore that is so manifest let us omit^. And let us consider how
profitable to the preservation of the civil society of man that opinion is.
Put the case that a rumor spread of the enemy coming does wonderfully
terrefie the Citizens. The whole City being astonished with fear takes great
care how they may put from them the evil which may ensue. In this case, the
governors and chief rulers will look unto the common safetye, the most
courageous and lustiest men they will appointe ready in arms, garrisons they
will set in order, all the rest for the power and abylitye that every man
has will diligently bestirre themselves to drive from their bounds the force
of the enemy, which as a mischief and that no small mischief they make
accoumpte of. But this great wise man in that general fear and horror of all
his country, will not be by any means he, which more will esteem of this
terryble tumulte, then his own pryuate study and contemplation. For why
should he for a sort of silye simplemens sakes withdraw himself from the
study of wisdom? he will not do it in any wise. Nay which is more he will
not so much as change his countenance in that great hurly burlye, of the
whole city. All this time he deludeth their doings, accompting the^ very
simple and ignorante which dread that as a great danger and mischief,
which he supposes not to be accounted among the nombre of evil things. At the
length when he does see the siege laid against the whole city, and the city
to be set upon with mayn force, and that the chief rulers resist with might
and main, he cannot refrain from laughing to see the citizens with whom he
dwells tremble and quake for fear, sometimes to ru^ne all on a heap,
sometimes to run giddily hither and thither, and to try and assay every way
how to remove and put away the force of the enemy. Nay a wise man would think
in ihis pityfull plyght and common misery he should take arms and presently
encounter with the stoutest of his enemies, not for that he lightly thinks it
a great and perilous mischief, as through reason and judgment he is lead
and induced to believe the same. But let us know (I pray you) to what end and
purpose this Stoyck should take weapon? For wise men are never noted to be rash
in their doings and hasty, and what they take in hand proceeds of great
judgment and consideration. Therefore for what cause chiefly should he take
weapon in that kind of enterprise? Tell me I pray you, should he for ye
assisting his neighbors and poor countryemen? But for that cause he estemeth
them only miserable, for that they are ignorant, and carried away with vanity
and error of opinion. Again that by the glimse and o^tw^rde show whereof, he
sees them stricken into such a dampe of fear an evil thing, he can in no
wise accounte. And albeit he confesses it be a sharp shower, yet not to be
so much regarded that, for the peeuishe opynion of a sort of fools it should
be so exceedingly feared. Therefore lasely and slothfully, not manfully and
couragiouslye does he think that in that perilous conflict and bickeringe he
should behave himself. Then I pray you what great fruit brings this
wonderful wisdom? or where shall he show that so singular stoutnes of an
invincible mind? I do think at the last this will be the end of this tragical
matter: when he shall see the City beaten down to the ground when he shall see
all the treasure, goods and substance of the Citezens driven and carried away
before his face, he must show himself such a one, as whom no sorrow will
daunte or dismaye, no poverty pinch, no calamity crucifye, but rather he
vaunteth himself to be in bondage a king, in extreme want of all things a
man stored with welthe, in grife happy, in misery florishinge and in good
estate. And that he might prove the same, and withdraw his fryndes from
folly, in which only, he reposeth the chife misery yt may happen to man, he
framth certain horned, crabbed and sophistical arguments, whereby he would give
us a cert^yne salve for ye most fond opinion of his, thereby meaning to prove
death, banishment, poverty, lack of ofpringe, contumelious reproach, bondage,
not to be accounted evil. All these things to confess the truth, are
lustely and lostely spoken, but the common socetye of men reapeth at al no
fruit or commoditye thereby. For if a man be furnished with no other kind of
skill and wisdom the^ this, it is not possible he should by wisdom prevent
the imminent dangers of war, or with a valiant force or courage resist them
that be present. But paraduenture you will say. This opinion avails much in
things apperteyninge to civil affairs. In what causes I pray you? In
public matters? How can he vprightlye execute the office of a judge or
magistrate which makes no difference of things done in house of parliament, or
in place of judgment, which judges him worthy of as much punishmente which
has but lightlye offended, as him, which has most wickedly and abominablye
destroyed his father. What shall I stand in shewinge you that in private causes
which happens between man and man, it profits nothing at all? For how is
it possible that he will have compassion of the impotente, pitee the afflicted,
succor the poor, which holds him that is merciful a man base minded and
servile. Again may we think him apt to rebuke offenders and wicked persons
sharply, either to reward bountefullye men living vertuouslye, which is
utterly moved with no sense of love? or hatred. And that I may knitt up all in
one word, what shall he profit the common sotiety of man, which forgets
himself to be a man, and in a manner diuorceth himself from human nature?
For the affections of the mind are to be cut of by reason, not rashly to be
plucked up by the roots. For the one is good and a profitable way, and by
wisdoms moderation may be obtained: the other may in no wise be compassed,
and if it might, yet it were not so much to be desired. For all manner of
virtue of what kind soever it be, is at it were key cold and feeble, which
does not spring out of a mind stirred with most earnest prouocations of
industrye and diligence. For whereas all kind of duty is framed and fashioned
by the mind, he can do nothing lustely, valiantlye, forcebly, whose mind is
not kindled and wonderfully inflamed with arde^t desire. And whereas they take
it for a thing already granted unto the^ that every affection is contrary to
reason, that no wise man will grant: whereas they see reason it self
prescribes laws to al affections of the mind, and shows them how far
forth it is lawful for them to ranige. And therefore according to reason we
sometimes wax angry, and choleric, we hate, we love, we pity, we fear many
things that may ensue, we greeuouslye take present mischau^ces, we are stir
read up with great desire, we are moved marueylouslye with joy and
pleasure. Which affections when they excede measure, they are to be restrained
with the bridle os reason and understanding, not to be extinguished and put
out utterly. Therefore the motions of the mind do not impugn reason, whereas
they for the most part by her rule and gouermente are lead and ordered.
Certes, like as in the sea such quiet and calm weather is not to be desired,
where with the flood may not be with the lest puff of wind troubled, but
rather such open air, whereby the ship at the stearne may sulke the seas with
a merry gale and prosperous wynd: even so there is to be desired in the mind, a
little puff and as it were a blowing billow to hoise up ye sayls of the mind
whereby the course thereof may be made swift and certain. And even as askilfull
and courageous horseman does not always delight in a soft and gentle pace, but
sometimes gives his horse the spur: to the end his stead should move more
lively. So by reason sometimes the perturbations of the mind are stirred and
pricked forward, that we might more cheerfully dispatche our business. Therefore
what can we make of this felicitye which a man by no means may obtain, and if
it could be gotten, it nothing furthreth ye good estate and condition of men.
And whereas they argue ye only virtue acco^plisheth a blessed and happy life:
they seem not to understand what the nature of that word is, for virtue cannot
so much as by imagination be conceived to be any things else, but a thing
perfect and in his kind absolute. But what force of with be it gotten by never
so much study and diligence, is of that power and nature, that is able to con^
(...) that infinite gredines and desire (that is by nature ingraft in our
minds) of things both many and wonderful? Again by what virtue (I beseech
you that I may leave other things untouched) is a man ab e to diminish or
stake the fervent zeal of tracinge out ye truth, wherewith they are most
tormented which would feign be accou^pted perfect wise men. Either has there
been any man a live, which has attained the skill of all arts, which has
understood the reason of all natural causes, which has had the knowledge by
wisdom to rule and govern a common wealth? All things are hidden so in the
exceedinge deepnes and bosom of nature, that there has been at any time no
questi^n so plain and easy, whereof profound learned clerks has not given
diverse and intricate judgments. For how hard is it to open effectually the
argument we now entreat of, and presently have in hand, and (I assure you)
we are not able sufficiently to discourse of the nature of the body and soul,
which plainly proves what slender perfection in knowledge and learning we are
able to attain unto. Therefore how may this wise Stoike have through virtue
his contentation, when he infinitely desires the science of those things
whereof he is ignorant, neither only does covet the knowledge of those things
which he sees with his eye, but also would understand many other things
whereon his mind runs, whereas he himself is not able thoroughly and
perfectly to know the nature of the least thing that is. But then we suppose
that the estate of the mind is perfect, when the mind it self is so fully
fraighte with virtues, that there is nothing else which it may desire. No man I
think by this time doubts but yt the chief and sovereign good cannot
consist in single and bare virtue (which the Stoikes so highly extol) when
neither in virtue are contained al things which to ye estate and maintenance
of a man are required: nor our mind with virtue alone can rest co^te^ted,
especially desiring those things yt by no means yt man can work, are to be
attained. For all human things whether they be external, or else worthy
induements of the body and mind are streyghted into a little and narrow
compass: but our mind has bred and naturally ingraffed therein this
affection and disposition ever immeasurably and insatiably to desire some one
thing of great excellency and worthiness. And easier may you with a little drop of
water quench the fiery flames of Aetna, then slake the unquenchable thyrst of
desire that naturally possesses the minds of men. In consideration whereof
wicked and naughty persons, are not to be rebuked because they have infynite
desires, but because they desire things unlawful and abominable. For it is
given unto us by nature to have insatiable desires, but to have wicked desires
yt proceeds from a disordered custom, and leude conversation. For truly
neither he which does endeavor with all study to atchiue to honor and worship
keeps order and measure in the desire of honest things. But let us feyne and
imagine some one to have attained that felicity which Zeno has reposed in
only virtue. Let him be exquisitely learned in all sciences. Let him be
merueylously spoken of, for his exceedinge and great virtues. Let him have (if
it please you) all those good things which are within, and without the body,
for as much as both the Academikes, and Peripatetikes are of this opinion,
that these things are to be rekoned of, and had in estimation, as the
instruments and handemaidens of virtue: As strength, puissaunce, goodlines of
personage, sou^dnes of senses, perfection of health and many other of like
nature: then riches and substance, gentility, honor, children florishinge and
endued with all noble qualities, frindes not wavering, but tied with an assured
knot of perpetual friendship. Last of all (if you think good) that the Epicure
may not so mutch as bend his browe against us, let the abundance be granted
unto him of all pleasure, with yt which ye body, and the mind might be
delighted: again let him have cause neither of fear, or lamentation, if it
may be possibly attained through man's counsel and providence. This man (say
you) may be thought of all other most happy, as who abounds in all things
which appertain to glory, prosperity, and pleasure. But if you would demand
of this good fellow whether there were any thing else which he could find in
his heart to possess, no doubt he would cry out, if he mean not to gloss, and
use feigned speech, that he living in this plenteous store, and abundance of
worldly glory, fealt himself nevertheless content, but moved with farther
desire. Zeno immoderately with open mouth exclaimeth upon this man, reuilinge
him as a pezant and mad man: chiefly for that he cannot master and qualify
that motion of the mind, through the power whereof he is moved to desire
infinitely, then for that in the abou^dance of worldly wealth he professes
himself still oppressed with penury. Whom for all that if you indifferently
judge, you ought to pardon. For put case his mind with those good things
should rest contented, which can come to pass by no reason. For if you should
power into the mind all those good qualities that might be procured by man's
travail and industry, you could not by any means satisfy the insatiable
capacity thereof. But admit it satisfied, yet notwithstanding shall it be
inflamed continually with the desire of immortalitye. But this says he, no
wise man will desire. Which has appoincted unto him self such bounds and
limits, that he orders his life by the rule of nature and not of desire. As
though it were beesides nature to live ever: Or as though there were any
thing more agreeable to nature. To prove this, wherefore are we pensive and
careful of those things that happen to us after our deaths? Wherefore do we
desire ofspringe and the succession of children? Why do we think it a worthy
thing to be commended to our posteritye? Why are most pregnant and
florishinge wits moved with the desire of perpetual fame and glory?
Assuredly this affection proceeds of no other cause, then of the desire of
immortality. For whereas man being a creature endued with reason and
understanding plainly and evidently sees that, that is not to be thought to
appertain to perfect blessedness, which is variable and subject to alteration:
knowinge also for a certainty, that those things which may be lost or taken
from us are mutch disagreinge with the nature of felicity, he dreadeth death,
and is stirred up with an egree motion of the mind and moved with a wonderful
instincte of nature, to covet the fruition of immortality. And being yet
uncertain to attain the same, is duringe this life tossed and turmoyled
hither and thither, and imployeth thereto his whole study and diligence, that by
all means he possibly may, he moughte preserve himself from utter destruction
and final decaie. Some man therefore holds himself most happy if he leave
behind him after his death a perfect portrayture of his own name: and one
that shall be as it were himself in in another person. Some man strives
exceedingelye by sententious sayings and worthy monumentes of an excellent
wit, by noble and valiant Acts to purchase to himself continual fame and
memory. Some other in erectinge great and sumptuous buildinges seeks thereby
to commend himself unto posterity. Which gives a sufficient note, that even
by natures instincte and fore warninge all men tremble and quake at the memory
of death, and then do by all means sheewe their desire of perpetuity of life.
Therefore whereas the nature of man is such that it cannot have on earth any
long contynuance (for all kinds of estates are equally subject to death, and
the way to the grave (as Horace says must once be trod) for this cause all
men generally do apply thereunto their whole diligence, after death at least
wise to leave some representation, or counterfaite show of life. How can it
therefore be gainsaide but that a creature desirous of euerlastingenes, must
needs be stricken with great fear and terror of death? And saying that no
man in this life can attain his joy and hearts rest (for how can the mind
have his contentation having not obtained that, for the which it so mutch
longs) it does evidently appear that we are created to some other greater
and more excellent purposes. And therefore is it that our minds are not
satisfied with those good things that happen in this life, because all
things here are of no estimation, and streyghted into a narrow compass in
comparison of those, which we through a secret working and inclination of
nature are prone to desire. But to the knowledge of those good things which
only are accomted the chiefest and by all means possiblye to be desired, two
ways there are that may conducte us. First of all the very desire of the mind
it self will open unto us plainly what it is: then our birth and the
consideration of owr generation will more plainly show us, what it is that we
desire. For we must not suppose any other end to be proposed to each thing
we desire, then that whereunto nature it self being not corrupted or
depraved is bente and inclined, neither from any other fountain ought the end
of blessed life to be deryued the^ from that, from which we first borrowed the
beginning of life.

FIrst therefore it is requisite to understand what that appetite of desire is,
which is so depely impri^ted in ye mind of man. We se al me^ for ye most part
do avoid as much as in the^ lies the things that are displeasant, and paynful
and to desire inordinatlye that which may stir up delectation and pleasure,
to make great price of riches and ability, to be inflamed with the love of
learning, the which if many through their dull and barrayn wits do not attayn,
yet they can do no less then love and honor the learned man, in so much that
him whom they see furnished with most excellent arts and sciences they
think most like, and semblable to immortal Gods. Again daily experience
does show us, that all me^ are enamoured with the bewty and worthiness of
virtue and honesty, in so much that wicked and evil disposed persons are moved
and allured with the perfection thereof, and being taken in a trippe wexe
ashamed at their offense, desiring rather to be accounted honest and virtuous,
then leude and ungracious. To conclude al me^ are of that nature that they are
not contented having attained one kind of those things which are termed
good, but they would be fullye freight with all together and clean exempted
from all fear and grief of ye mind. Again they immoderatly desire to have al
those good things reach to the higheste degree of perfection and to have
them continue and remain for ever. But what is this else then to desire to be
like unto God in estate and condition? For the omnipotent and divine nature of
God is such that it abounds in all felicity, and being replenyshed with his
unspeakable wisdom and virtue, and separated from the contagion of all
corruption reigns in a most glorious kingdom, blessed and endless. They
therefore that would inioye the things that in perfectnes and principality
exceed all other, and would with an ardent desire covet an eternity and
perpetuity therein, wishes him self as it were to be of the number and
company of Heavenly saints. What should I here speak of the earnest zeal
of religion by nature given to us men in general, which stirs up all men
by all ways and means to love and reverence the omnipote^t Godhead of him
that rules this world, and by many outward signs, but yet most certain
tokens to declare that they are wonderfully inflamed with an earnest desire to
se, and have ye fruition of him. Does it not manifestly show, that there is in
us some divine and heavenly nature, which withdraws our minds from the
desire of things earthly and transitory, to the beholding and admiration of
divine and celestial things? for no creature in the whole universal world
desires any thing whatsoever it be, except it be agreeable to his
disposition and nature. And if there were any man that has given himself as
it weere prisoner unto lust and sensuality and were so enta^gled with ye
pleasur of this life, that he rekoned not of the life to come, yet this one
thing would apparently show him to be endued with some heavenly wisdom, in
that he could never be satisfied sufficiently neither with any pleasure, nor
with any stoare of worldly substance. In so much that no riches was able to
satisfy Craesus, no kind of pleasure could content Sardanapalus, no worthy
exploytes in martial affairs was able to quench that insatiable thirst and
desire of glory wherewith Alexander ye great was so much inflamed. Of whom
this is most truly written.

The youthly Macedonia^ Prince one world could not suffice. All which may
fullye persuade us that there is nothing under ye Cope of heaven that may
content the infinite desire of the mind: whereas all worldly things are
brittle, mortal and mutable: but the mind of man coueteth great things,
things permanente and eternal, and by all means seeks to aspyre unto
immortalitye. And whereas it does often times through evil custom declyne
from the right way, and seeks nothing else but that which is frail, and
subject to mortalitye, and in the abundance of these earthly and transitory
things reposeth blessed life: albeit he obtain all that he desire, yet never
can yt which is sufficient be gotten, and to late shall he understand that he
has desired rather a false and counterfayte, then a true and perfect
blessedness. And like as we say the fire, the water and all things else have a
certain end to the which (if there be no impedimente) they be by a certain
natural desire carried: so also to man, God is proposed, as an end, whom by
the instinct of nature we desire: and of whom they which are partakers shall be
most happy and blessed, replenished with all kind of perfect joy and
pleasure. The which will more clearly appear, if we set before our eyes, the
original and beginning of man's creation: which if we advisedly consider, we
shall find therein al things right excellent and perfect.

But the birth and generation of man, must not be ftche from Poets fables, or
grounded on the opinion of Philosophers, the which albeit we must needs grant
were of excellent wit, and learning, yet being in a time over whelmed with
error and blindness, could not behold the truth, and in steed of truth, they
defended and maynteyned those things, wherein through palpable ignorance they
were grossly deceived. Therefore we will omit their opinons uncertain, and
disagreeing among themselves, that out of no other books then holy wryt, we
may fetch the truth it self. For in it is contained the true and perfect
Philosophy. And first of all me thynks it convenient after the manner of Poets
in this cause to cry and call for the aid and assistance not of the Mufes, or
Apollo, but of the highest, and most mighty God that he will so wash and cleanse
me from all spotte of crime. that I may be able uprightly, purely, and
syncerely, to handle so great and wonderful ssmieties.

THe most excellent power, and majesty of that heavenly mind, which being
most high and euelastinge, we condignely reverence and adore, as our God, and
as ye everlasting fountayn of life, as the maker and creator of all things,
when it did seem gaod unto this wisdom ao deal liberally, and to imparte
his benefytes to many for nothing shows so much the goodness of God, as his
(free beneficence) in the beginning he created the invisible world, bewtifyed
with holy angels, who beholding always that incomprehensible light and
brightness, do live in everlasting blessedness. Unto which estate of glory and
immortality, all came not, but only they that delyghtinge not so much in the
exceeding bewty of their own nature, as rejoicing in the Prince and geuer of all
light and brightness did think with themselves, that the castle of their
safety, and the end of their blessed life, was to be reposed in their lord
and maker. For they that being to much enamoured with the beauty of
themselves, did fall to the neglect and contempt of God, and laying a side due
reverence of their Lord and creator, thought all goodness to proceed from
themselves, yelding to their own nature as it were a certain Godhead, being
for ever deprived of that passing clear light, whereof they were most
unworthy, they were thrown down into the place of perpetual and everlasting
misery, and into the dark dongeon of that night that shall ever continue. But
after God had made the Heavens and wonderful w^orke thereof, which no eye has
seen, then he framed this world most beautiful and of exceeding fairness,
garnishing it with all pleasures and commodities. In the making whereof, he
used no other engine or devise, then his own will and pleasure. For with God,
the word is the fulfiller of all works. And thus God brings to pass by his
great providence those things at the length, which he has appointed before
all worlds. But first some man will ask of me this question. To what purpose,
and for whose use, that most high creator and Lord of all things, has
made this so beautiful workemanshippe, this so excellent form and shape of
heavenly bodies, this so large and spacious greatness of Sea and Land? For it is
not the practice of his infinite wisdom to do any thing in vain, and to no
end and purpose. For whose sake then did he after a most wonderful order, frame
that most goodly and seemly substance of things dislike in nature, yet
agreeing among themselves? for his own sake think you? because he would have a
trimmer habitacio^, wherein he might more co^modiously dwell? But it were not
only a wicked thing, but a point of extreme madness, to thi^cke so of that most
blessed mind, then the which nothing more perfect and absolute may be imagined,
the virtue and power whereof is infinite, to have needed any earthly and bodily
tabernacle, or that all times before he wanted some what to thee accomplishing
of perfect blessedness, or to the fulness of his glory: or that God could be
enclosed within any certain room or compass. What then? were these things
provided for the Angels, and saints of God? In no wise: for they being severed
and free from all fellowship and conjunction of the body, desire nothing else but
to behold their maker, neither ca^ they reap any commodity, or conceive any
pleasure of things beneath in these low parts. And to thinck this substanciall
workmanship was made cheiefly for unreasonable creatures, or for the use of
trees, and plants, it were a thing to absurd. For, were it not a thing far
unsitting with the majesty of God, to have framed so great and wonderful a
work for brute beasts, and creatures void of reason and understanding, and
therefore joined unto him by no kind of affinity and likelines? God has not
therefore devised this so goodly a frame for himself, for Angels, for the
fruits of the earth, for living creatures void of reason, but for man made
of body and reasonable soul, and consistinge of both those natures co^ioyned,
yt he might both with his outward senses view the excellent workmanship of the
world, and also conceive in mind deeply the exceeding glory and greatness of
the workman. Wherefore all the world with the beauty and pleasure thereof, was
ordained for the profit and vtility of man. First and principally yt he
might have a dwelli^g place, wherein not only the body should be nourished and
comforted with diverse and sundry fruits of the earth, which it abou^dantly
brings forth for the maintenau^ce and sustentacion of all living creatures:
but also yt the mind observing through understanding and judgment the works
of Nature, with the variety, pleasure, and delectacion thereof, might by a
proper and peculiar food, which chiefly consists in the manifest saying of
the truth, be fed and receive his solace and contentation. That when the
order, settled rule, and constant government of so great a work, should
stir up exceedingly the mind of man: it might also induce him to the
co^templacion of the chief and principal workman. So that the goodly
proportion and frame of the world might be a schole and a certain way and
trade of learning, whereby man might be taught to honor and worship his lord
and maker. And thus it is clear and apparent, that the most high and mighty
God has for man's sake made and created fruits and co^modityes, which the
earth with wonderful plenty yeldeth, sensible creatures, all manner of soyles
whatsoever, the seas overwhelmed with a gross and foggie aier, the heavens,
the firmament, the sterres, by whose gentle mouinges, much good happens to
all living creatures. Man was not as yet created, when God had prepared for him
so beautiful, so rich, so bountefull a kingdom. At length when the world it
self was fully finished he made man his body of earth, and be breathed
thereinto a soul finely fashioned, according to his own Image and
similitude. Here may you see manifestly the original and beginning of the most
excellent and noble soul of man, which being derived and taken out from no
other thing, then the spyrite of God, and being enclosed in the body as in a
worthy vessel, retayneth a divine form, pure, and deuoyde of all filthye
corruption Then the body was not infected with any vice, whereby reason might
be disturbed, or the mind it self with darcknes overwhelmed. The first man
therefore knew all sciences, understood ye causes of all things, was
sufficiently learned in the rule and discipline of life, being instructed by
no other teacher then God himself, the giver of all knowledge and wisdom.
And he did not only excel all other creatures in the comely shape and feature
of his body, but he was far beyond them all, in the amiable, and the most
excellent and divine shape and form of the mind. For both parts thereof were
with so singular and passing clerenes enlightened: and also united with such
concord and agreement ye scarcely any surer concord, or any more decent and
seemly manner of comlines could be imagined. There was in the mind no error,
no motion in the sense, whereby the rule of reason might be disordered: whereas
reason it self, as it were in a perfect and flourishing commonwealth, so in a
peaceable and quiet estate could very easlie restrain all raging affections.
The mind therefore had no kind of let, and impediment whereby it might be
hindered from daily contemplacion. But the understanding and capacity of man
being flourishing, quick, and bent to the search of high matters, when it had
found out and discussed the nature of all things that were contained and as it
were hidden in the air, the sea, and earth beneath, it was not satisfied with
those things which were under the circle and sphere of the Moon, and with those
things which might be seen, but would needs pearce the clouds, and search
the nature of heaven it self. And being thus made of so excellent a
disposition and nature, was also endued with those virtues which excede the
common state of man, by the exercise and fruition whereof he might be the more
assured always of the love and grace of his lord and maker. For the charecter
and figure of true and perfect justice, which prepares the mind to all
holiness, and is the most surest bulwark and defense thereof was deeply
imprinted in him. There was therein a firm and assured constancy of virtue,
and the exceedinge perfect shape and comlines of honesty it self. Again he
had his wit tied to no kind of necessity, neither parcially inclined to any
cause, nor intermedled with any kind of affection or perturbation. To be
brief, God having showed himself so liberal and bountefull toward man, he
made him president and chief ruler of the earth, and appointed him a Princely
place for his habitacio^. The Greeks call it Paradise, a gardeine flowing with
most pleasant springs, most delectable, and decked with great store and
variety of sweet smellinge flowers, most fit to live in, in all felicity and
pleasure. In this most pleasant seat man was placed, yt by that place which
they say was high and mounted alofte, he might learn not only like a ruler
and governor, wisely to guide the stern thereof: but also thereby be
admonished with discrete government, and free liberty, to take upon him the
charge and rule over all other lyuinge creatures. In the ordering of which
kingdom he followed not a written law, but the law of nature: yt is a most
perfect order, and agreeable to the divine nature of God, which they term the
chiefest and most sovereign law of all other. Furthermore there was a promise
made, a reward appointed that if he did administer the government assigned unto
him godly and righteously, he should enter into that heavenly kingdom and
everlasting bliss, the which in this life he would so much desire. This was
the first estate allotted and appointed to man, this was the first beginning
and foundation of that Nobility, whereunto man aspired: in which no man can
note any thing, but that which is right honorable and worthy of high
estimacion. Whereby it is evidently to be perceived what a miserable miste of
darcknes auerwhelmed ye mi^ds of them, which having their soul created by ye
providence of God, (and to speak the uttermost) as it were proceedinge from
the nature and substance of God himself, suppose notwythstandinge their
felicity to be reposed in things transitory and subject to change and
alteration. It was therefore most wisely said of ancient Philosophers, and of
the Stoikes especially, ye beatitude and happiness is nothing else, but to live a
life correspondent to the law of nature. But being ignorant what best did agree
with ye nature of man, it consequently followed, that they could not p^efectly
know what did appertain to the nature of blessed life. Therefore that great
ouersighte and blindenes bread mischeiuous errors, and was cause of many
wicked and desperate opinons. For look unto what opinion any man of himself
was leudly addicted, that end, and felicity he unto himself appoyncted. For
they that knew not part of themselves to be immortal, and supposed the sense
of the soul to be extinguished with the body, hunted after with all diligence
and pain nothing else but things transitory, and appertaininge to their bodily
substance. But they that saw somewhat, although through a miste, thought not
the desired end of man's life to consist in things subject to inconstancy,
and mutability, but rather in the qualities, and riches of the mind. In this
poyncte truly they said well. But let us understand what qualities and riches
they meant. If those which are borrowed and derived from no other but of God
allmighty and are by his grace powered into our hearts, nay remain allwaies in
God himself, in this opinion there is no odds betwixt them and us. But if
they defend this learning, ye felicity consists in the virtues of ye mind,
which through the study and diligence of many are attained and after this manner
deem all to be chiefly in themselves, herein they show how ignorant they are
of their own natures, and are found also most wicked and blasphemous against
God him self. For they seem not to understand that the soul is not of it
self, but took his beginning of God, who refer the desired end of all
their life not to God, but to their own propre wit, and understanding, and
being impudente and presumptudusly minded, all their actions in their whole
life which they ought to dedicate to ye honor of Almighty God, they co^ferre
and bestow upon settinge forth their own fame and glory. If therefore true
felicity, and the end of our life is to be fixed in the cause and geeuer of
life, there is no man so blind, or selfewilled, but may easelye perceive that
he is to be of us chiefly desired, as the last end of our actions, by whose
benefit, aid, and help, we came into the world, whom through a meruaylous
and exceedinge inclination of nature we fervently desire, we entirely love,
we deservedly reverence, worship, and magnify. Let us therefore eftsoon
turn, and be spedilye converted unto that fountain of all good things, that
is everlasting and can never be drawn dry, from whence we came, by whose
grace we live, and are preserved in our good estate. For it is not to be
doubted when we have ended our life in this world, we shall at length enjoy an
endless and most blested so that all that restless desire wherewith our minds
were inflamed, shall be satisfied, neither shall we have any thing else justly to
require. We must therefore refer all our doings and actions to this end,
yt we may at the length have the fruition of the highest and ever living God.
For if pleasures do in any wise appertain to perfect blessedness, then shall
we with him enjoy stable and permanente pleasures, and those which in no age
shall decaie. But if our sovereign good rest in Sapience, then at the length
shall that insatiable desire of tracinge and searchinge out the truth be
satisfied, when all darkness and obscurity being taken away, we shall not only
contemplate and behold the perfect and true nature of each thing, but him
that is Lord and Ruler of nature it self. And if long life makes us happy,
that is only to be termed long life which is immortal, and not that which
through age and continuance of time is consumed. Lastly if they justly think
that quietness and security must be a part of the definition of felicity, (for
they hold this opinion that our life is happy and blessed when we are assured
of those good things wherewith it abounds shall long continue.) If therefore
without security, we cannot so much as understand what happiness is, there
shall we be sure to be released from all cares and vexations, when no terror,
no sudden motions shall disquiet us, when we shall have the most high and mighty
God ye buckler of our defense, and the preserver of our safety. But now I will
briefly conclude and knit up those reasons, which occasioned me to fall into
this kind of disputacion. This was set down by us as a ground and principle,
yt virtue was a certain perfection of the mind, directing us the right way to
our last and chief desired end. Again felicity (as it is declared) is no
where to be put but in God alone. Then it follows by good reason, yt no
quality or affection of the mind can be said virtuous, except it be ascribed
unto God. Wherefore if neither felicity, neither any thing which it co^teyneth
may be thought frail and mutable (for it were a gross error to thinck those
things happy and blessed, yt vanish away suddenly) but assuredly me^ passing
their times as they that are tossed in a trouble tempest, or sea of waueri^g
affections, no doubt men in no wise may be thought happy, except they be daily
by the grace and favor of God stayed up, and protected. Again it is of all
men confessed, that virtue is the mean whereby we are conducted and led to
felicity, and therefore that is not to be taken for a virtue that does not
join us to God, and is not referred to him alone. And therein only consists
the worthiness of true virtue, where all other are in no wise to be esteemed as
virtues, but the shadows and false counterfaytes of virtue. For by what reason
should we give ye name of virtue unto that, which has not prefixed before it
an end of blessedness? Aristotle affirms that Diomedes, was in no wise
puissaunte either showed any point of manhood and true magnanimity, when
the Greeks being put to flighte he remained behind alone, and had rather with
danger of his person stand against the force of Hector, then to bear the
ignomye of a Turnebacke, and ran away. I pray you why so? Was it not a
noble act and worthy of great honor, when Diomedes, being relinquished of
his friends and countrymen, himself alone or with a very few, stood to his
tacklinge, thinking it better to die manfully, the^ to live wretchedly, making
more accoumpte of his glory and estimation, then of his safety, and
preservation? No doubt it was very well done (quoth he) but for that Diomedes
in his enterprice sought not so mutch true praise, as the vain brute of the
people, (for he feared mutch least that Hector in the midst of his glory
would the more triumph, if he might say, he had put Diomedes to flighte) he
therefore purchased not due praise of virtue. In like manner Aristotle judges
of Hector, for that he openly confessed that he took great care least that the
men and women of Troy would spread any rumor sou^dinge to his dishonor,
and therefore would more boldly and couragiouslye venture his life in battle.
This man of singular wit and learning, judged them not to have deserved the
title of true honor and virtue, for because they did not respect true and
perfect honesty, with he thought should be considered as the principal and
chief end of our life, and therefore remoueth them from that order and degree
that virtue purchases: and places them in a second room, in which he
reposeth that counterfaite image of virtue, which brings us to do our office
and duty through an ambitious desire of glory, and is contained within the
compass of law, and civil discipline. The end therefore (according to
Aristoteles opinion) proves every Act to be honest, or dishonest, ignoble, or
honorable. For one, and the self same action may be taken in hand, whereby
sometimes great estimation, sometimes no small discredit and shame is procured,
according to the diversity of the intent and purpose. Whereby it follows
necessarily yt they only may be termed stout and valiant men, which having
respect to the true end of virtue, worthily die the death: and they that
regard rumoures and vain reports of the people, and for that refuse not to
endaunger themselves, are to be esteemed as vain and light: but they that
through some naughty and unlawful desire, or some lewd and vicious
perturbation of the mind, are stirred up to do some valiant enterprice, are of
all other to be holden most wicked. Whereby it is concluded that neither
Hector, nor Diomedes were to be commended for their prowes and puissance, and
that Achilles, and Paris, were not only not valiante, but worthy of all shame
and dishonor. For the one in defense of an infamous, and wicked marriage came
forth into the field, the other shed so mutch blood, and made that great
slaughter of his enemies, only to quench, and satisfy the immoderate anger and
rage of his mind. Aristotle may be with all convinced of the ignorance of true
magnanimitye and fortitude, whereas he could not, being overwhelmed with the
like cloud of blindness, understand what felicity was, from whence the
constancy and stability of virtue, and the decent semelines of honesty issues
and flows. But you will say he has written many things of God, shewinge
therein great wisdom and learning. I know that very well. But (I pray you)
what place has he assigned him in the making and creatinge of all things
appertaininge to man? For whereas he denies the world ever to have been made,
in deed this one only office he appoynteth to God to move the world about
the Pole with a wonderful swiftnes. By the conversion and turninge whereof,
the chaunges, and courses, Generations, and corruptions of a^l things under
heaven are made. Again there were many of great learning and judgment which
supposed the world to be ruled not by fortune, or any means casual, but by
the divine providence and ordinance of God. But not so, that they either
thought that virtues proceeded from him or that the desired end of our life
should rest in him. Therefore what avail their inco^sta^t opinions of God
dusked and defaced with so manifold errors to the consideration of our last
desired end? For if they confessed an eternal and everlasting God, forced
thereunto through beholdinge the meruaylous and exceedinge beauty of the
world, and the wonderful order of heavenly bodies, yet for all that, they did
not due honor unto him, neither did put in him the hope of a blessed and happy
life. Therefore none of the whole pack of them, either could behold the end
of our life, or could perceive in their minds the perfect form of virtue,
desiringe rather the shadow and counterfaite, then the plain and lively image
of nobility, representinge it more in a glorious ostentation and brag of
words, then fullfillinge it absolutely in their manners and life. To conclude,
if that only may be justly judged true virtue, which brings us to perfect
felicitye, it is most clear (which also has been proved sufficiently before)
that, that only is to be taken for virtue which lifts up our minds
intentiuely and with great affection to the beholding of God everlasting, the
beginning and end of all things. Whereupon this may also consequently
follow that all honor, and true noblenes receives light and beauty of that
most excellent and notable virtue. But all nobility whatsoever, if it do not
issue and spring out of this divine virtue, albeit it has a fair show
glistereth gaiely, nevertheless in very deed it is vain and mutable, neither
can it participate the nature of perfect and true nobility. And no doubt that
race and kindred, in which that heavenly kind of virtue appears, may not so
much be thought to fetch his descent and genealogy from men, as to spring out
of some celestial and divine generation. Therefore after I have declared the
fall and misery of the first man, I will manifestly discourse unto you, the
worthy notes and properties of this divine and celestial kindred. For the
declaration of that calamity and disstresse wherewith the first parent of all
mankind being oppressed fell, will contain the cause of that error, and cloud
of ignorance, wherewith the minds of men overwhelmed, so many ages lay hidden
in darcknes, yt neither they could behold any heavenly light, neither
sufficiently consider ye worthiness of true Nobility. Whereby it came to pass
that Nobility being utterly extinct in steed thereof succeeded an abject mind,
and a vile estate, rude, base, and barbarous. After these so many and wonderful
miscryes be laid open and evidently known, then will it more clearly appear
by what means we were again restored to our former dignity, and how we
again recovered ye name and worthiness yt we before lost.

TO return therefore to man, he (as it was, declared before) was placed in the
earth, to the intent he should be lord and owner thereof. Again that he should
govern all living creatures, and behold the heaven above with all godliness, and
dutiful reverence. He had therefore a Princely jurisdiction over the earth, he
served only the Lord of heaven, and being a holy one wholly dedicated to God,
he was the expounder of his holy will and pleasure: and the chief Prince and
first parent of al mankind. Who having in body a most comely and goodly
personage, in mind notwythstandinge attained to honor due to celestial
creatures, in so much that through a heavenly inspiration, he could foreshew
many things to come. And thus naked he wandered in yt sweet and delectable
gardeine. For neither wa^ted he any kind of vesture to cloth himself, whom the
sharpenes of no kind of weather could grieve and offend, neither had he about
him any stain, and unseemly thing, for the covering and hiding whereof, he
might be careful. And he had a law given him that he should exercise that
free will that was given unto him in the practice of virtue, that at length he
might by his own demerits deserve to be of the number and company of
heavenly saints. And the law was that he should not presume to touch the
fruit of a certain exceeding goodlye tree which contained the knowledge of
Good and Evil.

God gave him this commandment not that he disdayned that man whom he had
manifoldly blessed, should have the understanding thereof, but that by that
means he would the better forsee and provide those things which apperteined
to his good estate, and preservation. For he knew right well, that if man
were set at liberty, he wooulde straight way work his own confusion. So
therefore God did moderate his liberty, that he again might restreine the
same by a very necessary and expedient law. Neither did he so much forbid
him to eat of that fruit, as that he should not slip in to that, which by
that fruit was meante, and signified. For whither this was signified, that he
should not meddle with those causes, or search by his own industry to attayn
the knowledge of those things which his capacitye could not reach and
comprise: Or that he should not in the choice of good, and refusal of ill, use
rather his own judgment, then the will and pleasure of the almighty, by whose
wisdom he should yield himself to be governed: or this that he should
not inclyne him self to the love of those good things which are mixed and
intermedled with a number of evils (For in the scriptures to know, is
earnestly to desire and follow:) Therefore I say whither he gave that
commandment to man that he embracinge that soueraygne good, that is not
entermedled with any evil, should utterly refuse other good things which
appear fair and pleasant, and yet are corrupt and poisoned, what more wholesome
precept and commandment might have been ordained more profitable for man? For
our wits are utterly confounded, and cloyed with the search of those causes, the
exceeding deepenes whereof our wits may not be able to compass, and in any
affairs to follow our own brain, and not to be lead by the wisdom of God,
it is a most undoubted token of our fall and utter confusion: but to be lead
away from that good thing which is most principal, and chiefest of all other,
being deceived with ye swetnes of any vain, and transitory pleasure, is to be
holden generally as a thing dangerous, and deadlye. This was the estate of
our first parente, which should have been most happy and blessed, if he had
not been acquaynted with that huge, and cruel monsterous beast, that has
brought to all nations pestilent infections, and utter decay. For when that
Prince of darcknes understood, that aucthor of all sin and wickedness, and
chief captain of those angels, who (as we have declared) puffed up with pride,
would through their own power be like unto the immortal and everlasting God,
and therefore fell into the lamentable and pitiful pytte of perdition. I say
therefore when the devil saw man made of earth, ascend unto that place of
glory, from whence he fell, he through envy waxed whote and imagined all kind
of crafts and suttelties, to destroy and utterly overthrow the state of
mankind. Taking on him therefore the shape of a serpente, assaulteth through
guiles and feigned sleights the woman, who^ he thought to subdue with less
labor, for that she was frail and the weaker vessel. He therefore enticeth
her, and with sweet and sugared words allureth her to the eating of the fruit
forbidden. Bearyng her in hand that as soon as she should take a taste of
that most pleasant apple, she should eftsoon be inspyred with that heavenly
knowledge of good and evil. The woman therefore being marueylouslye allured
with the fairenes of the tree, and also inflamed above measure with the desire
of that heavenly science and wisdom, was easily induced to drink that cup
of deadly poison, offered unto her by that most pestilent Serpent. Thus the
woman neglectinge the commandment of the most high God, and gracious geuer
of all goodness, by whose favor and mercy she received life, and was endued
with many gifts, followed the counsel of her most deadlye enemy, inuitinge
also her husband unto that woeful, and bloudye banquet. This was the original
and beginning of the misery of man, this was the root of all evils. Herehence
proceeded death and immortality, which afterward increased more and more and
with most cruel tyranny oppressed all the world. For as soon as man had
yielded himself by sufferance, to be corrupted with the filthy contagio^ of
that foul fault, that evil immediately ran to the veins: and searched even
ye very bowels of the body, and at one time did slay and murder both body
and soul. Which the siely and wretched soul of man incontinently felt, when
it perceived it self separated and haled from God, from whence it took his
beginning, and by whose divine power it mayntened life, and when it understood
that the body was not to feel harm or iniurye by sharpenes of air, and at
lengeth should be bereaved of life, after it had passed through diverse
distresses, and most bitter and grievous lamentations, and sorrows, and of
death and mortalitye these weere certain and evident signs and tokens,
troublesome motions in the body, which declared the minds inconstancy,
affections subject to no rule of reason and understanding, and vile,
chaungeable and waueringe desires. For this was most iustlye decreed, that he
which had broken the commandment of his lord, and most impudently and
wickedlye stood against his will and pleasure, in like manner should have those
which before were obedience, rebellious and contrarily disposed, assaying most
desperatelye to invade and overthrow the fortress of reason. And whereas two
things especially belonged to man, that is to exercise him self in action and
contemplation, and therefore was endued with a reasonable soul, that in what
soever he took in hand he should wisely govern every affecte of the mind and
employ all the power of his soul in the searchinge out of heavenly wisdom:
he in both these parts was deeply wounded. For the mind, when the clear
light thereof was extinct, wherewith it before glistred gloriously, lay now
ouercast with darkness and obscurity, and the whole order of life being as it
were with darcke night overwhelmed, was welnigh put beside his rule and
soueraigntye, so yt although in that darckenes some glimse of light appeared,
yet could it not thereby be guided to the end desired. For the reasonable,
soul was miserably afflicted and wounded deeply, and diversely tossed mith
troublesome storms of the mind, which it could by no means resist. Then
shameful filthiness showed it self before, that time unknown, by the vglye
sight and monsterous aspecte whereof our first parents being dismayed,
shrouded themselves in darcke woods, and covered those parts with leaves of
trees which they felt to be most striving against reason and understanding.
Heerehence came all kind of corruption, herehence rofe al folish and vain
opinions. From this fountayn sprange all vile and wicked d^sires: from thence
came grefes, vexacious, all carnal and fleshelye lusts which easelye wryth
and wreste the fraielty and weakness of the mind whythersoeuer themselves are
bent and inclyned. And those miseries that happened to the mind, were also
imparted to the body which was appointed to endure most paynfull toils, and
labors, and at last to suffer the bitter panges, and pains of death. And in
few to conclude, man was in such case left, as they are that being removed
from high degree, and from a singular hope of further preferment, are cast
headlonge down into extreme misery, and wretchedness. For he was spoiled of
all his ornaments, expelled Paradise, estraunged from his own house, his own
country and the goodly fellowship of ye heavenly wights, and that which might
grieve him most of al being shut out from the love of God, which was before
ratefied unto him by assured couenaunte and promise, the residue of the whole
race of his life he spent in continual tears, and in calamitye, and myserye
most intolerable. And whereas briers and brambles (which by the
commandment of God, the Earth brought forth to his pain) pricked his body:
yet mutch more tormented was his mind, being wounded with the remembrance of
his heinous contempt, and transgression, and with the secret knowledge of his
fault within his own conscience, which kind of remorses, and gripinge
griefs would suffer him to take no delight in worldely pleasure, and did
continually draw aside all his cogitacio^s to the desire of his former
felicity, and the se^sible feelinge of his present miserye. So that this
heaviness and heart breakinge which now happened, proved manifestly the tree to
be of great virtue and efficacy. For now had he by his own deed sufficient
experience, how much miserye grew unto him by his mischievous act, and
present euelles so wrought with him, the better to know prosperitye, when we
happen to fall into some adversity.

This was the miserable wretchedness and lamentable misfortune of our first
parente, into the which he fell headelonge, in that, yeeldinge unto the
temptation of the serpent, he forsook his sovereign Lord and God. Neither
did he only undo him self, but also utterly spoiled his posteritye. For
whereas by course of generation we descend from him which is himself sick
and diseased, it cannot be chosen but that we should draw near unto him in
the similitude of infirmity and heinous offense, and being corrupted with ill
blood derived from him, we should be borne infected with the qualitye of the
same nature. Therefore all posteritye has suffered through him a grievous, and
deadly wound. For whereas our understanding and reason is not a little decayed
through the incurable malady which we have fallen unto us, from our first
parents, as part of our inheritance, it comes to pass that all our
affections and passions of the mind like as wild beasts vncheined, wax
outrageous and not able to be maistered, not sufferinge the mind in a quiet
stay, but disquietinge the same with infinite vexations. The seely mind
therefore troubled with fear, and lustful desire, and miserablye plunged with
diverse kinds of maladies, and distemperatures, is so into contrary sides
plucked, and haled, that it is almost besides it self, in so much it is lead
whither any willfu^l and licentious pleasure, and pestilent appetite will
bring it. The image therefore of our first father sufficiently expressed in
this so great changeablenes and frailty of mind and body, did sow in us the
seed of all other mischiefs, with afterward did invade the children of men.
For first of all when those outrageous affections had by little and little
diminished and overcome the power of our understanding, then was yt apparent
that man his countenance advanced and lifted up to heaven, now being
disgraced was more prove to look on the Earth, and being thereon fullye
fixed, reposed all the confidence and stay of his estate in vain and worldly
goods. Therefore the love of honesty, the glory and honor of true nobility
must of necessity decay, and be extinguished utterly by the neglecte and
contempt of that chief and sovereign good, in which remains the su^me and
perfection of all true honor and godliness. But when the use and custom of
sinninge increased, and daily grew to greater force, and was found more
abundant, it came to pass that no horrible act could be imagined, whither it
proceeded of lust and concupiscence, or of raginge furye, and impudent
boldness, wherewith man defiled not himself. Neither did it suffice him to
commit all kind of villainies whereby faith and the leage of common society
might be hindered: but he fought against God most high, by pollutinge his
relligion, and violatinge his holy laws and ordinances. For whereas their
minds were overwhelmed with darkness, they could not easily comprise the
nature of any thing except they had a certain warrant from the eye, either
some other external sense of the body might give them knowledge thereof.
Therefore seeinge they could in no wise understand the majesty of God, and had
bent themselves to the beholding of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars in
whose beautyfull and clear aspectes they were exceedingely delighted, they
began to honor and worship them as though they had contained in them the
divine majesty and Godhead. From thence they eftsoon fell, (for the mind
being clogged with the multitude of iniquity could not stay in the Stars
themselves) and not only to mortal men, but also to brutish creatures (as
long as by them they reaped any fruit or commodity) they ordained divine
honor to be attributed, and when they were dead, aulters to be erected and
dedicated unto them. What should I recite the Aegiptian Serpent? What should I
make mention of the wicked and horrible honor done unto Osiris, and Isis?
What should I call to memory ye rest of their Idolles, bearinge the image and
likelines of brutish and unreasonable creatures? Again it were to no great
purpose, to understand of the ceremonies or rather reuelles of Bacchus, with as
it may appear by ye word it self, were with a certain furious rage and madness
done and celebrated. To conclude what should I rippe up the rabble of that vile
and stinckinge religion, which has abused the simplicity of all natures, and
defiled all people not only through licentiousnes and outrageous wickedness,
but also by bloudsheddinge and detestable murder. As though it were lawefull
and no offense, if it were done by show and color of religion, to abando^ all
honesty and shamefastnes: which was both in the ceremonies of Venus, and
Bacchus usual, and in many of the rest solemply practiced, in so mutch that
such horrible and detestable cruelty has bin shewe^, that their Aulters has
bin oftentimes imbrued and stained with man's blood. The which thing verelye
has bin practiced not only among the Barbarians, but also where learning and
humanity has bin professed. For both the Rhodians who for credit of
learning were supposed to have Minerua their Patroness, did offerre in their
yearly Sacrifice a man to Saturn. And almost all the Grecians, before they
would march on toward the field, would after a most detestable and horrible
manner defile the Aulters and Temples with manslaughter. And the Romans
though not often, yet sometimes with men offerred up in sacrifice, thought
good to appease the wrath of their Gods. Wherefore little is it to be marueiled
at, if the Thracians, the Frenchmen, the Scythians, and other Nations, at that
time void of all humanity and good ciuility, embraced and well liked of those
Sacrifices, by the instigation and motion of evil spyrites, which consisted in
murder and effusion of blood. And to speak of Diana honored in Scithia,
which was never satisfied with blood (that I might let pass the other cruel
Gods of the gentiles) it is manifest that the Princes of Phaenicia in the
great calamities of their country, were wont butcherly to kill for sacrifice
that child which they most entierly loved. The Ecclesiastical Historyes do
witness also that this was the manner in Scythia, that parents layinge aside
all good Nature, and fatherlye love and pity, were wont to appointe, and as
it were consecrate their children to the fire. But what do I stay in this
matter, whereas it is delivered unto us by the hands of many writers, that
almost no sacrifice was done by them without some notable and great impiety.
In fine it came to pass that a wonderful immunitie and liberty in sinning,
followed that outrageous fury and wickedness. For whereas it is the propertye
of true religion to keep men within the bounds of duty, after that, that
religion was published and allowed which did not only set at naught all duties
appropried and belonginge to honest shamefastnes and good humanitye, but also
brought men to this opynion that the Gods were pleased in unlawful lusts, in
bloudshedinge, in wilful and horrible murder: now it could not be chosen,
but that al men in general thus desperately set, should defyle themselves with all kind of beastlines, and detestable villainy. In the end it came to pass
that sin taking root, and beginning of the deprauation of nature, then
increased by use, lastly perfyted and confirmed by unclean and vile religion,
should work the utter undoing, and overthrow of all mankind. But
paraduenture some man will say what of all this? do you think in that great
wrack and decay of virtue, to have been remaining not one sign, or relic of
true nobility, neither any one man of those ancient times, to have given
himself to the study and love of honestye? I cannot deny but many in that
common miserye of man have been allured through that counterfayt show of
honesty, and have been after a sort stirred up to the exercise and practyze
of virtue. There was no doubt, there was the image and character of God
imprinted in the mind of man, disgraced through sin not clearly put out, and
utterly extinguished. And when thou heareste the image of God, thou must not
think I mean any such picture as might be painted by Protogenes in a table
or curiously set out in couloures by Apelles, or any other resemblance of
any thing made in yuorie by some exquisite craftesma^, which might represe^t
ye lively image of God, For ye image of god is nothing else but ye imitatio^ and
folowinge of his virtue, as near as a man possible may. And that is, a
provident wit, able to co^prise many things, quick and sharp, containing within
it self all seeds and causes of virtue. Therefore whereas we are by the
handie work of God thus made and created, nothing is more agreing to our
nature, and constitution, then true worthiness and honesty. And if so be that we
had been from the beginning free from the infectious contagion of sin and
iniqui^ye, and delivered from all fond perverse opynions, and from all heinous
and deadlye offenses, virtue it self would have easily won us to the love
of Godliness. But whereas the multitude of those so many mischiefs conspyring
together seeks the spoil of this image of God, it is most commonly lead away
from the good inclination of nature: and then falls out that contencion and
as it were civil broyle, in which reason enlightened with a certain glimse and
similitude of divine nature oftentimes victoriouslye triumphs: but is many
more times lead captive and yields to beastlines and sensuality, yet so, that
it leaves some certain signification of doloure and grief in that striving
and as it were drawinge back, it is carried away from virtue and Godliness.
Which manifestlye proves that the sparcke and grace of virtue may be
through some lewd lust and outrageous concupiscence enfeebled, but never
subdued. For no man has ever bin so exceedinglye given to licentiousnes,
either so dronken with the dregs of sensuality, but as soon as that wavering
and wilful pleasure (the mistie vapoure whereof had bleared the eyes of his
understanding) was vanished, waxing heavy, crucifying himself through
sorrow and lamentation, he was in conscience grievously tormented. Which ye
young man in Plautus sufficiently testifyeth, for he in this wise complayneth.

Al those things knew I perfectly which thou did the^ declare
I had in mind imprinted fast, how I did never spare
To spend and spoil my fathers goods, to stayn their ancient name
That glory purchasde to our race, and eke renoumed fame.
I knew what best did me beseem, ne could it put in ure,
Such force did Venus work in me, so did she me allure.
Whereas he makes mention of the force of Venus, it may plainly appear that
he notes unto us those evil affections and the inconstancy which we
received of our first father which also grew and was increased, through the
sin of al posteritye. Again where he inuaieth against himself miserable and
wretch that he was, and by an inward consideration of his offense conceiueth
grief, herein he shows some sparck of grace and heavenly wisdom which
delights in nothing except it be honest, and rightuous. There are who can
deny but there are in us by nature remayninge (that we return from whence we
have digressed) the seeds of virtue, the fervent and earnest zeal of honesty,
the desire and love of true nobility. Yet notwtstandinge such has been the
fraylty and weakness of man his nature, such has been the calamity of man
through sin received, that although very many through a good inclination of
nature have attained a certain apparante show of virtue: yet very few have
embraced the true and perfect form of honestye and virtue. For albeit they
affected a certain kind of worthy renoume, yet what true worthiness was, they
knew not, when they never looked up into heaven, whence we ought to fetch
al true and perfect virtue. And how could they behold the heavens? whose minds
were fully fixed on the earth, supposing they should direct al their devises
either to the gatheringe of worldely pelf and riches or to the attayning of
such praises and glory as the people pleased to bestow on them. I pray you
therefore what have those iolye fellows, and great wise me^ gotten. which
lived so many years ago? what has most noble and valiau^te Emperors
compassed by their worthy and great enterpryces taken in hand for the titles of
honor and glory? may we think they have bestowed al their industrye, labor,
and trauaill, in the seking of glory and renou^e in vain? No doubt in vayn.
For they carefully embraced that virtue, that was fair and goodly in show but
in deed a cou^terfayt, and a vayn shadow: For all men although they had
before their eyes a certain rese^blance of virtue yet could they not keep
themselves safe and free from the common plague and infectio^ that annoyed
generally all mankind. Neither could they be delivered from these strange
maladies of the soul wherewith they were miserablye entangled, whereas it was
not in their own power to help themselves: and God both the fountain, and
last end of all virtue, by whose only virtue, they might obtayn it, they did
not with the eyes of their mind sufficiently behold. Therefore there reigned in
that age no true virtue but the false and counterfayte form of virtue: no true
and perfect worthiness, but the vain shadow of worthiness: no true desire of
renomne, but a pretensed, unruly and fond lusting after fame and glory. All
which truly were not so much incited with the excellent, and delectable
shape of honesty it self as that they might mount up to the state of honor,
and with admiration be reverenced of the people, did take in hand those notable
and famous acts. That if it so be that they which seemed somewhat to put to
their endeavor to their attayning of virtue had not ye fruit of their labors,
what may be thought of the rest, who having broken the bands of pyety,
honestye, and godliness, did unto nothing so much bend themselves, as to
enterpryce all horrible factes and villanyes, thereby to fulfill the immoderate
and outrageous lust that they had, to make proof of all things.

IN time past Jury only kept it self within the compass and bounds of duty,
being lincked and streyghted in with the laws and precepts of God, and with
most pure and sincere religion, and a long time free from all abominable
superstition, of which it is written* There is no Idol in Jacob neither
carved image in Israel. The lord their God is there.

And in a another place: God is known in Jury, and his holy name in Israel.
This Nation did diligently exercise it self in the study of Holiness, and
hopinge for the life to come, practiced as much as in it did lie, all manner of
piety and righteousness. Notwithstanding the nature of true and perfect
Godliness was not expressed in their law, but such a kind of honesty, which
might seem to have bin not absolute and entire good, but rather an unfinished
and rude shape of honesty. No doubt it restrained men from many wicked, and
wilful enterpryses, it withstoode furious madness and impiety, it did
seuerelye and sharply punish offenders, yet did it not lead and guide any
man to the perfectest and highest step of virtue and wisdom. For they were
provoked to the love of virtue, not by the incitinge and allurement of virtue
it self, but partly by dread and fear, partly by prefermente, appointed for
such as did surpass all other in innocence and integrity of life. For
whereas they saw in the first ordinance and establishment of the Law, flames
of fire flashe out in every part of Heaven, the Earth, and air to quake with
the vehemente and terrible ratlinge of thunder, strange lighteninges fall from
the firmament, through the flakes and flames whereof the highest mountain on
every side was set on fire, besides the dreadful sound of the trumpette, the
wonderful smokes and thick mistie clouds, and the rest of those terrible
aspectes which manifestly declared the majesty of the Godheade it self
present: thus being marvelously daunted with fear, and stricken with
astonishme^t, with loud voice they call upon Moses. Speak thou (say they)
unto us, and we will eftsoon give ear unto thee. Let not the Lord speak
unto us, least happly we die. But unto all this what answers Moses? He
bids them to be of good courage, and gives them to understand the provident
will of God. Fear you not (quoth he) for God is come to prove you, and that
you should stand in awe of him, and that you should sin no more. Which in
effect sounds thus. As yet you are not by the will and appointmente of God
free from wicked desiers, and from other evil affections of the mind: neither
are you such which of your own good nature will be brought to honesty and
Godliness. This terror therefore God has stricken into your minds, that at the
least by that means he might restrain you from your wilful and wicked
ways. But with what rewards does he allure them to the exercise of virtue?
Eue^ with the same almost does he entice them, the which the rude and ignorant
multitude does so much desire and wish, with plenty of corn, with abundance
of riches, with sound and perfect health of the body. But if that be only to
be termed virtue, which not constrained by fear, but by a mere voluntary
motion does her office and duty, and takes any worthy enterprice in hand not
for the attayninge transitory things in this life, but because it directs it
self to God the final end of life in deed, then how may that he deemed a
virtue which is by fear forced and wrested out, whose end and felicity is
put not in the true worshipping of the everlasting God, but in the careful
coveting of worldly commodities? I would not have those hereby signified, who
having more experience of the frailty of man his nature, right wisely
understood that they could not of themselves perform those things yt were
commanded in the law, except they should seek refuge at Gods hands, the
only stay of ruling and guidinge their lives aright. For they that far
passed all other in rare and singular wisdom, had no confidence in their own
natural strength, and did put their whole trust in God, and being confirmed
with the power of the holy spirit, came to the higheste perfection of virtue.
Who notwithstanding were few in number. All the rest, who either leaned to
much to their own reason and understanding, or for worldly respects did their
duties, could by no means purchase renown, to virtue due and appertayning,
neither could any long time because of the infirmity and imbecilitie of their
minds, continue in good living, nay rather fell headlong into great and
horrible impiety, being entangled and snared with wicked desires, and the
entisements of most filthy pleasures. Besides this many of them when they had
defiled and polluted themselves with the foul and shameful stinkinge sin of
any superstition whatsoever, they were in that desperate state and condition,
that no outrageous and detestable villainy could be imagined, which they
willingly would not commit, in so much that they would throw their natural
children into flaming fire, in honor of their false and feigned Gods. Of this
so great and notable impiety, fury, and madness, many holy and worthy fathers
complain, but especially Jeremy most lamentably above all other. For example,
when he speaks in the person of God thus: They have brought their wickedness
into my house, in which my name is called upon, that they might pollute it, and
that they might build alters in Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of
Ennom, there to destroy their sons and daughters with fire. And again, This
place shall not hereafter be called Tophet, and the valley of the sons of
Ennom, but the valley of murder, And I will bring to naught the Counsel
of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and I will cut them with the sword in
the sight of their ennemies. These words spoke Jeremy. But it is not
necessary to rippe up the rabble of those mischiefs, with the which that
Nation was infected, through the corruption whereof, true belief was decayed,
and relligion subverted, the law of God brought in contempt, and by the means
of lust and superstition, trodden under foot. It is sufficient that we
understand yt not so much as in that nation, but only in a very few, there
remained the desire of true and perfect virtue, and yt the greatest part of
them yielded themselves thrall to more impiety of sin and wickedness, then any
other men. Neither is the crime to be valued alike in him that has had no
kind of instruction and learning, as in him, who to all kinds of virtue has
bin by the laws of God trained and directed. That if neither reason to men,
nor practice to the virtuous, nor the law to the Hebrews, had sufficient
force in it self to the attayning true and perfect comme^dation and glory
annexed to virtue, and nothing else in things appertayning to man, is left to
put us in mind of virtue: it follows by good reason that all perfection and
worthiness of true virtue and nobility lay hidden and extincte all that time of
our ancestors, neither that there was any place in the world, whither the
abomination of sin, as a certain deadly and pestilente infection did not
creep. Verelye this was that huge and monsterous kingdom of sin and death,
which had a long time oppressed all Nations, of the which the holy Scriptures
in so many places complain. There is no man (says the Scripture) which loves
justice and righteousness, there is no man that seeks earnestly after God, all
men are gone astraie out of the right way, there is not one man living that
has done his duty, to conclude all the world is oppressed with the tirannie
of sin, and the cruelty of death. This also: All men are occupied in the
study of vanity, they are carried away with dreams and feigned fantasies.
They embrace nothing but that which is void of wisdom and honesty, and
full of all error and damnable impiety. That also is a most worthy saying,
wherein the glory and flourishing estate of man is compared to grass, and to
the flower of the field, which if any boisterous blast shall happen to shake,
it is so scattered that the least sign thereof may be no more seen and
perceived. Much like unto ye saying of Esaie. All flesh is grass, and all the
glory thereof, is as the flower of the field, the grass wythered, the flower
eftsoon vanishes away, but the word of the Lord endures for ever. All which
evidently prove, yt there was no lively and perfect image of dignity and
worthiness, after that fall of the first man, nor any absolute kind of true and
right renown, nor any form at all of true Nobility, when all the world
was universally overwhelmed with all kind of sin and abomination, and all
things over spread with darckenes, had lost their beauty and seemelines.

THE SECOND Book of Christian Nobility.
NOw sufficiently (as I think) it may appear, that the nature of true and
perfect virtue and noblenes, has these many years passed lien hid in
darcknes: whereas the chief, and sovereign good was to most part of men
utterly unknown: whereas the pestilent and tyrannical reign of sin had
enfebled ye force of man's reason: whereas their right worthy attempts, who
in wit and industrious travail excelled other, stretched only so far, to
practice and exercise one only kind of virtue, and that not in deed, but in
word and show goodly and glorious: whereas they also that had understanding of
the law of God, through weakness and imbecillitie of mind, infected with most
pestilente and pernicious errors, were occupied and conuersau^t in all kind
of filthiness and abomination. General therefore was that plague and misery,
universal was that fire brande and flame, which a long time ran through
the whole world, that darcknes was common and every where, wherewith all those
means to attain renown and worthiness were covered and obscured, till the
time came which by ye secret purpose and provident will of God, was before all
worlds declared, at what time man kind should be delivered from so great
misery and wretchedness. For when the Son of righteousness appeared, who
dispersed the foggie miste of error and impiety, that before darckned ye
minds understanding, and gave a clear and heavenly light to the seely and
miserable estate of man: Men began with their eyes to behold the true seemly
shape and form of honesty. Then began they to be inflamed and stirred up to
the attayning of praise and glory incidente only to true and perfect virtue,
being by the holy spirit of God directed, and established. Who truly was not
so much incensed against man in the correction and punishment of his heinous
transgression, yt he would clean blot and race out of his memory the most
excellent image of himself, imprinted in man. But rather for the exceeding
greatness of his offense, used a mild and gentle chastisement: and also
appointed to man such a pain, as whereby he sought not severe reuengeme^t of
his impiety: but to apply to his disease, a wholesome medecin and remedy, and
to recall him again to virtue and honesty. But it was necessary by ye law of
righteousness, yt some, whose weldoinge through their intolerable pride and
stubbernes, was not to be hoped for, should feel the whippe and scourge of
severity, only to be a terror unto other: and they being an example unto
them, it fell out yt many returned from their wicked ways, and by that means
the number was far greater of those that might rejoice in the love and mercy
of God, then complain of his sharp and severe judgment. To conclude after
sin and wickedness was once committed, all means possible were devised, to
heal ye festered soore, by sin procured. There were laid forth menacing
threatninges, there was sent among men death and destruction, general
ouerwhelming of waters, great waste and hurt by fire. Again, there happened
strange sights and prodigious monsters, to fear and terrify the minds of
me^. Further the broiles and tumults of war, the utter ruin and subversion
of countries, had this meaning to strike into men some remorse of sin, and
to withdraw them from their wickedness and abhominacio^. On the other side the
commodities of this life, the law set down by the finger of God, the
institution of holy religion, Gods promises, his exceedinge benefits, were to
reduce men both to their duty, and to the purchasing of their own health and
safety. God therefore of his entyre and fatherly clemency, goodness, and
mercy, provided for the safegarde and preservation of man his estate by all
kind of means, whether they were* ordained for his chastiseme^t, or for a
means to allure him to virtue and goodness. But after that the extremity of
his sickness so much increased, and his wickedness waxed so great, that his
wounded soul seemed almost incurable, ye chief and principal of all
Physicians, applied unto him another sovereign medecin, and gave unto him an
especial preservation, not only to repair that which was impaired, and lost
by disease, but also fully to restore his former health, with further
encreasinge the same with strength, and all other necessary supplies. This no
doubt was the wisdom of Almighty God, the eternal son of the father
eternal, begotten in such wise as no tongue can declare, the perfect image of
his fathers glory, ye fountain and welspring of life and immortality. He
therefore who had in the beginning of the world, imprinted in man the shape and
liklines of himself, has losed him which was bound with fetters of sin and
death, and compassed about with al kind of misery and calamity, and has by his
singular and divine providence restored him to his former liberty. First
therefore it was expediente and necessary that, that abominable and most
heinous offense wherewith mankind generally was infected, should be washed
away: and that the violating and defacing of the relligion of God should be by
some holy sacrifice or satisfaction raunsomed, and that the filthy stain by
wickedness and sin received, should be cleansed, and clean taken out. That at
the length man being thus delivered from the bondage and tyranny of sin,
might recover the worthy titles of his aunciente dignity and renown, and in
the end attain the glory of life everlasting. But no such sacrifice could
possiblye be found, by which so great impiety might be purged, or the just
judgment of God satisfied, or the stain received, quite and clean taken
out, and washed away. Therefore we all defiled with sin, subject and
thrall to most woofull calamities, soyled with the suddes and filthye frothe
of all kind of dishonesty were borne to perpetual and everlasting miserye.
This should have been our wretched and unfortunate estate, except our most
bountefull and merciful Savior Christ, had beholden us most miserable and
cursed ^aitifes with the eyes of his mercy, and had of his singular gracious
goodness, taken upon him ye true form and shape of man, and retaininge still
the majesty of his Godheade had after a wonderful order united and joined
thereunto the nature of man. Therefore the Lord and Ruler of all the world, at
ye bendinge of whose browe the Heavens and Earth do quake and tremble, to the
intent he might bring man (lamentably lost, and expelled out of the
territory and pleasant place of Paradise) to his native soil, and country
again: he descendinge from the highest heaven, was conuersaunte here with us
in Earth, in such sort yt he neither laid aside the rule of Heaven above, nor
yet did seclude and separate himself from the swaie and government of the whole
world beside. By this league and mutual conjunction of the divine and human
natures, sin that had taken deep root in man was incontinently pluck up by
the roots: the rule and aucthority of death was abridged, and for all manner
of wickedness with the purest and holiest sacrifice yt moughte be, satisfaction
was made. For what more holy kind of sacrifice could be invented, then that
which was done and celebrated by the Highest Bishop, who was by the ancient
Prophecies of the holy Fathers said to be a Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech? Who made sacrifice not with sheep or calves, or any offeringes
by the vain supersticion of men allowed of, but with his own most precious
blood. Who that he moughte keep us from that death and destruction that did
hang over our heads, was content for the general salvation of us all to let
those things light upon his own head, and for our sakes to offer up
himself a pure and undefiled sacrifice. Who suffered himself to be scourged
with rods, and to be hanged on the cross, that he might hear the
punishment of our general offense, and appease Gods wrath against us with the
sacrifice of his sacred body. O exceedinge greatness of God, O plenty infinite,
and unmeasurable of the benefits of God, and wonderful largnes of his gifts,
heaped and powered upon us. He the maker of all things, by whose power all
things both above and beneath were framed and finished: who rules and
disposes all things, the exceedinge glory of whose majesty the Heavens
cannot contain, did lie enclosed in the womb of a most blessed Virgin, and
took upon him the very true and perfect shape of a man, that he might place
man in some degree and divine perfection. This was that which many hundred
years before was foretold by men inspired with the holy ghost: to wit,
that time would come, that God covered with human shape, should use the
office of an instructor and teacher, and should deliver unto us the wholesome
discipline of virtue and godliness. For Esaye writes thus. All nations shall
run to him, and mutch people shall go, and they shall say, come ye let us
ascend up to the hill of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and
he shall teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths. And in another
place he utters such speech as if God the father should impart his mind and
counsel with his son. In this manner: I have appoyncted thee to be the
atonement betwixt me and mankind to be a light to lighten all nations, to
make the blind to see, to set him at liberty, which is fast tied in chains.
Again in another place the son of God speaks thus of him self. The
spirit of God rests on me, for that he has anointed me, and sent me to
instruct the meek in spirit, and to remedy the^ that are afflicted. Baruch
the Prophet calls him God, from whence has spronge all knowledge, and
wisdom. And a little after this, he says: he has appeared in the Earth and
talked with men. And Ioell does with these words stir up all Godly men.
Rejoice O you sons of Sion, and be glad in the lord your God, for that he
has sent you a teacher to instruct you in all righteousness. Therefore after
that the voice of that heavenly docter, in darkness gave light, and had
instructed mankind with the rules of true religion, and the discipline of
wisdom, and had taken away the greedy minds desire of humayne and tra^sitory
pleasures, and had sheewed them that nothing in Earth was greatly to be
feared, not death, which kills only the body, but does not so mutch as
touch the soul: not want of children, lack of friends, pouertye, and such
like, which if they ircke and grieve the carcas, yet nevertheless the good estate
of the soul, which is immortal, they cannot hurt, and had taught them
afterward to embrace charity, lyberality, temperaunce, when he had deeply
imprinted these things in the mind of man: and had confirmed the hearts of
his folowers and auditors with an assured hope of immortalitye, and inflamed
them with a fervent desire of divine perfection: who can doubt but that now,
not an image and show of virtue, but the wonderful excellency of perfect
virtue allured them, that were borne to renoume and after a merueylous sort
inflamed? What shall we say? In that he did not only teach them is exercise
themselves in all honesty and godliness, but also confirmed their strength
whereby they might be able constantly to perform those things that he before
had taught them. Which also by holy Oracles and Prophesies was before showed.
The eyes (says he) of the blind shall be opened. It is not to be understood
that the holy Prophet did prophecy these things only of bodyly eyes. For all
those things that have been declared unto us through the instinct and
inspiration of the holy ghost by those excellent men, are not to be applied
to the body, b^t referred to the mind, and soul. Again it follows. The
ears of the deaf shall be opened. He calls them deaf, which has shut their
ears, to the intent they would not understand the will and pleasure of God,
of whom Ieremye speaks. Behold their ears are uncircumcised, and they
cannot hear. Notwithstanding Christ of his mere mercy has brought to
pass, that the deaf with their ears should receive good instruction. I pray
you what follows afterward. Then shall the lame leap as the Heart, and the
toungues of the dombe shall sound forth the praise and glory of God. What is
understood by the lame, they are not ignorant, which are but young and simple
scholars in divinity. For they are lame that have any kind of let or maime in
their soul, by the impediment whereof they are stopped in the race of piety
and godliness: who can neither endeavor by force of strength nor by any means
so deal by swiftnes of runninge, that they may obtain the reward of virtue.
Therefore consider and ponder with your self how manifoldly the soul of man
is blessed by him that restored the liberty of man and browghte him out of
danger and captivity.

Who gave sight to the blind, opened the ears of them that were deaf, gave
swiftnes to the lame, so that like Hearts they are able to run up to the
tops of the highest mountains, and make engines to destroy Serpents.
Lastly infantes, suckinge babes, and dombe men can utter Hymns of praise, and
songs of thanks geuinge. But in this chiefly God did deal with us most
lyberally, that whereas we were before altogether lost and forlorn, and no
part of our life void of miserable wretchedness, now by the great goodness
and healpe of Jesus Christ, we are restored to our former felicity.

And yet his benefyte in this one poyncte far exceeded all other, that he
poured into man largel^ his wisedomt and grace, and with continual care and
study preferued his holy law, not ingrauinge and curiously caruing the same
in tables, but most deeply imprintinge it in his heart and mind. For now
nothing letting the mind, being in great felicity and blessedness, it did
wholly yield it self to all kind of righteousness, and celestial discipline,
the virtue and power of the most high and everlasting God showed it self
most louinglye unto the soul of man being his own image and liklines,
which he in his creation had endowed with all grace and virtue, and now
appeared, and gave unto it a clearer light and did inflamed it with an earnest
desire of heavenly wisdom. And if the Law be nothing else but a right and
perfect rule of reason, assuredly that reason which not only by nature, but
that which is much and far better and by the pressed and ready help and
power of almightye God was made so perfec that it might easelye apply it
self to follow the will and pleasure of God, it can not be gainsayde but
that it co^teineth the law of God. For thus it is written in ye Prophet
Hieremie. This shall be the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel.
After those days faith the Lord, I will give them my law to possess the bowels
of them and will write it within their hearts. And this law is Christ himself
even he which is called the wisdom and power of God the father, who is to
mortal men an example of rare and excellent virtue, and the only means to
govern their life by, being always present with those minds which of vnpure
he made chaste and holy and be kindles them being stirred up with the motion
of the holy spirit of God, to the desire of immortal glory. And whereas by
the capacity and understanding of man there can be nothing comprised greater
then the power, majesty, and godhead of Christ, which we know is present
always with us, by whose grace we are moved to embrace true and perfect
virtue, certes there is notonge so eloquent, no discourse of man so copiouse,
and so rhetorical, that can declare sufficiently, or effectually set f^th the
exceedinge greatenes of the mercy, and ^lemencie of God. And now me think I
see (most renowned Prince) that I have through a certain boldness, incide^te to
young men, rashelye and aduenturously taken upon me so great an interpryce, as
I shall not in any one point happily discharge. For I am entered into ye
discourse of those things as it were into the deep, and main Sea, with ye
profou^dnes whereof all eloquence, and oratory of man must needs be
confounded and overwhelmed. But what do I speak of the understanding of man? The heavenly Powers themselves, ca^ scarcely through their divine and
angelical vttera^ce, worthily handle matters of so great importance: so far
of is it, that the tongue of a mortal man, often defiled with vnpure and
unseemly speeches can with exquisite learning describe the wonderful benefits
of God, bestowed on man. For is there any manne endued with such singularitye
of judgment, that he is able to conceive, much less express in words in
what manner the Son of God has taken unto him the shape and form of man,
and with so wonderful a link of conjunction, united his and our natures, that
being very God, was perfect man, that he might cleanse and purify the whole
generation of man, from every blot and blemish of sin and might keep them
safe, holy, and undefiled from all kind of wickedness? further what kind of
eloquence is able to express the miserye of the cross, which Christ himself
provided, and prepared as a bulwark and engine to undermine and overthrow the
force of our enemy who ca^ set forth as the worthiness of the matter it self
requi^eth the unconquerable virtue of him with the which he stroke to the
ground, and crushed in pieces that venomous serpent, into whose power al the
generally were fallen, and extinguished the far stretched kingdom of death,
and banished and put to flight all supersti^io^s, and barbarous behauours. That
in mean time I omit that, how he was raised from death and bearyng with him
the spoils which he being the victor and conqueror in all battails procured
to himself with wonderful glory entered into the throne celestial, that
from thence forth he moughte bring under his authority and eternal
jurisdiction al countries, and nations. Also that I omit to speak of that
kindlynge of fire of the holy spyryte, wherewythe the Apostles minds inflamed
with a rare and syngular constancy, declared things secret and heavenly, and
filled the whole word with Christ's holy name. All these things stryke into
our minds a wonderful admiration, and through their exceeding greatness bereue
man of his reason and understanding, and makes his tongue to folter, and
stagger. Therefore it is a great matter and difficult, and not only excedeth
the slendernes of my simple wit, but is a thing, whch cannot be compassed by
man's reach and capacity to utter and declare any one part of those things,
which not the doctrine and tradition of men, but the wisdom of God has
inspyred into our minds, notwithstanding: that should have been considered,
before we had in our first entrance as it were passed forth out of the heaven.
Now truly whereas we have boldly launched into the deep, we must hoyse up our
sails. Therefore leauinge that argument which we have before dilated so
farforth as it was lawful and we durst presume, we will by Gods aid and
assistance brieflye speak of those things which concern the worthy titles
of a Christian name.

ANd first as touching virtue if (as it was of us before declared) yt only is
to be demed a virtue, which proceedinge from God, always is referred to God,
and to him directs al her actyons: and evident it is that the heavenly and
celestial kind of virtue did only proceed originally from the doctrine and
mighty power of Christ, and it was powered only into the minds of the^ which
were the true folowers of Christ: it consequently follows that one lyin
Christians the perfect light of true nobilitye appears. For this is the
only virtue which weakened all the strength and cut a sunder the synowes of
sin which restored to the former beauty the most excellent and divine
substance of the soul, defiled with all uncleanness, which did make strong and
lusty the feeble strength of the soul with a marvelous swiftnes and consta^cie
far passinge the opinion and credit of men, which has aliened all our
cogitations from all human and transitory pleasures, to the study of holiness
and pure religion, and has laid open a sure and ready path way to heaven. Let
any man (if it so please him) compare that kind of virtue which was in ye
Grctians and Romans both, that was to outward appearance worthy great
renoumne, with the nobilitye of a Christian man, he shall eftsoon perceive what
great odds and difference there is betwixt them both. Their virtue attained by
man's travail and pain rests in things vain and transitory. The virtue of
Christians given to the^ by the francke, and free gift of God has a most
assured hope, fixed in God. Their virtue has respect to temporal treasure,
and the glorious glisteringe of wordlye pleasures (which in short space
perishes and comes to nothing) the virtue of Christianes respects only the
things that no time shall consume, the things that are heavenly, and
everlasting. Their virtue darckned with the contagions of sin, and brought
low creeps on the ground: but the virtue of Christians being pure, and
undefiled swyftly, and confidently flies up to heaven.

Their virtue with a waueringe hoope and fainte courage thinks on their
glory. The virtue of Christians, rests and stays on a most form and
assured hope of immortality and thinks certainly to enjoy the true fruict,
and effect of glory. Lastly their virtue pufte up with most light and
fantastical opinions stirs up among simple and fond men great admiration.

The virtue of Christians illumined with the true light of holiness, and
sanctimonye, rauisheth wise men with the desire and love of true and
everlasting worthiness. To conclude in the one, may you see a certain half
dead image of virtue: in the other virtue her self, furnished with all
necessary healpes, and beautified and setforth with all her due titles, and
ornaments. Again he shall easily understand, wherein they both differ, which
will give himself to the understanding of their effects and operations. For
he that will examine and diligently consider Christian lyberality, meekenes,
and temperance, and the offices, and duties that spring out of their other
virtues: and will compare them with the actions that proceed out of humayne
virtue: shall find that the soul of a perfect christian man, is an holy place
and Temple in the which the eternal Godhead of the blessed Trinitye
inhabiteth. For so he him self testifies. I and my father will come to visit
him, and we will make with him our abode and mansion place. And else where. I
will make my habitation among them, and will walk up and down. And Paul in
many places calls the minds of Christians the churches, and Temples of God.
Therefore whereas God himself has made his seat, and dwellinge place in the
minds of them, that trace the steps, and tread the pathwaye of Christ,
that his aid and assistaunce being always pressed, and at hand, he might
inflame the^ with an earnest desire of followinge his divine virtue, it is a
ridiculous thing, co compare the bare show of any human virtue, to a
virtue so exceedinge excellent,

But now touching nobility what should I say? For if it be true that the
wise and learned suppose all nobylitye to spring out of virtue, and do think
the fame to be nothing else but a race, and kindred illumined with rare and
singular virtues, truly that stock a family yt is fr^yght with divine
virtues, cannot be thought but to issue out of a divine race and progeny. And
therefore we do not timerously, and staggeringely, but with a loud voice, and
bold courage say yt the whole generation of Christians fetch their petegree
from God himself. Who have not their generation in that manner as the race of
those famous worthyes that Homer writes of. For they, when some of them
excelled other in any notable and famous Act, did easily challenge unto
theimselues a feigned nobilitye, referringe the first beginning of their whole
kindred to ye false and wicked Gods of the Gentiles. But we Christians truly
call our father not Jupiter, or Bacchus, but the high, allmighty and
everlasting GOD. Neither can any man, without an heinous, and intolerable
offense, doubt of this so worthy and famous gentility, saying it is made
evident and known unto us by so many and so immunerable testimonies of holy
scripture. First John the holy Prophet of God, does say that those which has
received the faith of Christ, have received this special benefit, that they
are made the children of God. In so much that they are not in any wise to be
esteemed of that line, to the which by co^sanguinity they are linked, or of
that race into which by adoption they are received, but are to be reputed and
referred as the ofspringe, and children of God. Behold (says he in an other
place) what benefit we have received of God in that we are called the sons of
God. But what says Paul? In how many places? How notably, how
rhetorically, does he dispute of the excellencye of nobility. As where he
calls Christ our brother, where he says that by the mere bounty, and free
grace of the holy spirit, we are adopted into the kindred and family of God.
VVheras he with vehement speech calls that universal creator of all things,
the father of us all. But can you require a greater warrant then his own
testimony? I will declare (says he) thy name unto my brethren, and in the
midst of thy holy Temple will I praise the. And in another place. You must
not call upon any father in Earth, for one only is your father in heaven:
finally this. I go up to my father and yours, my God, and your God. It were an
endless labor to collecte and gather together all aucthorities that ratify and
confirm this divine kind of generation and kindred. But I have said enough
and to mutch all ready, especially whereas I hasten to speak of other matters.
But this I suppose not out of the way to warn you of that they are not diverse
families and kinredes in which we repose this holy and godly nobility. For
although they are by blood severed, by estate and condition diverse, by reason
of distinct places infinite: yet after they are into one place assembled, to
the intent they should show themselves valiant souldiars under their chief,
and general Captain Christ, they are incontinently tied together, and united
with one blood of kindred, and consanguinity. For they have now laid aside
all alliance and proximity of blood, by which before they were severed, and
being adopted into the house and kindred of God, in which there is no
distinction of birth, they are now equal and all a like Gentlemen. For after
that they being inwardly sanctified by the outward element of water in the
holy sacrament of Baptism, for most part had renounced the old use and
custom of sin, and had laid aside the prince and image of our first father,
and leauinge their former life, and being as it were borne again, began to
enter into a new life, there was wrought incontinently a new disposition of
the mind of man, and there did spring up and arise therein a wonderful
perfection, and excellencye of nature: so that no^e no sign of man's infirmity
was left. Therefore that birth day of ours we ought not to solempnize wherein
we are borne in to the world, being by nature appoincted to all kind of
miseries, and woeful calamities, but that day (I say) we ought to celebrate
with wonderful joy and pleasure, in which the light of heavenly grace was
offered unto us, and our salvation and liberty by the gracious goodness and
benefit of Christ our blessed savior, procured. For we are not so much to be
called the children of those Parents by whose means we enjoy this wretched
and mortal life: as the children of God himfelfe, of whom we have this kind
of life, that is full of divine perfection, and by whom at length we shall
obtain immortality. Therefore although a kindred be made of them that are now
ioygned together, but were distinct, called, and chosen allmoste out of all
Nations, differinge in place, in manners and nature dislyke, although they are
all called to the participation of this most holy covenant, yet one kindred of
al kinredes is made, having the very self same holy rightes, the very self
same root and original of their gentility. The first beginning of our race
and kindred (as it is before declared) is God himself, at whose beck all
things were made, and are preserved in their good estate, unto whom all
things are carried with a desire passinge man's cogitation and credit. For he
was the aucthour of our generation, he blessed us with most excellent gifts,
and called us to the inheritance of immortal glory, he enritched us with all
heavenly and celestial orname^tes. What thing can a man devise in his mind in
estimation and worthiness more excellent then ye man should be raised out of ye
slime of the Earth, to climb to so high a degree and estate of dignitye.

Let any man therefore (if him lists) vaunt of his badges and cognizances, let
him bring down the line of his noble race from the very first founder of his
nobility, let him with words of very light credit* aduouch Hercules, or
some one of the worthies to be the chief and first beginner of his house and
kindred, or if he may purchase credit thereby, let him descend from the race of
Iuppiter himself, so that we may truly call the eternal and everlasting God
our father, which truly we may be bold to do, whereas we retain within us
enclosed the spyrite of god, which is unto us a pleadge of this our divine and
spiritual nobility. For no more assured and more substanciall testimony can
possibly be spoken of, the^ that gift of the holy Ghost most bountefully
bestowed upon Christian men, with which they are inflamed, with which as with an
earnest desire of celestial things in all kind of virtue, they are made
vigilant which purchases to the soul, security, joy, and a wonderful
charity. This assistance of the holy spyryte is of that sort, that it will not
suffer us to be of weak and faint either courage, or hope. Of the which that
we might the better entreat, the very Etymology, and worthynes of the name
of a Christian is to be declared, the beginning of which name I will somewhat
more at large express. And whereas that is co^monlye known, it is not
needful for me to give no^yce thereof that the name of Christ, implies a
certain unction and anointing. forth very same signifies (...) in Greek,
that Vngi in latin, which in our tongue is to be anointed.

THere was in time past an ointment of great holiness and virtue, white
wonderful solemn ceremonies made, wherewith they that were ordained Pryestes,
Princes, and Prophets were wont to be anointed. And that it was lawful for no
man to enter into priesthode, either to take upon him the majesty and
aucthority of a King, except he were anointed with this holy ointment, it is
a thing more commonly known then that itne death by any man more amply to be
discoursed. And how Prophets should have the same, poured upon them it
appears by the histories of kings. For there God commanded Elias to annoint
Ahael and Iehu, and to create one king of Siria, the other of Samaria Further
he adds. Thou shall anoint Helizeus the son of Saphat and appoint him a
Prophet in thy room. It was not therefore at that time lawful neither to
execute the office and duty of a king, nor to enter into holy orders of
Pryesthode, nor for Prophettes sometimes by divine inspiration to foretell
things to come, or to enterprete any difficulte or secret misterye, except
they had been before with this oil anointed, and consecrated. Not truly
because there was that virtue in Cassia or Cinamome or other sweet odoures
tempered with oil, that without them we should think no man able to attain
honor and soueragnetye. But no doubt there was another kind of oil secret and
spyrituall, where of this compounde devised by Moses, was but a shadow and
outward sign, without which no man could as his estate required govern a
kingdom, no man incorruptly exercise ye most holy function of Priesthode, no
man through the divine spirit of Prophecy,, foretell things to come. For no
other thing is this kind of oil, but the aid and assistance of the holy
spyrite always at hand, and a heavenly gift by Gods gracious goodness bestowed
upon pure and undefiled minds, by the power whereof many abydinge here in
earth, have after a sort obtained, the estate and condition of heavenly
wightes. This is that oynment wherewith Christ was washed from top to toe as
it is written. The spirit of God rests upon me, for that he has anointed
me. But Daniell does not only Prophecye of the annoyntinge, but shows that
it is limited within the space of iii. score and x weeks within which time it
should come to pass that the stayne of sin should be clean washed away, and
the gilte of impyetye satisfied, and the chief of the^ which are called holy,
should be anointed not with any such oil, wherewith the body might be for a
short time through the sweet smell and pleasant sauoure delighted, but whereof
the soul should receive endless comfort, and everlasting joy, and pleasure.
Which is more plainly in another place declared in this wise. Who^ God has
anointed (says he) with the holy ghost and virtue And whereas al those
functions which have been of old time in some sign signified, and bestowed on
diverse men, were after a most excellent order and all at ones to be bestowed
on Christ. For his everlasting kingdom, his most high priesthode, was by
divine oracles foretoulde and he was called many hundred years before the
excellent Prophet: seeing therefore he was after a wonderful order to be
magnified with all glory, and to be advanced above all men to the higheste
estate of honor: meet it was that above all other partakers of the same
inheritance, and glory, he should be anointed. As it is written in the book
of Psalms Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God even
thy God has anointed the with the oil of gladness above thy felows. A drop
of Myrrh, and Cassia has destilled from thye garments. He therefore
aboundinge with sweet smelles, and precious oyntmentes, and therefore called
by the name of Christ, being appointed king of kings, and advanced to the
higheste dignity of Priesthode, partaker of all determinations and purposes of
God, and being the dealer and worker in them, so governs all things, that he
obteineth for us at Gods hands peace and atonement, and inspyreth into our
minds all good lessons and precepts of wisdom and things far beyond ye reach
and capacity of man's knowledge. Therefore all those worthy tytles of Power,
holiness, and spiritual perfection in this one name of Christ are contained.
Seeing therefore of that which plenteously abounded in Christ or king, some
part was also derived unto them that walked in his ways, and followed his
aucthoritye whom he calls brethren, companions, pertakers of all those good
things that should be given unto himself, therefore of good right the name of
Christ was applied to them, and they were termed Christians, either because
they worshipped Christ, or because, they weere partakers of the same
annoyntinge. For thus it is written in John You have the annoyntinge from the
holy one and you know all things. And again shortly after he says The
annoyntinge that you received of him remains in you: no need have you of
any man to teach you, but his annoyntinge shall teach you all things. Whereas
therefore the virtue and efficacy of this annointment is such that it is able
to creat kings, to make Priests and to inflame the hearts of al men with
heavenly motions: it is no doubt, but that al true Christians are partakers of
the perfection of all those worthy and honorable functions: for they are not
only kings, or chosen to be pryestes as John writes in his Apocalipse, but
they have also a wonderful knowledge of the hidden and secret misteryes of
God. For more justly may you call him a king (that here I might omit to
speak of the incomparable riches of that eternal and spiritual kingdom)
which uses the restraint of the Law of God to moderate his lustful desires,
and to bridle the evil affections and vices of the mind, and directs all
his actions to the princely precepts, and royal rules of Christ then him that
lives in Princely aucthoritye, and like a vile drudge, is a bond slave to
shame and sin. More iustlye may you call him a pryeste whose holy and devout
prayers does far, and by a great many degrees excel in respect of the
perfection of pure relligion the sacrifice either in morning or evening used in
old time: then Caiphas who with sinful hands, did celebrate most detestable
and horrible sacrifices. More justly may you term him a prophet which by the
instinct of God, knows many things which are above man's capacity, and
knows the ready, and most certain way to salvation, then Balaam, who being
blinded with desire, saw not destruction for him prepared. Divinely therefore
was spoken that Godly saying of Moses, when he disputed of the worthiness of
Christian men. You are (quoth he) a chosen people, a Princely, or peerles
Priesthood. See how he joins with the dignity of a king, the authority of
Priesthood. For he by no means would have those auctorities severed. For he
cannot with a good conscience exercise the function of a priest, who can
neither justly rule himself, nor wisely govern other. Neither he that
Princelike maynteyneth justice and upright dealing, can want that honor that
to a priest is properly belonginge. Not so truly, that he which lives
virtuously can incontine^tly administer holy rightes. For we should so make a
confusion of all offices, and all degrees of authority should be taken away,
then the which thing nothing can be more pestilente. But yet shall every man be
a priest, that is a follower of righteousness, to use that kind of holy right,
which is to offer up his own body, a lively sacrifice, holy, and pleassnge
God: and to offer up due honor and reverence proceedinge from a sincere and
pure mind, and understanding. What then follows? A holy Nation, a conquering
people, that you might show forth and preach virtues proceedinge from him,
which out of darcknes has called you into a marvelous light. Now in that
he says Holy, which was taken out of darckenes, and called forth into
marvelous light, that is to the knowledge of divine and heavenly things, it
is the gift of the Holy Ghost, with his power and virtue, inwardly
illumininge our minds, and stirringe them up, and bringinge them to the
chiefeste things of all. And that this is the peculiar token of a heavenly
gift, and concerns the auctority of Prophecy, who sees not? For the
function of Prophecy is nothing else, but a declaration made by the holy
Ghost of hidden secreces, the searchinge and finding out whereof is above the
reach and Nature of man. Seeing therefore many things that far exceeded man's
senses, are brought to light by God: do we doubt, but that there is
imprinted in our minds a certain excellent gift of prophecy, and a most
certain foretellinge of many things to come? For what else is faith wherewyth
we are all sealed, and whereon we are all grounded, but an assured hope of
those things which we trust to obtain, engrafte in our minds by God
himself? So falls it out that by the instincte and secret workinge of God
himself, we promise our selves those things which far exceed ye
cogitacion of man: which out of doubt appertains to the office of
prophesying. Therefore this name of Christians, is commended unto us by no base
gift, and auctority, given thereunto by Almighty God, but by most excellent
and honorable titles. For so it is aided and assisted by the holy ghost,
that it has sufficient ability to obtain Princely jurisdiction, to have a
most excellent Priesthode, and to be lifted up by the virtue and power of a
heavenly mind, to immortality.

But now since we have already spoken of the beginning and worthynes of so holy
and so excellent a name: I must also in few words entreat of the antiquity
thereof. Not to that end truly as though it greatly auayled to the worthiness
of Christian kindred, how many arms and cognisaunces of our generation we can
account, or how long continuance of time it held the possession of
gentilitie. For saying that it fetches his beginning, and takes his first
ofspringe and Original from God, it fears not the envious report of new
made, and late spronge Nobility. But least we should seem to exclude not a
few, who in this kindred were the very chiefeste, and whose excellent virtue
was renowned in many places, I thought it expediente to entreat also of them.
For there is no cause why we should fette the first original ground of this
name from the Acts of Antioche, in which City first (as it is mentioned in
Luke) the name of Christians grew to be common. For although this name then
first was commonly received, yet in deed, long before JESUS was conuersaunte
with us in earth, the worthiness and excellency of this name was used among
men. For Christians are so called, either because they follow the doctrine or
government of Christ: Or else this name proceeded from that heavenly motion and
annoyntinge: Or as I rather suppose both these things auayled to the first
invention of the name, both because they were wholly pressed to follow their
master Christ, as though they were by oath bound thereunto, and also were
pertakers of the self same annoynting. For who is so mad that he dare out of
this kindred, to thruste out Moses? Who had rather take upon him reproach and
contumely of Christ, then to have plenty of all Princely wealth and
sumptuousnes? Who dare deny Jacob, who with great devotion worshipped Christ
on a ladder? Or Isaac, who as a Sacrifice offered up to God, was a shadow of
Christ's his punishmente? Or Abraham which beheld the day of Christ, and by
the sight thereof conceived a great and wonderful pleasure? Or to conclude,
who will suppose David to be rased out of this lineall descente of Christian
kindred? with whom the couenaunte of Christ to be borne of his line, which was
sometime made with our forefathers, after a most holy manner and fashion was
renewed. But what manner of man was David? Such a one as in the whole order of
his life declared himself to be a man excellently furnished with all Christian
virtue. It were an infinite labor, if I should go about to recite them all
that were before the law, and under the law. This one thing I say and
affirm, which by every man's testimony is confirmed, that there was never in
any age any man commended for singular godliness and virtue, but he which
wythall his heart embraced Christ. Those things yt he should do, the Prophets
stirred up thereunto by the holy spyrite foretold. Most holy kings have had
their hearts set on fire, with an earnest longing and desire after him. A figure
of him many men furnished with all kind of virtue by many signs, expressed
and signified. And even as when in a manner of a triumph he was brought into
Jerusalem, with an innumerable company and multitude of people, whereof part
which went before with their garments strowed the way, and part that followed
after with a wonderful clapping of hands, signified gratulation and hearty
reioysinge: yet one general voice of them all was heard, setting forth to the
uttermost they could his unvanquishable virtue. So those worthyes of ancient
time prepared the way unto Christ, and their posterity followed Christ, with a
most ardent desire: and by the general voice of them all the praises of their
only King and Lord, are lifted up as high as heaven. This was that example
which was proposed to Moses to follow. Behold (says God unto him) and do
according to the example which in the hill is showed unto thee. And not only
to Moses, but unto al them in whom singular godliness and divine wisdom
appeared, who through Christ the only refuge of all human affairs, have
obtained all those worthy indumentes and qualities of the mind, which made
them in fame and report flourishe. Who, as they were by faith persuaded, they
hooped would come: whom already in mind they beheld as present: and according
to whose will they kept themselves within the bounds of duty, in exercising
themselves in all godlynes and purity of life. And so to pass over that, that
they did not altogether lack the sight of him, For not so seldom as ones he
offered himself to be seen of those most holy men. As to Moses both in many
places, and especially in that fire and flame of the Bush: As to Esaie being
placed in that Princely and heavenly seat: As to many other whom to reckon it
is not easy. That here therefore I should not declare how many of them beheld
Christ covered under some certain form: that truly is most euidente that
they all examined all their actions in their whole life according to the rule
of Christian discipline. But when a man considers with himself, that Moses
humbly lifted up his hands unto God, and beseeched him to appease his
wrath, and grant mercy and pardon for those that were then the ennemies of
God, can any man doubt but that he conformed his life to the commandments of
Almighty God? That I should with silence pass over other, who most stoutely
and valiauntly, and with a marvelous contempt of death with singular meekenes,
and lowlines of mind, and with other great ver^^es have showed themselves
worthy folowers of the rule and discipline of Christ. For what needs me
declare the acts of every particular person? He that shall look into the
life of Samuel, he that shall consider the acts of Ezechias, he that shall
behold Josias, and all the Prophets: he that shall consider all the residue of
the like condition and nature, shall plainly perceive, that they referred all
their actions in their whole life, rather to the end of the law that is
Christ, then unto the law it self. If therefore it likes us that Christians
should therefore be called, because they follow the prescript rule and
discipline of Christ, no man can doubt but that they also who foresawe that
Christ should be borne, and reposed all the hope of their salvation in his
doctrine, and his gracious goodness, may well and truly be called Christians.
Or if you had rather the name should be derived from annoyntinge, there is no
cause why we should doubt that this worthy name was also to be applied to
them. For thus is it written of Abraham and his children. Touch not my
anointed, and against my Prophets devise no evil. Whom God calls anointed
it is euidente enoughe that he means that annoyntinge not of the Law, but of
the holy spyrite, and for that cause they were called anointed. But to what
purpose should I speak any more ^f this gift of the holy Ghost? Is it not a
thing manifest enough that no man after that scourge of our first fathers
offense was laid on the necks of all mankind, could do any one action
proceeding from true and perfect virtue? Therefore whosoever have performed
the perfect duty of virtue and holiness, they have obtained that, not by their
own power, but by the aid and assistaunce of God. For whosoever even in ye
memory of those men, distrusting his own wit, and helps of nature, flies to
God, and has piteously beseeched him of mercy, and favor, he has eftsoon
tried the greatness of his gracious clemency and goodness, and has felt his
mind before stricken with sorrow, and miserablye afflicted, to be revived with
Gods help and assistaunce, and to be stirred up to all manner of virtue.
Nothing therefore worthy to be remembered, neither in the governance of the
public weal, nor in the relligious and devout obseruaunce of sacred and
holy things, nor in martial affairs, has bin brought to good effect,
except the mind of some right Noble personage, have bin stirred and moved
thereunto, by the especial instigation, and furtherance of the holy spyrite.
Whence proceeds that saying? Powered upon Iepthe was the spirit of the Lord:
Upon Sampson fell the spirit of the Lord: There lighted upon Saul the
spirit of the Lord. And other such places infinite, contained in books of
holy Scripture, and for ever commended to posterity. Can any man then doubt
to attribute unto them the order and dignity of true Christians, who received
the same gift of the holy Ghost that we our selves did, and which supposed
that all the means and procuremenses of their salvation rested only in
Christ? By whose only grace and favor they could attain that worthy
calling which they have obtained already. For no other refuge is there for
the myseries of man, nor from any thing else can there be showed forth any hope
of faluation. All they therefore that refusinge the base condition of
seruilitie and bondage, so far proceeded that they obtained the spyrit of
adoption, are of our kindred and co^sanguinitie, are to be accounted our
forefathers: and Abraham himself is also our father. And we are rather
descended from him, saying that the similitude of him came unto us, and with
like godly affection resemble his faith: then they that thinck themselves to
come of his race and line, and yet by that this example which was evidently
seen in their own kindred and family, are not restrained from their wickedness,
and ungodly life. For saying that in this spiritual kindred all things are to be
drawn from bodilye sense, to the excellent nature of the mind, it skilleth
not greatly of whose blood you are begotten, but whose steps you follow in
the orderinge and disposing your life. Justly therefore were ye minds of them
repressed, and beaten down by the forerunner of Christ, which were puffed up
with a vain opinion of Nobility. Say not (quod he) we have Abraham to our
Father, for God is able of these stones to raise up sons unto Abraham. The^
after in vehement words he threatens them. Now (quod he) the Axe is put to
the root of the tree.

They were surely stricken with an axe, with which they were cut of from their
gentle blood. And we again are ingraffed and fast joined thereunto. They
therefore which supposed themselves to descend from a noble line, being
brought to a very base estate, are justly and by good right taunted with these
reproachful words. A wicked, and adulterous generation, a generation of
Vipers: and other such words to like effect. But we that were of an obscure
and basebloude, are translated into the house of Abraham, and in the account of
our ancestors we reckon all those kings and Princes. Yet perceive they not
that, seely wretches as they are. But as they call themselves Jews being not
so in deed, so do they boast in the name of Abraham, whereas from the dignity
and worthiness of that most flourishing kinread many hundred years ago, they
were thrown headlonge, and now like vagient persons and outlawes, wander up
and down being excluded out of all places, and bereeued of all other
external commodities. We (I say) we are the true Jews, so that we
maintain the worthynes of our ancient stock, with just and upright
dealinge, and with an honest and godly conversation. For although we
circumcise not the flesh, the circumcision of the mind we willingly embrace.
And although we keep not our Passover, making solemn sacrifice with the
blood of a Lamb, yet we worship Christ offered up for our selves, and
being marked with his blood, we have an assured confidence, that thereby all
pestilence is clean put away. And although we abstain not from Leven, yet
we are afraid of the infection of the old sin and wickedness. And what
need many words? All these Ceremonies of our elders in old time appointed
with all reverence we think ought to be received. Yet all things as the true
dignity and worthiness requires, we suppose ought to be drawn from a bodily
and corporal sense, which now, the time so requiringe is utterly buried, and
to be applied to a spiritual virtue, and efficacy, inwardly workinge. And
that Judah, we have the chiefest of our name and kindred, of whom this is
mistically written. Judah thy brethren shall praise thee, thy hand shall lie on
the necks of thy enemies, thy fathers sons shall worship thee. The which
prophecy that it apperteyneth to Christ no man in his right wits will deny.
Whether therefore are they which follow the bare shadow of the old law, and
refuse salvation by the louinge kindness of God ordained, and by the law
declared, to be called Jews? Or they rather that with all Godly reverence
observe the secret wisdom of the law hidden under the letter? Further
whether is it meeter to affirm those the ofspringe of Abraham, that have
degenerated from his virtue, and have showed themselves stiffenecked, and
rebellious toward God, or those rather which have loved to maintain the glory
of Abraham, and with a most ready goodwill have embraced true religion? As
therefore those excellent men were renoumed and made noble, by the pureness and
sinceritye of a Christian life, so also we that trace their footesteppes do
obtain the praise and name of a Jew. Therefore now no odds in kindred, no
distinction of sacrifices, no dislyke condition of life, is left. Forasmutch
as all things, which before time were at deadly debate and variance, are now
linked together with the fast bond of necessary affinite, by the mighty
reconciler, and intreater for peace, who has not only reconciled things
divine and humayne, but has also brought to perpetual agreemente, and
concord the most diverse intentes and purposes of men, and has of a condition
of life iarringe and kepinge no concord, made a pleasant concent and harmonye
far beyond the expectation and credit of men. If therefore Abraham be of our
blood and consanguinitye, who should let us to suppose them to be contained
within ye same worthy house and family who lived a great while before him, and
were pertakers of ye same faith and the same religion. But why do say before
him? When as rather from the beginning of ye world we may bring down ye line
of this worthy petegree. To what purpose should I here recite those holy men by
nature appoyncted to all excellency, and pre-eminence?

Of which sort Abell was, whose blood after he was murdered and slain, made
such a loud cry, that it pierced Heaven, and came to the ears of Almighty
God. Also what manner of man was he which of God was taken up into Heaven, and
no more appeared in earth? What manner of men were a number of other, whom (as
Moses witnesses) God himself advanced to nobility? Therefore what is more
ancient, what of longer continuance then the noblenes of this Christian
kindred? Which even from that time wherein the beautiful and goodly proportion
of the world was first framed, has been had in high estimation: which
being continued with a singular trust and faith in God, with notab^e virtue,
with meruaylous sanctimony, and holiness of life remained in the state even
until the coming of Christ: and now by the gracious goodness of Christ is
plentifully stored with all those goodly qualities, all which before, with a
constante mind and hope, trusted through Christ it might obtain. For what
can want thereunto, to the settinge forth the true praise and glory thereof?
For if honor through virtue be attainted, the^ truly in this Christian
kindred great honor by virtue procured, and the clear light of perfect
renomne appears. If for the glory and fame of most excellent men ye stock is
to be commended, innumerable is the multitude of them which by their continual
exercise in virtue and godliness have kept possession of this nobility. If high
advancement by antiquity be procured, there is nothing among men of more
antiquity, then this kind of nobility.

But because it will not suffice that we dispute of virtue in general, except
we touch also some particular brau^ch thereof: we shall not do mutch amiss
after that we have generally spoken of the singularity and excellency of
Christian virtue, and declared the antiquity of Christian nobilitye, now to
discourse of every special membre thereof. Not truly of them all, for that
were an infini^e labor: But of them only which especially seem to lay open
an entrance to worship and renoume, and make the way plain and ready to
perfect nobilitye. That if nobility be a kindred furnished with excellent
virtues, and they be called the most excellent virtues with which they yt be
adourned seek not their own private gain and commodity, but are careful for
the common estate, of which sort are Justice, liberality, and stoutnes of
stomach: truly by this means only euidente it is that the chiefest nobility
is only in Christians: because they only are freight with those virtues,
whereby their kindred and family does purchase true renoume and famous memory.
And that I should begin with that virtue yt is coumpted the chiefest of all:
they only can mayntaine Justice, who are let with no gredy desire, who have
not their minds disturbed with any motion of anger, who are not to be moved
with any man's hatred, or malicious dealinge, bredinge offense, who to conclude
seek not to be pleasers of the peoples fantasy, but have their minds
supported and stayed by an assured persuasio^ in their conscience of their
honest and virtuous conversation. For as long as the mind is disturbed with
wrath, concupiscence, or any other evil affection, it cannot easily be stayed
from desiringe other men's goods, or offeringe to other force and violence, or
by any other means, to use wrongefull and injurious dealinge. And he also
which respects the brutes and reports of the people, and for that cause uses
just and upright dealinge, is not in deed therefore a just and upright liver,
but hunteth after praise, and commendation by a pretended show, and vain
ostentation of Justice. For seekinge to get himself a name by honest and
sincere behavior, so long as he shall have witnesses of his usage and
conversation, he will keep himself within the bounds of duty: but when the
fear of infamous obloquie shall cease, he will make no stay at the violatinge
all manner of laws for his own profit and commodities sake. Wherefore as they
whose minds are fixed on the earth, and are tossed with sundry troublesome
motions of the mind, which are doted in love with worldly pelf, and in them
think all things to be reposed, can by no means abstain from injury: so
they whose minds cannot be vanquished with desire, and are free from the
corruption of evil affection, who despise all worldly and transitory
pleasures, and look upward to heavenly things, will in no wise abuse their
neighbor, through any kind of injurious dealinge. For I speak not of them
that have no poyncte of Christianity in them but the bare name, being in deed
fardest of from all conscience and honesty: but of those only that are true
Christians and frame their manners according to the prescripte rule of Christ.
For how shall a man think him to do injury, who neither will follow his own
desire, nor burn in raginge lust, nor yield to any other affection of the
mind? Can any man think that he may by bribes be incited to do that is
wrong? No surely: he despises, and as things of naught esteems all wealth
of the world. What? Shall he stand in awe of sharp and cruel punishment? No
truly. For in vain may a man use toward him menacinge threats, which
esteems as mutch of the shame by unjust dealinge procured, as of the
punishments yt may be laid upon him. Yea (but you will say) he will do
wrong by the means of hatred for some offense conceived. No verily. No hatred
can be greater then that which he will always keep against sin and
wyckednes all ready conceived. Neither will he against any thing conceive
such offense, that he will thereby purchase the offense and displeasure of
his Lord and father in Heaven. And in one word to conclude, what injury cann
that man find in his heart to do who in all his life endeavors to seek the
goodwill of all men. Who thinks it an heinous offense to maintain hatred,
and a wicked and abominable fault to revenge iniurye. Who that comes most
near to the bountefull goodness of God) is most of yt mind that he supposes
we most do good to our enemies. For it is a quality most properlye incident
to God to show mercy unto them that are most unworthy, to let his light shine
upon wicked and sinful persons: unto the vilest sinners of al other to give
abundance of wordly commodityes. Who does not assign to any man the pain due
to wicked persons, as soon as he has committed any heinous offense,
neither does he fling him down headlong to the place of everlasting misery:
but gives space to repent, and of his wonderful clemency calls him home to
amendment, that at the length after his return home again he may take
mercy upon him. And so desirous are they which follow the rule and disciplyne
of Christ by immitation to express the gracious goodness and mercy of God,
that in the same they repose the w^^le sum of religion. Therefore neither
provoked with taunts they are any thing moved: neither vexed with slanderous
reports they are kindled with anger, nor provoked with injuries they go about
to be reue^ged Nay rather, which is a great gift of God, they suppose that
trial to be laid upon them, that they by a heap and multitude of good
turns, should turn the edge of their enemies malice, and that they should
desire the safity and good estate of the^ of whom very wickedly they are
opressed with wrong. Do you think then that they can be provoked by any
means to do wrong, who neither can be ouercommed with desire, nor daunted
with fear, nor stirred up toward any man with immoderate hate and malice?
who eue^ to their enemies show all duty, and courtesy? who to conclude
think themselves then to have made the greatest gayn when the have generally
procured every man's commoditye? for what should I here speak of
liberalitye? seeing that is most evident, that al ye lessons to conform our
life by, which of the chiefeste and most excellent doctor were given unto
us, do appertain to the settinge forth of mercy, and bountefull dealinge.
For he does not with more earnest endeavor instructed us to exercise the
office and duty of any virtue whatsoever, nor more often beats into our
heads, nor with more earnest and vehement speeches beats down any vice,
then the foul vice of avarice and cruelty. So that when he proposes before
our eyes the seueritye of the last general judgment, and declares who are to
be chose^ and called into heaven: who again to be thrust down into the place
appointed for the wicked, and into utter darcknes: he rekoneth up no other
duetyes, but those that proceed out of courtesy, and liberalitye. Neither
powers he out threats, namely against any, but cruel and discourteous men: You
did not (says he) harbor me when I was a stranger, you did not cloth me,
when I was naked, you did not visit me when I was weak, and all the residew
of like sort. Which truly we must not think so to be taken that through
other virtues there is no access to glory and renoumne: or that other offenses
are not to be punished with most sharp and bitter punishment. What is the
cause then why he does not recon up other offenses. Whither for that cause,
that as there is no virtue which moore resembles the goodness of God, then
courtesy and liberality: so nothing more detestable, more odious, more
repugnant to the pleasure and will of God, then the vice of avarice and
cuttethrote crueltye. Therefore when he had declared the order of the last
judgment, no need had he to recite all kynds of duties but those he would
only contain in his treatise which are simply the best in all our life
especially to be practiced. For nothing can be done in earth that is more
acceptable to God the^ to belpe them that be in misery, to give succoure to
them that be aflicted, to show mercy to them yt be perplexed and dismayed,
with good turns to healpe a great number, to deserve well of al men in
general, there is no more present remedy to cure all the maladyes of the mind,
there is no more expedite and ready way to heaven. Al they therefore that are
not only in name Christians, but in life and conversation conform themselves
to the rule and discipline of Christ, exercise especially this one virtue and
suppose that they ought with continual earnestnes of desire to embrace the
same, and in the same they think reposed a great strength, and pilloure of
their salvation. Then think they themselves to follow his rule and example,
which made us partakers of heavenly and everlasting riches: when they bestow
al their whole substance upon the general profit and commoditye of all men.
Now consider how great the excellency is, how great the honor and
estimacion of Christian liberality? the common sort of men think that they
have gotten sufficient praise for their bounty and francke dealing if they
gratify other men in that, wherewith they abound out of measure. And the most
part of men do into so narrow a compass and into such strayghtnes draw the
office and duty of liberalitye, that they suppose they owe nothing to any
body, but unto theymselues and unto them that by consanguynytye and aliance
are lincked unto them. And if they bestow good turns upon other, they
bestow them upon such that are like, and through the possessions able
manfully to requite them, and more abounda^tly then they have at their hands
received. But they yt have wholly given up themselves to ye rule and disciplyn
of Christ, do not only in abundance of wealth, but also in aduersitye and
when they live porelye perform al dutys to courtesy and liberality
appertayning. Further they think no man an alian whom they can by any means
healpe. Lastly of al they are not so much disposed to deal franckly with them
that are able to make them sufficient amends, as with the^ who for their great
necessitye, and want are not of abilitye to make requital of a benefit
received. Neither are they of that nature and disposition that they will only
lay out their money and leave other good acts undone, as giving good counsel,
and good example of virtue and applying to al good things their industrye and
dilligente. But whatsoever with their wit, labor, study and pain can
possibly be attained, they will take in hand, so that they may do good to other
men thereby: neither by venturinge their lives will they at any time stick to
save other men harmless and free from danger, especially them that
profess the name of Christ. For so great agreement is there among them in the
profession of true religion, that are instructed with ye laws of God: such a
fryendly league in all honest and virtuous accions, and to conclude such a
perfect and firm knott of love and frendshippe, that none of the^ more
esteems of his own estate then of the estate and condition of other men, It
is not therefore to be maruayled that the number of the^ was so great which to
relieve other men's necessitye and want, have spente all that their fathers have
left them: seeing that many to do good unto other men have most manfully and
courageously lost their lives. And what need I in such a number rekon a few?
for in the first beginning of the church these duetyes of love and charity
were generally embraced, and now they are not of all men forsaken. For there
are not a few which do not only dispyse all riches, and wordlye substance
but also if the case so required would be contented for other men's sakes to
loose their lives. For the clear light of Christian virtue and honesty has
always appeared. Sometimes it has bin more general, and led very many into
the right way. Sometimes it has conducted but a few, yet always has bin
well accounted of, and shall as long as the world continues, keep his
wonted honor and estimation. For it did not proceed of men: but God
himself did therewithal establishe man's mutable estate, and brittle
condition. Therefore there will never want some which will not more esteem of
their own private commodities, then of the safety and preservation of all
men. In so much that they will bestow with a right good will their lives, so
that thereby all men generallye may reap some fruit, and commodity. And
this one thing as each thing else, deserved great admiration: That men being
by Nature lincked in love, yet it has so fallen out, that they being
entangled with vices and troublesome affections of the mind, very seeldomlye
have applied themselves to the maintenance of perfect frendshippe. And
therefore so many hundred years scarcelye two or three couples of friends
have bin found, that have continued in a firm and stable league of
frendshippe. Of whom also we have notice rather by the feigned Fables of
Poets, and by a general opinion conceived of our elders, then a certain
proof, by testimony of sufficient credit.

But after that the minds of men were able to behold the exceedinge brightness
of his Heavenly doctrine, so grrate consent of love was incontinently among
men, so firmly were they united in prrfecte frendshippe, that no man would
hold any thing in several, as his own proper goods: but each man bestowed
all his worldly substance to the use and commodity of all men in general.
But why do I say worldly substance, saying it is manifest that the
goodwilles of all men were so lincked together, that no man thought good of any
thing, but all men did allow thereof, no man desiered any thing, but that,
that was expediente and behoouefull for the saftye and good estate of all
men. Luke says: One was the heart and mind, of the number of them that
believed in GOD. Neither did any of them account that which he possessed to
be his own: but they had all things common. Here you see that worthy and
excellent kind of frendshippe, that through the opinion of Virtue is
procured: (a bare pattern whereof resembled as it were in a shadow in Poets
Tales, struck into men a great admiration: unto the which scarcely two or
three couples of men have attained) not embraced only of a few, but
wonderfullye mayntayned of all the whole multitude of Christian people. For so
firmly were they in minds united and joined, that they did not only live
after one manner, and under one law, but all generallye were of one mind and
one will, and desire. To conclude only in Christians the perfection of true
frendshippe appeared, the clear light of unfeigned love shined. For even as
we note in many a certain endeavor to be virtuous, but we see in no man the
perfection of Virtue, that has not a taste of Christian relligion: so although
many have had the outward show and appearaunce of frendshippe, yet the liuelye
and natural shape of true frendeshippe only in Christians has been to be
found. For saying that frendeshippe springs out of Virtue, it must of
necessity follow, that perfect frendshippe should remain only in them, in
whom perfect Virtue is reposed and put. But let it in this Book suffice of
Justice, liberality, and frendshippe the fountain of liberalitye in few
words to have entreated. The residewe of my discourse, in which I must
dispute more at large of Christian fortitude and magnanimity, because of the
peevish and perverse dealinge of them which cannot find in their hearts to
yield unto Christian men the commendation of that Virtue, I will remitte, and
put over to the process followinge.

THE THIRD BOOK of Christian Nobility.
THe most excellent and worthy properties belonginge to a Christian name,
that is justice, and liberalitye, have bin declared of us in the book next
before, not with such eloquence, and in that kind of lofty style, as the
waightines of the argument did require, but as the slendernes of my skill
would permit me in that dispute to follow. It remains therefore ( Lewis
most puissaunte Prince) that we in more ample manner speak of fortitude, and
the unconquerable courage of the mind, the worthiness of which virtue is such,
that by no flourish of eloquence it may be sufficienrly described. For they
that have not bin dismaide at the terror of death, they which have with most
valiaunte courage suffered bodily torments, they that would for no manner of
grief be disturbed in mind, and do any thing to stayne their honor and
estimation, have bin always had in great admiration. For whereas we all in
general think life to be sweet, and do follow the intisementes of Nature,
who so despises death, overcomes undoubtedly Nature it self. And truly
how much admiration, and worthy renown has in all Nations bin attributed to
this contempt of death: Hereby we may have an euidente token, that no virtue
is in the books and monuments of learned men so much commended, no virtue
with like praise extolled. The just and temperate men are after a mean sort
commended, but stout and valiaunte men are placed among the stars
themselves. Socrates which was in his time the only mirror and example of
continency and sobriety, purchased by no kind of virtue so worthy fame, as
by that his constancy which he used in retayning his former dignity, when by
the severe sentences of the Judges he was condemned to die. They themselves
which abydinge a very hard Fortune are thrown down, being spoiled and
bereaved of all their substance, and void of solace, if in extreme desperation
they do themselves to death, although in that kind of death, there is a
certain suspicio^ of dastardly cowardice (because they hasten their dyinge day
not so much for shewinge their constancy, as for auoydinge of myserie) yet
they themselves which so of their own voluntary disposition depart from life,
are oftentimes wonderfully commended. For so much is the virtue of the mind
accounted of, that the counterfaite show thereof stirs up admiration. Which
if it so be, who can with words express the stoutenes and valiauntnes of
Christian virtue? For if the wits of them that have most professed eloquence,
when they would with trim speeches, and rhetorical words, describe the
praises of any humayne virtue, are sometimes overwhelmed with the wayght of the
matter, to what kind of eloquence can be so wonderful, or so excellent,
whereby a man may be able with filed phrase and piked speech, to set forth the
worthiness of so great a virtue? But I albeit by reason of any wit or
exercise am able little to do, seeing that I have taken in hand so great a
matter, least greater should be my blame in geeuinge over the same, then my
boldness in taking it in hand, as far forth as my poor ability will serve,
I will endeavor at large to discourse the excellency of this so noble a virtue.

ANd first we ought to consider what great diversity there is between the
fortitude now specifyed, and man's valiauntnes and magnanimity.

First of all if you respect the end, they that for Christ's sake venture
their lives, obtain the true end of virtue: but they that propose unto
themselves riches or fame, and glory, dependinge on the voice and consent of
the unlettered multitude, and respect not the true soueraygne good, they are
rather to be accounted men pufte up with a vain desire and ambition, then
valiaunte and courageous men. Further many offerre themselves to danger not
with judgment, and prudente advise, but being pricked forward with a
certain rage and furye of mind, conceived either of hatred, envy, or some
other earneste and whote affection. But Christians whereas only wickedness
they deadlye hate, toward the men themselves they bear a mind void and free
from all manner envy, rancoure, and other leude and wicked affection. Finallye
they never take upon the many dangerous attempt, but being moved thereunto
either with a very earneste hope, or with a desperate fear of their present
estate. For none of them except he had some certain hope to escape danger, or
gain some private commodity, or else were paste all hope of escapinge, would
think it good to come into danger: but our men in many places have been
led to their temporal bane, and death of the body, having free election if
they would, to live in pleasure: so that on one side no hope of life was
offered, on the other side, if they would forsake their opinion, they had
proposed unto them many things whereby they moughte live a pleasant life:
yet notwithstanding they marchinge forward to a certain and assured
punishmente of most cruel death, refused all pleasant intisementes of life,
and neither with threats, nor fair promises could they be driven from their
profession of faith, and Christian piety. And again of what force is that,
that of so many as are contained in the memory of man, very few have
been found which by learning, exercise, and continual study to do well,
have come to that perfection, that they with a willinge mind could suffer
death: upon a sudden there began to grow an innumerable multitude not
only of men and women, but also of children, and almost infantes, which have
for the faith of Christ suffered stripes, death upon Crosses and Gibbets,
burninge fires, and to conclude most cruel kinds of death, with invincible
minds and willinge hearts. When all the rulers of the world, and Lords of
the earth bent their maine force as it were, and ventured life and limme to the
intent all relligion and fear of God should be utterly rooted out of the
hearts of men, when the Devils themselves, authors of all mischief and
wickedness, stirred them to cruel tyranny, whom they had with most unclean,
and filthye superstition as it were, led captive under their authority, when
most strange and terrible tortures were devised to the utter overthrow of
Christian discipline, when violence and horrible crueltye was practiced in all
corners of the world, where the faith of Christ was ever heard of, when all
these things were invented to the subversion and overthrow of Christian
Piety: Notwythstandinge such was the virtue of true Nobility, and Christian
magnanimitye, that it did not only with constante, perpetual, and invincible
defense of Christianity courageously wythstande the assault of the enemies:
but also most willinglye and cheerefullye offered themselves in Christ's
quarrel to the sword, to fire, and faggotte. They were leadde away to
execution, and cruel tortures: whippes, gallowses, gibbettes, and torments
never before heard of, were prepared for them.

Neither could those butcherly bloudsuckers, grown through villainy into
outrageous fury, satisfy their cruelty, if straight way they should have
bereaved of their lives those innocent Lambs, therefore with prolonginge their
cruel punishmente they went about to repress that kind of contumacie,
springing not out of presumptuous pride, but out of rare and excellent virtue.
Neither were those horrible cruelties practiced for the love they boar to
their own relligion, but only for the envy and malice they boar to their
excellent virtue, through which they saw all their thundering threats to be
scorned at, and utterly despised. Yet their Christian stoutnes could neither be
vanquished, nor daunted, and dismayde, another with threats, nor with tortures,
nor with any never so exquisite punishments. And when the Tortours, yea the
torments themselves also began to slake their force, yet those worthy
wightes remained still in the same constancy and stoutenes of courage. But
when again, after a little space, these butchers returned with all cruel means
to tear in sonder the bodies of Saints, those right holy men came with a
mind after a wonderful manner confirmed, and newly imboldened to the same
punishments. Neither was there in the mean time any one word uttered of them,
but that which did exceedinglye set forth the lauds and praises of our Savior
Christ. Therefore what more excellent and worthy matter then this may be in
words contained, or in mind conceived? It seems to every man a just
matter, and occasion of honor and glory, to be paciente in the middeste of
tormente and persecution: but these men did not only suffer death patiently,
but willingly and with a glad and joyful heart did bear the cross of all
kind of trouble and affliction. For the assured hope of triumph in Heaven,
both diminished and abated the bodily pain, and filled the mind which great
joy and gladness. A rare example of valiant courage is with praises even to
the sky extolled. But in this race and kindred of Christian people neither the
consideration of age, nor the imbecility of Sex, nor of blood, or degree,
could be any let or impedimente to this worthy glory and renoumne. For
to what end should I make mention of those which were the best and chiefest
in any kindred: whereas children, and virgins innumerable have refused for
Christ's sake no punishments of cruelty whatsoever. How many bondemen that
they might preserve and maintain the free liberty of the mind, have set at
naught the bitter pains of most sharp punishments? How many souldiars
(which kind of people most commonly abhors altogether the study of virtue,
and sanctimony) have more esteemed of death referred to Christ his laud and
praise, then all manner of garlandes and triumphs? What should I recount the
Mauricians, Sebastians, Catherines, Agathes, and the Gordians: whereas it does
sufficiently appear that the multitude of them has been innumerable and all
most infinite, that have attained the praise of ye excellent virtue: the
external show and image whereof men endued with excellent wits, have after
long exercise scarcely obtained. All which may be to us a sufficient argument
and token, that this kind of fortitude and confidente courage far differs
from that, which is in the rules and monumentes of ethnike Philosophers
contained: which was powered into the minds of Christians, not by secular
learning, but by the gracious gift and goodness of God: being the worthiest of
Christian name and nobilitye, and the most certain and assured testimony of
Christ's most pure, and holy religion. Notwithstanding some there are who
prefer before our men in virtue, and valiant courage I say not such as Cato,
and Brutus were, whom some honor as Gods immortal, but Cleombrotus, who in
his rage cast himself down hedlonge from a high tower, or Empedocles who
furriously raginge with ye like madness threw himfelfe into the flaminge fire
of Etna, or some other foolish and desperate person. Therefore our men to wit,
Cornelius, Cipriane, Laurence, Steven, and Paul himself being most holy men,
and excellinge in all virtue, are by no means rekoned of them in the number of
stout and valiant men. Further a certain malepert, saucye, and wicked writer
in books in which he has contained the history of his own City, and many
questions pertaininge to the state of a commonwealth, in the Hetruscan tongue
thought not good to dissemble what his opinion was touching the religion of
our sacred and holy profession. For he reports that the faith of Christ and
his holy religion has utterly destroyed the prowes and valiauntnes which was
wont to appear in men of oulde time. And therefore he imputes the fall of the
Roman Empire, the decay of fame and glory, the overthrow of chiualrye, to
this most pure and holy religion of the most high and everlasting God. Then
afterward only to currye favor of the Godly, he affirms yt the great
decay of nobility came to pass not through the deprauatio^ of religion, but
through the defalte of interpretoures, misconstringe and evil understanding
the same: whereas notwithsta^dinge he is not able to show what crooked sense
of interpretation that was, that ministered matter of so great mischief. But
that leauinge behind him the stinge of his malice, he mough seek some shifte
to escape by means whatsoever, he salueth a grief most justly conceived,
with that remedy and medicine most foolishly applied. I would willingely have
some compassion over him, for that he is dead, if he did not now corrupt
many more with his vile and pestilent writing, then in time past with his
lewd life most reproachful and subject to to contempt. But for as mutch as his
books though he be dead, do so greatly sclaunder Christian nobility, I will
not doubt, being (as I trust) defended and protected with the aid and
assistance of Christ to combat with the spirit and ghost of this wicked
person. Which notwithstanding I do not for the desire I have to encounter with
another, but only to withstand their brainsicke and wicked dealinge, whose
minds are alike dusked with error and blindness. For this mischief is spread
far and wide, and has greatly infected many with pestilente contagion.

This therefore first would I demand of him, what he notes in Christians,
that he may by any means deem worthy of contempt? For if so that it argues
a valiant and noble mind to cotemne the pomp and vanity of worldly pleasure,
being lifted up in such manner, that it thinks of nothing, but that which is
both heavenly and excellent: then truly nothing may make more for ye honor
and advancement of Christians, who having full knoweledge and understanding
that they are of the fellowship and company of heavenly wightes, do judge
no worldely and transitory thing worthy of estimation, imployinge al their
travail and labor to the attaininge true honor, and immortality. If
fortitude be accompaned with invincible patience, who would not wonder at the
courage of Christians, when he shall consider that virgins themselves, for the
name of Christ have desired most cruel punishments, and all manner of
bodylye torments.

how hyghelye was Leaena the Harlotte commended, which being rent and torn
with many tormenes would not detecte them that were pryuy to a certain
conspiracy? What praise won Anaxarchus for the like matter? How greatly was
Thraso of Syracusa commended for that he would not be forced with any kind of
punishmente to procure the death of them that were partakers of one
co^spiracie? These men undoubtedly Matchiauele himself (for so this notable
writer is called with whom I have to deal) may not deem in any wise worthy of
contempt, because they had no knowledge of true relligion, which he in no wise
would have to be magnifyed: and were notwithstanding partakers of traiterous
attemptes, the means of descryinge whereof he supposes worthy of great
commendation. But how obscure is their consta^cie if it be compared with the
valiant courage and magnanimity of Christian men? For if you respect the
cause, they for hate of the tyraunts by whom they were annoyed patiently
endured their cruel punishments: our men for the love of Christ, of whom they
had received wonderful benefits, thought all torments easy and tolerable.
If you weighe the exceedinge greatness of the tormente, and the continuance
thereof, you shall find them not common and usual as theyrs were, but new and
strange tortures were devised for Christians, which as long as might be,
moughte tear their live bodies, and wonderfully beat and bruise them.
Furthermore, they when they were driven to extreme miserye, and state of
desperation, seemed outwardlye to bear an external show of their former
worthiness, and hauty mind: Christians when they had free election to accept
that they best liked of, yet not with unwilling minds they exchaunged a
glorious and honorable death, with a life stained with ignomye, and shame. If
you regard the number, it is a ridiculous thing to set an infinite number,
against a very few. Do thou then despise this wholesome discipline, out of
which has bin yielded so many notable, and worthy examples of virtue? Can
thou constantly affirm, that the minds of men are induced to think beastly
and abiectly of themselves by this doctrine, which has with stoutnes, far
beyond man's creditte, armed the tender nature of women and the feeble age of
childred: which has stirren up so great a multitude to an ernest desire of
praise and glory? What perverse and overthwart persuasion of mind is this?
that thou should have in admiration the vayn shadow of virtue, and should
suppose true virtue worthy of no estimation at all. But no doubt herehence
proceeds this great error. Thou doste behold only the external form of
the Cross of afliction, that excellent virtue that under the form of the
cross lies hidden, thou do not behold. For the dull capacity of a simple
understanding overwhelmed with darkness, and with filth defiled, is not able to
abide the bryghtenes of so clear a light. For the doctrine of Christ (as
Paul says) seems to wicked and desperate persons to have a show of
ignorance and to much humilitye: But to them that are of a mild spirit, and
confirmed with the grace of God, it shows a fullnes of heavenly wisdom, and
most excellent virtue. For even as in the person of Christ all men beeholde
that face wherein as it was by the prophecy of Esaie foretold, there was no
forced bewtye, nor semelines, and yet all men saw not the glory of that divine
nature which John beheld, even so many through the like blyndes and want of
understanding contemn the life of Christians void of al wordlye pomp and
are by no means able to behold the excellent brightness of Christian nobility.

But as concerning the Romain Empire (that we may say some thing thereof,
albeit it seems a thing far from our intent and purpose) has not this fine
fellow which is so expert in all matters of pollecie, read in most learned
writers, that even Cities themselves have their cha^ges and courses: and that
all comonwelthes do as it were by the course of nature rise and fall? Neither,
yt it is possible that any thing under the Moon should be immortal, and
contynewe for ever. All things as they have a beegynnynge so necessary it is
that they should ones decay, and through the cruelty of death dispatchinge
every thing perish and come to nothing. For how many Cities, how many
countries and nations are beaten flat to the ground and covered with moolde,
which long ago most of all flourished, both by reason of their far stretched
Empire, and glory and renoomne, purchased by famous and noble acts? who has
overthrown the dominions of the Assirians, and Persians? who has wasted ye
wealth of the Athenians? who has abrydged the power and pomp of the
Macedonians? Truly no other thing can be alleged as cause thereof but the
natural course of the world, then the which nothing is more britle and
uncertain. For if Cirns had not utterly extinguished ye Assirians Empire, if
Alexander had not as it were crushed in pieces ye power of the Persians, if the
Macedonians and al Greece by the wars of the Romans had not been utterly
vanquished: yet notwithstanding it must be granted of necessitye that al
these Empyres shauld have been destroyed with some other power, or declyninge
with age at last should have perished and decayed. Wherefore it falls out
that no wise man does wonder at the utter subuersions and destruttions of
common wealths: and on the contrary part they think nothing so worthy
admiration as ye continuance of a City established and endued with great
principallityes. And therefore they suppose the question is rather to be asked
why Sparta so many years continued in the self same manner of gouernmente, and
in ye self same order of disciplyne, then why the glory and wealth of the
Athenians so soon decayed. And this also is so much the more wonderful in the
Romans common wealth by how mutch more this Cittye excelled all other that
ever were in worthiness both of glory, and dominion. For many things easelye
bear up themselves: but the highest things by their own peyse and weight,
are come in sunder, and fall down to the ground. Therefore whereas this fares
it with all Cities and countries, that no wise man wondereth at their fall, but
thinks the cause of their long continuance with great study to be
considered of as a thing very incredible, This man well skilled, as he himself
thinks in civil policy, lamenteth the decay and ruinous fall of Rome, and
as though it should have been perpetual, except it had been hindered by
the religion of Christ, he argues of crime the son of God himself. O thou
man in madness exceedinge all other. do thou ask what other thing has
decayed the wealth of the Romayne Empire? First I answer that as that City was
happily erected then grue to a more parfecte state, and by noble acts,
flourished the^ confirmed with laws, and ordinances, came to a perfect
rypenes of Dominion and was wonderfully advanced: so was it necessary that it
now yielding to stooping old age should at the length have (as it weere) a
last day to live in and should feel the heavy strok of the hand of death.
Furthermore this I affirm that all those good means by the which ye Empire
was first established, and by the which it moughte have been mayntained in the
same estate, long before the birth of Christ was lost and out of their
hands. Canste thou in any wise think that when immoderate delicacy and
riotte, when insatiable desire of riches had ones by invasion entered into the
manners of the Romans, when no accoumpte at al was made of the aucthority of
ye Laws, and Senate: when the minds of the rascal multitude by the
sediciouse and bransicke orations of certain desperate persons were tickled with
hoope of rauine and spoil with violence and force to bereue the wealthyer
sort, of their goods and substance, when crueltye armed with impunitye, with
slaughter and effusion of the blood of the Cityzens, with goare blood
staunched the City: when they that in feattes of Arms most prevailed, did
bend their thoughts not to seek the liberty of their country, but their own
private aduauncemente: when with all these weapons the body of the common
wealth was wounnded, do you think yt it could by any means be brought to pas yt
the co^mo^weale could long continue? Add thereunto (if it like you) Saleable
Elections, Judgments raunsomed, mattes of Provinces, extraordinarye and
infinite aucthorityes, the chardge of the commonwealth committed to certain men
carried forth headlonge with a hastye desire of rule and principality, you may
understand, that it could no otherwise be, but that the wealth of ye City
utterly decayed, it must needs come to ruin. What should I in this place
declare the bloody broyls in the times of Scilla and Marius? which infinitelye
plagued and vexed the City and with all manner of cruelty dismembered the same,
and at lenghth by the infection of ye dissentio^ even to posterytie continued,
laid open a gap to the government of Tyrautes. Do thou then doubt but that
the City being gashed and mangled with so many wounds, should at the last be
covered with moulde, the Cityzens with salt and bitter tears waylinge and
lamentinge at ye funeralles thereof. And therefore if it be demanded of wise
men what time Room fell to utter decay they will aunsweere (I suppose) that
even from that time wherein the old order of discipine and government was
abolished, that common wealth began to be of no reputation. For they linger no
longer about the consideration of the event of any thing, which most
certainly gather the things that follow after by the causes that go before. If
you ask them that lack wisdom and experience they will straight way elleadge
that tyrannical government of Caesar. For there is no man so besides himself
that will think after the utter abolishment of laws, the loss of liberty,
and the ouertourninge of the whole state of policy, that any one spark of ye
old common wealth remains. But I pray thee what toye took thee in the head
that thou did impute the overthrow of that Empire to the manners of
Christians? whereas not only the cause of that calamity, but the event it self
was many years before the birth of Christ our King? And if any man ask the
question after tirannye had the upper hand what wasted the wealth of Room,
taken from the whole City, and bestowed upon one man, first I will repeat
those things that I before rehearsed; that all those worthy qualities whereby
the people of Room obtained their ancient renoume, and large Empire, a great
while began to decline, at last fell hedlonge down to the ground. For then
immediately in steed of frugality, outrageous riotte, in steed of enduringe
hardines in war, an exceeding tenderness and nicenes both of the whole body
and mind: in steed of dread, and awe of the laws, impudent boldness,
insatiable lust, immoderate desire, vehemently assaulted the minds of the
Romans: and stirred up men that bare goodwill to their country to vprores,
and civil broils. Further this I affirm that the barbarous demeanor of
their Emperors, and their ouerthwarte nature, ioygned with immoderate riot,
and unbridled lust, did as it were cut them of from al their prosperity.
Neither is there cause why I should here recite so grievous plagues as
wherewith the commonwealth was afflicted, saying that it is evidently known
that many for their cruelty, and horrible factes have been sl^ine, both of
their Citizens, and of souldiars, and ofte^tymes of them that envied them
their place, and high aucthority. But when the custom of killinge of Rulers
grew to be familiar, and there was not only counterwaites and treachery
devised against wicked tyrants, but against discreet, and moderate governors,
and that the name of rule and Empire wanted due reverence, at length the matter
grew to that pass, that nothing was so vily reputed of as the Emperor of
Rome. In the end when the aucthority of the Senate, and people of Rome was
extinguished, and the knowleadge of Souldiarfare together with avarice
excessiuely increased, it fell out ye souldiars for a booty in ready money to
be paid, did assign before hand to whom they listed the Imperial Crown.
Therefore whereas they had respect neither to virtue, neither to nobility, but
as it were making a bargain of bying, and sale unto him yt promised most,
sold ye Empire, every vile caitife and leude varlet had free access to the
swaye and gouernmente of the whole common wealth. Therefore whereas the people
of Rome were governed by such heads, it could not be but all those things
should fall to utter confusion, whereby that common wealth was wont to be
renoumed. Especially saying that oftentimes, least there should want at any
time an occasion of civil dissension, there was appoyncted in diverse places,
many Emperors, if they were to be called Emperors, and not rather strange
and prodigious monsters. Therefore ye wealth of the Romans partly by civil
discord, and horrible dissentions wasted, partly drunk up and consumed by
the means of great and terrible wars, which throughout the whole world was
waged against the Roman Empire, was subject to common thraldom and misery,
of all things incident and appertaininge to man. And here (I pray thee) what
cause have thou to accuse the name of any thing that is called Christian? For
if the doctrine of Christ had wrought in the manners of the Romans,
contempt of laws, riot, wanto^nes, immoderate desire of rule, most egre and
vehement dissension of Citizens among themselves, if to conclude, it had
induced them to violente dealinge, fury, and rage: then moughtest thou have
justly and truly said that, that had bredde in the state of Rome all these
mischieues. For they be those horrible vices, that have plagued and destroyed
not only Rome, but all other Imperial Cities. But if nothing be more
repugnant to Christian manners, and conversation then the vices before rehearsed,
with whom nothing agrees, but that which is just, and vpryghte, tendinge to
quietness and temperaunce: which most reverently accoumpte of modesty, and
innocence, and above all mischiues hate civil discord: which abhor all
troublesome and desperate enterprices, yet will thou be so sottish and impudent,
that thou will seek with this sclaunder to deface the dignity and worthiness of
Christianity? Can there any manner of discipline more confirm and establishe
cyuill policy the^ that, which teaches Justice, equity, meeknes, love of our
country, and constant affection of virtue? And all these things truly in the
manners of Christians are found in degree of most excellent perfection. I could
recite how many Christian Emperors there have been by whom the Empire
impaired and fallinge to decay, has after innumerable calamities been reared
up again, and restored to his former estate and dignitye. I could show that
the borders thereof have been more amply enlarged then ever they were before,
by the most earnest maynteynours of Christ's religion. To conclude, I could by
force of reason constrain them to grant that those miseries which afterward
lighted upon them, happened not through the love, but through the contempt
of Relygion. But because I make haste to the end, this one thing will I
say, that death pursues not only al men, but also al humayne arts and
sciences, all nations, and estates of government: and they al at last fade
away, and are overwhelmed with the loathsome darkness of sloggishe oblivion.
Only it is the kingedome of Christ, which can by no force of enemies be
overthrown, by no worldly wealth ouerborne, by no civil broils and
dissensions at any time torn, and rent in sunder. The riches of the Persians
are clean consumed, the mighty power of the Grecians is utterly ouerturned,
the Empire of the Romans is beaten down, and has had a great fall. All
things that either are, have been, or hereafter shall have being, after one
sort or other shall perish and come to nothing at the length: but ye
kingedom of Christ with all goodly ornaments enritched, world without end
shall florishe, and shall abound with immortal and everlasting glory: by
sacred Oracles it has been foretold, the power, of him is an everlasting
power, which never shall be taken away, and his Kingedome it is that shall
never be dispersed. And in an other place, It has pleased me therefore to
show forth signs of him, because they are great, and his marvelous things
because they are strong, and his kingedome, because it is everlasting. And
that saying also. Thy kingedome is a kingdom of all worlds, and thy rule
from generation, to generation. Also that which is recorded in the history of
the kings, is to be understood of this kingedome. For in this manner God
talks with David. Thy house shall be sure, and thy kingdom shall continue
for ever. Which also may be gathered out of Luke God (says he) shall give unto
him the seat of David his father, and he shall reign in the house of Jacob,
and his kingedom shall have no end. Let therefore men of simple understanding
leave of wickedly to complain of the ruin and decay of the Roman
commonwealth, let them not wickedly and ungodly lay the blame of that ruin and
decay upon the goodness of God. Let them at the length understand ye only the
name of Christ is such, as no age or time can extinguishe: to wit, whose
glory, praise, virtue, worthiness, riches, power, are immortal, and heavenly.
And whereas all other things are frail, and brittle, they have determined and
appoyncted to the^ a short race of life to run. Only therefore the names of
Christians leaninge and resting upon the stays and proppes of the aid and
assistance of God shall flourish for ever and ever.

IT follows that we say something of fortitude and chiualry, the practice
and use whereof he demeth to be unsitting and far unfit for ye profession and
conversation of Christians. For how agrees (says he the contempt of glory,
which is wont to be prescrybed to Christians, with the excellency of this
virtue. For no man except he be stirred up with the desire of renomne, will
think good to take upon him any strange and dangerous adventures. Now
whereas he affirms that no man can be valiant except he be induced thereunto
through the desire of fame and glory, I do not doubt that those Philosophers
will easily grant that, which have both written books of contempt of
glory, and have delivered unto us many rules and principles of prowes and
valiau^ce. For if they had supposed that of those things, one had destroyed
the other, they would never have been so mad, that by the selfsame reasons,
and means, men might be dissuaded from the desire of glory, and incited to
the study, and love of virtue? And they defined virtue to be that, which did
not depend on the vain brute and report of the people, but which took in
hand great and noble enterpryces only for the love of honesty. But this
jolly fellow so argues, as if the only desire of praise should prick men
forward to virtue and there were not much better prouocations of virtue, and
industrye, with which good men's minds, night and day urged and allured, took
upon the^ dangerous attemptes, both with a right goodwil, and with great care
and pain. As the entyre love of our country, the great care of our honor,
and estimation, a reverent duetye both toward the laws, and also toward
religion it self. All which things are most perfectly contained in the rules
and institution of Christians. What if they be most desirous of praise? yet
will any man be either so mad or impudente, that for this cause he will seek
to discredyte them, and stayn their honor. They are truly far of from the
desire of vain praise, yet wonderfully inflamed with the desire of immortal
and true glory.

They set at naught the report of men, yet they are earnestly bent to true
praise, which is contained in the testimony of Christ, beholding al things.
They desire not to have me^ the beholders of their matters, for as much as they
know when they attempt any worthy acts, the angels of heaven look upon
them. This is the propertye of a noble mind, of a gentlemanlyke and haughty
courage not to hang upon the opinion of the ignorant multitude, to neglect all
things here below and to view and contemplate things heavenly and
spyrituall. For what he calls abject and base I cannot well perceive. For if
he think that pride and insolency, cruel and brutish behavior, minds loftye
and disdaynfull, and maruailously puffed up, argues a noble and valiant
courage: then grant I that there is nothing more vile and abiecte the^ the
stock and generation of Christians, which does forsooth with earnest endeavor
watchfully apply the study of temperance, mildnes and lenity. But if al
virtues as the best learned men have testified, and declared, are contained in
one linck of love, society, and coniunctio^, neither can there be among the^
any repugnance, so far of is it, that the praise of mildnes and modesty should
be opposite and contrary to manlye courage that by no means they may be
dislinked, and feuered. Therefore no man can be valiante except he be both
mylde and moderate. For he is much deceived in opynion which thinks the
force of the mind stirred up not with desire of Equitye, and humanity, but
with whote desire and furious rage is rather to be called ma^hode the^ cruel
egrenes of a savage beast. But this notable author yt instructs Princes how
to undo their country which teaches them to establishe the wealth and estate
of their kingdoms not so much by equity, and courtesy, as by guilfull pollice
and crueltye: let him truly call by what name he will that furious dealinge
far passing the usage of the barbarians themselves in villainy, and tyranny,
so yt no man in his right wits will assent to so fond and wicked an opynion.
But we will never be so wood and frentick, yt we will say that, that meknes of
mind which ye holy scripture calls humility, whereof he was an example unto
us yt was also a pattern of notable prowes, is any impediment to fortitude it
self. For whereas all virtues are as it were with glue fastened together: then
truly especially meeknes of mind and valiant courage.

For each of them proceeding out of a noble mind are almost of like honor and
estimation for it is no greater sign of a valiant courage to be able to
withstand the force of his enemies, then to refrain his angry mode: and to
subdue al troublesome affections, and by no grudge of offense to be removed
from humanity and constancy of mind. Therefore there has not been any man
lightlye famous for valiantnes, but he has purchased praise by mildnes and
courtesy. How great was the glory of Themistocles who sittinge in counsel
with the Grecians, was of the other Captains contrary to order of ciuilitye
bitterly tau^ted? but he thought good not to restrain their lauishe speeches
with yelding tau^t for tau^t, but wisely to appease them with patience and
sufferance. What should I speak here of Pericles? what should I rehearse
Julius Caesar, and many other, who did no more earnestlye seek to get them a
name by martial prowess, then to win commendation by courtesy and patience.
On the other side as each man is of a more shrinking and dastardly courage, so
is he moore disposed to anger and crueltye. All those barbarians which can by
no means be trained up in ye precepts of fortitude have been counted so cruel
that our usual speech has ascrybed the name of barbarousnes to cruellty it
self. What should I show you here of ye nature and qualityes of women? then
whom, as nothing is more feeble and weak, so nothing more swyftlye carried to
reuengement of iniurye? For if mildnes and curtesi-do not at al dim the
light and exceedinge brightness of virtue, but issuing out of ye like
haughtines and generositie of mind, is a great orname^t to fortitude: is there
any man so void of reason, that Christian mildnes he will term cowardice,
repugnant and opposite to the rules of fortitude? what perverse dealinge? what
an ungodly mood (a mischief and sorrow come to it) is this? that we make
light account of those things that are true and perfect in our men, the bare
shadow whereof in other men we have in admiration? they have always been
counted of a noble and valiant courage, who being girded and nipped with
tau^tes and provoked with injury are not ki^dled with wrath. But our men, of
Christ have learned this lesson, that they should requite with courtesy
reproachful words, and injury with good turns. Then some man may say unto
me: whereas christians are so gentle and merciful, they will never drive back
from their bounds the force of their enemies, neither will resist villanye with
duty of sword, but they will with a good turn requit al outrageous dealing.
Who so alleges this, little considers distinctions of duties, neither
considers that distinct and diverse things are mete and convenient for
destinet and diverse persons, places, times, and causes. For Christians
themselves who in private grudges and injuries embrace mildnes and patience,
they in common dystresses and dangers are most egre of al and are most
earneste and vehemente maynteiners of the common safetye and liberty.
Especially whereas the state of religion is impugned. For they think in this
case all sufferance an intolerable offense, and patience to be a horrible
fault. Of this mind was Moses the beloved of God, whom the holy scriptures
do testify and declare of all men to have been the myldest, who
notwythstandinge with singular valiaunce vanquished the host of his enemies,
and appeased the wrath of the majesty of God offended, with the sharp
punishmente of many. David also was of like nature whom about other the
scriptures do highely commend for his exceedinge gentleness. He nevertheless
vanquished and put to flight a great and puissaunt host of enemies, and put to
the sword huge multytudes of Alienes and strangers. Even so, many Christian
Princes being most dysposed to all kind of humanitye, have matched the glory
of Martial prowess with ye praise of lowlines and courtesy. What? Has not
Christ himself sufficiently taught us by his own example, how far forth
we should use lenity, and again when we ought to take upon us the person of
severity, when with whips he severely and sharply punished them that
co^mittinge sacrilege, polluted the holy Ceremonies? Therefore there is no
cause why any man should contemn Christian meekenes, whereas it is so ioygned
with true fortitude, that nothing can be more firmly and surely tied
thereunto. For they both issue and flow from one headspringe and fountain,
and the one wonderfully beautyfieth and adourneth the other.

Now let us come unto the last argument of this notable writer, wholly
consistinge in religion, and in those old Ceremonies with all wickedness
polluted and defiled. For he thinks that bloody sacrifice, and slaughter of
beasts, to have such force, and efficacy, that was able upon a sudden of
timerouse persons to make fearce and hardy. And us that neither use any such
bloody sacrifice, nor imbrue our aulters with the blood of four footed
beasts, nor look upon the bowels and intralles of beasts, he supposes by
this inconvenience happening by the means of our religion, to be deprived of
many necessary means and furtheraunces to the attayninge of virtue. Here
truly I know not what might be added either to the rage of his impietye, or
to the blindness, and folly of his mind: for to compare horrible supersticion
with the most holy religion of the everlasting God, it is an offense paste all
satisfaction, and abhominably wicked: but to think him that can behold with a
countenance void of quakinge and tremblinge fear in the butcherly manglinge
of beasts, like to prove a valiant man, it is a plain argument of extreme
madness. For if we shall follow his counsel, why do we not muster all the
butchers we can get? Why do we not also press forth to battle hangemen,
for they of force must be more cruel then other, which quarter and cut up the
bodies of men. That they forsooth with that Noble courage that they have gotten
by thrustinge in their arms elbowe deep in the blood of beasts, and by
sharp punishment of condemned persons might desperately venture among the
thyckest of their enemies, and keep us safe and harmeles from all imminent
danger. What if I show that all things contained in those sacrifices and
ceremonies did tend to timorousnes and cowardice, nor that there was in them
any thing to imbolden the mind of man? First those prayers of theirs in old
terms and solemn words appoyncted to be said, what a deal of trouble
and fear did it contain? In which if they should happen any whit to stomble
and stagger, if any thing were uttered in words out of course, or with
signs and tokens of sinister hap they thought all the Gods of the people
of Rome would be incontinently angry and highlye displeased. Further what a
great fear was cast on those men, entangled with that oulde wives
supersticion, when each thing in the sacrifice did not fall out to their
minds? When the intralles threatened unto them some dreadful and doleful
destruction? But when it so chanced that they should at one time offer up
many sacrifices, and it happily so fell out, that the bowelles of one beast
gave those signs whereby men supposed that the Gods did promise that all
things should prosperously and well succeed, and the bowels of other,
portended some doleful euentes, it must needs be that their minds should
hang in doubt through wonderful fear, which could neither be animated and
encouraged with the intralls betokeninge good fortune, because of their variety
and inconsta^cy, nor again despise those that betokened ill luck, because of
that religion which they were so misseled in. What say you to strange sightes
monsters, the au^swers of Birdgazers, and Southsayers, what great force have
they to rebate and appaule the courage of men? When nothing happened either by
course of nature, or casual chance, yt they did not interpret to be done by
the singular provision of the Gods, pretendinge some great plague, or
calamity. Therefore either the flyinge of birds, either tre^blinge of ye
Earth, or a thu^derclap on ye right side, or any other such mo^sterous matters
and, sometimes prodigious things fained, did wonderfully terrify and fear
poor miserable men. What should I recite the dau^cinge of the Sun? Which
being forced, it would not suffer them that were superstitious and very
mutch given to halsoninge to conceive any firm and assured hope at all. And if
by any chance chickens happened to refuse their food, and yt matter being
once hard, sonke into ye minds of the soldiers: they as though forewarned of
the Gods themselves of some great ill that should betide them, being
astonished, with that which they made so religious rekoninge of, and being
troubled and dysmaied with doubtful fear encou^tred with their enemies. In
many places therefore it is recorded that many hosts have been put to wrack,
and slain, because with ill luck, and ill chiuinge they were conducted
against their enemies. Which thing truly is nothing to be meruailed at. For
they being wholly addicted to ye religion, to believe that without the especial
provision and power of the Gods, foreshewinge some great scourge and plague,
chicke^s refused to eat of a soppe cast among them, and for that all their
courages began to quail, and their hands through fear wax chil for cold,
and they themselves did not with wonted hope and courage march on to battle,
it must needs be that they should have some notable overthrow. And by yt
means it was brought about, yt all men yt were wonderfully given to that kind
of religion, whom they termed fanaticall, were troubled with continual fear,
and care of the mind that bredde continual doubt. What, if many very valiant
men moved with the least and lightest strange sightes yt might happen in many
places have given great token and sign of fear? The Lacedaemonians (that we
also speak somewhat of the Grecians) when they took any war in hand, and
the Kings according to the manner did make sacrifice in the uttermost bounds
of their country, if by any chance they were hindered that they could not
accomplish or finish their sacrifice, they incontinently leadde their hosts
back home again. And whereas the Lacedaemonians obseruinge the guise and
facion of their country were trained up to endure hardness, and to practice
feats of arms, yet they became so dastardly by ye means of their affiance in
that filthy supersticio^ of their abominable sacrifices, that they at such
times would dimisse their souldiars. Further if any great noice should chance
to be heard, all their cou^sells and devises te^dinge to ye maintenance of war
were utterly forsaken, and clean laid aside. And to proceed: what other thing
(I pray you to let pass ye Lacedaemonians overthrew the wealth of ye Athenians,
but a certain peuish old wives superstytio^? for when Nicias undoubtedly a
valiau^t captain, was together with Demosthenes made chief conductor of ye nauye,
and general of ye whole ba^d, and laid seege against Siracusa, and had certain
intelligence of ye Cittye being defended with their own strength, and by the
healp and assistaunce of all Greece beside could not be taken: and Demosthenes
was earnest with him to remove the navy from the havens mouth, least the
passage being stopped by their enemies all the whole force of the Arhenians
which was in that navy contained should after a most miserable sort be spoiled
and slain. Nicias him self liked well of his advise, yet did not put in ure the
good and wholesome council by the means of a fond religious fear. For duringe
the space of a few days about that time, the light of the moon (as at
certain seasons it must needs happen) was eclipsed by reason of the earth
betwixt the moon and their sightes. That Nicias thinkinge a rare and strange
matter, thought good to defer the same to the interpretors of secret holy
mysteries. They returned aunsweare, that it was not lawful within thirty days
to scour the seas with their navy, or to take in hand any other great
enterprise: In the mean time the men of Sycil with huge heps of earth dammed up
the mouth of the haven, and placinge there many mighty ships stopped up their
passage. Therefore that navy of theirs, in which was contained ye flower of ye
youth of Athens, and the whole force of the Athenians, when now in vayn they
sought to break through the navy of their enemies and endeavored to pass out
of the haue^, by that fond supersticious perswation of Nicias was most
miserably scattered and beaten down and all the whole nobilitye had by dent of
sword their bloody bane and destruction. Will thou say then that those
ceremonies, those filthye and oldwiues superstitions did instruct men and
train them up in prowess and chiualrye? which make me^ stout of stomache and
courage tremble, which misleade their minds from constancy, which hinder
their devises that tend to common safty? do thou in this manner show thy
dutiful heart toward Almighty God, by whose means and gracious goodness we
are disburdened and delivered from so wicked, so unclean, so frantic and mad
superstition, that thou dareste presume to prefer the same before the
religion of Christ? For if the minds of men instructed with precepts of
Christian religion are thereby made cowardlye, and dasterdly, and by those old
and unclean ceremonies (in which Godly honor was done to the Idols of
wicked men) they were incited to valiantnes, surely they seame to be preferred
before the rules of our religion. But consider with thy self the foolish,
mad, and erroneous opinion thou have held. They which have truly tasted
of Christ's religion are not moved with the flyinge of birds, the scrychinge
of shrechowles, nor the intralles of beasts, threatninge some doleful event.
They are not troubled with earthquakes, with thunderclappes, with any
prodigious and monsterous wonders. To conclude there is nothing that can daunt
or dismay the mind of a Christian man.

For he is so trained that if he should se all the world egrelye bente to
battle, if he should see all manner of dangers devised and prepared
against him, if he should see every thing round about set on light fire
and almost consumed,, he notwithstanding through an assured hope and
confidence, should remain unchangeable, neither be discouraged through the
terror of any mischief. First because he believes that he is guarded and
defended with a mighty and puissante army. For he reads in the holy
scriptures that there are garriso^s of Angels which defend the Godly from
all iniurye, and in time of need qualify the outrage and force of ye enemy.
For Jacob knew him self with this strength to be fortified when he declared
that he saw the tents of God. Again when the Syrians army was even upon
Helizaeus ready to devour him, and his servant stricken with great fear cried
for help: fear not (sath,) Heliseus, and be of good courage, for our number
far excedeth theirs. And it follows in that holy history. And when Heliseus
had made his prayers to god, he says O Lord open the eyes of this boy that
he may also see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the boy and he saw, and
behold a mountayn al covered with horsemen and fiery chariotes that compassed
Heliseus round about. And that no man may think that God deals but with
few in that manner, it is written else whereof all them which with a pure and
undefiled heart embrace righteousness, and honor God in all singlenes and
simplicity. The Angel of the Lord has pitched his tents round about them
that fear him. He therefore which does faithfullye creditte those testimonies.
and does undoubtedly believe that he is by the power of God protected, can in no
wise tremble with fear, but with a lustye and boulde cowrage will use that
saying that in another place is written. If tents stand up against me my heart
shall not fear. If a battaill rise up against me, in him will I put my trust.
And that place also. These in chariottes, they in horses, but we in the name
of the Lord have our hope reposed. They being vanquished weere slain, but we
being of good courage carried away the victory. This hope therefore (I say)
will not suffer the familye of Christians to be weak and fayntharted. Further
the cogitation of immortalitye, and a certain foreknowledge of glory to come,
what force has it to the confirmation and establishing of their constancy?
Caesar reports that the French men were maruaylously stirred up to all
prowes and valiauntnes through an opynion that the Druides did persuade the^
to be of, which was that the souls of me^ were not subject to death but after
their departure passed from one body to another, and therefore castinge a part
all fear of death, they valiauntly took in hand wayghty and dangerous
enterpryces, not making account of life. Whereas they were persuaded that
death was nothing else but the chaung and alteration of life, and passinge of
the souls from bodies to bodies. And is it even so in deed? The ancient
French men through a most vain opinyon, grounded upon a vile fond
superstition, feared no manner of danger: and shall Christians fear death,
who believe not through a slender opinion, but through a constant trust and
affiaunce that after they have departed this life they shall obtain most
perfect blessedness? For what is moore manifestlye known in Christian
religion, then that all they that embrace justice and godliness, after that they
are losed out of their bodies, as it were out of bonds shall as it were fly
up into heaven, that they might obtain world without end everlasting
glory? Again what is more deepelye printed in our minds then that the
bodies which are now utterly consumed, shall be again restored, and being
with celestyall and heavenly bryghtenes illumyned, shallbee again united to
the souls with so fyrme and sure a league and band, that it can be by no
means vyolated and broken: that we being after such an heavenly sort
renewed might enjoy al perfect and eternal pleasurs both in body and soul.
He who in this point is fullye persuaded (believe me) will never vnwyllynglye
and with a grudgynge mind depart from this life intermedled with so many
myseryes and calamityes. Lastly what should I speak of ye infinite and
wonderful love with the which they yt are truly entered into Chrysts holy
profession, are every day more and more nflamed?

This undoubtedly is most euidente that our minds are by no means so much
incited and stirred up to hazard and adventure our lives, as by love and
charity. For to him that is in love nothing seems hard, and all things are
most sweet and pleasant which are enteprysed for the attayninge that thing
which is unto him most dear and tender. In so much that he not only
contemns death, which seems to all men most terrible and dreadful, but
sometimes persuades himself most willingly to desire the same. That if love
lightly begone betwixt man and man, and grounded on very small causes has
such force, that it causes ye contempt of death, what may be thought of the
excellency of charity, which is through the gift and grace of the holy
spirit most liberally powered into pure and undefiled minds? by the force
thereof Christian Nobility supposes all the sweet pleasure of life to be
reposed in labors and perils, despising all pleasures of the body, and the
britle estate of honors, and all abundance of worldly wealth. And being
greatly inflamed with the desire of Christ, it cannot be removed from
Godliness, neither with threatninges, nor with terrors, nor with strange and
new devised punishments. To conclude this love makes a man think that all
torments which he suffers for Christ's sake, whom he tenderly and earnestly
loves, are light and pleasant. Furthermore nothing is so much desiered and
wished for of Christians as for the relligio^ of the everliving God, to loose
their lives, in the midst of the most exquisite torments of the body that
can be devised. Which truly is not to be wo^dered at. For whereas love turns
aside ye cogitacion of the mind from fear, it must needs be that perfect
and godly love is armed with a wonderful stoutenes and constancy of mind.
Therefore which of these two relligions would sooner allure men to the
embracing of Virtue? does that think you which holds the weak and frail
nature of of man always in suspense, through the vain and folish credit they
give to ye little stringes that are in the intrals of beasts, to the flying of
birds, to the hyuinge of Bees, and to such other fained monstrous devises: or
rather that religion which so establishes and confirms the minds of me^
that they would not be dismayed if the whole world should be turned vpside
doue^? Further that religion which with fond superstition sometimes does hinder
the course of perfect exercise of humayne virtue? or that which with constancy
proceedinge from virtue far passing the credit of man, strengthens the
weak and soft nature of women, and the tender years of young children? Finally
is ye religion to be embraced which is not able to fortifi the minds of men
with any assured hope? or that rather, which shows forth the help and
assistance of God, with a most certain hope of immortalitye, with an
especial love toward almightye God, and with an earnest and ferue^te desire
of him, who has taught us the perfection of heavenly wisdom and perfectly
instructed us to despise al worldly and transitorye vanities. But what need I
convince with many arguments either ye impyetie or madness of this most
detestable and vile caitife? whereas both of those are so clear and manifest,
that nothing is more easilye noted and espied. His wicked impyetie appears
in that he would seek in such order to stayne the honor of Christians,
which he would never have done, if he had conceived any good opynion of the
Godhead of Christ His madness appears in that he with so false, so fond, so
ill codcluded reasons confirms his wicked opinion.

But I know I have longer stayed in this process, then per adventure need
required. Which if any man think worthy of blame, I would partlye he should
pardon my grief wherewith against him I was wonderfully styrred: And partlye
that he should think that that was not altogether impertinent to my purpose.
For whereas I enterprysed to set forth the honor and dignity of Christian
noblenes, and ye Tusca^ writer in a most barbarous kind of style endeavored to
obscure the same, I thought good not to dissemble, especially since that I
perceived the number of them which either stirred up by his wrytinges, or of
their voluntarye motion, were partakers of his wickedness and fury were, far
and wide dispersed. Now therefore whereas I have refuted their broad and
lauishe speeches, and have declared that which was clear and manifest, that
no dastardlye fear and baseness of abiecte minds, but al things right worthy
and excellent were to be found in the profession of Christians, and the whole
order of this most holy disciplyne did excit men to valiantnes of courage, and
contempt of death: yt was not beside my purpose, making mention of fortitude
that consists in martial affairs, to refute in few, their kind of
discourses, which detest generally the noble knowledge of feats of arms, and
all worthy chiualrye as a godless and wicked thing and quite repugnante to
Christ's commandments. First therefore I can conceive no reason why they
should despise warfare when it is ryghtfullye begone, and taken in hand in the
defense of religion, whereas we see it wonderfully extolled in innumerable
places of holy scripture. Which they do not deny, but what say they? many
things (say they) were contained in the old law which rather for the times
sake were tolerated, the^ worthy due commendatio^. As to make a divorce, to
take usury of forrayne countries, of which sort they say is to make war upon
our enemies. But what sembla^ce or similitude has either vsuoye, or diuorses
with martial affairs? For they were not commended, but tolerated, because of
men's weakness and imbecillitye. But he that durst presume not to obey, when
commandment was given to wage battale, committed an offense so heinous, that
he could redeem the same by no satisfaction.

For in what place read we that it was decreed that he should other abide a
pain, or be subject to a curse if any man, whereas after the first offense
his wife committed it was lawful so to do, did not depart from his wife, or
exacted no vsurye of forrayners and strangers? But in many places we have
well noted, that men ravished and replenished with the holy spirit, have
decreed that they should die the death which through cowardice refused to come
forth into the field. But what should I in this place make mention of Debora,
who being inspyred with the holy Ghost, curses them which for as much as in
them lies, take not in hand the wars of the Lord: and inuegheth against
their cowardice in sharp and vehement words. Again they lay to our charge
circumcision, the offering up of a lamb, old sacrifices, which were in old
time with great devotion kept, and after the coming of Christ lackte their
wonted reverence. As though warrefare did any whitte appertain to the
ceremonies and misteryes of holy things, and were not rather ordained for the
preservation of the common wealth? For those holy rights, in which were
foreshadowed the express signs and tokens of Justice and salvation to be
procured by our high and mighty savior Christ, after the coming of the
thing it self which was by those signs declared: were by good right and just
desert abrogated and disanulled. But this cannot be thought of the noble
knowledge of feats of arms, for as much as it is not comprysed under the
nature of ceremonies, but embraced for the maintenance and preservation of the
common safety, and wholly appertains to civil policy. And to confound those
things which are to be distinguished, it is either the property of extreme
madness, or an argument of wonderful temeritie, and rashness. And whereas the
estate of the commonwealth cannot be established, but it must needs be stayed,
and as it were propped up with strength and force of arms, for as much as all
things in time of peace to be practiced and exercised, are under the tuition
and defense of martial prowess: he that takes away the knowledge of feats
of arms, works the overthrow of the common wealth. Which thing if it had
happened through Christian discipline, then mad men moved with some reason,
might lay to our charge that some commonwealth by means of Christian
discipline was overthrown. Which slanderous accusation how wicked and vain
it is we have before declared. For Christ would not that the estate of civil
policy should be overthrown, but rather established and confirmed. And
therefore as he has not wrested the sword out of the hand of a Magistrate, so
neither would he have a soldier to want his weapon. To the intent that the
Magistrate, being armed with auctority of laws, might with severity of the
same laws, suppress wickedness, annoying the members and inward parts of the
common wealth, and the soldier clad in armor, might with dint of sword
repel and put a side from the commonwealth all imminent danger. For this
cause John never exhorts men from applyinge themselves to the knowledge of
feats of arms, but prescribes laws unto soldiers of harmless usage, and
temperate behauour. And Paul calls those magistrates the servant of God
which with the sword punish wicked and desperate persons. Truly nothing were
more heartily to be desired of a Christian man, then that all men would
refrain themselves from wickedness and sinful lust. But forasmuch as that
cannot always fall out, and in steed of continency, unbridled lust, in
steed of justice either foreign force, or civil broils use to arise, then of
necessity either the force of the enemy is with weapons and main strength
to be beaten back, or the outrage of our citizens with sword to be repressed.
That say they is contrary to Christian charity. As though any kind of
cruelty were greater then to be dissolute and negligent in a general distress
and misery. Christ has commanded that we should be revenged of our
enemies. No doubt it is the propertye of perfect and absolute virtue, when
priuatlye we sustain wrongs and iniuryes to show a singular and wonderful
patience of the mind: but when either the common wealth and saftye of our
country, or the honor and estate of religion is impugned, the^ against
outrage and villanye to take an invincible stomach. Christ has especially
commended unto us peace. No doubt that peace he has commended which he
himself gave us, which does not co^siste in pleasant rest and quietness that
man's nature is prone to desire (for who can suppose that he has granted
unto us that kind of securitye when he suffered his own discples to be tossed
as it were with troublesome waves of man's outrageous fury) but that peace by
the which we were reconciled into ye grace and favor of God, which had
conceived great wrath and indignation against us, and to whose religion our
wilful aypetytes were most repugna^te. These enmityes therefore and
dislykinges between us and God, Christ (as Paul testifies in many places)
with his own precious blood has done away, and has purchased for us a peace
continual and everlasting The which we may then especially enjoy, when we
most vehemently and egrely fight other for the safetye of our country or
maintenance of the says of Christ and his religion. Unless paraduenture we
suppse that Abraham wanted the benefit of this peace, at what time he
gathering a band of men of his own domestical servants encoutred with a
huge and puissante host of his enemies, and valiauntlye far exceedinge the
estimation of man vanquished four mighty Kings: and his enemies, being part
of them slain, the other part put to the worse, he carried away the spoil Or
if we think likewise of Gedeon, who being guarded only with three hundred
men of war slew innumerable multitudes of his enemies. Again what think you
of Joshua Moses his sucsessour? what of Ieptes? what should I reherce many
other noble men, honowred as well for their feruente zeal of religion as
magnifyed for their worthy exploites in martial affairs? May we think that
they did offend God when they most valiantly set upon their enemies? Or shall
we not rather say yt the^ especially ye peace of God took effect among them,
when in the cause of righteousness against Godless they waged battle But what
have we to do (say they) with those examples of antiquitye? They were Hebrews,
but we are Christians. And are you still of this opinon, that you will exclude
out of the number, and from the worthy calling of Christians, those holy men
who as I have before declared were right good and true worshipers of Christ and
had received the same gift and grace at the hands of God yt we our selves
have received? for what other thing signifies that outcry The sword of God,
and Gedeon? and a gain yt place. The spirit of god was poured upon Iephthe and
other like places innumerable: but that not without the mighty power of
Christ so great wars could be taken in hand and dispatched? Further what
signifies that out of heaven battle was waged against the^ and the stars
continuinge in their order, and in their proper course fought against
Sisara, but that the hosts of Heaven under the charge of Christ their
captain, whom the holy scripture calls lord of hosts, do fight for the
Godly against the ungodly and wicked? Therefore there is no cause why we
should lightlye make accounte of those examples of virtue, left unto us by
those most holy men for a memorial to continue with us as long as time indureth.
For they are not to us strau^g examples but properly belonging unto us, and
familiar, as done by our own ancestors, to the imitation whereof we must at
length stir up our dull natures. For I would not have any man so
weake-brainde, to think that contrary to the will and pleasure of Christ,
which we know assuredly to have been don by his holy aid and assistaunce,
and to the accomplishinge whereof it is most euidente that the valiauntest men
of all have bin with his voice almost excited and stirred up. For to omit
Historyes of ancient time, Constantine ye Emperor overcame Maxentius not so
much through the multitude and number of his souldiars, or strength of his
host, or his skill and experience in warrefare, as by the furtheraunce and
help of Christ, whom at the very first onset he so terrifyed, that after a
most shameful sort he put him to flighte, and made him ready to seek his
own destruction, and in the end compelled him to drown himself in the
channel of Tiber the river. The which maruaylous and wonderful terror Christ
himself stroke into the hearts of his enemies. For whereas Constantine at
that time thought very well of Christian relligion, he saw almost at the very
instant when he should encounter with his ennemy, the air being most fair and
clear, the sign of the Cross shyning marvelous brightly, and heard a voice
sent down from Heaven, declaringe unto him that he should obtain the victory,
if he would follow the cross as the ensign and flagge of God most high and
everlasting. From hence proceeds the ground and cause that kings and Princes
especially in their Ensigns have a cross. In this sign Constantine not only
obtained victory, but reposed in the same the cause of immortalitye, and
everlasting glory. Having that sign carried before him, he put to wrack hosts
of his enemies innumerable, and did most largely extend the hands of the
Romayne Empire.

What should I speak of Theodosius? Who had such a conflicte with Eugenius,
that he might easily perceive that by the help of Christ himself present
with him, he gat the upper hand. Which Emperor truly in one poincte was mutch
to be meruailed at For at such time as others cherished their bodies with
sleep and delicious meats, he confirmed his mind with prayers, powered out to
God with an earnest and Zealous affection. Which his godliness and devotion a
singular good effect followed. For as soon as the banners being displaied, he
came hand to hand to bicker with his enemies, suddenly there arose most
vehement and mighty whirlewindes, which ouerthrewe his enemies host, and
rebounded with great force their darts, slonge at Theodosius his host, upon
their own heads. This noble victory Claudian records, for in this manner
he writes unto Theodosius.

O too too dear to mighty God, to whom from caves below
In armor clad cold winter storms Don Aeole out does throw
Whom souldiarlike the welkin serves, to whom at tro^pets sound
The Winds obey, as though conspird their enmies to confound.
Again what may be spoken of Carolus Martellus? is it to be thought he could,
being at the first a man of small power and ability, have raised himself to
so great honor and glory, without the aid and assistance of Christ himself
present? Especially since he has done those valiant acts that by man's power
could by no means possible be atchiued. It may seem peradventure unto many in
credible, that is written, three hundred seventy thowsande Arabians were in one
skirmishe slain, through the only valiant dealinge and happy government of
the said Marcellus, and in that time when that nation was most strong and
puissaunt, and had subdued and spoiled all Spain and Africa. But unto me
truly nothing seems less to be wondered at. For there is nothing so hard to
overcome, or so well fortified and defended, which a most noble mind inflamed
with the love of God may not utterly overthrow, and beat down to the ground.
Charles the great bourninge with the like zeal, made most sharp and
vehement wars against the enemies of them that professed the name of
Christ, and for the wealth of Chrystyans never refused any danger what
soever. Therefore his great virtues by the which as by certain stairs he
climebed up to heaven, are commended to immortal memory, by all manner of
worthy Monumentes. Long after him many other Princes Italians, and French,
being inflamed with the like fervent zeal of religion, Godfreye being their
captain general, a man mutch renoumed as well for his singular stoutnes of
courage, as for his rare and exceedinge sanctimony, banishinge the Turks and
Saracens recovered Syria and Cylicia, and all that part of Asia, and in the
end with main force and with a strong army won Jerusalem, for deliverance
whereof they relinquished all those things which in man's life are dear and
pleasunt, and took upon them unmeasurable toil and labor. In whom I know
not whether I should more admire their princely puissaunce, or their
unspeakable virtue and godliness. For their valiantnes was so great, that they
subdued the Barbarians driuinge them out of the borders of Syria, which were so
strong and many in number yt they had in their minds purposed to extinguishe
and raze out of the memory of man the very name of a Christian Their exceedinge
great virtue and godliness did appear in this, that being neither urged by
necessity, nor provoked by injury, they made war upon all the enemies of them
that were called by the name of Christians: to the intent they might reverence
and render due honor unto such monumentes as Christ had left behind him, and
to the footesteppes of Christ imprinted there in the ground, for the more
lively remembrance of the benefit of Christ bestowed upon us, and also to
take away, and blot out utterly that old infamy and reproach wherewith
Christian people were somewhat stained before, as concerning the most holy
place of his sepulcher, which had been spitefully abused by the Barbarians.

What should I entreat of the worthy and noble acts of the Spaniardes,
with most stout and courageous stomaches, and rare and singular godliness done
and accomplished? Which were of such sort that no wise man can otherwise
surmise, but that they could not possibly be contrived without the present
healpe and assistaunce of Christ, for whose love the whole nation of the
Spaniardes did cherefully adventure and hazard their lives? For when as the
power and strength of all Arabie and Afrike together making a rode, and
rushinge into Europe had subdued the Spaniardes by sword, and murdered most
cruelly an infinite number of men: a very few persons in number, of them that
were left a live, after that great ruin and wrack gatheringe themselves
together, did so valiauntly withstand and keep back ye force of their enemies,
that they delivered a great part of Spain, and set them again at liberty.
Their successors also not long after followed the ensample of those their
ancestors in such sort that being but a few in number at yt time, when as
Africa did use very often to send in great strength of men to succoure and
aid the Saracens then dwellinge in Spain: they did not only withstand the
forcible invasion of so huge a multitude, and valiauntlye abide their violent
force, but also at length they drove all the Barbarians clean out of Spain.
The which noble and valiant act, your graces graundfather Ferdinande the
King, ( Lewis most noble Prince) was wonderfully commended and praised of all
men, as a man of stomach unconquerable and excellent man, for all qualities
every way singularly to be honored. But if a man should ask the question,
how it came to pass that the self same people which had brought under their
subjection Spain, then florishinge and in good estate, was afterward by the
remainder of Spain, expulsed and put to flight: he shall find no other cause
thereof, but an earnest zeal to set forth the religion of Christ, which before
truly was almost extinguished, but after that general scourge and calamity
wherewith those our countries were afflicted, was wonderfully stirred up and
renewed. They therefore set on and urged forward, with that wonderful fervent
love of virtue and godliness, when they adventured to do all manner of worthy
acts in defense of Christ's holy name, those things they accomplished
deserving everlasting memory. It would be an endless labor for me to
rehearse in how many places they have put to flight and vanquished a
meruaylous number of their enemies with a small band of men, how often by
most evident signs they have perceived that healpes and supplies came down
from Heaven unto them, which was plainly to be seen in Alphonsus the first
king of Portugale, and the chyefest of your name and kindred. For that man
endued with right excellent virtues, and such pyetye as exceeds common
creditte, having consumed his whole age in most holy wars taken in hand
for the honor and dignity of true religion, and seeing on a certain day
himself with a very small band of men ready to encounter with a huge and
mighty host, he he held in the element the image of Christ being round about
it enlightened with a shyning brightness, with which sight he was so encouraged
and animated, that he overthrew and vanquished five kings in one day. Moreover
what should I say of his son Sanctius? whose other valiant acts at this
present to omit, that deed of his truly was notable, whereby he purchased to
himself a memory of a name for ever to continue, in that, when a strong and
mighty army of Moors invaded Portugale, yt passing along from thence they
might bring under their jurisdiction all the whole country of Spain, he did
not only abate their courage, but with rare and singular valiant stoutenes,
he brought them under, and as it were maugred them together. It is needelesse
for me to rehearse and speak of the ages and times of other kings, lineally
descending of their race and progeny? For this truly appears plainly by the
records and testimony of our own Chronicles, that there was almost none among
them all, that in his time procured not unto himself worthy praise and
commendation, as well for his valiaunte courage, as for his piety and
godliness. Wherefore when all the worshippers of Mahomet were with great
conflict in war subdued, and expelled out of the king of Portugale his
territory, they led forth their host, not so much for number as prowess
invincible, and invaded the coasts of Africa, where after they had gotten most
famous victories, and subdued many cities, they held by force of arms a
great part of the Moors land. Truly it is no easy matter to express with
how whote and lusty courage our countrymen dealt in those co^flictes, who
ran into the midst of their ennemies host, that a man would have thought
they had earnestly desired death. For they right well understood yt the race of
this life is soon run, and therefore they referred all their thoughts, to
that immortal glory which is prepared for all them yt manfullye and in a good
quarrel depart this life. And so being incited and provoked with that most assured
hope of immortality and earneste zeal they hear to the aduauncemente of true
religyon, sometimes they wished nothing more desirously, then that they might
vow to spend their frail and short life (which shortly after they must
deeds yield to nature) in Chrstes quarrel. So that at length it fell out by
their means and worckinge that all those countries which for number of people,
and violent invasion might else have swarmed and increased through all Spain,
were now so cut of, that they stand more in fear of our force and weapons
bent against them, then we have any cause at al to be dismayed at their fury
and outrage. And to conclude, what a noble act was this of theirs, that they
sailed over the great main sea with a wonderful long and fearful
navigations, and by force of arms passed through almost al parts of ye West,
East, North, and South? To what purpose should I rehearse here how they overcame
and how ye wa^ ye mightiest towns yt were in Arabia, Persia, and Aethiopia? how
hardly and with what great difficulty they ended those warrres wherein they
overcame India? how they discomfited and put to flight on the seas, nauies
maruaylouslye well furnished, and huge and mighty hosts. How the whole Power
that ye Turcks were able to make about those parts was put to wrack and
utterly vanquished through ye puissance and valiauntnes of our countryemen. And
are al these things (think you) of that nature, that they could be done
without the most pressed and ready healpe of the eternal God? Certes, I for my
part will never think so well of the virtue and passing politic wit of your
father Immanuel that noble Prince for prowess and chiualry far passing all
other within ye compass of our memory: I will never so much maruayle at that
singular forecast and wonderful virtue of your brother John, a most just and
merciful Prince: To conclude I will never be far in love with the stoutnes of
our countryemen and their peculiar and natural inclination thereunto, that I
will suppose they were able to do such worthy acts by means of wisdom and
strength, but by the providence and mighty power of God Almighty. For our
countrymen were never able to overcome neither the Moors in policy, nor the
Persians in strength, nor the Turks in chiualrye, nor the Arabians in number.
And yet only by the earneste zeal to piety and godliness and the most sincere
profession of Christ's religion which has always most plainly appeared in
our countriemen, they have been ouercomed and their power scatterred. This is
the only thing that has increased the wealth and estate of Portugal, that
has purchased to our kings and princes everlasting fame and glory, and has
by long custom taught an infinite number of Alians and strangers to submyt
themselves to their rule and dominion. But what should it avail to use more
examples in this matter? seeing that nothing is more clear and evident as well
by the testimony of holy scripture, as also by a great number of other
things for memoryes sake lest in writing then that, yt kind of war with either
for ye preservation of common safty, or defense of religion is taken in hand
so acceptable to Christ, yt it is directed by the present assistance of his
mighty power. Wherefore if Christian religion be no hinderaunce at al to the
knowledge and exercise of martial affairs, but does rather wonderful set forth
and confirm the same: in as much as it takes away al fear and dastardly
cowardnes through the assured hope of immortality and maruailoslye stirs up
our minds unto ye attaining true glory: then it follows by good reason that
ye christians more the^ all other are famous not only through the praise and
commendation of integrity, innocency, te^pera^ce, liberality, and justice, but
also that they far excede al other men in renomne of Chiuallrye, and all
other lawdable propertyes of virtue. For that is to be set down as a sure
ground and principle which was heretofore declared that, that only is to be
termed a virtue, which directs it self unto that soueraygne good, and
last desired end, for whose sake al other things are to be wished for: and
that also which is directed and guyded by Gods holy will and pleasure, not by
man's own wilful appetite and ficle fantasy.

So that it may easily be gathered hereby, that they never showed any notable
stoutnes of courage in war which sought after shadows of false renomne, but
true fame and glory the could not obtain. Only they that seek after Christ
beholdinge always the true end for whose sake to come into peril and danger
of venturynge life, and limbs they think it not only honorable, but most
sweet and pleasant are in deed truly to be judged stout and courageous, and
full of magnanimity.

THe conclusion of all is this, that we should diligently consider, and
depelye ponder with our selves how great the dignity and majesty is of this
Christian kindred which God him self the high prince, and ruler of all,
purging the same from al contagio^ of sin and impiety, has made his by
adoptyon, and has advanced it to all worthy tytles of great renoume, and has
powered thereon such gifts as shall be immortal and never decay. Which is not
li^cked to any mortal affinity or allia^ce, but acknowledges God as an only
governor and parent. The which Christ our mighty and blessed savior has so
united unto himself, that he has imparted therewith almost worthy and
heavenly indumentes. He has also made us partakers of his spiritual unction:
he has bestowed upon us kingely, and priestly aucthority: he has inspired
into our minds knowleadge of Heavenly things, and has instructed us after a
wonderful order, and by Heavenly secret workinge in all manner of virtue. He
therefore that seeks praise, worthiness and renoume, must endeavor all he can
to attain Christian virtue, must earnestly enbrace true justice, absolute
liberality, perfect temperance, and other virtues which our lord has
prescribed unto us: and must retain that fortitude, unto which the worthiness
and excellency of that name is duly and fitly applied. For what thing else in
the life of man is permanent, highly advanced, worthy great honor and
estimation? Nay rather what is not unconstant, low in estimation, vile of
condition? For whether we respect the uncertainty of riches, or the waueringe
condition of honor and humayne glory, or the painted show of kinrede and
nobility: or lastly the counterfaite and deceiptfull resemblaunce of human
virtue, we shall find nothing that may fully satisfy our hearts desire, or
delight our minds with any such pleasure as long may continue. For all
these things are vile, transitorye, mortal, full of error and contemptible
vanity. Only the worthy titles of Christian nobility are highly esteemed,
immortal, of dyuine perfection and excellency. Such as no force can undermine,
no continuance of time drown in the pit of oblivion, no kind of calamity
utterly extinguishe. And although man's base and abject mind be in no wise able
to aspire unto so great honor and dignity: yet they which through the healpe
and gracious goodness of Christ have severed themselves from the society and
fellowship of men and are now adopted into the houshoulde and familye of GOD,
being stayed by the help and assistaunce of God, shall most easily bear and
maintain that their honorable port. For although they be conuersaunt here
with us in earth, yet all things appertain to the^, which are due to Heavenly
wightes, and they are now after a sort rekoned and accounted in the number of
the Gods immortal.

The Epilogue.
THus have you received of me (most renoumed Prince) a present, not truly
with wit and learning polished, in either of which because I know my defect,
I am right heartily sorry: but yet meet and conueniente both for that trade of
life which you apply your self unto, and also for your noble and haughty
courage. For being as you are wonderfully furnished with the virtues of
courtesy, liberality, constancy, and fortitude, that is su^ely among the
rest of your moral qualities worthy singular commendation, that you frame and
measure all your devises conformably to the rule of Godliness and Christian
relligion. For the nobility os your house and family, coming as you do, of
the race of noble kings by lineall descent, does not so puff up your mind
with pride and insolency, but that you suppose mutch more glory and worthiness
reposed in the worthy calling of a Christian, then in those glorious titles.
Neither so took you in hand noble acts, as though you should respect
therein the laud and praise of the vulgar people. Neither with that mind and
intent did you expose your life to many perilous dangers, that you might
thereby purchase a reward of mortal men. But being as you are of haughty
mind, in all things which you bring to pass both with singular forsyghte
and providence, and also with wonderful courage and stoutnes, whether they
appertain to civil government in time of peace, or to martial prowess in
time of war, you give most manifest notice and signification, that you set no
store by human things, but do with most earnest endeavor and intention of
mind affect those things that be Heavenly and everlasting. Therefore not
without just desarte of yours, all good men love you, all nobility with
reverence behold you, all Spain with all manner of praise and commendation
extolleth your name. So that there is no man that knows your majesty, but you
have him bounden unto you, either for your gentle and courteous usage, or for
your rare and singular wit, or for your wonderful earnest motion to virtue and
godliness. And although hardest of all be the condition of approved virtue,
forasmutch as it is no easy matter to be aunswerable to the expectation of
men, all ready by reason of worthy acts conceived, yet such is the haughtines
of your Graces mind, that you can most easily pass and overcome the opinion
of all men conceived of you. For Christ our mighty and blessed Savior will
never fail you at your need, since you refer all your worthy acts and
enterprices to his honor and glory, but will protecte you with his mighty
power, and will indue you with such honor and glory, as shall for ever and
ever continue.

FINIS.

