THE SAINTS SOCIETY.

Delivered in XIV. Sermons,

By I. B. Master in Arts and Preacher of GODS Word at Broughton in Northampton
Shire.



LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER, dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1636.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND NOBLE GENTLEMEN, Mr. EDWARD MOVNTAGVE, Mr. WILLIAM
MOVNTAGVE, Mr. CHRISTOPHER MOVNTAGVE, and to the virtuous and noble
Gentlewoman, Mrs. MANNERS, Children of the right honorable EDWARD Lord
MOVNTAGVE of Boughton, in the County of NORTHHAMPTON. Grace and peace.
I Formerly considering (worthy and honorable) what a bountiful Patron your
honorable father has been (and still is) to me; not only in giving me
freely a presentation to the place where I now am, when I had little or no
relation to his Honor; nor yet desiring any such favor from his Lordship: But
also by a continual supply of his many bounties and favors to me, and mine;
consulted with my self to testify my gratitude to him, as Elisha with his
servant to the bountiful Shunamite, 2 King. 4. 13. And finding my self as
unable to pleasure him by speaking, etc. As that is needless, he dwelling
among his own people, being known and honored, in Court and Country. Yet
considering that something was to be done for him, as Elisha for her, Ver. 14.
I resolved to show my thankfulness to him (as Elisha to the Shunamite in a
child) in you his children, by fore-warning you of, and fore-arming you against
the Sirenian and sinful inchauntments of Satan's instruments, to draw awry
your young and flexible years into ways uneven, and unequal. For this cause
I gave you in writing, an Epistle persuading you to imitate your virtuous
Parents in their many pious and praiseworthy practices: to which I adjoined
this Discourse of Spiritual Goodfellowship; not then intending any further
publication: Yet now I have presumed to publish the same (being persuaded and
encouraged thereunto by many Divines, especially two Batchelours in Divinity;
(M. Robert Boulton, and M. Nicolas Estwicke) Lecturers at Kettering, who heard
the Sermons preached, and perused my Book. They being known in the
Universities where they have been Students and Fellows of Colleges; in the
Country where they live, and elsewhere; to be grave, reverend. godly, and
judicious Divines) under your patronage, and protection. Persuading my self,
that I adventuring to divulge this little Treatise in an age so learned and
judicious, shall be questioned like the Wise man's poor man, What fellow is this,
etc? And Christ Jesus my Lord and Master is not this, etc. that disgraceful
disesteeme of good things by mean men, of which Jesus the son of Sirach
speaks, Ecclesiasticus 13. 23. saying, When a rich man speaks, every man
holds his tongue, and look what he says, they extol it to the clouds; but
if the poor man speak, they say what fellow is this? And Jesus the Son of
God found verified in himself, of whom they said, Is not this the Carpenter,
the son of Mary? -- whence has he such wisdom, etc? Mark 6. 3. Being more
now then heretofore. As for mine Epistle which I gave you to be as a glass
whereby you may more easily take notice of, and as a book of records to
further your remembrances of the many worthy examples of your renowned Parents,
although I have kept it (though unwillingly, it being fitted for this Tractate,
opening somethings in the same, and persuading by practice and examples, as
this by Doctrine and Precept: it having had the approbation of my betters by
far to accompany the same (being accommodated thereunto) as well in public
as in private) from public view. Yet my hope and earnest desire is, that you
(right noble and virtuous) will profitably peruse both that and this to
practice both, assuring you, that by walking in those ways traced out by your
religious Parents, and described in this Discourse, you shall be sure to please
God, glad the good, put to silence the contrary minded, declare your reverent
esteem of your godly Parents, in not degenerating from their Christian
courses, and manifest your selves to be true and living members of this
incomparable goodfellowship with all true believers, the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ. Thus desiring you, and all good Christian Readers to give God the
glory, and me your prayers. I leave them, and you, to read for your direction
this following Discourse in few hours, which I have painfully collected for
the good of Gods Church, not without great labor, and much time; beseeching
the Lord Jehovah, blessed for ever, to grace my honorable Lord, his virtuous
Lady, and all his noble Children with all spiritual blessings, until he bring
them to glory, the perfection of grace.

Servant to you all for the salvation of your souls, JOSEPH BENTHAM.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
IT is the glory of true virtue to appear as she is, and to be seen in her
own proper colors: wherein she has a glorious triumph over vice, which,
though audacious and impudent, yet is she ashamed of her own face, and seeks
to cover it with the veil of virtue. Instance Idolatry, which puts on the
mask of Piety, Superstition of Religion, Hypocrisy of Sincerity,
Covetousness of Thriftinesse, Prodigality of Liberality, Lewd fellowship of
Good-fellowship. Hereupon the lewdest companions that can be, such as fear nor
God nor man, such as take liberty to all looseness and licentiousness,
committing all manner of sin with greediness, Carders, Dicers, Swearers,
Swaggerers, Gluttons, Drunkards, and others like them, very beasts in humane
shapes, Swine, Dogs, Toads, Aspes, yea Devils incarnate, take upon them the
name of Good-fellowes, and entitle their abominable and execrable communion
Good-fellowship. Herein they have prevailed as far as Papists in their undue
and unjust usurpation of the title Catholic: entituling their Apostaticall
and Antichristian Church the Catholic Church: and to make their blindness (or
rather madness) the more manifest to the whole world, they join these two
contradictory titles together, Romish-Catholick^. Yet herein they have so far
prevailed, as not only themselves assume, but others also give them that title
Catholic. But how? Surely in way of scorn and derision: as the Holy Ghost
gives the style of Gods to Idols. As Papists, so other lewd companions have so
far prevailed by usurping to themselves this style Good-fellowes, and to
their society this title Good fellowship, as others also that are not of that
fraternity give them and their divelish society this style and title. Wherefore
to pull away these stolen feathers from that black crow, that foul crew,
this Treatise is penned: wherein is declared, who are the only true
Good-fellowes, and what is the only true Good-fellowship, namely the Saints and
their Society. In handling which point thou have (good Reader) set before thee
as the particulars whereof that Good-fellowship consists, so the sweetness
and amiablenesse, the dignity, and excellency thereof, and many other
allurements to draw thee thereto; together with directions how to obtain a
freedom in that fellowship, and how to carry thy self worthy thereof,
answerable thereto. Be more diligent inviewing and well observing the matter of
this Treatise, then in enquiring after the Author thereof Expede Herculem. By
this small parcel of his pains, thou may judge what the man is. Yea by a
studious reading of this Book thou may know thy self, and understand of
what company thou art. Thou may hereby judge of companies, and know which is
the best. In this Treatise thou shall find that the true Good-fellowes here
described have a sweet communion one with another, yea and with the Father, and
his Son. What high prerogatives and excellent privileges these be, what
cordials are thence ministered to poor distressed souls, what thereupon to be
avoided, what to be endeavored after, are distinctly and succinctly set out in
this Discourse. Such apt and just consequences are diducted from the principal
Points, as most, if not all the heads of our Christian Religion are explaned.
Brevity and Perspicuity are here joined together. Read, and mark, and thou
shall find such variety of matter as will minister delight with profit. Thus
much I thought good to give thee notice of, not simply to commend the work,
but rather to incite thee to seek after the treasure which is hid therein,
that so thou may show thy self like the wise Merchant, who having heard of a
Pearl of great price, and of a rich treasure, could not be quiet till he had
got them, as the Lord notes among his Parables. Farewell in the Lord.

Thine in the Lord, G. M.

The Contents.
Showing the occasion and drift of this Discourse, page 1. 2. All Saints have
fellowship together. Ten Reasons proving the Point: The Saints have like grace
and glory, and how: Six Objections (against this fellowship) propounded and
answered. page 3. etc. Saints must not communicate with the wicked: Reasons why
not: Disswasions from their communion: how we may, how we may not communicate
with the wicked: and with whomwe may not. page 6. etc. Saints must love each
other entirely, and why: how we may, and why we must love all men, even the
wicked, and how we may not: we must especially love good men: five motives
persuading: five objections answered, and how to love the Saints. page 9. etc.
Saints must communicate gifts and graces each to other: 4. reasons why: and 6.
motives persuading to relieve: 2. reasons why rich men should give, 6. Lets
removed: the poor must give, their objections answered: how much we must give,
3. reasons why we must give much: when we must give, 5. reasons why it is not
good putting off till death: of what a man must give: after what manner, and to
what end. p. 12. etc. Grace must be communicated, it is the best work of mercy,
though slighted by some, derided by others. 6. motives to communicate grace
from Saints examples: Gods glory: the nature of grace: the practice of the
wicked: our brothers gain, and our own. page 18. etc. Saints frrailties are
to be concealed: not that they are such offenders as the world deemes them:
sc. they are not covetous because they are painful, why they are painful;
neither because they are not wastfull, why they are frugall; neither because
they are not always open handed to clamorous beggars, why they relieve
beggars: Dissemblers not here justified, but condemned, slandering the Saint.
2. motives persuading to conceal the frailties of the Saints: what Puritanes
are naught, who are here pleaded for: 5. answers to the worlds objection, some
Professors are naught, therefore all are naught. page 23. etc. Saints must
reprove, and be reproved: how we must reprove, a man faulty may reprove: 4.
cavils against reproving, confuted. 3. motives persuading to reprove. page 32.
etc. Saints must be peaceable: what peace such have: others discord should not
dissever Saints, what we must yield to for this peace. page 34. etc. Saints
must forgive: yet Magistrates may punish: Men may sue at law, and how: How men
may forgive, who must forgive, whom, when, what, and how: the envious,
wrathful, and revenger no rule for us: 7. motives persuading to forgive: and
objections answered. page 37. etc.
II. Book.
GOD is the Saints Father: he is their Father, all, or most of those ways
whereby man is father to man: He begets, feeds, clothes, corrects, provides
inheritance for, and marieth them. page 41. etc. Saints must love God: Few love
God truly, and who they be. 4. motives persuading to love God. page 46. etc.
Saints must shun sin: They are not without sin, contraryminded confuted:
self conceipted Pharisees censured, who are such: a sixe-fold difference
betwixt the sins of good and bad men: a threefold encouragement of sinners to
sin, answered. sc. Gods mercifulness. 2. Hope of late repentance. 3. Saints
sinning. Motives dissuading from sin. page 53. etc. Saints must depend upon
Gods providence: Covetousness censured, who are covetous: Depopulatours
censured, pious poor encouraged to depend on God; means must be used, and may
without coveteousnesse: Puritanes, how covetous, how not. 4. motives to depend
upon God. page 65. etc. Saints must honor God, how God is honored with soul
and body, and why: why with the tongue, and how. sc. by talking reverently of
the Word. 4. abuses, disswasives from each. 2. By talking reverently of Gods
titles. 3. Abuses, disswasives from each. 3. By speaking reverently of divine
Attributes, how God is just, how merciful, who dishonor him in both. 4. By
speaking reverently of Gods works, how of creation, and redemption. 5. By a
right use of anoath. 2. Reasons against Anabaptists. 4. kinds of wicked
swearing. 4. disswasives from superstitious oaths. 6. from causeless, and 4.
objections answered: How to honor God in our lives. 6. Motives to honor God.
page 72. etc. Saints must do Gods will: Selfe-deceivers: Gods will must be done
wholly, faithfully, timely, and continually: Motives to do Gods will, and
directions how. page 88. etc. Saints must be content with Gods allowance:
depopulation, usurie, covetousness, and pride from discontent, censured. 3.
reasons why we should be content: Honest labor not forbidden: Nor prayer for
temporal things, why, and how pray for them: Nor providence: Nor begging
allowed: 8. motives to contentment: what food should content, what raiment,
calling; a poor estate, and why: with afflictions, and why. page 98. etc.
III. Book.
OBjections against the fellowship of Saints answered. page 113. etc. Saints
have fellowship with the Father, the Point proved, and confirmed by four
reasons. page 115. etc. Comforting the Saints against Bellarmines uncomfortable
doctrine of falling from grace, and the Devils temptations to this purpose:
against enemies, poverty, infamy, exile, death, sin, and other terrors.
page 118. etc. Reprehending wicked men: their danger presuming to harm the
Saints: their folly in not laying hold of this society. page 12^. etc.
Persuading by a threefold motive to this communion. p. 129. etc. They who have
or desire this fellowship, must shun sin, because it is darkness, death,
it angers God, crucifies Christ, grieves the Holy Ghost, makes men monsters,
it is the proper object of hatred, it is against God, and from the Devil. page
130. etc. They who have or desire to have fellowship with God, must avoid the
society of sinners. 4. disswasives, whose children, what beasts, and filthy
persons they be. They are dirt, chafe, dust, smoke, and scumme. page 13^.
etc. They must labor to be like God, wherein, and why. p. 138. etc. They must
pray to God: Prayerlesse persons woeful: what faults hinder prayer: How to pray
aright. page 140. etc. They must hear Gods Word: Lets removed: Motives to
hear: Directions how to hear to obtain fellowshippe with God. page 142. etc.
They must seek the Lord: what it is to seek; how; by what means, and why we
should seek the Lord. page 146. etc. They must sanctify the Lords Day: the
name of the Day: the judgment of diverse Divines of the Sabbath: whether
works then lawful, what works meant, disswasives: whether sports lawful,
reasons, disswasives, objections answered: whether worldly words, 4. reasons:
whether worldly thoughts, 3. reasons. Meditation of Gods Works, Word, and why:
conference for the Lords Day: works for the Lords Day: sc. reading, singing,
and how; prayer, deeds of mercy, their kinds, and manner of doing them:
Recreation for the Lords Day; four motives to practice. page 149. etc. They
must choose the thing which pleases God: diverse choosers, which are the best.
page 177. etc. They must take hold of Gods Covenant: the foundation, and frame
of this Covenant: how the same to the justified Jews formerly, as to the
justified Christians now, and how not: we must enter into, and keep this
Covenant outwardly, and how, inwardly, and how: how the Law binds, how not
against Antinomists. 6. motives to keep covenant with God. p. 178. etc. They
must cleave to the Lord, what it is to cleave to God, manner, means, and
motives. page 189. etc. They must serve God: what it is to serve God: How we
are free from the Law, how not, against Antinomists, and others: we must serve
God with fear, objections answered: disswasives from serving four evil
masters: the excellency and manner of Gods service. page 191. etc.
IIII. Book.
ALL Saints have fellowship with Christ, because they are his fellows, spouse,
branches, building, members, and linkt to him in the nearest ties. page 202.
etc. Reprehending those who harm them. page 209. etc. Dissuading from hurting
the Saints; why the world is enraged against them: who are their greatest
enemies, how holily they live, how near and dear they are to Christ. page
211. etc. Persuading all to join in fellowship with Christ: This is the
sweetest, most honorable, the firmest, richest, the most joyful and peaceful
society. page 217. etc. Comforting those who have fellowship with Christ, from
Christ's names, against fear: Christ loves such with all loves: such are
justified, what justification is, its causes. How faith justifies, how not:
six notes of happiness, all in the justified. Such are sanctified, and how:
difference betwixt justification, and sanctification: how sanctified persons
are clean: how once justified, always justified. page 228 etc. They have
Christian liberty: a fourefold false liberty disclaimed; Christian liberty
frees not from obedience of the Moral Law: what conscience is, what binds
conscience, the Law binds the conscience to obedience: wherein this liberty
consists; its excellency, a threefold use from this liberty. page 242. etc.
Exhorting and directing to this society: Scripture, truths trier: sins of
former times as bad as now, why they seem worse now. page 253. etc. They who
have fellowship with Christ, do, and ought to imitate Christ: wherein we must
imitate Christ actively, passively, and why: profane livers, fashion
followers, and followers of men censured: how men may be imitated, how not:
what we must do if we imitate Christ. 3. motives to imitate Christ. page 256.
etc. They have, and must have faith: and what faith; its excellency: three
sorts faulty concerning faith: our duty concerning faith. page 265. etc. They
have Gods Spirit abiding in them: its necessity, who faulty: our duty to
examine our selves: who have, who want Gods Spirit: duties of such who have
Gods Spirit, and of such who want the same. page 269. etc. They who have
fellowship with Christ, be, and must be his sheep, branches, spouse, members,
building: their duties hence. page 276. etc. The Conclusion, showing the drift
of all. page 278. etc.
Courteous Reader, pardon I pray smaller faults escaped in printing, and amend
these greater as following.
Page 13. line 5. for comsorts, read consorts. p. 21. l. 1. correcting, 1.
converting p. 31. l. 28. openly, r. only. p. 38. l. 19. of, r. as. p. 49. l.
28. leading, r. loading. p. 64. l. 33. stayng, r. staining. p. 70. l. 16.
alike, r. alive. p. 80. l. 12. it, r. in. P. 100. l. 4. where, r. whence. Ibid.
l. 5. Bubus, r Subus. p 108. l 33. money, r. many. p. 178. l. 19. feel, r.
seek p. 183 l 17. Judicial, r. judicial. p. 227. l. 17. we and all, r. woe
and alas, p. 245 conjunction, r. conviction. p. 225. l. 33 dissoluble, r.
indissoluble.

Marginall faults.
Page 13. for tunica quem, r. quam. p. 23. bonum, r horum. p. 100. comitatu, r.
comitatum. Ibid contratius, r. contraria. p. 110. it appears, r in apparel,
p. 245 exemple. r Epist p. 253. virtutis. r. veritatis. p. 154. (...), r.
(...). p. 256. limices, r. limits.

Information for the meanest Reader.
Where you shall find these following, this is their signification. e. g. For
example.

to wit.
viz. sc.
that is.
i. e. i.
Ibid. there, or in the same place.

1. True good fellows have fellowshippe with, 1. All Saints, page 3 etc.
Therefore they must 1. Avoid wicked men's society. page 6. etc. 2. Love all,
especially the Saints, and all those. page 9 etc. 3. Relieve each other. page
12. etc. 4. Communicate gifts and graces. page 18. etc. 5. Conceal each others
frailties. pg. 23. etc. 6. Reprove one another. page 32 etc. 7. Strive for the
peace of the Saints. page 34. etc. 8. Forgive each other. page 37 etc.
2. The Lord, or God the Father. page 115. etc. Therefore. 1. Themselves are
comforted. page 118. etc. 2. They who wrong them, and neglect this communion
are reproved. page 125. etc. 3. All are persuaded to this communion. p. 129
etc. To this end they must
1. Shun sin. page 130. etc. 2. Shun society of sinners. page 135. etc. 3.
Imitate God. page 138. etc. 4. Pray to God rightly. page 140. etc. 5. Hear Gods
Word delightfully. page 142 etc. 6. Seek the Lord. page 146 etc. 7. Sanctify
the Lords Day. page 14. 9 etc. 8 Choose that which pleases God. page 177 etc.
9. Keep Covenant with God. page 178 etc. 10. Cleave to God. page 189. etc. 11.
Serve God. Page 101. etc.
3. Christ Jesus, or Gods Son. p. 202 Therefore, 1. They hurt themselves who
harm them. page 209. etc. 2. All should be dissuaded from wronging them. page
126. etc. 3. All are persuaded to join in this communion page 129 etc. 4. They
who have fellowship with Christ are comforted. page 224. etc. 5. And persuaded
to
1. To imitate Christ. page 257. etc. 2. Have true faith. page 265. etc. 3. Have
Gods Spirit. page 269. etc. 4. Be Christ's sheep. page 276. 5. Be branches
grafted into Christ page 276. 6. Be Christ's spouse. page 276. 7. Members joined
to him. page 276. 8. And stones built on him. page 276.

2. These goodfellowes have God to be their Father page 41 etc. Therefore they
ought to 1. Love God. page 46. etc. 2. Shun sin. page 53 etc. 3. Depend
upon the Lord. page 65. etc. 4. Honor the Lord. page 72. etc. 5. Do Gods will.
page 88 etc. 6. Be content with Gods allowance. page 98 etc.

OF THE SOCIETY OF THE SAINTS, the first Book.
CHAP. I. Showing the Sum and Occasion of this Discourse.
1 JOHN 1. 3. That you also may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
GOodfellowship the times favorite, is so generally applauded, that most men
are almost enchaunted with its clamorous brute; Insomuch, that many ample
patrimonies, and great revenues by goodfellowship are wholly exhausted: many
extravagant enormities are slighted over, because committed not by some simple
sot, or rude rusticke, but by some goodfellow. Yea, it is esteemed a sufficient
protection (with many) against reprehensions, and condign punishments for
blaspheming the names of God so sacred: excessive drinking, more then brutish:
rotten communication so contagious: scurrulous jests, so offensive: mis
spending time so precious: scandalizing the ways of men better then
themselves, so holy: and for many like execrable abominations to plead
goodfellowship. Goodfellowes I do intimately love, and with such entireness
affect goodfellowship, that I deem my self too too unfit to decipher such an
heavenly association. Yet perceiving slavish Hagard mineering over princely
Sarah; hellish vice jet about, varnished over with the title of virtue: impiety
that disguised anticke, to dis-franchise true society of its due renown,
endeavoring to make it ridiculous with satyricall mocks, cynicall girds, and
hellish reproaches: and striving to soar higher then is meet for such ignoble
and illegitimate counterfeits. I cannot but desire curiosity to curb this
copped monster, yet with no wrongful obtrectations; and adorn true
goodfellowship, not with any Hyperbolicall praises; a naked tale most truly
setting forth the naked truth; it shining most bright when it is in the least
bravery. Neither with any borrowed paintings, painting being more meet for
ragged walls, then precious marble. But with its own ineffable beauty, and
inestimable splendor: fair countenances needing no colors. To this end I
have chosen our Apostles words, which snew us an excellent fraternity, and
endeavor to agglutinate us into that so sweet Society, which is with the
Saints, with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: which is the true
goodfellowship; yea such, that whosoever is in this, is a goodfellow indeed.
Whosoever is not in this Society, is in truth no goodfellow. Yea, so precious
is this, that we all should labor to have fellowship with the Saints, the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

This fellowship or communion is threefold. 1. Of the members amongst
themselves: You with us. 2. Of the children with the Father: Truly our
fellowship is with the Father. 3. Of the members with the Head: And with his
Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. Saints have fellowship together.
Cor. 10. 17. We: that is, all true Christians, are one bread: showing the
union, and Society of the Saints partaking in one bread. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 20,
27. Now you are the body of Christ, and members in particular, Ephesians. 4 4. There
is one body, 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. Heb. 13. 3. Being your selves also in the body,
Zach. 3. 8. Thou and thy fellows.



But all the Saints, although distant, different, etc. are members of one and
the self same body, Ephesians. 3. 6. The Gentiles fellow heirs, and of the same
body. Therefore, etc.



All the Saints etc. are stones of the same building, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. 1
Pet. 2. 4, 5.



But all Saints are branches of the same vine, Ioh. 15. 15: of which vine
Christ's Godhead is the root, his manhood the stock, his graces the sap, his
servants the branches, and good works the grapes.



But all the Saints are children of the same parents, having all one Father,
Romans 8. 14. Ephesians. 4. 6. One Mother, Gal. 4. 26. One elder Brother Christ Jesus,
Heb. 2. 11. All being begotten by the same immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And
nourished by the same milk, 1 Pet. 2. 2.



But all the Saints are heirs of the same kingdom. All being Heirs of
promise, Heb. 6. 17. Of an eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. Of Gods kingdom,
Iam. 2. 5. And same kingdom, Mat. 25. 24.



But all Saints are soldiers of the same combat, against the same enemies,
Ephesians. 6. 12. With the same weapons, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13. Under the same Captain
Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 2. 3. For the same Crown and Conquest.



But all the Saints are the one, and only spouse of Christ, Rev. 19. 7.



But all Gods Saints are sheep of the same flock and fold, Luke 12. 32. Ioh.
10. 4. 16.



But Gods Saints are such amongst whom is unity in Religion, Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6.
Sympathy in affection, Romans 12. 15, 16, 10. And mutual charity, Romans 12. 13.

10. Those who have the self same grace and glory, have 10.
fellowship one with another.

But all the Saints have the self same grace and glory.

1. They have the same grace of faith, or like faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Faith in
like in regard of property and power: each saving faith having this property
and power, that it does receive Christ who is the common object of faith
(although not in equality ^r measure, one more, another less, according to
the proportion of faith.) By the which like faith all Saints enjoy the same
grace of adoption, Ioh. 1. 12. The same grace of justification* Romans 5. 1. 3.
The same grace of sanctification, Act. 15. 9. The same grace of patience, Heb.
11. The same grace of perseverance, 2 Cor. 1. 24. The same victory over the
world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4. The same conquest over Satan, Ephesians. 6. 16. And the same
hope of glorification, Romans 5. 2.

2. All Gods Saints have like glory, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 11. 39, 40. Degrees and
differences of glory I verily think there are, Matthew. 20. 23. To sit on
Christ's right hand, signifying (as I conceave) the chiefest glory and
blessedness in Gods kingdom. Upon these grounds I may safely aver; That all
the Saints and servants of God, although never so far distant in place,
different in condition, or aliens by nation, have fellowship together. First,
can any fellowship be more compact, then of stones in one edifice, limbs of
the same body, and twigs of the same root? Secondly, what fraternity more
intimately indeerd each to other, then of Co-heires? Copartners in grace and
glory? Co-workers in the same labors? Co-enjoyers of the same husband?
Thirdly, what communion more firmly cemented then that twixt brethren of the
same parents, sheep of the same flock?

God is not the God of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, Romans 2. 29.
Gal. 5. 6. and 6. 15. But some are honorable, some ignoble. True: all one
body. God is no respecter of persons, his choice is not like man's, 2 Cor. 1.
27. But some live in Europe, some in Asia. They are many members, yet but one
body, 1 Cor. 12. 27. They are several branches. vine, Ioh. 15. They are
diverse stones.

CHAP. III. First Use of the Point. Society with sinners to be avoided.
association (as there is) betwixt Gods (...) page 71. etc.
Saints? then every associat in this goodfellowship should abandon Society with
the men of Belial, Ephesians. 5. 11. have no fellowship, etc. By consequence, not
with unfruitful workers of darkness. For what communion has light with
darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? What part have believers with
infidels? 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. Do not these Scriptures, Psalm. 6. 8. Depart
from me you workers of iniquity. Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me you evil
doers. Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech. 2 Pet. 2. 7. Lot vexed
with the conversation of the wicked, teach us, that good men which are true
goodfellowes loath society with the wicked? enmity then between lambs and
wolves, the seed of the woman and the serpent, Genesis 3. 15. antipathy then
betwixt Gods Saints, and Satan's slaves? Gods darlings, and Satan's dross? All
are men. contrary natures in them; grace working in one, sin in another, then
which no qualities more repugnant? contrary masters guiding and governing
them, and in them, God in the good, Satan in the wicked; then which no
substances more opposite? wicked men, their society being dangerous and
infectious. Custom with the evil is the food of wickedness, Heathen say.
(...) A gap.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, the Apostle says, Galat. 5. 9. And
our proverb tells us, that one scabbed sheep infects a whole stock. These
Sirens will bewitch us if we listen to them. A man cannot take this fire in his
bosom and not Prove 6. 28.
be burnt: handle this pitch without defilement: neither walk with these byars
and remain whole. Psalm. 106. 35. They were mingled amongst the Heathen, and
learned their works. Tempted they were, and tainted by this coupling.

What wise man would willingly converse with cruel and Dissw. 1.
savage beasts? But such are wicked men in Gods esteem: in their practices,
and delights, Psalm. 22. 13. 16. Isa. 11. 6.

Spiders, Cockatrices Isa 59. 5. Vipers, Mat. 12. 24. and Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2,
6? And will any man in his right wits company with the poisonous Spider,
eye-killing Cockatrice and venomous Viper?

briars, Ezekiel. 2. 6. And thorns, Isa. 27. 4. What prudent man would delight
himself amidst such incommodious consorts?

smoke suffocate and smoother grace in the good? Psalm 68. 2.

dust, and contaminous dirt, Psalm. 18. 42. Is it convenient for Gods wheat
unnecessarily to intermingle with such chafe, Psalm. 1. 4. Light in weight, in
worth, conversation, and condition? Can it any ways benefit Gods gold and
precious jewels to commixe with wicked dross, Psalm. 119. 119. Laboring to
darken, corrupt, and defile the righteous, as dross does gold?

Seeing therefore O you Saints of God, you have communion with Abraham, and all
his children: Do not you exercise intimate passages of love with the limbs of
Satan. It is lawful for Gods Saints to be in company and conversant with the
wicked by divine precept, sc. when they are of the same family, as parents and
children, husbands and wives, masters and servants; these may lawfully converse
together, though one amongst them be impious, 1 Cor. 7. 10. 12. 21. 1 Timothy 6.
1. 1. Pet. 2. ^8. And when by plantation and co-habitation they be of the same
particular Church and Congregation, as godly and wicked Parishioners and
Pastors: these may lawfully communicate, the godly with the wicked. 2. By
divine providence, when it is not desired or sought for, but offered in
courtesy, Luc. 14. 15. or enforced by authority, as in civil Services,
Commissions, Syses, Sessions, Imprisonments, etc. Or occasioned by necessity,
as in bargains, buyings, etc. I think it not unlawful simply for a true
goodfellow to have community with the wicked, there being a necessary and
inevitable Society, sc. 1. By divine precept, of a good subject with a wicked
Prince, David with Saul: A good Minister with a bad people: A good wife with a
wicked husband, 1 Cor. 7. etc. 2. By Gods providence, meeting together in the
way, market, feast, etc. as well as a voluntary and free. Neither is every
voluntary unlawful; for a good man may freely converse with the corrigible, so
that he desires, endeavors, and has hope to win him. It is the voluntary
Society with the incorrigible sinner which is so sinful, Pro. 1. 10 and 14. 7.
2 Cor. 6. 14. and so dangerous, Prove. 13. 20. Ezra 9. 14. Namely, if it be
causeless, careless, comfortable, and continual. Disacquaint therefore your
selves (you true goodfellowes) from the intimate fellowship of Idolaters, Deu.
7. 2, 3. Scorners of Gods Word, and good counsel, Psalm. 1. 1. Dissemblers,
Psalm. 26. 4. Adulterers, Psalm. 50. 18. Apostates, Psa. 101. 3. Slanderers, ib.
5. Proud persons, ib. Cruel men, Psa. 139. 19. Drunkards and gluttons, Pro.
23. 20. These, and such like persons are noted out by the Spirit of God, as
unfit for Gods Saints to communicate their sweet passages of Christian love,
and sanctified affection. Neither in truth can they find any more consolation
in their company, then delight in grapes of gall, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Contentment in
drinking down filthy dregs, Zeph. 1. 12. Or odoriferous sent in the vomiting
of a dog, 2. Pet. 2. 22. Neither can they reap any more comfort in their
communion, then sweetness in the apples of Sodom, or strength in a rotten
stick; for with them they shall never have their tongues exercised, nor their
ears acquainted with any christian discourse; and by that means in time will
grow dull, and heartlesse in holy duties. I will conclude this passage with
some correspondent sayings of Saint Chrysostom: Hoc enim Iudaeis fuit causa
interitus, quod versarc^. tur cum improbis. Quocirca legem quoque acceperunt,
and lege superaba^tur ab ijs, and inbeba^tur eorum vitare coniugia, quocirca
lex appellabatur, sepes, quod tot undique circundaret and eorum consuetudine^
cum malis coerceret. Chap. in 138. Psalm. page 821. Non est autem hic parvus
gradus ad incrementum virtutis fugere and resilire ab eiusmodi hominum
congressionibus. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 138. page 82^. Non enim parvum aut leve quid
est ad securitatem, libertatem and omne^ voluptatem liberari a tali hominum
caetu, and perlongissim^ ab improboru^ consuetudine versari immo vero magna est
foelicitas. Idem in Psalm. 139. p. 823.
For this (says he) was the cause of ruin to the Jews, that they were
conversant with the wicked, therefore also they received the law, and were
separated by the law from them, and were commanded to shun their marriages;
therefore the law was called a hedge, because it did environ them round about,
and did restrain their familiar conversation with the wicked: For it is not a
small step to the increase of virtue to avoid, and skip back from such men's
company. And it is not a small, or light help to safety, liberty, and all
pleasure to be freed from such an assembly of men, and to be conversant as
far as may be from the company of wicked men, yea truly it is a great
happiness?

CHAP. IIII. Use. 2. Saints must love, especially all Saints.
love each other, yea with such earnest ardency, that time by peecemeale may
not empayre, fancy dissolve, nor suspicion enfringe. Very needful it is for
all such who are joined in this goodfellowship, to love one another. serve one
another in love, Gal. 5. 13. and shall not we obey? God so love this society?
that for it he sent his one and only son, 1 Ioh. 4. 10. love is a note of
his Disciples, Ioh. 13. 14. love to the good an infallible demonstration of
Gods cohabitation, 1. John 4. 12. Is it not meet and fit for brethren mutually
to love? But we are brethren. members of the same body: And shall not we love
one another? Love we therefore. But whom should we love?

1. Al men, for they are al brethren partaking with us in common nature. The
workmanship of our Creator, whose good pleasure is that we should love them,
Math. 5. 44. Love therefore all men; for he who hates a man loves not his
maker. But David hated such who hated God, Psalm. 139. 22. True, he loved not
the vice for the persons sake, nor hated the persons for the vices sake. To
hate the sin, and love the Scie^ter odisse oportet. August. in Psalm. 139.
person, is a charitable Christian hatred: We ought to hate knowingly loving
the person, loathing his evil properties: loving the substance, hating the
naughty qualities: loving the creature, detesting the corruption: the former
being of God, the latter from the devil. Show therefore (thou true good
fellow) such tokens of love to a son of Belial which may be beneficial unto
him, and not hurtful to thy self; advising, counselling, admonishing,
reproving, correcting, relieving him in his distress, and praying for his
amendment; That his wolvish nature may be turned into a lamblike disposition:
Persecuting Saul may become a preaching Paul. But do not join with him in
intimate friendship: do not countenance, commend, nor justify him in his lewd
conversation. For these tokens of love cannot be afforded without prejudice to
thy self, and hurt to the other.

2. Are we to love our enemies, how much more our friends and fellow servants,
etc. Let the men of this world love any but these goodfellowes, let them say
such men are honest men, and we could love them, were they not so precise. Let
them love sinners more then Saints: yet all you which are incorporated into
this society. Do you love men for their wisdom; although such love men for
wealth. Do you love men for their new birth; although such love men for their
rich birth. Do you love men for their holiness; although others love men for
their honor. Do you love men for their graces, not for their greatness. Love
grace in any, love it in all. Reason thus with your selves. for him; make him
his flesh: and shall not I love the redeemed members of my Savior? who more
noble? Gods Sons, Christ's Spouse, a heavenly offspring. 2. If virtue; who more
wise then these who are wise unto salvation? who more courageous then these
that overcome the world, mortify the flesh, and quell the fiery darts of
Satan. 3. If alliance; who more nearly allied then children of the same
parents? 4. If beauty; who more amiable? Insomuch that although the glorious
sun ever shining with such radiant splendor: although the pomp and glory of
the whole world could not allure the Son of God, yet the inward beauty of the
Saints: Christ's Spouse does strike as it were his heart with a vehement
affection and passion of love, Cant. 4. 9. Thou art fair, etc. 1. 14. all
glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. Love therefore all those of this fraternity.
Indeed and in truth, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. Without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. So as to
lay down our lives for the brethren, 1, Ioh. 3. 16. Thus renowned Hester 4.
16. If I perish, etc. Thus a Bishop answered a judge commanding him Firmus
Pagastensis episcopus Mentiri nes^^^, prodere nolo. Aug. de mend. page 19. Au
bros de virgin. lib. 2. p. 81 82.
to disclose his fellow Christians, I know not how to lie, I will not betray.
Thus Didymus to save the chastity of Theodora condemned to the stews changed
apparel: safely dismissed her, died for her, and with her. And greater cause
have we thus to do then had Pylades for Orestes: or those Pythagorean
Philosophers, Damon and Pythias.

CHAP. V. Use 3. Saints must relieve others.
See M. Boulton walking with God. page 257. etc.
communicate such gifts and graces God has given us to the benefiting one of
another. In a body all members have not the same vigor, neither are the same
gifts granted to all in the mystical body: Bodily members intrude not into
each others office: neither in the mystical body should they thrust themselves
into one another calling. All the members of the body do whatsoever they do
to the common good, or profit: So likewise should Christians refer all their
actions to the utilitie of the whole body. 1. The Church.

We should therefore relieve one another, as members of the same body. This duty
is so perspicuous that it needs no large discourse to procure credence: for not
only diverse undeniable confirmations which might be drawn from Gods sacred
truth, and many unanswerable reasons declare its necessity: but even experience
(the mistress of more wisdom then folly) teaches us that stones in a
building support each other: That branches of a tree do so draw nourishment
from the stock, that each has sufficient sap, and proportionable to its
necessity. That members of our bodies are not only careful of themselves, but
of their fellows. Insomuch that the eye is busy to adorn the body, yet not
it self: the hands to cover the whole, themselves remaining naked. That
faithful friends are in prosperity a pleasure, a solace in adversity, and in
grief a comfort, yea such who account a man's mishap their misery, the pricking
of our finger the piercing of their heart. And this Doctrine I have now in hand
does tell us that all comforts of this goodfellowship are stones of the same
building, then which there cannot be a more firm connection. Branches of the
same vine: then which there cannot be a more inherent inoculation. Members of
the same body, in the which there is a most sweet concordance. Are all in an
inviolable league of friendship, in which fellowship there ought to be no
falsehood: where simpathy of manners should make conjunction of minds, and
therefore those of this consociation cannot but relieve the distresses each of
other. Instead therefore of proving the point which is undeniable, let me
persuade you to practice the duty so tragical to many men. To this end
consider, that 1. by relieving our fellow members we become creditours to the
worlds Creator, Prove. 19. 17. 2. By succouring Gods Saints we take the way to
enrich our selves, Prove. 11. 25. 3. And we do a work acceptable to God, Heb.
13. 16. 4. Which shall be rewarded, Eccl. 12. 1. Psalm. 41. 1. Mat. 25. 35. If
we come short in this duty, God will not hear us, Prove. 21. 13. Dives could
not get a drop of cold water to cool his tongue. 6. The poor Saints have
right to our substance: We say not give me my bread, but give us our daily
bread. And therefore one of the Fathers Famelici panis est quem tu tenes: nudi
tunica quem in conclavi conservas: discalceati calceus qui apud te marcescit:
indigentis argentum quod possidemus inhumatum. Eslote vos divites primi in
conferendo qui estu primi in discernendo, estote primi in larguate rerum, Salv.
lib. 5. page 153.
says, It is the starvelings bread which thou do keep back: it is the
garment of the naked which thou lockest up: it is the shoe of the unshod which
corrupts by thee: it is the money of the needy which we possess unburied with
us. Give therefore.

1. But who should give? All of this society. Be you rich men (says holy
Salvian) first, in giving, who are the chief in judging; be you the chief in
bountifulness of substance, which are chief in liberality of words. You who
have this worlds good, 2 Timothy 6. 17. For you are best able: David sent
therefore to Nabal for succor. Lazarus lay at the rich man's gate. 2. You have
received most from the boundless sea of Gods mercy, and therefore by
distributing to the poor you must send back most again, Eccl. 1. 7. Be not
you therefore like those rich usurers, Neh. 5. Nor those rich oppressors, Iam.
2. 6. most cruel, least compassionate. Do humanitati non homini. I give to the
man, not as a wicked man, but because he is a man of mine own nature.
rich men say (as Negandi causa auaro unsquam desicit M^^ p. 67.
cause of denying is never wanting to a covetous man, says a Heathen) with
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 10. There are many idle, etc. and because there are many such
will send away good David comfortless by weeping cross. Yet do you relieve
many who are unworthy, rather then send away one David without succor. For we
have fellowship one with another.

2. But must none but rich men give? Doubtless yes. He who labors for his
living must give, Ephesians. 4. 28. The poor Macedonians did give, 2 Cor. 8. 2.
Christ Jesus who received of others, Luc. 8. 3. Gave to the poor, Ioh. 13. 29.
Luc. 21. 4? Art thou more penurious then the widow of Sarepta, 1 Reg. 17. 12.
Yet she gave. Art thou so poor that thou can not give a cup of cold water,
Matthew. Non curat De^^ quantum sed ex quanto, satis enim obtulit, qui parum sibi
reliquit.
10. 41? Of a little give a little, and the gift is great. God regards not
how much, but of how much, he gives abundantly who leaves but little to
himself. The widows mite with a willing mind is accepted. Solomon says the
contrary, Prove. 28. 27. thou shall find it. Eccl. 11. 1. Say not I must save
for my children. they shall be fed, Psalm. 37. 25. Give therefore.

3. But how much should I give? Giving of alms is compared to sowing of seed,
2 Cor. 9. 6. From which comparison I collect, that first as the husbandman of
the increase of his corn reserveth part for seed again, so the Christian man
ought of his increase to bestow part upon charitable uses, Lev. 19. 10. Eccl.
10. 1, 2, 6. Secondly, as the husbandman if he have ground and seed sows
much. So the Christian man if he have plowed ground whereon to sow this seed,
waters whereon to cast his bread, and seed also, he ought to sow plentifully.
Thirdly, as the husbandman rather then he will want seed, spares from his back
and belly. So should the godly man rather then not have seed of mercy to sow,
spare from his own belly. Fourthly, as the husbandman sowes of his best, so we
should not give of our worst. Alms are sacrifices, Phil. 4. 18. But God most
be sacrificed to of the best. A cup of water is accepted where there is no
better. The widows mite regarded because she had no more. But he who gives
crummes having abundance, sowes rotten seed which will prove fruitless.
Fifthly, as the husbandman casts one handful after another, so the Christian
husbandman should sow not once only in his life, or once by the year, but
once Why we must give much.
and again, Eccl. 11. 6. Remitting due debts in case of extreme poverty, Exodus
22. 26. 27. Lending freely to the needy, Deuteronomy. 13. 8. Luc. 6. 35. Giving
bountifully of our goods, Exodus 22. 25. In a word therefore, we must be
liberal in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 18. It is not enough for a rich man to give,
except he gives liberally, Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Thou shall open thy hand wide. First,
much is required of him to whom much is given, Luc. 12. 48. Secondly, the
necessities of the needy being great, there should be a proportion twixt giving
and their need. Thirdly, the more men give the better it is for themselves, 2
Cor. 9. 6. According to our seed we shall reap in harvest. He who sowes short
of his ability, shall receive short of his expectation. Yet must we not so give
as to leave nothing for our selves; our fountain must be dispersed abroad, yet
must we not give away fountain and all, Pro, 15. 16, 17. We must reserve one
coats to our selves, Luc. 3. 11. except in case of great necessity, when there
is no other way to relieve those who are to be succored, but by giving beyond
our power, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3. and so giving as to sell all, Luc. 12. 35. Acts 4.
34.

4. But when should we give? Seed is not sown in harvest, but whiles seed-time
lasts: sow therefore whiles our seed time lasts. Be always ready. 1 Timothy
6. 18. Titus 3. 1. Be not like many men who are never ready to give while they
livel reserving all to the last, this course being first against Religion,
which would have us always ready. Secondly, against reason, for is it a time
to sow in harvest? O you preposterous benefactours, who put off all works of
mercy until you die. Consider, 1. Death may surprise you suddenly, how then
will you give? 2. Riches may leave you, although they now cleave to you in
abundance: give therefore while you have time. 3. That the necessities of the
needy and poor are present: and the light of nature tells us, that he gives a
benefit to the needy twice who gives quickly. What (...) his dat, qui dat
cesertter. Publ. p. ^9.
good had it been for Dives to have comforted Lazarus thus. Be content thou
forlorn man to endure this extremity until I die, and then I will bequeathe
thee somewhat: whereas Lazarus might starve before that legacy could relieve
him. 4. He who gives whiles he lives is partaker of the poor man's prayers: he
who puts off all till death, tempts the poor and needy to wish his ending, and
so occasioneth him to be accessory to his death. He that would have the poor
man's prayers while he lives, and tears when he is dead, let him give his lift
time. 5. The unfaithfulness of men put in trust is such, that it is good for
men to be their own executors in giving to the needy m^ns relieve. The
husbandman knowing the ground to want seed, sowes although it says nothing.
Job if he saw the poor without clothing, clothed him. He that sees his
brother have need, and shuts up, etc. 1. Ioh. 3. 17. Pure religion, and
undefiled is to visit the fatherl^sse, Iam. 1. 27. not to suffer them to visit
by begging which is a disorder in a commonwealth. Inquire we therefore such
who dare not for shame, or cannot for sickness ask, and bestow our alms upon
them.

Give. But of what? Of a man's own. Give in justice, goods truly gotten, Isa.
5. 8. 8. 3. 58. 7. not goods of oppression, Restitutio est actus redditur quod
ablatum vel acceptum est. Tolet. inst. Sac. lib. 5. c. 16. p. 715. Hom. of
resur. To^. 2. p. 212. dare rem deo, se d^mon^.
usury, etc. such are for restitution [ without restitution (which is an act of
justice by which that is repayed to every man which is taken from him) God
accepts not your confession, nor yet your repentance] not distribution. Those
who give goods wrongfully gotten, to the poor: do give their substance to
God, themselves to the devil. Worthy is the saying of Solimus the ninth of the
Ottoman race, who being persuaded by Pyrrhus to do some good works with wealth
M. Knols, Trak. histor.
he had wrongfully taken from certain merchants answered. Would thou Pyrrhus
that I should bestow other men's goods wrongfully taken from them, upon works
of charity, and devotion for mine own vain glory, and praise? assuredly I
will never Third part of H^. against peril of Idol page 72. Nih^l est enim
liberale quod non idem ^^t ius^um. Tull off c ^6. Wherefore L. Si^las, etc.
C^sa^* conveying of goods from the just owners unto strangers* o^ght not to be
thought liberality, for nothing is liberal whih is not just said a heathen.
do it: nay see they be restored to their right owners, which was done
accordingly. L. Sillas, and Caesar's conveying of goods from the just owners
unto strangers ought not to be thought liberality, for nothing is liberal
which is not just, says Cicero. And remarkable is the doctrine of the Church
of England, which says, money so wickedly gotten is most meet to be put to so
wicked an use. God hates spoil, and ravine offered in sacrifice, and alleges
Plato, who says, such men who suppose God does pardon wicked men if they give
part of their spoils and ravine to him, take him to be like a dog that would
be entreated, and hired with part of the prey to suffer wolves to werry the
sheep.

How, or with what mind should we give alms? with a loving mind, 1. Cor. 13. 3.
with a tender and pitiful heart, Isa. 58. 10. In simplicity, singleness, and
sincerity, Romans 12. 8. Mat. 6. 3. like the husbandman, who covers the seeds
when he has sown it with cheerfulness, 2. Cor. 8. 4. 12. 9. 7. In faith,
our persons not accepted, neither will our work. With a bountiful and
liberal heart, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. 2. Cor. 9. 6. To right ends, s^. 1. To Gods
glory, 2. Cor. 8. 19. To declare our thankfulness for Gods favors, 2 Cor. 8.
To refresh Christ in his members: To provoke others to bountifulness, 2. Cor.
9. 1. ^. To procure a good opinion of our profession, Mat. 5. 16. And to
testify our faith, and other graces.

CHAP. VI. Use 4. Graces must be communicated.
MVch more ought we to impart such spiritual graces we have each to other: for
if we must give bread, much more grace. It being peerlesse better then life,
Psalm. 63. 3. More comfortable to its enioyer then the increase of corn, wine,
and oil unto their owners, Psalm. 4. 7. It being peculiar to the household of
God. The fountain of other favors, Psalm. 84. 11. A step to the crown of
glory: And keeping from destruction, Lam. 3. 22.

Let therefore the men of Belial deride with hellish geering at this, as too too
unnecessary preciseness. Let them with virulent tongues slander this as a
matter of unwarranted singularity. Let Satan's revellers endeavor to pervert,
and impoyson the hearts of all they can with detestable impiety, and
profaneness. Let lukewarm Christians carelessly slight over this so
important duty: Yet all you who are entered into this so sweet society of
Saints, do not you eat your spiritual morsels alone: do not you hide your
talents in a napkin, but employ them to your Master glory, communicating grace
to your fellow members. To this end.

1. Behold the holy ones of God whom you ought to follow Mot. 1. Saints example.
as they followed Christ, Ephesians. 5. 1. Then will you acknowledge this to be
avowable. Thus did the children of the Church, Isa. 2. 3. Thus did Philip of
Bethsaida, Ioh. 1. 45. Thus did the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 28. 29. Thus did
that Seraphicall Preacher Saint Paul, As 26. 29.

2. Consider that glory of God is end of our Creation, 2. Gods glory the end of
our Creation.
Rev. 4. 11. Predestination, Ephesians. 1. 6. Ought to be the end of all our actions,
1 Cor. 10. 21. It is of such great esteem with the Lord that he would rather
part with an only Son then with his glory; and therefore ought to be the end
of all ends, 1 Timothy 1. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 11. And that you can no ways glorify God
more then by lessening Satan's side, and increasing the number of Gods subjects,
A Kings honor (as says the Lord, Prove. 14. 28.) consisting in the multitude of
subjects.

3. If you are defective herein, it is an infallible argument 3. Grace and
gracious men are working.
that you your selves are empty of grace and goodness. If fire having
combustible matter leave off to combure, and turn into fire whatsoever it can;
if a candle once thoroughly lighted can cease to spend it self for the
enlightening and benefiting of others, then may the graces of Gods Spirit
having fit matter to work upon lie idle. Then may the Saints and holy ones of
God who are the Lights of the world, Ephesians. 5. 8. Matthew. 5. 16. cease to give
light to others by their godly conversations, and Christian persuasions. As the
former, so the latter is altogether impossible. It is the property of men
senseless and unseene in the ways of God: not to labor the good of other. It
is the quality of incarnate Devils to hinder and discorage beginners, crying
out; come let us go to the ale house, etc. in stead of, come let us go to the
house of God. But it is an inseparable condition of godly men to draw others to
amendment, to covert their brethren, and communicate Bon^^ s^^i diffus^v^m.
their graces to them. For grace is of a spreading nature, Ioh. 7. 38.

4. Shall wicked men who are obsequious to base Lords, 4. Wicked men strive to
make others bad.
serve with all dutiful observance, first the world, whose service is vain,
Eccl. 2. 10. Hard, bringing carking cares, Eccl. 1. 14. Dangerous, unfitting
for the service of God, 1 Ioh. 2. 16 Deceitful, offering with Iabin, milk
with the one hand, a nail with the other: exchanging for advantage copper for
gold. Secondly, sin, whose service is base, it being baser then the most
fastidious creatures, and exceeding tyrannical, recompencing its best and most
dutiful observants with everlasting death, Romans 6. 23. Thirdly, Satan, a
grand enemy to mankind; powerful only to punish, promising liberty, yet in
hellish bondage, joying at their destruction. Shall these strive with tooth and
nail, and employ their utmost endevors to hale and drag, and use all
fraudulent guiles and fawning glozes to win others to their pernicious and
damnable society, although hereby they aggravte their own damnation? And shall
not we who serve the Lord of life, whose service is as unlike to theirs as
light to darkness, heaven to hell, glory to shame. Whose service is first most
honorable, in regard of our Lord, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, of
whose kingdom there is no end? In regard of our fellow servants, who are not
the risse rabble of wicked men, but those renowned Patriarchs, as Abraham:
heroical Kings, as David: magnanimous Prophets, as Eliah: blessed Apostles, as
Paul: and all the company of glorious Angels and happy Saints in heaven
triumphant, and on earth militant. Secondly, most pleasant and delectable, in
regard of our Lord and Master, who is no churlish Nabal, oppressing Pharaoh, or
hard-dealing Laban. But such whose words are full of delectation, he calling us
not only servants, but sons, Exodus 4. 22, 23. and friends, and his deeds
correspondent. In regard of our task, his commandments being pleasant, and
not grievous. And most gainefull, bringing advantage by life, and death:
sickness, and health: here, and hereafter. Shall not we (I say) employ our
utmost endeavors to conglutinate others into t^^s so sweet society* Seeing
that by this means we do not diminish our own store as by parting with wordly
substance, nor keep our own without impai^ing or augmenting it. But hereby we
increase graces here, and glory hereafter.

one another so much, as by correcting our brethren: as by Imparting grace to
others, the best benefit to them.
inlightening them with our knowledge: imparting Gods graces to them: and
working grace in them. For could we by our endeavors raise them to the highest
pitch of honor: mount them aloft into Hamans place of favor and command. So
that their smiling countenances might make glad so^e: their angry frowns
strike dread into the hearts of others. Could we ascertaine them of the full
fruition of all the golden mountains, and fruitful Islands under the whole
heavens. Could we procure for the satisfying of their appetites, the greatest
satiety of all mellifluous Nectars, and delicious aliments that earth, air,
and water can afford: of all exquisite and resplendent garments, curiously
wrought and embroidered by the art of man: finely perfumed with the most
odoriferous Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia; and garnished with variety of gemmes and
belliments, so that they are clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare
deliciously every day. Yet all these without grace are but so many silken
manicles, and golden fetters of a miserable wretch haled to woeful execution.
On the contrary. Let a man be furnished with the last measure of those heavenly
endowments of saving grace* although he be the drunkards song, a byword to
foole^, the anvile of all dunghill scorn and disdain, a monster amidst men,
Psalm. 71. 3. Zach. 3. 8. such an object of commiseration that may melt an
Adamantine heart into pitiful compassion of his extremest miseries. Yet in
this man the beloved of the Lord, his rich inheritance, peculiar portion, rich
jewel, apple of his eye, an heir of heaven, a judge of the world, Christ's
beautiful spouse: never wanting a sweet comforter, a never-failing friend, who
will not leave him until it has set an eternal crown of glory upon his
head, Psalm. 84. 10. Poise these in an even balance, and we shall see grace as
far surmounting all these golden vanities, as heaven does earth: the
peerless Sun a pinking candle: and a golden mountain a heap of dust. 1.
Grace is peculiar to the soul. Its not the back or belley, but man's immortal
soul. which is the place wherein grace is resident. 2. Grace is proper to the
Saints. Those who walk in the cursed ways of damnation are strangers to Gods
graces. But those other things are common both to good and bad: Absolon of an
amiable beauty as well as Joseph: Goliath matchless in power and prowess as well
as Sampson: Haman a Kings greatest favorite as well as Mordeca^: Dives
abounding in wealth as well as Abraham. 3. Grace of as long continuance as
heaven it self, and those crowns of immortality. In regard of it self, as
love, joy, peace which shall extend even to eternity, never ending. Or in
regard of its fruits, the fruits of faith, hope, patience, prayer, etc. being
endless. Those other are of so limber, and brittle nature that there can be no
assurance of their continuance. Riches often mount aloft on Eagles wings,
leaving their owners in extreme scarceness. Beauty is often blasted by cares,
sorrows, discontents, sickness, and made disdainefull. Strength many times is
enfeebled by inlenesse, gluttony, drunkenesse, adultery, diseases, etc.
Honorable advancement is often turned into scornful contempt, and hateful
obloquie. Howsoever, at the bed of death, they must shake hands for ever. 4.
Grace is a most sweet refreshing comforter in all extremities. This did revive
David in his distress. This made Job bless God for taking away. This made the
Apostles rejoice in afflictions. And the Martyrs to contemn the utmost rage of
hellish persecutors. Those other have no more power to comfort in the needful
time of dread, then congealed ice to give warmth to a starveling body: tart
vinegar to supple a smarting wound: or smoothering smoke to comfort a tender
eye. Witness Achitophel, who for all his great esteem hangs himself. Ahab,
who being but denied Naboths vineyard, is sick with grief.

6. Lastly, considering that gain is of such efficacy that it makes the
martial man to abandon all fearful cowardice: forsake the delight of his
eyes, and his tender children: disregard his own life, and with heroical
prowess encounter his formidable bloodthirsty enemy. What drives the ventrous
mariner through so many perilous hazards, and dangerous pericliations, save
only hope of gain? Yea, what does edge the keen appetites of cursed and
cruel inclosers, oppressing landlords, hellish usurers to grind the faces of
the poor, purchase Gods displeasure and damn their souls, save only gain?
This therefore being so prevalent, let me use it as a spur to prick you
forward to this so sacred duty. By improving thy gifts and graces to the
benefiting of others. 1. Thou shall not only gain glory to God, (and that is
gain enough, for those who honor God, the Lord will honor them:) 2. Nor
only gain thy brothers soul out of the jews of Satan, which is no small
advantage. 3. But herby thou shall increase thine own graces. Grace not being
like these dunghill vanities below, which minish by distribution: nor like our
candles, which keep the same light though a thousand are lighted by them. But
like the 2 Reg. 4.
widows oil, which multiplied by pouring out. And those talents which doubled
by employment, Math. 25. Excellently says S. Chrysostom. For in sensible
riches those who pay their money, Nam in sensibilibus ij qui denumerant
pecunia^ suam, imminu^nt substantiam, and locupletiores fiunt qui recip^^nt: hi
autem nonsi^: sed and is qui denumerat suas facultates magis auget, and
recipientium divitijs multum add^t. Chrysostom Hom. 15. Genesis Porro quanto plus
profundimus fluentorum bohum spiri(...), tanto nobis and fluenta sunt auctiora.
Non enim in hac causa contingit sicut in pecunijs: illic enin^ quidinumorant
vicino, imminuunt suam substantiam: and quanto plus expendit, tanto minu^
possidet pecuniae: Hic autem plan^ sec^ agitur. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in Genesis page 37.
do diminish their substance, and they who receive are made richer: but these
not so, but both he who numbreth does more increase his substance, and does
add much to the riches of the receivers. Again. Furthermore, how much more we
pour out of these flowing spiritual things, by so much those spreading in
abundance are greater to us. For in this cause it does not happen as in money,
for there they who tell out to their neighbor diminish their own substance,
and by how much the more he spends, by so much the less money he possesses:
but here it is done quite otherwise.

CHAP. VII. Use 5. Saints frailties to be concealed.
mad, sottishly foolish, and deprived of understanding, wit, Product(...),
(...) t^men ante ^ndore, (...). po(...) (...)ato c^^men (...) ato lib. 3. de
Mo^^b.
and reason, would disclose to his prejudice and disparagement, a loathsome
sore (although cleaving to some baser member) except to a faithful friend, for
advice and counsel; or to some well skilled Chyrurgion for health and recovery?
How much more doggedly frantic are such, who sport themselves with the
frailties of the Saints, and discover their fallings to the dishonor of their
great God Jehovah: the scandalizing of his glorious Gospel, the wounding of
their conscience, loss of good name, grieuing of their brethren, and to the
joy and rejoicing of none, save Satan and his cursed reuellers.

1. My meaning is not to make Gods children such offenders as the raging world
does, for then (woe, and alas) none so proud; covetous, hypocritical,
deceitful. These judging of Gods children, as drunkards do of solid
substances; deeming them to whirle about, deceived by the vertigiousnesse of
their own brain: or as dazzling eyes pronounce things single to be double. So
these notorious censurers (although they cannot accuse them for any usurous
compacts, extorting convenants, selling of time, defrauding, bribery,
uncharitableness, withholding the least dues from any man, etc.) blush not
peremptorily to pronounce Gods children to be of all men most avariticus. And
why think you? Is it because they grind the faces of the poor? etc. no such
matter. But because 1. They are so painful and laborious in their several 1.
Why good men are painful.
callings, which diligence springs not from the root of avarice. But from a
desire: 1. To show themselves obedient to Gods commandment. 2. To avoid
idleness the bane of virtue: nurse of vices, and Satan's pillow. These not
immoderately desiring the dunghill vanities of this life, their heavenly minds
soaring aloft after more durable treasure. Nor distrusting Gods providing for
them, they being well assured that he who is unchangeable, and has promised
that such as fear him shall want nothing, cannot but provide for them. They
well knowing that he who feeds ravens, and clothes the grass will not suffer
his own children to want. He having given them his Son, they are confident
that he cannot deny them any thing. 2. Or they are covetous, because 2. Why
they are not wastfull.
they be so sparing, they do not lavish out their allowance in newfangled
attire, or in goodfellow-meetings as they are called: whereas this parsimony of
theirs proceeds not from any cursed desire of, or love unto riches, which they
know is damned idolatry. But from 1. A godly respectfulnesse to wife, children,
and such as depend upon them. 2. The tenderness of their conscience, not
suffering them to add one mite by wrongful dealings unto their estate: so
disabling them from profuse expenses. 3. A serious consideration of the strict
account they are to make and render to their Lord, as for other things, so for
the employment of their outward substance. 3. Or else they are covetous, because
they 3. Why they are not bountiful to beggars.
do not give pharisaically to every clamorous beggar and unworthy spend-thrift
so much as the impudency of the one demands: and the vainglorious example of
some pharisaicall braggard (otherwise perhaps and in secret a divellish
incloser, damned usurer, grinder of the faces of the poor, seller of time,
defrauder of others, etc.) does incite him to. And that not because they are as
hard as flint, as greedy as hell, as worldlings are ready to say. But either,
1. Because they would not encourage them in their villainous courses of
idleness, drunkenness, etc. And therefore (although by their will none shall
go from their doors empty handed without relief according to their ability,
yea although they know Why they relieve beggars.
many to be unworthy. 1. Because they would take away all occasion of scandal
from Gods children, and their profession. 2. Because they cannot but
commiserate even unworthy ones, and relieve the creatures of God. 3. Because
they see those wholesome laws which take order for their provision and
punishment, to be but sleeping statutes in the execution) are not easily drawn
to open their hands, and purses wide according to their desires. These well
knowing it to be fit fuel to fire their souls by swinish drunkenness. 2. Or
because they having but little (it being the condition of many of Gods people
not to flow in wealth) and knowing they cannot give away much. Upon mature
deliberation they resolve with their pittance of meal and oil to relieve good
Elisha; and to cast their few mites into the treasury of the Lord. 1. They
desire to glad the hearts, strengthen the hands, and refresh the distressed
members of Christ in secret. And therefore will not vaine-gloriously cast away
their right to every swinish beast, clamorous beggar, and unworthy one. In a
word, should we give our consure according to the worlds esteem, David,
Jeremy, Job, yea, our Savior Christ himself had been the vilest of men. Which
once to think is prodigious blasphemy.

2. Neither do I intend to persuade men to hide the horrible impieties of
disguised miscreants. I earnestly desire that their masking robes, and
sheeps-clothing might be pulled from off their faces: that their roguish
condition, and wolvish disposition might be conspicuous to all men. That their
leprous, maungy, and stinking insides might be manifest, by uncloathing them of
those golden robes of Christian profession: and taking away their painted
bravery. That so (if it were possible) they might repent of their damned
seeming without substance, and that all men might know the better how to avoid
them. Men they are like the bird Piralis which takes the color of any cloth
where she sits: turning like Polypus into the likeness of their consorts: or
the fish Scolopidus in Araris as white as snow at the waxing, as black as a
coal at the wane of the Moon. These, these I say are the men who ^ ^3. publ.
make Religion a cloak to cover their horrid villainies. These will be usurers,
grind the faces of the poor, defraud their brethren, oppress the helpless,
withhold the laborers hire, enrich themselves by lying, bribery, oppression,
seiling of time, (I mean not charitable for bearance, which is no other then
free and favorable lending; but rigorous and ravening extorting from others,
forcing them to pay for their own cost, care, pains and industry, Gods
blessing, and time) or any manner of means, and cloak all with a mantle of
profession. These are those for whose sake Religion is ridiculous; profession
is laughed to scorn. Gods children are nick-nam'd, the Gospel scandalized, and
God dishonored. And therefore as they are odious unto God and Angels: so I
wish they were so apparently known, that they might be abominated of all men.
Of these I say as Saint Augustine Nolite mihi colligere professores nomin^
Christiani, nec professionis s^evim aut setente^ant (...)es. Nolite consectari
turbas imperitoru^, qui vel in ipsa vera religione superstiti^s^ sunt vel itaa
libid^^^bus dediti and obliti sint quicquid Deo promiserunt. Tom 1. p. 774.
August. de moribus ^ccl. cap. 34. Nunc vos illud admoneo, ut aliquan do
Ecclesiae Catholicae malc^^cere de^i natis, v^tuperan do mores hominum, quos
and ipsa condemnat, quis quotidie tanquam malo filios corrigere (...) de^. ibid.
said of the like: Do not collect unto me such professors, etc.

3. But my purpose is to move the Saints of God to conceal, and hide (and yet
with the precious Balm of godly reproof to heal) the slips and frailties of
true-hearted Nathaniels, men of this society, from the eyes and ears of
worldly men, the only censurers and condemners of Gods children, and their
sincerity. Cursed Chams sporting at the nakedness of upright Noah's. Railing
Rabshakes ever belching and breathing out blasphemies against Gods precious
ones. As I need not strain my doctrine, or ground to build these two uses upon
it (for if we have such fellowship and near society, we should without doubt
cover and cure each others deformities) so without wresting one whit, the
undeniable truth of Gods word does set down these two duties. For the first of
these two, the fourth in order we may see that heroical Preacher Solomon
making it a note of true Love, Prove. 10. 12. to cover all sins. And Saint
Peter guided by the same Spirit sets down in a manner the same words, 1 Pet.
4. 8. Love covers the multitude of sins. se. Does conceal, keep close or
secret, and does not tell abroad the sins of their brethren. Let dogs Doegs
thirsting after, and delighting in the overthrow of innocence, discover the
errors of Gods anointed ones with Satanicall aggravations. Let covetous
Zibaes by presents and false suggestions dispoyle honest Mephibosheths of
reputation and favor. Let perjured varlets, men of Belial witness falsehoods
against pious Naboths. Let Rehum and the nations lay disloyalty to the charge
of Gods people. Let idolatrous Chaldaeans accuse Ananias and his brethren (men
nobly resolute for Gods cause) of rebellion. Let unworthy great ones of mere
spite and envy pick quarrels against Daniel, faithful to his God and
Sovereign. Let vainglorious Amaziah peremptorily (although untruly) affirm
Amos has conspired against the King. Yea let Satan the grand captain of this
train calumniate Job. Yet let every one who is aliving member of this body: a
polished stone in this building: a fruitful branch in this Society of Saints,
keep secret the infirmities of his fellow-brethren, soldiers, etc. What
though professed enemies to godliness out of the implacable enmit, twixt their
two opposite sides invent and forge incredible falsehoods, and aggravate truths,
making of molehils mountains, to distaine the glory of the Saints. What though
false brethren under hypocritical pretenses of being sorry do strain
themselves to the utmost to besmeare the sons of God, hoping to beautify
themselves by their staine^ and spots. Yet I desire to persuade you of this
society with blessed Shem and Iaphet to hide the aberrations of your fellows
from the censorious eye of every worldling. 1. Because if Mot. 1.
ever any heir of heaven by the violence of some temptation, and neglecting
his Christian watch has committed any notorious evil (which I think he may
do as well as Noah, David, Peter, and Paul) and this be told in Gath and
published in Askalon, a generation of men delighting in evil: he is sure to
have (instead of tears and prayers which is the practice of good men in that
case) such exaggerating trumpetters, and swift dromedaries of ale-bench
haunters. That be his fault like a ball of snow, so small that with facility a
babe may roll it: yet by their tossing and trumbling it amidst their drunken
consorts: and by their additions forged in hell, and hammered in their
divellish hearts, it shall be made intolerable. Witness Abimelechs case, 1 Samuel 22. He relieved David in simplicity of heart, not knowing of any
disagreeing twixt David and his Sovereign: and therefore at the worst was
only a fault of error. Yet see it is so stretched by the false tongue of
Doeg, that it cost the heart blood of fourscore and five Priests. 2. Because
if any evil fact committed by a good man be carried by the wing of fame
amongst the Serpents brood, It shall ever after be the badge and character of
all Gods children. If any through want of wit, Christian consideration, and
mature advice have wronged his neighbor in civil commerce, although he has
made restitution to the wronged party; made his peace with his God, and taken
revenge upon himself for his oversight: yet this is presently made the common
marks of all professors. The world hence resolutely August. Epist. 137.
concludes: All these professors and puritans are stark naught. None so
cruel, none so unconscionable as they; whereas no men breathing have more
tender consciences: yea such that they dread as much to add riches of
iniquity: unto their substance, as to cast wild fire amidst their thac^e.
Mistake me not I pray. I do not by naming puritans apologize for that damned
heretical sect, (denying repentance to such as fell, although through
infirmity: condemning second August. Tom. 6. lib ad quod vult deum. Here Is. 38.
page 18.
marriages; glorying in their works; and deeming themselves without sin)
which sprung up in the third hundredth year after Christ. Neither do I justify
fanaticall Separatists. So were the Albigentes called 55. Christopher Sibthorp.
page 340.
Nor plead for factious fellows, whose aim is contention, not
sanctification. But by puritans, I mean practicing Protestants; such men, who
daily read the Scriptures, pray with their families, teach them the way to
heaven, eschew lying, swearing, usury, oppression, time-selling, defrauding,
and all known sins: spend the Lords days holily in hearing Gods Word,
prayer, meditation, conference, singing of Psalms, meditation of the
creatures, are merciful to the poor, deligent in their particular Callings,
frame their lives according to Gods will revealed in his Word, etc. And what
Protestant will condemn any of these actions, although many do, the men
tearming them Saints on Sunday, devils all the week after. Saint-seeming,
bible-bearing, hypocritical puritans. Seeing therefore by spreading abroad any
fault, of any of Gods children, thou wrongest thy self, and all thy fellows,
be entreated to practice this so urgent duty. And give not the world the least
occasion to blaspheme the sweet society of Saints: but show thy self a friend
( whose property (as one says well) is to carry his heart on the back of his
hand to disclose his mind: his tongue in the palm to close-his mouth) to true
good fellows. Before I leave this duty, give me leave to digress a little to
examine, and answer the worldlings argument, which sillogistically must run
thus.

Some professors are cruel, covetous, hypocritical, stark naught, etc.

But all such fellows are some professors.

Therefore they all are covetous, cruel, hypocritical, stark naught.



1. Take notice of your fond arguing from particulars in the like: Something
which glisters is brass, copper, tin, and such sordid metal. But all gold
is something which does glister. Therefore all gold is brass, copper, etc.
Something which shines is called foolish fire, a vanishing meteor. But the
Sun, Moon, and Stars are some things which do shine. Therefore they are
foolish fire, and vanishing meteors.

Peter, and the rest with Judas his treason; nor the Disciples with Ananias his
sacrilege; nor Saint Paul with Demas his earthly-mindednesse.

unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, they so continuing, 1.
Cor. 6. 9, 10. But I that am a fornicator, adulter^r, effeminate person, a
thief, covetous, drunkard, etc. am an unrighteous person, 1. Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Therefore I so continuing cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven. Or thus:
Whosoever wants holiness shall not see God, Heb. 12. 14. But I who am only a
civil honest man, at the best want holiness. Therefore I shall not see God.
Or thus: Whosoever goes to heaven, must be a doer of Gods will, Mat. 7. 22. But
I who live in swearing, lying, scorning of goodness, etc. am not a doer of the
will God. Therefore I shall not go to heaven.



To forsake the devil and all his works, therefore swearing, lying,
drunkenness, and all other damnable deeds of darkness. To believe in God, and
serve him, consequently to repent, obey his will, pray, and perform other such
services he does enjoin. To hear Sermons, and call upon others to do the
same, to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to be made like unto him
in all things, to die from sin, and rise again to righteousness, to
mortify continually all their evil and carnal affections to proceed daily in
all virtue and godliness of living, to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
and manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the
devil, and continue Christ's faithful soldiers and servants to their lives
end, profess as much as the forwardest professor in England.

But all these blattering beasts, and brawling Belials who bawle, and bark
against professors, and profession, profess all this, is is evident not
openly by their own confident confession, but also by the latter end of the
rubricke of Baptism. Baptism does represent unto us our profession, which is,
etc.

From which premises, I may soundly and certainly infer.

1. Therefore if all who make profession of Religion are naught, themselves so
doing are likewise naught.

2. Therefore profession and show of Religion, are only col^urable, and
pretended, practice of that which themselves profess, to practice the prime,
and principal, if not the sole cause of their implacable and inveterate
hatred, and of their immoderate and impetuous bitter taunts, and reproachful
railings against professors, and profession.

CHAP. VIII. Use 6. The Saints must reprove, and be reproved.
begin at home, Mat. 7. 3. Be not like Lamia, eagle eyed abroad, stark
blind at home; least it be said to thee, out of thine own mouth will I
condemn thee, Romans 2. 21. least like fullers earth thou purge others, and be a
castaway thy self. Zeal is best which begins at home. Be thine own
physician A man faulty may reprove.
first, least thou quench fire upon other men's houses, and suffer thine own to
perish. I do not think that a man may not reprove another, himself being
faulty. For if none should reprove but those who themselves are in-offensive,
none must reprove, Iam. 5. 17. But if that a man be faulty, by not reproving,
he adds other men's sins unto his own by assenting. A good man's reproof
smites backward, and forward: he never reprooves another, but withal himself,
if faulty. 2. Reproove with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. 2. Cor. 2. 4.
In the application of a plaster to a wounded part: what sighs from the heart,
tears from the eyes, trembling in the joints, sympathy in the members, and
tenderness in the hands? And shall any in this Society with domineering
insolency, impetuous rage, and implacable malice, launch the smarting sores of
his enfeebled brother? Deal therefore as Physicians with patients, who wrap
their bitter pills in sweet sugar: Or mothers who cover bitter wormeseed under
pleasant raysings. Prick not therefore the heart which asks a plaster. 3.
Salve his sick soul with Christian counsel, and godly reprehension, with as
much secrecy as thou can possibly tell it betwixt thee and him: naturally man
abhorres disgraces, and therefore easier allured by secret advertisements, then
open disgraces. 4. And let it be apparent to his understanding that God is the
reprover, man only an instrument.

Let therefore Laodicean Gospellers suffer our glorious God, and his divine
truth to be blasphemed: so sitting themselves to be spued out of Gods mouth,
Revel. 3. 16. Because they neither leave Religion, nor defend it. Let them say
they love God well, but they love not to be brawlers: and yet they will be
moved for their own causes. Let them argue after this or the like manner. If I
reprove a friend, I offer him great discurtesie. If a stranger, I shall be too
insolent. If an Atheist, I lose mine endeavor. If an enemy, I incur
inevitable danger. Therefore I see not why I should reprove any. For these
reasons want validity. They should consider against the danger of an enemy,
that it is a greater danger to fall into the hands of the Lord by dishonouring
him. That it is not vain to reprove an Atheist: Gods word will have its
savor, it will not be in vain: we should do our duty, and leave the success
to God. Neither is it a matter of insolency to reprove a stranger, being
subject to Gods Law as well as we. If a stranger wrong us in our good name, if
he cut a purse, to bo^r neighbor, we think it no insolency to reprove him. And
to pleasure a friend by silence is most abominable. He is a friend. Be it so:
and is not God a dearer friend? Must we not prefer him before father, mother,
friend? He is a friend. And do thou become his enemy in suffering sin upon
him? If this be thy dealing toward thy friends, God preserve me from such
friends. He is thy friend. Deal therefore friendly with him. Its not a
friendly part to suffer a man to run headlong to destruction, but to
restrain from ruin. I desire such friends who may be as glasses whereby to
see my stains. What though many do much hurt by unseasonable and unworthy
reproves, shall we therefore neglect them? Because some come to markets to cut
purses, lie, cosen. Shall not therefore honest men frequent such places for
their commodities? Because some who hear Sermons are naught, shall not Gods
children therefore desire the sincere mi^ke of the Word? Let these short
inducements following persuade you to this Christian duty. 1. The express
c^mmand of Lev. ^9. ^7. Gal. 6. 1. double sin, Lev. ^9 ^. To win a brother.
To save souls, Iud^ 2^. And to procure love, Prove. 9. 8. Although brutish
persons, Prove. 12. ^. and s^^rners hate reproof, Prove. 9. 1. Yet such who are
wise, a^^ lov^rs of knowledge, will love you better. ^^ting his brother, Lev.
19, 17. thereby murdering, 1 Ioh. ^. ^5. and haling upon himself the others
offenses in the judg^ment, not only of Divine but of mere mo^all men, ou^
whereof says, If you do not admonish your friend of h^^ faults, you make them
your own: and as it argues hatr^^, so it cauleth another to sin, Lev. 19.
17. It oft^^. sla^es two souls, Ezekiel. 3. 17. And causes to err, Proverb. 10.
17.

CHAP. IX. Use 7. Saints must he peaceable.
Angelical society. There is no jarring on the body betwixt fellow members;
no disagreement between branches of the same tree. There should be none
amongst brethren of the same family, and soldiers of the same band. And sure I
am, as there is unity in religion, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. So there should be sympathy
in affection, Romans 12. 10, 15. 16. Neither indeed can there be contrary
judgments amongst us in (...) p^t^rat ^ Spirit^^ Cvp. ad teph. de Mattino
A^elatense page 238.
whom there is one spirit, says St. Cyprian. Labor we therefore for that
perfect peace (perfect in regard of its author, proc^rer, perswader,
possessour, parts, continuance and reach) the royal prerogative of this
heavenly company, promised by the Lord, Isa. 26. 3. Performed by Christ's
merits, persuaded by his Spirit, and preached by his Ministers. Whereby we have
peace with the blessed Trinity, Romans 5. 1. glorious Angels: good men: our own
consciences; yea with sin in regard of the strength, though not the stain:
with Satan in regard of his deadly blows, although not his buffetings: with
death in regard of the sting, though not the strokes: with the g^^ue in regard
of the chains, though not the chop^. Strive we therefore mightily for the
peace of Sion, the com(...)ion of Saints. For thus doing we do no more then
what is our duty; God commanding us by the mouth of the P^a^mist, Psalm. 122. To
pray for the peace of Jerusalem. By Saint Paul, to pray for Kings that under
them we may lead a pea^eable life, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Yea we being urged hereunto by
the practice of Gods servants: Peace be within thy walls, was the Psalmists
prayer, Psalm. 122. 7. What though wicked wights by their impieties hinder their
own and others peace, there being no peace to the wicked as says my God, Isa.
57. 22. For what peace so long as their wickedness remains, 2 Reg. 9. 22.
What though Antichristian papisme, un-christian paganism, and false-christian
profaneness will admit of peace with none but such as fit their own humor. So
that whosoever will have peace with them must look for such usage as the
travelers found at the hands of Scyron and Procrustes, famous robbers in
Attica: who by cutting shorter the taller, and stretching out the lesser,
brought all to an even length with their bed of brass. What though all peace
and unity is not good: there being great peace betwixt the wicked, Exodus 32. 4.
Betwixt Herod and Pilate. What though there may be discord in Gods Church
as well as between the Apostle of the Jews and Gentiles: between Paul and
Barnabas for small matters: as well as amongst Primitive Christians, whose
dissentions were such, that Christianity was publicly derided: and so great,
that they condemned one another of heresy? Yet I earnestly desire, that those
who are strong would bear with the weak: that the weak would not contemn
the strong: yea, that all both strong and weak would live in peace, we all
having fellowship one with another. 1. In things simply good we must have
peace. 2. In things indifferent we should have peace: these being neither good
nor bad in their own nature. They differ from necessaries diverse ways: sc.
1. The least omission of a necessary good wounds the conscience: so not of an
indifferent. 2. In necessaries we may sin in the doing, not doing, and in the
manner of doing. In indifferents only in the manner, e. g. If without
knowledge of its indifferency and use, Romans 14. 14. If without faith, Romans 14.
23. If we u^e them in hatred, and not in love. If we destroy our brother by our
meat, etc. 3 We may yield to some things inconvenient for the peace of this
society, if we follow the advice of the Trent Historian, saying, It is, etc. Or
of learned lunius in his (...) 60. (...). necessary (...) to veeld to the im
effecti(...) of others, and for p^ty to accommodate to that which in rigor is
not due, yet in equity convenient. Histor. Trent. p. 62.
parallels where comparing Genesis 11. 11, 12. In which place there is no Cainan
in the Original (although the S^ptuagints have one) with Luke 3. 35, 36. In
which Genealogy there is a Cainan, says he allows of the answer of Beda, who
affirming that Cainan is neither in Genesis, nor in the Chronicles, says St.
Luke took it from the S^ptuagints, yielding to the received opinion amongst
the people, lest by crossing it he should hinder the peace of the Church, and
hazard Scriptures authority. Then he answers diverse objections. sc. St. Luke
knew it was false. A Yet he knew it was such a falsehood which did not hinder
the truth of a Christian faith, although of a particular History. St. Luke
hereby confirms a fault. A. No, he does not make a private error public,
neither does he nourish a private error: he only tolerates a public error
to prevent a greater evil. What evil did he prevent hereby? A. Ques^ioning
the authority of Scriptures: troubling the building of the Church in her
minority. This was worldly wisdom. A. This was wisdom of the Spirit. Then he
concludes that the Seventy did evil in wronging Scripture, that the Evangelist
did well. And adds a prayer that God would grant unto men of God such modesty
in enduring errors in others to their edifying and public peace: so that they
be such which may be undergone with peace of conscience. And me thinks our
Savior Christ's paying of tribute, St. Paul's shaving of his head, and
circumcising of Timothy, do show that even some inconveniences are to be
tolerated for the peace of this Society.

CHAP. X. Use 8. Saints must forgive each other.
Ignosias alijs mul^^ n^hil tibi C^co. bull. 46.
to forgive each other. Should the foot kick the opposite leg, that does not
repay like for like. If the tongue, lip, or finger are bitten by the teeth,
they seek no revenge: When the feet by their slips throw the body upon the
ground, it only grieves for such failings, and all is well; pardon many things
to others, nothing to your self, says a heathen.

1. I intend no prejudice to the scate of justice, as if Magistrates might not
punish offenders: For they may both punish, and forgive. They are Gods
Ministers, and being in his stead, they may, and must correct offenders. The
offenses which they punish, are not against them as private persons, but the
commonwealth: and Therefore they must inflict punishments.

2. Neither is it my purpose to hinder the course of justice, and law for the
remedying of wrongs, and redeeming a man's right. It being possible for a man to
sue his brother at the law, and yet forgive. There is a forgiveness of
revenge, not requiting evil for evil; of private punishment, of judgment, a
man judging an injury to be none of satisfaction. A man must forgive the
revenge; and may pardon the offense, punishment, yet exact satisfaction by
suing at the law: He having used all other lawful means first, as help of
brethren to arbitrate, etc. Not distrusting God, and depending upon the means.
Retaining love to the party: Giving no offense to God, nor his glorious
gospel, 1. Cor. 6. 17. Not being contentious in suing for trifles.

3. Neither would I persuade men that they can forgive sins; God only
pardoning sin. Truly, he neither deceiving nor being deceived. And properly
he taking away with the punishment the guilt. 1. Ministers have power to
forgive only ministerially, by declaring whose sins are forgiven, whose not.
As the priests under the law cleansed the lepers, pronouncing the clean to be
clean, not making him to be so; so Ministers of the Gospel have received
power to remit where God remits, but no where else. 2. Magistrates have power
to forgive, not sin, but private injuries as private men's offenses, in
public by mitigation of punishments. 3. Private persons have power to forgive
the damage arising from a sinful act, not the act it self being only (...)
against God, Psalm. 51. 3. 4. David stan^d only against God, yet this sinful
act brought detriment to Vriahs bed, and life: pardon they may the guerdon but
not the guilt; the annoyance, but not the offense. But my drift shall be to
exhort all good fellows to forgive, and pardon the wrong done, like Joseph,
Genesis 50. 17. 21. The punishment due to that wrong, like David, 2. Sam. 19. 32.
The restitution and satisfaction of the creditor, (in some cases) the debtour,
Luke 7. 42. To put away all anger for the trespass, like Iepthah, and
Mephibosheth Forgive therefore. 1. But who must forgive? (...).
All of this ^ociety, all which look for remission of sins, Mar. 11. 25. 26.
2. But whom must we forgive? Any (...).
one, enemies, persecutors, the obstinate, much more thy penitent brother. 3.
But when? Whenever, or as often as you (...)
pray, 70 times 7. times a day, sc. 490. times in one day. 4. But 1 (...). 2
(...). 3 (...) 4 (...).
what must I forgive? Any thing, i. e. any quarrel or grudge, etc. any
injustice, or wrong, 1. Cor. 6. 7. Any contumelious usage, Genesis 50. 15. Any
loss, Genesis 31. 39. Any defrauding, James 5. 4. 5. But with what mind, with
what affection? Freely of our own accord, fully remitting all, sincerely from
the heart, Mar. 11. 25. What though the malicious man hatch, and harbor within
his bosom, Envi^, the scumme of imperfections, forbidden by God. 1. Pet. 2. 1.
A work of Satan, Genesis 2. 1. Of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 29. Of darkness, Romans
13. 13. Of the flesh, Gal. 5. 21. Opposite to charity, ^. Cor. 13. 4. And
abdicated by holy men, Titus 3. 3. Let him feed, and foster this
selfe-tormenting (envy (says holy Salvian) Invidia sola authorem persequitl^r:
Sa v. de Gub. Dei, lib 3. page 7^.
does only persecute the author) viper by self-love, impatience, and
selfe-conceitednesse: making himself a fool, Pro. 10. 18. An unprofitable
hearer, 1 Pet. 2. 1. Rotting his own bones. Prove. 14. ^0. And slaying
himself, Job. 5. 2. Like the Mountain Aetna, scorching himself with his own
^^mes. What though the wrathful man fl^sh^th himself in bloody and barbarous
cruelties, acting that which is Satan's proper work, doing contrary to Gods
nature, he being mild and merciful: precept, and practice. Quid siulti
propri^m non posse and ve^^e nocere. ^^as 49.


What and if the furious irefull revenger proceed in his uncharitable and
unwarrantable ways, thereby exasperating to more hurt, doubling his own
grief, losi^g tranquillity and peace of conscience, good will with men, and
favor with God, by usurping his regal right, and robbing him of his
authority. Yet let every member of this concrete communion freely, fully,
soundly, and sincerely forgive each other.

Math. 5. 39. His sacred practice. Gracious promise, Math. 6. 4. And dreadful
judgments against all such who will not forgive, Mat. 7. 1, 2. and 6. 15. Iam.
2. 13. Secondly, Gal. 5. 17. Our flesh lusting against the Spirit) Either
against the same person which we should forgive: some other: and God himself.
But we offending would willingly have forgiveness. Thirdly, Math 5. 44, 45. We
shall gain comfort, which while the boisterous s^rges of angry passions
tempestuously trouble our choleric nature, we are senseless of, yet
afterward we shall find to our more then ordinary consolation, witness 2 Samuel
25. 31. ^3. We may with a hopeful assurance sue unto God for a full remission
of all our enormities: and with a blessed confidence graspe, and hold fast a
firm persuasion, that our sins are done away, grounding upon Gods
unchangeable promise, Mat. 6. 14. By freely forgiving we shall make our foe our
friend, Romans 12. 20. heap coals of fire on his head. 1. He will repent, and
embrace us friendly; or else if he continue in his malice, he shall be fired
with his own conscience, and consumed with the wrath of God. And hereby we are
made fitter for all pious duties, 1 Pet. 2. 1. I cannot forgive because the
matter is so great. Thou have offended the Lord far more, yet he is willing
to forgive thee. But he ought not to have dealt thus and thus with me. But I
meant him no harm. But thou art his superior. God is thine. Thou art Gods.
But thou carest not for his favor, thou live not by his friendship. The Lord
our God needs none of thy help, thou live by him, not he by thee, yet he is
willing to remit thee thine offenses. Be not we rigorous for a hundred pence,
lest we be bound to pay upon pain of everlasting Math. 18.
damnation a thousand talents. Let not us provoke the Lord to mete out to us
condemnation by our not forgiving. Let not us send up Vriahs letter in our
prayer, forgive not us because we will not forgive. But let us freely forgive
each other, seeing we all have fellowship one with another.

Now before I enter upon the second branch of our Society, I intend to speak
somewhat of the word Father, not in the largest extent thereof, as how he is
Father to all creatures, men, Angels, etc. But only how is the Father of these
goodfellowes: afterward I purpose to show how he and we have fellowship each
with other.

OF THE SOCIETY OF THE SAINTS, the second Book.
CHAP. I. GOD is the Saints Father.
with the Father] John 1. 12. Romans 8. 14, 15. 1 These. 1. 5. And a cloud of
witnesses of Scriptures testify this truth. To the confirmation whereof I will
use only two Reasons, it being as apparent, and generally assented to, as that
the Sun does shine at noone day.



But the Lord of heaven and earth is Father to the Saints, all, some, or most
of those ways whereby one man is father to another.

Therefore the Lord of heaven and earth is the Father of these goodfellowes.

He who is Father to the Saints in regard of direction, paternall procuration,
instruction, imitation, image, and adoption, is Father to the Saints most of
those ways whereby one man is father to another.

But the Lord of heaven and earth is Father to the Saints in those regards, viz.

1. Man is father unto man by direction, Genesis 45. 8. Thus God is Father to the
Saints, directing them by his Word, which is a light to their feet, and a
lantern to their paths. And his Spirit leading them thereby, Romans 8. 14. so
that they walk after the Spirit.

2. Man by paternall procuration is father to man: thus Job was a father to the
poor, Job 29. 16. And so is God a father of our society, defending us from
cursed calamities, plucking us out of the jaws of the Lion, and providing for
us necessaries at the least, so that we have Sufficient for our good, if not
satiety to give us contentment.

3. Man is father to man in regard of instruction or doctrine. 1 Cor. 4. 15.
Gal. 4. 19. Thus is God much more, pouring grace by his Spirit into the heart:
for Paul may plant, Apollo water, but God only gives the increase.

4. Man in regard of invention is father unto man; who in regard of imitation
is his son, Genesis 4. 20. Iabal the father of such as dwell in tents. The
Devil thus is the father of all wicked ones, Ioh. 8. 44. Thus is Abraham
father of all godly persons who walk in the holy steps of Abraham, Romans 4. 12.
Thus is God our Father, we being followers of him as dear children, Math. 4.
45. Ephesians. 5. 1.

5. Man is father to man in regard of image, Genesis 5. 3. Some images represent
the shape, thus pictures are images of men. Some agree with the thing in
nature, so children are images of fathers having the same specificall essence.
Some the very individuum. So Christ is only the image of the Father. Christ
Jesus is only the perfect and consubstantiall image of God, Col. 1. 15. Heb.
1. 3. The godly are the imperfect image of God, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. We
having a resemblance of his nature, may be called his image: for although this
is daily corrupted by sin, yet it is again renewed by Christ Jesus, Col. 3.
10.

6. Man is father to man in regard of adoption. Moses thus the son of
Pharaohs daughter. Mordecas thus a father to Ester, Est. 2. 7. Thus is the Lord
our Father, Romans 8. 14, 15, 16. and 9. 16 Gal. 3. 26. and 4. 5. etc. Therefore
he is a Father to the Saints or these goodfellowes all or most of those ways
whereby man is father unto man.

He who performs more freely and willingly then all other, all offices and
duties of a father to these goodfellowes, must needs be their Father.

But the Lord of heaven and earth performs more freely and willingly then all
other fathers, all offices and duties of a father to these goodfellowes.
Therefore he is their Father.

The latter proposition I thus prove.

He who does beget, feed, cloth, correct, provide inheritance, and marriage for
these goodfellowes more freely, etc. does perform all offices and duties of a
father, etc.

But the Lord of heaven and earth does thus, viz. passing by temporal respects.

1. The Lord does beget us spiritually by his Word, 1 Pet. 1. The Lord Begets.
23. Raising us when we were dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
Therefore we are said to have Gods seed abiding in us, and to be borne of God,
1 Ioh. 3. 9.

2. Parents do not only beget, but provide for the sustentation Feeds.
of their child begotten. Should parents forsake their children begotten and
borne, birth which is the greatest good they receive in the world, would prove
a great evil, yea such, that better were it not to be, then being to want
means whereby this being may be preserved. The Lord in this respect is a
Father feeding the soul he has begotten so. That were it possible to extract
the careful providence of all the most tender parents under the Fabric of the
heavens, and replant it in one man: were it possible for this more then
ordinary man to provide for his so tenderly affected children the greatest
varieties of all mellifluous aliments that earth, air, and water could
afford: Could be feed them, with the marrow, fatness, and quintessence of the
most delicious cates of natures simples, or mixtures of skillful artists: could
he satisfy their thirst, and delight their appetites with the fained Nectars
and Ambrosia's of those forged gods, yet all this, and a thousand times more
(if so much could be) is as nothing in comparison of the Lords fatherly care in
providing for his children. What are these in regard of his sacred Word, that
sweet refreshing milk, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2. Free from all mixture of error,
heresy, or tradition, therefore called sincere. That substantial bread of the
soul, preserving its life, health, and strength, Job 23. 13. That purest
wheat, Ier. 23. 28. That strong refreshing meat Heb. 5. 13. Sweeter then
honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. Those green pastures and waters of
comfort, Psalm 23. 2. That heavenly refreshing wine, Can. 2. 4. Which Pelican
calls honey, milk, Nectar, Ambrosia, In Ezekiel 34. 14.
the food of justice and truth, always fatting the souls of the faithful.
What are these to the grace of Gods Spirit, that necessary milk to an heavenly
life, Isa. 55. 1. And that sweet delightful wine? What are these to that
celestial and spiritual bread Christ Jesus which came down from heaven, John
6. 50. That food truly effectual to the faithful soul, our blessed Savior
who is meat indeed, Ioh. 6. 55. That rejoicing wine the blood of the
immaculate Lamb slain from the beginning, Mat. 26. 28.

3. Parents also cloth their naked children; and in this respect 3. Clothes.
the Lords care far surpasses all fathers, he clothing us with the robes of
Christ his righteousness, which is such a vesture that who so wants, is
far more, (yea, without all comparison) polluted, subject to evil, and
unlovely then any newborn babe, naked and unwasht, and in the blood. And of
such worth is this garment, that were it possible, the cunning of all skillful
Artists could concur to the fashioning of some one garment made of the
excellencies of silks, precious stones, resplendent pearls, and costly gold:
Could they convey the quintessence of all odoriserous perfumes into the same.
Were it possible tobe clad more excellently then the Lillies of the field,
far surpassing Solomon in all his glory. Yea, imagine a man to be as richly
trimmed as that glorious runner in the firmament coming out of his Tabernacle
to run his race, Psalm. 19. Or as that transcendent canopy of the heavens decked
with innumerable varieties of resplendent stars. Yet all these are as nothing
in comparison of the rich robes of Christ's righteousness wherewith the Lord
does cloth his children. Which is a garment whereby the nakedness of the
soul is covered, 2. Cor. 5. 2, 3. Rev. 3. 18. is comforted, and kept warm,
defended from the fiery darts of sin, and Satan, Ephesians. 6. 11. decked,
beautified, and adorned, Isa. 61. 10. This garment being pleasant, sweet, and
dainty, perfumed with odoriferous powders of Mirrh, Alloes, and Cassia, Psalm.
45. 8. precious and costly, ver. 9. resembled to the gold of Ophir: Curious and
costly, compared to the needle-worke of a skillful embroyderer, ver. 14. This
garment ravishing the heart of Christ Jesus, Cant. 4. 9. the smell of these
ointments, far surpassing the savor of all spices, ver. 10. and the smell of
this garment being like that of Lebanon, ver. 11.

4. Parents correct their children for their amendment: 4. Correct.
So the Lord chasteneth his Saints, Heb. 12. 7. yet in love, verse 6. more
tenderly then the fathers of our flesh, ver. 9. and more profitably, they many
times for their pleasure; he to make us partaker of his holiness, ver. 10. to
prevent sin, 2 Cor. 12. to run decaying grace, Hos. 5. 15. to weane from
the world; and to try our graces, yea and with such fatherly compassion, that
he is grieved as it were when he smiles; Oh Jerusalem, etc. Oh that there had
been such an heart in my people, etc.

5. Parents provide inheritance for children. The Lords 5. Inheritance.
provident care in it is, is imparaleld. For were it possible for a father to
bequeath to his child Europe, Asia, Affricke, the incognitameta, and Antarticks
portion. Could he leave him the full fruition of all the populous cities,
fertile countries, earthly paradises, golden mines, yea all the wealth within
the circle of the sphericall Zones. Could he not only wish for with Alexander,
but also obtain other worlds, as an immeasurable addition to his former
inheritance; yet is there no more comparison betwixt this only imagined
sovereignty, and the real inheritance of Gods children; then there is betwixt
corruption, and incorruption; pollution, and perfect purity; lasting eternity,
and a fading moment; heavenly treasure, and earthly trash, 1. Pet. 1. 4. To an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the
heavens.

6. Parents provide marriages for theit children. Even so 6. Marriage.
the Lord of heaven has provided such an husband for his children. That if all
the renowned excellencies of all mankind, from Adam to the dreadful day of
judgment; and of all angelical beings which are and have been, were conferred
upon on men. His comely feature should be hateful deformity; his amiable
beauty loathsome ilfavourdnesse; his quickwitted understanding, blockish
ignorance; his angeliall eloquence, rude barbarism; and his other perfections
mere frailties, in respect of those extraordinary transcendencies of Christ
Jesus the husband of Gods children, Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9.

CHAP. II. Duty 1. Saints must love God.
IF God he our father, we ought to love him. Not only Duty. 1.
does Religion command children to love their parents, but also nature it self
requires this duty: some therefore derive Pilius of (...).
the word signifying a son, of a greek word which signifies a lover; And I
verily think (this being so much talked off, and practiced in conceipted
ostentation) few which hear me this day, think, I need tell them they ought
to love God, nor persuade them to put the same in practice. The simplest here
present being ready to say: though they come to the Church for fashion sake,
as their neighbors do; although they are not very bookish; although they give
little ear to the Word of God preached, yet they know as much as the best
preacher can tell them: they knowing that they must love God above all, and
their neighbor as themselves, and this they do, or else it is pity they
should live. Loath I am to have you spend time to no purpose; much less at a
Sermon, for if all words should be gracious, much more of a Minister, in
public to a congregation, as from God. And therefore did I not think it more
then needful to persuade you to love God. Did I not hear painted sepulchers,
satanicall liars, and other cursed impes of that damned Apostata say, theylove
God. Did I see him loved in deed, as well as in word, in truth, as in tongue,
in practice, as in profession; I would willingly have spent my pains about
some filial duty less thought upon, then on this so much talked of, yet
little practiced. For if we but inquire at the oracle of this our father, we
shall find recorded in indelible characters, that such who truly love God, Hate
that which is evil, Psalm. 97. 10. Keep Gods commandments, Exodus 20. 6. Ioh.
15. 10. sc. sincerely although imperfectly desiring, and endeavoring to
perform things commanded. Ioh. 21. 15. Ioh. 4. 17. being followers of him as
dear children, Love not the world, 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Love truly Gods children,
1. Ioh. 4. 20. Mat. 6. 21. Tim 4. 8. Iam. 1. 12. such who detest sin, because
its a breach of Gods law, and therefore eschew, and fly from it, as from a
serpent. With those who thirst after impiety, as greedily as the chased dear
after the water brooks, or the gaping earth after the dew of heaven; and
solace themselves with as great delectation in silthinesse, and superfluity of
naughtiness as Leviathan in the restless Ocean. 2. Such who keep Gods
commandments with sincerity of heart, they to the utmost of their power
leaving undone all evil forbidden; and doing all good duties commanded, not
for any sinister aim, or by-respect, but for the Lords sake, because he has
commanded these, and forbidden those: and being universal in this their
obedience, neither appliable like the star Mercury to every adjacent, nor the
turning weather cock, hurried about with every blast of contrary wind,
remaining the same in all companies, places, and at all times, like the green
ivi^, keeping the same color in the sharpest winter, that it has in the
pleasant summer. With those who no whit regard those sacred laws written with
the finger of the worlds creator: and those who unequally and unjustly share
their obedience betwixt the Lord, and his grand enemy the devil; and such who
have their changeable suites sometimes seeming to observe Gods commandments
for sinister respects, otherwhiles, namely in secret, and amidst their
villainous accomplices, no whit regarding those divine, and more then angelical
direction. 3. Compare we those who walk conscionably in their callings, being
careful to have the souls of their children, and servants decked with the
invaluable robes of Christ's Righteousness; nourished and strengthened with the
food of eternal life: With that careless company which regard no more, so
that they be of comely feature, neately trimd, finely fed, of liberal
education, and richly provided for: and those vilest of men who by their wicked
examples stain their purest times with the blackest dye of hellish impieties,
Satan's cognizance, feeding their immortal souls with the damned art of
swearing, lying, cursing, and such like venom and poison of Aspes. 4. Those
who conform themselves to the glorious example of our heavenly father, doing
their utmost devoir that they may be holy, pure, perfect, and merciful as
their father in heaven is. With that degenerating company of men which will do
the lusts of the devil. Could we segregate those which are crucified to the
world, and have it crucified to them; and although they love the good creatures
and gifts of God, yet it is neither preposterously, irreligiously, nor
unequally but in order, sc. first God, then godliness, then good men, enemies,
then profit, then pleasure. 6 Those whose hearts are fast glued to the Lord
Jehovah, and his crowns of immortality as their only treasure. 7. Those who
love with all entirenesse of affection the sons of God. And Those who love
the appearing of our blessed Savior, having a comfortable assurance of his
love, and a sincere care to please him in all things. From those which love the
world servilely, sensually, preposterously, immoderatly, disorderly, and
undiscreetly. Those whose chiefest treasure is on earth. Those who are enraged
with implacable malice against the children of God and their sincerity. And
from such who love the Lords appearing no more then villainous malefactors the
coming of a just and righteous Judge. And it will manifestly appear (I much
fear) that few only, love God (I speak comparatively) indeed and in truth,
although all love him with the tongue and lips. Give me leave therefore to use
these following motives to persuade you to love God.

The first drawn from God himself, and they are these. Mot. 1.
The Divine Precept of our gracious God: he requires, wills, and commands us to
love him, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and 10. 12. Thou shall love the Lord thy God. The rich
promises of the Lord to all those who truly love him, Exodus 20. 6. Show mercy
unto thousands, etc. Psalm. 145. 20. The Lord preserves, etc. His pronenesse to
hear our prayers, Psalm. 116. 2. He bids us ask, and we shall have, seek and
we shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto us, Math. 7. 7. Yea, he
oftentimes prevents us, granting before we desire. His practice proceeding
from love. Do not Heathen, Publicans, yea savage beasts love those which love
them, and shall not we love him? What creature in whom is the breath of life,
but it may perceive Gods love to it in its creation, preservation, gubernation,
direction, and continually receiving good things from him, Psalm. 145. 16? All
the several sorts of blessings, the multitude, measure, and continuance of the
same coming from his love, Psalm. 68. 19. He daily leading us with his
benefits. What godly man but may discern his unspeakable love to him in Why
God adopted us.
his only Son, Ioh. 3. 16. to die for him, when an enemy, Romans 5. 8. To
raise when dead in trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 5. In choosing and taking him to be his
son when he was the child of the Devil, and that not because he wanted
children, he having a natural Son Jesus Christ the righteous: Nor because he
needed an heir, he living and reigning for ever: Neither because his natural
Son is unfit to inherit, he being as fit as his Father. But only because he
loved him. No love like the No love like Gods
love of God to us wards; his thoughts are thoughts of love, Ier. 29. 11. His
affections are affections of love, Ier. 31. 3. His words are words of love,
Ier. 2. 2. And his deeds are correspondent, Deuteronomy. ^2. 10. No love so great as
the love of God to his children. Not of careful at her. Mat 7. 11. How much
more your Father. Not of tender compassionate m^t^ers, Isa. 4^. 15. Yet will
not I. He loving(...) Hreatly, ^ph. 2. 4. Tenderly* Za^h. 2. 8. E^erla^^ingly,
Ier. 31 3. 4. Freely, without (...) desert(...): which is (...) if we consider
his (...), and ou(...). 1. (...) (...) we were not Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. 9. 11. W(...),
re naught, ^ph. 2. 2. 5. When w^ ^^re ^n^m^^s, ^om. (...). 8. (...)m, 1 ^o^. 4.
10. ^.
19. And secondly, Our love to him (...) and defective, 1 Cor. 1^. 11. De^iled.
Isa. 64. 6. O(...) d^^t, (...)17. 10. And un^quall (...) Gods love, Ephesians. 3. 18,
19. And last^^, the g(...) God, he (...) worthy (...) love before, and above al
other things. Of (...)omthing, and there i(...) thing in the world so (...)y of
^ur (...)is. (...) and what is there in the (...) w(...) ^o do us that go^d
the Lord does? A(...) such de^ight? (...) regardfull of our love (...) To which
we are so indebted as ^nt^ God: Wherein (...)d such delight and comfort as in
the love of G^d? (...) us with thy self O man, and say, Shall the Lord of
heaven and ^^^th ^n^oyne me by his authority, then which (...) W^^e and allure
me by his (...) more amp;e? To love himself, a (...) hear our pray (...) and,
himself the only o(...)?

The s^^^^d (...)tive d(...) Great and m^^y are the pro^^table (...) love G^d.
They shall (...) (...)g 5. 31. They (...)d, Psalm. 14^. (...). They are (...) 1.
12. 2. (...) o(...). 1. (...) behold, more may his searching ^are hear, but
his inquisitive ^eart d^lv^^ into the heart and bowels of the earth, dives
below the s^^ting r^stlesse waves of the raging Ocean, mounts up alo^t by
transcendent speculations peeping beyond those starry bodies. So that he can
talk of the ear^^s center and circumference; of the number, greatness, and
dignities of those heavenly lights. Yet this eye has never seen, ear ^^rd,
^^ther has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
has prepared for those that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. 2. Such is the variable
condition of mankind, that he (...) not long in one stay: joye^ and griefs
successively accompanying each other as day and night. In this intermingled
intercourse of such contrarieties what can possibly produce better effect^ then
love to God? This making all things work together for the best, Romans 8. 28. Do
we desire to have the successful proceedings of all things? Would we have the
fiery dre^dfull assaults of that old Serpent, the truc^lent and villainous
behavior of that viperine brood. e. ^. Their (...) lies and falsehoods, their
tongue-killing slanders, and backbitings: their scurrulous satyricall
scoffings, and their utmost rage stowing from their malicious envenomed h^art^^
In a word, would we have all things, both sins, and su^^^rings, our own and
others turned by Gods providence to our good? The way to accomplish our desires
is truly to love God, Romans 8. 28. 3. Consider the perilous condition of such
who love not God, Exodus 20. 5. Visiting the iniquity of them that hate me.
Deuteronomy. 7. 10. Repayeth them that hate ^^m, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 6. 22. If any man love
not the Lord Jesus, let him be* Anathema, Maranatha. Would thou not therefore
^
have the Lord visit, i. e. fulfill his threatened judgments upon thee and thy
posterity? Would not thou have him repay, i. mete out to thee as he does to
sinners their own ^^ (...) (to repay, being to pay back, or to pay a man with
(...) ow^e in ^^y Would not thou be Anathema, Maranatha, (...) f^r ever and a
^ay, or with eternal execration: be ^^^s^aded truly and practically to love
God. 4. The perfection of true love to God should animate us to put the same in
practice. Love to God is called the first command^ment, because it is first to
be done, we must prefer the love and glory of God* before the love and safety
of men and creatures. And the great commandment, it concerning a great person,
being of great weight and importance, requiring great knowledge to understand
it, and being very difficult to observe.

We our selves earnestly desire the love of our children. We think our selves
extraordinarily wronged if we want their love. And what respect have we to
their greatest obedience if it proceed not out of love? Go therefore, and do we
likewise in loving God our heavenly Father. Secondly, we except we are stocks
and stones, incapable of sense, or bruit beasts, devoid of underdanding, desire
extraordinarily the love of God our Father: without which better had it been
not to have being, or if any, the subsistence of some baser creature. Instance
we in what we can. Be it for proportion ilfavoured beyond all imagination, be
it more pestiferous then the eye-slaying Basilisk, and hideous Gorgon. Let it
have all the concurring ingredients of misery and contempt, being the subject
of extreme wretchedness, and an object of hatred to men and other creatures.
Yet man not beloved of God is beyond all comparison more wretched, death being
a period to its calamities, and an entrance to the others unsufferable, and
never ending torments. But let a man be beloved of God, although he be table
talk for hypocritical mockers at feasts: a byword to men vil^r then the
earth, the drunkards song, and trampled under foot by every stigmaticall
varl^t, yet is he as honorable as an heir of heaven, a member of Christ, and
a child of God. Do we then (as we do if we are in our right wits) desire God to
love us, and shall not we love him again? Reason therefore thus with thy self
O man. Are there so many profitable advantages accom^dating true love to God,
and shall I neglect them? Has true love to God such beneficial effects, and
will thou despise them? The want thereof such dangerous execrations, and will thou incur them? Is love to God that great and first commandment, and will thou transgress it? Do thou think to have the love of God (without which
thou art most miserable) and thou not loving him? Is it fit for children not to
love their father No no, if other men will hate, yet I am resolved henceforth
to love God. Yea, and express the same by hating what is evil. Obedience to
Gods commandments. A conscionable discharge of the duties of my calling.
Conformity to God. Not loving the world. Entirely loving the Saints. Often
thinking on God as my chiefest treasure. And loving the coming of Christ to
judgment?

CHAP. III. Duty 2. Saints must shun sin.
IS God our Father? Then ought we to consider advisedly Duty 2.
of our noble parentage, and with all circumspect consideration take heed we
disgrace it not, nor distaine our Fathers household. And employ our endeavors
to the utmost to honor and glorify our Father, and grace his faithful family
by our virtuous conversations. It is not seemly for a Kings son to defile
himself with contaminating dung, and such like sordid filth; it is not for them
to consort with fellows of base, inordinate, and immorigerous ranks. How much
more unfit is it for Gods sons (children to a King truly, really, whose
kingdom is of such large extension, that heaven, hell, earth, and all places
are within his royal government: and of such commanding power, that all
created beings, whether ruling Kings or potent Emperors, whether Celestial
Angels or infernal Devils, stand his subjects to do him homage and that not
for a moment, or some small time of continuance, but through all eternity) to
pollute themselves with sin, and impiety more loathsome then any thing
whatsoever. e. g. Be it that a man from top to toe is soyled with the most
noisome excrements that are imaginable to be upon the face of the earth: yet
with a small quantity of water, and a little industry of man it is easy to have
him cleansed. Suppose a man to be as it were clad with boyles and botches from
the sole of the foot to the crown of the head; yet it is possible that good
diet, wholesome air, the help of skillful Physicians should restore him to
perfect sanity. But all the water in Abana, Parphar, Jordan, nor the whole
O^ean is of force to wash off, nor the most excellent diet, wholesome air,
drugges and pearls of price, horns of V^icornes, stones of Bezar ordered by
the exactest skill of men and Angels is availeable to purge away sin. It is
only the blood of Christ which cleanses from sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. What made
those for^orne Apostate fiends of glorious Angels to become damned Devils,
detested of God, Angels, and men? Sure I am, not their Creation, it being
excellent, but their depravation, their sin. Whence is it that the Lord does
hate his own Ordinances, New Moons, Sabbaths, and prayers, Isa. 1. 15? What
occasioneth the Lord to turn a fruitful land into barrennes^e, save the
iniquity of those that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 37. Why did the Lord drown
the whole world with an overflowing deluge, overturne those pleasant and
fertile cities ( even as the Garden of God, Genesis 13. 10.) with fire and
brimstone, save only because of their sins? By which particulars it is most
perspicuous, that nothing whatsoever so filthily polluteth as sin: and
therefore such persons whose father is the great King, ought not to pollute
themselves therewith. What else mean those Scriptures, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let every
one who names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. He who
commits sin is of the Devil. Ver. 9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not.
And again, He cannot sin because he is borne of God. 1 Ioh. 2. 1. These
things have I written that you sin not.

1. Mistake me not I pray. I intend not the least allowance of Donatists,
Pelagians, Catharists, and Familists, who glory of perfect purity, yea, to be
as pure as Christ in heaven: of freedom from all sin, the Scriptures telling
me, that in many things we offend all, Iam. 3. 2. I seeing the Publican whose
prayer was accepted, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18. 13.
Saint Paul complaining to be of sinners the chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15. And our
Saviors own Apostles commanded to pray forgive us our trespasses: not for
modesty sake, as Pellagians affirm: but of consciousnesse of humane fr^ilty,
as says Saint Hierome. He who commanded to sin no more, Ioh. 5. 14.
Commanded also to pray daily for forgiveness. He who said, whosoever is borne
of God sins not, 1 Ioh. ^. 6. Said also, If we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth i^ not in us, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. We make God a
liar, and his word is not in us, verse 10. Although we know God hears not
sinners, Ioh. 9. 31. Yet we know also that Christ came to call sinners to
repentance. The same God who directed Balaams tongue to say God has beheld no
iniquity in Jacob, nor seen perverseness in Israel, Number. 23. 21. Directed the
tong^e of Moses the man of God to say, Thou set our sins before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. ^0. 8. What then? is there
contradiction in the Scripture? No such matter: both the one and the other are
the undeniable sacred truths of God. God sees no sin in his people, sc. with
a revenging eye, as to condemn his people for their sins. That mandate sin
no more, is a comparative speech, whereby the cured is exhorted to strive that
his sins be not such, nor so many as they had been, but that their force
might be weakened, their number lessened, and occasions avoided. God hears not
sinners, i. such who make a trade of sinning, suffering it to reign and rage
in them. Whosoever is b^r^e of God sins not, cannot sin: He does not
sin, i. not ch^rish it, and suffer it to reign, but endeavors to cleanse
himself from sin, following holiness of life. He cannot sin, ^. ^^to death,
as he is borne of God, as he has Gods Spirit, and graces, although as he is
man, as he is flesh he does: He cannot endeavor to sin, etc.

2 Neither intend I the least justifying of such abominable i^po^rit^s (painted
pollution covered with pretended religion is worthy double punishment, yea
double damnation) which living i^ loathsome imp^^ties, boastingly reject their
neighbors, ^^^^stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier th^^
thou, Isa. 65. 5. I am not as other men are, etc. Luke 18. 11. I fast, pay
tithes, although they omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment,
mercy, and faith, Mat. 23 23. within full of extortion and excess, 25. of
hypocrisy, and iniquity, 28. These righteous persons Christ came not to call,
Math. 9 13. These being a generation which are clean in their own eyes, and
yet is not washed from their filthiness, Prove. 30. 12. I leave such dotages as
the proper characters of spiritual fools, whose ways (though naught) are
righteous in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness,
Pro. 30. 12. Of unsanctified persons, Prove. 30. 13. Of L^wd companions, Isaiah
65. 3, 4. Of formal Christians, Math. 7. 22. Of Civil honest men, Math. 19.
20. and of proud Pharisees, Luke 18. 11. Which were a people eagerly thirsting
after vaineglorious ostentation, doing all to be seen of men: the greatest
enemies (as it is ever the property of outside Christians) to Christ and his
Disciples: the most dogged censurers of men's a^tions better then themselves
causelessely. A lively pict^re of whom we shall sind pourtrayd in most ignorant
sots, goodfellow-drunkards (Papists, hypocrites, familists) and mere civil
honest men: whose actions (although in many particulars they come short of
those painted sepulchers) run paralled with theirs, Math. 6. The Pharisee gave,
prayed, fasted to be seen of men, Math. 19. 20. Luke 18. 11. And boasts of
exact obedience* Upon which ground I suppose every one of indifferent
understanding will ingeniously confess that these forenamed who seldom give
except vainegloriously to some clamorous beggars, seldom or never pray in
secret, or in their families, only in public to be seen of men. By
consequence avouch themselves to keep the Law of God perfectly. for although
they are sinners as they say, yet they have kept the 1, 2, 3, 4 commandment,
etc. And not in those who are called Puritanes by worldlings, because they will
not be profane, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Because they endeavor in all things to live
honestly, and to keep a good conscience. These (not only giving sometimes in
the view of others) carefully relieving the distressed members of Christ in
secret: praying conscionably, and constantly to their father in secret: and
although they justify themselves in regard of some special kind of sin
only, or some degree, or some circumstance, as David cleares himself, Psalm.
7. and 27. And Saint Paul himself from soule-murther, Acts 20. 26. Yet in
regard of their common corruptions, and particular frailties condemn
themselves more deeply then any others, Psalm. 51. Romans 7. 16. 1 Timothy 1. 15.

But since it is evident without contradiction, that not only all men, but also
all regenerate persons who are borne of God are sinners, and yet such are
exhorted not to sin, yea are said not to sin, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Give me leave
briefly to point at (under correction of the learned) the differences betwixt
Gods children, and wicked men: and then to persuade all such who profess
themselves the children of this Father (although they cannot but sin) not so
to sin as wicked and ungodly ones do, which is the second Use of this Point.

The godly man imployes his utmost endeavors to shun Differen. 1. Godly shun
secret sins.
envy and anger as well as murder, lust as adultery, infidelity, hypocrisy,
pride, earthly-mindednesse, and all secret and hidden sins as well as outward
impieties. He desiring to approve his heart unto God. He well considering, 1.
That the secrets of the heart are as transparent to the omniscient
thought-searching Jehovah, as the most audible words, and public actions. 2.
That God will judge for secret sins as well as for outward, Romans 2. 16. The
wicked man so be, he can demean himself so smoothly and plausibly that man
cannot accuse him of outward villainy: thinks all is well, although his heart
is farc't brim full of privy pride, secret hypocrisy, shameful ignorance,
wanton obscoenities, base earthly-mindednesse, canckred envy, unadvised anger,
etc. Deeming either his thoughts to be free, or doing all to be seen of men.

Small sins.
that, 1. Because he knows that the smallest is sin. 2. Committed against
an infinite God. 3. A trespass against the most holy Law. 4. Able to deprive
of the greatest good, sc. Gods favor. 5. Able to bring the greatest misery. 6.
Not washed away with any thing save the ^^val^able price of the bl^nd of the
immac^late Lamb Christ (...). The wicked man makes of mountains molehils,
makes no scrupl^ of p^tty oaths, Racha, fool, wanton dalliance, merry and
off^^^^s (...), hurtfu^l jests, etc. Yea, he is ready not only to ext^^^^te,
but to plead that they are small. Whereas no sin is sm^ll compared with* the
Law, the punishment, person offended, and price of redemption.

The child of God does not only take heed of the top, and ^
height of sin, but of the first and least degree of sin. He advisedly
considering the insinuating, spreading, and incroching nature of sin, one
drawing on another: he therefore diligently withstands the first degree, he
crusheth the egg l^st it prove a S^rpent, quenches the sparkles, least they
fire all, Iam. 1. 19. The wicked no whit regards concupiscence, the root and
beginning of sin, but deals with it as Milo with his calfe, carried it a
calfe, and an ox likewise: custom comes upon him which hardens his heart,
Ier. 13.

The godly man sins not with full c^nsent of heart, The 4. ^
Spirit strives against the flesh, Gal. 5 17. His sin is as bitter and
burdensome to him as death, Romans 7. 24. Yea he is so ir^^d with the remainder
of old Adam, and with his particular slips and wants in well-doing, that he
lamentably complains, O wretched man, ver. 24. Not despairing of salvation, as
the next words and last verses of the next Chapter declare, but bewailing his
present mis^rable condition so subject to sin, as one groaning under a heavy
burden. And therefore does earnestly strive against the sin and temptation,
^^^ting the spiritual warfare, with the two edged sword of the Word, and
ardent prayer.

The wicked sins with unanimous consent of heart and mind (...) headlong
into it as the enraged horse into the ^attell, draw^s iniquity with cords of
v^n^ty, Isa. 5. 18. Drinks it down with as thirsting appetite, and delighting
pleasantness as fishes do water. And therefore (although he is often times
curbed by the fear of punishment, and dread of shame (whereas the rich
furniture of Gods peerlesse graces, his entire love to God, tenderness of
conscience restraines the good) from many foul enormites) seeks diligently
occasion to commit sin, and rejoices greatly, finding opportunity thereunto.

The oftener a Godly man sins (although his use is not 5. By sinning, learn
more carefully to avoid* sin.
to sin willingly, neither does often fall into the same sin) the greater is
his sorrow; Contrition, humiliation, strife, etc. Witness David, Peter, and
the incestuous person. A good traveller minding his way, is made more watchful
of his footsteps by his many slips, and fallings. An approved soldier
disdaining base cowardice, and miserable slavery; and thirsting after wished
conquest, does rouse up, and vivifie his dismayed spirits with addition of new
supplies of vigor: gu^rdeth himself with more heedfull watchfulness; buckles
his neglected armor faster to his body; yea doubles his diligence in all
particulars after the receipt of some shameful foiles from the hand of his
formidable foe. The wicked is more obdurate by often sinning; grows worse, and
worse: seeks it more greedily every day then other, Prove. 23. His custom in
sinning takes away the sense of sin: his ordinary feeding upon those grapes of
gall, and swallowing down such deadly poison, makes it as welcome to his
appetite as his daily repast, and as luscious to his palate as the sweetest
Ambrosia: his long grounded acquaintance with those hellish brats, links him
with such indeerd intimatenesse to those infernal fiends, that its as possible
to unspotte the party-colored Leopard, and whiten the tawny Negro, as to
disjoyne his fast glued affections by accustoming to do evil from his sin,
Ier. 13. 23.

The godly man advisedly considering what he has done 6. Rises by repentance.
after falling into sin, flies with all speed to the Lord Jesus, his souls
physician; uncovers his wound to the bottom, humbly s^ing to have his si^ke
soul bathed in, and balmed with the blood of the Lamb. He falls down at the
throne of grace, accusing, judging, condemning himself, and sending forth
floods of tears from his wounded heart, or grieving that he can grieve no more
for his shameful faylings. He beggeth pardon for his iniquity with as much
earnestnes as a condemned malefactor: He loathes his sin now more then ever, for
disquieting his soul, and hindering his peace with his God. He becomes more
nobly resolute against sin, and its devilish occasions then he was before, so
raising himself by true repentance. The wicked although sometimes consideration
of the righteous judge, the dreadful day of judgment, and those unutterable
torments prepared for the damned, works in them some melancholy fits of
dumpishnes, yet they never rise by true repentance: for either they are sick
not perceiving it, rushing upon the wrath of God like blind Balaa^^or although
they leave some evil ways, they take other as bad, only exchanging sin for
sin: or if they do confess their sins, its not entire and universal; wanting
either sorrowful contrition, or true faith, or a godly purposed resolution to
join with confession, the confusion of their sins.

Thus I hope it is as clear as the shining of the sun in a M. Yates, 16. ad
c^ page 97.
summers day: that although all men are sinners; yet there are apparent
differences betwixt the good and bad in sinning. A good divine says well:
Their sins are not the same in purpose, which may be the same in performance.
Is there not great disagreement twixt grieving Gods spirit, and despighting the
same? Is there not great difference betwixt touching sin, and tumbling in it?
sipping of it, and swallowing it up? twixt sudden fallings into sin, and
carelessly lying in it? sure I am there is a manifest dissimilitude between a
mad man's, drunkards, and swines willing, greedy and delightful wallowing in
the mire, and the falling of a man in his right wits. And I verily think all
men will acknowledge, that its one thing to pursue with all greediness and
overtake sin: another to flee amain from it, as from a serpent, and
unwillingly be overtaken. 1. Let all such who hate to be reformed animate
themselves, and encourage others to persist in all dissolute and disorbitant
courses. Because the boundless sea of Gods mercy is bottomless and infinite;
little considering, that although Psalm 10^. 17.
Gods mercy is everlasting. Exodus 20. 6.
Great. Exodus 33 15.
Free. Psalm. 109. 2.
Sweet: yet it is appropriated only to such who Deuteronomy. 5 10.
observe Gods commandments. Deuteronomy. 5. 3.
Love God. Psalm. 102. 18.
Keep his Covenant. Prove. 28. 13.
Confess, and forsake their sins. Ier. 3. 12.
Return to God. Amos ^. 15.
Hate evil, do good, establish judgment, etc. Gal. ^. 15. 16.
and such who are new creatures. And not to such who make it a packhorse to
carry their hellish enormities. Or 2. Because they may repent at the last as well
as the penitent thief upon the Cross, and many other of their own fraternity,
who although they ran riot with them in their prosperity, yet dyed like lambs
calling upon God. Little considering that they (for ought I know) might as well
neglect al means to provide food, and raiment, because God fed, and clothed
the Israelites; his ancient people in a barren wilderness so many years
miraculously. Smite their dumb beasts to make them speak, because God once
did wondrously open the mouth of Balaams Ass to reprove the madness of the
Prophet. Cast away all care, and expect flesh, and bread to be brought from
heaven extraordinarily by ravens, because Eliah was once so strangely
preserved. Presume to live forty days without bread, or water, because Moses
and Eliah fasted so miraculously: As well as think to repent at their last
gasp, because once one thief did so miraculously. And as for the repentance
of their own boon companions, its probable that it is not sound but
counterfeit: For can we imagine that those who will not hear Moses, and the
Prophets, so as to be drawn to repentance, and amendment (it being the means
the Lord has sanctified to man's conversion) will be drawn to sound and
sincere repentance, and a through reformation of their lives by a fit of
sickness? And does not daily experience demonstrate Ficta cito ad naturam
red^er^nt suam. Simulata non di^ durans. pab. page 64.
to the eyes of all such who will open them to the truth, that such people if
God spares them usually like Pharaoh and Jeroboam, run greedily with the
dog to their old vomit? A learned Knight says, What shall we call a mocking
of Sir Wal^er Raleigh in his Ep^stle.
God, if those do not mock him, that think it enough for God to ask him
forgiveness at leisure, with the last drawing of a malicious breath? these
find out a new God, make one, a leaden one, like Lewis the 11, etc. Afterward
he says, Let us not flatter 1. Book, 2 Chap. 3. Sect. page 28.
our immortal souls, for to neglect God all our lives, and know that we
neglect him, casting our hopes upon the peace we trust to make at parting, is
no other then a rebellious presumption, and a contemptuous laughing to scorn,
and d^^iding ^f God, his ^
laws; and precepts. That learned Prelate, Bishop (...), ^it^s Saint
Augustine, thus speaking; If any one being in the last ^^tremity of his
sicknes^e, is willing to receive penance, and does receive it, and presently
is reconciled, and departs hence. I confess unto you, we do not deny unto
him that which he asks, but we do^ not presume that he goes well from hence.
I do not presume: I deceive y^u not. I do not presume, he who puts off his
r^pentance till the last, and is reconciled: whether he goes hen^e ^^cure, I
am not secure, penance I can give him, security I cannot give him. Do I say
he shall be damned? I say not so; but do^ I say also he shall be freed? no:
What d^st thou then say unto me? I know not, I presume not, I promise not. Will thou free thy self of the doubt? Will thou escape that which is uncertain? Do
thy penance while thou art in health. The penance which is asked for by the
infirm, is infirm. The penance which is asked for only by him which is a
dying, I fear least it ^
also die. Agreeable whereunto is the saying of Mr. Dike, repentance at death
is seldom sound; and Saint Chrysostom does rhet^rically reprove such
protracting procrastinatours. But thou say, God has granted to many space to
repent of their sins in old age: Art thou sure God will grant the same to thee?
Thou say peradventure he will: what say thou peradventure, and sometimes and
oftentimes, bethink thy self that the business thou have in ^and con^er^es
thy soul. Therefore suppose the contrary, and think with thy self, what if
God should not grant me? When thou go to war thou do not say I need not
make any will, peradventure I shall return again, etc. 3. Let them (...)
themselves asleep in the pleasant crad^e of security, promising to themselves
those heavenly habitations ass^o^e, or before the best of the precis^r sort.
For what and if they have their faults, so had all the glorified Saints when
they breathed in this sub^^^ary world, and so they hope the most resined of
them have (Although thus doing they without a^y dissembling, show themselves to
be a serpentine seed, feeding only upon the drossy dusty part of the
fruitful earth wholly slighting, and neglecting the many fragrant flowers,
pleasant plants, and nourishing fruits: and spider-like, sucking only poison
from the sweetest flowers in Gods garden.) Whereas had they but half an eye
truly open, they might as clearly perceive as they see the most glistering
stars in a fair night, shining in the open firmament. That the sins of
Gods children are not recorded for encouragement to sin, but to terrify from
sinning: for let any man behold how they smarted, as well as how they sinned.
Look upon Noah, derided of his wretched son, cursing his posterity: Moses
and Aaron denied entrance into Canaan: Sampson slavishly grinding in the mill.
David's child dying, his son climbing into his bed, driving him from his
regal government. Let him consider the hardness of recovering their former
peace, joy, etc. How often they watered their couch with their tears: how
bitterly they wept: how long they lay groaning, and crying, create in me a new
heart, etc. Psalm. 51. And I think he will not (except he be possessed with a
more braine-sick frenzy, then a madded Bediam willingly wound himself,
because such and such being wounded, obtained perfect recovery, the wound being
so tart, and smarting, and the cure so difficult; but rather conclude: If the
devil has foiled such tall Cedars, and valiant champions, then I so weak, so
frail* have n^ed with all circumspect watchfulness to shun idleness David's
wounder: take heed of wine overcomming righteous Noah, strive against
presumption occasioning Peter so often with such fearful imprecations to deny
his master: yet let every one who has the seed of Gods spirit abiding in him,
take heed that he does not sin in the Scripture phrase, sc. so as to commit
sin, wittingly, willingly, unrepentantly. To this end let him advisedly
consider.

1. That sin is the only thing which his heavenly father Dissw. 1.
has forbidden him: will not Joseph meddle with his masters wife, because she
was the only thing in his masters house, he was not to meddle withal: and
will thou show thy self so unthankful to a father so liberal, and bountiful
to thee, as to commit that one thing he has forbidden?

God is light, It is darkness in regard of its author, fountain, its nature,
and effects plunging into Gehenna, a place of utter darkness. God is life, It
is death deserving, disabling, destroying, and causing death. It is death in
regard of the due desert which is double death: Of the effects disabling to do
good: of the nature and property, which is to destroy: of the painfulness,
bitterness, noisomeness, and loathsomeness, and of the power none can
withstand it. God is good, sin is evil; for it is 1. The most loathsome, and
irksome thing in the world. Compare we it with the most offall, and refuse
things, and we shall find it most noisome, and excrementitious. Is it not
resembled to thorns, briars, pitch, then which what more averse to the touch
of man? To dregs, gall, wormwood, then which nothing more distasteful. Is it
not termed stink, dung, carrion? then which there cannot be any thing more
disliked of the smell. Is it not styled mire, dogs vomit, menstrous clouts? on
which particulars the sight does loath to look. 2. It is the shamefullest
thing in the world. Not only are Gods children ashamed of it, Romans 6. 21. but
even the grand seigniours in Satan's band. Its a rare thing (I think) to find
a quassing drunkard, filthy whooremonger, hypocritical glozer, grating usurer,
or any other of those higher forms in Satan's school, of such a whoorish
forehead, as to profess himself a trader in such disordered courses. Nay,
will they not disclaim all acquaintance with them? will not the cut throat
usurer say he is no usurer, but a charitable benefactour to the needy man? the
glozing dissembler glory of his uprightness? or can a man draw from drunkards,
or strumpets an acknowledgement of their villainies? 3. It is of all evils the
most depriving of good, bringing sterility upon the fruitfullest countries;
stay^ng the most pious actions with a tincture of such a displeasing die, that
sacrifices by this means are made abominable: new moons, and Sabbaths
hateful, and prayers not sufferable.

work of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. His of the Spirit. Sin is a work of Satan,
1 John 3. 8. Sin is a work of the body, Romans 8. 13. His of the Spirit.

Ioh. 1. 7. 22. and. 3. 5. And that upon good grounds: It being against his
Fathers glory: the salvation of his Elect: it being contrary to his Fathers
works, and advancement of his kingdom.

CHAP. IIII. Duty 3. Saints must depend on Gods providence.
IF God be our Father, we ought to cast our care upon him, Duty 3.
depending upon his fatherly providence for food, raiment and the supply of all
outward things. This truth being a maxim surely confirmed in those sacred
lines written by the heavenly Majesty, and generally assented unto by all men.
I supposing there is not a man to be found either so unexperienced or
brainlesse as not to consent that childrens sole dependence is on parents wise
and careful providence. I shall not need long to insist in the confirmation of
this Thesis. In a word, David, Psalm. 55. 22. has these words, Cast thy burden
upon the Lord, q. d. If there be any thing which troubles thee, or that thou
thy self stand in need of, commit the care thereof into Gods hand, staying
thy self altogether upon his providence, He shall sustain thee. i. God will
play the part of a good Father. St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care
upon him, for he cares for you. Let it be the badge and character of all
gold-sicke Mammonists and earthly-minded worldlings (in whose catalogue I
include not only greedy inclosers, cutthroat usurers, unjust getters: but
also swil-bellyed drunkards, lascivious wantons, riotous spend-thrifts, etc.
For although these in their own apprehensions, and the worlds conceit are
free from avarice. Yet it is evident that they are notable Mammonists as thus:

1. Those are truly covetous whose desire of other men's goods is such, that for
the obtaining thereof, they stick not to use means indirect and unlawful,
Ephesians. 5. 5. But these riotous (...) fraudater, alioni avid^^ avar^^. Ephesians. 5. 5.
roisters for the general have desires enlarged as bell after their neighbors
goods: little regarding how they get, so they may have to spend upon their
lusts, hence it is that they will be usurers, make no scruple of oaths, lies, or
any such like sinister means to minister fuel to the consuming fire of their
insatiable and ravenous lusts.

2. Those who desire worldly things before and above any (...) Col. 3. 5 ^.
thing, are covetous persons, Col. 3. 5. But these jolly follows desire wordly
things before and above any thing. For they pursue with such enraged thirsting
appetites carthy dross, that they will not refrain upon the Lords Day from
plodding and prattling about their adored God. They cannot spare the Lord a
fragment of their time to pray with their families, or in private. They cannot
when God by his judgments, sovereign authority, by commandment, the
necessities of their brethren, and their own duty, in joins sanctity, days
of humiliation and fasting, least they should be undone.

3. They who are lovers of money, are covetous persons, as appears (...).
by co^paring He. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 10. In both which places the word is the
same, and translated in the one, love of money, in the other covetousness. But
these men are lovers of money, preferring it before the glory of God, their
souls health, and their poor brother. And therefore although they stick not
bravingly to defray large expenses at some drunken sitting, and lash out in
trimmer attire perhaps then their neighbors, yet are not to be excluded the
lists of covetous persons. Let it be (I say) the note of such, to distrust Gods
gracious providing for them: From which mistrustfull diffidence, Insoelicissimi
p^uperes sic sunt, quasi inter concertantes procellas in medio mori posit^:
nunc istcrum (...), nunc all number stictibus ^bruuntur. Salv. lib. 5 page 514.
their in humane depopulations, unnatural usuryes, purloynings, lying,
defrauding, and an innumbred swarm of such unconscionable kinds of gettings,
whereby they tear in pieces their poor brethren, contrary to the laws of
grace, nature, and charity, do stream forth. But let not the least thought of
diffident distrustfulnesse seize upon the innobled soul of any in Gods family.
No, not of such whose drooping souls are ready to saint and sink under the
pressures of poverty and scantnesse.

1. For be it that inregard, 1. Of the inhumane practices The poor man's hurters
of madded and irreligious depopulatours, an order of men more worthy
banishment from our English Coasts (in my apprehension) then the jesters,
juglers, loyterers, vagabonds and fools, which Marcus the Emperor shipped
from Rome: these being in my conceit the greatest bane to our Commonwealth,
robbing, 1. Our Dread Sovereign of many able subsidy men, so of maintenance.
Of many able fighting men, so of safety. Lessening the number of his subjects,
so of honor. 2. Our country of its native commodities, corn and cattle, the
town in tillage maintaining far more cattle then the same enclosed. And of
the fruitful endeavors of many able bodies: there being a necessary
dependence of the greatest number of trades upon the tilled town: and the
tilled town besides the many benefits other ways, affoords employment to as
many if not more shepherds then the same enclosed.

2. And in regard of the never satisfied thirsting appetites of greedy gripes
of this world, whose hunger after golden vanities cannot be satisfied with any
additions to their former sufficiencies. Which unquenchable humor causes them
to get into their hands as much as possibly they can (little considering that
the Commonwealth is benefited most by distribution of its employments into as
many families as is possible) and to ingrosse in these scarcer times more corn
then is fitting, to turn the staff of bread excessively into a drunken
commodity for their own inrichment (no price being ever great enough to
satiate their greedy appetite) to be wasted by the sons of Belial upon their
quaffingale-benches: What with the many proctours such have in private and
public, some in pulpit daring to exclaim against those who disease these
drunken Devils: Except Justice deals wisely and resolutely, it will be as great
a waster as I know any. Be it I say in regard of these two evils, it is a
matter of great difficulty (if not of impossibility) to have befitting
subsistence for the greatest part of the poorer sort of people. The former
depriving them of employment. The latter of livelihood, pulling it almost
wholly out of their reach. Yet all you who are not only poor, but Gods poor
also, (there are poor, and Gods poor, Psalm. 72. 2. judge thy poor: such are
Gods poor, who are godly and poor, religiously worshipping God, committing
themselves wholly to his protection, and which are poor in spirit, Math. 5.
2.) and so have him to be your Father. Be you persuaded (for it being a harder
matter to depend upon God when outward means are wanting, then when they are
enjoyed. I therefore direct the drift of this exhortation (although to all Gods
children in general) especially to you) notwithstanding these maine obstacles,
to have a firm dependence upon the gracious providence of your heavenly
Father. But do not think that I intend to dissuade you from prayer for daily
bread, Christian providence, and painful industry in your lawful callings.
Do not imagine that I advise you profusely to spend that God may send,
according to that wicked proverb. Or to have you through your negligence lose
the worst of your substance. For a godly man must pray, labor, provide, shun
wastfulnesse, and preserve from loss the meanest of his substance: and may do
all these things, and yet be neither covetous, nor distrustful. Although for
these causes Gods children are esteemed of all men most avaricious: Yet for a
man I hope, 1. To labor in a lawful calling painefully and diligently is not
covetousness: If it be done in obedience to Gods commandment, without the
least inordinate desire unto, or love of money: and for a supply of present
necessities. For this did St. Paul, yet was not covetous, yea he proves by thus
doing that he was not so, Acts 20. 33, 34. 2. To provide carefully for a man's
family is not covetousness: so it be not immoderate, neglecting the poor, and
distrusting the providence of God, for thus did Jacob, and Saint Paul, and
warrantably, 1. Tim. 5. 8. 3. To save from loss the basest of a man's substance
is not covetousness, except we will tax our Savior Christ Jesus for saving
of fragments. 4. Neither is every desire of wordly things covetousness, no
more then every desire of drink is drunkenness, of meat gluttony, for then
sowing, we could not safely desire a harvest. It is an inordinate desire of
meat which makes a glutton; of drink which makes a drunkard, so of money
which makes a covetous man; scil. desire of more then needful, then that which
will do a man good; we may safely ask bread, and desire what we labor for.
The world therefore does good men a great deal of wrong; taxing them for these
particulars with covetousness. They desiring not the least mite of other men's
goods, defrauding no man of a pin, not desiring wealth above, or before all
things, but Gods kingdom, grace, etc. not loving money, for did they, how
could they sanctify Sabbaths, days of humiliation, and fasting, and their
families daily by christian exercises. But in Saint Paul's sense 1. Cor. 12. 31.
they are, I confess of all men exceeding covetous. They earnestly desiring,
and greedily thirsting after spiritual blessings, and heavenly glory. Now give
me leave to use four motives to persuade you to rely upon your heavenly
father, to live by faith.

Art thou a father having children few, or many? then be Mot. 1.
thine own judge, if thou deem'st not thy self disparaged, if thy children
misdoubt thy want of willingness to provide for them to the utmost of thine
ability? nay, do they not solely depend on thee, and seek for food, raiment,
and such like necessaries at thy hands? And dare thou having the blessed
testimony of Gods spirit? Romans 8. 16. the spirit of prayer, Romans 8. 15. being a
follower of God as a dear child, being borne of God, and so having a
comfortable assurance that thou art Gods child by adoption, dishonor thy
heavenly father, distrusting provision? Does he not bear as tender
affectionatenesse toward his children as thou do toward thine? God forbid
that any such villainous thought should seize upon thy heart. He loving his
children greatly, Ephesians. 2. 4. everlastingly, Ier. 31. 3. tenderly, Zach. 2. 8.
more then any mortal father, Mat. 7. 11. or the most pitiful mother her
sucking infant, Isa. 49. 15. Is he not as able to sustain his children as thou
art to maintain thine? Who; and what is he who dares suffer his heart to
nourish any such hellish blasphemy: The earth being the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, every beast of the forest being his, the cattle upon a thousand
hills, the fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field?

Psalm. 34. 9. there is no want to them that fear him, ver. 10. the lions do
lack, and suffer hunger; but they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing,
Mat. 6. 33. all these shall be added to you, Psalm. 33. 19. He will deliver
their soul from death, and keep them alike in the time of famine. Sure I am,
the promises of God as they are sweet, and precious, so they are yea, and Amen,
2 Cor. 1. 20. Romans 4. 16. for he cannot lie. Numb. 23. 19. Ioh. 1. 2. and the
Lord is unchangeable. If therefore thou fear God, first seek his kingdom,
and the righteousness thereof, and if the enjoyment of these things be for thy
good, misdoubt not the fruition of them.

Genesis 42. 1. Why look you, etc. the Lord made sufficient provision for them.
He gave them bread in a desolate wilderness, Exodus 16. 15. 35. He gives
Sampson water out of Lehi, Judge. 15. 19. He feeds Eliah by a widow, and
ravens, 1. King. 17. 4. 9. with a cake, and cruse of water, 19. 5. 6. an
hundred Prophets by the bountiful Saints extremities are Gods opportunities.
hand of a good courtier, 1. King. 18. 13. David speaks nobly to this purpose,
Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, -- never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his
seed begging bread. And I verily think (although the number of beggars does
daily increase) let a man diligently view over a whole country, and he shall
hardly find one whom the world calls puritanes, so forsaken of God, as to beg
his bread, but either the Lord does stir up the hearts of some good Obadiahs
to relieve them in secret: or does contrary to all expectation sustain them:
or makes their little as effectual (like the widows meal, 1 King. 19.) or as
if they had great abundance; and more available then great revenews of wicked
men, ps. 37. 16

Giving food to all flesh, Psalm. 136. 25. Satisfying the desire of every living
thing, Psalm. 145. 16. Filling all with his good, Psalm. 104. 28. (hence it is
that the eyes of all wait upon him, Psalm. 145. 16. and the Lions seek their
meat of God, Psalm. 104. 21.) and thou must of necessity confess: That all
sustenance is his gift. That all are mere gratuities. That he does continually
supply the wants of all creatures. And that he is a liberal giver, feeding
millions of millons every day. And then rouse up, and animate thy drooping and
dismayed Spirits, as Christ did comfort his distrustful Disciples, Math. 6.
26. etc. Do all the innumbred swarms and troops of birds, beasts, and fishes
depend upon my Father? Does he afford them such sufficient supplies and
contented satisfactions, that although they have nothing beforehand to glut and
satiate the eye, they chirp and sing, leap and skippe, and shall I distrust
who am a man, a child by adoption? God forbid. will not the Lord much more
provide for me, who am better then they? Doubtless he will. Be it therefore
that I am poor, yet my Father has more then enough to supply my wants. Be it
that I see no means in humane reason how to live, yet will I depend on him who
can preserve me with, or by small means. Be it that my charge is great, yet
will not I distrust: I see the little Wren, a poor and weak bird, having her
nest stored with a multitude of little helpless creatures, to skippe as
livelily, to live as merrily, and sing as pleasantly as at other times. I have
nothing beforehand; no more has she. I have a great charge. She as great. I
have small means to get. She has less. It is my gracious Father who provides
for her and hers. He will also for me and mine. To this I may fitly add the
saying of a devout Writer: Thy children are thy riches, children are not a
trouble, Fil^^ tui divitiae tue sunt, silij non labor, sed requies parentunt
sunt and levamen laborum, ac omna fortunae so latium si boni sunt: si mali, non
de numero sed de moribus querela est. Qua pascet omnes? Qui pis^es maru pascit,
quadrupedes etc. Quis vestet? qui agros herbis ac floribus vestit, atque
frondibus silvas. Adrian. Ca^th page 126
but an ease of parents, a solace of calamities, and a consolation of every
estate, if they be good: if they be evil, the complaint is not of their
number, but their vices. Who shall feed them all? He that feeds the fishes of
the sea, the four footed beasts, etc. Who shall cloth them? He who does
cloth the fields with herbs and flowers, and the woods with leaves.

CHAP. V. Duty 4. Saints must honor God.
FOurthly, we are to honor our Heavenly Father, Mal. 1. 6. Duty 4.
A son honors his Father. If I be a Father where is mine honor? Our
Father -- hallowed be thy Name, is the continual cry of Gods children, and
it is a necessary inference. If we ought to honor our fathers by nature,
precedence of time, age, and office, much more the Lord our Heavenly Father. In
prosecuting this filial duty, I intend to have the judgment rightly informed
how God must be honored, and to persuade by certain motives the affections to
practice this fourth siliall duty.

God may be honored or despised many ways, but these three especially.

1. In himself or his own person, diverse ways. 1. By obeying him and
submitting our selves to him. 2. Believing in him and trusting to him. 3. By
calling upon him, and praying to him. 4. In loving him above all. 5. In fearing
him above all. 6. In confessing of his truth. 7. In confessing of our sins.

2. In his servants: either Prophets or people, Ministers or members of Christ:
when they are honored for his sake, or his gifts and graces are honored in
them. God is honored in his Ministers, when those branches of honor are given
to them which the Word of God requires. As: 1. Reverence in thought, word, and
gesture. 2. Obedience to their Doctrine. 3. Imitation of their good example. 4.
Maintenance.

3. In his sacred and holy Ordinances: Word, Sacraments, prayer, or other parts
of his Service, when they are reverently and rightly used. So men may dishonor
God by the same means or after the same manner, sc. when any of the aforesaid
duties are denied or wanting, he is dishonored in regard of himself or
servants: and in regard of his Ordinances, when any of them are refused or
abused.

We are to honor our Heavenly Father with soul and body both, for he created
them both, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator, Ver. 9. Spirit to God who gave
it. He redeemed them both, 1 Cor. 6. 20. He sanctifies them both, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
23. He preserves them both, Psalm. 97. 10. And he will glorify both, 1 Cor. 15.
49. But first with the soul, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. Bless the Lord O my soul. And
that: 1. Because the Lord requires it most, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Ioh. 4. 24. 2. Because
it is the seat of sanctification, the beginning and efficient cause of every
action, Math. 12. 35. Prove. 4. 23. 3. Because the Lord observes, tries, and
searches it most, 1 Ioh. 3. 19, 20. 21. 4. Because the Lord regards it most.
And 5. Because if the soul once truly honor God, it will draw the whole body.
Let hollow-hearted dissemblers and tombe-like Pharisees (as Alexander in
another case scattred in India at his departure spears, shields, swords, and
other warlike furniture, fitter for men of gyant-like then ordinary stature,
that he and his might be thought to be men of extraordinary greatness) seem
to glorify God more then other men, being in the mean time as full of dregs
and filth as a loathsome caske, and as empty of worth as a drum, having in it
nothing but windy air, although its sound is great and clamorous. Yet let
every adopted child of the Lords be exhorted to honor our heavenly Father:

1. Inwardly: and that first in his understanding. 1. By an effectual,
spiritual, distinct, special, lively, experimental, and consequently, saving
knowledge of God, the want thereof causing a denial of honor to the Lord,
Exodus 5. 1. I know not God etc. Romans 1. 21. 2. By a true faith, unbelief
hindering from sanctifying the glorious name of God, Number. 20. 12. Secondly, in
his affections. 1. By a spiritual child like or siliall fear, whose fruit and
force is to restrain from vice, and constrain to well-doing for desire to
glorify God. 2. By a Christian love a fruit and sign of a justified perion,
causing us to delight in God for his goodness sake, and in our neighbor for
Gods sake.

2. With our tongues, given us by our sole Creator for this end, Iam. 3. 9.
Therewith bless we God, even the Father, Phil. 2. 11. that every tongue should
confess to the glory of God the Father. Psalm. 51. 15. And my mouth shall show
forth thy praise. We are to honor our heavenly Father in word by speaking
reverently of all those things whereby God and his holy will is made better
known unto us, e. g.

1. By talking reverently of the unmatchable sacred, sanctifying Word of God a
necessary duty imposed upon all Gods children, booke-learned or illiterate,
Deuteronomy. 6. 7. These words shall be in thy heart, -- and thou shall talk of them.
Yea, it is impossible the Word of God should be in the heart (as it dwells
richly in the heart of Gods children) and not in the mouth, Psalm. 37. 30. 31,
The mouth of the righteous -- the Law of God is in his heart. medicinable
plaster of the soul, Psalm. 107. 20. Therefore to be applied to heal. leaven,
Mat. 13. 33. Therefore to be employed to alter the nature of man, turning his
heart first, then his members, that he may lead a new life. bread, the souls
bread, Prove, 10. 21. Amos 8. 11. Not only vivifying the same, but also
preserving its health and sanity, making it lively and full of vigor. water
drawn out of the Wels of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Still refreshing waters, Psalm.
23. 2. And as the sweet distilling rain, dewing down abundance of fatness
upon the thirsty ground, Isa. 55. 10, 11. It is water to mundifie the putrified
sores of a wounded soul. To cool the scorching heat of fiery trials and
hellish temptations To animate with all refreshing comforts the unwearied soul
pressing forward with an ardent earnestness in the race of Christianity, and
fighting with an invincible courage, and undaunted resolution under the Lord
Jesus. To fructify the soul naturally b^ren of goodness, that it may be as a
field fruitful in good works. a treasure unmatchable and peerless, Mat 13.
44. To be desired most earnestly, esteemed most highly, kept most carefully,
and lost most unwillingly. Its the excellent heritage of the Lords inheritance
Psalm. 119. 11. Surmounting far in worth or value the most refined silver, and
purest gold of Ophir, Psalm. 19 10. 119. 72. All manner of desired riches, 14.
And the richest spoils taken after a wished conquest, Ver. 162. Is it so, as
so it is, and shall we then use it fruitlesly? God forbid. What, and if
Iulianian A postasie scoffs at those Heavenly Oracles, saying, turn the other
cheek (after blows given to Christians) according to your Masters Precept.
What though godless Atheism sports it self with such sacred phrases, yet my
brethren do not you. hand, and powerful arm of the worlds Creator, Isa. 49.
22. 53. 1. The rod of Gods mouth, 11. 4. The rod of his power, Psa. 110. 2. A
sharp two edged sword piercing to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirits. fire, Ierem 5. 14. and 2^. 29. Thirdly, from abusive usage of it in
countenancing vice, or disheartening virtue. Let none of us dare to wrest these
sacred lines, and wring the Lords sword as it were out of his own hand. axe
keen and sharp, Luke 1. 9. To destroy sin not grace. It is a sword double
edged, and cutting, Psalm 45. 4. hammer, able to 3. (...)
break and bruise to powder the Adamantine stony hardness of man's heart, Ier.
23. 29. To batter down Satan and all his accomplices, not to hurt the Lords
Anointed. goad sharp and piercing, Eccl. 12. 11. To stir up the good being
sloathfull to discharge their duty: to gall only the wicked and ungodly. of
all inchauntments those are most dishonorable to God, most acceptable to
Satan, and most hurtful to the charmer which are Disc. of Witch. Dissw. 1.
made of the Scriptures, says Mr. Perkins. It is the peculiar heritage of the
righteous, Psalm. 119. 11. What have you to do Ob. 1. An.
with it therefore you sons of Belial? It Is a medicine. True: to draw out and
dry up sin being rightly applied, not to cure the bodily sickness of men or
beasts. It Is a pearl, Mat.

2. By talking reverently of the titles of God we honor our Father. By
speaking of these vainly we dishonor him. vain admirer who upon every
unwonted accident breaks out into such like speeches, O Lord, O Jesus, etc.
Would seriously consider: That he has not the least warrant for this his folly
in any parcel of Gods Books. That he is Jehovah, a being of greatest Majesty
and power, who can consume him in a moment with the breath of his nostrils,
whose glorious titles he so fondly abuses. That he dares not so idly
intermingle the sacred Names of his consecrated Sovereign Humana sort redlit
aqualis. Salv. ^. Gub. lib. 3. page 75.
in his ordinary communication. cursed imprecatour and rash petitioner (whose
mouth is wont to belch out most hellish language, wishing things evil and
execrable to befall others, or himself either absolutely or conditionally)
would be instructed that he has no ground from the imprecations of those
renowned Saints, Paul and David. These did imprecate others, Psalm. 109. 2 Timothy
4. 14. True. These were men of against whom they prayed to be incurable; and
they did imprecate out of a pure zeal to Gods honor, and of his glory. David
did imprecate himself although conditionally, Psalm. 7. 4, 5. True. But the
matter was weighty, and there was no other means to manifest the truth: i. e.
his innocence, in that wherewith he was charged, and therefore no warrant for
such like horride, and blasphemous speeches, I would I was hanged, I would I
was damned, the devil take me, etc. premeditately to ponder in what a pitiful
plight he was in, should the Lord deal with him according to his wish. And
thirdly, that the abusive blessers who thank God for their unconscionable
gettings and other execrable impieties, like Micahs mother, Judge. 17. 2. and
Saul, 1. Sam. 23. 21. making God the author of such their impieties, that God
is the only, and chief good, goodness it self, the author of all good, and
from whom nothing but good. And as for evil he does prohibit the doing,
detests the act, and punishes the agent which he would not do: was it his own
work. That God is wisdom, sin is folly. How can wisdom produce folly? God
is justice, sin injustice. How can justice produce injustice? God is mercy,
sin is misery whose beginning is doleful, continuance toilesome, and end
shameful, and therefore, that God cannot be the cause or author of their
sins.

3. By speaking reverently of his divine attributes as justice, mercy, wisdom,
etc. That mighty Lord on whose hand the King of Israel leaned, dishonored the
Lord in doubting of, or questioning the plenty promised, 2 king. 7. 2. So Moses
by shortning the Lords hand, Number. 11. 21, 22, 23. and diverse do no less,
daily complaining of their ill luck, and bad fortune I will for this time
summarily, and succinctly give a taste only in two; justice, and mercy. For the
first, we honor the Lord, declaring him to be as indeed he is most just: and
that 1. Simply and absolutely, 1. Justice.
as he is of himself infinitely and perfectly righteous in himself, and of
himself. 2. Respectively and relatively, in regard of his office, he being the
most righteous judge of men, and angels. For 1. Knowledge and understanding of
things, and persons to be judged. 2. Care of equity. 3. Rightful authority to
determine, and decide. 4. Power and ability to punish offenders, and free the
harmless innocent which are in God infinitely, and transcendently. either
Because he punishes finite sins with infinite punishments: for what though
sin as it is a transient action is finite and temporary: yet in regard of the
object against whom it is committed: of the subject wherein it is resident,
mind of the sinner, and law whereof it is a breach, it is infinite. Or because
he loved Jacob, and hated Esau before they had done good or evil. Who art thou
that dare reply against God? Has the potter power over the clay of the same
lump to make one vessel to honor, another to dishonor, and has not God?
May he not do with his own what he will, Romans 9. 20. 21. by your overbold, and
saucy presumptiousnesse in sinning; sealing to your souls a general acquitt
all from all those unutterable and insufferable tortures, the just judge of
heaven and earth has threatened against impenitents, because he is merciful,
so wholly dispoyling that glorious majesty of this divine attribute Justice. A
good divine says thus, let fond presumption M. Yates, I (...) Ca^^r:
hope for parden without payment, disjoyne mercy, and justice in him to whom
both are alike essential, and say, although I go on in sin yet God is
abundantly merciful: go on, presume, and perish. For the second, we honor our
heavenly father, when we rightly ascribe mercy to him. The Lord is most
merciful, his mercy being of such large, and endless extent that in regard of
continuance it does equalize eternity, Psalm. 103. 17. In regard of reach, and
compass, it extends it self to the highest hills, clouds, and heavenly
habitations, Psalm. 36. 5. to all persons, yea created beings, yet restraining
it self in respect of spiritual and celestial benefits, to such as carefully
observe the commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Truly, and entirely love him,
Ibid. Confess their sins, and forsake them, Prove. 28. 13. And turn from
their transgressions, le. 18. 8. To God, Ier. 3. 12. Two sorts of people,
therefore as much as in them lies, rob our heavenly father of his due honor:
namely such; Who make him less merciful then he is, and that 1. By rushing
headlong upon that dreadful rock of desperation, falsifying Gods promises,
Cayn-like, crying out their sins are greater then can be pardoned: Whereas
could they but repent truly, and savingly, their most deep died scarlet-like
sins should be blotted out of Gods remembrance. 2. By comparing Gods
unparaleld mercy with mortal man's. The Lords being everlasting, constant, free
and rich. Men's being momentany, mutable, mercenary, and poor. 3. By an
overweening conceit of their own worth: promising to themselves undeniably
those blissful joys for their merits sake, deeming their own worthfull
actions to be sufficient to purchase that matchless crown of glory if not
superabundant and superrogatory. Secondly, who make him more merciful then he
is, casting the innumbred swarms of intolerable prodigious oaths, beastly
drunkennesses, and other their obstinate hellish enormities upon the mercy of
God, as if it was a common packhorse, whereon to unload their wilful, and
unsupportable evils, causing the creatures to groan, and the earth to mourn,
and reele to and fro, tottering and staggering like a drunken man; little
considering, that as he is merciful, so is he just: and those who will sin
because God is merciful, shall surely be plagued because he is just.

By speaking reverently of the unspeakeable works of God, both Immanent in
himself, acknowledging with the Apostle the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God; and that his judgments are unsearchable, and
his ways past finding out: and Transeunt as his wonderful works of creation,
redemption, and particular works of mercy, Exodus 15. and justice, 1. Sam. 3.
18. Job 1. 21. Let these short instances in few words now suffice. We honor
the Lord by talking of the works of Creation, after this or the like manner.
Who created? The Lord of hosts, What he made? All that is made. How he did it?
With his Word. To what end? His honor and glory. And here I cannot omit to
reprove a most vile (although usual) kind of dishonouring the Lord, in
laughing to scorn persons in body deformed, or in mind defective. The
renowned maker of the world, and not the workmanship, being (in my shallow
apprehension) derided. Suppose a man for instance coming into the workhouse of
some skillful artist; and there beholding some piece of work less curiously
wrought then other, should therewith sport himself with scoffing derision we
could not but conclude; That the artificer, and not the artifice is reproached.
Secondly, we may honor the Lord by speaking reverently of the work of the
worlds redemption, it declaring. Who redeemed? The ever blessed Son of God.
From what? The curse of the Law, the wrath to come, the devil, the hands of
our enemies. Wherewith? His own precious blood. Whom? his pasture sheep. And
why: his own honor, and glory. We may honor God with our tongues by the
right use of an oath: sc. The person rightly qualifyed; having a warrantable
calling thereunto; the matter being true, just, and of great importance: the
manner, time, and causes rightly observed, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. For hereby
we make the Lord a witness, judge, and revenger. Two sorts of people I desire
to advise, deserving greatly to be taxed concerning this particular: they
greatly, dishonouring the Lord about an oath. Fantastical, anaba^tisticall
dreamers, who condemn all swearing as unlawful, and would you think why?
Mat. 5. 34. says our Savior. Heb. 6. 16. An end of all strife: qualifies but
condemns not an oath. He debars not from a necessary confirmation of truth by
an oath, but only corrects the evil custom and use of swearing, which was
such that they thought it a matter of no moment to swear in familiar talk by
heaven, head, earth, etc. Zach. 5. 3. Mal. 3. 5. 2. Or pestiferously binding
themselves by oath to do mischief, like cursed Iesabel, 1 Kings 19. 2. Cruel
Herod, Mark. 6. 23, 26, 27. And those bloody Jews, Acts 23. 12, 13. 3. Or
superstitiously swearing by that which is not God, Ier. 5. 7. 12. 16. Amos 8.
14. Math. 5. 35. 36. 23. 20, 21, 22, Or by the Lord, and some thing else, Zeph.
1. 5. God himself is hereby dishonored: He requiring this duty to be given to
him alone. Man hereby dishonors himself, making the creature being worse
then himself, his better, an oath is taken of the better, Heb. 6. 16. see but
swearing by the rood, mass, etc. is forbidden, where swearing by Malcham. And
the sin of Iurare per creaturas est illicitum, Origin. lib. ult. contra
Celsum fol 239. 6. Quidam ex secta Pythagorea maluit tria talenta perdere quam
jurare. Idem. Hom. 24. Fol. 58. Jurantes per creaturam ideo peccare dicuntur
quia ignorato aut neglecto opifice religionem operibus and creaturu
impertiuntur. Hilar. Can 4 in Math. fol 76. 6.
Samaria is prohibited because the former are, as the latter were idols, and
that Math. 5. 34, 35, 36. Forbidding to swear by heaven, earth, Jerusalem,
etc. Forbids also in my conceit swearing by light, bread, silver, drink,
faith, and such like, these being, but creatures as well as those. 4. Great is
also the peril of such like swearing, the Lord says such forsake him, Ier. 5.
7. threatens not to spare, ibid. to overthrow them, Ier. 12. 16, 17. And
condemnation, Iam. 5. 12. 4. Or fourthly, by swearing causelessly or rashly in
their ordinary communication, deeming it a matter of manhood to toss and
tumble in their blasphemous mouths the sacred Name of the Lord of glory. Or if
they abstain from such a height of prodigious villainy, conceit themselves
that a now and then intermingling of oaths of a lesser rank to be a garnishing
Rhetorical flower to adorn and beautify their communication. Say not, O my
brethren, For neither may we swear to the truth, but when we have a calling
thereunto. Neither may we confirm all truths by oath. For when then must we
use yea, yea, nay, nay? And usual swearing to truths is a ready way to swear
falsely. Say not it is your infirmity. Mat. 5. 37. 1. From an evil heart, or
evil continued custom, or that evil one. Say not you are urged so to do.
The filthy adulterer is urged by his hellish lusts to commit villainy: yet is he
inexcusable. So be it that the swearer is urged, yet it is by the Devil whom
he should resist, his wicked heart which he should master, and ungodly
associates whom he ought to avoid. Say not you cannot be credited except you
bind your sayings by oath. For, whether is it better that you should be
discredited, or God dishonored? Are you not ashamed so to live that you cannot
be credited without swearing? 3. Do you not know that this is a ready way to
make you never credited? Will not wise men (think you) reason thus? He who
makes no conscience of swearing, makes none of lying. But such men make no
conscience of swearing, therefore none of lying. But rather reason thus with
your selves, and say: Do evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33?
Cannot many words be without sin? Proverbes 10. 19. Certainly many oaths
much less. Must we give account for idle words? Math. 12. 36. Much more for
idle oaths. Are idle oaths Symptoms (Christ being Judge, Math. 5. 37.) of an
evil heart, and a wicked custom? Do such (according to Saint James 5. 12.)
endanger a man's salvation? our blessed Savior the best expounder of his
Fathers will, the sole Savior of all Gods Elect people precisely prohibit all
additions of contestation, protestation, or execration, in our ordinary
communications: and enjoyne us strictly to have our communication yea yea, nay,
nay? Does that Divine Penman of the Holy Ghost Saint James the servant of the
Lord, James 5. 12. Peremptorily enjoyne us neither to swear by heaven, etc.
Nor by any other oath, but to have our communication yea and nay least we fall
into condemnation, and shall we presume to swear idly, or unnecessarily? We
will not do it.

3. Lastly we are to honor our Father by beautifying our Religion with a godly
life and upright conversation, Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men
that, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Having your conversation, etc. And the contrary is a
dishonouring of the Lord, as it is evidently apparent in that foul and filthy
fact of David, 2 Samuel 12. 14. The carriage of the Jews, Ezekiel. 36. 22. And of
those profane Preachers, Romans 2. 23, 24. That we may thus honor the Lord, we
must conscionably decline from all evil, and endeavor with our utmost
abilities to practice what is good. What though many profane persons pacify
their guilty consciences justly galled for their wretched and irreligious
actions like those wicked justiciaries, Math. 7. 23. Who persuaded themselves
(but they were deceived, being rejected for their works of iniquity, Verse
23.) that by their prophecyings and such other good duties they should make
amends for their foul enormities, and procure for themselves an easy passage
into the blissful possession of the Lord of glory. What and if diverse others
deem themselves, and are so esteemed by their neighbors the only men under
the Sun, because they do no hurt: which alas is a poor commendation for a
Christian man. (Yet happy would it be with our Kingdom if all Christians might
be said justly to do no hurt, for then it would be empty of all cutthroat
usurers, merciless depopulatours, and an innumbred swarm of such like
devourers) for was this a sufficient commendation? Why was the unprofitable
servant cast into utter darkness? Why was the fruitless fig tree withered?
Might not they have pleaded as well destroy us not, we do no hurt? Might not
those cursed goats Mat. 25. reply as well although we did thee no good by
relieving thy distressed members, yet we did thee no hurt by impoverishing,
afflicting, grieving oppressing? Yet sure I am, it is the property of Gods
children to depart from evil and do good, Psalm. 34. 14. Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Job 1.
8. Zach. 7. 9. He being a converted man. He being of God. He laboring for
heaven. Conforming himself to the precept of God and godly men. Follow we
therefore these shining Lamps in declining all evil, and endeavoring to
practice all good duties (there being no mediocrity between well doing, and
evil doing. For he who does not good, does evil, committing a sin of omission)
that so doing we may glorify and honor our Father this other way: sc. in our
conversations. I having thus briefly and concisely declared how we are to
honor our father. I will now propound six inducements to persuade you to give
our Heavenly Father his due and deserved honor both with your thoughts, words
and actions.

You will (as you ought to render to all their dues: tribute Mot. 1. Honor due
to God.
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor
to whom honor, Romans 12. 7.) give to every one their right, will you not? Will
you give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and not to God the things
which are Gods? Shall Masters, servants, husbands, wives, neighbors, and
strangers have that which is their due, and shall not God? Yea shall the Devil
have his due (for that I take it is no unwonted proverb) and must the Lord
only be patchingly dealt withal? God forbid. Glory and honor are the Lords
through all eternity, Romans 11. 36. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Could you declare the glory of
God not only like those glittering heavens dockt with innumerable varieties of
resplendent stars, or that canopy-like firmament reaching all the world over,
and every where to be seen, continuing from the creation without wearing,
fretting, renting or tearing. Or that swiftest runner, whose Tabernacle is in
the heavens of such ^.
swift celerity that in one day and night he whirles about the whole world,
240000. Germane miles in one hour: and whose glorious brightness is such,
that nothing can hide it from the heat thereof. But with those four beasts,
Rev 4. 8, 9. (whether the Angels of God which is most likely, or such
Ecclesiastical persons the servants of God who have faithfully labored to
deliver to the Church the truth of Doctrine, I will not stand to dispute) also
continually give glory and honor to him that sits on the Throne who lives
for ever and ever: Yet could you not give to God more then his due, for all
honor and glory is due to him through all eternity.

For what cause (think you) do you enjoy abundance of 2. We made to honor God.
unspeakable mercies from the bountiful hands of your merciful Father? Do
you imagine that you might spend your time in sportfull vanities, seemingly
delightful, as if you were placed upon the earth as Leviathan in the waters,
to play therein? Deem you the end of your noble creation to be to congregate
heaps of dro^^ie, dunghill, and transitory trash of earthly treasures? No
such matter. Or do you think you are sent into this world to devour your
poor brethren by cursed and cruel enclosure, cutthroat usury, or ravenous
extortion? Nothing less. For the end of your creation, yea, of all created
beings, whether glorified Angels or infernal Devils: whether magnificent
starrie bodies, or contemptible terrestrial worms: whether endued with reason
or deprived of sense is the honor and glory of God. The Lord has made all
things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. I have created him for my glory, Ezekiel. 43. 7.
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev. 4. 9.
10. Must those splendent ornaments of the world, Sun, Moon, and Stars of
light because he commanded, and they were created, Psalm. 148. 3. 5. Must
hideous Dragons a terror to men and other creatures inhabiting solitary
deserts. Must fire, hail, stormy wind, sNow and vapors. Must mountains and
hills, fruitful trees, and all Cedars. Must beasts and cattle, creeping things
and slying fowls praise and honor God for their creation? Much more ought
mankind, whether Kings of the earth or people, Princes or Judges of the earth,
whether young men or maidens, old men or children, Ps. 148. 11, 12. For imagine
we a creature composed of the very excellency of all creatures, grant it the
best qualities of the rarest beasts, and birds which excel in feature,
strength, gesture, swiftness, voice, or otherwise. Give it the quintessence of
the earths fecundity, as the chiefest virtues of plants, trees, flowers, and
herbs good for meat and medicine: the worth and value of pearls and precious
stones: the richnes of all the refined'st gold and chiefest treasure. Infuse
into the same the most odoriserous smell of all the sweetest perfumes, deck it
with the glory and brightness of the stars, yet wanting an humane soul, it
would come far short of the meanest reasonable creature. It having a soul
capable of those peerless graces of Gods Spirit, interest in those unvaluable
merits of the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, and those immortal crowns of
unspeakable glory. Reason therefore thus. Shall all the creatures inferior and
serviceable to me honor the Lord? Am I made a creature so noble and excellent
for this end? Then surely I will honor the Lord my merciful maker.

The glory of God is the end of your redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Redeemed to
honor God.
20. For you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and
in your spirit which are Gods. Have you any interest in that painful and
unconceiveable redemption of Gods Elect (which I hope you have) then stir up
your selves after this or the like manner. Had I more then all other imaginable
excellent qualities and dignities? Did I excel in wisdom, and understanding
not only those renowned Heathen Philosophers, but even their fained Apollo:
and our Divine Solomon. Had I the tongue of Angels, and a body as beautiful as
the Sun. Had I a Sovereign command over men and all other inferior
creatures. Could I enjoy the sweetest contentments of the most mellodious
music, richest robes, costly cates. Had I the full fruition of all the
richest treasures in the whole world: yet without Christ Jesus, without
redemption I had nothing. Am I therefore partaker of that comfortable work of
redemption where justice and mercy met together, whereby I am saved from the
curse of the law, the power of darkness, the devil, the wrath to come, the
guilt, guerdon, due desert, and punishment of sin. Was I redeemed, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot. Was I redeemed? that I might
serve him in holiness, etc. Luke 1. 74. 75. that I should honor him. Then
surely I will not be so unmindfull of such a mercy; nor unthankful to such a
benefactour, but will honor him, who has thus honored me.

Gods honor ought to be the end of all our actions, 1. Pet. 4. The end of all.
4. 11. If any man speak -- if any man minister, that God in all things may
be glorified, 1. Cor. 10. 31. whether you eat, or drink, or whatsoever you
do, etc. do all to the glory of God.

Do we desire our own advancement, and benefit. The 5. A means to be honored
way is not turk, and popishlike, like cruel Abimelech to build, our deemed
safeties upon the ruins and blood of others; or like fair tongued Absaloms by
insinuating flatteries: or like couzening Zeba^s by lies, and falsehoods, or by
any such like Machivelian policies. For could we; such hopes, such happinesses
would prove like spiders webs. But the only means is by honoring the Lord,
1. Sam. 2. 30. those that honor me, will I honor says the Lord.

If none of these will prevail, yet let fear of punishment due to such which
dishonor, and deny honor to the Lord 6. Want dangerous?
persuade. Why was Pharaoh scourged with a tenfold plague? was it not for
dishonouring God? Why was Herod eaten with worms, save because he gave not God
his glory, Acts 11. 23. Yea, why was an entrance denied to Moses, and Aaron
into the land of promise: was it not because they sanctified him not in the
midst of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 51. Wherefore did the Lord smite
David's child with death, save for dishonouring him. 2. Sam. 12. 14. Were your
strength as sinews of iron; your wisdom, and policy, as exact as is possibly
attaineable by mortal men; your friends and favorites many and mighty. Had you
the swaying of earthly scepters; yet neither these, nor any such like can
possibly secure you from the irefull revenging hand of God, if you either
dishonor or deny him honor. Witness these forenamed, who were kings, or as
kings. Witness that saying of the Prophet to Ely, 1. Sam. 2. 30. Those that
honor me -- those that despise me will I despise, (or shall be lightly
esteemed) i. e. accounted vile in Gods sight. Do not think to avoid the
judgment if you will not be persuaded. To deny the truth of Scripture, is
blasphemy. To think he will not do what he has said (he being faithful) and
so to make him a liar: or that he cannot punish, although he has threatened
he being omnipotent is much more blasphemous.

CHAP. VI. Duty. 5. Saints must do Gods will.
IF God is our Father, we ought to do his will. The doing Duty 5.
whereof allieth men to Christ Jesus, Mat. 12. 50. Makes men like Christ, Ioh
6. 38. Is a means for man to prosper, Ioh. 9. 31. Is the direct rode and
pathway to heaven, and happiness, 1. Ioh. 2. 17. Many men alas look for
heaven, who never shall enjoy it. Ignorant men, because they mean no harm,
although the Lord will come in flaming fire against such, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Civil honest men, because they do no hurt, and render to all their dues,
although they want holiness, without which none can see God, Heb. 12. 14.
Pharisees, because in diverse things they excel other men, although they want
the pith and marrow of Christianity. These and such like hope for heaven. But
they being asleep in sin dream of fullness; but will arise empty, of
plenty; awake poor, of heaven find nothing less. Heaven is promised; but not
to all, 1. Ioh. 2. 25. It is reserved; but not for all, 1. Pet. 1. 4. There is
a broad way leading to death, traced by the most. There is a straight and
narrow way, leading to heaven not known of all, and found only by few, Mat.
7. 13. 14. even of those who do the will of God, Mat. 7. 21. would we know who
shall go to heaven. Ask not the ignorant man, his cloudy and dark
understanding cannot tell; he only hopes well, that is the utmost of his skill.
Ask not the carnal man, he is not able to discern such things, 1. Cor. 1.
14. no more then the blind can judge of colors. Ask not the civil man, he
walks in a way which seems good to himself, but it is not right enough to
bring him to heaven. Ask not the Pharisee, his golden shows are too too
weak, our righteousness must exceed his. But ask of Christ, who is the
Truth, and cannot deceive us: the Light, void of ignorance: and the Way it
self, leading to heaven by his example, by his merits, and by his doctrine;
and he will tell us, we must do the will of his father which is in heaven,
Mat. 7. 21. Think not O thou painted sepulcher with thy lording tongue, and
divelish heart. Think not O thou carnal christian with thy Lord Lord, living
in iniquity, to have the prerogatives of Gods sons; but show thy faith by thy
works, thy profession by thy practice. Join with Lord Lord, doing of Gods
will; so shall thou declare thy self to be the child of God, so shall thou
obtain the proper privilege of Gods children, the kingdom of heaven.

1. Let the worldling do the will of his god Mammon, therefore as moles
blinded in the earth, or as the horse without understanding, who knows no
greater felicity then plenty of hay and provender, only tune this note, who
will show us any good: whereas all his wished contentments bring him no true
content, being never able to satiate his soul, witness Ahab, 1. King. 21. 5.
he had a kingdom; yet still he needs something, a garden of herbs, witness
the rich man, Luke 12. 17. who had so much, that he could not tell what to do;
yet still he is in a pecke of troubles, for having plenty he wants room, he
knows not what to do: yet for these unprofitable things which cannot add a
minute to his time, nor a cubit to his stature, he makes Esaus bargain
exchanging, a birthright for pottage: or Glaucus exchange, gold for copper, all
his pains having been as to break a wormeaten nut which fills his mouth
with myry dirt; and for these his gettings, which are but like Sodomes fruit he
neglects to do the will of God, which is, that he should seek Gods kingdom
with his chiefest desires and endeavors: whereas he regards it not at all, or
too slightly: Which is, that he should instruct his family, after the examples
of Abraham, Iosuah, and David. Deuteronomy. 6. whereas he as if all soul care lay
upon the Pastor (yet the Jews having Priests, Prophets, and Levites, were
enjoined this, Deuteronomy. 6.) thinks he has done his duty, if he feeds and
clothes his family; little considering that if he does no more, he does not so
much for his children, bone of his bones, and servants members of his
oiconomicall body, as for his cattle to which he gives fodder and lodging. For
these having such things have all things to them necessary; and whereof they
are capable. Whereas those having food, raiment, and lodging, have not all
necessaries (saving grace being needful to them) nor whereof they are capable,
they being capable of grace, and glory, of which those brutish creatures are
not.

2. Let the wretched sinner do the will of sin, crouching down and becoming
servile to such base commanders, Romans 6. 12. more loathsome then a toad, worse
then the devil, it making him of a glorious angel to become an apostate
devil.

3. Let all the heirs of wrath, and children of the devil, do the will of
Satan the god of this world, as one says of the Irish, they will be Irish
like Jupiters cat; so these, they M. Morison Irish hist.
will be wicked; yet let every one who wishes well to his soul, who desires
to be saved, who longs for the kingdom of heaven, and would be esteemed the
child of God do the will of God our father, and that;

1. In all things after the example of David, who had respect to all Gods
commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. after the example of Christ, who fulfilled all
righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. and of Zachary and Elizabeth, who walked in all the
ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1. 6. Think not O foolish Herodians, that your
doing somethings is sufficient you shun drunkenness, but care not whom you
devour: Idolatry, yet live in filthy adultery, etc. Saul did in part; Herod
somethings, neither sufficient, Think not O you unjust sharers who divide
twixt God and the devil (not much unlike the traveller, who offered to his
Apollo the shells, but ate himself the kernels: giving to God your bodies in
the temple, your hearts. to Satan; for you will do Gods work with your tongues,
the devils in your lives; professing piety, you practice iniquity) that God is
well pleased with such unjust divisions. God will not part with him who is his
foe: he will not be content with part all being his due. What and if the wanton
worldling, pleases himself with his windy words, and thoughts so free;
pleading for them as Lot for Zoar, that they are but little ones; or as the
Pharisee, not so bad as other men, yet shall he know, they are not free from
Gods tribunal seat: where his lust will be found adultery, anger, murder, and
his little ones infinite. What and if the ungodly Papist persuades his seduced
disciples, that some sins are pretergressions not transgressions: not
against, only beside the law and will of God, no ways offending God, for
which God cannot in justice punish with hell fire everlastingly: yet let all
such who would be esteemed the children of God, do the whole will of our
father. 1. Omitting no good duty he has commanded, we being faulty by
omission as well as by commission: Saul for not killing, as Ioab for murder;
Dives for not giving as the Jews, for oppressing. 2. Committing no one thing
forbidden: 1. Shun those little ones, many sands are as weighty as some great
stones, many moates as blemishing as one beam, little lice, and flies
destroyed the Egyptians. These eggs will prove devouring and empoysoning
Cockatrices. These twigs will prove thorny bushes, except they are timely
stubbed. 2. Avoid all Dalilahs, pleasant sins, those delightful eyes, and
profitable hands, for Are they not loathsome, and incurable? Did they not cost
Christ's blood to redeem from them, 1. Pet. 1. 18? Will you do that so
unworthy your calling? Dare you draw such burdens upon your souls? What though
they please you, they displease God? Think thou O man, that they will not be
bitterness in the end? These are Dalilahs of those hellish Philistimes to
destroy. These are sweet but deadly poison. These like the Scorpions, Rev. 9 7.
10. have amiable countenances, yet stings in their tails. They have lovely
embracings, yet sting like Serpents, Romans 6. 23. These make the sinner jolly,
and pleasant as the herb Sardonia the eater, who eating dies. Dash ^isus
Sardonius moritur and ridet. Sal^de gub. de lib. 7. page 217.
therefore these little ones against the stones, crush these Serpents eggs,
especially leave off, and slay from them more then from a Serpent: those great
and crying evils; Oh forsake all usury, too uncharitable, unnatural and
gainefull to be good. There is nothing more filthy, nothing more cruel, then
the present Ni^^^ ^nim present(...)a ^^rpius, (...), siquidem ^^^^smodi
^^^nerator negotiatur aliena di^^rimina (...)cres ut putat quisi^^ de a^^^^ius
in ^l^^itate cons^quitio (...) quisipic^atis me(...) repose^^, velut metuen^ ne
imm^s^ricor^forte videatur: cum p^^^^cto (...), ^aiorem misero ^oveam
crude^^tati(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Hom. 6. in Matthew. 2.
usury, because a lender of this sort does gain other men's perils, and as he
thinks, does purchase more plentiful gains by the adversity of another:
and moreover he does demand of duty, and with authority as if it were the hire
of piety, fearing least he should seem unmercifull: whereas truly he has
dug out a great pitfall to the miserable man, under the color of pitying,
and bringing help, says Saint Chrysostom. Drunkenness too fordid for
Saints. I persuading you thus to do, exhort you to no more then what is just,
and equal. If you consider 1. That God has not abridged you of any action,
only of the naughty manner of doing, he does not forbid to get goods, only by
unlawful means: He prohibiteth not drinking, only drunkenness or excess.
2. That all Gods commandments whether negative or affirmative, are divine,
holy, just, heavenly and perfect, binding the conscience, tending to life or
death. 3. That if servants must do the will of their masters in all things,
Tit. 2. 9. sc. which are lawful, and not gainsaid by higher authority, how
much more then are we bound to do the will of God in all things, he being our
Creator, Redeemer, King, etc.

2. Faithfully, he who serves God with seeming devotion, must look for a
seeming heaven: as the cook who exacted of a poor man money for being
refreshed by the smell of his meats, was awarded to hear the chinking of
silver in a basin for payment. Man cannot abide unfaithful dissemblers: much
less can the searcher of all hearts. Sincerity is commanded, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And
highly commended. He who does Gods will for by-respects, offers beautiful
sins. He Splendida peccata.
who does any thing to satisfy his own will, serves himself. He who does any
thing commanded by God dissemblingly, offers hypocritical and damned
obedience. His rich alms not worth the widows two mites. His Pharisaicall
prayers not comparable to one publicans groan. This is but a livelesse
carcass, or a breathless painted picture. Be not therefore dissembling
hypocrites in doing the will of God, like roguish Players, who often are Kings in
countenance, knaves in condition. Or like painted Idols, which look like men,
being but senseless wood or stone. Dissembling hypocrites by their juggling
tricks of dissembling profess themselves Gods servants, yet are the Devils
factours: serving the world and Satan in Gods stead, and therefore an
hypocrite is altogether a seemer of that he is not, seeming to have grace which
he wants, not to have vice which he has. But do the will of God faithfully and
sincerely, and declare the same: 1. By doing all you do for Gods sake, sc.
because he has commanded them, and does approve them: avoiding evil for the
Lords sake, because he has forbidden it, and detests it: not for by-respects,
or sinister aims. 2. By being universal in your obedience. In regard of
matter, doing all good commanded, shunning all evil forbidden. In regard of
time, not altering with the times. In regard of company and place, remaining
the same in all societies, like Joseph in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon, and Paul
in bands: and in all places, at home as abroad, in private as in public.

3. Timely: so Solomon commands, Eccl. 12. 1. And this you shall find needful
if you ponder advisedly, That 1. God requires the nonage as well as the dotage:
the wine of our time as well as the lees, as we may see tipified to us in the
first fruits which were dedicated to the Lord, Exodus 13. 2. and 22. 29. And
good reason, for if the Prophet must be served before the widow (although her
own) 1 Kings, 17. 13. Then it must needs be fit and reasonable to serve the
Lord before even our selves: we, our time, and what we have being all his. 2.
Sin by continuance will disable from doing Gods will, Job 11. 20. His bones
are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust,
Ierem. 13. 23. Can a Leopard change his spots? Spots are deeper rooted by
continuance. Wool once thoroughly black is capable of no Quo semel est imbut:
recent servabit odorem Testa diu, Hot. Ep. 2. ad Lolium lib. 11,
other color. 3. Timely is profitable, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child, etc.
Lam. 3. 27. Good to bear -- from youth, Marc. 10. 21. Christ loved him. 4. The
contrary is hurtful. For, 1. Means now enjoyed may be missing. 2. And how can
such look for love from God? Can a husband embrace that wife in old age, who
all her young time has followed strangers? Will a master at night give daily
pay to him who all the day has served his enemy? If we reserve the dregs of
our days for him, how can we but expect that he should reserve the drogs of
the cup of his wrath for us? 3. Sin may prevent it, growing stronger and deeper
rooted by continuance; and more lovely and sweet by customary acquaintance. 4.
And death may prevent you. You are resolved to do Gods will before you die: do
it therefore to day, for you may die before tomorrow. You are now alive, and
lives like: but what know you how near death is to you? Perhaps you shall not
live till Isaacs age, until your eyes wax dimbe through years, for you may
die in your young time as well as the young man in the Gospel: the children of
David and Jeroboam. Perhaps you shall not die upon your beds like old Jacob,
calling your friends about you. For you may die in the field as well as good
Abel. In the Temple as well as great Senacherib. Upon your seats as well as old
Ely. Delay not therefore. And why would you reserve such old, lame, and sick
sacrifices for God? Your old Seven instituere est mortuum cur are. Diog. An age
I man is but a moving Anatonne, or a living mortuarie.
age only which is not teachable. Your old age when you shall be men, and no
men: having eyes, yet scarce seeing: ears, yet scarce hearing: feet, yet
scarce able to go? Is it because young Saints prove old Devils, soon ripe,
soon rotten, too hot, cannot continue? If these occasion you thus to do,
they deceive you. Young seeming Saints only prove old Devils. And it is
absurdity to desire temperance of mediocrity M. Nath. Brent Hist Trent. page
667.
in the best things, which are so much the better by how much the bigger, says
a learned Writer.

4. Continually thus we are commanded, counseled, and to this we are
encouraged in holy Scripture, Mat. 24. 13. Ioh. 8. 31. To. 2. 7. 2 Timothy 4. 7,
16. Rev. 2. 10. What do thou mean thou wretched Apostate, who have been,
but now art not a doer of Gods will. Thy good beginnings not being continued,
benefit not, Math. 10. 22. Satan was an Angel of light, Saul, Demas, Judas,
and Julian began well. And thou have lost all thy former labor, Ezekiel. 18. And
made thine estate worse then if thou had never known the way of
righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 8. 9. and 10. Math. 12. 45. What do thou
mean thou time-server, whose goodness, Religion, and worship of God is pined
upon other men's backs. Like the Israelites, whose piety depended upon their
Elders Judge. 2. Or young King Ioash? whose devotion was much led by good
Iehojada, 2 Kings 12. 2. These Elders and this Iehojada dying, the Religion of
the forenamed much decayed. So thou will seem good with the good, be bad with
the bad, an Atheist Si sueris Roma. Romano vivito more, Si sueris alibi vivito
more loct. Aug. Ep 86.
with Atheists, a Papist with Papists, religious with the religious.

Like the Star Mercury, applying it self to the Planet next it. Or like a
tree which is reported to open and spread its leaves when any comes to it; and
shut them at their departure from it. Thou mutable Camelion, and turning
weather-cocke, certain in nothing but uncertainty: Little do thou consider
that such aguish fits betoken a sick soul: these flashes are notes of a dark
heart: backwards and forwards, up and down will never get to thine intended
journeyes end. To be driven about with contrary winds will not obtain a safe
arrival at the wished haven. But o you holy ones, the children of our Father,
do you avoid such Apostacy and inconstancy: be not you like Nebuchadnezzars
image, whose head was gold, breast and arms silver, belly and thighs brass,
legs of iron, feet iron and clay, Dan. 2. 32, 33. Do not you turn back again
into Egypt. Have the noble resolution of M Knols. Turk. Hist.
an Earl of Sarisbury who being environed by Turks and Saracens, and advised
to flee, said, God forbid that my Fathers son should flee from the face of a
Saracen. Neither do you prove cowards you sons of God: an armor you have,
and that of proof, yea invincible, yet not one piece for the back parts. Be
you like those kine, 1 Samuel 6. Going forward until you come to your
Celestial Bethshemesh, the house of the Son of God. Be you like those
trees, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Which are most fruitful in old age. Be you like the
natural motions which move fastest as they come nearer their center, as stones
thrown upward move faster as they come nearer the earth. Be we like those
righteous persons who shine more and more toward the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18.
Do the will of God, and continue doing of it unto the end: for what will it
avail you to begin if you hold not out to the end of the race? Behold the
constancy of the Lords Worthies in greatest calamities, Psalm 44. Hear what
sententious Tertullum says, None is truly a Christian, but he who persevereth
Nemo autem Chri(...) (...) and per (...). Verde haeress page 96.
unto the end. And consider that the crown of immortal glory is promised to
those who continue, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Rev. 7. 10. Be we therefore persuaded to do
Gods will according to his will.

Will pleasure prevail with us? Psalm. 119. 97. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Will profit? Pet
2. 15. Sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3. And salvation. Will examples? John 6. 38.
Balaams ass at Gods commandment open his mouth, and reprove the madness of
his master. Ravens feed Eliah at Gods appointment. Frogs and lice execute
judgments upon Pharaoh at Gods bidding? Did the earth open? rocks rend? stars
fight? seas recule backward? wildernesses tremble? etc. Do things by nature
light ascend, heavy descend, yea and often cross the course and current of
nature, and shall not we, not senseless creatures, not bruit beasts, not
Gentiles, but Christians who style our selves the sons of God, not do the
will of our Father? God forbid. As we excel these in dignity, let us excel
them in duty, and do the will of our Father. Which that we may do:

1. Pray earnestly, Our Father -- thy will be done. In which S. Cyp. de Orat.
Dom.
place we do not pray that God would do what he will, but that we might do
according unto his will.

2. Take heed of self-will, our will is commonly contrary to Gods will, Ioh.
1. 13. Paul would not be buffeted, and the Disciples would have fire in revenge
from heaven. Submit we therefore our wills which are so corrupt to that most
holy will of God.

3. Shun ignorance of Gods will: for how can he do the will of God who
knows it not, Luke 12. 48? Let some in the Church of Rome teach that ignorance
is the mother of devotion. Let the simple soul promise to it self an excuse
by its ignorance, and persuade it self that good meaning shall save. Let the
enemies of all goodness rail against knowledge, saying it puffs up and is
fruitless. Yet O thou Christian soul which desire to approve thy ways to
God thy Father. 1. Believe not thost Popish instructours, for they are
deceivers. Can that be the mother of devotion of which Satan is the Father, 2
Cor. 4. 4? Is Psalm 95. 10.
error: is Acts 17.
superstition: is Isa. 44, 19.
idolatry: is Exodus 5. 1.
contempt of God good devotion? These, these I say are the daughters, brats,
spawnes, and ofsping of this mother 2. Follow not that blind man's guiding who
cannot perceive heavenly things. For as a penny in the water seems bigger then
a Star in the Firmament: so heavenly graces (although they infinitely
surpass these dunghill vanities, are not at all or so little known to him
that they are little or no whit regarded by him. Will that excuse which
occasioneth all kind of iniquity, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19, 20. Will that save which
makes men accursed, John 7. 40? Is vengeance inflicted in flaming fire, safety,
2 Thessalonians. 1. 8? That reverend Bishop Dr. Usher says, some invincible ignorance
is damnable. Page 51.
-- If a patient and Physician were both ignorant of an only remedy to
recover a sick man fro his disease, the sick must perish as well not knowing,
as if knowing he refused it. 3. Regard not those witless and worthless
arguments. What though braine-knowledge pusseth up, saving knowledge humbles.
What though knowledge is fruitless in many, ignorance must needs be fruitless
in all. How can man do that he knows not? How can man do Gods will being
ignorant thereof? Be wise therefore and understand the will of God, Ephesians. 5. 17.
That ye may do the same.

CHAP. VII. Duty 6. Saints must be content with Gods allowance.
LAstly, if God be our Father, learn we to put in practice Duty 6.
St. Paul's Lesson, one of our fellow brethren, Phil. 4. 11. To be content with
our Heavenly Fathers allowance. The want of which Christian virtue is the cause
of many monstrous evils, and domineering transgressions. What mooveth the
insatiable inhumane depopulatours lesle merciful then the raging Ocean (as a
reverend Bishop says in these words. Remember Bishop Babing^m, Genesis 1. Ver. 9.
p. 5.
with your selves the rich cormorants of this world, who like floods and
streams of strength too much overflow and drown their brethren, their poor
and weak brethren in this world, not leaving any place for them to dwellin, or
to inhabit near them, etc.) Like the hideous Gorgon, suffering none or very
few to live in her sight. To dash themselves against those keen and fearful
judgments of God, Isa. 5. 8. Woe be to him, etc. For so says my forenamed
learned Author, of whom says he, is that woe denounced, Isa. 5. 8, 9. A
fearful thing that men for denying others place by them shall lose their
own. To plunge themselves so deep into Gods displeasure, that Gods judgments
pursue them so fast. That if a man make diligent enquiry and search in a little
after succeding ages (oftentimes in their own) for these monsters of men:
dispeoplers of towns: ruiners of commonwealths so far as in them lies:
occasions of beggars, and beggary: and prey of usurers. Instead of spacious and
splendent houses, he shall find rumous heaps: instead of good housekeepers,
poor shepherds: instead of Christian men, filly beasts: instead or
predecessors never dying same teir remembrance stinking: instead of Lords and
owners of towns, lands, and great possessions, men either languishing with
need and penury: or succored by friends bountiful hands: or relieved in some
charitable hospital (I could wish that every open hearted Job, and bountiful
Cornelius would for ever exclude out of their foresaid hospitals (as unworthy
the least relief) such cruel inclosers, their Adamantine hearts no whit
regarding the cries of so many-distressed ones)? Only want of contentment. If I
have any of these here to learn them to be content, I advise them to listen to
that forenamed famous Divine in the forenamed place. How much better were it
(says he) even of these waters to learn to contain our selves in one place
appointed, and to leave room for others without drowning and overflowing them
with our greedy minds, till the wrath of God overflow us also, and give unto
others all our gatherings. And to hearken to S. Ambrose, long sine speaking
thus to their cruel Non igitur unus Ahab natus est, sed quod pejus est
quotidie Ahab nascitur and nunquam huic secuolo moritur, -- Quousque exten
ditis divites insanas cupiditates? Nunquid soli habi tabitis superterram? Cur
ejicitis consortem naturae, and vindicatis possessionem naturae? In commune
omnibus divitibus atque pauperibus terra fundata est, our vobis jus propriu^
soli diuites arrogatus? Am. 1. 4. lib de Nebu: cap. 1. page 772. Hie ager quem
tu dissusis includis possessionibus quantos populos a lere potesti Ibid. cap 3.
Fugiunt cohabitare hominibus, and ideo excluduus vicinos -- Avu avibus se
associat -- Pecui pecori adjungitur, piscis piscibut: nec damnum ducunt sed
commercium vivendi, cum plurimum comitatis copessunt, and quoddam munimentum
solatio frequenuoris societatis affectant. Solus it is homo consortem excludu,
includis feras, struu habitacula bestiarum, destrus hominum. Inducis mare intra
praedia tua, ne desint bellue, producis fines teriae, ne possis habere
sinitimum. Amb. 1. 4. lib. de Hab. cap 3 275.
forefathers. Therefore one Ahab is not borne, but which is worse, Ahab is
daily borne, and never dies hence -- How far O you rich men do you enlarge
your raging desires? whether will you dwell only upon the earth? Wherefore do
you thrust out a partaker of nature, and maintain the possession of nature?
The earth was established in common to all, poor and rich, why therefore do
you rich men only claim the proper right to your selves? This field which
thou do enclose enlarge possessions, how much people can it maintain? They
refuse to dwell with men, and therefore they shut out neighbors -- A bird
joins it self to birds, a beast is associated in friendship to beasts, a fish
to fishes: Neither do they bring loss, but they receive for the most part
communication of living by fellowship; and they covet earnestly fortification
by the consent of a more frequent society. Only thou man do shut nout thy
companion, and do include beasts, thou buildest dwellings of beasts,
destroyest the dwellings of men, thou inducest the sea within thy possessions,
that beasts may not be wanting. Thou stretchest out the ends of the earth that
thou may not have a borderer.

2. Where is it that the ravenous extorting usurer (like the Vsura est
contrarius naturae, Tolet lib. 5 Iust^t Sace^d. cap. 37. p. 781.
devouring Bubus, who with golden outsides beguileth and destroys the simple
fishes flocking about him with admiration) does please himself with such a
kind and course of life which is against nature, equity, good manners, and the
utility of commonwealths: Does live in no calling (for if it be a calling
which is lawful why do all laws forbid it? As learned Bishop Jewel says,
why do good men abhor it? Why are they 1 These 7. 6. Page 78, 79, 80. etc.
ashamed to be called usurers? Why does God prohibit it? What ground has it
in Scripture? What benefit is it to mankind?) Does hazard the ruin of his
soul, and the loss of heaven, save only because he is not content? I will
leave these griping usurers to be dealt withal by some reverend and grave
Fathers. For although light may shine from a wooden candlestick, and meat
may nourish out of an earthen dish as well as out of gold: yet your experience,
gravity, and profound learning will procure greater respect to the truth. Be
entreated therefore to un-maske these monsters, and drive them from their
shifting holes. It is time to deal roundly with them: It not being now as in
the time of Agis when all usurers bonds were burnt, which made the clearest
fire that ever Agesilaus saw in Athens. It not being now as when the Heathen
punished usurers as much more as thieves. It ceasing now to be as when they
were denied Christian burial, and the Cent. 1. lib. 11. cap. 7. ex Pet. Cant.
sacred Communion. It ceasing to be now as it was 1200. years after our
Savior, when usury was so detested, that an usurers house was called the
Devils house, his substance the Devils substance, none would f^tch fire at his
house, or have any commerce with him. (Yet the Doctrine of the Church of
England Third part of Hom. against peril of Idol page 7^
says, a goods gotten by usury are unjustly gotten, and Part. of Hom. for rog.
week. page 242.
So many as increase themselves by usury, etc. they have their goods of the
devils gift -- they kneel down to the devil at his bidding, and worship
him.) For now they multiply, they are deemed by some, the Saints of our time:
yea this sin Vsura est peceatum mortale and oppositum asserere, est
haereticunt. Tolet. lib. 5. c. 28.
creepes I fear into our Clergy, and many forward Professors. But woe to such
professors, who make Religion to cloak their impiety, whose profession and
practice are so contrary. If any usurers are now my hearers, I would not have
them think that I wish them any hurt. Oh no; I wish to them as to mine own
soul, even salvation. I wish that with Zacheus they would make restitution of
their evil gotten goods, and not keep in store the matter of their sin to
witness against them, reserving the treasures of wickedness still in their
houses, Micah 6. 10. it being better for them with Iam 5. 3. M. Samson preface
to Bradf. Ser. of Rep.
Mr. Bradford, to forgo all their patrimony on earth for restitution, then to
reserve it for their private enrichment here, and eternal beggary and endless
misery hereafter; that they would forsake that cursed kind of life, embrace
some honest calling, and so come in the end unto salvation.

3. From what root grows that forbid sin of Covetousness: loathsome to
Heathen men, as appears by such like sayings of theirs. Who is rich? He that
covets nothing. Who Quis dives? qui nil cupiat. Quis pauper avarus. Bias 48.
Avaro quid mali optes insi ut diu vivat pub. 54. Inopiae parva desunt,
avaritiae omnia. Idem 70. Avarus ipse miseriae causa est suae. 53.
is poor, the covetous man. The covetous man himself is cause of his own
misery: small things are wanting to poverty, all things to covetousness:
accusing God of injustice, and want of providence: which is against nature,
christianity, and salvation; making man injurious to God, his neighbor,
himself, and substance, but only from his unsatiable desire, which like the
lean kine ever hungered; like the vast ocean receiving all waters, yet never
full; like the earth the horseleach, barren womb, and hell never satisfied;
surely from want of contentment.

4. In a word, is not want of contentation it which occasioneth our apish
fantastique fashion followers, so often to metamorphise themselves, sometimes
being men, sometimes only like men? It is therefore seasonable at all times,
befitting all estates, and profitable for all persons, to learn in all estates
therewith to be content. Saint Paul had well learned this lesson, Acts 20. 23.
Phil. 4. 11. and persuades all Gods people to learn the same, Heb. 13. 5. 1.
Tim. 6. 6. 8. And if we well consider, we shall find convenient, and fitting
for us to be content with our fathers allowance. ( Contentation is when the
mind of man is pleased with such things as God has thought fit, and meet for
a man, so that he is ready to undergo (...).
a more hard, and mean estate if God will, ever judging his present condition
best for him.)

Tim. 6. 6.

O happy ones, who preferred your souls before your bodies, heaven before
earth, and were so content with necessaries; yea ofttimes to wander in
sheepskins, and goateskins being destitute, and afflicted. We commend, and
admire Abraham leaving his country: Moses forsaking an earthly paradise, Job,
Paul, and such; and shall we not imitate them, as in other graces so in this?

Have we food and raiment, we deserve not so much: Have we not food to eat,
and clothes to put on, we deserve more woe, misery, and calamity. 2. Be our
estate what it will, it is as good as we brought into this world: for how came
we hither? Naked, weeping, poor, and shiftlesse. Why did God make man the
principal creature of the world to be so borne, whereas other creatures can
make some shift for themselves, but only to teach us contentedness? All we
have, we found in the world. Have we food? we brought none. Have we clothing?
we came naked. Have we any comfort? we came weeping. Have we any ways to help
our selves? we came shiftlesse: be we therefore content. 3. And we have more
then we can carry away, Job 1. 21. naked shall I return, M Knols. Turk. Hist.
1. Tim. 6. 7. we shall carry nothing away. Saladine Conqueror of the East of
all the greatness and riches he had in his life, carried not with him after
his death, any thing more then his shirt, said a Priest at his appointment, it
being all the funeral pomp he would have being dead.

1. This contentation does no whit impeach honest labor, and industry in a
sanctified calling. The same God who commands contentme^t enjoining us to
labor in some lawful calling, sc. such as is founded upon Gods Word?
profitable to mankind for soul or body, this life or that to come, 2 Thessalonians.
3. 10. Adam must get his bread, etc. Genesis 3. 19.

2. This does not forbid us to pray unto God for temporal things, for although
we must be content if we have not bread, yet may we lawfully pray for
terrestrial supplements; 1. We being commanded to pray for daily bread. 2. We
having a gracious promise to encourage us, Mat. 7. 11. 3. And Saints examples
warranting us, Genesis 28. 20. Prove. 30. 7. 4. God being hereby glorified, we
acknowledging the receipt of temporal things, yea every pittance and morsel
of bread to come from him. 5. And these being so necessary, that without them
we cannot live. sc. 1. This prayer being in faith, assuring us we are Gods
children, and that we have right to them in Christ. 2 Not with an immoderate
care, but to sustain present necessities. 3. Not simply, but conditionally
praying for them so far forth as they tend to Gods glory, the good of his
Church, and our own salvatin. 4. Not to that end we might be rich, but to
enjoy necessaries; not that which corrupted nature thinks necessary, for had
it millions of gold it would think more necessary, but necessaries truly in
regard of nature, and a man's particular calling.

3. This condemns not godly providence for time to come. A wise, provident,
foreseeing consideration, being allowed by the practice of Joseph, Genesis 41. 48
and the Apostles, Acts 11. 29. By Gods precept, Prove. 6. 6. And by the end of
Gods gifts, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. God gives providence for its proper and peculiar end.
We are forbidden to care for to morrow, sc. with carking care distrusting Gods
providence. And we are allowed to lay up, sc. if without covetousness, made
only in reverence to Gods gifts, to lawful ends, not trusting in any store,
not robbing our selves or others.

4. This does nothing privilege our idle wandering beggars, although they say
they are content, and that they sleep as contentedly as we in our beds. This
kind of living 1. Being a disorder in a commonwealth, that being hereby robbed
of the labors of many able bodies. 2. A shame to Magistracy not redressing it.
3. A disgrace to rich men, proclaiming them irreligious and unmercifull, St.
James telling us, that pure Religion is to visit, etc. Not to be visited, etc.
James 1. 25. 4. And forbidden by God. But this condemns such who are
discontent with Gods allowance, and commands us all, walking honestly in our
lawful callings, tobe content with whatsoever God in his wisdom shall give
unto us. Which that we may be, let us consider:

Job 1. 21. He gives, he takes. What we have are mere gratuities, only at the
will of our Father. He gives food to all flesh, Psalm. 136. 25. He gives meat
in due season, Psalm. 145. 16. Have we much? It is Gods gift. Little or nothing?
It is his goind, and shall we be discontent with God? Shall our children be
content with what we give them, and not we with what our Father allotteth us?
Shall God undertake to provide for us, and we distrust?

Those who fear the Lord shall want nothing, Psalm. 34. 9. sc. which is good
for them, Verse 10. We think we should be bountiful had we riches as many men
have: we would do justice were we in authority, etc. Alas poor discontented
man thou holdst thy garments fast in boisterous winds, which thou throw'st off
in a sunny day. Thou would be better. How know thou that? Aeneas Silvius
contradicted that truth being Pope, Fascic. tempo.
which before he defended. It is recorded that a certain learned man preaching
vehemently against non-residency, had his mind presently altered by preferments
from the Pope. A learned Father writes thus to one, To the zealous Monk,
Monacho fervido, Abbati repido, Episcopo frigido, Archiepistopo dissoluto.
Lukewarm Abbot, cold Bishop, and dissolute Archbishop. God may in love keep
from thee that, thou so earnestly thirsts after, least it hurt thee. Thy
corruptions may like snakes in cold adversity be stupifyed and benumbed, which
by warmth of abundance may become vigorous and full of strength, to overmatch
thee. Pious and learned Salvian says, Pedissequa etiam plaruque novi honoru
est arrogantia. Sal. Epis. Eucherio page 278.
Arrogancy Quotus enim quisque sapientium est quem secunda non mutent, cui non
crescai cum prosperitate vitiositas. Sal. lib. 7. de Gub. Dei, page 250.
for the most part is the waiting maid of new promotion. Elsewhere he says,
For how many wise men are there whom prosperity cannot change to whom
corruption does not increase with prosperity. Deem therefore thy present
estate the best, and be content.

Thou art a man: God might have made thee a beast. Thou art a Christian: thou
might have been a Pagan. Thou art a sanctified Saint: thou might have
still been dead in trespass and sins. Grudge not therefore for what is
wanting, but give thanks for what thou have, and be content.

Stay sirs said the wise Hare in the Fable, Let our estate content us, for as
we run from some, so you see others stee from our presence. When thou shall
behold how many go before thee, think also how many come after thee, and this
will make thee thankful and content.

Aristoles Ephemera, have thou enough for to day? Be content; perhaps thou
shall need nothing tomorrow.

They take them wings and they are gone, Prove. 23. 5. And they have the name of
uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Riches certainty is mere uncertainty. All
earthly things are sickle and fugitive, mere shadows and vanishing shows,
reeling and tottering without foundation, forsaking us living, or we them
dying. Job tarried, his riches left him. Dives went, his riches staid behind
him. And then does no man know to whom he shall leave them. See the brittle
condition and tottering stay in worldly things by Adonibezeek, Iud. 1. 6, 8.
Who having caused seventy Kings as dogs to gather meat under his table,
himself is afterward so abased. And by Bajazet the first, the fourth of the
Ottoman race, the first brother-killer, who being taken by Tamerlane, was put
into an iron cage, led in a chain, made Tamerlanes footstool, and as a dog
to gather meat under Tamerlanes table. Where the Historian notes that a
shepherd was more happy then Bajazet, and that worldly bliss consists not
so much in possessing of much, subject unto danger, as in enjoying a little
with contentment devoid of fear. Neither are they only uncertain, but also
vanity and vexation of spirit, never satiating the soul of man no more then
piling on wood nor pouring on oil upon a raging flame can cool, or quench its
violent and ardent heat, Eccl. 5. 10. He shall never be satisfied with silver.
Let Alexander conquer a world, yet he thirsts after another. Let Ahab have a
kingdom, yet he wants Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings 21. 5. Let the richman have
superabundant increase, yet something is wanting, which makes him not know what
to do, Luke 12. 17. And their largest term is life, then like the sp^^ers web
they are all swept down, whether riches of iniquity, or Gods good blessings.

pound of care will not pay a pennie-worth of debt. Man disquieteth himself in
vain, Psalm. 39. 6. Labor in vain, Psalm. 127. 1. All a man's discontent cannot
add a mite to his substance, moment to his life, or hair breadth unto his
stature.

Tim. 6. 6. Thorns choke good seed Math. 13. 7. Discontent is a throne,
carking cares are thorns, weed them out therefore, and be content. Let
therefore ambitious Haman gall and fret himself with torturing discontent,
because every knee does not bend to him, Est. 3. 5, 6. Let such who have made
gold their hope, Job 31. 24. Yea, let all worldly minded men tire out
themselves in laboring to get, exeruciate themsElves in carking to keep, and
languish through fear of losing these dung hill commodities: and so never find
any solace or contentment in them, they being the same men in plenty as in
penury, being in both tormented with the rack of discontent. Yet let us who
have given our names to Christ Jesus, seeing God by his special providence
allotteth to every child his proper portion; seeing he gives what is best for
us: and what he withholds it is in love. Let not our eye be evil, because God
is good. Let us not repine at other men's large portion, nor grudge because we
have no more, but be content.

1. Have thou food convenient? Be with it content. What and if thou can not
heap dish upon dish, and course upon course? What though thou want dainties
to provoke lust and wantonness? Yet be content with thy share and proper
allowance. If it be but food convenient, Prove. 30. 8. If it be but food to
eat, Genesis 28. 20. If it be but a dinner of herbs, Neque beatior est qui magnu
op^bur praeditus est, to qui diurnum habet victum. Solon. Herod. Clio page 38.
Prove. 15. 17. It is not excessive dainties, but Gods blessing that nourishes
a man's body, witness the little meal and oil, 1 King. 17. 14. Witness
Daniels pulse, Dan 1. 15. Christ's five barley loaves feeding five thousand,
John 6. 9. Witness the Israelites Quails which choked, and their loathed
Manna which strengthened them. Have thou therefore but parched pease with Booz
and Ruth: pulse with Daniel; or barley loaves with our Savior Christ, be
therewith S. W. R lib. 1. cap. 7 Turks care not Sect. 3. page.: 34. how little
they be stow in Private buildings, saying their mean cottages are good enough
for their short pilgrimage: though sumptuous in their Churches. M Knol.
content. Milk and fruit were the banqueting dishes of our forefathers.

2. Have thou clothes to put on with Jacob, Genesis 28. A house to lie in, and
clothes to keep thee warm, be therewith content. Thou have clothing. What
though it is of skins? Adam the sole Monarch of the world had no better, Genesis
3. 21. What though it is of hair? John Baptist that Seraphicall Angelical
Teacher had no better, Math. 3. 4. But thou would be a little gayish and
trim: yet take heed of excess, seek not gorgeous apparel, seek not
n^w-fangled fashions, carry not all thine ability upon thy back, seek not to
have as much in a ruff as would wholly cloth thee: but having convenient
covering fitting thy calling, be content. Say not thy gorgeous attire is thine
own: so are thine ears and eyes, yet neither to be abused. Content thy self
to wear what is fitting. It is not fit for Christians to fashion themselves
unto this world, Romans 12. 2. It is not fit for subjects to wear a crown, nor
servants to be as their Masters. But I wear mins own. And may not a man
offend with his own^ apparel? doubtless yes. sc. In regard of the occasion,
if thou wearest it not for necessity or decency, but because it is the fashion,
Romans 12. 1. In regard of its maintenance, sc. when to maintain thy jollity
thou robbest either Magistrate, Minister, Hireling or other. In regard of the
effects, when thine apparel does justly grieve the good, give occasion of
scandal to the bad, or hinder good exercises. And when thine apparel is 1.
Immodest, 1 Timothy 2. 9. Not agreeable to thy calling, hats are for heads, not
for hands, gloves for the hands, not for the feet. 3. Not agreeable to thy
condition, and means of maintenance, gold upon a hatband or shoe-strings, none
or little in the purse is very ridiculous. 4. Not respecting the cry of the
needy: it is not fit to garnish one part of the body with gems, billiments and
brooches, and the rest go naked and bare. Be content therefore with fitting
attire. It is better to have a gracious mind in a leather doublet, then a base
fantastical mind in golden apparel. In laboring to be like a gentleman in
apparel, yet none in truth, thou provest thy self a brainelesse man. Seek
for enough, carke for no more: superfluity makes a man neither warmer nor
honester. But it is some credit to be gay and fine. But with whom? With wise
men? No money in homely garments can take up more on trust, then diverse others
who are so greatly finish. With God? No, he more esteems of a leatherne, yea a
naked, yea a Lazar Saint, then of a velvet Devil, Luke 16.

3. Have thou an honest calling or trade of life? Be therewith content. Be not
like the discontented owls of our times, who looking with malicious eyes upon
that others have, grieving at their own, supposing their callings too too base
for their heroical and magnificent spirits, in discontent thinking to amend
them by exchanging, overturne all, forsaking that kind of life whereto they were
apted and made fit by parents choice; their own experience, and masters
instruction: they puzzle and weary themselves in their newfound vocations
until they can live in neither. Is thy kind of life unlawful? Art thou an
usurer, etc? Then leave it. Is it an honest calling? Walk in it with
contentment.

4 Art thou a poor man, yet be content with thine estate, for consider: If
thou had riches so much desired, God can make them barren like Hannah so
much beloved, 1. Sam. 1. 5. Infa^tem nudum cum te natura creavit. Paupertatis
o^us patienter far memento. Cato lib. 1, 21.
and thy poor estate fruitful like hated Peninnah. 2. They are like puddles
failing most in time of greatest need. 3. They make a man no better in Gods
sight. The Lord may give them as Iael gave drink to Siscra, Judge. 4. 21. or
Ehud gave Eglon a present, Judge. 3. 21. as Hester gave Haman a banquet, Ester
7. or as the butcher gives the slaughter cattle a good pasture. The mountains
which are full of golden mines are not usually clothed with corn, nor laden
with grass. 4. They are not as they seem^ to be, and are esteemed. They seem
treasure, as if they were for ever. They are deemed substance, as if without
them men were but shadows. They are called goods, as if they made men good, so
much worth, of such ability, account, and reckoning. But alas these are stolen
names, for they are thorns, Mat. 13. 22. deceitful, Mar. 4. 19. and often
golden Virtuti modicum, vitio nil satis. Adrian carth. page 98.
fetters. 5. Thou have but a very little. Be it so, nature is content with
little, grace with less, it is only corruption of nature which is not content.
One says well, a very little contenteth virtue, nothing satisfies vice.

5. Art thou in captivity, famine, reproaches, etc. yet herewithall be thou
content.

1. Why O thou Son of God should thou be discontent with exile for thy
fathers sake, since thou can not be exiled out of thy fathers country, the
earth being the Lords. Since the passage to heaven is open, and easy from one
country as from another. The Lord being graciously present with his in Ezekiel.
11. 16
their captivities as with Joseph, Daniel, etc.

2. What if God for ends best known to himself, lays upon thee famine,
nakedness, and such like calamities, be therewith content, and seek not by
wicked purloyning to relieve thy necessities: hear what a heathen man could
say, ^
I judge thee miserable, because thou wast never troubled, thou have passed
over thy life without an adversary. Virtue is greedy of danger, military men
glory in their wounds; thou may know a governor in a tempest, a soldier in
battle, how can I know, how much courage thou have against poverty, if thou
flowest with wealth? Whence can I, etc. Moreover, consider 1. That these
extremities can only hurt the body, discontent soul and body. 2. That God
has promised sufficient, either therefore he will give clothing to cover the
body, or enable it as well as the hands and face to need none; hear what our
Homily says: We are never contented, and therefore we Hom. against (...) page
1^4.
prosper not, he that ruffleth in his sables, in his fine furred gown, cork
slippers, trimne buskins, and warm mittens, is more ready to chil for cold,
then the poor laboring man, which can abide in the field all the day long
when the north wind blows, with a few beggarly clouts about him. 3. Else the
Lord will supply these defects with patience, and spiritual endowments.

3. What if reproaches, disgraces, and infamous indignities coming from a
viperine generation of virulent enemies of Gods people, and from the serpentine
tongues of all d^boist stigmaticall fellows pursue thee, yet be thou therewith
content (if th^^ be an honest hearted Nathaniel, and a true Israelite, and have
all those rusticall taunts, scurrilous girds, and h^llish obtrectations for
pieties sake) considering 1. That it has been, and will be the peculiar
portion of Gods Saints to be stung by the serpents seed. Thou art made a by
word: so wa^ Job 30 9. the drunkards song: so was David, Psalm. 69. 12. an
object of many forged calumniations, so was David, our blessed Savior, etc.
Do they style thee heretic? so did they Saint Paul, Acts 24. 5. 14.
Blasphemer? so did they Christ Jesus, Mat. 9. ^. glutton, and drunkard? so did
they, our Savior, Matthew. 11. 19. Devil? so did they, the Son of God, Matthew.
10. a deceiver of the people? so did they, the worlds judge. Since therefore
the most generous and blessed ones have drunk deeper in this cup of disgrace,
and infamy for pieties sake, be thou content to pledge them. 2. That these
carping wranglers, geering Ishmaels, and tonguesmiters of godliness and
goodmen, are but bruit beasts in Gods estimation, in their delights, practices,
and end: We can contentedly pass by a snarling dog barking at us, and why
then should we not be content, although these dogs of hell grin, and gnash
their teeth against us. 3. That these shall be soundly scourged for their bold
attempts against Gods Kings, and Priests, the Lords jewels, and the apple of
his eye. Witness scoffing Ishmael, cursing Shimei, railing Rabshakeh, and
those mocking children which were rent by bears (I do discard, and casheere
hence as none of those to whom I speak in this passage) such disguised
miscreants, whose profession and practice agree like harp, and harrow;
Iudasses, amongst Apostles; Demasses among Christians; of men the vilest; from
heaven the farthest.

Ought we to be content having nothing with poverty, captivity, etc. what
cause of contentation, therefore have we all. Blessed be God the father of
mercies. We sit quietly under our own vines; We have food convenient, a
fruitful The greatest opp^e^o^^^ and most under ^roden wretches, are all
subject to one high power. governing all alike with absolute command. S. W. R:
lib. 5. cap. 6. p. 773.
land, the glorious Gospel of Christ a light to our feet, and a lantern to
our paths: We have no leading into captivity: We see no Saint murderers,
haling and dragging our sincere Nathaniels to fire, and faggot: why should we
not therefore be thankful, and content, Have we not overplus? yet if we
follow nature or grace as our guide, we have that enough which may give us
content: you therefore whose onerous penury seems to overcharge you, be you
content with your fathers allowance. And you great, and mighty ones of the
earth, you came naked as well as others, you shall go empty as well as they;
you have large endowments, the Lord has allowed you nec^ssaries, and
delicacie^; be you therefore thankful to this bountiful benefactour, be you
content with your so large allowance, and do not grind the faces of the
poor, nor chop them in pieces as for the pot, by excessive rents, and
exactions, be you pleased to let men gather up your fragments, and with the
sweat of their brows to gleane a living out of the earth: In a word, let us
all whose father is the Lord, be content with his allowance.

OF THE SOCIETY OF THE SAINTS, the third Book.
CHAP. I. Answering objections against this communion.
Alas by your own confession, you are grievously perplexed, troubled on every
side, cast down, 2. Cor. 4. 8, 9. If we look upon your doctrine, it is
counted schismatic, Acts 21. 28. and heretical, Acts 24. 14. If we behold
your actions, they are deemed rebellious, seditious, profane, Acts 24. 5, 6. If
we consider your esteem in the world, we shall have small encouragements, not
only are you despised, and defamed, but made a spectacle to men, and Angels to
the whole world, 1. Cor. 4. 13. you are as monsters or men wondered at, Zach. 3.
8. you are made as the filth of the world, and of-scouring of all things, 1.
Cor. 4. 13. Happily some few wise, mighty, and noble, may favor you; yet not
many such will embrace your doctrine, 1. Cor. 1. 26. Happily a few despised
ones may join in your society, but what are they to others? What are such
simple ones compared with the learned Scribes? What are such beggarly fellows
in regard of the rich ones of the world, or your so little handful to the
whole world? Your society alas is a little flock, persecuted people, and
despised company.

troubled, yet not distressed; perplexed, yet not in despair; persecuted, yet
not forsaken, 2. Cor. 4. 8, 9. Our doctrine is counted heretical, and
apocalypticall frensies: yet after that way they call heresy, we worship the
God of our fathers. Our chiefest pillars, such as Saint Paul, are counted
pestilent fellows, moovers of sedition, ringleaders of secta ies, prophaners
of temples, Acts 24. 5. 6. fools, 1. Cor 4. 19. although they have had as
liberal education at Gamaliels feet, as black mouthed Tertullus; the filth
and of scouring of all things, we yield all this, and more. We are poor, yet
making many rich; having nothing we possess all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. We are
as sheep appointed to the slaughter, etc. yet for all this our fellowship is
desirable, for though it is base in the eye of the world, it is most
honorable. Though it seems ignominious, it is most glorious. Though it is
poor to man's view, yet it is unspeakably rich. Think not worse of it for
worldlings censure. What wise man will reject sweet smells, because men sentles
regard them not? disesteeme of those heavenly lights, because blind men do
not behold their beauty? abominate, sweet sounding melody, because deaf
persons receive no contentment by it? who of any indifferent ingenuous
education will vilify true nobility, because fools despise it? trample under
foot precious pearls, because swine so use them? or dis-esteeme of the
glorious communion of Saints, because bedlam beasts, hoodwinked, yea stark
blinded by the god of this world, dead in sins and trespasses so basely
regard it? Our fellowship is not only with crosses, although we endure them;
with poverty, although we feel it; with scorns, although we suffer them. But
with rejoicing, which is our privilege; with riches, which are our right; and
with honor, which always accompanies us. For truly our fellowship is with
the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. Doct. 3. Saints have fellowship with the Father.
our fellowship with the Father] Ioh. 14. 23. We will make our abode with him,
1 Cor. 14. 25. That God is in you, 1 Ioh 4. 12. 13. If we -- God dwells in us
-- we dwell in him, and he in us, ver. 16. dwells in God, and God in him.



But all the Saints of God are linked unto the Lord, in the nearest, and most
intimate ties of society. Therefore; The latter proposition I make evident thus.

Those who are linked unto the Lord in the ties of servants, which are the
greatest favorites: of friends who are best beloved, are linked to the Lord in
the most intimate ties of society.

But all the saints of God are linked unto the Lord in the tie of

1. Servants, which are the greatest favorites. The Lord is pleased to grace
them with this title of being his servants, Isa. 44. 1, 2. Jacob my servant,
Job 1. 8 my servant Job, Number. 12. 7. my servant Moses is not so. Let none
object and say, Is it any honor to be a servant? for it is a title of the
greatest dignity to be styled Gods servant. Or if so, is there sociall
communion betwixt Master and Servant? For there is intimate society betwixt
Masters, and beloved favorites though servants. Witness the sociable
association of Jonathan and David, 1. Sam. 20. yet was David his servant, ver.
7 8. Witness the friendly fellowship twixt David and Hushai, ^. Sam. 15. 37.
and 16 17. yet was he his servant, 15. ^4 and 16. 19. and Witness these
servants of God, who are his greatest favorites, Exodus 4. 23. Let my son go
that he may serve me, yea so dear, and tender in his sight are they that he
would not have the least hurt or violence offered to them, Psalm. 105. 15. touch
not mine anointed, esteeming them his special treasure, jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
and the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8.

2. Friends, Isa. 47. 8. the seed of Abraham my friend, 2. Chron. 20. 7. and
gav'st it to the seed of Abraham thy friend, Cant. 5. 1. Eat O friends,
drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved, Iam 2. 23. called the friend of God.
Can any fellowship be more firmly cemented or intimately indeerd then that of
Viservet animae dunidium meae. lib. 1, Od^. 3.
friends? surely no. The Poet Horace wishing a prosperous journey for his
friend Virgill, calls him half his soul. Saint Augustine bewailing the
death of his friend Hebridius, says he, thought his soul, and the soul of
his friend had been (...) ego sensi any(...), ^^ animam (...) in da^bu^
corporib^^, etc. lib. 4. Cons. cap. 6.
but one. For I thought that my soul, and the soul of my friend had been but
one soul in two bodies: he therefore being dead, life was dreadful to me,
because I desired to live no longer, yet therefore I feared to die least he
should wholly die. And the sacred Scripture affirms, that a friend is as a
man's own soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. that he loves at all times, Prove. 17. 17. and
sticks closer then a brother, Prove. 18 24. If all the love of Pylades and
Orestes, Damon and Pythias, Pyramus and Thisbe, Scipio and Lelius, and of all
other renowned heathen friends, unheard of or recorded. If the most melting
affectionatenes^e of Jonathan and David, David and Hushai, Augustine and
Hebriaius, and all other the dearest friends profane and pious, could possibly
inhabit within any two created beings; yet might there not be so much as any
comparison betwixt such an imagined friendship, and this real of Gods to his
Saints. For for these his friends sakes it is, that there is a continued course
of summer and winter; that the world enioyes the comfortable aspect of all his
excellent creatures; that the world is not wholly consumed in the twinkling of
an eye, 2. Cor. 10 6. yea for them he gave his own Son to suffer a shameful
death, to them he gives his sanctifying Spirit, and for them he reserves an
everlasting crown of glory.

Witness that sweet strain in the heavenly hymn of Moses the man of God,
Deuteronomy. 32. 10. He kept him as the apple of his eye. Witness that faithful
petition of Isreal's sweet singer, Psalm. 17. 8. Keep me as the apple of thine
eye. Witness the Prophets reason of Gods heavy judgment upon the nations
which spoiled his Church, Zach. 2. 8. For he that touches you, touches the
apple of his eye. Witness that consolatory saying of our Savior, Math. 10.
40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me. Witness that heavenly speech of Christ Jesus to that enraged
persecutor of Gods people, Why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. And witness
that irreversible and irrevocable sentence of the most upright Judge of men and
Angels at the last and dreadful day of judgment. Math. 25. 40. 45. You did it
to me: You did it not to me. Therefore they have fellowship, etc.

3. Those who are joined to the Lord with an undissoluble bond of an
everlasting love, which can never be broken, have fellowship with God: But the
Saints are joined to the Lord with an indissoluble bond of an everlasting love,
which can never be broken, Jeremiah 31. 3. I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, hence is it, that the gates of hell shall not prevail
against them, Math. 16. 18. So he loves them, that nothing can separate them
from the love of God, Romans 8. 39. So that they are sealed with the Spirit of
God unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 1. 13. 4. 30 So that he has purposed with
an unchangeable decree to have them saved.

4. Those who dwell each in other, have fellowshippe one with another: But the
Lord of heaven and earth, and the Saints dwell each in other, 1 Ioh. 4. 12. 13.
15. 16. 1 Ioh. 3. 24. Ioh. 14. 23.

CHAP. III. Use 1. Comforting the Saints from this fellowship.
Nathaniel.

1. Against Bellarmines unsound and uncomfortable doctrine Consol. ^. Tom. 4.
de ustificat. lib 3. cap. 14. page 897. etc.
of final and total falling from grace, the love and favor of God. It Is
possible (I know) for these goodfellowes to fall in part, and for a time from
some graces, some measure of grace, and from former signs, and sense of Gods
favor. Of graces some are principal, and absolutely necessary to salvation,
as faith, hope, love, these may be lessened, decayed, and covered in regard of
operation, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a new heart. Some are less principal,
yet requisite, and very profitable, as the feeling of Gods favor,
cheerfulness in prayer, joy in the Holy Ghost; which lesser graces may be
quite lost for a time. Me thinks such like considerations as these following
may sufficiently encourage all of this society against fear of not continuing
in the love and favor of God. 1. Such are the gifts of God the Father to his
only Son Christ Jesus: Which Donatives he will not lose, John. 6. 39.
Neither shall any take them out of his hands, 10. 28. 2. Such are the precious
purchase of the invaluable blood of the immaculate Lamb, the Son of God,
more worth then millions of worlds, Acts 20. 28. Things dearly bought are
dearly beloved, dearly beloved are carefully kept, and not willingly lost. 3.
Such have Christ Jesus praying for them, Luke ^^. 32. That their faith fail
not, John 17. 9. That his Father would keep them, Verse 11. from the evil one
Verse 24. Heb. 7. 25. That they may be with Christ. 4. Such are kept by the
invincible power of God, through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. 5. To such
the Lord has promised (and his promises are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.)
eternal life, 1 John 2. 24. 6. Such are sealed by the Spirit of God to the day
of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Therefore it is as possible, 1. For Jesus Christ,
that invincible Lion of the Tribe of Judah, victoriously conquering sin,
Satan, death and damnation. 2. For the Lord of Hosts, whose hosts and armies
are all creatures, from the most contemptible flies and lice, to the mightiest
Angels: whose omnipotency is such, that he effects what he will, all things
being alike possible to him: It Is as possible (I say) for the Son and Father
to be overcome, as for the Saints, being kept and preserved by them both. 3.
It Is as possible for Gods decree to suffer mutation and change, and so for that
Lambs Book of Life (for so is the Decree of Gods Election called) continually
to be mutilate, subject always to defacing by having the names of some of Gods
Elect blotted out of the same; and yet there is no variableness with the Lord,
nor the least shadow of changing, Iam. 1. 17. 4. For the engraven seal of Gods
sanctifying Spirit to be blotted out, and so to be more uncertain then those
of the Medes and Persians. 5. For the inestimable blood of the immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus to be as water spilt upon the earth. 6. For the purest and most
prevailing prayers that ever ascended to the Lord of Sabbaths, the meritorious
petitions of Gods own Son to be of no force (and yet the Prayers of one
righteous man avails, if it be fervent, James 5. 17.) 7. For Gods promise to
be unfaithful, as for those who have fellowship with the Father, to fall from
grace finally, totally: But the one, therefore the other are altogether
impossible. I know the Prophet ( Ezekiel. 18. 24.) says, when the righteous, Ob.
etc. But as Mr. Yates and others say well: Those words are a commination or
warning to keep the elect from falling, to make the reprobate inexcusable. 2.
The words are generally spoken to all in the Church; therefore the worser part
may fall away. ^his ad Casarem. page 110. Zanch. Tom. 7. page 340, 341. Contra
Rem. in Collat. Hagien. These. 5.
3. They are conditional, like Romans 8. 13. Luke 19. 40. Scriptures and reasons
against this are learnedly answered by Mr. Bernard in his Rhens against Rome.
When therefore that roaring Lion who seeks by all means to devour, shall use
such like temptations against the assurance of thy perseverance as these
following. O thou who have fellowship with the Lord, and so furnished with true
saving faith, thou art mutable, frail and weak. 2. Thou art uncertain of thy
salvation. 3. Thy first parents in Paradise could not stand. 4. Their strongest
Children have fallen, witness David, Solomon, Paul, Peter, etc. and do thou
think to continue? Thine enemies are not few, but many: not mean, but mighty:
not malecontent alone, but also malicious: not tractable, but truculent: not
lither, but laborious: not simple, but subtle: not negligent, but vigilant;
and do thou dream of perseverance? Enliven thy self after this or the like
manner. I confess mine own imbecillitie, the fall of my first parents in
Paradise in their innocence, and their posterity; neither am I ignorant of the
number, nature, and properties of mine enemies. What then? Must I therefore of
necessity fall away? No such matter. 1. I am weak and seeble. True. But I do
not rest upon my self, but upon the Lord, who keeps me, who is greater then
all, neither is any able to pluck me out of my Fathers hands, John 10. 29. 2. I
am uncertain. But how? In regard of my self; but God has established me in
Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 21. 3. Neither did Adam stand in innocence, nor Satan in
glory. True; they stood by their own strength; so do not I: by Christ I stand,
and am kept by the power of God to salvation. 4. The strongest of Adams
posterity have fallen: yet not finally; Peter was winnowed, Paul buffeted: But
they rose again, their faith did not fail, Gods grace was sufficient for
them. Winnowed I may be, buffeted I may be, overcome can I not be: for my life
is hid with Christ in God. 5. Mine enemies are many: yet more with me, then
against me, 2 Reg. 6. 6. They are malicious: But God is merciful. They are
not so strong, but God is more strong; and although they are watchful, yet I
know to my comfort that he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep,
and therefore I shall continue. Moreover: 1. Since it is Gods will to save me,
John 6. 39. 2. And Gods will shall be done, Psalm. 115. 3. For he can do what he
will, although he will not do all he can. 4. Since the faithful formerly
believed this, 2 Timothy 1. 12. For I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed to him against that day, 4. ^8. Will preserve me, etc.
5. And warrantably. The Apostles and Prophets preaching it, 2 Timothy 2. 10. The
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who are
his. 6. Since, the gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11.
29. And so the graces of God are irrevocable in regard of the seed, substance,
and habit of them; although not in regard of the actions, fruits, feeling,
measure and degrees, Psalm. 51. 9, 10 11, 12, 1^. 7. Since the Lord will finish
and perfect his works of grace once begun, Phil. 1. 6. 8. Since (in a word) I
have fellowship with the Father, and so intimate, that he vouchsafes to dwell
in me by his graces and Spirit, (and therefore his presence is effectual and
mighty to possess and govern me, has dominion over me, inwardly enlightening
me to know: and powerfully guiding me to do this known will of God. 2.
Continual, not as of a guest who lodges for a night in an Inn, and is gone
next day, nor as a sojourner that flitteth, but as an owner and possessour to
abide for ever) and graciously admits me to dwell in him, so as to be joined
constantly unto him by faith, as by an instrument; of which society, my love to
God, and my brethren is a witness, 1 John 4. 16. I should not only infinitely
wrong mine own soul (which I estimate more then the world, for all that would
advantage me no whit if it were lost) bereaving it of its comfortable assurance
of Gods infinite love and favor: But also the Lord himself questioning the
immutability of his unchangeable decree: the power of his omnipotent
almightinesse: and the certainty of his promises, which are yea and Amen,
confirmed with the hand, seals, and oath of truth it self; if I did not
ascertaine my self of my continuance to the end. Persuaded therefore I will be
that I having fellowshippe with the Father, shall not fall finally or totally.

The consideration of our society with the Father is an unmovable proppe and
pillar to uphold our wavering faith: a sure anchor to sustain us in the most
boisterous storms in this raging sea of misery, when the most hideous billows
of fiery trials, infernal temptations, ignominious reproaches, or any other
disasterous waves of storming calamities, disquiet our passage toward the
haven of endless happiness. Have we fellowship with the Father, then with
God; and what is he? A Lord of armies, having all the hosts in heaven, every
one of those ministering Angels, one whereof destroyed 185. thousand in one
night, 2 Reg. 19. 35. The innumerable multitudes of Sun, Moon, and Stars
of light, lud. 5. 20. Every one of those Elementary Bodies, or Meteors
engendered of vapors in the air above, as wind, rain, hail, storm, tempest,
thunder, and lightning, having the sole sovereignty over, and the only
guidance of all the variable and numberl^sse armies of all earthly artillery.
Witness the sea swallowing up the pursuing Egyptians, and sheltering Gods
peculiar people: Witness the earth ingurgitating, or greedily devouring up
those rebels in the wilderness: Witness the Hornets driving out the
Canaanites; Lice, flies, and Frogs taming the haughty Egyptians: Witness
those vermin, whose contemptible intrals were the sepulchers of proud King
Herod: Witness the swords of enemies piercing through the bodies of their
fellows, Judge. 7. 23. 2. Chron. 20. 22. Yea, sheathing themselves in their
owners bowels, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Therefore omnipotent to defend us. Although
therefore we be few, and naked, neither furniture of horses, chariots,
Captains, or soldiers can hurt us, if he be for us. 2. Let Captains of
enemies be as Cyrus amongst the Persians; Hannibal amongst the Carthaginians;
Marcellus, Scipio, and Pompey amongst the Romans; Pyrrhus amongst the Epirots;
Scanderbeg against the Turks 2. Let their soldiers be as painful as Pismires,
as fierce as Tigers, as swift as Eagles, as strong as Lions, as obedient as
Scipioes. 3. Let them have all things fit for war, plenty of money, corn,
and other provision, fitness of place, help of friends and allies. 4. Let
their walls be like Babilons, Forts like Niniv^hs. 5. Let them have Tamberlanes
troop of 400000. horse, and 600000. foot: yet need we not fear having
fellowship with God, who is able to defendus.

Have we fellowship with the Father; then with God who is good and merciful to
bestow all the treasure of grace upon us. 2. With the Father, who is just to
protect us against Satan's cavils, Romans 8. 33. 3. With the Father, who is
wisdom it self, to direct us by his Spirit in the darkness of this world. 4.
With the Father, who is rich to reward us in mercy.

1. How should we be cast down with poverty who have fellowship with him who
is most rich, whose is the earth, and the fullness thereof, who opens his
bounteous hand, and fills all with his good blessing, Psalm. 145. Who gives
to the cattle their food, and to the young Ravens when they cry, Psalm. 14.
True it is, that many of these goodfellowes have need, and may want bodily
food. But this want is supplied, 1. with strength of body to bear the want
thereof, as in Moses and Elias forty days. 2. With Gods rich blessings upon
poor means of maintenance, and nourishment, as in Christ's miraculous feeding
of many thousands with a few loaves and Fishes, in the widows meal, and oil,
1 Reg. 17. 14. 2 Reg. 4. 6. And in Daniels pulse. 3. With contentation of mind
with little as well as with much, Phil. 4. 8. 11. 12. Or, 4 With
counterblessings of another kind, as spiritual for corporal, eternal for
temporal, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Poor and yet making many rich, James 2. 5. Poor and
rich in faith, Rev. 2. 9. True it is, they may want; but they cannot want any
thing that is good for them, Psalm. 84. 11. Psalm. 34. 10. God denies them; not
because he is not able, or willing to give; but because such is his wisdom and
love, that he knows and gives things most needful for them, as a careful
mother, nurse, and Physician. If the want of them be medicinable and profitable
for us, we need not regard the lack of them. Will the Lord give to ravens, and
lions, and not to men? Will he give to wicked men, sons of Belial, and not to
his own? Will he give them his Son, his Spirit, his graces, his kingdom,
himself, and deny them baser matters? No, he cannot, he will not, if the
enjoyment of them be for our good.

2. How should we be terrified with infamy of this world, having fellowship
with the Lord of glory. For what? And if S. Augustine feared the praise of the
good, detested that of the evil. S. W. ^. p. ^.
none are less gracious then the godly men: Yet, 1. They are gracious with
some, although not with all. 2. They are in some favor, although not in great.
3. They are sometimes in favor, though not always. 4. They are gracious with
God, although not with men. True it is, none are, or ever were more base and
vile then the godly men; yet never in the eyes of all men, only of the wicked.
2. Not altogether, but in part. 3. When they were most base and vile in men's
eyes, they were most glorious in Gods: For, they have fellowship with the
Father.

3. How should we fear exile, who have a country in heaven, we having
fellowship with him, whose is the earth, out of whose country we can never be
banished?

4. How should we fear death, who have our life hid in M^rs time as, qui ad
^^undam (...) ^^^ ^^hic merte (...). ^yprian de Mo^ page 53. (...) in t^mere.
qui ad Chri(...) tree. Ib. page 49.
Christ with God? Let him fear death (says St. Cyprian) who will pass from
this death to the second death.

It is his part or duty to fear death who will not go to Christ, says the
same Father.

I desire to be dissolved, says the blessed Apostle, Phil. 1. 23. Blessed are
the dead, says the Spirit, Rev. 14. 13. Come Lord Jesus, says the Bride, Rev.
22. Whence springs this desire? What is the ground of this blessedness? And
whence flow those earnest longings? save from the sweet society with the Father?

5. How should we fear sin, having fellowship with him who justifies? Romans
8. 33. Death, having fellowship with life? Or Satan, having fellowship with
God? True it is, we living here on earth are subject, 1. To sin; scil. the
stain; yet free from the dominion, and due desert of sin. 2. To death, scil.
its stroke, it being decreed for all men once to die yet free from the fling of
death. 3. We are liable to Satan's bitter buffetings, yet that evil one cannot
touch us with his deadly blows, John 5. 18. 4. We are not exempted from the
grave; It must have us, but it may not hold us for ever.

6. How should we fear any thing, having fellowship with God, who has all
things?

To conclude therefore: For our comfort we may ascertaine our selves, that
having fellowship with the Father, we shall have no good thing withheld
totally, finally, without a supply if it be good for us. 1. Have we fellowship
with the Father? Then shall we be invested with his Spirit, enriched with his
graces, rewarded with his kingdom. 2. Have we fellowship with the Father? We
need not fear either want of sufficiencies: want of counsel in distress:
want of comfort in cur extremities: want of grace in this life, or glory in
that which is to come. 3. Have we fellowship with the Father? We have him
therefore to be our friend, his Son our Spouse, his Spirit our comforter, his
Angels our guard, his Saints our companions, and his creatures our servants.
And does not this minister (my brethren) superabundant consolation to all such,
who have fellowship with the Father? All matter of comfort is included in this
fellowship. Is an happy, an honorable, a pleasant, or profitable condition,
matter of solace and rejoicing? Behold, here are all; for who more happy, who
more honorable, who more pleasant or rich, then such who have fellowshippe
with the Father?

CHAP. IIII. Use 2. Reprehending wicked men.
WHy boast you so, you bragging Belials, terming your selves, and such who are
birds of the same feather with you the only goodfellowes? Whereas, were it
possible to take away your dunghill scurrilities, quassing complements,
ridiculous girings, obscoene ribauldries, irreligious tongue-smitings of men
better then your selves, blasphemous oaths, and such like hellish stuff, your
time is irksome, and your mirth is marred. Why vaunt you so of your society, it
being with Satan and his cursed works of darkness? Here is a fellowship,
which is truly good, because with God. Yours brings shame, this honor: Yours
perils, this safety: Yours loss of time, of wealth, of wit, of credit, of
soul, of heaven; this great gain, interesting into earthly things, giving a
full enjoyment of a sufficiency of saving graces, and an assurance of
immortal Glory: yours no sound comfort, this joy solid and substantial; for
it is with the father. In stead therefore of glorying in your sin, take
notice of your danger, folly, and duty.

1. Have the Saints fellowship with the Father, then in what a lamentable case
are all such, who dare presume to abuse, and wrong those who a^^ so nearely
indeared to the Lord? It was and will be the use and practice of Satan, and
his serpentine brood to esteem of Gods Saints, as of the refuse and ofscouring
of all things, 1. Cor. 4. 9. 13. to repute them monsters, Isa. 8. 18. Zach. 3.
8. Psalm. 71. 7. To make them their songs, and byword, Job 30. 9. in their
ale-bench meetings, Psalm. 69. 12. To accuse them falsely, lay to their charge
things which they never knew, or some ways or other to tongue-smite the
spotless innocence of the Lords own jewels; and then with domineering
insulations to laugh amain, that they had a dexterity to conceive, give birth
unto, or greater growth to the fabulous fictions of their base brotherhood
against the Saints of God. But were such men well verst in the book of God,
they should find that mocking Ishmaels, railing Rabshakehs, reviling Shimeies,
scoffing Children, back biting Doegs, slandering Tertullus, and all the Kennell
of those doggish barkers against Gods Children, either for natural
infirmities, 2. King. 2. 23. Or for pieties sake, Genesis 21. 19. Gal. 4. 19. Or
for envy, Acts 21. 24. 28. escaped not the sharp, and smarting punishments of
the Lord? Witness those 42. children eaten by 2. bears, 2 King. 2. 24.
Witness the son of the bondwoman cast out of the Church of God. Witness old
Shimei, cruel Doeg. Witness 2. Chron. 36. 16. Ier. 18. 21. And do you who
tread in the same trace with that railing rabble think to escape? Ioabs
soldier, if he might have received a thousand shekels of silver in his hand,
yet would not put forth his hand against Absalom, 2. Sam. 18. 12. for had he,
he should have wrought falsehood against his own life. Haman for all his
greatness dares not but honor Mordecai, although he hated him to the death,
Ester 6. 11. because he was a man the King delighted to honor: Mean men fear
to hurt, or harm the dearly beloved of great persons, dreading their
displeasure. The children, yea the favorites, yea the servants of mortal
Princes, deem themselves greatly priviledg'd from danger, and disgrace: And
dare you abase, and abuse, not a Mord^cai, not the sons, or favorites of
mortal Princes; but such who have fellowship with the father? These are the
Lords jewels, Mal. 3. 17. 1. Yea such, that he purchased with his sons own
blood, Ephesians. 1. 14. the purchased possession. Men may give much for Jewels,
but no man I think would give the life of a son, of an only son, of such a
one in whom he was well pleased, for any Jewel: the rich merchant sels all to
buy a precious pearl, but not the life of an only son: but these are such
jewels that the Lord did buy at so dear a rate. 2. Yea such that he does
carefully keep giving his angels charge over them, who pitch their tents about
them, Psalm. ^4. 7. yea himself does always watch over them by his careful
providence, Psalm. 121. 5. Are they so amiable, and lovely, so dear, and
precious, so honorable, and glorious, so carefully kept, and defended with,
and by the Lord: and dare you offer violence unto them? 2. These are the apple
of Gods own eye; do you not tremble to strike at God himself, yea, at his
eye, yea, at the apple of his eye, the tenderest part? 3. These are his
peculiar people; his anointed ones, whom you may not touch so as to hurt, or
offer the least violence unto them, Psalm. 105. 15. and presume you to confront
this divine sentence by wronging them what you can? 4. These are the Lords own
temples, 2. Cor. 6. 16. you are the temples of the living God, wherein the Word
dwells plentifully, Col. 3. 16. yea the spirit of God, 2. Cor. 13. 5. yea the
Lord himself, Ioh. 14. 23. And will you account them, and reproach them as the
filth, and of-scouring of all things? 5. These are they, whom the Lord
imbraceth with the most amiable amplexures, for he is in them, and they in him;
and guardeth with the safest defense of a guard of Millions of Angels, and his
own watchful providence. 6. These are they, who have always free access
into the courts of the King of heaven; where their Prayers, aided, and framed
by Gods Spirit, perfumed, and offered by Christ Jesus, are sure to prevail. 7.
To conc^ude, these are they, who are all in all (with reverence be it spoken,
and heard) with God, having fellowship with the Father. And dare thou, a man,
whose breath is in thy nostrils, wrong them in heart, with thy tongue, or hand?
Or if thy foole-hardy audacity dares do so much (as impiety is adventurous)
do thou think to escape? No, no, in persecuting them, thou persecutest God;
in touching them, thou touch^st the apple of his eye, and in injuring them thou
wrongest those who have fellowship with the Father.

2. Behold your excessive folly, and madness O you sons of Belial: well may
you be called fools, Psalm. 14. 1. 73. 3. Prove. 8. 5. Nay are you not more
foolish then all fools, eagerly pursuing shadows in stead of the substance;
preferring dross before gold, nisles, and trifles before treasure? Is not he a
fool of all fools, who preferres bondage before perfect freedom, the most
abject condition before the noblest; are not you therefore Idiots in the
highest degree; there being a fellowship affording honor unspeakeable, and
unconceavable, abounding with variety of the greatest contentments, wanting no
manner of consolation, more safe then heart can wish; overflowing with all good
things, in which society there is perfect freedom, and more ineffable, and
inestimable excellencies, then hearts or tongues of men and Angels are able to
conceave* or vtt^r; for it is with the father. And yet you (shall I say like
childish babyes? that is too too little, like natural Idiots? that is not
enough: like the beast that perishes? surely worse: like madded Bedl^ms?
that is not all: with David's fool, say in your hearts there is no God, no such
fellowship: or like Salomons fool, Pro. 13. 19. to whom it is an abomination
to depart from evil, lay open your folly in preferring the cursed and irksome
by-waies of sin, and impiety, and so the forbidden fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. The society of spiritual fools,
whose companions shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. And therefore the society of
Satan before this excellent fellowship, which is with the Saints, and with the
Father. You are ready to say and affirm, that Gods children are fools,
because they run not headlong with you to the same excess of riot: But they
know that you are fools, in not associating your selves to their society,
which is with the Father.

CHAP. V. Use 3. Persuading to this Society of Saints.


1. You merrie-men of the world, get you to be consorts in this society; and
then although you shall part with worldly, wanton, wicked, sinful, sensual,
and shameful delights, yet shall you be sure to have superabounding joy, such,
which is, 1. Great, Luc. 2. 10. 2. Exceeding, though in temptations, James 1.
2. Unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Vnconceiveable, 1 Cor. 2. 9 As at a conquest, as
in harvest, Isai. 9. 3. As at a continual feast. In a word, fullness of joy,
Ioh. 16. 11. Which shall be everlasting, Isa. 61. 7.

2. You covetous persons; hitherto you have endeavored to quench your extreme
thirst by drinking such brinish waters, which increase it more; do you
henceforwards covet after the best things, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Desire spiritual
blessings, and heavenly glory? Get to have this goodfellowship, then all are
yours, 1 Cor. 3. 21. Whether Paul, -- or the world, etc. Verse ^2.

3. You climbing ambitious spirits, who beat about how to nest your selves
alost; get you to be of this goodfellowship, then are you mounted higher then
you imagine. Is the being of a Kings favorite the pitch and period of your
desires? Or is a kingdom that which you so thirst after? Is the being sons
unto Kings the utmost of your wish? Neither these, nor any other honors can be
wanting to you, if you have fellowship with the Father. Seek we therefore
first, and principally the kingdom of heaven, this excellent fellowship, then
shall we have honors, ric^es, delights, and all other things whatsoever
desirable. Be persuaded therefore, for I persuade, but for your good.

CHAP. VI. Showing the first means to, and duty of this Society.
TO abandon, and abominate sin, and iniquity, to have 1. Means. Duty.
no fellowship with the fruitless works of darkness. God is righteous, sin
is unrighteousness, and these two have no fellowship; God is light, sin is
darkness, and these have no communion, 2 Corinthians. 6. 14. When Joseph was to
come out of the dungeon to stand before Pharaoh, he shaved himself, and
changed his raiment, Genesis 41. 14. How much more, when we desire to come, not
before Pharaoh, but Pharaohs God: not to stand before him, but to have
fellowship with him, ought we to strip our selves of our prison rags, the
filthy and nasty weeds of corruption, and filthiness. Considering, that if We
say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
truth, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. What, and if such men, who sit in darkness, and shadow of
death, remaining and abiding secure in the estate of sin and wretchedness,
Luc. 1. 79. What and if those who are lovers of darkness, taking full pleasure
and delight in unbelief and sin, John ^. 9. What and if even they who walk
in darkness, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. Leading a sinful life, yea such a kind of life as
they do, which shun and fly the light of the Word. What if those, who are
under the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. The dominion and sway which sin and
Satan do bear over unregenerate persons. What and if the whole infernal
rabble of that hellish rout who are under Satan the ringleader of all wicked
men, therefore called the Prince of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. are very
obstreperous, exclaiming with the loudest outcries against all such who
question their society with God; they having ever in a readiness, Lord, Lord.
At what time soever, etc. They are men of good meaning, although they are not
bookish* They have a sure belief in God: They love God above all* and their
neighbor as themselves: God they hope did not make them to damn them; all men
are sinners as well as themselves: They hope to be saved before, or as soon as
the strictest Saint-seeming Puritanes of them all. These and such like
traditionary conceits being in their shallow apprehensions sufficient to quiet
their guilty consciences from ever accusing them; to put to silence and make
mute those cutting conclusions, and peremptory propositions of the Holy Ghost,
1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Neither fornicators, etc. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. An Antidote
sufficient to counterpoyse against the poysonfull venom of their infectious
impieties. A paime^t equivalent to countervaile the numberless debts of their
heinous enormities. And graces availeable to equalize them with the Saints, and
annexe them firmly to this Divine Society, which is with the Father. Yet I
humbly entreat and beseech, yea I charge and command in the name of the Lord
Jehovah all you who either hope for, have, or hunger after this Celestial
Society, to have no fellowship with the fruitless works of darkness, to
forsake and flee from sin and iniquity.

Sin is darkness. Romans 13. 12. Cast off the works of Mot. 1.
darkness. Ephesians. 5. 11. Fruitless works of darkness. 1 These. 5. 4. Not in
darkness. Darkness it is, in respect of its author who is the Prince of
darkness. 2. Of its fountain, the dark heart of man. 3. Of the nature of the
nature of its author, he hates the light. 4. Of the time wherein done, the
night: 1 These. 5. 7. Of its fruits, eternal darkness. Wicked men are walkers
in darkness, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. Yea, such ways of darkness, that I am altogether
ignorant whereunto to resemble it. Should I parallel it with Cimerean
darkness, that no whit comparable, it being occasioned by the far distance
of the Sun from that place and people; and so but natural, an absence of
light natural; this by the absence of the splendent rays of the rich, and
radiant graces of the Sun of righteousness, therefore a spiritual
darkness, containing the fearful estate of unbeleevers in this world. Or
with that Egyptian plague of darkness which was palpable? There is no
comparison; by that their bodily eyes were blinded, by this of the soul, 2
Cor. 4. 4. That was but for a short time of continuance, this otherwise. That
kept them from mooving, this hoodwinks and infatuates them so, that although
they go, yet whither, they know not, 1 Ioh. 2. 11. But in God is no darkness
at all, 1 Ioh. 1. 5.

Math. 8. 22. Let the dead bury their dead. Ephesians. 2. 12. Dead in trespasses and
sins. 5. 14. Arise from the dead. 1 Timothy 5. 6. Dead while she lives. 1 Ioh. 3.
14. Passed from death. Well may sin be called death. 1. It deserving death.
2. Causing death, Romans 5. 12. 3. Being odious to a living soul, as death to a
living man. 4. Bitter as death. 5. It disabling the soul from well-doing. And
6. destroying as death. But God is life, 1 Ioh. 1. 2. Is it a grounded axiom.
Omne dissimile est in sociabile.
That every dissimilitude is insociable? Do we all know that light and
darkness can never accord; but the one is ever a privation of the other? Does
experience daily declare unto us, that there is not the least society betwixt
living and dead bodies, although of the most intimate confederates? Although
the one a most compassionate mother, the other an entirely affected child. Yea,
although of the lovingest mates that ever were linked in the sacred bonds of
conjugall society: But the living, as disjoined from the dead, parts them away
by a speedy interring them in the earth. And is it possible (think for God and
sin (twixt whom there is the greatest repugnancy) to accord? Can any so much as
dream of (yet dreams are but dreams) having fellowship with those fruitless
works of darkness, which are dead works, yea, death it self; and with the
Lord of light and life?

Sodom, The Lake Sodom 180 furlongs which is 22. miles of ours in length.
^50, in breadth which is 18. of our miles as some say, some more, Ios
Weissenbig. It has no outlet or disburdening
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim with fire and brimstone from heaven. In a word,
sin is that which provokes the Lord to send upon a people or person his
numberless and insupportable plagues and punishments: hence come noisome
beasts, hence doleful captivities, hence destroying pestilences, hence famine
so tragical, yea all other greater or lesser temporal tortures: Hence
blindness of mind, hardness of heart, pertinacious obstinacy, final
impenitency, yea all those endless, easelesse, hopeless, helpless torments
of eternal damnation, where their worm never dies, and their fire is not
quenched, of which those other are but vaunt-courers or forerunners. And can
we have fellowship with God, except we abandon iniquity think we?

Judas, corrupt Pilate, perfidious perjurers, bloodthirsty Jews, and
torturing executioners; yea, as the thorns, whips, nails, mockings,
buffettings, spittings, and spear, wherewith the head, back, and cheeks so
tender, and lovely were bloudily and barbarously gored; the harmless
innocence derided and calumniated; yea, the hearts blood of the Son of God
more worth then millions of worlds spilt upon the earth. This is that which
grieves, despights, and quenches the Spirit of God. And can we persuade our
selves of having fellowship with the Father, if we delight in sin, which
crucifies the Son, and grieves, if not wholly quenches, and despighteth the
Holy Ghost.

Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2. 6. Vipers, Math. 3. 7. Cokatrices and Spiders, Isa. 59. 5.
Dogs, swine, and such like foul and filthy creatures. Ignatius says, I
sight valiantly with beasts in Assyria even (...)
to Rome, not that I am devoured by bruit beasts. For these as you know, God
willing ^^ared Daniel. But of beasts bearing (...), in whom that cruel beast
does (...), which does daily sting and wound me. St. Chrysostom says,
Sometimes he calls them (...) for their saw^inesse and violence: sometimes
horses, for their lust: sometimes asses for their sottishness and ignorance:
sometimes lions and libards, for their ravening end covetousness of having:
sometimes also aspes, for their guile: oftentimes serpents and v^pers, for
their secret poison and malice. The way therefore to have fellowship with the
Father, cannot b^^y delighting in that which Metamorphoseth men into such
monstrous shapes.

Lords, and ought to be the (...) object of man's hatred, Psalm. 5. 5. Thou
hate all workers (much more the works) of iniquity, 45. 7. T^^^ hate
wic(...), Rev. 2. 6. That hate, -- (...) I also hate; yea, with such an utter
(...), that it makes him (...) his own creatures excellent by creation, as
Devils and wicked men; his own Ordinances, as New Moons and Sabbaths, Isa. 1.
15. And prayer^. If therefore we desire fellowship with the (...), we must
(...) and avoid it.



Who is the Father of it? Satan, Ioh. 8. 41. Math. 13. 28. The works of your
father you will do. What is the mother to conceive and bring it fort^? Man's
corrupt soul. What is the fruit of it? Separation from God. What is the
reward? Eternal death, R^m. ^. 2^. And can we imagine to enjoy f^llowship with
the Father, and iniquity? Such who think so, are deceived, those who say so,
lie, and the truth is not in them, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. If we say, etc. Let us
therefore who desire fellowship with the Father, ^ave no fellowship with the
fruitless works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. and cast we off the unprofitable
works of darkness, Romans 13. 12.

CHAP. VII. The second means and duty, Sinners Society to be shunned.
HAve we or desire we fellowship with the Father; then 2. Means, Duty.
avoid society with Gods enemies. The blessed man (consequently those of this
association) walk not in the way, -- sit not, -- stand not, etc. Psalm. 1. 1.
The Citizen of Sion who is directly one of these consorts, may and must think
vilely of the vile person, and with his eyes, countenance, and gesture declare
it, Psalm. 15. 4. affording no more then civil courtesy, and that with some
dislike, declared toward equals, honoring authority, vilely esteeming of the
persons of superiors if the sons of Belial; for these have two persons: 1
their own, 2 another, scil. the Lords as they are his deputies. Godly David
hated such, who hated God (such are all wicked men, Exodus 20. 5. Romans 1. 30.
either openly or secretly) Psalm. 139. 21. yea with perfect hatred, accounting
them his enemies, being enemies to his God. And King Iehosaphat was sharply
reprooved by the Prophet Iehu, and severely punished by the Lord for helping
the ungodly, loving them which hated God, 2. Chron. 19. 2. scil. for joining in
fellowship with wicked Ahab; so that he would be as he was, his people as
Ahabs, and would be with him in the war, 1. King. 18. 3.

Is it needful ( O you blissful goodfellowes) to dissuade you Dissw. 1.
from intimate society with wicked men? I persuade my self, you know full well
their pestiferous pedigree; what, and whence it is, you being well acquainted
in the Word of life, cannot be ignorant that they are, 1. Children of this
world, Luke 16. 8. and the friendship of this world is emnity with God, Iam. 4.
4. 2. Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. therefore distasteful. 3. Children
of Belial, 1. Sam. 2. 12. therefore lo^thsome. 4. Children of the devil* John
8. 44. therefore hateful to God. 5. Children of wrath, therefore abhorred of
the Lord. 6. Children of hell, Matthew. 23. 13. therefore fitter for fellowship
with damned Devils, then the associates of the Lord of Glory.

Yet view them well in the spotless Christalline glass of Gods Word, and
there you shall see clearly deciphered in lively colors, the loathsomeness of
those base companions.

1. Would you see what beasts they be? Scripture calls them 2 Timothy 4. 17.
Lions, and they are savage: Isa. 11 7.
Bears, and they are cruel: Ezekiel 29. 3.
Dragons, and they are hideous: Mat. 10. 16.
Dogs, and they are bloody: Mat. 10. 16.
Wolves, and they are truculent.

2. Desire you a sight of their venomous serpentine nature? have you ever heard
of the sevenfeeted tormenting tayle-killing Scorpion? such are they, Rev. 9. 3.
5. 10. or the damme destroying Vipers? such are they, Mat. 3. 7. Have you ever
heard of the dreadful Basiliske, killing man and beast with its breath and
sight? these are no less, Isai 11. 8. 59. 5. Or of the poysonfull venomous
Aspe? these are such. I need not tell you of the poisonous nature of the
Spider, its known to all; and these likewise are such, Isa. 59. 5.

3. Consider that the Word of truth styles them. 1. Thorns, and 2. Briars, Isa.
10. 17. 27. 4. 55. 13. Ezekiel. 2. 6. Micah. 7. 4. 3. Thistles, Matthew. 7. 6. 4.
Brambles, Judge. 9. 14. 5. Stubble, Job 21. 18. 6. Evil trees, Matthew. 12. 33.

4. No marvel though such holy men as Upon Psalm. 6. Mun^^ excre^enta
Bucer, called them the excrements of the world, Scripture terming them.

1. Sordid, dirt of the street, Psalm. 18. 42. and no marvel: for,

1. As dirt, the more it is stirred the more it stinketh; so these.

2. As dirt is neither good for manure, nor mortar field, nor town; so these
are neither good for God, nor men, Church, nor Commonwealth.

3. As dirt is hurtful, and noisome to man, and beast; so these to all about
them, who fare the worse for their sakes.

2. Unprofitable Chafe, blown away with the wind, Psalm. 1. 4. and to be
burnt with unquenchable fire, Matthew. 3. 12. For as Chafe is light, so are 1
These in weight, Dan. 5. 27. found too light: 2 In worth; for they are little,
yea, nothing worth: 3 In conversation, their mind, will, deeds, words being
inconstant: 4 In condition, for all their honor, and pleasure, etc. is but
vain.

3. Noisome dust swept away with the besome of Gods judgments, Psalm. 18. 42.
as the dust before the wind, being 1 Unstable, and light: 2 Barren of good
works: 3 Dry, devoid of grace, and the sweet distilling dew of Gods Spirit, as
dust is light, dry, and barren.

4. Contagious dross, Ezekiel. 22. 18, 19. become dross, Psalm. 119. 117. and not
undeservedly: they 1. Laboring to darken, and obscure the righteous, as dross
does gold. 2. Striving to corrupt, and infect them by mixing themselves with
them. 3. Falling from them in the fiery trial. 4. Cast away into perdition,
when severed from them.

5. Stinking smoke, Psalm. 68. 2. Isa. 65. 5. Hos. 13. 3. and justly too: for
1. They endeavor, to climb, and mount aloft as smoke does. 2. They are
soonest gone when they get to the highest, as smoke is. 3. They seek to
choke, smoother, and stifle the righteous, as smoke, etc.

6. Should I say they are as the loathsome excrementitious scumme, I have my
warrant in sacred writ, Ezekiel. 24. 6.

Imagine we a man composed of the naughtiness of all hurtful creatures; give
him the bloodthirsty nature of a Lion, Bear, Dog, and Dragon; give him the
tormenting tail of a stinging Scorpion; the venomous teeth of a gnawing Viper;
the virulent breath, and dreadful sight of an eye killing Cockatrice; farce
his bowels with the poison of Aspes, and the venime of Spiders: go to an hedge
of thorns, briars and brambles, and a bed of thistles, and thence extract the
hurtful properties of these evil plants, and add them to this monster; heap
on the stinking, loathsome, and unprofitable conditions of the most loathsome
scumme, canker-eaten dross, suffocating smoke, sterilous dust, and
contaminating dirt. The wicked man is this compacted monster; and therefore an
unmeete associate for a Saint, for such a one who has, or desires fellowship
with the Father.

CHAP. VIII. The third means and duty, We must be like God.
WOuld we communicate in this community; we must 3. Means. Duty.
endeavor to be like the Lord. Similitude is a fastening link to conglutinate
Societies, which all delight in, such who are most like themselves: hence it
is, that birds of a ^
f^ather fly together; like master like man. If thou will marry, marry thy
like, says the Poet, and that friendship is the pleasantest which likeness of
conditions has linked together, says the hear^en Orator; and Saint John
tells us expressly, there must be a congruence in this consociety, 1 John 1.
7. If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another. Be we therefore followers of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5. 1.

1. In holiness, 1. Pet. 1. 15. as he which has called you is holy, so be you
holy in all manner of conversation, ver. 16. Because it is written, be you holy
as I am holy. True it is, God only is holy, i. e. infinitely pure, and
righteous; yet the Saints are holy also, i. e. separate from sin, and
corruption, unperfectly here, most perfectly hereafter in heaven.

2. In a godly remuneration, rendering love for hatred, benedictions for
execrations, good turns for bad, prayers for persecutions, Matthew. 5. 44, 45.
That we may be Children of our father, for he makes his sun, etc.

3. In a pitiful compassionatenesse, easily moved to grieve at the miseries
of others, and to succor them, Luke 6. 6. Be you therefore merciful, as your
heavenly father is merciful, Col. 3. 12. put you on as the etc.

4. In perfection, Matthew. 5. 48. Be you therefore perfect as your father in
heaven is perfect; not as if we could be without sin, as doting fantastic
Familists aver; or keep the whole law as superstitious Antichristian Papists
avowe. For Scripture, and each man's enlightened conscience witness the
contrary. But 1. Comparatively in regard of the weak and wicked. 2. In regard
of parts being sanctified in every part, and power of soul and body, to every
duty concerning them in some measure; So that there is an upright judgment in
the mind, an honest heart, a sincere, and good conscience.

5. In walking in the light, 1. John 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is
in the light, we have fellowship one with another; and this we may do by
following Gods Word, as our guide in our travail to eternal blessedness. Let
Satan's hellish brood do the works of their father the devil, walk foot by
foot in those cursed paths which Satan has traced out unto them: viz. in the
dark, and damned ways of swearing, lying, cursing, etc. and so demonstrate to
the whole world, that themselves have fellowship with the devil. Let cavelling
carpers deem these sayings hard and harsh Paradoxes, peremptorily concluding
it to be altogether impossible for any man to be holy, merciful, perfect,
etc. as the father in heaven is. Yet let all such, who already have, or desire
to enjoy fellowship with the Father, conform themselves unto him in the
Scripture sense, which speaks not of equality, but similitude, endeavoring to
be holy, loving, merciful, and perfect; as a staggering child may imitate a
mighty man: This sanctity, perfection, and such like excellencies of all the
glorified Saints that are, or shall be, being no more in comparison of this
unparalleled holiness, and perfection of God, then the dim, and duskish light
of a pinking candle, compared with the splendent luster of the radiant sun,
enlightened moon, and glistering stars.

CHAP. IX. The fourth means and duty, is prayer to God.
HAve we or desire we fellowship with the father; delight 4. Means. Duty.
we then to speak to him in prayer, and rejoice to hear him speak to us in
the ministry of the Word. What society where intercourse of speech is wanting?
every colleague in each community will acknowledge society, and mutual
exchange of speech to be inseparable; and that it is one way to connexe men
firmly in a friendly fellowship. A word of each.

1. Should I say, prayerlesse persons are graceless, I have my warrant, Zach.
12. 10. the spirit of grace, and prayer being joint companions.

2. Should I term them godless Atheists, who can justly contradict me? not to
pray, being one of those marks, wherewith men foolish, and without God are
branded out, Psalm. 14. 4.

3. May I not confidently affirm such to have cast off the fear of the Lord,
restraining prayers before God, Job 15. 8.

4. May I not pronounce peremptorily, prayerlesse persons to be destitute of
the spirit of adoption: Saint Paul testifying that the Saints have received the
spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba father, Romans 8. 15. And can a
prayerlesse person (he wanting gods grace, his fear, the true God and his
blessed Spirit) have fellowship with the Father?

Moreover, do many people pray to no purpose, asking and not receiving,
because they ask amiss, Iam. 4. 3. their prayers being pinnioned that they
cannot mount aloft into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaths. 1. By gross
pollutions, Isa. 1. 15. I will not hear because your hands are full of blood.
2. By disobedience to the voice of God in the ministry of his Word, Zach, 7.
13. therefore -- as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I
would not hear says the Lord of hoasts. 3. By impenitency, Job. 9. 31. God
hears not sinners. 4. By regarding iniquity in their hearts, Psalm. 66. 18. 5.
By (...), Prove. 23. 13. He that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, shall
cry himself and not be heard. 6. By cruelty, Micah 3. 4. Then shall cry,
etc. 7. By painted hypocrisy, Math. 6. 5. 8. By faithless infidelity, Iam. 1.
6. 7. 9. By pharisaicall selfe-conceitednesse, Luke 18. 11. 14. 10. By blind
ignorance, Mat. 20. 22. You ask you, etc. 11. By malicious envy, Math. 6. 15.
If you forgive not. 12. By praying for those things which are impious, unjust,
hurtful, impossible, needless, or otherwise not to be prayed for. It stands
us in hand therefore, if we either have, or desire to have fellowship with the
Father, not only to pray, but so to pray as we are directed in the Word of
truth. viz.

1. With a fore-thinking premeditation of the weightinesse of that important
duty we are going about, our own weakness and worthiness, and the dreadful
Majesty of the Lord to whom we pray: thus we are commanded to take words and
turn to the Lord, Hos. 14. 3. Thus dealt the penitent prodigal, Luke 15. 17.
8. I will go to my father, and say, father, I have sinned, etc.

2. With a sincere purity of heart, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near, etc. I know
it is impossible for man to be pure, save only, 1. In regard of former times of
unregeneration. 2. In regard of their desires and endeavors. 3. In regard of
other men, scil. sons of Belial.

3. With a lowly and submisse humility: thus did the father of the faithful
pray, stiling himself dust and ashes, Genesis 18 27. That prevailing Canaanitish
woman petitioner, Math. 15. 27. Truth Lord, yet the dogs; etc. Luc. 18. 11,
12. God be merciful to me a sinner, Thus are we all commanded, Psalm. 95. 6.
Let us bow, etc.

4. With knowledge and understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15. I will pray with
understanding.

5. With a faithful assurance that our prayers shall be granted. What else
means the Apostle St. James, 1. 6. 7. Let him ask in faith. Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Without doubting. And our Savior Christ, Math. 21. 22. All things
whatsoever you ask in Prayer, believing.

6. With zealous earnestness, James 5. 16. Cold prayers lose their fruit and
force.

7. With hearts reconciled to God by true repentance, Isa. 1. 16.

8. With hearts reconciled to our brethren by brotherly love, and condonation,
Math. 6. 14.

9. With an unwearied constancy, Crying day and night, Luc. 10. 7. Holding him
fast till he bless us, Genesis 32. 28. And never giving over until we prevail,
Math. 15. 22, 23. and 28.

10. In the name and mediation of Christ Jesus, the sole Savior of mankind,
and the alone Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Hitherto you have
asked nothing in my name, etc. John 16. 23.

11. For things agreeable to Gods will, 1 John 5. 14. viz. For things which are
good, holy, lawful, possible, profitable, and needful.

Prayer thus qualified is good and acceptable in the sight of God, 1 Timothy 2. 3.
Is an extraordinary (yea beyond imagination) prevailer with the Lord in the
courts of heaven: bringing such who effectually use it, to salvation, Romans 10.
13, 14. And therefore to an happy enjoyment of fellowship with the Father.

CHAP. X. The fifth Means and Duty is hearing of Gods Word.
DEsire we with the most earnest longings, strive we amain 5. Means, Duty.
with our utmost endeavors to hear the Lord speak to us in his Word, and
delight we extraordinarily in such desires and endeavors.

This is the word of Gods grace, Acts 20. 32. 1. Coming Mot. 1.
from Gods grace. 2. Showing Gods grace. 3. Working grace in those who believe
and obey it.

Word of faith, Romans 10. 8. 1. Requiring faith to believe it. 2. Teaching what
faith is. 3. Begetting and strengthening the same. Romans 10. 17.

Word of life. John 6. 68. Thou have the Word of eternal life. 1. Begetting a
Spiritual life, 1 Pet. 1. 23. 2. Nourishing and strengthening our Spiritual
life, 1 Pet. 2. 2. And 3. Offering eternal life, John 5. 35.

Word of salvation, Acts 13. 26. In regard of its fruits and effects, declaring
to us the way of salvation.

Word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1. Showing how men are reconciled to
God. 2. Instrumentally working the same reconciliation betwixt God offended,
and man offending. And therefore a special means to obtain fellowship with
the Father. Let not the examples of the world, whose desires after the enjoying
of transitory delights, and momentany treasures are boundles, and their
endeavors endless, no whit at all, or very little regarding this heavenly voice
of the Lord of glory; neither let the strange and preposterous practice of
diverse greater persons (whose use was ordinary to have Thursday meetings for
bowling; but not Friday for hearing; thus sleighting, if not contemning the
Divine Ordinance of God) alienate or estrange your longing desires from this
saving and reconciling Word of God.

1. Say not you (my beloved brethren) you could hear with all reverence and
diligence, might it please the Lord himself to speak to us. For 1. should the
Lord himself speak from heaven, you durst not hear, Exodus 20. 19. Could not
they? And can you? 2. For the Lord does speak by us his Ministers, as Kings by
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

2. Say not with your selves, I could willingly hear, was the Messenger this
or that famous man; but such, and such are mean and base fellows in men's
esteem. For were not the Prophets and Apostles so accounted of? Yet they were
to be heard: and we see it is the good pleasure of God to save them that
believe by the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Foolishness, not in
regard of it self, but in the opinion of worldly men; Yet is it the savor of
death unto death, or of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2. 16. But be it they are mean,
yet they being Gods mouth, hear them. Is gold or silver of greater weight or
worth out of a parse of velvet decked with curious imbroiderings, then out of a
plain or homely pouch of leather? May not meat be as pleasing to the palate,
as wholesome in the stomach, and as nourishing to the body of an hungry man out
of a clean earthen or wooden platter, as out of a plate of silver? Does not a
candle shine as bright and profitably from of a plain wooden candlestick, as
from of another made of the purest gold, and framed after the most curious
form the exactest skill of the cunningest artificer could invent? And shall
the Lords Word, better then thousands of gold or silver; the most nourishing
meat of each sanctified soul: a light to the feet, and a lantern to the
paths of godly men, suffer loss or diminution of its peerlesse valuation; be
disabled from nourishing the newborn Christian babes that they may grow
thereby; Or have its more then sun-like light (for that cannot guide to heaven)
ecclipsed by the meannesse of the messenger?

3. Say not (my brethren) I cannot hear such or such, they being reputed
naughty men. It was, we know, the portion of Eliah, Jeremy, Paul, John
Baptist, and our Savior Christ, (that man without sin, the best Preacher that
ever spoke upon earth) to be accounted pestilent fellows, troublers of states,
ring* leaders of Sectaries, deceivers of the people, and therefore not to be
heard. No marvel therefore though the envious man still strives to eclipse
the brightest lights, and to darken their bright shining rays of sincere
Doctrine, and soundness of life, by some hellish exhalations of slanderous
imputations, drawn out of the misting fogs of the dunghill dispositions of
earthly worldlings by the heat of malice, pride, and passion; and to deface
their blameless innocence, and the most upright, and conscionable cariages in
their callings with the staining ti^cture of contentious faction, hellish
maliciousness, base covetousness, opinionative pride, or some such like vile
diffamations obnubilating, and obscuring these shining candles, to this end and
purpose, that others might fall and never rise again. But what, and if the
messenger be a man of infamous rank (as alas there are too many such) yet let
us regard his Doctrine which is of God: An authentical Proclamation loses
nothing of its authority by the promulgation of a deboist Officer. Eliahs food
was acceptable to him although unclean ravens were his servitours: and I
think none of us will refuse current coin coming from the hands of slovenly
or bad companions. And shall not we hear the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in
Moises chair, Math. 23. 1, 2, 3. Because they say and do not. But argue thus
with your selves. 1. Since no flesh can hear God and live, Exodus 20. 19. 2.
Since it is impossible, and against the pleasure of Christ, that he should
preach again in his manhood. 3. Since it is no ways warrantable to expect
preaching by Angels, there being no such precept or practice. 4. Since it is not
only impossible, but unprofitable (for those who will not, etc. Neither will
they believe though one come from the dead, Luc. 16. 31.) to have a teacher
come from the dead. 5. Since (though it were to be wished that none but good
men did preach the Word) we must regard, not so much who speaks, as what is
spoken, we resolve to hear Gods voice in the ministry of the Word.

1. Not spider-like, striving to suck poison from the sweetest flowers,
Scribe-like seeking with poisoned hearts to entrappe the preacher, as if we
came to mend him, not our selves.

2. Not Athenian-like, itchingly desiring novelties, new texts, new Teachers,
not seeking for grace, but news to feed our vain and fond curiosity.

3. Not unprofitably, like riven vessels, which receive plenty of water, yet
leake out all.

4. Nor obstinately, like the pertinacious stiff-necked Jews who resolutely
answered, they would not hearken, Ierem. 44. 10. But with a serious Christian
preparation, diligent attention, post-consideration, and practice, the end of
hearing. This word of God offering health to the sick, liberty to the bond,
life to the dead. It having whatsoever is desirable, whether profit,
surpassing gold; or delight, sweeter then honey. And it being a word of
reconciliation, so a means to obtain fellowship with the Father where it is
wanting, and a necessary duty for all such who have fellowship with the Father,
delightfully to hear God speak to them in his Word.

CHAP. XI. The sixth Means and Duty is, Seeking the Lord.
HAve the Saints such a fellowship? Seek we the Lord, that 6. Means. Duty.
we also may have fellowship with the Father. For, the Lord will not forsake
them that seek him, Psalm. 9. 10. This is neither the last, nor the least
means to obtain society with the Lord. The Holy Ghost in many places
frequently inculcating this duty, stirring us up to seek the Lord, directs,
and guides us how, and presses us forward to get communion with the Father.
For what is it to seek the Lord, save to seek the love and favor,
fellowshippe and fruition of the Lord? And how shall we get communion with the
Lord, better, then by seeking the Lord? viz. Seeking to know him, seeking to
obey him, that we may enjoy him? Sociall combinations are not compacted til
after former, fervent, and frequent seeking. Courtly dignities, country offices
if of profit, meet mates for marriages, friendly companions, who stick closer
then brethren; arts, and sciences, health, liberty, wisdom wealth, yea,
grace, and glory, therefore fellowship with the Father, if wanting, must be
sought that they may be had. Seek we therefore to pacify, to please, that so
we may possess the Lord, or have fellowship with the Father.

Deuteronomy. 4. 29. If thou seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou
seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Set your
heart, and your soul to seek the Lord your God. Ier. 29. 13. Ye shall seek
me, and find me, when you shall seek me with all your heart.

Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee, with my spirit within me will I
seek thee, -- with all thy heart and soul.

Zeph. 2. 3. Seek the Lord, ye meek of the earth.

Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found. Prove. 8. 17. Those who seek
me early, shall find me.

Prove. 2. 4. Seeking him as silver, and searching for him as for hidden
treasures. Seek we therefore, and that;

Cant. 3. 1. By night on my bed I sought, etc.

Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Acts 17. 27. Seek the Lord, -- 30. ever, -- repent.

Zeph. 2. 3. Seek the Lord all ye meek.

John 5. 27. Search the Scriptures, etc.

Cant. 6. 1. Whither, -- that seek, Zach. 8. 21.

If moving inducements will prevail, behold

Thus says the Lord of Hosts unto the house of Israel, seek you me, Isa. 55.
6. Acts 5. 4.

Chron. 15. 4. 15. But when -- and sought him, he was found of them.

Ier. 10. 21. The Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord,
therefore they shall not prosper, and their flocks shall be scattered. Ezra 8.
22. His wrath is against them that forsake him.

Deu. 4. 29. Ier. 29. 12, 13, 14. You shall find me, etc.

5. The profitable advantages redounding to all those who rightly seek the
Lord are very large and many. As for example.

1. R^st on every side from enemies, 2 Chronicles. 14. 7. Because, etc.

2. The hand of the Lord is with them for good who seek him, Ezra 8. 22.

3. They shall never be forsaken who seek God, Psalm. 9. 10.

4. They shall want no good thing, Psalm. 34. 10.

5. The Lord is good to the soul which seeks him, Lam. 3. 23

6. They shall live that seek God, Amos. 5 6.

Instigate and stir up your selves to seek the Lord with these, or such like
meditations as these four following.

1. Shall the Centurions servant go, and come, do this and that, at his Masters
bidding? Ought all servants to obey the injunctions of their Masters in all
things, scil. which are lawful, and not gainsaid by higher authority, and
shall we refuse to obey the Divine and heavenly precept of the Lord, whose will
the creatures readily fulfill, although it thwart and cross the order of
nature; fire ceasing to burn, lions laying aside their ravening disposition,
waters becoming unpaflable, an ass speaking, ravens officiously serving a
Prophet, and those swift runners in the firmament standing still, the one upon
Gibeon, the other in the valley of Aijalon: and shall we disobey an edict so
just and profitable, of a God so gracious and powerful?

2. Will the adventurous Merchant seek for pearls; the resolute soldier for
honorable conquest, hardly, if ever attained? And shall we neglect to seek
the Lord so easily found, if rightly sought?

3. Are all such liable to the dreadful wrath of God, who neglect this duty?
And shall we incur such fearful plagues?

4. Are the Lords gracious promises so ample and rich? His rewards granted to
such as seek him unspeakable for number and valuation? And shall we refuse
them? No, no, since the Lord has commanded us by his authority (then which
none more Sovereign) to do a thing neither impossible, nor difficult, the
neglect whereof being perilous; the performance whereof being very profitable;
we resolve hereafter through the assistance of his grace (although worldly men
with desires insatiable as hell, seek for either newfangled toys, as the
fantastique fashion-monger; excessive dainties, as the gourmandising glutton;
undeserved renown, as the ambitiously insolent; earthly pelf, as the dunghill
Mammonist, or such like idle, and unprofitable, if not hurtful things.) to
seek the saving knowledge of God, of absolute necessity, of excellent dignity,
and unspeakable utility, to seek the love, and favor of God, being both free,
and great, tender, everlasting, and unparalleled, by obeying him. So will we
seek that we may know him; that knowing we may obey him; that knowing and
obeying, we may enjoy him. That thus seeking to please, to pacify, and
possess, we may obtain, and enjoy this fellowship with the Father.

CHAP. XII. The seventh Means and Duty is sanctifying the Lords Day.
HAve we, or desire we fellowship with the Father? If 7. Means. Duty.
we have, declare it; if we desire it, seek it; By keeping Gods Sabbath;
choosing the thing which pleases God; taking hold on his Covenant; serving the
Lord, etc. That all these are marks and duties of such who have fellowship
with the Father* and means for such to use, who desire to get or keep
communion with the Father; The Lord himself by the mouth of his servant Isaiah
does sufficiently declare, 56. 3. In which chapter is contained a
pre-occupation, or removing of a secret objection or inward temptation made by
the pious Proselites, and godly Eunuchs against themselves; the former
objecting separation from Gods people, the latter their miserable estate; the
Law cursing the impotent, and childlesse. To which objection the Lord himself
makes answer, in which he plainly does prohibit such reasonings and
disputings; and interdict such imaginations, and collections ( let them not
say) and promise better, and greater prerogatives then those which they wanted.
So be that these strangers, and Eunuchs were such who had joined themselves to
the Lord, ver. 3. and declared this conjunction by these practices of piety,
ver. 4. and 6. and therefore I may safely and warrantably add to those former
means, marks, and duties, these following.

The keeping therefore of the Lords Sabbath is a sign, and means of man's
communion with God. Although then there were many Sabbaths of the Lord (called
his, to show Justin calls it the day of the sun, because he writes to the
Gentiles, says Wallaus. Instinus diem solis appellat, quia ad Gentiles
scribit, and Wall. cap. 7. p. 147. Qui dies solis a profanis, Dominicus a Sanctu
dicebat^r. Beza in 1 Cor 16. 1. Qui oli^ dies solis nunc dominicu^ dicitur.
Jdem. Iun. Trem. bib.
who was the author of them, and to what end, and use ordained, and to
distinguish them from Idols Sabbaths, or feasts of false gods, or devils) viz.
1. Eternal, celestial, and glorious. 2. Temporal, and typical which were
shadows of the other. Which temporal were some of years, some of weeks,
and some of days: yet in regard that only of days (of the temporal) is now
remaining, I purpose to confine my self to that. And passing over those
ceremonial, and Jewish Sacrifices which are wholly ceased; as 2 lambs of a
year old without blemish; 2 tenth deals of fine flower mingled with oil; and
one drink offering thereof, Numb. 28. 9, ^0. I will only point at some of
these substantial, and moral duties which God once commanded, and never since
forbad. Call the day what you please (neither am I scrupulous, or contentious
about words) 1. Either Sunday, which is an ordinary Name of the day. Dies Lu^^.
Di^s Ma^t^.
name of the day, as Monday, etc. for the rest of the days: Saint Luke calling
a certain hill in Athens, Mars hill, Acts 17. 19. 2. Or the first day of the
week, as Saint Paul does, 1. Cor. 16. 1. 3. Or the Lords day; because the Lord
then Cannon 13. Tertul. lib de corona ^ilitis. c. 3. Cyprian Epist. 36. ad
Fidum de infan^ib: bab. p. 231. Pri^us and dominicus. Propterea quod Dominus a
morte ad vitam redierit, dominicus appellatur. T. 1. p. 105. 5. in Psalm. 118.
rose, as Saint John, Rev. 1. 9. The Canons of our Church; our pious statutes
made concerning this day, in the reign of our gracious Sovereign King
CHARLES: This day was called the day of the sun by the profane, the Lords
day of the Saints, says Beza: It was in time past called the day of the sun,
now it is called the Lords day, says Beza, So Tertullian says, Cyprian, and
others, and the ancient Fathers; as Chrysostom, [because the Lord in it
returned from death to life, it is called the Lords day.] 4. Or the Sabbath,
which name is used and is not Jewish. 1. The name being moral, not
ceremonial. 2. It lively expressing the nature of the day. 3. The rest being
perpetual; therefore the name may, although our Lords day has not that name
in the new Testament. For 1. our Savior could not speak of it at all, it not
being till his Resurrection. And the Apostles called it the first day, the
Lords day, for distinction sake the better to be understood, not abolishing it;
therefore I hope, I taxing no man for calling it by the name of Sunday, none
will fault me if I style it the Lords day; I having Statute, Canon, and divine
law to warrant me. And be entreated to keep the day holy, by doing such duties
which remain to be performed of us under the Gospel. This keeping being a
means of man's communion with God; In that it is an occasion, and means of
hearing Gods Word, whereby faith comes; and also of receiving the Sacraments,
and using of Prayer, whereby we draw near to God. I will only, and that
concisely point at some of the Lords days duties; I handling them now only by
way of use to another doctrine. That we may keep the Sabbath or the Lords day,
we must observantly take notice, of the negative, and affirmative precepts.
Negative, precisely prohibiting the doing of any manner of works: 1. Servile,
wherein we serve our selves, not God; therefore all sinful actions of body and
soul; for although these are strictly forbidden every day, yet it is a greater
sin to do them upon this day, it offering fewer urging, or alluring
provocations, and affording more helps, and Per voce^ ^pus (...) seu (...) non
intelliguntur direct opera hominum vitiosa: quia ea nunquam conceduntur: sed
opera servilia, a (...) servir^ per qua scilicet ^^^squisque pro ratione
vocationis suae victum ex^rcet, etc. Wallaeus de 4. precep. page 7.
means against them. 2. All works of mind or body needless, or unnecessary.
By the word Thou shall do no manner of work, are not understood the vicious
works of men, because they are never permitted, but servile works of (...)
signifying to serve, by which every one by reason of his vocation does pursue
his living, says Wallaeus. But least I should wander in so wide and spacious a
field, I will therefore show you what others, which I have read, say, and then
give mine answer only to some questions.

Omnis Christi amator Dominicum celebret Diem, Diem resurrectioni consecratum
Dominicae, Reginam and Principem Dierum omnium, in qua, -- and vita etc. Epist.
3. ad Magnefianos.

Die vero qui Dominicus vocatur, quem Hebraei primum vocant, Graeci autem Soli
distribuunt, and qui ante septimum est, sancivit, a judicijs, alijsque causis
universos habere vacationem, and in eo tantum orationibus occupari. Honorabat
(sc. Constantinus) autem Dominicum Diem, quia in eo Christus resurrexit a
mortuis. Sozomen. Histor. Eccl. Tripart. lib. 1. Cap. 10. page 275.

Dominicum ergo Diem Apostoli, and Apostolici viri ideo religiosa solemnitate
habendum sanxerunt, quia in eodem Redemptor noster a mortuis resurrexit: quique
ideo Dominicus appellatur, ut in eo a terrenis operibus, vel mundi illecebris
abstinentes; tantu^ Divini^ cultibus sErviamus; ipse est primus dies seculi, in
ipso formatasu^t elementa mu^di; in ipso creati sunt Angeli; in ipso quoque
resurrexit a mortuis Christus; etc. Sermon. 251. d^ tempore.

Vide^mus ne -- sed di^i dominici sequestrati a rurali opere, and ab omni
negotio, soli divine cultui vacemus. Ibid.

Neque venatione se occupet, and diabolico mancipetur officio, cirumvagando
campos, and sylvas, clamorem and cachinnum ore exaltans. Ibid.

Tunc ipsi foris aut causas dicere, aut diversis student calumnijs impugnare,
aut videlicet in alea, vel in jocis inutilibus insidiari -- quatenus unus
punctus di^i ad dei officium, and reliquum diurnum spatium cum nocte simul ad
eorum deputetur v^luptates. Idem. Ibid.

Melius vtique toto die foderent, quam toto die saltarent. Con. 1. part. 1. in
Psalm. 32.

Melius enim arare, quam saltare in Sabbato -- illi ab opere bono vacant, opere
nugatorio non vacant. in titul: Psalm. 91.

Non hoc autem solum ratione aptum est tempus ad benignitatem, prompto and
alacri animo exercendam; sed and quod habet quietem, and remissionem,
immunitatemque and vacationem a laboribus. Chrysostom. Tom. 4. page 545. in 1. Cor.
Homil. 45.

Primo die qui -- dominicus appellatur celebres Magistri ac doctores, Sancti
patres nostri nobis canendum, and Psallendum centesimum decimum octanum Psalmum
tradiderunt. T. 1. Page 1055.

Ignatius that ancient Bishop of Antioch in his 3. Epistle which is none of his
5. counterfeit Epistles, says, Let every one that loves Christ keep the Lords
Day, -- which is the Queen of days, in which death is overcome, and life is
sprung up in Christ.

Renowned Constantine ordained as follows. That day which is called the Lords
Day, which the Hebrews call the first day; which the Grecians attribute to the
Sun; which is before the 7. day, he ordained that all should cease from suits
and other businesses, and to be only occupied in prayers upon it: and indeed
he did honor the Lords Day; because in it Christ rose from the dead.

St. Augustine says, the Lords Day the Apostles and Apostolical men have
ordained with religious holiness to be kept: because in the same our Redeemer
rose from the dead, and therefore is called the Dominicall or Lords Day, that
in it we may only attend on the Divine Service; this is the first Day of the
world, in it were created the elements and the Angels; upon this Day Christ
rose; and the holy Ghost was given; and Manna first descended from heaven upon
this day.

And again, Being sequestered from all rusticall works, and business we give
our selves wholly to the worship of God.

Neither let him busy himself in hunting, and enthrall himself in any
devilish work, in wandering about the fields, and woods, making a loud noise
and laughter, etc.

And in the same Sermon reprooving certain disorders on the Lords day: he
says, Then ( scil. in the time of the public worship of God) without doors
they tell tales, or study to fight against others by slanders; or to take great
pains at dice, or other unprofitable sports: -- as if one period of the day
was set apart to the service of God, and the rest of the day and the night to
their own pleasures.

The same father says thus in one place; They might better dig all the day,
then dance all the day.

And in another place; It is better to plow then to dance upon the Sabbath: --
they rest from a good work; rest not from a vain and triffing work.

And S. Chrysostom speaking of the fitness of this day for works of mercy;
says, It is a fit time to practice liberality with a ready and willing mind;
not only in this regard, but also because it has rest, ceasing, freedom, and
vacation from labors. And in another place he says:

Our reverend teachers, and instructers, our holy fathers have given us the
118. Psalm to sing the first day, which is called the Lords day.

Leo the first, commanded Sunday to be kept holy. And that all Christians
should behave themselves godly, and virtuously all the day long in preaching,
hearing, and remembering the Word of God, visiting the sick, and poor, and
comforting the comfortless.

Leo the third. at a Counsel in Ments, decreed that Sundaies should be kept
holy with all reverence; and that all men should abstain those days from all
servile work, and worldy business; and that there should be no faires,
markets, or any buying, or selling on the Sundaies.

I have read that in a Counsel at Nice, order was taken that those who either
kept court, bought, or sold, or otherwise profaned the Sabbath, should be
prohibited the Communion: because To^o hoc die tantummodo vaca^du^, quia toto
hoc die ma^u^ d^o expan. d^^dae.
that whole day we ought only to rest, and spread abroad our hands in prayer
to God. The ancient Waldenses and Albigenses who were Luthers, and our
forerunners in a short Commentary upon the Commandments; say, They that will
keep the Sabbath, must be careful of four things: 1. To cease from all
worldly labors. 2. Not to sin. 3. Not to be idle. 4. To do things for the
good, and benefit of the soul.

Our own Canons enjoyne us to celebrate the Lords day according Can. 13.
to Gods will, i. e. in hearing the Word of God read, and taught in private and
public prayers, in acknowledging our offenses to God, and amendment of the
same, in reconciling our selves charitably to our neighbors where displeasure
has been: In often receiving the Communion of the body, and blood of Christ, in
visiting the poor, and sick, and using all godly and sober conversation, Thus
says our Canon.

1. An Act made in the first year of our gracious Sovereign King CHARLES,
says thus: Keeping of the Lords day Anno C^roli.
is a principal part of the true service of God, which in very many places of
this Realm has been and now is profaned, and neglected by a disorderly sort
of people, in exercising, and frequenting Bearbaiting, Bulbayting, E^terludes,
Common plays, etc. Upon the Lords day.

There shall be no meetings -- of people out of their own Parishes Another
S^tute. 1628.
on the Lords day for any sports, or pastimes whatsoever; nor any Bearebayting,
Bulbayting, E^terludes, Common plays, or other unlawful exercises, or
pastimes used by any person within their own Parish. The mulct for every
breach of this statute is 3 shillings 4 pence.

Our Homily concerning the first part of the place, and Page 138.
time of prayer, says, God has given express charge to all men, that upon
the Sabbath, which is our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work
day labor, -- even so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and
rest from their common and daily business, and give themselves wholly to
heavenly Page 139.
exercises of Gods true Religion, and service. In the same Homily. It is
lamentable to see the wicked boldness of those, who will be counted Gods
people, -- these are of two sorts. The one sort if they have any business to
do, though there be no extreme need, they must not spare for the Sunday; they
must ride, and journey on the Sunday; drive and carry; row, and ferrey; buy,
and sell on the Sunday. -- The other sort is worse, -- although they will not
labor; yet will they not rest in holiness, as God commands, but rest in
ungodliness, and filthiness, pransing in their pride, pranking, and pricking,
pointing and painting, themselves to be gorgeous, and gay: they rest in
excess, and superfluity, in gluttony, and drunkenness, like rats, and swine:
they rest in brawling, and railing, in quarrelling, and fighting: they rest in
wantonness and toyish talking, etc. So that God is more dishonored, and the
devil better served on the Sunday, then on all the days of the week besides.
And in the conclusion of the second part, thus. Come with an heart sifted, and
cleansed from worldly and carnal affection, and desires; shake off all vain
thoughts which may hinder thee from Gods true service; the bird, etc. Bishop
Babington writing upon the fourth Page 319.
verse of the 31. Chapter of Exodus, says thus: A place never to be forgotten,
touching the Lords commandment of the Sabbath; for he will not have his own
work meddled with on that day. Oh what can we think of our works? His
tabernacle builder must be forbidden, and our buildings must go on. Read and
feel that place in Jeremy 17. 25. with a tender heart. Then shall -- gates, i.
e. the government shall stand and flourish, ver. 27. Kindle a fire, i. e. the
Lord will overturne all with great destruction. He is the same now he was then,
and his glory is as dear to him. The same reverend Divine, in his 8 Page 259.
note upon the 16 Chapter of Exodus, says thus: Forget not to mark the great
care that God had of his Sabbath, that it might be kept holy; -- May not a good
soul thus reason. Good Lord, what do I upon the Sabbath day? this people of
his might not gather Manna; and may I go to faires, and markets, to dancings,
and drinkings, to wakes, and wantonness; to bearebaitings, and bulbaitings,
with such like wicked prophanations of the Lords day? May I be absent from the
Church, -- walking about my closes, and grounds, sending my servants, and
cattle to towns with corn, which I have sold before -- are these works for
the Sabbath? Can I answer this to my God, that gives me six days for my
self, and takes but one to himself? Of which I rob him also, etc. Bishop
Bailey, in the Practice Page 442.
of Piety, says, we are to cease from all civil works, generally from the
least to the greatest; and instanceth in these seven. 1. Works of our calling.
2. Carrying of burdens. 3. Keeping of Faires and Markets. 4. Studying any
Books but Scripture and Divinity. 5. All recreations and sports which at other
times are lawful. 6. Gross feeding, and liberal drinking. 7. Talking about
worldly things. I need not therefore say with learned Sir Walter Rauleigh. I
rather choose to endure the 1. Book. 2. Chapter.
wounds of those darts which envy casts at noveltie, then to go on safely
and sleepily in the easy ways of ancient mistakings: seeing to be learned in
many errors, or to be ignorant in all things has little diversity. I having
such a cloud of witnesses Neotericke and of hoare-headed antiquity which defend
the same in substance (some in one thing, some in another) which I purpose to
propound to your considerations. I hope therefore that none will tax me of
Sabbatarian paradoxes, Apocalipticall frensies, or Herterodoxe opinions, I
being guided by the light of truth, and that light which Writers ancient and
modern have set up to lead me. In a word therefore consider (for I purpose to
propound only four things to your considerations, not peremptorily concluding
hegatively, or affirmatively.)

Whether it can be lawful for us to do any bodily works 1. Consid. 1 Reg. 19.
8.
upon the Lords Day, such only except, which present necessity compels unto
for preservation of life; thus Elijah by flight; the Macabees by fight did, and
we may, and must preserve our lives; the recovery of health; convenient
preservation of health, as the ordering of meat for the day; the Disciples
plucked, and rubbed the ears of corn; for if we may water and fodder the
beast, Luc. 13. 15. (which yet could live a day without) that so it might be a
comfortable day to it; no doubt but we may dress food for our own comfort.
Decency of the body, as clothing the same. Preservation of goods, by taking out
of, or defending from dangers, Luc. 13. 15. And giving necessary provision to
them, Luc. 14. 5. Yea to the fatling beast to feed him. 1. Because else he
could not live so chearefully. 2. The labor is the same in giving much or
little. 3. All creatures may then have the ordinary provision of the week at
the least. 4. Else to the hurt of the creature, so loss of goods. Necessity is
sanctified, and may stand for just excuse; when we cannot keep the rest of the
commandments without breach of one of the rest. e. g. I am bound to preserve
life; a man or beast is in danger of death; I may break the rest to save life;
God will have mercy and not sacrifice: mercy is a work of sanctification;
sacrifice a means; we must leave the means, and do the work. Tertullian
says, God forbad humane works, not Tertul. lib. 2 contra Marcyonem, page 185.
Nec Sabbatt inspicis legem opera humana, non divina prohibintem, -- Non facies
-- opus, Quod? Vt^que tuum. -- Arcam vero circumserre, neque quoti li enum opus
vileri potest, neque humanum, sed bonum and sacrosinctum, and ex ipso Dei
praecepto utique divinum.
Divine. -- Thou shall do no manner of work. What manner of work? What kind
of work? Namely thine own. -- But to carry about the Arc (sc. about the walls
of Jericho) can neither seem a daily work, nor an humane, but a good and a
holy work; and therefore from the very commandment of God Divine. Those
therefore I mean which may be forborne without breach of charity sinning
against nature, or hurt of the creatures. And therefore, 1. Whether those are
not blameworthy who trot about for gain or pleasure, buy and sell grind, and
bake, patch, and mend, or do any other outward, or inward work of man or
woman, which may be done before, or stay till afterward. 2. And if it be not
good for each man to reason thus, or after the like manner with his own soul.
1. Is the fourth Commandment a precept which is moral, as it must needs be:
For, 1. Else there would be but nine moral Precepts. 2. It being delivered in
mount Sinai, at the Nec ejus observatio capit Lege data in Sinaised aute
celebrabatur, ut apparet ex Mannae pluvia, Exodus 16. Martyr in Genesis 2. Ex hoc
loco probabilis conjectura elicitur, Sabbathi sanctitatem suisse priorent le
ge, and ceric quum aute narravit Moses vetito^ fuisse die septimo Manna
colligere videtur ex recepta notitia and usu sumptum. Call. in 4. Precep.
same time, by the same Lawgiver, after the same manner, with more motives,
and a special Memento. 3. Given in Paradise, observed from the beginning
before any Ceremonial Law was given. Neither did the observation of the
Sabbath begin, when the Law was given in Sinai, but it was solemnized before as
appears by the rain of Manna, Exodus 16. says P. Martyr.

From this place a probable conjecture is fetched, that the sanctification of
the Sabbath was before the Law, and truly when Moses did show before that they
were forbidden to gather Manna upon the seventh day, he seems to conclude that
it was taken from received knowledge and use, says Mr. Calvin. 2. Did our
Savior Christ Jesus confirm the morality of it, coming to fulfill, not to
break one jot or title of the Moral Law. 3. And do the same reasons which
bound the Jews, oblige me to the performance of such duties, as in it are
enjoined, and restrain me as well as them; 1. God giving me six days as he
gave them. 2. Being my God as he was theirs. 3. Proposing his example for my
imitation. And, 4. I needing his blessing as much as they. And does this
commandment precisely inhibite the doing of any manner of work; insomuch that
those holy followers of Christ, Luc. 23. 5, 6. (and their puritannicall
preciseness is commended) abstained from so good a work as to embalme the
body of our Savior, their spices and ointments being already prepared; and
shall I gad to faires and markets, shall I walk about my closes or grounds
(except it be to meditate or to praise God for his bounty toward me;) shall I
send my servants and cattle with corn, etc. Are these works for the Lords
Day? Is the day none of mine, and shall I spend it about mine own affairs and
profits? Dread I to rob men, and shall I presume to rob God, yea him who is my
God, of his Day, of his Holy Day? No, no, I will not; trouble me therefore no
more, O rebellious flesh, with thy many idle, and godless pretenses. Thy
covetous carkings formerly have made me with those worldly minded to go and see
my grounds which I had purchased; to prove mine oxen which I had bought, when
the Lord did graciously and earnestly invite me to him. Thy mistrustfull
diffidence has pricked me forward with remerarious rashness to do many
un-needfull actions: thou having abashed me with a fearful timidity of loss,
of undoing, have made me negligent to seek principally the kingdom of heaven;
and to care for the morrow, when it might sufficiently and time enough take
care for it self. Thy savage cruelty heretofore has made me unmercifully
bloody to my precious soul, servants, and beasts, fore-casting, and
fore-providing something for them to do on the Lords day: Cease henceforward to
molest me with these temptations; I have now learned to be content with Gods
allowance to me, and dealing toward me. I am now resolved to depend on him,
and on his gracious providence: and by Gods help will be so merciful to my
self, servant, and beast, that we will not do any servile work on Gods Day,
wherein we serve our selves, and not God.

Whether sports and recreations, yea, such as at other 2. Consid. Augustine.
Batly. Babings, Homil. S^at.
times may be lawful, are not demonstrated to be unlawful upon the Lords Day.
By many of those I have named before, amongst whom S. Augustine is one, who in
another place as I have read (not in him, but cited) speaking of some, who
rested to sports, toys, hunting, and nets, says, It is to keep a Qui
vacabant nugu, lud^s, venatio. nibus, retibus, etc.
Sabbath to the golden Calfe, the Idol of Egypt, not to the God of heaven. To
which I will add Gualter, who says, Therefore they cast far away the impure
works of the flesh, and the Proculergo abjiciunt impura carnis opera, and
insanum studium voluptan dupeccant qui diem hunc superbiae, sustus, aleae,
poculu, and impuro voluptae. tum slu lio tribuunt. Dies fellos Majestati
Aleissimi dedicatos, nullu voluptanbus occupart. -- Nec huj^t religiosi diet
otia relaxantes, obscrenis qutbuslibet patimur voluptatibus detiners: nihil
eodem die vindicet sibi scena theatralis, aut Circense certa men, tui serarum
lachrymosa spectacula.-Iiaec olim Christiani Principes curarunt. At hadie esta
vix Episcopis curae sunt. Gualte^ in Hom 33. in Mar. 3 page 33. Theodoslus,
Valentinianis, Arcadius, Leo, Antonius, a quibus prohibitum est paenis,
exhibere hoc die spectacula, aut voluptatibus dare operam. Wall. (ex Bucero) p.
74. Vt omnis profinitas and carnalis oblectatio ex eu exulet. -- Deinde and hoc
necessarium est, ne aut ejusmodi oblectamenta usurpentur, quae fructum auditi
Verbi, aut reliquorum pietatis extrcitiorum intercipiant, aut etiam miumtat,
sed potius ut eis inserviant, and ad ea majori cum vigore resumenda hominem
disponam. Wallaeus page 133.
peevish exercise of sporting. -- They offend which apply this day to pride,
disdain, dice, cups, and impure study of pleasures. -- Neither do we suffer
Festival Days dedicated to the Majesty of the Highest, to be occupied to any
pleasures, -- either to be detained, refreshing the vacant time of a religious
day in any filthy delights. Let the stage. play, or the Circensian exercise, or
the lamentable spectacles of beasts challenge nothing to themselves on that
day, etc. (This was a Law of Leo and Anthemius Emperors) In times past Princes
did see to these things, but now Bishops scarce regard them.

And Wallaeus, who says, Theodosius, Valentinian, Leo, and Antonius, forbade
by punishments to behold plays on this Day.

Again: That all profane and carnal delights be banished from them, -- and
then this is necessary either that such recreations be not usurped which
prevent or weaken the profit of the Word heard, or of other exercises of
piety; but rather that they may do service to them, and frame a man to begin
again the same with more liveliness. 2. And whether they have not an absolute
inhibition by that authority which is without contradiction, Isa. 58. 13. Not
doing thy pleasure on my Holy day. Man's pleasure signifying sometimes any
manner of sinful delight agreeable to our corrupt nature; as, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
lovers of pleasures. Sometimes honest delights, serving for the solace and
comfort of man's life, Genesis 49. 20. Giving pleasure for a King. 3. And by these
reasons.

The first drawn from the greater to the lesser. I reason 1. Rat.
thus.

Where lawful labors, and profitable works are forbidden as unlawful, there
lustful and wanton actions of sports and delights much more. But lawful
labors, etc. are forbidden upon the Lords Day as unlawful. Therefore lustful
and wanton actions of sports, etc. much more.

The former Proposition (I take it) may be avowable thus.

1. Where such actions which are strictly commanded by the Lord in the general
course of man's life are forbidden, there those actions much more are forbidden,
which are never so strictly commanded, only sparingly permitted.

But where lawful labors in men's callings are forbidden, there such actions
are forbidden which are strictly commanded in the general course of, etc.

Therefore much more sports which are never commanded, only sparingly permitted.

2. Where the more lawful, and less distracting are forbidden, there the
less lawful and more distracting are much more forbidden.

But where lawful labors, etc. are forbidden, there the more lawful, and
less distracting are forbidden (works are more lawful, because commanded by
the Lord; less distracting, sports wholly possessing the mind with desire of
masterie, etc. I think each man's experience will say, his mind is more free
for heavenly things when he rides a journey, then when he rides in hunting;
when he plowes, then when he wrestleth, rings, plays at cudgels, etc.)

Therefore sports and delights less lawful, and more distracting, etc.

3. Lawful labors, and profitable works as little, if not less break the
rest of the Lords Day by equal comparison, as sports and recreations. e. g. To
ride in hunting breaks the rest of the Day as much (if not more) as to ride in
travel, to labor at a bell, as to labor at the plough; to strike with a
cudgel, as to strike with a flaile.

From the name of the Day, and duties commanded for the 2. Rat. Sanctificare
est ad usus sanctos applicare. Wallaeus de Sob, page 105.
Day (it is called Gods Holy Day, 1. Because separated by God, 2. Because a
means of holiness, we are enjoined to remember to keep it holy. i. Wholly to
spend it in his service, i. in holiness,) I reason thus.

Those things which are impediments and lets of holiness cannot lawfully be
done upon that day which is Gods Holy Day, and ought to be kept holy.

But sports and recreations are lets and impediments of holiness (this is
evident to every man's experience which will tell him, if he will permit it
freedom of speech, that these inchaunting Sirens do so charm, and bewitch,
these insatiable ingrossers of time do so extraordinarily distract, if not
wholly possess the mind, that it is wholly estranged, and alienated from holy
duties; so that they seem tedious and irksome to it? Who knows not how those
make pensive the heart when they are called to these? Who knows not how they
exhilerate the heart, when these in public are ended? Who knows not how
those (like vene mous weeds and choking thorns) suffocate and strangle these,
intruding themselves into the room of, and shoulder out Divine contemplations,
heavenly communications, and godly and Christian actions?)

Therefore sports and recreations cannot lawfully be done upon the Lords Day.
And therefore whether it is not needful for us, whom it concerns, so far as
in us lies, to dissuade, and draw people from such courses; and if it be not
good to this end for every Christian soul, to reason after this or the like
manner.

Are these things so? Yea, moreover, 1. Has the Lord Dissw. 1.
of his free favor and bounteous liberality allowed me six whole days for my
pleasure and profit (some little part of each day except to sanctify my self,
family, and calling, in lieu whereof he allows me back part of his Day for
refreshing, works of charity, necessity and decency) and reserved only one Day
for his service and worship, and shall I allow my self or mine, sports upon
this Day which is the Lords, not mine nor theirs? 2. Has the Lord provided me
sweet recreations, heavenly refreshments for his Holy Day, and shall I prefer
the huskie, drossie delights of un-needfull carnal sportings before those
truly solacing melodious rejoicing? 3. Would good S. Paul never eat any flesh
while the world stood, rather then offend his weak brother, a man, a sinful,
and mortal man like himself; and shall I play and sport my self in needless
exercises whiles the Lords Day lasts, and so offend the Lord, a God so
merciful, a Father so loving, and a Judge so fearful? 4. Should the Lord
come to judgment upon that Day (as some think) would it not be far better
for me to be then found serving him in spiritual exercises, then my self in
carnal sports? Let other men do as they please, I am as yet fully resolved,
that neither I will, nor mine shall (if I can remedy it) sport and play upon
the Lords Day: Surcease henceforward O froward flesh, to hinder me with thine
idle objections. Tell me no more that the Lords Day will be a sad Day if I may
not sport; this day bringing sweeter and sounder delights. Tell not me that
many men must have recreations, therefore upon the Lords Day: as my works have
toiled them, so my time shall refresh them, if such refreshing is needful. I
my self could not take it well to have another man's toiled servant sent to me
for food, because he must have food, he having wrought hard. Tell me no more
that many good Divines think them lawful on the Lords Day: for if it be
disputable, it is the safest course not to use them;



1. Since the Lord Jehovah in express words by the mouth of his Prophet Isaiah
58. 13. says thus, not speaking thine own words.

2. And for these following causes.

1. Where the Lord has commanded the whole man to rest from servile works,
there he commands the hand to rest from working, the foot from walking, and the
tongue from talking.

But in the fourth Commandment, Thou shall do no manner of work, the Lord
has commanded the whole man, etc. Therefore, etc.

2. Those things which as lets hinder the duties of the Lords Day, are
forbidden.

But worldly words as lets hinder the duties of the Lords Day, scil. holy
conference: therefore, etc.

3. Where bodily works are forbidden, there those things are forbidden which
hinder the sanctifying of the Sabbath, as much or more then bodily works do.

But bodily works are forbidden: therefore worldly words, hindering more the
sanctifying of the Sabbath. Because a man may work alone, but cannot talk
without company.

4. That Commandment which ties the outward man from the deed done, ties the
tongue from talking of the same. e. g. The sixth forbids murder and murtherous
words. The seventh adultery and adulterous words. The eight theft and
deceitful words.

But the fourth Commandment ties the outward man from worldly works: and
therefore the tongue from worldly words.

And therefore whether many people are not much to blame, who make the Lords
Day a reckoning day with workmen, a directing day what shall be done the next
week, a day of idle tattle about their pleasures, profits, gossips tales, and
other men's matters.

Whether worldly thoughts are not unlawful on the Lords 4. Consid.
Day, considering,

1. That each Commandment extends to the thought, binding it, e. g. the 6 from
anger, the 7 from lust, the 8 from covetousness, etc.

2. That the Lord especially requires the inward man, Luke 10. 27.

3. That worldly thoughts hinder from heavenly, and therefore whether those are
not blameworthy, who busy their heads upon such days in plodding about their
worldly business, etc.

And lastly, if it be not a pious and profitable, a comfortable, and necessary
resolution for a man constantly to purpose to do as follows:



1. The works of God general, and special.

1. To the glory of God, beholding in their innumerable varieties and melodious
harmony, the powerful omnipotency, and infinite wisdom of God.

2. To mine own endless comfort, viewing in these the boundless, and
bottomless depths of the Lords ample and gracious favors toward me giving
me such a being, such senses, members, calling, substance; such variety of
creatures to delight, feed and guard me; such a Savior, such a Word, such
excellent means to save me, etc that thus feeding my soul with such solacing
considerations, I may edge and keen my dull desires to praise and magnify a
God so good, and gracious.

3. To the humiliation of my soul naturally prone to an overweaning conceit
of its own nothingnesse, pondering the grievous groanings, and massy burdens
of distressefull miseries Gods justice has inflicted upon the poor creatures
for my sins: and finding my self to come short of them in obeying the will
of God, I continually failing, they always doing that for which they were made.

4. For mine own instruction, these being a large, and fair book written by
the LORD JEHOVAH in fair and capital letters, wherein he that runs if he
have but eyes in his head, may read his own fickle, and fading condition,
being like the withering grass; the baseness of himself, made of dust, and
turning to it again; the uncomfortable, irk some, and fastidious condition of
death, and a spiritual darkness, scil. sin, and iniquity resembled to death
and darkness natural. Yea, the book of the creatures is a library so full of
learned literature, that contemptible Ants, and glorious Angels; beautified
stars, and basest vermin; yea, all beings created to swim, and play in the
liquid streams and vast ocean; to fly about with out stretched wing in the
thin, and perspicuous air; or to run and range upon the sound and solid
earth; by their contentation with, and thankfulness for their little pittance,
and obedience to the Lord, their bountiful benefactour preach loudly to me
contentment with, and thankfulness for my so large allowance and obedience to
a father so beneficial to me undeserving. That so, by the meditation of the
works of God, I may be stirred up to trust, love, fear, and obey God,
pondering, and perusing his works of justice and mercy.

Ios. Assidua meditatio memoriam efficit indel ebilem: Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in Genesis
1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2, practiced by the best men, as David, Psalm. 119. 97. 99. and
the Virgin Mary, Luke 2. 19. 2. That as meditation without hearing is
erroneous, so hearing without meditation is barren, and the dullness of my
blunt, and obtuse, and

Nathaniels with the dark, and divelish robes of censorious uncharitableness,
Luciferean pride, and damned hypocrisy, because these truly befit many who are
professors, and others in their conceits; thus extracting matter of large
discourses to please themselves, purchase admiration, and applause for their
great and deep experience, and procure many farewell thanks for their good
company. Yet I, although I formerly have been, and still am too often, and
futurely may be that way overtaken, so as to talk of such fruitless and
unneedfull matters, resolve henceforward to have my communication of such
things, whereby God may be glorified, my self, and others edified in the holy
faith: not meddling with other men's matters, but such as concern my self, or
those with whom I confer, and principally those which appertain to our
souls good, and amongst other things by name of the Word of God in general,
and such Scriptures as I have heard read, and expounded in particular, as
wisely, peaceably, orderly, lovingly, honestly, and humbly as I can: I well
considering besides the necessity, and furtherance of such like conference.

more comfortable then those, they yielding not the least glaunce, or
glimmering of sound delight, or comfort when a man is going to his bed, falls
into any affliction, or temptation, or comes to his bed of death: But instead
thereof, many befoolings of himself for mispending so many precious hours,
and golden opportunities, about fruitless foam and froth: these abundantly
cheering the heart, gladded with the consideration of the many benefits it has
gained, and fruits it has reaped by such like talkings together.

more advantageous then that. Can you say, and speak truly that ever you
gained any knowledge of God, your selves, the Word, the way to heaven? Can you
say that ever you gained any grace, goodness, or any thing, save an addition
of new sins to the catalogue of your old by such like Lords days chattings?
Whereas I dare affirm this kind of Sabbath conference to increase saving
knowledge, sound comfort, true Christian love, heavenly-mindednesse, and to
warm, and vivifie the saving graces seated in the heart.

3. And more honorable; me thinks it is a poor commendation, or credit for a
man to have a faculty with facility to find out idle discourse to drive away a
day; each new speaking, stammering child which can lispe out but half english
being able to tattle somewhat or other to that purpose. But for a man humbly,
lovingly, and feelingly to confer of the narrow way which leads to life,
how to walk in it with comfort, declining the many bypath of sin: of the
Christian combat, the number and nature of enemies, their sleights and
subtilties, how to escape them, and to get the victory: this is a greater
glory to a Christian man.

Whereas many men, and women spend the Lords day in Affirm. 3. Deeds.
sloathfull lithernes, sleeping, or doing certain odd chares, which purposely
they had appointed for that day: yet I determine resolutely to spend all spare
time:

1. In reading Gods Word, and good books, and that with inward desire, and
outward endeavor to profit.

2. In singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5. 19. In which
angelical exercise I will do what I can to sing.

1. With my heart, Ephesians. 5. 19. i. e. with understanding, sense, and feeling.

2. To the Lord, Ibid. scil. 1. In his glorious powerful, and gracious
presence. 2. Upon a holy remembrance of his blessings. 3. To his honor, and
glory.

3. With Grace, Col. 3. 16. to exercise the graces of the heart, as holy joy,
trust

4. In Gods mercy, etc. in singing, Teaching, and admonishing my self and
others.

5. For mine own and others consolation, Ephesians. 5. 19. making melody, etc.
James 5. 13. I well considering this duty to be: 1. Gods own ordinance, Ephesians.
5. 19. 2. Binding all persons, James 5. 13. is any merry, let him sing. 3. To
be performed publicly, Ephesians. 5. 19. 4. And privately, Psalm. 101. 1, 2. 5. A
special duty for the Lords day, Psalm. 92. Title. 6. And a duty which is 1
Good, having in it no evil, being Gods ordinance: 2 Pleasant in it self, and
to the hearers: 3 And comely to the user, Psalm. 147.

3. In praying to God to sanctify the day, and duties thereof to me; I being
able to do nothing of my self.

4. In doing such like works of mercy as these following: sc.

1. Visiting the sick, and that,

1. To benefit mine own soul, and that by,

1. Taking notice of mine own mortality.

2. Satan's subtlety striving to lull men asleep in security, or plunge them
into desperation.

3. The difficulty, if not impossibility of repentance deferred till death,
and sickness.

4. The excellency of saving graces, a good conscience, etc. which will do men
good when all worldly contentments forsake them.

2. To do good to the sick party, and that by persuading him to a Christian
carriage in sickness. sc.

1. A serious consideration causing sickness.

2. The profit, and advantage of sickness; trying grace, weaning from the
world, provoking to prayer, and taming the flesh.

3. If men rightly behave themselves in sickness: 1. Not neglecting, nor
depending too much upon the means. 2. Praying to God. 3. Giving good counsel.
4. Submitting themselves to Gods will, etc.

4. And make a good use thereof being made more compassionate to others in
misery: hating sin, the cause of the scourge. And not as the fashion of many
is, who go to the sick: but

1. To the hurt of themselves, being hardened in seeing the foolish virgins, or
Nabal-like sickness, or death, of wicked men; and the violent death and
sickness of many good men.

2. To the hurt of the sick: 1 Viewing the weakness of the sick, to sport
themselves, and discredit their weak neighbor. 2. Hardening them what they
can in their sins by securing them of longer life, flattery, etc.

2. Relieving the distressed with a thankful, loving, pitiful, 1 Cor. 16. 1.
single, cheerful, liberal, just, and true heart.

3. Teaching the ignorant, drawing sinners to repentance, comforting the
distressed, admonishing the unruly, encouraging the good, rebuking the bad,
reconciling the disagreeing, stirring up the slothful, etc.

Whereas many people deem such like courses to savor Affirm. 4.
of melancholic madness, and too much puritannicall austeritie, and think
themselves undone, if they may not have free liberty to glut and satiate
themselves with carnal delights, and vain sportings: I am surely persuaded,

1. That there is no true, sound, and solid cause of delight Recreat. 1.
in any vain sportings, or worldly pleasures; especially in comparison of
these Lords Days delightful duties, if they may be poised in an even
balance. e. g. Balance together the least measure of saving graces, and a
world of voluptuous contentments, and gainefull profits, and I Will undertake
that the former, the means of getting, and the helps in keeping, it shall be
found more honorable, profitable, and delightful, and so over-weigh by far
the latter. Or 2. Cast into one end of the scales the Word of God, into the
other any worldly contentment what you will; and let the Lord himself, (who is
fittest and best able to decide the controversy) be judge, and it will be found
far to surpass in worth, and valuation, all pearls of price and excelling
treasures, Mat. 13. 44. 2. Surmounting in profit and advantage the most
advantageous practices in or about the world; making those who read and hear
it with open eyes, and hearing ears, happy, Rev. 1. 3. And those who meditate
therein day and night, like trees planted by the waters side, etc. Psalm. 1. 2,
3. Thirdly, to ravish the heart, truly sensible of Divine delights with
unsatiable glee, and unmatchable gladness, rejoicing that heart as much as if it
had found great spoils, Psalm. 119. 162. Being more luscious then the sweetest
honey, or the most mellifluous honey comb, Psalm. 19. 9.

2. That there is sound and sufficient cause of joy and delight in all such and
other Sabbath Duties. Instance in some particulars. e. g.

1. In hearing and reading the Word of God, if we consider it in its names, and
effects, declaring the nature thereof. e. g.

1. It is a transcendent pearl, and excelling treasure, Math. 13. 44, 45. More
lovely then gold, or much fine gold, Psalm. 119. 127. Better then thousands of
gold and silver, Verse 72. And therefore cannot but fill, and farce the soul
with consolation in getting, possessing, and enjoying the same.

2. It is bread, water, wine, milk, and meat, to feast, and fatten the soul
begotten by this immortal seed, and enlivened with Gods quickening Spirit: and
therefore must needs make merry the same, feeding, and fatting it self with
such heavenly cates.

3. It is a light to the feet, and a lantern to the paths, Psalm. 119. 105.
Then which, what more needful, profitable, or pleasing to the Christian
travailer to direct him to the haven of endless happiness?

4. Is there not extraordinary matter of joyful delight in reading, and
hearing read and preached:

1. The Word of grace, justly so called, showing and working grace in those
which rightly hear it?

2. That Word which begets and increases faith, therefore termed truly the
Word of faith?

3. That Word which declares the way of salvation, therefore styled by the Holy
Ghost a Word of salvation.

4. That Word which nourishes and sustaineth a spiritual life, and offers
eternal life, ergo called a Word of life.

5. And the Word of reconciliation, as is before showed.

2. In prayer, which sacred duty will appear perspicuously to each enlightened
soul, to be a true cause of gladness, when rightly performed, it seriously
considering.

1. How acceptable it is with God; he being well pleased with such like
sacrifices, 1 Timothy 2. 3.

2. Of what excellent dignity, put for the whole worship of God, Psalm. 50. 15.

3. How commodious and gainefull. 1. Being a Sovereign salve for every sore.
2. Bringing salvation to the pious petitioner, Romans 10. 13. 3. Resisting that
implacable enemy, Satan, Ephesians. 6. 18. 4. Prevailing with God extraordinarily,
beyond imagination.

3. If we ponder advisedly, that while here we live, we are in a strange
country, being pilgrims, and strangers, having no continuing city, seeking one
to come, scil. an heavenly; where our Father, our Head and Husband, our friends
and fellows, our crown and inheritance are: It will necessarily follow, that
as it is a gladding discourse to contrymen, meeting in another nation, to
talk of their own country and commonwealth, their friends and families, and
which way to take soon and surely to enjoy their wished company: so it must
needs be a delightful colloquie when two or more citizens of heaven, meeting
in this their pilgrimage, confer cordially of the way to heaven, of the pious
and sweetened paths directly tending thither. Secondly, if we seriously consider
that a godly and Christian communication is an excellent means to increase
saving knowledge, enkindle godly zeal, nourish Christian love, cherish and
warm all gracious beginnings, and edge and keen the longing appetite to
hunger insatiably after the best things; We cannot but conclude that such like
conference on the Lords Day must needs afford superabundant matter of pleasure
and delectation.

4. To instance in the duty of Divine contemplation, which seems to worldlings
full of pensive sadness, and madding melancholy, this I say savouring
seemingly so much of uncomfortable sorrow, is no wise defective of recreating
festivities; each particular holy meditation having its several oblectation.
For examples sake, let it be

1. Upon the works, and creatures of God; how do these make merry the godly
soul after a serious musing of them; considering that as they were made for
the glory of God, so for his particular good, some to guard, some to delight,
some to feed, and refresh, and all to serve him after one manner or other.

2. Let it be upon the Word of God, what it has been, is, and will be to him,
the many fruits and benefits he has reaped from it.

3. Let it be upon Gods particular favors and mercies bestowed upon a man's
self (especially his soul) and general benefits and blessings he has
bestowed, and promised to bestow upon his Church and chosen.

4. Let it be upon the remission of sins, how, and by whom, wherein every
sincere Christian may behold clearly the unparalleled love of Christ Jesus,
freeing him by his own painful passion from the guilt and guerdon, the due
desert and dominion, the power and punishment of his sins.

5. Let it be upon the inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, not
fading away, reserved in the heavens, etc. And I think it will be granted without
contradiction that such like meditations make the godly soul to leap for joy.

6. Let it be upon dismal death, and mouldring mortality: even this will
comfort the heavenly minded soul, loving the appearing of Christ; longing
after the same with the Bride in the Revelation, certifying him that these
miseries are but momentany, and that this miserable mortality shall be swallowed
up of glorious immortality.

7. Let it be of the judgments of God denounced, or inflicted upon others or
upon himself; even these contemplations want not matter of consolation to that
soul which considers Gods infinite love, sending no greater, he deserving
the extremest; enabling him to make a good use of them, and to bear them
christianly.

This I suppose is a commodious and profitable, necessary and warrantable,
Christian (not Jewish) resolution, to abstain from those worldly and wanton
words, works, and thoughts: and to be wholly employed, and that delightfully
in those holy and heavenly contemplations, communications and actions. And that
I may stir you up to put in practice this so laudable, sweet, and profitable
resolution: to those former reasons and motives I have intermingled in my
former passages, give me leave to add these following reasonings, and pious
arguings.

1. Is the Lords Day the queen of days, yea, the Lords market day for our
souls, wherein we are to buy, Isa 55. 2. without money or money worth, the
heavenly and celestial bread, water, wine, and milk of Gods sacred Word, and
saving graces, the golden gifts and precious merits of Christ to enrich our
faith, Rev. 3. 18. The eye salve of true wisdom, and the Spirit of light to
illuminate our spiritual blindness, and the white raiment of Christ's
righteousness, that we may be clothed, and that the shame of our nakedness do
not appear; and shall we pass it away in wanton delights, in fruitless, and
hurtful discourses, in distrustful, and distracting musings, or in needless
and dunghill actions? And not rather spend this Day in buying such peerless
traffic, not only in the public assemblies, but also before and after the
same, by Divine contemplations, heavenly communications, fervent, and faithful
prayer, and other such like pious Lords Days practices?

2. Is this the Lords Day, not mine, his Holy Day, no common or profane one;
therefore to be sanctified, therefore to be kept holy; and shall we show such
intolerable ingratitude, as to deny so small use of time to him, that gives to
us so much and so large use of time?

3. Is it a matter of duty, and not of courtesy; of charge, and not of choice;
of allegiance, and not of liberty; of necessity, and not of indifferency: not
permitted, but commanded to sanctify the Lords Day, and keep it as holy as we
can; and shall not we use our utmost endeavor to do the same?

4. Do those who conscionably sanctify the Lords Day, imitate the prime and
purest examples, walking in those paths which have been traced out by David,
Nehemiah, and such like ones; by Jesus Christ, such a Son, such a Savior; by
the Lord Jehovah, who rested the seventh Day from his work of creation,
although as easy to him as to speak, and cause it to be created: And shall we
be drawn into unwarranted courses, or omit necessary pious duties upon Gods
Day; because many who are great Scholars, good Preachers, great men, the
wealthiest in our parish, and many honest men make no bones of worldly
discoursings, unneedful actions, nor are very forward in those other
substantial duties. Learning they may have, wisdom, greatness, yea,
goodness, yet may their example be erroneous, no sufficient pattern for
imitation: in many things we offend all; yea, and good St. Paul would be
followed no otherwise then he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be it they be wise
or wealthy, honorable or honest, who give or take liberty; yet sure we are, we
take the surest and safest course, yea, the most commodious and comfortable,
having Gods precept for our warrant, and his example for our encouragement.
Powerful they may be, but he is omnipotent; wise they may be, but he is
wisdom it self; honest they may be, he goodness it self.

5. Since the Lords Day is a blessed Day; so called, either, 1. Because it is
instituted to Gods service. 2. Or because the Lord gave it a singular
privilege to be a Day of rest and holiness, a Day of delight and heavenly
feasting, to the world. 3. Or because the Lord does bless more effectually all
such who conscionably keep it holy, on that Day then any other: so that then
they enjoy after an extraordinary manner this transcendently sweet, and lovely
fellowship with the Father. We for our parts will alienate and estrange our
souls, tongues and bodies, so far forth as in us lies, from such works,
such words and thoughts which withdraw the mind from God: and endeavor to
spend those little parcels of time, which remain to us exempt from the
public assemblies of the Saints, and the doing of some few necessary actions,
in Divine contemplations, Christian communications, such pious and holy
actions, that so the Lord may suppe with us, and we with him, Rev. 3. 20. We
feasting him with the fruit of our true repentance. 2. With our faith,
believing and applying the Word and promises of God. 3. By serving God
faithfully, giving up our souls and bodies, holy and acceptable sacrifices to
him: he feasting us in his Word and Sacraments. That so he may dwell in us, and
we in him; and to conclude, that we may obtain (if still we want) communion
with God, or get (if already we have) a more perfect, and full assurance of our
fellowship with the Father.

CHAP. XIII. The eight Means and Duty, Choosing the things which please God:
What those things be: Diverse chusers: Which are best.
HAve we, or desire we fellowship with the Father? Show 8. Means. Duty.
it, and seek it, by choosing the thing which pleases the Lord: This choosing
being both a mark, and means of man's communion with the Father, Isa. 56. 4.
Where and who is he that would not be a chuser, might the choice tend to his
real and seeming contentment? With what greedy graspings would some possess
mountains of gold, silver, pearls, and precious stones, and worlds of wealth?
With what enraged, bloody, and implacable cruelty would some bathe their hands
and glad their hearts in the last groanings, and effusion of the most warm and
in most hearts blood of their enemies? How would some ingrosse kingdom after
kingdom, yea one world after another? How would some plunge themselves into a
bottomless Ocean of voluptuous delights, and play and swim therein like
Leviathan in the sea? How would some glut their insatiable appetites, feeding
themselves upon the extracted quintessence of all real and imaginary
dainties, might each have free liberty of choice? Chusers you may be, chusors I
desire you to be, not of such dunghill dross, not of such barbarous revenge,
not of such fading crowns, not of such frothy delights, not of such
corruptible cates; But with David of the (...) truth, Psalm. 119. 30. Or of Gods
precepts, Verse 135. Of that which is good, Isa. 7. 15. Of that good part which
Marie chose, Luc. 10. 42. And of that which pleases God. 1. Obedience pleases
God, 1 Samuel 15. 22. 2. Sorrow for sin pleases God, Psalm. 51. 17. 3. A holy
life, that pleases God. 4. Saving faith pleases God, Heb. 11. 6. 5. To do
good and communicate please God, Heb. 13. 16. 6. And to frame our thoughts,
words, and deeds to Gods will, pleases God, Col. 1. 10. These things choose
therefore, and I Will warrant you your choice shall not repent you. Enoch was not
taken to heaven, because he was rich, royally descended, the seventh from Adam,
because he was learned, had a comely and strong body; but because he pleased
God, Heb. 11. 5. Choose we therefore with Enoch, the pious Proselite, and godly
Eunuch, the thing which pleases God; this choice being a sign of man's
communion with God, and a means whereby a man is joined to God; that so with
these we may have fellowship with the Father.

CHAP. XIIII. The ninth Means and Duty, To take hold of Gods Covenant.
HAve we fellowship with the Father? Declare it. Do 9. Means. Duty.
we want it? Feel it; by taking hold of Gods Covenant, this being a mark and
means of man's communion with the Father, Isa. 56. 4. Ier. 50. 5. The
foundation of which Covenant is Christ Jesus only, Isa. 42. 6. He only being
the peacemaker, or Prince of peace. 2. The only Angel of the Covenant, Mal.
3. 1. 3. The Mediator of the New Testament. 4. The Father only being well
pleased in him. 5. By him only man comes to God. And, 6. In regard that he
only ratified, and confirmed it with his own Blood, Heb. 7. 22. 8. 6. 9. 15.
Secondly, the frame is by way of contract; in which are comprised, 1. Certain
Articles and Conditions on both parts. 1. The principal Party covenanting is
God, who covenants to be our (...), and the God of our seed, Genesis 17. 7. i. To
save us and ours, to give us righteousness, and eternal life in Christ. 2.
The other is the godly man, who for his part promises to be the Lords people,
Ios. 24. 15. And therefore binds himself to believe, and rest upon the promise
of God. 2. Signs, and seals, binding each party to the agreement or covenant
made on Gods part. He has given us his Word, Handwriting, oath, ( Heb. 6.
17.) as Seals. On our part, the ancient people of God have bound themselves by
writing, Nehem. 9. 38. Seal, ibid. Imprecation, 10. 29. And Oath, ibid.
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 13. etc. And the people of God now, perhaps by writing,
perhaps by seal, perhaps by vow, surely by word, Baptism, and the receiving
of the Lords Supper. 3. Writings, containing the conditions on both sides,
scil. the Word of God, the Old and New Testament called the Covenant, Ex. 24.
2. Book of the Covenant, 34. 28. Words of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9. 11. 29. 1.
Tables of the Covenant, Romans 9. 4. The Covenants, because they show what God
will do to his people, and what we are to perform according to the tenor of
the Covenant. This Covenant (or compact) made betwixt God and man, 1. Touching
reconciliation and life everlasting, is, 1. Legal, of works, which is a
league made touching salvation upon condition of perfect obedience set down in
the Moral Law, wherein eternal life is promised to such as perfectly fulfill
the same, and eternal death threatened to such as transgress the same. 2.
Evangelicall, of grace, which is an agreement concerning men to be freely saved
through faith in Christ. This Covenant God made with the justified Jews before
Christ, to whom he was a child borne, and a Son given, Isa. 9. 6. And the
believing Jews, and Eundem spiritum and eandem fidem fuisse in Apostolis and
Prophetis, evidentissime probat Apostolus, 2 Cor. 4. Epiph contra errores
Marcionis.
Gentiles since; for although the Prophet Jeremy speaks of an old, and a new
Covenant; yet himself shows, that this old and new covenant for substance are
one and the same, Verse 33. of Chapter 31. I will put my Law in their inward
parts, -- will be their God, and they shall be my people. I will forgive their
iniquity, 34. Which is the substance of the old and new Covenant. The old in
shadows prefigured Christ to come: The New apparently shows that Christ is
come. The Apostle S. Paul (1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. says, the ancient Jews and we
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. Their
Sacraments were more in number then ours, differenced in rites and measure of
signification from ours, yet the same Author, end, and signified thing, etc. S.
John speaking of love, calls it a a new commandment, and an old, 1 Ioh. 2. 7,
8. Old, in regard of the substance; new, it being newly approved and renewed by
Christ, Ioh. 15. 12. So this Covenant of grace was the same when it was old to
the sanctified Jews, in regard of substance, as it is to us; to whom it is
new; only it differs in this, that now it is published more clearly, not in
such dark shadows, and more persons are renewed, more graces are bestowed.

Gods Covenant made with the justified Jews, and us Gentiles, or the old and
new Covenant 1. Differ in the Circumstances, Adjuncts, Accessories, Oiconomie,
Administration, and Dispensation. 2. Agree in the Substance:

Particularly, in the 1. Principal efficient cause, Ier. 31. 31. 2. Moving
cause, Luc. 1. 54. 55. 72. 78. 3. Meritorious cause, Genesis 3. 15. Ephesians. 2. 12,
13. 4. Material cause, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Reconciliation, etc. 5. Instrumental, the
Word 1. Of Gods grace, Act. 20. 32 2. Of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 3. Of
faith, Gal. 3. 8.
6. Formal cause, or mutual promise, Gods, which is free, and man's, which is
due, To 3. 22 7. Final cause, to stir up and confirm the hope of
immortality, Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10. 8. Effect, justification and regeneration, 1
Cor. 1. 30. and 6. 11. 9. Subject persons, only Gods Elect, true believers,
Romans 3. 3. 26. 10. Inward seal, sc. the holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13.

This Covenant we for our parts must make, Psalm. 50. 5. Or enter into, Deuteronomy.
29. 12. Keep, Psalm. 103. 18. Or stand to the words thereof, so as to perform
or accomplish, 2 Reg. 22. 3. That we may 1. please God, this being a thing
pleasing the Lord, Isa 56. 4. 2. Show that we have communion with God, this
being a sign of man's society with the Lord, ibid. 3. And demonstrate that we
desire the same, this being a means of man's communion with God.

This Covenant is laid hold upon and kept.

1. Outwardly.

1. By hearing the Word of God (that Book of the Covenant containing the
conditions and articles of the Covenant) with an open, Psalm. 40. 6. Wakened,
Isa. 50. 4. And hearing ear, Mark 4. 9. Such as joins to hearing attention,
to it a desire to be changed, to it a care to believe, and conscience to obey.

2. By receiving aright the Sacraments which are signs of holy things, which
are holy tokens, visible signs of invisible graces, where we see one thing,
believe another, which are seals of the promises of God in Christ, whose use
is to strengthen us in the promises of salvation, which God has not only made
to us in word, but confirmed them by writing, and lest we should doubt, set to
his seals according to the manner of men; that nothing should lack that might
increase and strengthen us. Signs they are not only figuring, admonishing,
and signifying what is promised; but also exhibiting that which is promised to
the faithful; yea, sealing, and confirming the exhibiting of them These are
called by Master Calvin, Genesis 17. 18. Testimonies, Seals, and Pledges of
Spiritual Graces, and benefits which spring thereof: the Gates of Heaven, etc.
They are Signs to present, Seals to confirm, and Instruments to conveigh
Christ and all his benefits to them that do believe in him: In the right use of
these Ordinances the partakers have assurance of their being in the Covenant of
grace. Saint Paul speaking of Circumcision which was a sign of the Covenant,
Genesis 17. 11. Calls it the seal of the righteousness of the faith, etc Romans 4. 11.

3. By pious prayer, prevailing extraordinarily with God, Luke 11. 13. The Lord
giving his Holy Ghost to those which ask him.

2. Inwardly, we take hold upon and keep Covenant with God.

1. By Faith, believing the Promises. This shows us the Lord, Heb. 11. 27.
Brings us to God, Verse 6. Begets to God, John 1. 12. This justifies, Romans 5.
1. Persuades of Gods peace, and assures us of joy, 5. 2. This purifieth the
heart, Acts 15. 9. Overcommeth the Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 9. And the World, 1 John
5. 4, 5. This is that which stays us in grace, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Which is our
seal, John 3. 33. Which we set to, that God is true; and therefore a means
whereby we take hold of, and keep this Covenant inwardly.

2. By obeying the precepts of God; this is that which allyeth, and affianceth
man to Christ, Ma. 12. 50. Crowns with eternal bliss, Math. 7. 21. Vpholds
man, and supports the world, 2 Corinthians. 10. 6. Surmounteth far sacrifices, 1 Samuel 15. 22. This is the substance of man's covenant with God, Neh. 10. 29.

What intoxicated madness, or giddy vertigiousnesse has possessed your-hearts
and heads? What shall I term you? Cerdoniani, Cainitae, Marcionists,
Apellitae, Severiani, Manichees, Architae, Patricij? You I mean who fence, and
hedge out the regenerate from without the Old Testament, so far forth as you
may or can: For, prove unto you that God does afflict his Children for their
sins, that sorrow for sin is necessary to the regenerate (points which you
deny) the former by David's suffering for his sin with Bathsheba; the latter
by his watering his couch with his tears: you reply, they were under the Law,
in the time of the Old Testament. You I mean, who cry out against the Moral
Law, as once the Babylonians did against Jerusalem, down with it, down with
it even to the ground: away with the law, it belongs not to the regenerate man.
It binds not the conscience of him that is in Christ: You equivocating
Pretteians, Antinomists, I do not say you are Marcionists, Manichees, or the
like in all particulars; but in this you walk cheek by joale, hand in hand
with those forenamed heretics. They condemned the moral law, so do you. They
denied the resurrection of the body, and I much suspect that this is one of
those other deeper doctrines, you were promised to be indoctrinated in. Had you
known how learnedly, and orthodoxally Probemus extructionem potius legis and
prophetar^o inveniri in Christo, quam destructionem. Lib. 1. Contra Marcionem.
page 260. Magis extruens, quam destruens substantiam legis and prophetarum,
Ibid page 228.
Tertullian scourged your great Grandfather Marcion, showing the law to be
fulfilled and built up in Christ, not abolished by Christ. Onera legis usque ad
Ioannem, non remedia: operum iuga reiecta sunt, non disciplinarum. De oratione.
page 788.
That we are freed from the burden of the law, not obedience. In hoc venturil
ut legis, and prophetarum ordo exinde cessaret, per adimpletionem non per
destructionem. Lib. 4. Contra Marcionem. page 273. Aug. qu. 69 Veter. and no^
testam page 745. Non dissolvis aliquid, sed confirmavit -- nunquid haec
cessasse dicenda sunt? absit. Contra Adimantum Manichai discipulum, contra
faustum Manichaeum. Lib. 6. page 231. Non concupisces preceptum est agendae
vitae. Circumcides omne viasculum octavo die preceptum est significanda vitae.
Ep. 49. ad Deograt.
That the law, and Prophets were till John. So that they ceased by fulfilling
not by destruction. Had you known the mind of Saint Augustine, that terrible
hammer of heretics, who tells you, that the ceremonial law is wholly
vanished as a shadow, because the body is exhibited; abolished as a tipe,
because the truth Christ Jesus is come. The Judicial law is abrogated, so
far as peculiar to Jewish policy. But as the Covenant of Grace made betwixt
God and man in Christ Jesus, was ever since the fall one and the same, in the
days of Adam, Abraham, and of Christ and his Apostles, although the
administration thereof was diverse according to the different estate of Gods
children. So the Moral law of God was ever the rule of obedience for all
duties of love to God and man, and shall so continue with the Gospel to the
end of the world.

Had you consulted with Saint Chrysostom, who says, Dei igitur iustitia and
lex veritas est in aeternum. Tom. 1. Hom. in 118. Psalm page 1085 Legis non est
translatio, and transmutatio: etenim hic habemus legem. Legem destrui^^^ per
fidem? Absit; sed lege^ statuimus Tom. 4. Hom. in Heb. 6. page 148 ^^
Therefore the justice and law of God is truth for ever. i. e. There is not
removing, and change of the law for here we have the law. Do we destroy the law
by faith: God forbid, but we establish the law. Had you been acquainted with
the doctrine of the Church of England, which says, The law is immutable, an
ordinance of God in no time or age to be altered, or of any persons of any
nations or age to be disobeyed. Homily 1. of Idol. page 20. Had you considered
how our Savior Christ confirms the Moral law, showing that he came not to
destroy it, Mat. 5. 17. pronouncing its perpetuity to continue till the heavens
be no more, ver. 18. and denouncing a dreadful judgment against such as shall
teach men to break one of the least of those commandments, ver. 19. and
expounding strictly the 6. ver. 22. the 7. ver. 28. the 3. ver. 34. Had you
taken advise of the Apostle Saint Paul, who tells us, that the law is holy,
just, and good, Romans 7. 12. that he served the law of God after the inward man,
ver. 25. That the Commandments of the second Table are fulfilled in this: Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, 13. 9. 10. That Children must obey their
Parents, because it is right; which he shows thus, Honor, etc. Ephesians. 6. 1.
2. Saint James if you had asked his advice, would have told you, that if you
fulfill the royal law of liberty, etc. 2. 8. Or Saint John, he would have
taught you: That hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments, 1. John 2. 5. that sin is the transgression of the law, 3. 4.
that we love God, if we keep his Commandments, 5. 3. Had you been well
advised, that obedience to Gods law, is a prime part of this Covenant on man's
part. If you would not have yielded any being to the Ceremonial and Judicial
law, as Sir Walter Raleigh does, who says, the former lives in the Sir Walter
Ral. lib. 2. cap. 45. page 277.
things it foresignified; for the shadow is not destroyed, but perfected, when
the substance is represented to us: the latter in substance, and equity; yet
would you have said with him, the Moral law lives still, is not taken away
saving in the ability of condemning; for therein are we commanded to love God,
and use charity one to another, which for ever shall be required. You would
have acknowledged, that although there is no force in the law for our
justification; yet it is of great use for edification, and sanctification. That
it does not cease to teach, exhort, and prick forward the faithful under the
Gospel to that which is good. That although Christ accomplished, and abolished
the Ceremonial, so he accomplished, but abolished not the Morrall law. That
although the law is abrogated in regard of justification, malediction and
rigor, God accepting the ^^^cere will for the deed: yet the use of the law is
established for the leading a godly and christian li^^. That although
Christians are not under the law as a rigorous exactour, and horrible avenger:
yet they are under the law as a righteous commander, and holy conducter to
lead in the way of holiness. In a word: That the ten Commandments contain
the express form of Gods eternal will, the substance of all duties of piety
to God in the first Table, of charity to man in the second: all which God
required from the beginning before Moses: in the time of the law by Moses;
after Moses by the Prophets; now to the end by Christ, and his Apostles;
although darkness in Ceremonies is dispelled, sense of prophecy is fulfilled,
and handwriting against us cancelled: And not so headily and rashly, upon the
mere warrant of your one of a thousand have abrogated the Moral law, as not
binding the conscience of the regenerate, the Lord at this day no less then in
ancient times exacting as well at the hands of regenerate, as unregenerate,
that they perform obedience to the law. But leaving such intoxicated dreamers
to solace themselves in their imaginary golden dreaming fancies of no law, no
repentance, no sorrow for sin, no affliction for sin. For wakened they will
not be I fear out of their fools Paradise. I return to my propounded use,
and will use a few Motives to stir you up to take hold of Gods Covenant.

Lov. 26. 9. Isa. 54. 10. 56. 5. the contrary makes liable to all his curses,
Lev. 26. 15. Deuteronomy. 29. 21. Consider therefore what you have to do.

Whom should we follow if not the Saints? To whom should we be agreeable or
like, if not to them? With whom should we have a connecting congruity, save
with such who are Gods chosen, and peculiar people? Take hold therefore of Gods
Covenant; for by entering into, and keeping covenant with God we imitate the
best; by the contrary the vilest men, even villainous miscreants, heirs of
perdition.



1. Will you not take hold of Gods covenant, because you must then part with
sin of all sorts, even with your darling corruptions, iniquity breaking
covenant with God; and they are so sweet to your soul, that nothing else can
afford a more pleasant relish then they; neither is any thing so advantageous
as are they. If this be thy plea O man, thou art to be pitied: the more a
fool, or mad man glads himself in tumbling in the mire, the more swinish, and
sottish is he, and his estate more lamentable. Be it thy sins are sweet, yet
deadly poison. Be it they make thee merry; so does a certain herb, the eater
(as it is reported) who eating dies. Be it they seem profitable, yet are they
fruitless, Ephesians. 5. 11.

2. Is it because Gods Commandments are grievous, which then thou must obey?
Who says so O man, besides Satan, thy cursed flesh, and wicked men? Christ
otherwise, Matthew. 11. 30. My yoke is easy, and my burden light. Saint John
says otherwise, 1. John 5. 3. His commandments are not grievous.

3. Is it because Gods commandments cannot be kept? True; no believer, or
regenerate man by the assistance of Gods grace is able to observe all and every
commandment of God, in every part, at all times, In thought, word, and deed
perfectly as God in his law requires of him (as Papists Bern. Rhens against
Rome, page 269.
say:) yet the true Christian is said to keep the law of the Lord. 1.
Imputatively in Christ, the commandment is reputed done, when it is forgiven,
which is left undone. 2. In respect of his will, he having a desire which is
accepted. 3. In regard of endeavor striving to frame his life according to the
Commandments of God. 4. Comparatively in respect of others. 5. In regard of
integrity of heart to one commandment, as to another, to all, and every one,
at all times, as says Mr. Bernard. Besides, although they cannot fulfill any
of them; yet they are careful to follow all of them: though they cannot keep
them thoroughly; yet they desire and endeavor to keep them truly. Although
they cannot attain to the perfection of obedience, yet they strive for some
proportion and measure of obedience. And so they keep the law of God. First,
by imputation, 2. Cor. 5. 21. Secondly, by inchoation, Romans 15. 14. Thirdly, by
acceptance, 2. Cor. 8. 12. God accepting the desire for the deed, the will for
the work, the purpose for the performance, and part for the whole.

4. Is it because you can enter covenant elsewhere more for your advancement,
and preferment? If so, where, and with whom? If you think with the world, you
are pitifully deceaved, and mistaken: It Is but vanity, therefore seeming that it
is not, showing that it has not, soon passing away. It is but vanity,
therefore light, unprofitable, deceitful, and transitory. If with sin; how
are you deluded? it oppresses, it damneth. If with Satan, do you deal
wisely? What good can he give you, who has none himself? What favors will he
bestow, who seeks your utter ruin, and destruction? Relinquish therefore, and
extirpate such diabolical charms: enter into covenant you cannot with any
more honorable then our God: more powerful to defend you then the Lord of
Lords; more rich to reward you, merciful to bless, wife to direct you; and
more just to perform all his promises. Those who keep covenant with our God,
shall be graciously Protected, comfortably directed, plentifully rewarded,
triumphantly crowned, and immortally glorified.

Judge. 2. 20. 2. King. 18. 11, 12. and no marvel; for not to keep covenant
with God is disobedience, to break it wilfully is rebellion, Psalm. 78. 10.
breach of covenant with man is a great offense, Romans 1. 31. therefore with God
a grand impiety. Abraham left his native country, and fathers house, he went
with an intent to sacrifice his son upon mount Moriah. Moses left the courtly
pleasures of Egypt. Matthew forsook the receipt of Custom to follow Christ:
they refused not Gods designement because of those many perilous obstacles,
and dangerous difficulties they were to encounter with, and they were no
loosers. It is no loss to leave a fathers house, for a kingdom: carnal
kindred, to be father of the faithful: the pleasures of a corrupt idolatrous
court, to guide Gods people: the gathering of toll, or tax, to gather Saints
into Gods Kingdom.

Had you such a comely proportion, starre-like beauty, matchless validity,
undaunted valor, nimble agility, perfect sanity which is not attainable by
nature: Could you dive into deeper profundities, and discourse more profoundly
of matters Ethicall, Political, Physical, and Metaphysicall then all
Philosophers that ever breathed: Had you worldly honors, wealth, and delight
even to content, which is not possible; yet all those are but as dross in
respect of being in Covenant with God: For by virtue hereof 1. The Lord is our
God, not only by creation, and conservation as he is to all: But by election,
redemption, covenant, possession, affection, and adoption. 2. And we are his
people; not only by vocation, and profession; but his peculiar people, holy
nation, his people by election, conversion, persuasion, and practice. By virtue
of which it is, that the Lord is our strength, shield, salvation,
righteousness, King, Father, Redeemer, hope, help, fortress, and Deliverer:
Hence it is, that we have interest in earthly favors, remission of sins,
imputation of righteousness, and donation of Gods Spirit: Hence it is that we
shall have a joyful resurrection, immortal glory, and consummation of bliss:
Hence comes our spiritual power and authority; honor, and dignity; son*
ship, and adoption, Isa. 56. 5. Hence comes our right and title to the use of
the creatures, happy guard of Angels, beatificall, blissful promises, and
that unparalleled matchless crown of immortality. And to conclude, Hence it is
that we have fellowship with the Father. Join we therefore our selves in
covenant with the Lord. 1. Inwardly, by faith and persuasion. 2. Outwardly, by
vocation and profession* 3. Both ways jointly; by persuasion, profession, and
practice of piety and true godliness; that wanting, we may obtain: having, we
may declare that truly our fellowship is with the Father.

CHAP. XV. The tenth Means and Duty is, Cleaving to God.
HAve we fellowship with the Father? Cleave we then unto 10. Means. Duty.
the Lord: The prodigal a servant cleaved to his Master, Luke 15. 15. The
conjugall knot makes leave father, etc. and cleave to his wife, Math. 19. 5.
The friendly society tw^xt Jonathan and David knits the soul of Jonathan to
David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. Where there is firm communion, there To cleave to the
Lord is to be knit to him in heart without purpose of any (...)ration.
ever is a cleaving together. Those therefore who have fellowship with the
Father must cleave to him as a wife unto her husband, as a servant unto his
Master, as a friend unto a friend, as a girdle to a man's loins, for so says
the Lord, Ier. 13. 11* For as a girdle cleaves unto the loins of a man, so
have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel, etc. Draw w^
therefore near to the Lord, walk with him, continue in the Lord, depend upon
him, stick fast to him; or in a word, cleave we to the Lord. 1. Universally,
in all things, Deuteronomy. 11. 22. 2. Totally, in soul and body both, Ios. 22. 5. 3.
Spiritually and sincerely, Acts 11. 23. 4. Unseperably, and continually, Ios.
23. 8. We cleave unto the Lord,

1. Inwardly.

1. By faith. Heb. 11. 6. He that draws near to God must, etc.

2. By fear. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Fear the, -- to cleave unto him.

3. By love, Ios. 23. 11, 12. Love unites it self as much as may be to the
thing loved, it makes a man desire and seek above all things this fellowship,
when wanting. 1. In those means he has appointed to communicate himself unto
us. 2. Does communicate it self to God in things, in which he will be loved of
us. And, 3. It will make us accomplish the will of God. Cleave we therefore
thus unto the Lord: For, why should we not? 1. Trust in him, who is both true,
and faithful, mighty, and able to help. 2. Fear him, who is both just, and
terrible also, able to destroy both soul, and body. 3. And love him which is
so merciful, gracious, bountiful, and liberal.

2. We are to cleave unto the Lord outwardly, and not only in our souls, but
our bodies both, in the right and sanctified use of the Word, Sacraments, and
Prayer; Thus let us cleave unto the Lord, and manifest we the same,

1. By cleaving to that which is good, Romans 12. 9.

2. By cleaving to Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 31. His Word, Law, Gospel,
Precepts, and Promises.

3. By walking in his ways, Deuteronomy. 11. 22.

4. By keeping his commandments diligently, ibid.

5. By walking after the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13. 4.

6. By hearkening unto his voice, ibid.

Thus if we do, the Lord will uphold us in all distress; and Mot. 1.
against all assaults of enemies, inward, and outward, with his right hand. i.
His great might and power, Psalm. 63. 8. What then can hurt us? Or who can harm
us? True it is that many who cleave closest to God are soonest taken away and
destroyed, as in time of fiery trials, and open persecutions. Yet, 1. God does
not destroy them; but Gods enemies, wicked persecutors. 2. They die not in Gods
displeasure, but in his favor; their death is no shame, but an honor to them.
3. By the loss of a temporary life, they obtain life eternal. Instead of a
miserable life, a life most happy. 4. Outward blessings, as deliverance from
bodily death, and dangers, are promised and performed conditionally, as they
shall stand best with Gods glory, the good of his Church, and salvation of his
Saints.

Psalm. 73. 28. It is good for me to draw near to God. It is good indeed to
give, and join our selves most straightly to God so gracious and merciful. It
is good nearely to knit our selves, and closely to cleave to God: This cleaving
being a means to obtain, if we want: And to continue, if we have fellowshippe
with the Father.

CHAP. XVI. The eleventh Means and Duty is, to serve God.
LAstly, have we or desire we fellowship with the Father? 11. Mea^es. Duty.
We ought to serve him: David acknowledges himself servant to Jonathan,
although they were linked in such an intimate society, 1 Samuel 20. 7. 8. Hushai
exempts not himself from serving so good a Sovereign, who admitted him into
the fellowship of a friendly favorite, 2 Samuel 15. 34. Wives, although their
husbands companions, yoke-fellowes; yet being but the left side of the yoke,
fellow-helpers, not fellow heads, owe a kind of service to them, 2 Pet. 3. 1.
Likewise you wives, sc. as servants; i. with all fear, even to bad husbands,
as well as to good. Yea all such, who have fellowship with the Father, have the
denomination of servants. Jacob my servant, Isa. 44. 1. Job my servant, Job 1.
8. Moses my servant. Number. 12. 7. And the pious Proselite who joined himself to
the Lord, is said to serve him, -- to be his servant, Isa. 56. 6.

1. There is a service of man to man, and this is,

1. National. 1. By the law of nature, which is liberal. 2. By the law of
Arms, which is compulsive.

2. Domestical. Which is, 1. For a time. 2. Perpetual, as slaves for ever;
these are civil services of man to man; who is said to serve man,

1. When he applies himself to do him all the good he can, Gal. 3. 14.

2. When he submits himself to such who are Lords over him, Exodus 21. 6.

2. There is a religious service, where man serves God;

1. Generally, yielding to, and endeavoring to perform all the worship due to
God, Ios. 24. 15.

2. Particularly: 1. Religiously serving him in his public worship, Math. 4.
10. 2. In his common vocation, as he is a Christian, doing the revealed will of
God in the general calling of Christianity, Heb. 12. 28. 3. In his particular
function, Romans 10. 9.

So then to serve God is to do all things in the public worship of God, in
our common vocations, and particular callings according to the will of God,
therein earnestly desiring to glorify God. They therefore are much deceived,
who think a daily repeating over the Lords Prayer, ten Commandments, and the
Belief, or such like, constant keeping of Church-times, etc. is a sufficient
serving of God; to serve the Lord, being a doing of his will, and this is
frequently urged, and often inculcated in sacred Writ, Psalm. 20. 11. 100. 2.
Luc. 1. 75. This service is the end why we were redeemed, Luc. 1. 74, 75. Of
all Gods mercies, Romans 1. 12. And although our Savior delivered us from
bondage, yet not from service; when a man comes out of the bondage of sin, he
Ob. Answ.
must take another yoke, Math. 11. 28. But we are free; we have Christian
liberty, Gal. 5. 1. Ans. True, we are free from the execution of perfect
obedience, from the curse of the Law, not from the obedience of the Law, piety,
and righteousness. Hear Irenaeus speak, who says, Christ has Christus
tantum nos liberavit a se^vitute, non ab obedientia legis, Irenaeus lib. 5.
cap. 27. Duplicia sunt Mosis Pracepta, noturalia and servilia: servilia per
adventum Christi abrogata sunt, naturalia in suo vigore permanserunt, and per
Euangelium sunt consummata, Idem cap. 31. Dominus de^^it totam legem and
Prophetas pendere ex ipsis Praceptis, and ipse aliud majus hoc pracepto non
detulit, sed hoc ipsum renovavit suis Discipulis jubens eis diligere Deum ex
toto cord, and cateros quemadmodum sc. Idem. lib. 4. cap. 25.
only freed us from the slaverie, not from the obedience of the Law. The
Precepts given to Moses were twofold, natural and servile: servile are
abrogated by the coming of Christ: natural have remained in their strength,
and are fulfilled by the Gospel. Yea (says he) the Lord Auxit, and dilatavit,
has augmented and enlarged them. The Lord declared all the Law and the
prophets to depend upon these Precepts. And Christ himself has not showed
another greater then this Precept, but has renewed this to his Disciples,
commanding them to love God from their whole hearts, and others as themselves.
True it is, that we have liberty, and are freed from the curse of the Law, Romans
8. 1. Gal. 3. 13. Secondly, from the rigor of the Law, which said, do this,
and live; this liberty also the justified Jews before Christ had. Thirdly,
from observation of the Ceremonial Law, Col. 2. 16. 20. Thus the ancient Jews
before Christ were not. Oh that our Pretty Antinomists had but brains to
conceive, and grace to embrace the truth; then would they not so disquiet the
consciences of many unsettled Christians, and scandalize the Gospel under
pretense of lawless liberty. i. Although seduced Papists, ignorant Gospellers,
civil honest men, vainglorious Pharisees, profane people, and lawless
Libertines, like the ancient Samaritanes, who knew not the manner of the God of
Israel, therefore served the Lord, and their own gods also, 2 Reg. 17. 26. So
those forenamed, because ignorant of the right service of God. 1. The Papaline
serves God in his images, pilgrimages, and abundance of Popish traditions. 2.
The ignorant in his good meaning. 3. The civil man in his honest outward
conversation. 4. The tomb like Pharisee in his golden and graceless shows.
5. The profane in his diabolical conceit, that where sin does abound, grace
will much more abound. 6. The lawless Libertine in his licentious freedom; he
being bound to no Law, he doing all he does in love, by way of thankfulness:
therefore by consequent, 1. If he does not that which we are commanded he does
not sin; if he does that we are forbidden, he does not offend. 2. If he does
that which God commands us he does more then his duty, because more then he is
bound unto, and so does therefore merit at the hands of God.

Yet all you who either have or desire fellowship with the Father; Do you serve
God as he has commanded, without dimin^tion, or addition: Serve him therefore,
1. Sincerely. 2. Timely. 3. Continually. 4. In all things. Of which see page
92. etc.

5. We are to serve the Lord with gladness, Psalm. 100. 2. The Lord desires to
be served with a voluntary willingness, and cheerful alacrity, Exodus 35. 5.
1 Cor. 9. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 9. 7. A sonne-like service pleases God, not a
slavish: exacted service is seldom sure, it is rather done upon us, then by
us; and the more cheerful, and voluntary, the more acceptable is our service
to God. Serve therefore the Lord with gladness in love; yet so that our love
may keep it self to the Word and will of God: for things done without a word
from God, are not done of love, which is a fulfilling of the Law, Gal. 5. 14.

6. Serve we the Lord with fear.

the object of fear is evil; man (...).
fears that which will hurt him, which is evil. The Greek word signifies
fear and flight: intimating that we fear such things we flee from, and avoid.
For although the object of fear properly is evil, yet accidentally that which
is good also; Man fears good, not the thing, because it is good; but least he
be deprived thereof, and lose the same: thus a man often fears his life, least
he lose it. Secondly, we fear that which is good, least it procure some
appearing evil; thus we also fear God, least he punish us; the punishment as
from God is good, but unto us it seems to be evil.

2. Let no man say: the fearful are excluded heaven, Rev, 21. 8. And Gods
people are forbidden to fear, Genesis 15. 1. Luc. 12. 32. 1. 34. For these places
are to be understood of carnal fear; when man fears man, or worldly wants
too much; or God, only in regard of punishment. M. Perk. of Religion, page 704.
That fear in which nothing is feared save punishment, is no service of God.

3. Let no cavilling wrangler say, there is no fear in love, for perfect love
casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. We are to love God: therefore not to fear
him. Love casts out fear: but what fear? Not all but servile, or tormenting
fear, not sonne-like, or filial fear, this going hand in hand with perfect
love. Therefore does a loyal son fear to offend his father, because he
loves him. Wives are to fear their husbands, Ephesians. 5. 33. Children are to fear
their parents, Lev. 19. 3. Subjects are to fear their Magistrates, Romans 13. 7.
No man hence will conclude they therefore neither may nor can love their
husbands, parents, and Magistrates: this fear being an awful reverence: such
inferiors show to Superiors for the Lords sake, making them careful to obey,
and loath to offend them. Tertullian rebukes Marcion thus: Stulte, quem Dominum
appellas, negas timendum: cum hoc nomen potestatis sit etiam timendae: At
quomodo diliges nisi timeas non diligere? Plane nec pater tuus est, in quem non
competat and amor propter pietatem, and timor propter potestatem: nec legitimus
Dominus, nisi and diligas propter humanitatem, and timeas propter disciplinam.
Advers Marcion. lib. 1. page 165
Thou fool, which say he is not to be feared whom thou call Lord: this
name being a name of power; yea, of such as is to be feared: But how will thou
love, except thou fear not to love? Truly, neither is he thy father, toward
whom love for piety, and fear for power does not agree. Neither is he thy
legitimate Lord, if thou do not love him for his gentleness, and fear him
in regard of Discipline. The same Tertullian checks the aforesaid heretic
thus: Qui Deum non times quosi bonum, quid non in omnem libidinem ebullis?
Summum quod sciam fructum vit^ omnibus qut Deum non ti meant. Ibid. p. 165.
Thou which do not fear God because he is good, why do thou not break out
into all sensuality? The principal fruits of life to my knowledge in all which
fear not God. And again he says Neque enim timorem alia res quam contumacia
subvertit. De paenitenti^. page 480.
that nothing does destroy fear, save disobedience. And again the same
Tertullian says, Timor autem hominis Dei honor est, Ibid page 482.
the fear of man is the honor of God. True it is, that child-like fear may
well stand with love, and certainty of salvation; this fear enduring for ever,
Psalm. 19. 9. This being commanded unto, and the commendation of good men, Job
1. 1. Acts 10. 2. I know there is difference betwixt filial and servile fear;
filial endures for ever, the other is violent, therefore is not permanent:
servile fears evil of punishment, the other evil of sin: filial is only
in the Elect, servile may be in good and bad; being in the good as a needle to
draw after it filial as a thread; as a needle alone, so servile alone avails
not: yet by going before draws after it filial as the thread. The property
of this fear is to make us in our hearts stand in awe of God; and to fear,
hate, and eschew the offense of God, Prove. 8. 13. Exodus 20. 20. It being the
greatest evil for the creature to offend the Creator. We may and must
therefore serve the Lord with fear: for that man's hope is vainly confident,
who refuses to fear God in his conversation says * Mr. Burton. Truths
triumph over Trent, cap. 17. page 351.


7. In newness of spirit, Romans 7. 6. That is by living such a life which
becomes them whom the Spirit has renewed.

8. In righteousness and holiness, Luc. 1. 74, 75. i. By just and upright
dealing between man and man, in holiness. i. performing all such duties as
immediately concern God, and his worship.

Should I say no more, my Doctrine in hand (me thinks) is inducement
sufficient to persuade you thus to serve God: for if you have fellowship with
the Father, then it is a necessary duty. Serve him also you must, if you desire
this communion: it being a means to obtain fellowshippe with the Father.
Notwithstanding, because there be many bad masters in this world, which woo
and entice all, allure and draw too many to forsake the Lord, and to serve
them; I will in few words show that of all the services in the world, this of
the Lords is far the best.

1. Man's own flesh is often his master, which he carefully does serve. 1. By too
much pampering of it. 2. By an over carking and caring for the things of the
body. And, 3. By fulfilling the lusts of the flesh. Saint Paul was of another
mind; he kept under his body, and made it serve him, 1 Cor. 9. 27. And forbids
us to make provision for the flesh, etc. Romans 13, 14. As for this service, it
is no whit for a man's advantage; Their end is destruction, whose god is their
belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19.

2. Man serves man: First, having a more firm dependence upon man then God,
regarding more the authority of man, then of God: Thus Papists serve man; with
whom it matters not what God says, so be they have the Popes approbation: and
many other do so with whom the word of man is more authentical then the Word
of God. Secondly, reposing more confident affiance in the skill of man,
Asalike, 2. Chron. 16. 12. or power and valor, Isa. 31. 1. The contrary we see
in David, Psalm. 20. 7. Thirdly having men's persons in admiration, Jude 16. Thus
parasiticall Prophets, like Ahabs 400. and soothing companions by flattering
ostentation, have men in admiration for their person, ri^hes, honor, nobility,
etc. without respect of the fear of God, or true virtue; honoring them only
because they be rich, or noble (by the way great men have this misery, they
are most admired, least admonished) Thus who in his right wits would serve man,
considering: 1. How helpless he is, Isa. 2. 22. Cease from man whose breath is
in his nostrills; for wherein is he to be accounted of: these Masters cannot
redeem a brother, nor give a ransom to God for him, Psalm. 49. 6. 7. 2. How
execrable, Isa. 31. 1. Ier. 17. 5. 3. How base and contemptible it is for man
so to submit to man, made of the same materials, workman, manner, and in that
respect his equal, turning to dust, and rottenness as well as he.

3. Many men serve the world, viz. the ambitious by his inordinate desire of
honor, and striving for preferment, serves honor, and an ambitious humor.
The Covetous, by his love of riches, and obeying the avaritious desires
thereof, serves Mammon: the voluptuous person, by being too much addicted to
carnal delights, serves pleasure. These have a Master and a service; But such
which makes them much to be pitied, not at all to be envied: for alas; First,
they serve vanity, as Solomon concludes, who had a greater experiment of them
all then any other, Eccl. 1. 2. the service of vanity must needs be vain.
Secondly, neither is it only vain, but hardly tormenting, Eccl. 1. 14. 2. 10.
Vexation of spirit. How does this service abound with excruciating cares,
tormenting discontents, ignoble jealousies, disquieting fears, base
flatteries, restless contrivements, and an innumbred swarm of such like
anxious perplexities. Thirdly, neither is here all: this Master is a deceitful
cousener, not much unlike Jacobs Master Laban, giving a blearey'd Leah for a
promised Rahel: her best servitours often fail of their expectations: or if
not so; they prove like Sodomes apples, not worth the gathering; or a wormeaten
nut, not worth the cracking, filling the breakers mouth with filth, and
rottenesse. Fourthly, but there is a worse matter in this service then all
this. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1. John
2. 15. and no man can s^rve both God, and Mammon, Matthew. 6. 24.

4. There is another Master which too many men serve; his name is sin, John 8.
34. whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. Whosoever of his own accord
readily obeys the desires, and motions of sin is the servant of sin. Of
such servants Saint Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 2. 19. serving their lusts. 1.
Obeying the wicked motions thereof, consenting to them, or practicing them,
Titus 3. 3. S. Paul forbids us of this service, Romans 6. 6. and acknowledges
that once we were servants to this evil Master, Romans 6. 17. 19. 20. This is a
service strongly bewitching men with amiable enchantments, having abundance of
obsequious observants. But do they know whom and what they serve? I presume
no; for did they, they could not but abandon with loathing detestation a
Master. 1. So base, and vile, then which nothing more fastidious, or
excrementitions. 2. So abounding with such multiplicity of various impieties,
then which no service more tedious and troublesome, wherein a man serves, not
two, but a multitude of Masters, serving sin in the lusts thereof, Romans 6.
12. 3. So cruel, then which none more tyrannical, and bloody; paying its best
observants with as bad wages as may be; eternal death, Romans 6. 23. Iam. 1. 15.
These are services, but not like ours, although worldlings now as in Jobs time,
say or think, What is the Almighty, that we should serve him; and in Malachy
3. 17. it is in vain to serve God: Yet we know this service to be of all other.

1. Most honorable: For, 1. Our Master is not some Kings greatest favorite,
nor yet some potent Prince, nor yet a terrene Monarch, swaying the Sovereign
Scepter for his time of the whole world; But a Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, whose is the kingdom, the power, and glory; then which no Master more
honorable. 2. Our fellow servants are all the holy ones of God, as Abraham;
and those pious Patriarchs, such as Moses and Eliah, and those Divine
Prophets: such as David, and those other godly Governors: the heavenly company
of glorious Angels, Rev. 19. 10. Yea, our blessed Savior, our fellow servants,
Phil. 2. 7. Then which no fellow servants more honorable.

2. Most gainefull: these servants gain Christ, Phil 3. 8. Pardon of sins,
Gods favor, his blessed Spirit; yea, temporal favors, if commodious for
them, shall moreover and above be added to them, Mat. 6. 33. If they have not
riches, it is because they are not good for them. If they want health,
Temporalia non sunt bona, nisi in quantum ordinantur in coelestia.
it is because it is not good for them. If their life is cut short, they are
taken away from the evil to come. Yea moreover, as this service gains all
things, 1 Cor. 3. 21. etc. And as a good friend loves at all times, Prove. 17.
7. So this service brings in gains at all seasons, in sickness, and health,
prosperity, and adversity, Romans 8. 28. Yea, in life, and death, Phil. 1. 22.
Another man dies, his gains die with him, Psalm. 49. 17. His treasure was laid
up on earth, therefore leaving this world he parts with his treasure: the
servant of God dies, his gains follow him, Rev. 14. 13. His treasure was laid
up in heaven, departing hence therefore he follows his treasure, goes to his
gain: Perhaps he forgoes a material building, and lays down an earthly
tabernacle; but he finds a building given of God, not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. He leaves behind him some worldly substance; but
gets in heaven a better and enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. Peradventure he
may part with some corruptible inheritance, to take possession of an
inheritance incorruptible, reserved in heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Where he has so
much, that he is ever satisfied; and so much to come, that he is never glutted:
where there is infinite abundance of all things, and yet infinite more to come.

3. Most delightful: David had an honorable service, ascending from keeping
sheep to be son in law to a King. Jacob a gainefull, growing from alone man,
and a staff into a populous family, and certain droves; but neither had much
delight in his service. But as there is honor and profit in this service, so
there is plenitude of delight, and consolation. For, 1. Our Master is no
churlish Nabal, to whom a man could not speak, 1 Samuel 25. 17. No unkind Laban,
but a God most merciful and pitiful; gracious and favorable; patient and
long suffering. He terms his servants friends, Isa. 41. 8. Yea, sons, Exodus
4. 23. He lays upon us no burdensome yoke, but such which is easy and light,
Math. 11. 28. Not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5. 3. But the rejoicing of our hearts, Psalm.
119. 111. I need not go from my Point in hand to fetch this threefold cord
which is not easily broken. Those who truly serve the Lord, have fellowship
with the Father, then which what more honorable, gainful, or delightful?
Good servants 1. obey their Masters precepts. 2. Spend the chief of their time
in their Masters business. 3. Delight to please them. 4. Have no intimate
society with their Masters professed enemies. 5. Cannot endure to see or hear
them abused. 6. And fear to offend them. Be we such good servants. 1. Obeying
the will and Word of God. 2. Spending the day of our time in his service,
walking Enoch-like with God, Genesis 5. 24. 3. Joy in pleasing our so good and
gracious Master. 4. Avoiding intimate familiarity with his enemies. 5. Not
enduring to hear or see him dishonored. 6. And fearing to offend him. Thus
let us serve him; this serving being a duty we owe, if we have, or means to
obtain if we want fellowship with the Father.

OF THE SOCIETY OF THE SAINTS, the fourth Book.
NOW I come to the fourth and last part of the true goodfellowship, consisting
betwixt the Head and members: And with his Son Jesus Christ. This part of the
true goodfellowship is not the least, although the last. For by fellowship with
Christ, we have fellowship with the Saints, and without Christ Jesus there is
no fellowship for man with God. I will now forbear to speak of these three
titles, his Son, Jesus, Christ: It only suffices for the present to tell you
that Christ is Gods Son. 1. By Nature. According to his Divine nature he and
he only is the Son of God, being begotten of the same substance of the
Father by an everlasting generation, Math. 17. 5. 2. By Grace of personal
union, the manhood of Christ being unseparably united to the person of the
Son of God, Luke 1. 35. The Saints are Gods Sons by Adoption, Romans 8. 17.
Yea, all professors without practice are Gods Sons, although by profession
only, Genesis 6. 1. The creatures may be termed Gods Sons commonly. Saints are
Gods Sons specially. But Christ is Gods Son singularly.

CHAP. I. The Saints have fellowship with Christ.


[ With his Son Jesus Christ] Ioh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. I am the true vine, ye are
the branches, 17. 23. 26. 21. I in them, etc. Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith. Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

Christ his fellows have fellowship with Jesus Christ the Son of God.

But all true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians are Christ his
fellows (for Christ has taken them into fellowship of himself, and his
merits, Psalm. 45. 7.) Therefore all true believers, Saints, etc. Have
fellowship with Jesus Christ the Son of God.

That they are Christ his fellows, I prove thus.

Those who are fellow servants of the same Master, brethren of the same father;
fellow members of the same body, etc. are fellows.

But all true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians are,

1. Fellow Servants with Christ of the same Master, Phil. 2. 7.

2. Fellow-brethren of the same Father, Math. 12. 50. Heb. 2. 11.

3. Fellow Members of the same body, Ephesians. 4. 13. 15. 16.

4. Fellow Soldiers against Satan, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.

5. Fellow Sufferers, Romans 8. 17.

6. Fellow-Conquerours, Romans 8. 17.

7. Fellow-Kings, Priests, and Prophets. Rev. 1. 5.

8. Fellow-heires of the same Kingdom, Romans 8. 17.

Fellows they are; not by nature, it is of grace: not by desert, it is of free
gift or donation: not by excellency or aequality, it is only by estimation.



But Christ Jesus and all true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians are
linkt and conglutinated in the firmest connection of the Matrimonial knot, and
conjugall yoke: therefore have fellowship each with other.

The first Proposition is clear: I prove the second or minor thus.

Those who are bride, and bridegroom; husband and wife, are linkt and
conglutinated in the firmest connection of the Matrimonial knot, and Conjugall
yoke.

But Christ Jesus is the Bridegroom or Husband; all true belieuers, Saints,
etc. are the bride. Therefore Christ and Christians are linkt and
conglutinated, etc.

That Christ is the Husband to true believers, I thus prove.

He who does woo, contract himself unto, consummate the match made with, and
perform all duties of a husband to all true believers, Saints, or faithful
Christians is their husband.

But Christ Jesus does all these to all true believers. As for example.

1. He wooeth, beseeching us by his Ministers, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

2. He contracts himself unto the Church by a firm and free promise of
marriage with his Church with the consent of his Father.

3. He will consummate the marriage at the end of the world, Rev. 19. 7.

4. He promises all duties of a husband to all true believers; For instance.

Husbands ought entirely to love their wives, Col. 3. 19. Ephesians. 5. 22. Love them
they ought; for they are good things, Prove. 18. 22. For they are their
companions, Mal. 2. 14. And their own flesh, Ephesians. 5. 28. Christ Jesus loved
his Church with such entire and ardent love, that he gave himself for his
Church. But because I will not stay upon conjugall duties; in brief I say;
that no husband ever; nay if the excellency of all the most melting
affectionatenesse, and other chief virtues could be drawn out of all mankind
that have been, are, or shall be, and infused into some Angelical body; yet
could not this imagined excellent husband love with such a sincere, and
perpetual love, cleave so closely and compactedly unto; give such honor, or
due benevolence unto, consolate with such ravishing comforts, grant more
willingly the honest and reasonable requests, govern, guide, and direct more
prudently a wife lovely beyond imagination, as Christ Jesus does the Church, or
true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians his Spouse.

That all true believers are the Spouse of Christ is perspicuously transparent,
Rev. 19. 7, 8. 21. 9. 22. 27. John 3. 29. And in this that they owe the
selfsame duties to Christ Jesus which wives do owe to their husbands. sc.
Subjection, reverence, obedience, etc.

Therefore all true believers have fellowship with Jesus Christ, etc.

Jesus Christ, have fellowshippe with Jesus Christ the Son of God.

But all true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians are ingrafted or
inoculated into Jesus Christ. Therefore all true believers, etc. have
fellowship with Jesus Christ, the etc.

The latter Proposition I prove out of Ioh. 15. 1, 2.

1. There is a husbandman, who is the Father, justly called the husbandman: for,

1. He has a rightful interest unto, and an absolute Sovereign authority
over his spiritual vine, vineyard, and branches; his is the right, not by Law,
but by nature; not from any superior, but from himself, and he may do with it
what he will.

2. In regard of affection, the affection that he bears to this vine,
vineyard, and branches is transcendent; he loves them tenderly, and delights in
them wonderfully.

3. In regard of his actions: for,

1. He does plant, i. e. join the elect taken out of the rotten stock of old
Adam unto Christ and his Church by the spirit. Psalm. 92. 13. Romans 6. 5.

2. He does water with the true doctrine of his Word, the holy spirit, and
saving graces, Ezekiel 36. 15.

3. He does expect as earnestly fruit from his vineyard, as the husbandman does
from his, Isa. 5. 2.

4. He does prune and purge out blindness by the word of Knowledge, error by
the Word of Confutation, desperation, by the word of Consolation, etc. and he
preserves, etc. and on the contrary he rejects the fruitless branches, that so
they may wither, and be burned, John 15. 2. 4. 6.

2. There is also a Vine, and there are branches abiding in that vine, John 15.
4. Christ is a vine giving life of grace to all his members, as a vine gives
juice and life to all its branches; he ministers to Christians the sap of
his grace, and spirit, whereby they live, grow, and bring forth good works;
even as a vine does minister to the branches moisture, sap, and juice,
whereby they live, flourish, and bear fruit. In this vine the root is Christ,
his Godhead the stem, his Manhood, the s^ppe, his graces, the branches, true
believers, and the grapes good works. Neither is this contradicted, where the
Church is called a vine, Psalm. 80. 9. 14. Isa. 5. 1. 2. 3. A vine it is whose
sense is Gods protection, whose preachers are its watchmen, their doctrines and
exhortations as a winepresse to wring out good duties as sweet juice; and whose
grapes are good works as pleasant fruit. Nor where Christ is called a branch
as he oftentimes is, Ier. 33. 15. Zach. 3. 8. 6. 12. for when Christ is a
branch, his Church is the vine, himself the Head or chief branch, his Saints
inferior twigs, his graces sap, blossom, bud, and grapes. When the Church
is a vine, Christ wholly is the root, and stock; true believers the branches,
whose obedience is the fruits, or pleasant grapes; which way soever they are
ingrafted into Christ. Therefore have fellowship with Jesus Christ the Son of
God.



But all true believers are built together, or laid upon Christ Jesus the
foundation, etc. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. 1. Pet. 2. 5. 6, 7. Therefore Christ
Jesus is:

Daniel 2. 43. cut out of the mountains without hands; being not set up by
man, but sent by God. 2. A stone of offense, 1. Pet. 2. 8. to unbeleevers, and
misbeleevers, they perishing by refusing to be laid upon this stone. 3. A
precious stone, 1. Pet. 2. 6. he being of exceeding great value, more worth
then millions of worlds. 4. A living stone, 1. Pet. 2. 4. preserving the
faithful in the life of grace to the life of glory. 5. A stone with seven
eyes, Zach. 4. 10. in regard Gods providence watches graciously over all such
who are built upon this stone. 6. Yea the foundation of his Church, and chosen,
1. Cor. 3. 10, 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 20. Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone, 1. Pet. 2. 6.

True it is, that the decree of Gods election grounded upon his everlasting
love is a foundation, 2. Tim. 2. 19. because the godly are stayed upon this, as
a house upon the foundation. 2. Christian doctrine is a foundation also, Heb.
6. 1. It being a means to build men upon Christ the foundation. 3. Christian
princes, and Magistrates are thus styled, Psalm. 82. 5. because the quiet of the
Church does rest upon them, as a house on the foundation. 4. The Apostles, and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. Not only Peter (those who make Peter the foundation
whereon the Church is built. 1. Falsifye the Text, which is, not Upon thee
Peter, but Upon this Rock. 2. Deal reprochfully with Christ, lifting Peter
into the room of his Master. 3. Injuriously with the Church, building it upon
so weak a rock which so often failed) but the Apostles and Prophets all of
them as well as he are foundations ( viz. second, and subordinate) because by
their doctrien they lay the elect upon Christ the true foundation: which is the
true foundation of the Church in regard of his person, and office. 1. He being
the corner stone, or firm foundation whereon his Church is built. 2. He
supporting, and bearing it Up, as a foundation, against the gates of hell, that
they cannot prevail against it.

builders, 1. Cor. 3. 10. laying the Elect upon Christ, as builders do one
stone upon another, and all upon the foundation.

lively, 1. Pet. 2. 5. because they are quickened with the life of God by the
doctrine of the gospel. 2. Stones made up into a spiritual house, Ephesians. 2.
20, 21, 22. because they are founded on Christ the head stone. They are
therefore called Gods building, 1. Cor. 3. 9. their souls being as the walls,
the Word of God the Mortar, cementing, and the hammer to fit, and fashion them
for this building. Therefore all the Saints have near society with Christ
Jesus, being stones of the same building.



The head is the seat of reason, memory, imagination, and senses; It gives
life and motion to the members: From the head, the body by joints and bands
has nourishment ministered, is knit together, and increases, Col. 2. 19.
Therefore head, and members have society one with another.

All true believers are members, etc. Christ the head, etc. Ephesians. 4. 12.
edifying the body of Christ. 15. head even Christ, 5. 13. Christ is the head of
the Church, 30. for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
1. 22. gave himself to be head over all things to the Church, ver. 23. which
is his body.

Therefore all true believers, Saints, or faithful Christians have fellowship
with Christ Jesus.



1. Christ is the Shepherd, the Church is a Fold, and Christians are Sheep,
John 10. 14, 15, 16.

2. Christ is the Vine, the Church is the Vineyard, and Christians are
Branches, John 15. 5.

3. Christ is the Captain, the Church is the Field, and Christians are
Soldiers, 2. Tim. 2. 3.

4. Christ is the Physician, the Church is his Shop, and Christians are
Patients, Luke 5. 31, 32. Rev. 3.

5. Christ is our elder Brother, the Church our Mother, and Christians are
Brethren, Heb. 2. 11.

6. Christ is a Hen, the Church a Nest, and Christians are Chickens, Matthew.
23. 37.

7. Christ is a Fisher, the Church is a Sea, and Christians are Fishes, Mar. 1.
17.

8. Christ is a Feast maker, the Church a Banqueting house, Christians are
Ghests, Prove. 9. 1. 2. Math. 22. 1.

9. Christ is a Teacher, the Church a School, Christians are Scholars.

10. Christ is a King, the Church is a Kingdom, Christians are Subjects.

11. Christ is a Bridegroom, the Church is a Wedding house, Christians the
Bride.

12. Christ is the Foundation, the Church is the Building, and Christians are
Stones.

13. Christ is the Head, the Church is a Body, and Christians are Members.

CHAP. II. Use 1. Reprehending those who harm the Saints.
HOw dare you, O you sons of Belial, harm, or hurt, Use 1. Of Reprehension.
disgracefully deride, or persecute with hand, heart, or tongue these who have
fellowship with Christ? Whose Word so potent, that by it he created the
universal world: by it he cast out Devils; stilled the raging waves of the
impetuous sea, healed incurable diseases, vanquished Satan, and consumes
Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8. With Christ I say: of whom what shall I say? He being
wonderful, Isa. 9. 5. In his conception, in his birth, in his speech, in his
miracles, in his life, in his sufferings, in his death, in his rising, and in
his actions. He fed multitudes with little; he wrought strange miracles; he
overcame death, Satan, and hell; he shall come to judge both quick, and dead:
yea, he is a mighty God; and do you not dread to lade with taunting quips,
villainous reproaches, all hellish language and usage, such who have fellowship
with him? Yea such who are, 1. The redeemed of this Redeemer. 2. The holy ones
of this Sanctifier. 3. The clients of this preserver. 4. The soldiers of this
Captain. 5. The servants of this Lord. 6. The subjects of this King. 7. The
brethren and sisters of this Brother. 8. The sheep of this Shepherd. 9. The
Bride of this husband. 10. The members of this head?

These are Christ his sheep for whom he laid down his life, John 10. 15.

These are branches abiding in Christ, who shall have whatsoever they ask,
John 15. 7.

These are Christ's soldiers quenching the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.
16. And overcomming the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 5.

These are Christ his patients which he heales with his own blood, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.

These are Christ's subjects whom he rewards with kingdoms.

These are Christ's beloved Spouse, which he loved so entirely, as to give
himself for them, Ephesians. 5. 25. And do you not dread to offend them?

These are they for whom Christ prayed so earnestly to his Father to keep
them, to sanctify them, etc. And presume you to curse them?

These are they for whose sake he took upon him the form of a servant, endured
so much weariness, and labor, hunger, and thirst, buffetings, and
scourgeings, despightfull spittings, contumelious crowning with thorns Judas
his treachery, the soldiers barbarous inhumanity, the false witness bearing of
the perjured accusers, the frequent soliciting accusations of the Jews, the
unjust condemnation of Pilate, the cruelty of his executioners, the cursed
death of the Cross, the sweaty agony of Blood, the heavy Passion upon the
Cross, the temptations of Satan, Gods wrath, and the torments of hell: And
will you wrong them? Them I say whom he has bought at so dear a rate?

These are Christ's Spouse, Jewels, peculiar People, Kings, Priests, Prophets;
and are they the of-scouring of all things in your sight?

Do you not tremble to wish evil unto, much more to speak evil of, most of
all to wrong actually those who are the pasture sheep of such a Shepherd,
branches of such a vine; soldiers of such a Captain; the wife of such a
husband, and members of Christ his body?

We who have fellowship with Christ Jesus know that it is our portion to be
hated of all men for Christ's sake: to be by words to fools, as was Job, Chap.
30. 7. Songs to drunkards, as was David, Psalm. 69. 12. To be falsely accused,
railed upon: Christ our Head and Husband has drunk deep of this Cup to us,
and we are content to pledge him, we knowing this to be our lot, and for our
profit: We being more bright by such your filing, more purified by such
tryings, more odorif^rous by being pounded: we are the Lords vine, growing more
fruitful by pruning, his palms flourishing most when under pressures: and his
tillage whose hearts are more mollified, and softened, more apted for the seed
of heavenly truth, and saving graces; made more fruitful, and less weedy by
such your plowing: We therefore with patience, contentment, and gladness
suffer all your hellish indignities, even when you plow upon our backs, and
make long furrows: our bettering by your scourgings comes not from you, aiming
at nothing less, being helpers forward of our afflictions when our Father was
but a little displeased with us, Zach. 1. 15. But from our Fathers love and
bounty, making all things work together for our good, Romans 8. 28. You shall
therefore smart for grieving us; you being our Fathers rods, shall be plagued
with indignation, after by you he has corrected us. Witness the hard-hearted
Egyptians, Ahab, Iezabel, the three Herod's, the first butchering the harmless
Innocents, the second beheading John the Baptist, and the third Saint James.
Witness cruel Nero, bloody Domitian, John de Roma, Minerius, stinking
Gardener; witness the forty two children mocking the Prophet, Ishmael scoffing
at Isaac, cursing Shimei, railing Rabshakeh, and others: And do you think to
escape who harm and hurt with your utmost abilities these sheep which are of
Christ's fold; such members who have Christ their head; yea, such who so many
ways have such intimate and inseparable society with Jesus Christ, that what
is done to these, is done to him, Math. 25. 40. And he who persecuteth them,
persecuteth him, Acts 9. 4.

CHAP. III. Use 2. Dissuading from hurting the Saints.
PResume not O you sons of men to harm, or hurt those Use (...) Of (...).
who have fellowship with Jesus Christ: Be it they are generally hated of all
sorts and conditions: Be it that most men's mouths are open against them,
loading them with all manner of reproachful nicknames: yet do not you therefore
imagine that you are priviledg'd to inveigh against them: But consider in cool
blood advisedly,

1. For what cause the world is so extraordinarily incenst against them; and
you shall find it to be because they run not with the world to the same
excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Because their works are righteous, and
worldlings wicked, 1 Ioh. 3. 12. Even as the ancient Paynims in Tertullians
time ^onus vir Caius, Seius, sed ^al^^ tantum quod christianus, Tertul. Apol.
page 810.
could fault Caius Seius for nothing, save for being a Christian, which in
their apprehensions was sufficient to make him an evil man: So the profane
ones of the world think it as great a crime as may be to be a professor, to
whom we may say (as Tertullian to the forenamed Heathens: With you it Apud vos
quodv^ C^ler^ ^us est pr^t^r Deum verum. Tertul. Apol. page 860.
is lawful to worship any God except the true God) with you it is lawful to
be a swearer, liar, drunkard, any thing, except a sound and sincere professor.

2. Who they be which bark so bitterly against Professors, Tertullian long
since in his Apologeticall Discourse Qui fort^ vere de Christia^^rum
sterilitate conqueri possunt, primi sunt le^o^^^, productores, aquariols, sic
car^j, v^^^^rij, Magi, etc Tertul. Apol. page 885.
reasons thus. Who in very deed do complain of the unfruitfulnesse of
Christians? The chief are Bawds, Merchants for whores, Wittals, privy
Murderers, Poysoners Magicians, etc. Even so might I reason and say, who are
they which are so enraged against the most upright-hearted Professors? The
chief and principal are swinish Drunkards, cutthroat usurers, prodigious
swearers, unclean whore-mongers, etc.

3. Although I confess you may find some Iudasses and Demasses amongst the
Saints, (and why not as well as a Devil in Christ's selected Twelve, a
sacrilegious couple, and an Apostaticall worldling in the Apostles company?)
Yet for the general I dare say of Puritannicall Christians (what Puritanes I
disclaim, what I apologize for, I have formerly showed in brief, such which
will not be profane, such who are professing, and practicing Protestants) as
Tertullian of the Primitive ( Quis illi^ Si^ari^^? quis manticularius? quis
sacrilegus, aut corrupt^r, aut lavantium pr^do? quis ex illis Christia^^
ascribitur? aut cum Christiani f^o titul^ ^ff^runtur, quis ex illis talis
quales t^s n^ce^tes de vestris? (...) carcer semper, de vestris semper metalla
suspirant, de vestris ^esti^ saginantur. -- N^m^ illic Christia^^, nisi plane
tantum Christia^^, aut si and aliud, jam nec Christianus. Tertul. Apol. page 886.
which of them is a privy murderer? Who is a cut* purse? Who is a sacrilegious
person, or a depraver or a robber of washers? who of them is counted a
Christian, or when Christians are brought forth with their own title, which of
them is such as many guilty persons of yours? with which the prisons always
wax hot, the mines do sigh with yours, with yours the beasts are fatted. -- No
Christian is there except for being a Christian, or if otherwise, then he is no
Christian) which of them is a drunkard, swearer, liar? Which of them is a
defrauder? Which of them is as many of yours? (O thou world) which yearly fill
the prisons, make work for the hangman? Which of them live profanely and
wickedly?

4. How near and dear they are to Christ Jesus. Such they are which are,

1. Given by the Lord Jehovah, to* his beloved Son Christ Jesus, John 6. 37.
As branches to be grafted into him; as Brides to be married to him; stones to
be built upon him; as members to be nourished by him.

2. For whom Christ Jesus (Gal. 2. 20.) gave himself, -- for me, -- for us,
Ephesians. 5. 2.

3. To whom Christ is given, Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 1. 22. Gave himself to the Church.

4. Such who give themselves to Christ as living sacrifices, Romans 12. 1. As
sheep to be fed, scholars to be taught, subjects to be ruled.

5. Such, whose union with Christ Jesus is the nearest and surest in the world,
Cantic. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; nearer then the body and
branches of a tree, members of a natural body, boards, or stones of the same
building; then of man and wife; for they are but one flesh, whereas Christ and
these are one flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30. And one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

1. Then reason and conclude thus. 1. Are those who are the principal
laborious instruments to irritate and incense tumultuous turbulent spirits to
pursue with deadly hatred and all implacable, and impetuous
despightfulnesse-sincere-hearted Nathaniels, informing them (although falsely)
that such Scripture-men, Bible-bearers, Sermon* haunters, etc. are all
notorious hypocrites, and vile dissemblers; and are all such which enragedly
exclaim against the sincerest worshippers of God. 1. Either sottish ignorant
lossels, speaking against those things which they know not, as currish dogs
bark against the Moon, and at those they know not. 2. Or simple meaning men,
misled by certain usual, yet untrue and Diabolical maxumes commonly
applauded and credited, sc. no men are so bad as Professors; they are all of
them naught. 3. Or else the rude rabble of prodigious swearers, brainesicke
drunkards, and such like deboist ruffians, and stigmaticall varlets.

2. Yea, does this malignant or misled company pursue with all contumelious
disgraceful reproaches and maledictions the unblameable carriages of good men,
for no other cause, but because their works are righteous, and their own
wicked; for piety and profession sake, because they will not swear and
swagger, cogge and cosen, quaffe and carouse, drink and be damned with them.

3. Yea, are those maligned people a company of men abhorring all manner of
oaths, greater, and lesser? all lying, merry, officious, and pernicious,
slanderous back-bitings; profane jestings, quarellous contentions, quaffing,
carousing and drunken healthings, oppression, usury, and all unjust gettings,
wanton ribauldry? etc. Insomuch that Judges, and Iusticers, Gaoles, and Iurers
are not employed about the disordered cariages of these people. Do they labor
diligently in their callings? Frequent Sermons? Sanctify Sabbaths? Relieve the
distressed? Instruct their families? etc. All which are necessary and excellent
duties, if performed after a right manner, and to right ends: which they do for
any thing the world knows, God having reserved the act of reading men's
thoughts unto himself.

4. Yea, do many of the deboist Belials so approve of such people, that upon
their beds of sickness, when they receive the sentence of death in themselves,
they think themselves bettered by their company. They* wish and wish often
that themselves had lived l^ke them, and bind themselves by protestations, and
promises to walk in their steps, if the Lord will spare them but this time.

5. Yea, are they so indeer'd to Christ Jesus? that,

1. He is theirs. 1. By an everlasting covenant, Ezekiel. 32. 40. 2. By a firm
and inseparable contract, Hos. 2. 19. 3. By vow. 4. By promise. 5. By oath,
Ephesians. 16. 8. 6. By donation, given for them, and to them as a Head or Husband,
Advocate, Peacemaker, Prince, Priest, and Prophet.

2. They are his, 1. Creatures, as he is their Creator. 2. Redeemed, as he is
their Redeemer. 3. Holy ones, as he is their Sanctifier. 4. Soldiers* as he is
their Captain. 5. Servants, as he is their Lord. 6. Subjects, as he is their
King. 7. Sheep, as he is their Shepherd. 8. Body, as he is their Head. 9.
Pupils, or clients, as he is their Preserver. 10. Daughter, as he is their
Father. 11. Sister, as he is their Brother. 12. Bride, as he is their Husband.

3. That Christ receives of those that be his Saints, 1. their sins with the
punishments, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 2. Their afflictions and miseries, suffering with
them, Acts 9.

4. And they receive of Christ Jesus, 1. Right of Adoption. 2. Right of
Justification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Right of salvation, Col. ^. 12, 13. And the Lord
to be their portion, Psalm. 16. 5. 73. 26. Mr. Burton says: He partakes of our
flesh, Truths triumph over Trent page 111.
we of his Spirit: He of our nature, we of his grace: He of our infirmities, we
of his perfections: He of our poverty, we of his riches: He of our sins, we
of his righteousness.

5. Yea, are they joined, and compacted, not only to the visible Church by
certain bands which are visible and dissoluble, as namely the profession of
Christ, his Doctrine, Participation of the Sacraments, etc. But also compacted,
and knit to the Lord Jesus by other ^ies, and ligaments, which are internal,
invisible, and dissoluble, to wit, the band of their eternal election in
Christ, whereby God the Father adopteth them, and the band of the Spirit of
Christ, and so of faith in him. And shall I upon the malicious instigation of,
or to give contentment to such a viperine pestiferous company, deride,
disgrace, or any manner of way molest for piety sake those which (although
being men they have their frailties) live as holily as is possible for mortal
men; they being also so near to the Lord Jesus? I will not do it. Do I dread
to soil, or demolish the glittering Palaces of Princes, and Peers? And shall
I presume once to endeavor to ruinate or contaminate the Lords own Temple,
founded and built upon Christ Jesus? Am I afraid to harm, or hurt the sheep,
servants, children, brethren, consorts, or members of mortal Princes, whose
breath is in their nostrils, who must turn to dust, and come to judgment
as well as I? and shall I adventure to defame, and perplexe the sheep,
servants, children, brethren, spouse, and members of the Lord Jesus? O you my
feet, move not you the least motion against them: and you my hands, offer not
the least injurious violence against them: and you my eyes, do not cast a
malicious glaunce upon their prosperous estate, nor coy or contemptuous look
upon their persons: and you mine ears, do not admit any false and forged
calumniations against their spotless innocence: And thou my tongue, do not
tongue-smite, and traduce their pious profession: and thou my head, do not
invent intangling snares to inveigle their charitable and credulous simplicity:
and thou my heart, do not thou hatch or harbor the least sinister conceit
against their upright upright conversations. Be it they are black in regard of
sufferings, and afflictions outwardly; in regard of their often frailties, and
infirmities inwardly: yet are they amiable, and lovely in respect of their good
order and government, practice of piety, and outward obedience to Gods Laws
outwardly; of Christ's righteousness and sanctification begun inwardly. Be it
they are deformed in their own eyes, and the eyes of Atheists, Hypocrites,
etc. Yet are they lovely in the eyes of the Bridegroom Christ, Cantic. 1. 7.
And the Bridegroomes friends, Cantic. 5. 9. 17. Be it they are not gracious
with all, yet they are with some. Be it they are vile in the eyes of the
wicked; yet they are not in the eyes of the good. Be it they are vile in the
eyes of men, yet not in the eyes of God, for they have fellowshippe with his
Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IIII. Use 3. Of Persuasion.
BE persuaded, O you holy ones, to cleave more closely Use 3. Of Persuasion.
Nemo proficient erubescit; h^bet and in Christo scientia aeta^es suas. Tertul.
de pudicitia. page 745.
unto, and fasten your selves more firmly in fellowship with Christ Jesus: No
man growing better is ashamed; even the knowledge of Jesus Christ has its
growth and progress. And you, yea you, who as yet are barking black-mouthed
Belials, barking like dogs against those you know not; accompanying one
another inconsiderately in those clamours; yea all you of the fiercer and
milder temper of ungodly ones, be you all entreated to agglutinate your selves
into this society with Christ Jesus the Son of God. We who are washed,
sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, compassionate your
wretched condition: once some of us were such as you now are: formerly we
wrought the will of the wicked, and walked in the lusts of the flesh, as you
now do. De v^stris fuimus, fiunt, non nascuntur Christiani. Tertul. Apol. page
844. Acts 2^. 29.
Yours we were: Christians are made, not borne: so says Tertullian. We being
converted, earnestly desire, wish, and pray for your conversion; which being
true, will alter both the condition, and conversation of you: and we do
heartily wish that all who know us were both almost and altogether such as we
are, except our frailties and afflictions. We would meet you more then half
way to join our selves in intimate society with you, and give you the right
hand of fellowship; could you be entreated to have no fellowship with the
fruitless Ephesians. 5. 11.
works of darkness, and to have fellowship with Gods Son Jesus Christ. I
therefore an Ambassador for Christ, as though 2 Cor. 5. 20.
God did beseech you by me; I pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled to God,
and be joined in fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ.

Me thinks if you are but pliant or flexible, I should allure Motives.
you to this unconceiveable conjunction; I supposing your former thwart
detractions, unjust depravations, and unadvised detestations of, and your not
thirsting after, and endeavoring to associate your selves to this m^st lovely
society, to accrue from the misleading calumni^tions of malignant spirits, and
your own ignorant unacquaintednesse of the radiant resplendency, and re^ulgent
royalty of this more then Angelical conjunction. That I may therefore induce
and draw you to a love and liking of, inflame and set on fire your never
satisfied appetites after this incomparable and ineffable incorporation. I will
propose six following Propositions to your considerations.

First, this fellowship with Christ Jesus, or the union betwixt Christ and
Christians is the sweetest, and most odoriferous, Cantic. ^. 16. My beloved is
mine, and I am his: He se^deth among the Lillies. i. Christ Jesus is among
those persons and places where his graces grow, which graces make those in whom
they dwell Lilly-like. 1. In regard of their dignity and excellency compared
with unbelievers. 2. In regard of their spiritual beauty; Christ's purity, and
Christians piety compared with carnal Hypocrites, Epicures, and Atheists. 3.
In regard of their sweet savor or smell, compared with lewd livers. Christ
Jesus the Head of this Society, Cant. 2. 1. And all the body of this
conjunction, 2. 2. are Lilly-like both in favor and smell; therefore most
beautiful, lovely, and pleasant.

Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia are sweet incense and perfuming powders affoording
pleasurefull delectation; all the garments of all this goodfellowship smell of
Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45. 8.

1. Christ Jesus the head of this society is a bunch, or bundle of myrrh, or
pleasant nosegay, continually refreshing those which are joined to him with his
delectable sweetness, Cantic. 1. 13. Yea, his excellent sweetness to every
Christian soul is like Calamus and Camphire, which be sweet and delightful
things, Cantic. 1. 14. 4. 1^. Yea, all things in him are rich, and shining,
beautiful and precious; his hands being as rings of gold set with the
Chrysolite, Cant. 5. 14. yea his words are sweet, and delectable, his lips
being like lillies dropping down pure mirrh, 5. 13. And in regard of his
spiritual fairness, comeliness, and beautiful sweetness, he is called the
rose of Sharon, Cant. 2. 1.

2. All this society is a garden enclosed, whose plants are an Orchard of
Pomgranats: i. e. the faithful members of Christ as plants bear all sweet
delectable fruits, as Camphire, Spiknard, and Saffron, etc. 4. 12, 13. Yea to
whom the singing of birds is come: i. e. the time which follows effectual
vocation, when the sharp winter of an unregenerate estate being over, the
soul is refreshed with most comfortable graces, Cant. 2. 12. yea so
delightful, that Christ Jesus says of them, and to them, 7. 6. how fair and
how pleasant art thou O love, for delights? And can there be a sweeter, or more
lovely society then this?



1. The builder of it is most glorious, for he is a King of glory, Psalm. 24. 7.
and Lord of glory, 1. Cor. 2. 8.

2. The foundations of it as glorious as may be, Isa. 54. 11. Saphires, Rev.
21. 19. Jasper, Saphir, Chalcedonye, Emerald, Sardonix, Sardius, Chrysolite,
Beryl, Topaze, Chrysophrasus, Iacinth, Amethist. The decree of Election is one
foundation, 2. Tim. 2. 10. The sum of Christian doctrine is another
foundation, Heb. 6. 1. The doctrine of the Apostles, and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.
20. Christ is the foundation of foundations, 1. Cor. 3. 11. of this society,
glorious therefore are the foundations.

3. The gates are glorious, Isa. 54. 12. Carbuncles, Rev 21. 22. twelve gates,
twelve pearls: the Ministry of the Word, and faith make entrance for Christ
to come into the hearts of the Elect, and for them to flock freely into the
Lords assembly.

4. The walls are glorious, Isa. 26. 1. Salvation will God appoint for walls, 60.
8. call thy walls salvation, Zach. 2. 5. I (says the Lord) will be a wall of
fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.

5. The persons are all of them exceeding glorious, which will clearly
appear, if we seriously consider and take notice:

1. What glorious ornaments they are invested withal, sc. the many rich, and
costly, sweet, and comfortable graces of Christ Jesus called their garments,
Psalm. 45. 8. Because 1. the nakedness of their souls is hereby covered, 2.
they are comforted, and kept warm, 3. defended from the fiery darts of sin
and Satan: 4. decked, beautified, and adorned.

2. What glorious names and titles they have. Not only is the Church of God
nominated, the city of God, the mountain of Gods holiness, Psalm. 48. 1. the
joy of the whole earth; the city of the great King, the city of the Lord of
hosts; the city of our God, the perfection of beauty, Psalm. 50. 2. and the holy
mountain, Zach. 8. 3. But also all the persons of this society are Christ's
brethren, sisters, and mothers, Marc. 2. 33. Kings, and Priests, Rev. 1. 6. a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, 1.
Pet. 2. 9. the daughter and queen of Christ, Psalm. 45. 9, 10. Saints, jewels,
the Dove, and Spouse of Christ.

3. What glorious privileges they have, viz.

1. They are guarded from the dominion of sin, Satan, death and damnation by
the good spirit, grace, and mercy, power and presence, word, truth, promise,
and providence of God, and by the power of his sons death.

2. The Lord is a hearer of their prayers, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. which have free access
into the Court of heaven.

3. They are cleansed from their sins by the blood of Christ, 1. John 1. 7.
he having washed them from their sins in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5.

4. They have the saving knowledge of God, and his Son Christ Jesus, 1. John 2.
20. which is life eternal, Ioh. 17. 3. and a true cause of glorifying.

5. They have the holy Ghost given them, Romans 5. 5. whereby they cry Abba
father, Romans 8. 15. which bears witness with their spirits, that they are the
children of God, whereby they are ascertained, that God dwells in them, and they
in him, 1. Ioh. 4. 13.

6. They are in league, and amity with all the creatures, the numberless kinds
whereof are all serviceable to, and ready pressed to profit, and protect them;
from the most contemptible vermin to the glorious Angels, which glorious
creatures encampe round about them, Psalm. 34.

7. They are invincible, being able to do all things through Christ which
strengthens them, Philip. 4. 13. So that tribulation, distress, persecution,
famine, nakedness, peril, sword, nor death, nor life, nor angels are able to
separate them from the love of God in Christ our Lord, Romans 8. for in all these
they are more then conquerours through him that loved them: Yea by Christ Jesus
the world is crucified to them, and they unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. By their
faith, and new birth they overcome the world, 1. John 5. 4. they mortify the
flesh, with the affections, and lusts thereof; and valiantly resist the devil,
and victoriously vanquish the furious assaults, and fiery darts of Satan.

8. They are assured from the most true, and faithful word of the unchangeable
JEHOVAH who cannot lie; that plenty and penury, solace, and sorrow, yea sins
and sufferings, their own, and others, yea all things else work together for
their good, they loving God, and being the called according to Gods purpose,
Romans 8. 28.

they cannot perish, and that no man can pluck them out of his hand, John. 10.
27. He dwells in them and they in him, so that the gates of hell cannot prevail
against them, Mat. 16. 18. yea neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature is able to separate them from the love of God
which in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 38. 39.

wealthy companies there are in the world; The East-Indian trading through
many, and long during hazards for costly spices; the West-Indian hazarding for
gold and precious stones* some one way, some another: But all the factories in
the world, if they were but one conjoined company, is not comparable for wealth
and riches to this society; for whose sake Christ became poor to make them
rich, 2. Cor. 8. 9. poor, not by violent robbery, or compulsive enforcement;
not by profuse prodigality, or superfluous wasting; not by fraudulent guile, or
crafty deceit; not by due desert; he was neither driven by force, nor drawn
by due desert to make himself poor; but of his own accord, free favor, and
good will he became poor. First, in respect of his outward estate, which was
very poor; for his parentage was poor, Luke 2. 7. his education poor, Luke
2. 5. his maintenance poor, Luke 9* 58. and his attendance poor, Matthew. 4.
18. Secondly, in respect of his estimation in the world amongst men, Mark. 6.
2. is not this the Carpenter the Son of Mary, etc. John 6. 42. is not this
the Son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know, John 7. 18. have any of
the rulers or Pharisees believed on him? Thus he became poor, to make those
who have fellowship with him rich. 1. Both in earthly things, for through
Christ they have a religious right to worldly wealth, and substance, being
owners, whereas others have only a civil; and 2. As also in heavenly things,
by the same right and interest.

Which heavenly spiritual riches consist:

1. In the abundance of sound and saving knowledge, 1. Cor. 1. 5. being
enriched in every thing by him in all utterance and in all knowledge.

2. In the full assurance of Gods favor, grace, and mercy, Col. 2. 2. their
hearts -- being knit together in love unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, Ephesians. 2. 4. 7.

3. In the fruition of Christ his merits, and benefits, who of God is made to
them wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and red^mption, 1. Cor. 1. 30.

4. In the plentiful possession of saving graces, so that they are behind in
no gift, 1. Cor. 1. 7. but abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and
knowledge, 2. Pet. 1. 5. Adding to their faith, virtue, to virtue, knowledge,
to knowledge, temperance, etc.

1. These are rich in the fear of God; the fear of the Lord being their
treasure, Isa. 33. 6. and this is treasure indeed; the true fear of God being
a badge and character of a perfect and upright man, Job 1. 8. having a
protecting guard of glorious Angels, Psalm. 34 7. and a large, and ample promise
of the fruition of all good things, Psalm. 34. 9, 10.

2. These are rich in heavenly wisdom consisting in true godliness, and this
is unparalle^d wealth; length of days being in her right hand, and in her left
hand riches and honor, Prove. 3. 6.

3. These are rich in saving knowledge, they having an unction from the holy
one and know all things, 1. Ioh. 2. 20. which knowledge is riches of such a
nature, that it is the true cause of spiritual glorying, Ier. 9. 24. yea it is
life eternal, Ioh. 17. 3. yea doubtless all things are to be counted but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. Phil. 3. 8.

4. They are rich in faith, Iam. 2. 5. rich in faith; then which what greater
riches? bringing to God, Heb. 11. 6. begetting to God, John 1. 12. justifying,
Romans 5. 1. sanctifying, Acts 15. 9. overcomming the world, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. and
the devil, 1. Pet. 5. 9. making prayer powerful, James 5. 17. and the enjoyer
to continue in grace, 2. Cor. 1. 20.

5. They are rich in hope, Romans 15. 13. they abounding in hope through the
power of the holy Ghost. Then which what better wealth? 1. It being an helmet
of salvation, wherewith the vital parts of a christian soldier are protected
from receiving any deadly wound in this their sharp warfare, Ephesians. 6. 17. 2.
This being an anchor of the soul, sure, and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19. wherewith
the Saints sustain themselves in all the boisterous storms of this turbulent,
and unquiet sea of misery. By this they rejoice, Romans 5. 2. By this they are
kept from apostasy, and many unkindly fears. By this they are purified, 1.
John 3. 3. By this they have plenty of patience and consolation.

6. They are rich in liberality, 2. Cor. 8. 2. the riches of their liberality,
etc. i. e. good works, 1. Tim. 6 13. then which what wealth more advantageous?
By this they laying up in store a good foundation, 1. Tim. 6. 17, 18. This
being a principal preservative against the contagious Gangrene Covetousness,
the root of all evil. This being a plentiful seed, which will procure a
superabundant harvest, 2. Cor. 9. 6. This having a gracious promise of a rich
reward, Psalm. 41. 1. And this being one of those good works which accompany
these to receive their reward when all the world forsakes them, Rev. 14. 17.

7. But what need more particular instances?

1. Can any be more rich then they, which are rich to God? but so are these,
Luk 12. 21.

2. Is any more wealthy then such who partake of the unspeakeable riches of
Christ: whose reproach, and sufferings is greater riches then the treasure of
Egypt, Heb. 11. 26. but so are these, Ephesians. 3. 8.

3. Who more abounding in substantial treasure, then those who lay up for
themselves in heaven treasures, where neither moth, nor rust does corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through nor steal, Matthew. 6. 19, 20. But such are
they, Heb. 10. 34. having in heaven a better and an enduring substance.

4. Who may compare with those in wealth, and riches who have a kingdom where
they shall receive, and enjoy a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 8. a
crown of life, Iam. 1. 12. where they shall be heirs of promise, Heb. 6. 17.
of an eternal inheritance, 9. 15. of salvation, 1. 14. of Gods Kingdom, Iam.
2. 5. of the grace of life, 1. Pet. 3. 7. of blessing, 3. 9. yea of an
inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, not fading away reserved in the
heavens, 1. Pet. 1. 4. But such are these, Luke 12. 32.

5. This is the most joyful, and gladsome society that is; none but these have
any true mirthfull glee, or mirthfull gladness. True it is, ambitious Hamans
rejoice in their honorable advancements; Covetous earthwormes in their
plentiful increase; belly good Epicures in their dainty dishes, and excessive
devouring gourmandising; sluggards in their sleep; loiterers in their
idleness; spightfull persons in other men's miseries, etc. But these and such
like rejoycings are either worldly, the increasing of corn, wine, and oil,
Psalm. 4. 7. Or wanton, Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man, -- but know, -- etc. Or
most wicked, Isa. 22. 13. Behold joy and gladness. Ier. 11. 15. When thou
did evil then thou rejoycedst. These joys are sensual, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.
Chaunting to, etc. Drinking wine in bowls, etc. Not grieving for the
afflictions of Joseph. Or sinful, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Your glorying is not good. Or
shameful, Romans 1. 32. Having pleasure in those that do wickedly. These and
such like are but evil joys, like a hurtful hook, covered over with a fair
bait, or like a poisonous Mala gaudia mentis impia, sub dulci melle venena
laten^.
herb, with a beautiful color: Of such mirth spoke Solomon when he said,
laughter is madness, Eccl. 2. 2. Of such our Savior spoke when he said; Woe
be to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep, Luke 6. 25. And of
such spoke S. Paul, saying, your rejoicing is not good. 2. In this society
there is great joy, Luc. 2. 10. abounding, 2 Cor. 8. 2. exceeding, Iam. 1. 2.
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. full, Ioh. 6. 22. unconceiveable, 1 Cor. 2. and
everlasting, Isa. 60. 15. 9. 1. This joy has for its object and matter Gods
commandments, Psalm. 112. 1. Gods favor, Psalm. 4. 7. The Lord, Phil. 4. 4. And
the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2. etc. 2. This joy for the measure is
greater then all worldlings joy; being like that at a conquest, and in harvest,
Isa 9. 3. Glorious and unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Yea full, and perfect, 1 Ioh.
1. 4. First, in regard of its object, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc.
Secondly, In regard of worldlings joy, which is deceiveable and momentany. 3.
As also in regard of the use, it being an universal consolation against all
fears, griefs, and miseries. 3. The concomitants of Romans 14. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
this joy are righteousness, peace, love, a good conscience, etc 4. And as it
is hearty, cheerful, and unfeigned, like Mary's, whose spirit rejoiced in God
her Savior, Luke 1. 47. So it is constant and continual, abiding in all
conditions: so that afflictions for Christ's sake cannot take it away. Acts 5.
41. They rejoiced, being counted worthy to suffer for Christ: Nor tribulations,
Romans 5. 3. Rejoicing in tribulations: Nor the losing of goods, Heb. 10. 34.
Taking joyfully the spoiling of their goods: Nor sufferings, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
Rejoicing in Christ's sufferings: Nor temptations, Iam. 1. 2. Count it all joy
when ye fall into diverse temptations.

wicked, they have no peace, says my God, Isa. 48. 22. 57. 21. 1. No peace?
Not amongst themselves: Great is their unity, although it be in villainy; with
unanimous consent they once cried out against our Savior, Crucify him, etc.
Against Saint Paul, Away with such a fellow, Acts 21. The Tabernacle of Edom,
Ishmael, etc. once consulted with one consent to root out the name of Israel,
Psalm. 83. 4, 5, 6. And yet no peace? True it is, they have one common cause,
and quarrel; and therefore they conjoyne their forces together against Gods
peculiar ones, being all soldiers under Satan, and dogs of his kennell; even
as dogs of different colors, disagreeing bigness; dissenting kinds, and voice
run with united forces, full cry, and open mouth concordantly after the poor
hare; and yet at other times for bones, and scraps, yea out of their froward
disposition, no occasion being offered, mangle, and rend each other with dogged
spightfulnesse: Even so, although the sons of Belial, yea all the kennell and
rabblement of Satan's helhounds pursue with bitter barkings, and enraged fury
jointly the harmless innocence of Gods people; yet are they differenced
amongst themselves by dissonant disagreements, sometimes for trashie trifles,
sometimes, no occasion being given, out of their doggish frowardness. So that
they have no true peace amongst themselves, but acontinued desire to devour
each other.

2. No peace? Not with Satan, whose they are, and whom they serve? No, not
with Satan: for although he makes many golden, and glittering promises; yet he
does but gull them, requiting all, yea his best, and most dutiful observants
with eternal death.

3. No peace? What, not with themselves? No, not with themselves; They may have
a quiet conscience for a time, whereby they go on in sin, neither regarding
the blessings nor the curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Whereby they multiply
sin without sense, Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. Whereby they resolve to go on in their
wicked courses. This the Apostle calls a seared conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. And
a conscience, past feeling. But they are far from peace of conscience; for
when the Lord awakeneth these frozen, secure, and sleeping consciences, so that
these enraged gnawing worms begin to bite, yea so much that no wisdom can
counsel them, no eloquence can persuade them, no power can overcome them, nor
scepter affray them, when no physic can cure, surgery salve, riches ransom,
countenance bear out, or time wear away, or receive a new and fresh
commission from the unchangeable Jehovah, to be eternal and unrecoverable
executioners of Divine Justice. viz. Never dying, and ever tormenting worms,
Isa. 66. last. Then we, and all they shall see they were but in a fools
paradise, and a deluding dream.

4. No peace? No, not with Gods creatures, base or glorious; these being ready
pressed to harm and hurt them, if the Lord command, or permit; God being against
them, who can have peace with them, Romans 8. 31.

5. No peace? Much less with the Lord: For as Ieh^ could have no peace with
Ioram so long as the whoredoms, etc. 2 Reg. 9. 22. What peace can they have
with God so long as their impieties are so many?

As out of this society there is no peace, so in this there is perfect peace,
Isa. 26. 3. Peace they have with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 1. With
glorious Angels, these being their guard; with good men, Marc. 9. 50. Yea, often
with enemies, Prove. 16. 7. With heaven, earth, creatures, crosses, and their
own consciences. What though they have afflictions in the world, yet have they
peace in Christ, Ioh. 16. 33. And be it they not only have trouble without,
but temptations within; yet are they free from the force, power, and poison of
them; which works damnation in the wicked.

These things being so, me thinks all of you should use your best and utmost
endeavors to have part and interest in this goodfellowship, it being of all
societies the sweetest, surest, most glorious, most rich, most joyful and
peaceful; so that we may say of this as the Psalmist does of the City of God,
Psalm. 8^. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O blessed society. Yea, such
glorious wealth, beauty, victories, prophesies, presence, promises, and
performances, that (being advisedly apprehended) are of force to instigate and
induce each soul enlivened by the Spirit of Grace to applaud with an holy
admiration Psalm 84. 1.
this blissful association, and say; How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord
Christ Jesus. To desire with earnest ardency, wish for with unsatiable
longings, and say, Psalm. 84. 2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the
courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God; and
with the same sweet singing Psalmist magnify the sumptuous magnificence of
this assembly, saying, Blessed are they that dwell in this house, Verse 4. One
day in these courts is better then a thousand. I had rather be a doorekeeper in
this society, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness, Ver. 10.

CHAP. V. Use 4. Of Consolation to such who have fellowship with Christ.
ALL you who are stubborn, refractary, and inexorable bedlam Belials; who will
not have this man reign Use 4. Consolation.
over you; who will not be inoculated and inserted into this society of such
ineffable glory, unspeakable beauty, and other inestimable transcendent
excellencies: stand by, behold, and view with admiration the glory, and
magnificence of this society; and as Titus when he had seen the remainder of
the Sanctum Sanctorum, said, Now I well perceive that this is none other then
the house of God, and the dwelling of the God of heaven; Neither was it for
naught that the Jews stood so earnestly in the defense thereof: -- For great
is the glory of this Temple. So when you have seen the splendent glory, and
transcendent beatitudes of this unparalleled society, do you speak out, and
say, we well perceive that this connection is no other then the communion with
God, the dwelling of the God of heaven; neither is it for naught that such
precise practicing Protestants stand so earnestly in defense of it; for great
is the glory of this conjunction. But do not presume to meddle with, or lay
hold upon it, so as to apply it to your selves so long as you proceed in your
exorbitant disorders. This holy thing is not to be given to dogs; these pearls
are not to be cast before swine; neither must any Cananite enter into this
fellowship with the Lord Jesus. But all you who already are annexed to, and you
who desire with unchangeable longings, and laborious endeavors to conglutinate
your selves to the Lord Jesus, draw near with attentive harkening. That I may
edge and keen your obtuse and blunt endeavors to cleave more closely to, and
pursue more eagerly this desirable society: that I may hearten and encourage
you against the many oppositions you are to encounter with in this your warring
pilgrimage: that I may make gladsome your souls and spirits, I have words of
comfort and consolation to speak unto you. We have fellowship with Gods Son
Jesus Christ, and he is Wonderful to save us, Counselor to advise us, Mighty
God to deliver us, Everlasting Father to care and provide for us, A Prince of
peace to quiet our consciences, and Governor for our defense, Isa. 9. 6.

1. Be it you are infirm and weak; yet have you fellowship with Jesus Christ,
such a Child, which will make you strong.

2. Be it you are servants; yet have you fellowship with Jesus Christ, a Son
to make and keep you free.

1. Are you confounded in conscience, beholding the grim and ghastly looks of
your many bloody and crimson sins formerly acted or intended? Consolate your
selves with this, you have fellowship with him who is wonderful to quiet all.

2. Are you at your wits end, being void of counsel? Behold how you have
fellowship with Christ Jesus, a present Counselor to advise and direct you.

3. Are you feeble, yea ready to despair in regard of your inability and lack
of strength to withstand the fiery darts, and fierce assaults of Satan, that
author of evil; to undergo the many great and grievous pressures of
disgraceful ignominious reproaches, slanderous calumniations, and other
malicious usages you meet with in this world; animate your drooping and dismayed
spirits with this; you have fellowship with Christ a Mighty God, so that you
shall be able to do all things through Christ which strengthens you.

4. Are you fearful of death, that dismal parter of souls and bodies?
Comfort your selves with this; you have fellowship with Christ, an everlasting
Father, who has provided so graciously for you, that your death is not a
perishing, but a parting for a time; yea such, that although there be a
painful parting between your souls and bodies; yet there shall be a most
gladsome and joyful meeting.

5. Are you afraid of Gods judgments? Behold your fellowship with Gods Son
the Prince of peace.

6. Are you dismayed with any evil? Consider how you have fellowship with him,
who is Governor of all for your defense. Fear not therefore. What? Not God,
not his judgments, not man, not sin? I say not so.

1. Gods judgments and threatenings are to be feared, 2 Cor. 5. 11. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord; such who feared Gods judgments were
comforted, Isa. 66. 5. Yea the very Egyptians who feared the threats escaped
them, Exodus 9. 20. They are to be feared therefore, although not so as to think
to be overwhelmed by them; or that God does not love us.

2. Man is to be feared; although not simply for himself, yet respectively and
for conscience sake toward God, as Magistrates, Parents, husbands, etc.

3. The Lord himself is to be feared; yea this is such a grace, that it
characters out a righteous man, Acts 10. 2. Who shunnes evil, and does good,
Job 1. 8. Who delights in Gods Commandments, Psalm. 112. 1. Who succors the
persecuted Saints, 1 Reg. 18. 3, 4. Who honors God, Mal. 3. 16. Is obedient
to the Lord, Genesis 22. 12. And has true faith, Heb. 11. 7.

1. Fear Gods judgments, so as to avoid them.

2. Fear we sin, so as to flee from it.

3. Fear man for the Lords sake, so that we may be careful to obey him, loath
to offend him, Romans 13. 7.

4. Fear we the Lord, so as to be loath to displease him by sin, in respect
of his great goodness and mercies, and for love we bear to righteousness,
Psalm. 130. 4.

But fear not the wickeds fear, Isa. 8. 12, 13. sc. their Idols and Devils
with a distrustful fear, withdrawing the heart from God, and his promises.

Fear not dangers, death, creatures, tyrants, want, etc.

Math. 10. 26. 28. 31. viz. Immoderately, faithlesly.

Fear not such a fear which troubles the conscience, so as to hinder the
operation of salvation, and work of the Holy Ghost.

Fear not touching the pardon of your sins, for Christ has satisfied for
them.

Fear not death; for Christ has plucked out its sting.

Fear not Satan; for Christ has vanquished him.

Fear not condemnation; for there is none to them which are in Christ.

Fear not you little flock, you having fellowship with Jesus Christ, the Son
of God: but be you comforted, and encouraged, you having interest in that
society which affoords such plenty of consolations, and comfortable blessings
that I need not say, behold I have showed you by clear demonstrations, and
infallible proofs that this is the most beautiful, most honorable, most
sure, most rich, most joyful, and the most peaceful society that is; what can
I therefore say more for thee, O sweet communion? as Isaac said to Esau of
Jacob, Behold I have given to him for servants all his brethren, with corn and
wine have I sustained him; and what shall I now do to thee my son, Genesis 27.
37. Neither shall you need to question (like Esau; Have thou but one blessing O
my Father? Ver. 38.) and say, have thou but six blessings O lovely society?
there belonging to it such plenty of consolations, that could I live the age
of Methuselah, had I a heart and head furnished with the wisdom and ingenie of
all learned men; should I spend all that time, and those only supposed
endowments in finding out; and had I the tongue of men and Angels to express
the numberless transcendent excellencies of this communion; yet could I not be
able to delineate the incomparable and blissful felicities thereof. Howbeit,
give me leave to cheer and refresh your souls with some few of the many
millions of gladsome rays, which stream and flow from this Sun of
righteousness.

Are we in league and communion with Christ Jesus? Then he loves us with all
those loves which are most ardent, and excelling; Consol. 1.
he loves us with the love, 1. Of a Master, for we are servants. 2. The love of
a King, for we are his subjects. 3. The love of a brother: for we are his
brethren, Heb. 2. 11. and sisters, sc. By profession, and affection, Math. 12.
50. 4. The love of a friend; for we are his friends, Luke 12. 4. John 3. 29.
15. 15. 5. The love of a child, for we are his mother, Mark 3. 75. Being
near and dear to him as mothers are to their children: bearing and conceiving
Christ in our hearts as mothers do children in their wom^es, Gal. 4. 19. 6. The
love of a father, for we are his children. 7. The love of a husband, for we are
his spouse. 8. The love of himself; for we are his members. Then which what
love more free, more tender, so great and during? Then which what better
honor? What greater happiness then to have such love of such a Savior? Who
loving us so entirely, will surely pardon our many sins. 2. Pass by our
frailties and infirmities. 3. Shelter us against the wrath of God. 4. Defend us
safe against the malicious attempts of Satan. 5. Provide all necessary good
things. 6. And hereafter crown us with immortal and unspeakable glory.

Have we fellowship with Christ Jesus? Then we are surely Consol. 2.
justified. Justification being an action of the Father absolving a believing
sinner from his sins, and from the whole curse due to his sins, and
accounting him just in his sight, and accepting him to life everlasting, freely
of his own mercy through the perfect obedience and sufferings of Christ
imputed to his faith; unto the everlasting praise and glory of the mercy,
justice, and truth of God, Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely of his grace,
etc. Justification is the office of Homil. of sal. D. 3.
God onel^ and is not a thing which we render to him; but which we receive of
him: not which we give to him, but which we take of him. This is a benefit of
benefits, whereupon our salvation does depend: for whosoever shall be saved must
be justified. All graces are present in him that is justified, yet they Hom.
sal. D. 1.
justify not altogether. Now as the final cause of justification is Gods
glory and our own salvation: 2. The isntrumental is faith within, and the
Gospel without. 3. The efficient is Gods free grace. 4. So the matter is
Christ our Redeemer. 5. And the form is, the imputation of our sins to him,
and his justice to us. As our sin being imputed to Christ made M Burton, page
66.
him become sin for us: even so are we made the righteousness of God in him:
that is by imputation of his righteousness: which righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, is no more inhaerent in us to our justification, thou our sin
imputed to Christ was inhaerent in him to his condemnation. Therefore all Gods
Elect being joined to Christ, and having an heavenly communion with him, being
in themselves rebellious sinners, Gods enemies, and firebrands of hell, by
means of Christ Jesus with whom they have fellowship must needs be accepted of
the Lord as perfectly righteous before him, being justified by faith in him,
Romans 3. 28. Not that faith does justify in regard of it self, either because
it is a grace; for although it is an excellent virtue, yet it is imperfect, and
mixed with unbel^efe. 2. Nor in regard it is the work of God in us, for then
all graces might be means of justification as well as it. 3. Nor as it
contains other graces in it, for then it should be the principal part of our
justice: But in respect of the object thereof Christ Jesus, whom faith
apprehends as he is set forth in the Word and Sacraments. We are justified by
the act of M. Burton, Truths triumph etc. Cap. 5 pa 5. 60.
faith relatively to the object Christ; not for the act of it. Faith
justifies, not by the act believing, but as the instrument in applying the
object, -- which is Christ, as the hand is said to heal Ibid. page 80.
only by applying the medicine; or to enrich by receiving a treasure; or to
feed by putting meat into the mouth; as we say a child, etc. It is Christ that
is the Author and matter of our justification; it is Christ who applies the
same unto us; as for faith, it is but an instrument to apprehend, and a hand to
receive Christ's benefits for ours: Or as Paraeus briefly says, Faith
justifies instrumentally, the blood of Christ meritoriously. Fe^es iustificat
org^^ce. sangu^^ Christi meritorie. Pataus in Rom 3.
faith does not apprehend these by power from it self; but by virtue of the
Lords covenant, so that Christ, and his merits are the believers, not simply
because he believes; but because he believes upon precept and promise; the Lord
promising to impute the righteousness of his Son to us for our
righteousness if we believe. This faith lays hold upon Christ's painful
sufferings sufficient for all the sins of all men, and so freeth the
believing sinner from the guilt, and punishment of sin, and from eternal
damnation. It lays hold upon the perfect obedience of Christ in fulfilling the
Law, hereby curing his own actual disobedience of the Law; and applies the
perfect holiness of the humane nature of Christ, whereby he is accepted as
perfectly righteous of God, and by this his original corruption is healed.

1. Are they happy whose sins are pardoned? as indeed they are; for when
sin is pardoned; such debts and trespasses are forgiven which we could never
pay, nor any remit, Qui solus mundus est mundare praevalet immunda. Greg. Papa
in Job 14. 4. Nee homo nec Angelus. Aug. Agricola non vitis efficlum: Ad solam
Triuitatem pertinet, Idem Tom. 9 in Joan. 15. page 444.
save the omnipotent Jehovah, Isa. 43. 25. Nor any make satisfaction for and
purge out, except the Lord Jesus, and that with his own blood, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
When sin is pardoned; such spots, and blemishes are forgiven which made us,
and our best actions loath some unto God, Isa. 1. 14. 15. And guilty of
eternal damnation, Romans 6. 23. Is remission of sins such a favor, that it
has for its efficient cause, God only, and his beloved Son Christ Jesus,
Isa. 43. 25. Romans 6. 25. Its moving cause, the mere mercy, truth, and promise
of God, Ephesians. 1. 7. Its meritorious cause, the death of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. And its final, Gods glory, Ier. 33. 8, 9. And the sinners salvation: then
they must needs be happy whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Romans 4. 7,
8.

2. Are they happy who being sinners, are notwithstanding accounted righteous
by the righteousness of Christ imputed? as they must needs be; for by this
righteousness of Christ we are made the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
The whole obedience of Christ with the merit thereof eternal life is made
ours; as if we had done the one, and deserved the other; yea, by this we have
store of supplies for all our wants. We are poor, Christ is our riches; we are
naked; Christ is our garments; we are blind, Christ is our eye salve, Rev. 3.
18. We are deformed, Christ is our beauty, Rev. 19. 8.

3. Are they happy who being enemies to God by reason of sin, are made
friends to the Lord, they being reconciled to God by Christ, having their
sins done away, and themselves arrayed with the perfect righteousness of
Christ? as they needs must; for what greater misery then to be at enmity with
the Lord? And what greater felicity then to be in league with God? Romans 8. 31.
For if God be for us, who can be against us?

4. Is peace with God a great favor? as it is; it costing the blood of Christ
to make it, Col. 1. 20. It passing all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. And being a
forerunner of that perfect rest and joy the Elect have in heaven, 2 Pet. 3. 14.

5. Is it a great favor to be Gods adopted children? as it is intruth; the
Lord hereby taking us into his own family, and accepting us as his own
children; not because he wanted an heir, he living and reigning for ever; not
for want of children, for he had a natural Son; not because this Son was
unfit to inherit, he being as fit as his Father: But of his mere grace and
bounty, we being by nature children of wrath, disobedience, and the Devil.
This being such a blessing, that by virtue of this we are made Christ's
brethren, heirs, Gal. 3. 18. Heirs of God, joynt-heires with Christ, Romans 8.
17. Of Gods kingdom, Iam. 2. 5. By virtue of this we are Lords over all
creatures, save Angels; we have them to guard us, and all things working for
our good. This is such a favor, then which God could not have bestowed upon us
a greater. Plu^ est cum Paulus ait heredes nos esse, and coheredes Christ's;
quam si mill mundos, nedum coelum, and terram cum omnibi^ bonu no^ reipsa ^^
at^r^um (...)si^ os^sse. (...) in Romans 8. 17.
It is more when Paul says, we are heirs and co-heires with Christ, then if
he had affirmed that we should indeed enjoy for ever a thousand worlds, not
only heaven and earth, with all good things therein. If it was no small
preferment for David to be son in law to Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 23. Then what
preferment is it to be the Lords adopted children? Quid (...) conserra potest?
An non excellentior Majesta^ est esse (...) Dei (...) silium potentissina
Monarchae (...) terra? Ho^ beneficio nihil (...) est, vel excellentius.
^rentius in Isa. 38
What may be compared to such dignity? Is it not a more excellent prerogative
to be the Son of the God of heaven, then son of the most potent Monarch
upon earth? There is nothing more high, or surmounting this benefit. This is
such a favor, that a reverend Divine says thus of it. M. Greeneham,
Aphorisms.
As far as the spirit is above the flesh; God above men; heaven above earth:
eternity above time: so far is the new creation above the old. This is such a
blessing, that Saint John calls all to admire what manner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 1.

6. Is hope of the glory of God an extraordinary benefit? as it is; for by this
with patience we look for the accomplishment of all good things. By this we
undergo afflictions with a contented mind. By this we being inwardly cheared
and caused outwardly to confess the same to the glory of God, encouragement of
the Saints, amazement of wicked ones, and strengthening of our selves to
continue against all discouragements; and by this we are saved, Romans 8. 24.

Then how unspeakably blessed are those, who have union with Christ Jesus: for by
means of this conjunction they are justified, Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.
2 Cor. 5. 21. And by virtue of this justification they enjoy all those ample
privileges, and excelling prerogatives.

1. The justified man has remission of sins, Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised for our justification, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. Rev. 1.
5.

2. The justified man has Christ's righteousness imputed to him: so that the
Lord does freely account the righteousness of Christ to be his righteousness,
It was imputed to him Romans 4. 3, 4.
for righteousness, Ver. 5. His faith is counted for righteousness, Verse 6.
Unto whom God imputes righteousness, Romans 5. 18. By the righteousness of one
the free gift came upon all.

3. The justified person is reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans
5. 10. God was in Christ reconciling the world, 2 Cor. 5. 19.

4. The justified person has peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by
says we have peace with God, Ephesians. 2. 17, 18.

5, The justified man has the favor to be Gods adopted Son, Galat. ^. 26.
Ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6.

6. The justified man has also hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 1, 2.
Justified, -- hope of the glory.

Have we fellowship with Christ Jesus: then we are and Consol. 3.
shall be more sanctified, and that,

1. Inwardly, in having our minds, wills, and affections freed from the bondage
of sin, and Satan; and enabled by little and little through the Spirit of
Christ to desire, and approve that which is good, and walk in it.

2. Outwardly, in having the members of the body preserved from being means to
execute sin, and made the instruments of holiness, Romans 6. 19. This twofold
sanctification is begun here, perfected hereafter in heaven.

1. It is in nature after justification, but not in order and time.

2. It is not perfect in this life, as justification is.

3. It is the renovatio^ of nature, whereas justification consists in 1.
Remission of sins. 2. Imputation of Christ's righteousness.

4. It is an alteration of qualities from bad to good, whereas justification is
an absolution of a sinner from the guilt of sin and death.

Justification and sanctification differ no more but as the root M. Burton.
Truths triumph etc. cap. 3. page 16.
and the branch, the tree and the fruit.

This sanctification is by means of union with Christ; for he having taken our
nature, and sanctified it by his Spirit, and we being made one with him do
receive the selfsame Spirit to sanctify us, or make us holy; we being in
Christ he is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption,
1 Cor. 1. 30.

1. By virtue of this union with Christ Jesus, his death works in us (joined to
him) the death of all sin, and power to destroy all sin, or the lusts of
the old man, until they be wholly taken away by death. Romans 6. 6, 7. Our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, etc. Thus cleansing our members, as from
the guilt of sin, that it shall not be imputed to us; so from the filthiness
of sin, that it shall not prevail against us, Ezekiel. 36. 25.

2. His resurrection sends a quickening power into these our members, making
them rise from sin to work righteousness, and to live in holiness of life,
making them active to do the will of God in the works of Christianity, and of
our particular callings: so that now those who have union with Christ have a
new heart, sc. in qualities, being framed anew after God in true holiness,
Ezekiel. 11. 19. They are a new lump, i. Renewed from the leaven of sin, and
corruption, 1 Cor. 5. 7. And they are new creatures. i. Endued with new
qualities of righteousness and holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in Christ
is a new creature, they having.

1. Their minds sanctified or enlightened with spiritual wisdom and
understanding, Col. 1. 8.

2. Their memories sanctified to keep and remember that which is good, and
agreeable to Gods will, Psalm. 119. 11.

3. Their wills so sanctified, that being by nature unable to will any good
thing pleasing God, they are changed by grace, and freed in part from the
bondage of sin, so that they will, and choose that which pleases God, and
refuse evil, Romans 7. 18, 19.

4. Their affections are sanctified, so that they,

1. Love God, 1 Ioh. 4. 19. His children, 3. 14. The place where his honor
dwells, Psalm. 86. 8. His commandments, Psalm. 119. 127. And the appearing of
Christ, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

2. Hate sin because it is a breach of Gods Law, or because it is sin;
especially their own corruptions, Romans 7. 15. 24.

3. Sorrow and grieve for offending such a merciful Father by their sins,
Psalm. 38. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 10. 11. For the miseries of the Church, Romans 12. 15.
Lam. 3. 20. For the abounding of sin in others, Ezekiel. 9. 1. Psalm. 119. 136.

4. Rejoice because their names are written in heaven, Luc. 10. 20. Romans 5. 2.
In being partakers of Christ's sufferings, Acts 5. 41. In temptations, Iam. 1.
2. And in the loss of all things for Christ, Heb. 10. 34.

5. Their members of their bodies sanctified, being made instruments of
holiness; they formerly being means to execute sin. e. g.

1. Their eyes, which formerly like the eyes of fools were in the corners of
the world, Prove. 17. 24. Gazing after unprofitable things, are now the eyes of
wise men in their heads, Eccl. 2. 14. To epsy that which is good to follow it,
and that which is bad to eschew it; turned from beholding vanity, Job 31. 1.
Opened to behold the wondrous things out of Gods Law, Psalm. 119. 18.

2. Their ears, which formerly were given to hear delightfully lascivious
songs, idle tales, and worldly discourses, hearing Gods Word so as not to know
and understand it, Ier. 5. 21. Math. 13. 19. Are now become open, and hearing
ears, so hearing, that they willingly assent in mind to the word of God, and
good counsel, with a firm purpose to obey it, Ioh. 8. 47.

3. Their tongues, which formerly were exercised in ribauldry, lying,
slaundering, swearing, and dishonouring the Lord many ways, are now exercised
in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, in giving Christian counsel, in
showing forth the praises of the Lord, etc.

Thus all those who have fellowship with Christ by virtue of this union are
sanctified. 1. Being freed from the tyranny of sin into the liberty of
holiness, begun here, and daily to be increased. 2. Having a new quality of
holiness created in their souls, whereby they can in some measure truly hate
their own sins with firm purpose to leave them, and love Gods Law with
resolution to do it in some measure. And this is matter of comfort and
encouragement to all engrafted members into Christ Jesus, considering that they
are sanctified; and therefore,

1. Clean in Christ, although not in themselves.

2. Clean by imputation, although not by action.

3. Clean by way of comparison, although not simply.

4. Clean by proportion, although not by perfection.

5. Clean in part, although not wholly, and altogether.

Whenever in these books I have made mention of the Church Vtc unque in his
libris commemora vt Ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam, non sic a
cipiendum est quas^ jam s^t, sed quae praeparatur tit sit, quando apparebit
etiam gloriosit. Nunc enim propter qu^sdam ignorantiat and infirmitates
membrorum suorum, habet unde quoti^^e toti dicat, (...) nob^ debi^^ nostra.
Aug. cap. 18. de Baptismo Tom. 1. page, 46.
not having spot or wrinkle; it is not so to be taken as if she were so now,
but that she is prepared to be so when she shall appear glorious: for now by
reason of certain ignorances and infirmities of her members, the whole Church
has cause to say every day forgive us our trespasses. August. Retract. Lib. 2.
Cap. 18.

What comfort is it to consider that they are justified, and so are pardoned;
sanctified, and so are purged* (although there can be no pardoning where there
is no purging, yet that sin may be fully pardoned, which is not wholly
purged, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.) viz. 1. In time, although at once they cannot. 2. In
part, although wholly they cannot. 3. By degrees, although altogether they
cannot. 4. In death, although in life they cannot. 5. In, and by Christ,
although in, and by themselves they cannot.

What consolation is it to such, when considering that although being once
justified, they are not always and altogether justified: viz. 1. In their own
apprehension, yet they are in Gods estimation, and by imputation. 2. In their
own sight, yet they are in Gods. 3. In regard of their own assurance, yet
they are in regard of Gods acceptance. 4. In regard of the isntrumental, and
adjuvant causes. i. Faith, repentance, prayer; nor yet of the outward means,
Word, and Sacraments, etc. Yet they are in regard of the moving cause, Gods
grace; material, Christ's merits; efficient, God himself; and final, Gods
glory, and their own salvation. 5. In regard of new sins, requiring new
pardon, and new repentance, and prayer; whereof they cannot possibly be
altogether wanting; yet they are in regard of old sins already past, and
repented for.

What encouragement is it to such, considering that by means of this union
with Christ Jesus they have the Spirit of sanctification, whereby they are
reformed and sanctified, although not all at once (for as seed cast into the
ground does root, sprout, grow, increase, and bring forth fruit in time, and by
degrees; and as a tree is not at full growth the same day it is planted; and as
the issue in the womb is first conceived, then it feels, afterward it has
the power of reason, though not the use; and at length is borne and brought up;
and as we likewise are not learned at once, but first we conceive small
matters, and then proceed to profounder: Even so our regeneration and
sanctification is now begun; but must still grow in grace, go on from grace to
grace, from virtue to virtue; until we be grown to a perfect man in Christ,
and that is hereafter in heaven:) yet by degrees; and although but begun here,
yet perfectly in the life to come. Holy men affirm that those who are clean,
are to be cleansed. Tom. 9. page 444. Mundi mundandi. Aug. in Joan. 15. Quis in
hac vit^ sic mundus, ut non sit magis maguque mundandus? Motus immundi reprimi
possunt per gratiam, ejici non possunt nisi in morte. Bernardus Sermon. 58 page
165. Vitia in nobis non mortua, sed compressa. Idem. SubJugari possunt, non
exterminari Iebus^i. Idem. In munditia non potest esse (...).
Who in this life is so pure that he needs not to be more and more pure? Impure
motions may be repressed by grace, but they cannot be cast out but in death.
Vices are not dead, but suppressed in us. These Iebusites may be brought under,
but not rooted out. There can be no end in purity.

CHAP. VI. Consolation 4. Saints have Christian liberty.
HAve we fellowship with Christ Jesus? Then we are a people Consol. 4.
set at liberty; or such a company, who through grace are made partakers of
Christian liberty. 1 Pet. 2. 16. As free, -- using your liberty. Gal. 5. ^.
Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has made us free. Ver. 13. Ye have
been called unto liberty. 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty. Liberty I say, or freedom.

1. Not from the yoke of lawful authority, Civil, or Ecclesiastical; this is
an Anabaptisticall, no Christian liberty. The regenerate Christian being bound
in conscience to obey all lawful authority in performing their lawful
precepts, or undergoing their inflicted penalties, Romans 13. 5. We must be
subject, -- and also for conscience sake.

2. Not to sin, or continue in sin that grace may abound, Romans 6. 1. This
is a wicked licentiousness, no Christian liberty: the renewed Christian being
bound in conscience to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, etc. Ephesians. 5. 11.

3. Not from sin, so far forth as to receive an absolute perfection of
inherent grace in this life, so as to be free from all sin, and to be as
perfect as Christ is in heaven, as fantastical familists, and fanaticall
fantasticks avow against the light of Scripture, and their own conscience; for
the most sanctified Christian who breathes in this sublunary world is perfect
only; 1. Comparatively in respect of others, viz. Weaklings, and wicked ones.
2. In regard of himself, he having received a greater measure of present
profiting. Phil. 1. 5. Or else in regard of his upright sincerity, 2 Reg. 20.
3. He who says he has no sin deceives himself, -- and is a liar, says
Saint John, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. 10. Superbiam Valentinianorum imitantur qui se absque
peccato existimant, perfectos se vocantes, and semina electionis. Irenaeus lib.
7. cap. 1.
They imitate the pride of the Valentinians who think themselves without
sin, calling themselves perfect, and the seeds of election, says Irenaeus.

Likewise both in the worst there is some good, and in the best Sic. and in
pess^^^^ aliquid boni, and in optimis ^^^^thil pessimi, solus eni^^ Deus sine
peccato, and solus homo sine peccato Christus. Tertul. Semper debemus not
consiteri peccatores, nam quisquis se immaculatum and sine peccato dicerit, aut
superbus, aut stultus est. Cyp. de Elem. page 15.
much exceeding naught, only God is without sin; and only the man Christ is
without sin, because he is God and Christ, says Tertullian.

We ought always to confess our selves sinners, for who so says he is
unspotted and without sin, is either a proud person, or a fool: says
Cyprian.

And therefore say I, he who says he is as perfect as Christ, and the
glorified Saints in heaven, deceives himself, and is a liar; except he speaks
of likeness in quality, and not in quantity; and so is the saying of M. Dod to
be understood, which so often is urged: yea every upright Christian loves his
neighbor as himself, Math. 22. 39. Is merciful, as his Father is merciful,
etc. Has the same graces of sanctity which were in Christ, Psalm. 45. 7. viz.
In regard of the quality, but not equality; we receiving of his fullness grace
for grace, John 1. 16. Christ being anointed above his fellows.

4, Liberty or freedom, not from the doctrine and obedience of the Moral Law;
this is the liberty of equivocating Antinomists, tatling Philomenes, and their
fantastical fraternity: but no Christian liberty: every regenerate Christian
being bound in conscience to obey the Moral Law of God.

Of this point hear the concordant confessions of Christian Churches.

Hactenus itaque abrogata est Lex Dei, quatenus nos amplius non damnat, nec
iram in nobis operatur, etc. Anamen Legem ideo nonfastidientes rejicimus,
damna^^s omnia qu^ haeretici veteres and neoterici contra Legem Dei dederunt.
Helvetica Confessio. Artic. 12. page 38.
Thus far the Law of God is abrogated, insomuch as it does not condemn us
henceforth, neither does work the wrath of God in us, etc. Notwithstanding we
do not therefore disdaining reject the Law, we condemn all those things which
heretics old and new have taught against the Law, says the Helvetian Church.

Credimus omnes legis figuras adventu Christi subl^tas esse, quamvis earum
veritas and substantia nobis in eo constet, inquo sunt omnes impletae, Legis
tamen Doctrina and Prophetis utendum est: tum ad vitam nostram confirmandam,
tum ut eo magis in promissionthus Evangelic^^ confirmemur. Gail^ca Confessio
Artic 23. page 106.
We believe all the figures of the Law to be taken away by the coming of
Christ, although the truth and substance of them does continue to us in him, in
whom they are all fulfilled, but the Doctrine of the Law is both used in them
to confirm our life, and also that we may be confirmed more in the promises
Evangelicall: says the French Church.

Quimvis Lex a Deo data per Mosen quoad Ritus and Ceremontas Chriistancs non
astringat, neque tamen ab obedienti^ Mandatorum, que Moralia vocantur, nullus
qu intumvis Christianus est solut^^. Anglica Contessio. page 115.
Although the Law given of God by Moses in regard of the Rites and Ceremonies
does not bind Christians, neither is any, although a Christian loosed from the
obedience of the commandments, which are called Moral: says the English
Church.

Non (...) liberate donatos, quasi nullam legis obedientiam del camus.
Contrarium enim ante con^^ssi sumus. Scoticana. A. 15. page 147.
We do not think that we are so freed by liberty, as if we owe no obedience to
the Law, for we have confessed the contrary before: says the Scottish Church.

Credimus om^^ ceremonias and sigis ras Legu, omnes denique umbras cessasse
Christi advenventu: interint tamen (...) n^bis illorum veritas and substantia
in Chrisio, ideoque Legis testimon^^s ad hu^ (...) ut nost^ so^ in Evangelij
Doctrina confirmentus: and on^tes vitam nostram honest ad gloriam Dei juxta
ipsius voluntatem componamus. Belgica Confessio. Art. 25. page 175.
We believe that all the ceremonies and figures of the Law finally all the
shadows to have ceased by the coming of Christ: but in the mean time the
truth and substance of them does remain to us in Christ, therefore we still
use the testimonies of the Law that we may confirm our selves in the doctrine
of the Gospel, and that we all may set in order our life honestly to the glory
of God according to his will: says the Belgic Church.

Lex enim Dei requirit ut Christianus, etc. Argentinensis Confessio. Cap. 12.
De Monachatu. page 233.
For the Law of God does command that a Christian; etc. says the Church of
Strasburge.

Necesse est docere homines non solum quod Legi ^he liendum sit, sed etiam
quomodo placeat haec obedientia, placeat igitur haec obedientia, etc. Augustina
Conf^ssio. Art. 6 page 12.
It is needful to teach men that they must not only obey the Law, but also
how this obedience pleases, therefore this obedience pleases, etc. says the
August. Confession.

Agnoscima^ Leg^m Dei, eujus Epitome est D^cal^gus, praecipere optima,
justissima, and perfectissima opera, and hominum non solum o^ligatunt esse ad
obediendum Moralibus Praeceptis Decalogi, etc. Wittenbergica Confessio. page
145.
We acknowledge the Law of God, whose abridgement is the Decalogue to command
the best, most just, and perfect works, and man not only to be bound to obey
the Moral precepts of the Decalogue; says the Church of Wirtenberge.

Nec Praecepta Legis quae continentur in Scriptis Apostolicis sunt nova Lex,
sed sunt veteris Legis, etc. page 148.
Neither are those Precepts which are contained in the Apostolical Writings, a
new Law, but are of the old Law: says the same.

In regard this will be erroneous, if not heretical, if not blasphemous by
many misled people. Some of them stiffely, and with a refractorie
obstinatenesse affirming that the law of God binds the regenerate Christian no
otherwise then as he is a creature; which is as if they should say, it binds
Christians no more then beasts, birds, and fishes; for that which binds man
only as a creature, binds man no otherwise Species perfectae participant suo
ge nere ex aeque; ita ut altera alteri genus non ferat acceptu^; sed sui
generis communione plane sunt unum. Kecker. Syst. log. lib. 1. page 62.
then it does all creatures; according to the rule in Logic. Some again of a
middle temper distinguish the regenerate part from the unregenerate, and yield
that the law does bind the unregenerate part to obedience, but not the
regenerate: Give me leave therefore to stay a while in opening and clearing the
truth, if not to recall and reestablish those It is a hard matter to make them
see any thing, which before hand have resolved to close their eyes. Bishop
Usher. page 32.
wilful in their unsound opinion, yet to stay and settle the weak, and
wavering. They say the regenerate has liberty by Christ, and that he ought to
stand fast in that liberty wherein Christ has set him free, and so say we
because it is Scripture, Gal. 5. 1. They say there is no condemnation to them
which are in Christ, and so say we because it is Scripture, Romans 8. 1. They say
that the law has nothing to do in the Conscience of the regenerate Christian,
and that it does not bind the Conscience of the regenerate to obedience; but
this we deny, it being repugnant to sacred writ, and of evil consequence. The
falsehood of whose schismatic, and heretical opinion (Schismatic I call
it in regard of the rent, and breach it makes in the Church; heretical I call
it, it being an Incidere in falsae opinionis errorem priusquam vera cognoscat
imperiti animi est, and simpli cis perseverare vero in eo postquam agnoveris
cotumacu. Salvian. exempla. A pro. and vero page 296.
error about a maine point of religion contrary to the clear light of truth
of holy Scripture soundly, and generally held by the Church of God, and being
obstinately defended after conjunction, and lawful admonition) will
perspicuously appear to all which will not wilfully close their eyes against
the clear light of divine truth. I having showed what Conscience is; how this
Conscience is bound, and that the law does bind the Conscience of the
regenerate to obedience.

1. Conscience is an inward remembrance in our hearts, witnessing with us or
against us, of all our thoughts, words, and works. Conscience is a part of the
understanding, which takes knowledge of, and bears witness of a man's
thoughts, words, and works, excusing them when they be good, accusing them
when they be bad, Romans 2. 15. The (...) and (...) of (...) of (...) and (...).
Conscientia Con. and scio.
Greek word is derived of a verb, which is compounded of a verb, which
signifies to see; and a Preposition which signifies together; so that
Conscience does know with another, is privy to the things of another, by the
signification of the greek, and latin word.

This is Conscience.

Concerning bonds, and binding, the Word of God mentions diverse sorts, and
calls:

1. Sin by the name of bonds, Acts 8. 23. because it binds, and holds the
wicked fast in the bondage of Satan

2. Afflictions for Christ by the name of bonds, Heb. 13. 3. in which bonds,
good Saint Paul was, Acts 26. 29.

3. Gods favors the bonds of love, Hos. 11. 4. the Lord by these binding his
Saints unto him.

4. Gods laws by the name of bonds, Psalm. 2. 3. because they fasten us to God,
and bind us to our duties.

Conscience is bound by vows, and oaths lawfully made, and superior powers,
not properly in regard of themselves; but improperly, or in reference to Gods
law, commanding a man, although he swear to his own hurt, not to change,
Psalm. 15. 4. Therefore the Princes of Israel durst not hurt the Gibeonites,
because of their oath, Ios. 9. 9. To pay that which a man has vowed, Eccl. 5.
4. To be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. 5. And to obey our Pastors,
and Teachers, Heb. 13. 17.

But the Lord himself is the proper binder of Conscience, he being the only
Lord of Conscience, he only having power to command Conscience, yea to save,
or to destroy. He binds Conscience by his Word, giving it an absolute power
in it self to bind Conscience, and because it is the Word of him who can save,
or destroy, for keeping or breaking this his Word. This Word so binding is both
Law and Gospel. The Gospel binds the Conscience, not of those who never heard
of Christ, Romans 2. 12. but of those which have the means offered to believe,
and obey, Romans 2. 16. The Law binds the Conscience of all men, it being the law
of nature, written in man's heart in man's Creation; and therefore of such who
are regenerate Christians; not only as they are men, but sanctified men: Which
I show thus.



Therefore the law of God does bind the Conscience of the regenerate Christian
to obedience.



Therefore the law of God does bind the Conscience of the regenerate to
obedience.

Ioh. 3. 4.

But the law of God has this privilege, that the breach thereof is sin.

Therefore the law of God does bind the Conscience of etc.

The breach of the ceremonial law once was sin, now is not; because once it
bound the conscience, now it does not. The breach of the moral law is still
sin, therefore it does still bind.

e. g. if a Christian under the Gospel was circumcised, did sacrifice
bullockes, etc. he by thus doing did works meritorious, and superogatory, or
else was guilty of Will Worship; because he is not now bound to the doing of
them.

But if the regenerate Christian could, and did do all things which the law
enjoynes him, he is not guilty of Will Worship, neither does he merit at the
hands of God, Luke 17. 10. Therefore, etc.



But the Apostles have used the authority of the law to urge, and press
regenerate Christians to do their duties, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. Iam. 2. 11.

Therefore the law does bind the Conscience of regenerate Christians to
obedience.

I having premised these things, abandoning the ungrounded, and unchristian
liberty of Anabaptists, Epicures, Familists, and Antinomists, I come to show
and delineate your glorious liberty, (you blissful goodfellowes.)

As in all freedoms, the freed person is exempt from many burdensome bondages,
and grievous yokes; and interessed to have right, and part in many privileges,
and prerogatives; even so in this your spiritual, supernatural, and heavenly
liberty.

1. By means of your justification you have freedom.

1. From sin, Romans 6. 7. 22. from sin: i. e. the dominion, and reign of
sin, ver. 14. the guilt of sin, 8. 33. and the condemnation, or punishment
due unto it, Romans 8. 1.

2. From the unsupportable yoke of the whole ceremonial law, Col. 2. 16, 17,
etc.

3. From the thraldom of the devil, Luke 1. 71. 74. Col. 1. 13.

4 From the moral law, viz. in regard of Romans 8. 1. 2. the justification it
proposes, Romans 3. 28. and 3. the rigor of obedience it requires, so that you
are not under the law, Romans 6. 14. or the rigorous exaction of the law: you are
delivered from the law, 7. 6. or that perfect obedience the law in rigor
requires to salvation.

2. By means of your sanctification, you have freedom from the power and
dominion of sin, although not perfectly, and wholly; yet in part, and in all
the powers, and faculties of your souls, senses, and members. So that your
minds have freedom from the power of darkness; your wills from the power of
disobedience; your hearts from the power of deadness; your affections from the
power of pollution, and corruption; and your bodies from that power of sin,
whereby they were made weapons of unrighteousness, Romans 8. 2.



1. To serve the Lord of glory in righteousness, and holiness, Luke 1. 74.

2. To use Gods creatures, these not being unclean of themselves, Romans 14. 14.
and being pure to the pure, Titus 1. 15.

3. To use, or not to use things indifferent, keeping our selves within the
bounds of charity, and edification, Romans 14. 19.

4. To come to God by Christ in prayer, Romans 5. 2. Ephesians. 3. 12.

5 And you shall have a full and perfect deliverance from the very corruption
of sin, and of the grave too; and from all misery, Romans 8. 21. Ephesians. 1. 14.
and a free entrance into those heavenly habitations when you die, Heb. 10. 19.
This is that liberty which Christ Jesus procured you by his precious merit, and
the efficacy of his spirit.

This is a liberty of such extraordinary worthiness, that men, and Angels are
unable to conceive, or express the transcendent dignity of the same: Are
natural, civil, and corporal liberties so much doted on, and desired that
men will purchase them with long, and hard service, and bondage, yea with great
sums of money, Acts 22. 28. and of such consequence, that they freed Paul
from the whip, Acts 22. 29. exempt from diverse, and sundry taxations, and give
right to many large, and rich immunities: Then how lovely, and amiable, how
honorable, and unconceavably excellent is this Christian liberty, twixt which
and that is no comparison: For,

1. What is freedom from the tormenting stone, noisome plague, or destroying
pestilence, in regard of freedom from sin, of all sicknesses the most
dangerous, because damnable if not cured: most infectious, polluting, and
stayning souls: most odious to God, Angels, and good men: and most difficult
to cure, only Christ's blood being of force to heal this malady.

2. What is freedom from the Turkish slavish bondage, the Spanish miserably
oppressing galleys, and hellish tormenting inquisition; and the Egyptian house
of bondage in regard of freedom from the devil, of all enemies the most
cruel, his bondage most uncomfortable, and his torments most dreadful being
extreme painful, and horrible, altogether helpless, and hopeless,
easelesse, and endless.

3. What are the franchises of the most priviledg'd fraternities, cities, and
incorporations; the liberties of friends, and Favorites, of Kings and mighty
Monarchs in comparison of this liberty of true Christians, they being
priviledg'd to have free access into the courts of heaven, to the throne of
grace, to use Gods creatures, to call God father, to be his friends, and
favorites, and to pass from this vale of tears into those everlasting
mansions of blissful felicities? Give me leave to suppose a poor forlorn
contemned strumpet, borne of the most vile, and wretched parents in the whole
world, having nothing lovely, or desirable in her: but odious, and abominable
in all respects, having a soul full of darkness, folly, and madness; a body
altogether misshapen with blemishes and deformities; and tortured with all
kind of sicknesses and diseases, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the
head: being to live all her time in the greatest bondage that may be imagined,
worse then the Turkish, Spanish, or Egyptian thraldom: and at the end of her
life to be tormented with the most lingering and excruciating death, did not the
only Son of the worlds supreme Monarch rescue and ransom her with the
effusion of his own hearts blood; who of his free favor and bounty toward
this abject caitiffe without her desire, or desert condescended to cast off his
Princely robes and ornaments, and vouchsafed to court and woo this despised
creature to join her self with him in the nearest tie of the matrimonial
knot; and he for her sake will confront, and confound all her enemies who so
miserably oppress her; heal all her maladies which so cruelly vex her, with
his own blood; and give her instead of her shameful deformities, starre-like
beauty; instead of her deformed nakedness, Princely apparel; instead of her
aches, dolours, tumors, and other dreadful diseases, health and sanity;
instead of her extreme beggary, the riches of the whole world; mirth instead
of mourning; and instead of her bondage to tyrants, diseases, and direful
death, liberty and freedom from all enemies, to come boldly to the Kings
Court, and to solace her self in the enjoyment of all his honors, delights,
and profits, yea to be married to the Kings Son and Heir, and to be
interessed in himself, and whatsoever is his; would not all conclude, that the
liberty of this imagined wretch was unparalleled and unspeakable? Behold more
then I have imagined verified in all you who have fellowship with Christ Jesus:
Once you were more forlorn then this supposed creature, being children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. And the Devil, Ioh. 8. 44, Having nothing in you save
sin and wickedness; being dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. ^. Slaves
and bondmen to the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 16. Wearying your selves in his cruel and
irksome service, to be repayed with eternal death, Romans 6. 23. and everlasting
torments: had not the only Son of the worlds Creator taken pity upon you,
who of his free favor and bounty left that heavenly habitation, took upon him
the form of a servant, vanquished the Devil, death, and hell; delivered you
from the dominion, and reign of sin, and the wrath of God due to your
sins, and everlasting damnation, clothing your deformed souls with the rich
and lovely robes of his own righteousness, healed your sick souls with his
own blood, and conjoined you to himself in the fastest ligaments of the
firmest societies: by means whereof the creatures are your servants, the
Angels are your guard, Gods Word is your guide, his Spirit your Comforter, his
Son your Head, and Husband, and himself your Father: by means whereof your
wants, and wealth are sanctified, your blemishes are covered, your sins are
pardoned, your souls are comforted, and your selves shall be crowned; or in a
word, enjoy the privileges and liberties of the Sons of God, being liberties
which are glorious, Romans 8. 21. And purchased only by Christ Jesus, Gal. 5. 1.
And will not this Christian liberty, and all its gracious and glorious
privileges, freeing from the justification of the moral Law; the curse and
condemnation of the Law; the rigor of the Law; exacting perfect obedience, and
condemning all imperfection; and from the observation of the Ceremonial Law
satisfy and content you, O you heedlesse and heady equivocating Antinomists;
but you will incroach upon the forbidden fruit, and exempt your selves from
being bound to obey the Moral Law?

2. Have these goodfellowes such liberty, and will you not, O you sons of
men, enfranchise your selves into their society? You Will ride, and run; crave,
and crouch; buy, and beg; toil, and travail for liberties of favored
Courtiers, of free Denisons of famous Corporations, and other like of less
avail; and will you neglect this liberty so amiable, so great and glorious, so
unspeakable, and unparalleled?

3. Have you such liberty, you purchased possession, and peculiar people of
Christ Jesus, and shall crossing calamities, unsavory afflictions, or any
disasterous occurrents you meet withal in this your pilgrimage, dead, and
dampen your joyful performances of Christian duties? Or should not rather this
your liberty and freedom animate, and encourage you to wade over, and pass
through comfortably, and courageously all distasteful lets, and difficult
impediments objected, and set against you by the Devil, or his malicious
accomplices?

CHAP. VII. Use 5. Of Exhortation. Exhorting to this Society.
goodfellowship. As in the former, so in this part of true goodfellowship I
will couple together the true trials, necessary duties, and infallible marks
of those who have fellowship with Christ.

In handling which particulars I will keep my self close to the sacred truth,
it being the trial of truth, and Cuneo virtutis omnis extruditur haeresis.
Tertul. adversus Marcion. Lib. 1. page 160.
the wedge wherewith all heresy is driven out: For as learned Tertullian once
said: Ego meum dico verum, Marcion suum: Ego Marcionis affirmo adulteratum,
Marcion meum. Lib. 4. page 225. Faciunt sav^^ and vespae, faciunt Ecclesias and
Marcionit^. page 226.
I say mine is the truth; Marcion his: I affirm Marcions doctrine to be
corrupted, Marcion mine. Even Wasps make combs, and Marcionites make Churches:
even so now we say ours is truth, others theirs; we affirm their Doctrine to
be adulterate, they ours; and as Waspes have combs; even so have Papists,
Anabaptists, Familists, and Antinomists Churches. We say Christ is ours, and we
have fellowship with him; Papists affirm that Christ is theirs, and that we
are Heretics: and the giddy Antinomists that Christ is theirs, and that we
are legal walkers, bewitched Galathians, a generation of men full of
blindness, and ignorance, for say they times were never more blind, dark, and
ignorant, then now; which speech cannot be true in their own conceit, except
because there are so few of their fraternity. I do bewail, but excuse no whit
the sins of our times; yet I dare avow that sin abounded in former ages as
much as now it does. In the days of upright Noah, Genesis 6. 5. Of faithful
Abraham, 13. 13. Of meek Moses, Exodus 36. 6, 7. Of the Judges, Iud. 19. Ely, 1 Samuel 2. 12. 17. Of Eliah, 1 Reg. 19. 14. Of the Zealous Prophets, Isa. 1. 2, 3,
4. Ier. 2. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 16. 47, 48, 49. Of Hos. 4. 1, 2, 3. Joel 3. 13. Amos
2. 4, 6, 7. Micah 3. 8. 11. 7. 1, 2, 3. Zephan. 3. 1, 2. Zach. 7. 11, 12. Mal.
2. 10, 11, 17. Of John Baptist, Math. 3. 7. Of Christ Jesus, 11. 21, 22, 23.
12. 34. 15. 3. 21. 12, 13. 22. 5. 6. 27. 22. 25. Of Steven, Acts 6. 9. Amongst
the Romans 16. 17, 18. Corinthians 1. 3. 1. 5. 1. 6. 6. 8. 12. 11. 15. 12. 34.
Galathians 3. 1. 3. 6. 12. Philippians 3. 18. Colossians 2. 20. Thessalonians
1. 2. 14. 15. Hebrews 5. 12. The Asian Churches, Rev. 2. 3.

Descend we to Primitive times and there we shall find gross corruptions.

(...) Ignatius ad Trall^anos. page 9.
They are not Christians but covetous men, seeking gains by all manner of
means, says Ignatius of many Christians in his days.

Saint Cyprian complains of his time. R^rus ^od^ ^^inees, qui per^^liat
^mpudi^os F^^rus Moses, qui occidat sa^rilego^ Ra^^s Samuel, qui ^^obed^^ntes
lug^^t: (...) Job, qui pro s^^^orum negligenti^ sacrifi^ (...) off^rat: Rarus
A^on, qui ^or^m Pha^^one (...) Di^^as edicat: Rarus No^, qui his quibus
immersio (...) Arca^ bitumine litam provide^t: (...) Apostol^, (...) ^^rr^na
(...) Mag^^tratus, quorum Deus venture est, qui in his quae dicere ne^^s est,
impudentes l^tantur, and gloriantur. etc Cyprian de ^e^un. and Tentat. About
248. Lib. De Lapsis. page 82. 83.
In these days Phinees is seldom seen who will gore through the unchaste: A
Moses is rare, which will destroy the sacrilegious: A Samuel is rare, which
will bewail the disobedient: A Job is rare, which will sacrifice for the
negligence of his children: an Aron is rare, which will denounce Divine
comminations before Pharaoh: A Noah is rare, which will provide an Arc for
those to whom the flood does threaten: I speak weeping with the Apostle; the
Magistrates are enemies to the Cross, savouring earthly things, whose God is
their belly; who delight and glory in those things which are dishonest to name,
etc. And in another place he nominates diverse gross, and grievous sins in
the Church, whereof he complains.

After him St. Ambrose. Sunt nonnulli inter vos, fratres, quorum licet vult^^
in Ecclesi^ videamu^, cor tamen in agris esse cogn^s^i^^^s; and praes^ntiam
quidem eorum consideramus ^^ pleb^; sed convers^tionem ^orum invenimus in^ur^;
de terra enim semper cogitant, de terra tractant, quae terrena sunt sapiu^t.
Amb de quadrages. S^r ^9 de ^ejunio. and Elemosynis.
There are many, my brethen, About 370.
among you, whose heart we know is in the fields, although we see their
countenances in the Church: and by their presence we consider them in the
multitude; but we find them by their conversation in the country: for they
always think of the earth, talk of the earth, and savor earthly things.

After him About 400. Aug 119. ad Ianua^^m
Saint Augustine complains of his times often.

After him St. Chrysostom says of his time: Aut tales, aut peiores f^cti sunt
Christiani quales sunt heretici, aut Gentiles: adhuc autem and mayor
continentia apud illos invenitur quam vis in schismate sint, quam apud
Christianos. Tom 2. Hom. 49. super Mat. p 859 About 500.
Christians are now made such, or worse, as Heretics, or Gentiles; as yet
there is greater continence found amongst those, although they are in schism,
then amongst Christians.

Modern Writers complain of their times. Gualter says: Adulteria hodie vix
peccati lo^o censentur, and ^ pler^que cum ris^ exci^i solent Gu^lter in Hos.
7. Ver 4.
Adulteries are scarce accounted sins in th^se days, and are made matter of
laughter with many. The Church of God it self which in all ought to be a
pacifier of God, what is it else save a griever of God? What other thing almost
is all the Assembly of Christians, then a sink of vices? You shall more easily
find guilty of all evils, then of not all: more easily of all greater crimes,
then of less.

And learned Bradwardine speaking of his times, says: Salvianus who l^ved 480.
says of his times. Ipsa Dei Ecclesi^ quae in omnibut ess^ d^b^t pla^atrix D^i,
quid est aliud quam exacerbatrix Dei* quid est aliud pene omnis coetus
Christianorum, quam sentina v^tiorum? f^cilius ^nven^as reo^ maloru^ omnium,
qua^ non omnium: sacilius matorum criminum quam minorum. etc. Lib. 3. de Gub.
Dei page 8^. ^ Tetus enim pene mundus post Pelagium abijt in errorem. Prafat.
In Lib. de causa Dei.
Almost all the world is gone after Pelagius into error. Sins are not, only
they seem worse in this age, then in former times to some. 1. By means of
want of wisdom in them which so think and speak. 2. Ignorance, or
forgetfulness of sins committed in former times. 3. By means of the light
of these glorious noone* shine days compared with the darkness and mistiness
of former ages. And, 4. The watchful observation of men's evil actions under
the Gospel, to scandalize the same, and its Professors.

But to return. Since, as the harlots pleaded hard, 1 Reg. 1. 3. The living is
mine, the dead thine. So these and all other Demychristians, Antichristians,
and false Christians cry out, Christ is ours but none of yours. It is good
therefore to resort for determination to the sacred Scriptures, which (although
they are falsely urged by Heretics, as Tertullian says, De Carne Christi,
page 25. Therefore the same learned man brings the Lord thus speaking. (...)
and un de (...)? quid in meo agitu non mes? quo denique ture Marcion silvan^
meam (...) qua licentia Valentine fontes meos transvertu? qua potestate Apelles
limtees meos commoves? mea est possessio, quid hic caeteri ad voluntatem vestra
seminatis and pase^tu? Advers. haeres page 109.
How, and from whence do you come? What do you which are not mine in mine? By
what right O Marcion do thou cut my wood? By what license O Valentinus do
thou turn away my fountains? By what authority o Apelles do thou turn away my
landmarks? The possession is mine: why do you O others at your pleasure sow
and feed here?) are the rule to try truth from falsehood: Dei est Scriptura,
Dei est Natura, Dei est Disciplina; qu^^quid est (...) contrarium. Dei non est.
Idem de veland Virgin. page 500.
Scripture is of God; Nature is of God; Discipline is of God: Whatsoever is
contrary to these, is not of God, said the same Tertullian. I appeal therefore
to this Heavenly Oracle for resolution and direction, that hence both I and you
may know truly who have fellowship with Christ; and what they ought to do, who
desire to have, or already enjoy communion with the Son of God.

CHAP. VIII. The first Mark and Duty. Such must imitate Christ who have
fellowship with him.
WHosoever has, or desires to have fellowship with 1. Mark, Duty.
Jesus Christ, must be a strict imitatour of Christ Jesus: 1 Ioh. 1. 7. If we
walk in the light as he, etc. 2. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought
himself also to walk even as he walked. He must frame his life according to
his example. And Saint Paul charged the Corinthians to be followers of him as
he was of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. This imitation of Christ has its appointed
limitation, how far it extends: For in all things we are not to imitate our
Savior.

1. His Divine and miraculous actions; such as were his commanding the
tempestuous winds, tumultuous waves and raging spirits: giving life to the
dead, sight to the blind, health to the incurably sick, with his word;
forgiving sins, and giving heaven to the penitent petitioner upon the Cross
by his Sovereign authority, are not recorded to this end, that we should
endeavor to do the like. 1. We having no warrant hereunto from precept, or
practice, or promise. 2. Neither is there any possibility for us to express
them. 3. An endeavor to follow our Savior in these is impious; He putting
difference by such wondrous works twixt himself, and all other men.

2. His works of Mediatour-ship, as he was God-man, or Man-god, making
reconciliation and peace betwixt God, and Elect sinners, are not for our
imitation. He alone is Mediator both of redemption and intercession. 1 Timothy 2.
4. One Mediator between God and man. Verse 5. There is one God, and one
Mediator which is Christ alone: For he only has made peace for us, and does
perpetually mainetaine it.

3. But the Christian man's imitation of Christ is and ought to be,

First, Active, following his godly and pious actions done, not as God, or
Man-god, but as man made under the Law; which Moral actions are these, and the
like.

1. Obedience, Phil. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in you which was also in Christ
Jesus; -- 7. Servant, etc. He obeyed his heavenly and earthly parents, Luc. 2.
57.

2. Innocence, Isa. 52. 9. No deceit found in his mouth. Which of you
convinces me of sin, said our Savior, Ioh. 8. 46. I find no fault in this
man, said Pilate, Luke 23. 4. He has done nothing amiss, said the pious
thief, Luc. 23. 41. He a Lamb without spot and blemish, says the Holy Ghost,
1 Pet. 1. 19. 20.

3. Humility, Math. 11. 29. Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in spirit,
Ioh. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15.

4. Love, Romans 5. 8. He commended his love, in that when we were sinners he
died for us: He forgave his merciless enemies: He made intercession for his
bloody persecutors, Luc. 23. 34. And did good to all, 1 Ioh. 3. 16. He, etc.
And we ought, etc.

Imitation in these and such like virtues, is,

1. Of great necessity to all those which have, or desire to have fellowship
with Christ Jesus.

1. For all of this blissful communion being members of Christ Jesus, and led
by his Spirit.

2. Gods image by this imitation being renewed, and augmen^ed.

3. The want of this being a character of withered branches, who have no
abiding in the vine Christ, John 13. 2. 6. This imitation cannot but be of
absolute necessity.

2. Of great importance, many commodious advantages accruing hence.

1. This surely preserving against falling from grace.

2. This causing to edify the Saints, and helping to glorify God.

3. This giving tranquillity of mind, a good conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost,
and increase of graces.

Secondly, passive. Taking up his Cross, and following him, Math. 16. 24.
Phil. 3. 10. For whosoever does not bear his Cross, and go after Christ,
cannot be his Disciple, Luc. 14. 27. Not that we are to imitate Christ in the
Cross, in regard,

1. Either of the quantity: so many sorrowful reproaches, buffetings, so much
painful agony.

2. Or of the quality; such condemnation, sweatings, death, etc.

3. Nor of the end; to pacify Gods wrath, to redeem from vain conversations
sinful men, to heal sinners, to cleanse away sins, etc.

But in regard of the manner; enduring the Cross for Christ his sake, as he
our pattern suffered it for our sakes. e. g.

1. As he was obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8.
Submitting his will to his heavenly Fathers, Math. 26. 39. Even so we like that
valiant Champion S. Paul, should be ready, not only to be bound, but to die for
the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21. 23.

As he did, so we ought to undergo the Cross with contentment and patience.
Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth. 1
Pet. 2. 20. If when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God.

3. As he did, so should we offer up prayers, and supplications with strong
crying, and tears unto him that is able to save from death, Heb. 5. 7. O my
Father, if it be possible, -- not as I will, but as thou will. Father forgive
them. Acts 7. 59. They stoned Steven calling upon God, Lord Jesus -- Lord lay
not this sin to their charge. Iam. 5. 13. Is any afflicted? let him pray.

4. As he did depend upon God, Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted in God that he would
deliver him. So should we depend on God for deliverance. Psalm. 34. 19. Out of
all, etc.

5. As he did, so should we endure the Cross with constancy and continuance.
Psalm. 44. 17. All this yet, etc. Luc. 9. 24. Shall lose it, etc.

Thus to take up the Cross, and follow Christ Jesus, is,

First, Of absolute necessity, if we consider,

1. That it is not a matter of courtesy, but commanded: not arbitrary, but
strictly enjoined, Luc. 11. 23. Let him take up his Cross, etc.

2. That the condition of the Saints estate is to be as sheep among wolves,
lillies among thorns, Math. 10. 16. To go through many afflictions into, etc.
Acts 14. 22.

3. That the similitude of the Head and members requires so much, Ioh. 15. 20.
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. Math. 10. 25. If they
have called the Master of the house Beel^zebub, how much more shall they call
them of the household?

Secondly, of incomparable worth and valution: for,

1. Hereby the life of Jesus is made manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.
10, 11.

2. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12.

1. What and if many sons of Belial walk in quite contrary paths to these
which are traced out by our un-erring pattern; being abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate, Titus 1. 16. Full of Diabolical subtlety,
Luciferian pride, delighting in the works of the flesh, unrighteousness, and
darkness: wholly swarving from Christ's example: for is this to follow Christ?
He was obedient to God in all things, they truly in nothing: He was innocent,
and unblameable, they guilefull, and abominable: He was humble, they proud,
etc. Light, and darkness, heaven, and hell have as great affinity and
nearenesse, as these actions of theirs to those of Christ Jesus. Their filthy
lies, blasphemous oaths, uncharitable slanders, devilish pride, hateful
envies, and their abominable actions are the works of the Devil, which Christ
came to destroy, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. They doing his works are of their Father the
Devil, John 8. 44.

2. What and if many idle-headed fantastique fashion-mongers swim down
swiftly the current of the times disorders; hunting after strange fashions
greedily and delightfully; and apishly follow at the heels all newfangled
inventions; little considering that this is one of the forbidden conformities
to the world, Romans 12. 2. No part of this conformity to Christ, having a
dreadful commination threatened against it from the most just, powerful, true,
and unchangeable Jehovah, Zeph. 1. 8. You who are such; especially, if you be
of those which out-strippe the common Christian in Profession: Do you think
that this hunting after newfangled toys, and strange fashious is agreeable to
that Divine Precept, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. Love not the world, nor the things of the
world? Or that, Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves unto this world? Or to this
our heavenly pattern Christ Jesus? Was Christ a fashion follower?

But this, and that is the new fashion. And will you be Ob. An.
damned because it is the fashion of the most to go the broad way?

But pride is a quality of the heart. True; yet Scripture Ob. An.
and experience tells that it shows it self in men's words, countenances,
gesture, and apparel. That there is pride, is a truth. That there is pride in
apparel, is as true. That these fantastique imitatours are proud of their
clothings, is (I fear) as certain as either. That they offend the Divine
Majesty, and make themselves liable to his dreadful threatenings is as Da^^^^.
Calvine. Pisc^tor. Perk. of the right knowledge of CURIST ^^u cified, Page* 631.
undeniable as the verity of sacred Writ, Zeph. 1. 8. To which heavenly truth I
will add a saying of that reverend man of God, Mr. Perkins, which is this. And
proud men, and women that are puffed by reason of their attire, which is the
badge of their shame; and never cease hunting after strange fashions, consider
not that Christ was not crucified in gay attire, but naked, that he might bear
the whole shame: and curse of the Law for us. These and such like, whatsoever
they say in word, if we respect the tenor of their lives, are flat enemies of
the Cross of Christ, and tread his precious blood under their feet. And
conclude with the words of a reverend Prelate; Sumptuary B. Lake Sermon. on 1
King. 8 37. Preached in Westminster before the Kings Majesty and Lords of the
Parliament. Page 216.
Laws therefore (says he) are in these loose days most requisite to set
bounds unto our back and belly which are even mad with vanity. Whole books
might be written of our metamorphoses, both of diet, and apparel: And not to
flatter you, we are the most infamous changelings that are in the world;
prodigal, yea prodigious are the expenses that our Nation is at, to make it
self the byword of other Nations.

3. What and if many ignorant, and unacquainted in the ways of righteousness
consider only the cariages and conversations of erring men, making their
thwart, and crooked bypath the rule and square of their imitation, deeming
their condition safe enough, if they can warrant their ways by the practices
of men, especially of Preachers; thinking themselves to be as good Saints as
need be, if they can but say such Preachers who are learned men are usurers, or
drunkards, or swearers, etc. as well as we: they allow of this, and that
(although so much abhorred of the preciser sort) and practice the same, and
therefore we both may, and will. And will you be covetous cursers of Gods
people because the Prophet Balaam was so? Will you be treacherous betrayers of
the Son of God, and incarnate Devils, because the Apostle Judas was so? Will
you be Apostaticall worldings, because Demas a Preacher was so? Is this to
imitate Christ? To be as he was in this world? To be followers of Paul as he
was of Christ?

But all examples are written for our learning. True: Yet Ob. An. Ob. Answ.
not for our observation and imitation. But are not the examples of men to be
imitated? I say not so. If pismires, if locusts, and such like creatures, much
more is man for imitation: so be these examples are followed,

1. With choice, selecting those of pious and godly men.

2. With judgment, imitating the holy ones of God. First, In their ordinary,
not extraordinary actions: sc. such which were done either,

1. By singular commandment, as Abraham's offering his son, Genesis 22.

2. By extraordinary instinct, as Phinees, Number. 25. And Eliah, 2 Reg. 1. 10.

3. Or by miracle, as Peter's walking upon the water.

4. Or by custom of country, as fashions in apparel, Zeph. 1. 8.

Secondly, in their virtues only; not in their vices. We must be followers of
Saint Paul, so of other the Saints of God, as they were of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1.

Thirdly, with limitation: sc. as this imitation may stand with our callings,
and Gods commandments. Yet all you who already are ingrafted into this
unparalleled communion, and you which desire admittance into the same, do you
imitate Christ Jesus punctually and precisely in those forenamed particulars,
living godlily after the rule of Christ; suffering patiently after the example
of Christ. Which if you do, you must of necessity resolve,

1. To abominate and abandon sin: kill and crucify the lusts of the flesh,
and all carnal corruptions. 1. There being no agreement twixt light and
darkness. 2. God not abiding Satan's image upon his coin. 3. There being no
possibility of serving such dissenting masters. 4. These all much disagreeing
from our glorious pattern, they being the works of the Devil which he came
to destroy.

2. To make progress in piety, and grow in grace. For, 1. Babes in Christ must
grow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Gods Spirit cannot be idle, but causes the just like the
shining light to shine more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. 3.
Christianity is a race wherein they must run, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Wherein not to go
forward is to go backward. And Non progredi, est regred^.
4. Christ our pattern increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with
God and man, Luc. 2. 52.

3. To endure confiscation of goods, like those; Heb. 10. 34. Defamation of
your credit, like those, 1 Cor. 4. 9. 13. And the loss of life, like many
thousand Martyrs for Christ's sake; He endured them all for us; we must suffer
them all for him, Luc. 14. 26, 27. And do not reply like the fleshly
Capernaites, this is a hard saying, who can bear it? For to suffer the
spoiling of these not long lasting transitory trashy riches, to have in heaven
a better and an enduring substance is no loss, but extraordinary advantage. To
be disgracefully derided, and shamefully reproched by men blinded by the God of
this world, out of their wits, stark fools, and of a brutish nature for the
confession of Christ and his truth, and to have an honorable esteem from the
worlds Creator, the Elects Savior, the Saints Sanctifier, the glorious
Guarders of Gods Jewels, and all Gods people, is not any disparagement, but
great renown. To endure Martyrdom, or to suffer death for the Faith of
Christ, be it after the most ignominious, and opprobrious manner, and with the
most hellish, and horrible tortures Satan's agents and himself can invent and
inflict, is pronounced a blessing by the Spirit of Truth, Rev. 14. 13.

That I may persuade you to this imitation of Christ Jesus, I will propound
some few, sc. three inducements, or allurements.

There is nothing more equal, just, or convenient, then for Mot. 1.
Christians to imitate Christ. He is our unerring King, Master, Head, and
Husband; we his subjects, servants, members, and spouse; and can any thing
better beseem us then imitation? He our Captain and Commander; we his
soldiers; and is it not reasonable that we should follow him? Ioh. 10. 4. Such
interest he has in us that he may justly challenge that of us all, which
Abimelech commanded his soldiers, Judge. 9. 48. What you have seen me do, make
have, and do as I have done.

Be it to that cunning tempter, malicious accuser of the brethren, adversary,
Devil, in any his works.

Be it to sin, the cause of Devils, hell, and all judgments, and the
forerunner of Damnation. Be it to those stigmaticall impes and agents of the
Devil, who are of their Father Satan, and will do his works. Be it to the
world, it being enmity to God, and not to be beloved of the Saints, 1 Ioh. 2.
15. And conformity to it being forbidden, Romans 12. 2. And I think most men
will conclude that such conformity is dangerous, if not damnable. Be it to the
Saints in such things wherein they have swerved from this heavenly pattern,
and even this conformity is unallowable and abominable.



1. How can they go astray, who follow Christ which never did amiss?

2. How can they walk in darkness, who follow the true light? Ioh. 1. 8.

3. How can they be deceived, who follow Christ the truth?

4. How can they miss of heaven, who follow him which is the way? Ioh. 14. 8.

5. How can they wander, who follow Christ, the light to guide them, the way to
conduct them, and the truth to direct them?

6. How can they displease God, who imitate his Son, in whom he is well
pleased?

7. By this imitation we the members shall please our Head, we the subjects
shall content our King, we the sheep shall delight our shepherd.

8. By this conformity we are assured that we are predestined, Romans 8 29.

9. And ascertained that we shall be glorified: for if we bear the image of
the earthly, we shall bear the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 49.

10. Be we followers of Christ, who if we hunger, is our Celestial bread; if
we thirst, is the water of life. Be we as he was in this world; this imitation
being a forcible means to obtain; an infallible demonstration that we have;
and a necessary duty which we owe for this lovely and desirable fellowship
with Gods Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IX. The second Mark and Duty. Such must have faith who have fellowship
with Christ.
DEsire we fellowship with Christ Jesus? We must have 2. Mark, Duty.
faith. Not the worldlings fancied faith, which he sucked from his mothers
breast, believing ever since he was borne. Nor his painted fruitless faith, he
believing as well as the best; yet abhorring, or not loving, or little or no
whit regarding the Word preached, prayer, and other sanctified means, whereby
faith is begotten and increased. He believing; yet living profanely, or at the
least only civilly. Which is not a true faith: That faith which brings forth
evil Hom. of sal. E. 1.
works, or no good works, is not a right, pure, and lively faith; but a dead
divellish, counterfeit, and fained faith. They that Ibid. E. 1.
continue in evil living, have not true faith. Lively faith is not without
hope and trust in God, nor without the love of God, and of our neighbors; nor
without the fear of God, nor without desire to hear Gods Word, and to follow
the same, in eschewing evil, Hom. of faith, A 1.
and doing gladly all good works.

But the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, Iam. 2. 1. The faith of the Elect,
Titus 1. 1. That faith of which Salvian speaks, Quid est igitur Fides? opinor
fideliter hominem Christo credere. 1. fidelem esse, hoc est fideliter Dei
mai^data servare. Salv. lib. 3. p. 60.
saying, What is faith therefore? I think for a man faithfully to believe in
Christ, i. to be faithful, i. to observe Gods Commandments faithfully. That
faith,

1. Which is of a growing and thriving nature; from faith to faith, Romans 1. 17.

2. That two-handed faith, which by confidence the one holds the Lord, and
receives good; and by love the other imbraceth the brethren, and does good,
Gal. 5. 6.

3. That faith which yields obedience to Gods Commandments, even the most
repugnant to flesh and blood: by this Abraham left his country, and offered
Isaac, Heb. 11.

4. That faith, which does instrumentally justify, Romans 5. 1. And sanctify,
Acts 15. 9.

This is the faith we must have, if we would have interest in this happy
association.

1. By this faith we are built upon the foundation, and coupled to the
Cornerstone Christ.

2. By this faith we are married to our Husband.

3. By this faith we are ingrafted into the Vine, Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ^. 17. 4.
13. So that,

1. As by the mortar the stones cleave to the foundation, so by this faith
which is like a strictive mortar we are cemented and united to Christ.

2. As by the nerves or sinews the parts receive sense, motion, yea and life
from the head, so by this faith we receive quickening and vitality from Christ,
as the members from the Head, Ioh. 1. 16. Gal. 2. 20.

3. As by the true love-knot the husband and wife are made one flesh: so by
this faith we have spiritual familiarity with Christ, as the wife with the
husband, Romans 5. 1. Heb. 11. 6. Faith is the hand of the soul which applies
the sacrifice M. Burton. Truths triumph over Trent. cap 7. page 99.
of Christ for sin, it is the hand which puts on the robes of the
righteousness of Christ our elder Brother upon us. Faith is the ligament or
sinew which fasteneth and uniteth every faithful member to the Head Christ
Jesus. Faith is the life of our lives, Page 100.
and the strength of our souls.

1. This is that prevailing Champion which quenches the fiery darts of Satan,
Ephesians. 6. 16. Overcommeth the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4, 5. Prevails with God, and is
overcome of nothing; not by carnal sense, not by humane reasons; not by bitter
tortures, Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37.

2. This is the mother and fountain of all good gifts, the original of
justice, beginning of devotion, the head of sanctity, Fidet est origo
institiae, sanctitates caput, devotionis principium, and Religionis
fundamentum. Chrysostom. Ser. de fide. Tom. 4. page 574. A. M. Burton. page 198.
cap. 12. Page 201.
and foundation of Religion. Prayer is the proper work of faith, Romans 10. 14.
Confession to salvation is the speech of faith, Romans 10. 10. Good works of all
sorts are the fruits of faith. Faith gives life and being to every grace;
forasmuch as every grace is radically in faith: because where faith is, Christ
is. Holy faith is the foundation whereon all graces are built, the ground
whereon they grow.

3. This is that so necessary grace, that whosoever wants it, 1. Has no
spiritual life with Christ; the just living by faith, Romans 1. 17. And by the
faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. Neither is he a true Christian, he
wanting that whereby Christ dwells in the heart, Ephesians. 3. 17. Neither can he do
any good thing without this, all being sin, Romans 14. 23. And unpleasing to
God, Heb. 11. 6.

4. This is that which mounts and elevates a man into so high, and honorable,
holy, and happy condition that he has such heavenly privileges, and
transcendent prerogatives as to be Gods Son, Job. 1. 12. Christ's, and his
Fathers friend; to be a free Denison of heaven: as to come to Christ, to go to
God, to hasten to heaven, to be inseparably inserted, and indissolubly
compacted into this incorporation with Jesus Christ of incomparable value, and
ineffable excellencies. Is faith so preciously excellent?

1. Why O you sons of men, do you so much slight it, and neglect it?

1. As not to labor at all for it.

2. Or less then for temporary fading favors; you will ride, and run far and
near; toil and travail early and late, for health and sanity of your bodies;
for increase and augmentation of your substance, for food to eat, and clothes
to put on: but so carelessly, and negligently for this, that were your
endeavors no more earnest for bodily health, death so dismal would soon
smite you: for food, and raiment; your tender backs and pampered bellies would
quickly beshrow you: for worldly wealth, beggary so base would out of hand
overtake you.

3. Or more regardlesly then for any thing of base esteem in regard of it: you
take not cattle for your use at a venture, but after much searching and prying
whether they be sound and sufficient: you receive not gold carelessly, but after
trial, whether it is current coin and of sufficient weight: You take not
silver hand over head, but you first see whether it is payable money; you turn
and toss, rub, and ring each suspected piece, least you take brass for
lawful silver. And deal you thus with your faith? Do you examine whether you
are in the faith? Do you try by the touchstone of the Word, whether it is of
the right kind, not that of Devils; not that of temporizers; not that of wicked
ones, but that of the Elect, making them endeavor good, and shun sin? I
would you did.

2. Is faith thus excellent? Then you who wish well to your selves, prise, and
use all sanctified means whereby it is gotten, kept, and increased. This is a
pearl of price, the trial whereof is better then gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The least
degree whereof is better then a world of earthly contentments, benefiting the
enjoyer, when all worldly vanities stand in no stead; not forsaking him till he
has received the end of his faith, the salvation of his soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9.
This is a precious jewel in the esteem of God, and godly men, in regard of
the giver, worker, object, means, and use, 2 Pet. 1. 1. By this we are united
unto, we receive vitality from, and have familiarity with the Lord Jesus. Or in
a word, this is an astringent tie joining us into this union, so near, true,
and admirable; this fellowship so celestial, and inseparable, which is with
Gods Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. X. The third Mark and Duty. Such have Christ's Spirit abiding in them.
HAve we, or desire we fellowship with Christ Jesus? We 3. Mark, Duty.
must have the Spirit of God inhabiting within us, Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you; now
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. If we have
fellowship with Christ, we already have; if we desire communion with Christ, we
must get to have the Spirit of God to dwell in us. To like purpose is that, 1
Cor. 3. 16. Know you not that you are the Temple of God, and that the Holy
Ghost dwells in you. As 1 Cor. 6. 19. And 2 Timothy 1. 14. By the Holy Ghost
which dwells in you.

Of such absolute necessity is the having of Christ's Spirit Mot. 1.
abiding in us: That without it no saving faith, no sound hope, no true love,
no happy peace, no solid joy, no new birth, no new life, no spiritual
adoption, no real ingrafting into Christ, no union or communion with him,
these all being graces, works and fruits of Gods Spirit. Those who have not the
Spirit of Christ abiding in them are none of Christ's.

1. Soldiers; therefore the Dragons, there being but two sides; and therefore
shall be overcome, Rev. 12. 9.

2. Servants; therefore slaves to sin and Satan; therefore to be paid the
wages of eternal death, Romans 6. 23.

3. Subjects; therefore rebels and traitors against the king of heaven;
therefore to be slain, Luc. 19. 27.

4. Sheep; therefore Goats whose end is to be accursed, Math. 25. 41.

5. Branches abiding in him; therefore withered castawayes to be burned, Ioh
15. 6.

6. Acquaintance, friends, familiars, therefore strangers to hear that
doleful farewell depart, I know you not, Math. 7. 25.

7. Brethren; therefore bastards, children of this world, and the Devil:
therefore no inheritours.

8. Brides; therefore harlots, and strumpets; therefore divorced, and cast out.

9. Members of his mystical body; therefore limbs of the Devil to be
consumed.

Therefore if we have not the Spirit of God abiding in us, there is no
possibility of fellowship with Jesus Christ, while so we continue.



1. Whence is our regeneration or new creation? From the Spirit, Ioh. 3. 5.
Borne of the Spirit.

2. Whence is our justification? From the Spirit. 1 Cor. 6. 11. You are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

3. Whence is our holiness and sanctification? From the Spirit, Acts 15. 8, 9.
Giving the Holy Ghost, -- purifying, etc.

4. Whence is our Christian love, whereby we love Christ for his own sake, and
Christians for his? From the Spirit, Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us.

5. Whence is our obsignation whereby we are ascertained that we are the Sons
of God? From the Spirit, Romans 8. 16. It bears witness with our spirits that
we are the Sons of God. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has sealed, etc.

6. Whence is our direction how to live? From the Spirit, Romans 8. 14. Led by
the Spirit.

7. Whence is our corroboration or spiritual strength? From the Spirit, Ephesians.
3. 16. Strongthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man.

8. Whence our supplication, or ability to pray? From the Spirit, Romans 8. 15.
Whereby, etc.

9. Whence our consolation? From the Spirit, Acts 9. 31. Comfort of the Holy
Ghost.

10. Whence our incorporation into, and inhabitation in Christ? From the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. In whom you are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit. Saint Chrysostom says well: That Spirit does make holy,
sanctify, Ergo iste Spiritus consecrat, sanctificat, benedicit, honorificat,
guberuat, protegit, consolatur, producit ad santam Ecclesiam 1. Expos. Symboli:
Tom. 5 page 1147.
bless, honor, govern, protect, comfort, and does bring to the holy Church.
All those therefore who have these special and heavenly prerogatives of
regeneration, justification, etc. and communion with Christ Jesus, they have
necessarily the Spirit of God abiding in them.

1. Ponder with advisement and deliberation how lamentably dreadful their
condition is, who have not the Spirit of God abiding in them: for although the
conversation of many of them is plausible, and to admiration, in regard of
their upright civil carriage, yet wanting the Spirit of God they are none of
Christ's, and therefore have no interest in this communion.

2. Commiserate the Maniacque folly, and braine-sicke bedlam madness of all
such scorners which scoff at this, as if there were no cohabitation of Gods
Spirit in the hearts of godly men. These blinded beetles think none see,
because themselves do not; are persuaded none have Gods Spirit, because they
want it. The glorious Sun is in the firmament giving comfortable light to all
seeing creatures, although bornblind Moles never behold the least glimpse of
its shining rays. The blessed Spirit of God is dwelling and abiding in the
holy ones of God, although such deriding scorners hoodwinkt by the Devil with
the scales of blockish ignorance and damned infidelity are altogether
unexperienced, and unacquainted in such Divine and heavenly enjoyments.

3. Look O you sons of men whether this Spiritof God abide in you or not:
For not only Fantastique Familists, Anabaptisticall dreamers, and such like
factious sects, and Sectaries; but many other children of Beliall, who in truth
are as yet habitations for the unclean spirit, and the seven other spirits
more wicked to dwell in, Math. 12. 43, 44. Boast and glory of the happy
fruition of Gods Spirit, like the false Prophet Zedekiah, who notwithstanding
was possessed with a lying spirit, 1 Reg. 22. 23, 24. Search therefore the
Scriptures, for they testify of these things, and from them you may learn
what spirit you are of. The Scriptures tell us,

1. That where Gods Spirit abides, there is the Spirit of Prayer, Romans 8. 15.
We have received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. Verse 16.
The Spirit makes intercession for us.

2. Where Gods Spirit abides, there is a new birth, regeneration, a new
creation, Ioh. 3. 4. Borne of the Spirit.

3. Where Gods Spirit abides, there is holiness and sanctity, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Sanctification of the Spirit. Romans 1. 4. Spirit of holiness.

4. Where Gods Spirit is, there is knowledge of all things, sc. Necessary to
salvation, 1 Ioh. 2. 20.

5. Where the Spirit of God abides, there must needs be sincerity or
uprightness.

6. Where the Spirit of God abides, there is a testification to a man's own
spirit that he is the child of God, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit bears witness with
our Spirits that we are the children of God: From which grounded Maxims, and
undeniable Theses drawn from the Word of truth, these following inferences
must necessarily be concluded.

1. That the prayerlesse person, sc. such a one who prays not at all; or not
so, with such graces which Gods Spirit prescribes in the Word as necessary
companions of pious prayer, viz. Knowledge, faith, sincerity, zeal, etc. in
some measure.

2. That the unregenerate not converted man, who is the same he was ever, no
changeling, having the same mind, will, affections, etc. And he who is changed
from one evil to another as bad or worse; neither of these being truly
converted, so as to become new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17. New men, Ephesians. 4. 24. To
have new hearts, Ezekiel. 11. 19. And new lives; yea, all things new, 2 Cor. 5.
17. sc. wills, lives, affections, sc. love, hatred, etc. New eyes, Ephesians. 1. 18.
Ears, Psalm. 40. 6. And taste, Romans 8. 5.

3. That the mere civil honest man although he walk as inoffensively as did
ever any Heathen Worthy, and as plausibly as those justiciary Pharisees, being
no oppressor, paying every man to the mint, and anniseed. Much less therefore
the profane Belial which wallowes in all wickedness, wholly regardlesse of
piety of God, and righteousness to man.

4. That the man ignorant and unacquainted in those truths which are necessary
to be known: and the man, who although he has plenty of knowledge floting in
the brain, and flowing from the tongue, yet wants the necessary practique
knowledge: So that although he is able to discourse learnedly, and profoundly,
yet does he not believe that he knows is to be believed; love that he knows
is to beloved; and do that he knows is to be done, etc. in some measure.

5. That the flourishing Formalist, performing those many excellent, and
praiseworthy duties he does only outwardly, for by-ends, without the pith,
marrow, and substance of Christianity, uprightness of heart.

6. That the man wholly and altogether wanting the testimony of his own
conscience, grounded upon the testimony of Gods Spirit, that he is the child of
God: and he who in stead of the testification of Gods Spirit, which ever
agrees to the Word, glads and contents himself with the wicked spirit of
presumption, for his living willingly, constantly, and contentedly in those
wicked ways the Word of God condemns to hellish torments; argues an absence
of the testimony of Gods Spirit: for is it possible that Gods Spirit should
peremptorily affirm in the Word, that no drunkard, covetous person, hypocrite,
etc. shall inherit the kingdom of heaven; and yet testify to the conscience
of a drunkard, covetous person, hypocrite, etc. that he is Gods child, and
shall go to heaven?

That none of these have the Spirit of Christ abiding in them; and therefore no
fellowship with Jesus Christ, may safely, and must necessarily be inferred from
the forenamed propositions.

First, all you of the former rank which have the Spirit of prayer, true
conversion, holiness, saving knowledge, sincerity of heart, and a warrantable
assurance in your own consciences that you are the children of God,
consequently have the Spirit of God abiding in you; and therefore fellowship
with the Lord Jesus.

1. Be persuaded highly to praise and glorify the Lord so loving, and
liberal, who has bestowed such an inestimable treasure upon you, as is the
Spirit of the Lord; the Spirit of wisdom and understanding to teach you; the
Spirit of counsel to counsel and advise you; the Spirit of might to protect
and defend you; the Spirit of knowledge to instruct you, Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit
of the Lord inabling you to pray, and making your prayers acceptable, Romans 8.
26. Bringing you to liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Helping your infirmities,
enlightening your understandings, rectifying your judgments, reviving your
spirits, stirring your affections, sanctifying all inward gifts, and seasoning
the use of all outward things unto you; assuring you of all the rich treasures
in Jesus Christ. This being the gift of gifts, the head, the height, the depth,
the breadth, and length of all good things.

2. Not to grieve this Holy Spirit of God whereby you are sealed to the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. By doing any thing contrary to the light which is set
up in your consciences by the Word of God, and this Spirit; least if you vex
him he turns to be your enemy, Isa. 63. 10.

3. Not to quench the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. Do not therefore by your security
and negligence lose the fruits and effects of the Spirit, nor abate the working
of grace. (To lose wholly the saving graces of the Spirit, which a man once
had, as if a man should extinguish fire wholly, is not possible, the Spirit
abiding with such for ever, Ioh. 14. 16. But to lose some fruits and effects of
the Spirit, and to abate the working of grace, as if a man should slack the
heat, and lose the light of fire, does often befall the Saints, by means of
their carelessness and security.

4. To walk after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. Which are in Christ walk after the
Spirit. Gal. 5. 25. If you live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit. i. By
minding, liking, wishing, desiring, and affecting the things of the Spirit,
Romans 8. 5. And by endeavoring in the whole course of your lives and callings,
to order your selves according to the will and Word of God; for that which is
commanded in the Word, is enjoined by the Spirit; and to lead a man's life
according to the Word, is to walk after the Spirit.

Secondly, and you of the last sort, who have not the Spirit of Christ abiding
in you; and therefore have no interest in this incorporation: forget not your
miserable condition; and let me entice and allure you to remedy the same by
endeavoring to get this Spirit, which is most of all and first of all to be
sought, Luc. 11. 13. How -- give his Spirit. And is obtained:

1. By fervent and faithful prayer unto God, Luc. 11. 13.

2. By careful and conscionable hearing the Word of God, Gal. 3. 2. Received
-- faith preached? Acts 10. 44. While Peter -- Holy Ghost fell, etc.

3. By true and unfeigned repentance, Acts 2. 38.

4. By pious and sincere obedience, Acts 5. 32.

Do you therefore renounce and abdicate those loathsome deeds of darkness
wherein you have hitherto walked. Do not rest contented in your hollow,
livelesse, and spiritlesse performances of good actions and endeavor that by
sincere and hearty prayer, hearing, repentance, and obedience you may have the
Spirit of God abiding in you, that so you also may have fellowship with Gods
Son Jesus Christ, which will give you, 1. More joy then children which barren
women ask. 2. More comfort then health which sick folk desire. 3. More
benefit then strength desired of the weak. 4. More profit then sight which the
blind desire.

CHAP. XI. Such who have fellowship with Christ, be, must be his sheep,
branches, spouse, members, and stones built on him. Their duties from the
particulars.
TO these I might have joined many other necessary duties: certain tokens of
such which enjoy; and availeable means for such to use, who desire to enjoy
this happy community, and discoursed largely of them: But purposing now to end;
I will only nominate some, without any large dilating upon them.

1. Christ is the Shepherd, these are the sheep.

2. Christ is the Vine, these are the branches.

3. Christ is the Husband, these are the spouse.

4. Christ is the Head, these are the members.

5. Christ is the Foundation, these are the stones.

Therefore such who partake of this Divine Society, as they owe of duty, so
they testify their incorporation into this connection, and they which desire
ingredience into this peerless communion must seek the same, by endeavoring
to parallel these resemblances so far forth as sacred Writ does enjoyne and
warrant. e. g.

1. They are sheep; therefore as sheep are harmless, profitable in regard of
fleece, fell, carcass, and dung very fruitful, and increaseable,
notwithstanding many are killed, and many die: So these are innocent, suffering
wrongs, but recompencing to none evil for evil: very commodious to all about
them, Genesis 18. 10. And mavelous increaseable, although persecuted and abused.
They are the sheep of Christ; therefore they hear, they know, they believe,
and follow him, Ioh. 10. 3, 4, 5. 26. 27.

2. They are branches of Christ the Vine, Ioh. 15. 1, 2, 3. Therefore, as, 1.
They grow exceedingly more then other trees. 2. Have plenty of sap within,
when they seem withered and dry. 3. Bear fruit which is sweet in it self,
pleasant to the user, and profitable to the owner. 4. Yea such which are
conjoined, and well accord together both in the cluster, and in the wine. Even
so these ought, and do grow in grace, from virtue to virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. 2.
Are replenished with the sap of saving graces, even in affliction, when they
seem withered away, and dried up. 3. Have fruits and graces, comfortable to
themselves, profitable to others, and pleasing to God. 4. Yea, and are
conjoined in Christ the Vine, and also among themselves one with another.

3. These are the spouse of Christ; therefore they ought to love, reverence,
and fear him, hear his voice, and receive his instructions, obey his
commandments, and be clad with his marriage garments, sc. the gifts and graces
of his Spirit.

4. These are the members; therefore are knit to Christ the head, as his
members by a lively faith, submitting themselves to him their head, and
assuring themselves that he as their head will care for their safety and
well-being.

5. These are the stones built upon him the foundation; therefore submit
themselves to the hammer of the Word and the Lords Builders, to be fitted for
the Lords building: they are therefore knit together by the Spirit, and laid
upon Christ the Head-Stone to be an habitation of God; and are supported by
Christ Jesus their Foundation against the gates of hell.

CHAP. XII. The Conclusion, showing the drift of all.
BY that which I have spoken at sundry times from this place concerning this
subject of true goodfellowship, showing from sacred Writ who and what
goodfellowes are; wiping away many foul and filthy aspersions wherewith the
world does falsely blemish them; and declaring their duties and dignity.

First, I hope you see the error and injustice of this erroneous world,
depriving Gods Saints of this their rightful denomination; and conferring it
upon the most stigmaticall sons of Belial. Is he a goodfellow truly, and
only who has fellowship with the Saints, the Lord of heaven and earth, and
his Son Jesus Christ; And are they which strive to imitate the Saints,
endeavor to please God, and labor to have interest in Christ Jesus, base
companions, insociable persons, and unworthy the name of goodfellowes, because
they prefer this excellent communion before the beastly and Diabolical
society with the fruitless works, and unhappy workers if darkness? And shall
such which make open profession of the Devils service, are at open defiance
with all manner of goodness, be styled and esteemed goodfellowes, because with
shameless foreheads, and flinty hearts they wallow in all manner of
wickedness, because they swear and swagger, roar, and revell, scorn and
scoff at goodness, and good men, consume wastfully their patrimonies and
possessions in pipes and pots, in Tavernes and Taphouses, in drunkenness, and
other damnable courses? Yet this is the usual and common dealing of the most,
although impious and ungodly; for what right have Satan's imps and agents to
this holy title of goodfellow?

Hear our Church speak, which says: If we lack Jesus Christ: that is to
say, the Savior of our souls and bodies, we shall not find him in the market
place, or in the Guilde Hall, much less in the Alehouse or Tavern amongst
goodfellowes, as they call them, etc. Hom. of right use of the Church, Fol. 6.

Let drunken beasts and pot-companions; Let infatuated prodigals, and riotous
spend-thrifts; Let swashing swaggerers, who sport themselves at the godly
simplicity of honest men, and all other of the same kind assume to themselves,
and give to their companions their own proper titles: sc. fools, beasts,
sons of Belial, etc. And not incroach upon this title which is properly due
to none but such who have fellowship with the Saints, the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, I hope that you understand sufficiently by the foregoing discourses
the admirable and unspeakable privileges of all goodfellowes, or true
believers: being combined by the most astrictive ties in fellowship with the
Lord of glory, his blessed Son, and gracious Saints, and Servants. As also
the wretched and miserable condition of all other associations, who have indeed
a fellowship, but most abominable and base, with the fruitless works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. As also most dangerous, and dreadful, Prove. 13. 20.
Acompanion of fools shall be destroyed.

Thirdly, I hope also that you of the wiser sort of those who as yet are
without having any well-wishes unto your selves, are persuaded to flee amain,
seeking an hasty escape from all those unfruitful fellowships with the deeds,
and doers of darkness; as Lot from Sodom so full of villainy, so near
destruction; and to hasten speedily, as the creatures into Noah's Arc, to be
firmly knit, and inseparably incorporated into this society, abounding with
such felicities, and contentments.

4. And I doubt not but that you which have already admittance into, and
acquaintance in this goodfellowshippe, by the former particulars are animated,
and encouraged to cleave more closely unto, and to proceed more comfortably and
courageously in the same; it abounding with such variety of excelling
privileges, and transcendent prerogatives, maugre Satan's subtle and hellish
temptations, and the worlds despightfull usage, and injurious calumniations.

Of which hopes if I do not fail, I have that I labor for. I having declared
these things unto you, 1. That you also (which as yet are strangers from this
heavenly communion) may have fellowshippe with us, which you need not either
dread or shame; for truly our fellowshippe is with the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ. 2. And that you which are infranchised into this Society, may
walk forward comfortably and courageously through the many crossing
oppositions you meet withal in he holy path. Or to end with the Apostles
words, that your joy may be full.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table.
A.
ADmiration vain, to be shunned, and why, 76. Adoption, what, its excellency,
why God adopted us, 235. Afflictions should not discontent. 42. They are the
lot of the righteous, 210. They benefit them 211, Why God afflicts them, and
how, 45. Christ is to be imitated in his sufferings, why, and how, 256.
Anabaptists confuted concerning swearing, 80. Antinomists taxed and confuted,
182, etc 192, etc. 243. etc. Apostasy dangerous, 95. Apparel, what should
content. 107 Pride in apparel, 260. etc. Christians best apparel, 44.
B
BEauty and loveliness of Christ, and Christians, 218, etc. Beggars how to be
relieved, how not, why, 25 their vileness, 104. Body is to honor God, 73
Christ and Christians one body, 207. 276 Brethren, all Christians are brethren,
3.
C
CAlling, what lawful, 103. Changing of callings through discontent taxed,
189. Labor in the same. See labor. Certainty of salvation, 118, etc. Whence,
270, etc. Charity See relieve. Christ is Christians fellow, and how, 202.
Husband, 203. Vine, 204. Foundation, 206. Head, 207. A stone, and what, 206.
His power, 209. Love and nearenesse to Christians, 209, etc. Christ's poverty,
what, and why he was poor, 222. Christians, Christ's fellows, 202. Spouse,
203. Duties therefore, 176. And branches, 204. Duties therefore, 277. Stones
built on him 206. Duties therefore, 277. And members, 207. Duties therefore,
277. Resemblances betwixt Christ and Christians, and their nearenesse, 208,
214, etc. Church, a Vine, 205. Its foundations, what, how many, 206. A fold,
field, etc 208. Choosers we should be, of what, and why, 177, etc. Civil
honest men, in what they are defective, 272, 273. Clean, how Saints are clean
how not, 240. See pure and perfect. Cleaving to God, a necessary duty, what it
is. How we cleave to God, motives thereunto, 189, etc. Conference (see tongue)
for the Lords Day, 167, etc. How delightful. Conscience, what it is, how it is
bound to obey the Moral Law, 245, etc. See Law. Conscience testimony.
Consolation of Saints, see Joy. Whence, 270 Contentation, what. Why we should
be content, 98. etc. 106. With what, 107, etc. 118. Continuance crowned, 95.
Continuance of Saints. See certainty. Corrections and crosses. See afflictions.
Covenant with God. Its foundation, frame, kinds, the same now with that of the
justified Jews formerly. It must be kept. How, why, 178, etc. Coveteousnesse,
its root and fruit, 101. Puritanes, how covetous, how not, 69. Riotous spend
thrifts are covetous, 66. Creation for Gods honor, 71. God is derided in the
derision of the creatures, 80. Man an excellent creature, 86.
D
DEath not to be feared, 124. Its meditation joyful to the Saints, 174.
Dependence on Gods providence, 65. Motives thereto, 69, etc. 123. Depopulatours
hurtful, 67, 98, 99. Discontent fruitless, 106. Disparity betwixt Saints and
sinners 67. Drunkenness a vile sin, 92. Hurtful to the Commonwealth, 67.
E
ENemies not to be feared, 122. Envy, a hateful and hurtful sin, 38.
Exercises for the Lords Day. See sports. Exile should not discontent, 109. Not
to be feared, 124.
F
FAlling from grace, how Saints may fall, how they cannot, 118, etc. Family
provided for without covetousnes, 68. Less regarded by some then beasts, 90.
Father God is to al, especially Saints. 41. His fatherly love, their filial
duties, 41, etc. Some fathers prefer their beasts before their children, 90.
Faith, how all is like, how not, 4. Honors God, 74. Takes hold of Gods
Covenant, 182. How it justifies, how not, 233. True faith described, its
fruits and properties, who faulty concerning faith, 265, 266. Fashion following
reproved, 101, 108, 260. Fear honors God, 74. Cleaves to God, 150. Its
excellency, 194, etc. What to be feared, what not, 124, 230. What fear is
bad, what good. Objections answered, 194. Fellowship Saints have each with
other. Duties thence, 3, etc. With the Father, 115. Motives, means, and
duties, 129, etc. With Christ, 202. Its nearenesse, 213, etc. Motives to join
in it, 218. Who have fellowship with Christ, 253, 254. Objections against the
fellowship of Saints answered, 113, etc. Fellowship of wicked base, 125, 135,
etc, To be shunned, and why, 6, etc. 125, etc. What wicked men's society to be
shunned, 8. Food, what should content, 105. Spiritual the best, 43. Fools,
who? sc. What fools wicked men are, 128. Forgiveness of our brethren
necessary. How Magistrates, Ministers, and private persons may and must
forgive, 37, etc. Who must forgive: whom: when: what: how: and why. 38. Motives
to forgive: Objections answered, 39, etc. Forgiveness of sins, a great
favor, to whom it belongs, 234. God only forgives sin, 37. Foundation of
the Church, what, how many, 206. Flesh, an evil master, disswasives from its
service, 196.
G
Gain of Saints is great, 199. Garments of Christ's righteousness the best,
44. See apparel. God the Saints Father, 41. How a Husbandman, 204, etc. Good
must be done, as well as evil avoided 82, 91. Goodfellowship, what, 1, etc. Of
wicked, naught. See fellowship. Wicked are falsely called goodfellowes, 278.
Name goodfellow, to whom due, 278, 279. Glory, how like, 5. Gods glory. See
honor. Glory of Saints fellowship, 219 etc. Grace, how like, 4. Its spreading
nature and excellency, 19, etc, How it may be lost, how not, 118, etc. We must
labor to work it in others, and why, 19, etc. We must grow in grace, if we
will be like Christ, 262, 263.
H
HAte sinners, and how, 10. Sin, and why, 39 Hearing of Gods Word needful
and excellent, 142, etc. Objections against it answered, 143 How to hear, and
faulty hearers, 14^, etc. How we must hear, and why, 172. 181. Heaven hoped
for in vain by many, 88. Holiness See sanctification. How the Saints are
holy. Honor due to God. How God is honored. Why with soul and body both. Why
with the soul especially. How with the tongue and life, 72, etc. Motives to
honor God, 84, etc. Honor of the Saints, 198. And of their communion. See
glory. Hope of Saints, its excellency, 236. Hosts are Gods, 122. Husbands duty,
203. Saints husband transcendent, 46, 203. Hypocrites, how hurtful, 26, 55.
I
IGnorance hurtful: its fruits, 97, 273. Inheritance of Saints unparalleled,
45. Inhabitation in Christ. See Christ. Whence it is, 270, 271. Ingrossers of
corn censured, 67. Imitation of God, wherein, 138, etc. Of Christ, wherein and
why, 257. Of men, wherein, 262. Imprecations to be shunned, though Saints have
imprecated, and why, 76. Imputation of Christ's righteousness, 235. Joy of the
Saints, 129, 192, 224. Why they rejoice, 239. Justice of God, by whom abused.
Objections against it answered, 77. Justification handled with its causes, and
fruits, 233, etc. Whence it is, how it differs from sanctification, 237. How
once justified are always, 240.
K
KNowledge saving honors God, 73. It is needful to do Gods will, 97. and
necessary to enjoy Gods Spirit, 272.
L
Labor in lawful callings commendable, 24. When not to be taxed of
covetousness, 68, 103. Labor on the Lords Day. See works. Lords Day, why so
called, 150. Duties of the Lords Day. See Sabbath. Law, how it is kept by the
Saints, 187. It binds. How Christians are under the Law, how not, 184, 192. How
free from the Law, 243, etc. Liberality. See mercy. Its excellency, 224.
Liberty of Christians frees not them from Gods service, 192. Not from
authority, gives not liberty to sin. Frees not from sin, 243. Not from the
obedience of the Moral Law, 243, etc. Wherein Christian liberty consists, and
its excellency, 248, etc. Life godly honors God, 83. Love of God to us, how
great. Gods loveliness, 49, etc. We ought to love God. Who truly love him, 46,
etc. Their paucity, 47, etc. Love to God greatly rewarded, the first and great
commandment, and how, 49, etc. It honors God, 74. By it we cleave to God,
190: The rule of love, 194, etc. What the Saints do love, 239. Motives to love
God, 49, etc. Love all men, why, and how: all Saints, and how, 9, etc. Love of
Saints, whence.
M
MAn an excellent creature, 85. Serves himself sinfully: served sinfully how.
Disswasives. Meditation for the Lords Day, 165. Delightful meditations, 173.
See thoughts. Mercy of God, what, 79, 60. To whom it belongs, no encouragement
to sin, 60, 79. By whom it is abused, 79. Merciful works of diverse sorts.
Their excellency, 170, etc. Who must give, when, how much, of what, how, 13,
etc.
N
NEw creatures. How Saints have all parts new, 238, etc.
O
OAths handled by creatures, 81. Rashness: Disswasives, 81. Excuses answered,
82. See swearing. Obedience to Gods Law, part of the Covenant of man's part,
182.
P
PEace of Saints excellent, with them necessary, 34, etc. What we must yield to
for peace, 36. Its excellency, 235. Wicked have no peace, 226, etc Perfection,
how Saints perfect, how not, 139, 242. Objections answered, 55. Persecutors of
good men woeful, 126, etc. 209, etc. Pharisees, what? who like them in these
days, 56. Piety a cause of persecution, 212. Please God, what pleases God:
that is to be chosen, 177. Poor of two sorts, 68. They must depend upon God,
68. Be content, 109. Poverty not to be feared, 123. Christ's poverty, 222.
Prayerlesse persons woeful, 140. What prayers are fruitless, 140. What kind
of prayer is prevailing, 141. It is a duty for the Lords Day, 170. Yea
delightful, 172. It is part of the covenant, 182. Needful, 272. Whence it is,
270. To pray for earthly things lawful, 103. Preachers are builders, 207.
Their faults may not keep us from hearing, 143, etc. Privileges of the
Saints, 218, etc. Prophanest people usually the greatest persecutours, 212
Profession is good, though some Professors are bad, 29, etc. Providence good
and lawful, 68, 103. See depend on Gods providence. Pure, how Saints are pure,
141, 242. Puritanes, what meant, 29, 212 No Pharisees, 56. Not covetous, 69.
Not of wicked life, 214. Scarce any of them beg, 70. Or come to the gallows,
113.
R
REading Scripture, and good Books, a Sabbath duty, and how to read, 169.
Recreation for the Lords Day, 171. What is unlawful, 160. Redemption for Gods
honor, 80, 86. Its excellency, 86. Regeneration whence, 270. Its necessity
Danger of its want, ^ 72. Relief. See mercy. Remission of sins a great
favor, to whom it belongs, 224. See forgiveness. Repentance late very
dangerous, 61, etc. Reproofs, how to be used, who faulty. Why we should
reprove, 32, etc. Restitution, 17, 39. Riotous persons usually covetous, 66.
Revenge a great sin, 39. Reproaches for Christ should not discontent, 110. Not
to be feared, 123. Riches uncertainty, 105. Vanity, 106. Of the Saints, 222,
etc.
S
SAbbath Day to be kept holy, the name is Moral, its many names, Motives to
keep it holy, and what then lawful and unlawful, 149, etc. Sacraments of the
Jews and ours, how the same, how differ. Excellency of ours, 181, etc. Saints
fellowship See fellowship. Their excellency, 127. Their portion to be
afflicted, 126, 210 Sanctification handled, with its fruits, how it differs
from justification, 237, etc. It is necessary, 272. Whence it is 270. Satan
not to be feared, 124. His objections against perseverance answered, 119.
Scripture (though alleged by Heretics) decides controversies, 2^6. Seeking of
God a needful duty, what it is, manner and means of seeking, and motives to
seek God, 146, etc. Servants of God, who, who not. Services of God, and of
others. How to serve God, and why, bad Masters hindering this service of God,
191, etc. Sick persons duty, 170 Visiting them a Sabbath duty, 170. How to
visit, who faulty in visiting, 170. Sincerity needful, 92, 272. Its signs,
93. (...), a Sabbath (...)ing (...) Sins, (...) be concealed, 23. And why,
28. Sin (...) shunned, 53. Yea secret sins, (...), 57, 9^. Least degrees of
(...) all sin, and why sweet sinner 9 (...) sins of Saints, and wicked men,
57, etc. How good men sin, ibid. What they do having sinned, 59. How they are
free from sin, 124, 245. Their sins no encouragements to sin, 62, etc.
(...) encouragements answered, 60, etc. Disswasives from sin, 63, 136, etc.
Sin must be shunned if we imitate Christ, 262. How sin is infinite, 78. God
no author of sin, 77. It is an evil master, by whom it is served,
disswasives from serving it, 198. Sins of former times ^s great as now, 254,
255. Why seem greater now, 255. Sheep of Christ, their duty, 276. Sons of
God, who, 201. Their duty. See Father. Society. See fellowship. Soul is to
honor God, and first, 73. Sparing, how commendable, 25. Spirit of God dwells in
Saints. Its fruits in them, their misery who want and scorn this
co-habitation, 270 271. Who falsely boast of the Spirit. Who have, who want the
Spirit, 272, 273. Duties of both, 274. How the Spirit is grieved, how quenched,
how gotten, how kept, 275. Sports, whether lawful on the Lords Day. Reasons,
Disswasives, 160, etc. Strength Spiritual, whence, 207. Swearing now an honor
to God, 80 Anabaptists confuted. Disswasives from all evil kinds of swearing,
80, etc. Excuses answered, 81, etc. Sorrow of Saints, 239. Sufferings See
afflictions.
T
TOngue is to honor God, 74. Many ways, 74, etc. Thoughts unlawful on Gods
Day, 164. Time-serving hurtful, 93.
V
VIsiting the sick a Sabbath duty. How? who faulty, 170, Usury a filthy sin,
92, 100.
W
Wants temporal, how supplied to the Saints. 123. Will of God must be done,
88. Its reward, 88. It must be done totally, 90 Faithfully, 92. Timely, 93.
Continually, 95. Means, motives, let removed, 96, etc. Man's will contrary to
Gods, 97. Word of God, a Word of faith, grace, salvation, reconciliation, life,
142. Its excellency, 75, 172. It is to be talked of, 74. Not to be iested with,
75. No: to defend vice, nor dis^hearten virtue, 75. Not to be used in charms,
76. Words not fit for the Lords Day, 163. What then commendable, 167, etc.
Works of God, for his glory, man's good, 165. Works unlawful for the Lords
Day, with disswasives, 157. World, by whom served, disswasives from serving it,
197. Wrath a great sin, 39. Wicked men are fools, 128. Their society to be
shunned, and why, 6, etc. 135, etc.
Y
YOung people should do Gods will, and why, 93.

