A Brief Declaration Of that which is happened as well within as without
Oastend sithence the vij. of January 1602. As also when the Enemy did give
Four, Five, or more Assaults upon the same Town. Also The names of the
Commanders of those which have made these Assaults upon the town of Oastend,
and the names of the said Conductors which have been slain.

Middleborrow Printed by Richard Schilders. 1602.

AT LONDON Printed for Matthew Law. (1602.)

A brief declaration of that which is passed as well within, as without the
town of Oastend. etc.
WHereas the Archduke Albertus with his forces, about Seven months paste
being came before the town of Oastend, has caused the same presently to be
battered, and has caused the same to be continued during this Besieging
without discontinuance: so that from the beginning of this siege until the
vij. of January 1602. upon the Town has been shot One Hundredth Six and
Thirty Thousand Cannon shot. And perceauing yt after these many thousand shot
which he has shot upon the Town, ye same has nothing prevailed as he had
well hoped: He has on the vij. of this month of January 1602 from the
morning betimes till the afternoon, shot more then Thirteen Hundredth
shot. After which, on the said day he has done several Assaults as well
upon the town of Oastend, as the other Forts thereunto joining, not doubting
but he should have forced the town by reason of the want of Soldiers within
it, as he thought, but God has otherwise provided.

The success of the vij. day.
ON the Seventh day of January aforesaid after that style, the Spaniards with
the Italian alloted unto them, either of them under their Generals and
Commanders came marching toward the Town of Oastend under the conduct as
follows.

The Earl of Trusty or Triuulsie Italian Commander of Two Thousand Italians,
fell upon the Santhill but was very valiantly beaten thereof.

The Earl of Bucquoy chief of Two Thousand men made assally upon the East
Rauelin, but as the water was flowen too high, he was constrained to forsake
the same, and fell upon the half Moon over against the Geule, from whence
he was manfully driven away.

The Governor of Dixmuyde chief of Two Thousand men has made his assault upon
the Porquepycke then in vain, and beaten away.

One Captain with Five Hundred men thinking to force the West Rauelin, was
also beaten from thence.

Another Captain with Five Hundred men meaning to effect some thing upon the
South Carre, was valiantly resisted.

The Sargeant Mayor with a Thousand men meaning to overrun the West Carre
was also manfully beaten away.

This is as much as concerns the Assault.

The other day being the Eight of January 1602. (according to their style)
there was diverse Prisoners brought to diverse places for further examination: It
is held that in the assaults and in the retreat, from the Town more then a
Thousand were slain without those which were hurt. In the Evening of this
eight day there fled over one of the Enemies men, who reports that the
Archduke in the morning would come and assault again, and that ye Walons and
Duchess should assault by reason the Spaniards and Italians had assaulted, for
the which our Soldiers within did greatly long for that they had gotten good
booties of signor Spaniards.

On the Nineth of the same there was found one dead very richly apparelled
esteemed to be some Commander, he was booted and spurd, it was thought his
horse was shot, and drowned.

The Tenth of the same our soldiers thinking that the Enemy would again make
an assault, they have expected them with good devotion in hope of more spoil.

The Town is daily much fortified, so that they do not greatly fear the
Enemy.

On the Eleauenth of the same a Drum was sent from the Enemy for to know
what prisoners they had of quality: also to have a surcease of arms for Two
or Three hours, for to fetch or bury their dead, but it was not granted. In
the afternoon of the same day, came many Shalopes and Ship-boats full of
Soldiers out of the Fleet into the Town in the sight of the Enemy,
notwithstanding that they shat very furiously without doing any manifest harm
more then that they shot Three men, and one ship in the ground, wherein were
most Mariners, but all saved, (God be praised.)

The Twelueth of the same in the Morning about Nine of the clock, our men have
yet found one dead carcass with velvet breches laid on with gould lace, and
a gilt Rapier about him who was drowned, it is thought he was some Commander.

About this time have our men brought in a Wallon soldier from the East, who
reports that they have lost about Twelve hundred men.

The Enemy has again sent a Drum for to enquire after some great Personages
prisoners of quality: whereupon vuto him was answered that he should make
specification of the names what prisoners he sought, the speech is that the
Earl of Tributio or Triuulsie of Milayne cozen to the Duke of Mantua, Maistro
del Campo should be slain.

They do continue yet very strong in the fortisying and strengthening of the
Town: God preserve all the Governors, Captains, Officers and Soldiers,
with all others of the Town, and take them to his protection.

Names of those which were slain.
Simon Antony Mr. del Campo. Don Aluares Schuares Cruciador, or of the order of
St. James cross. The Earl of Imbeeke Italian esteemed to be rich, his
reuenews of 300 Pistolets a day. The Sargeant mayor General that was pledge
within Oastend the 25 of December last past. Durago Mr. del Campo. The
Lieutenant of the Governor of Antwarpe. Under the dead is also found a woman
person.
After this a Drum of the Enemy has declared that there were Twelve Hundredth
men flaine and one Thousand hurt, without those which are carried away with
wagons, and which were drowned, and driven away in Sea by the water of the
Sluice.

Those which assaulted in the old Town had powches or males with them, wherein
they had provided themselves of victuals for ij. or iij. days, they had also
Shouels, Pickaxes, Hatchets, Spades, and Ladders, and other Instruments which
they all left behind, to that end brought thither, according to the
declaration of an Alfero or ensign bearer, for to make place of defense for
them in the old Town.

The pieces of Ordinance standing in the Porquepyke and Faulse breye were cast
down in the assault, to the end if the Enemy had gotten the said places, or
any of them, he cold not have used the same against the Town.

FINIS.

