AN EPITOME OF ORTELIVS HIS THEATER OF THE WORLD, WHEREIN the principal
regions of the earth are described in small Mappes.

With a brief declaration annexed to each Map. And done in more exact
manner, then the like declarations in Latin, French, or other languages.

It is also amplyfied with new Mappes wanting in the Latin editions.

CONTEMNO, ET ORNO: MENTE, MANV. AO

projection map of the hemisphere with Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Arctic

AT LONDON, PRINTED BY JOHN NORTON.

DE GOVERNOR E VENT GRACE. blazon or coat of arms

TO THE NOBLY-DESCENDED, AND VERTVOVSLY-ACCOMPLISHED Mr. RICHARD GARGRAVE.
MOST worthy sir, no sooner did this stranger my friend set foot on English
shore, but being desirous to trauail North, I could not devise where he should
find more condign and respective intertainment then under your most
favorable roof. It appears by his many languages, namely Latin, Italian,
French, Spanish, high and lovv Dutch, and now lastly English, that he has
sometimes bin a traueler. And so indeed if you examine him thoroughly, you shall
find he has, asvvell by sea as by land. In his discourses he is unlike the
greatest part of our travelers, who with their tedious and fabulous
narrations will bring either deafnes to your ears or slumber to your eyes.
But this man speaks nothing but matter, and that so succinctly, as by his
conference you may reap delight, and yet not hinder your affairs of importance
or recreation. Give him encouragement in the North, and ere long you shall see
him come over in another habit, to try what acceptance the south will affourd
him. Thus doing, you shall not only grace him and benefit your country, but in
all dutiful services you shall make me his poor vvel-vviller,

Yours Most truly devoted.

A brief description of the 2 half globes or spheres, as well Celestial as
Terestrial.
BEcause the true and proper description of the earth and the parts thereof;
cannot well be made without the knowledge of Cosmographie and Geographie, It is
not amiss that the circular composition both of heaven and earth be briefly
explicated.

Cosmographie does describe the world, that is to say the heaven; and what else
is contained within the circuit thereof. For the world is divided into heavenly
and elementarie regions.

The celestial or heavenly does conteyne 8 distinct Orbs of stars, of which
the seven former and nearest to the earth are atributed to the seven planets,
and the greater of these does always conteyne circularly the lesser, and every
one of these does carry about one only star or planet, but the eigth otherwise
named the firmament; conteyneth in it all the other stars which are called
fixed.

The starry heaven or firmament conteyneth within his circumference all the
foresaid Orbs with their planets, and the same again with all the other
inferior Orbs is embraced of the nynth heaven, which is called the first
moveable, by whose continual revolution all these 8 Orbs of stars are
carried about, upon the pole of the world, from the east, to the west, in the
space of 24 hours: but the 8 inferiors on the other part are ever carried
continually about from the west unto the east, upon other poles, called those
of the Zodiak. But because mariners do use only the constitutions of certain
principal fixed stars, which are found about the 2 poles of the world, the
ambiguous moueinges of the planets are here omitted, as to them not necessary,
and here are only aioyned two celestial figures, by which the two half spheres
of the whole firmament or starred heaven, are demonstrated. Of the which the
first conteyneth the septentrional or northern stars, and the second those
which belong to the south^^^^

THE CELESTIAL GLOBE.
projection of two celestial hemispheres showing northern and southern
constellations

THe elementarie region is compassed and contained within the later Orb of the
planets, in the which the moon holds her place.

This region does consist of four elements, of which the highest is called by
the natural philosophers, fire, the next after is called air, the third,
water, and the fowrth, earth, of which the two later do make together one
round body.

And as to the view of the courteous reader has been set down in two half
spheres the whole constitution and order of all the fixed stars, so in like
manner is here pourtraited in other two half spheres the constitutions of the
whole earth, as well the parts habitable as the inhabitable.

The former of which conteyneth the new discovered world, which is called
America, the later, the world longest known, and by our ancerers inhabited,
the which is divided into three parts Europa, Asia, and Africa.

And because there is mention made in the descriptions following of the
different countries and places; with their proprieties, such particular
descriptions are therefore here omitted.

To declare also the reasons how the conjoined superfices of the whole earth
are to be designed in platform, would be ouerlong, wherefore such as desire
to understand it, may have recours unto the writings of Ptolomey Alexandrinus,
as also of Neoteryk, but espetialy to the comentaries of the most learned
Gerardus Mercator, upon Ptolomey his book of Geographie, and to such learned
authors as thereof have treated.

THE TERRESTRIAL GLOBE.
projection of two terrestrial hemispheres showing the new and old worlds

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.
As a preface to the reader.
IT is agreed on by all Cosmographers that the whole world is round, and it is
co^pact in that perfect figure, by the Almighty maker and author of all
perfection.

It is surely a mirror of most great admyration, wherein the unsearchable
science of the all-surpasling Artizan is to be seen, as also the greatness
of himself in so great omnipotency. And rather might it seem a point of faith
and belief to hold that the earth depending on nothing should be so
immovable, and being round, the oposite inahbitants under different horisons;
to be antipodes the one unto the other, but that experience and proof (and not
belief and faith) has taught it unto us.

How at the beginning the earth was divided from the sea; is altogether
unknown, but by the deluge the limits of sea and land have doubtless been
much altered, and sundry regions through the extraordinary violence of the
most forceible elements have since that time been also greatly changed. As
they are at this present, the heer-presented map in general, and those that
ensue in particular will demonstrate, to the which I refer the courteous reader,
and thus leaving the same to his best comoditie, with desire to be excused for
such brevity as in the descriptions I have been constrained to use, I humbly
take my leave.

R. V.

M. Tullius Cicero. The horse is created to bear and to dravv: the ox to til
and to labor the earth: the dog to hunt and to guard the hovvs. But man to
consider and contemplate with the eyes of his understanding the disposition of
the whole world*


THE DESCRIPTION OF THE EARTH.
TYPVS ORBIS TERRARVM
projection map of the earth
EVROPA.
THe countries of Europe, as we now call them are Spain, France, Germany,
Italy, Slauonia, Graece, Hungary, Polonia, Lituauia, Moscouie, or more
significatly the country of Sarmatia, and the Peninsula in which is Norwey,
Swethen, and Gothland. Among the Isles, Albion, containing England and Scotland
is the chiefest, next unto it have ye Ireland, then more northerly is Island,
Frisland, and lastly Groonland, all in the Ocean sea. In the Mediteraneum sea
it has Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Candie, Maiorica, Minorica, Corphum,
Nigropont, and others of less fame, whose several names, and situations do
appear in the Map.

This our Europe (besides for the Roman Empier) honorable throughout all the
world has above 28 Christian Kingdoms, if you add the 14 which some recon
only in Spain. It is passing fertile, naturally temperate, and of a mild aier.
And inferior to no other part in plenty of all kind of fruit, wine, and
plants, but to be compared with the most exellent, being made pleasant with
most fair Cities, Villages and Throughfares. And although it be in compass
lesser then the other, yet for the worthiness of the people it is preferred
before all other parts of the world, and ever has bin by all ancient
writers, having both for the Empier of the Macedonians and mightynesse of the
Romans bin most renowned.

EVROPA.
map of Europe

ASIA.
ASIA being the second part of the world, has on the west side to deuyde it
from Europe, the river Tanais, from the head whereof the division is made (as
it were by a line) and extended unto Sinus granduicus. It is moreover denyded
by Mare Magiore, and a piece of the Mediteraneum sea. On the south side it has
the sea of India. On the east the Ocean called Eous, otherwise, the east sea,
And on the north the icy sea of Sithia.

Asia by estimation seems as great as Europe and Africa, yet is it not taken
to be so populus as Europe having many wonderful great deserts, huge
mountains, and spacious sandy regions, and the mount Taurus stretches it self
very far and through the midst thereof.

Some have divided this part of the earth into five portions, The first is
that which joy neth unto Europe, and obeys unto the great Duke of Muscouy.
The second that which is under the great Cham Emperor of the Tartars. The third
that which is occupied by the race of the Ottomans, under the fowrth is
comprehended the kingdom of Persia, governed by the Sophie. And the fifth and
last part is that which as of old so yet at this present it retayneth the name
of India, being denyded under the comaund of many pety Kings, whereof diverse
are tributaries to the great Cham. And in this part is also contained the
great and mighty kingdom of China. This part of the earth is not only famous
among profane authors, for the first monarchies of the world, as of the
Assyrians, Persians, Babilonians, and Medes, but it is more illustred above
other parts in sacred scripture, wherein not only appears that in the same
mankind was first created, by Almighty God, but our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ coming into this world for the redemption of man, did choose to make
herein his birth place. It is also to be considered that the most precious
things that the world does yield are fonnd in this noble part thereof, as
besides great variety and diverse kinds of beasts, and birds, excelent sorts
of spices, fruits, medicinal herbs, roots, and other things, As also the
most precious metalles, precious stones, and pearls.

ASIA.
map of Asia

AFRICA.
THis third part of the world, the ancient writers have diuersty divided,
But as Ioannes Leo witnesses it is now divided into four parts, to wit
Barbaria, Numedia, Libia, and the country of the Negroes or moors. The first
of these being Barbary is the best and most fruitful, enclosed with the
Atlantike, and Mediterraneum seas, the mount Atlas, and the region called
Barcha, which confyneth on Egypt. Numedia which yeildeth dates and is of the
Arabies called the date country, is otherwise called Biledulgerid, this being
the second part bordereth on the Atlantike sea in the west, and the mount
Atlas in the north, in the east it reatcheth unto the city Eloacat, and
southward unto the sandy deserts of Libia.

Libia the third part is in the Arabeck tongue called Sa^ra, which signifies
wilderness, it begins at the river Nilus and reatcheth to the Atlantyke
sea, having on the south the Negroes or Moors, and on the north Numedia.

The fourth and last part is that which is called the country of the Negroes
or Moors (for that they are black people) it has Libia on the north. The
Ethiopian sea toward the south, the Gualates toward the west and on the
east side the kingdom of Goaga.

It is further to be considered that all Africa is enuyroned with the
Mediteraneum, Atlantyke and Aethiophian seas and the river Nilus.

Some have accounted Aegipt and Aethivpia to be of Asia, but with more reason
all modern Cosmographers do recon them to belong to Africa.

The south part or coaste of Africa was undiscovered unto the year of our
Lord 1497 that Vasca de Gama passed the promontorie or cape de Bona speranza,
and sailing round about all the south coast of this part of the world arrived
at Calecut in the east Indies.

Africa has great and dry deserts wherein many strange beasts and serpents
are nowrished, and in some parts there of (as about the river Nilus sundry new
creatures or monsters are often produced.

AFRICA.
map of Africa

AMERICA.
THis fowrth part of the world for the exceeding largeness thereof is called
the new-world altogether unknown unto all Consmographers until the year of
our Lord 1492, in which it was discovered by Christopher Columba of Genua, who
for that discovery was employed by Ferdinand King of Castille and Queen Isabel
his wife. It seems most strange that so great a part of the world should so
long remain unknown, considering the dilligent search of Geographers to
describe the whole earth, the opportunity to search out countries, and the
insatiable desire that man has of gold and silver, wherewith this America
abounds, and yet could never before be found out. Some think it was
decyphered by Plato under the name of Atlas, others affirm a piece of coin to
be found there having on it the Image of Augustus the Emperor, about the which
there are diverse opinions and disputes.

This part of the world has been all sailed about except on the north side,
which coast is yet undiscovered. It seems to form it selfinto two
peninsulaes, whereof the one which is northerly conteyneth new Spain, the
province of Mexico, the lands of Florida, and Terra noua, etc. That which is
southward called Terra firma conteyneth the regions of Peru, Bresilia, and
others.

America had not in times past either wheat or wine, kyne, sheep, gotes, asses
or dogs, but it has since the discovery there of been enriched from Europe
with all these and sundry other commodities.

AMERICA.
map of America

ENGLAND.
THe whole I Will of Albion called also Britannie being the greatest I Will of this
part of the world, is at this day by two several names called England and
Scotland, because it contains those two kingdoms. The Meridional greatest
and best part thereof is called England, of Englishmen (sometime a people of
German) whose offspring does still possess the same under their own King. It
contains together with the country of wales, 52 Shyres, 29 Cities and 25
Bishoprykes. On the east side it has the German Ocean, On the west the Irish
sea. On the south the narrow seas which deuyde it from France. And on the north
it is separated from Scotland by the river of Tvvede and the Cheuiot hills.

It abounds chiefly in cattle, for which cause the inhabitants are more given
to grafing then to tillage of the ground, desyring rather pasture then corn
land. This region is very temperate, and without great extremity of cold. The
soil is exceeding fruitful, howbeit it yeildeth not wine. There are many
hills, which being without trees do yield a kind of short and sweet gras
for the best nowrishing of sheep, which are here in all abundance, and whose
fine fleeces do excel those of other countries, which is caused either by the
temperature of the air, or the goodness of the pasture. This fine english
wool, may well be calls the Golden fleece, for that thereby so great plenty
of gold and silver from so many and so remote regions of the world is brought
into this Realm. Here are also great store of mines of Tin, Lead, and Iron,
as also of Copper, neither are the mines void of Gold and Silver. In brief
England abounds with plenty of all sorts of victuals, and is furnished with
all store of things necessary for the use of man.

ENGLAND.
map of England

SCOTLAND.
THe realm of Scotland has England on the south side thereof and on all other
sides else, it is enuyroned with the maine Ocean, on the north side it has the
Isles called the Orcades and on the west the Hibrides, all subject unto
Scotland. And albeit it be not so fruit full as England, yet is the land
abundantly furnished with cattle, and the sea with fish, and in it are many
things very strange and wounderfull.

In Glasco is a lake, one part whereof frieseth in winter but the other part
does never frise. In Carik are Oxen whose far is never hard, but always soft
and oily.

In the province of Coyl or Kyle about ten miles from the town of Aer here is
a stone 12 foot in height and 30 in length called the deaf stone, for albeit
never so great noise be made on the one side, on the other side it cannot be
heard, unless a man stand far of, for so may it be descerned, or else not.

In Lennox is a lake called Lowmond being about 24 miles in length and 8 in
breadth having in it thirty Isles, in this lake are three things worthy of
note. There are finlesse fishes, and of a good taste. There are fleeting Isles
that with thee wind are moved and driven to and fro, And somtymes no wind
blowing, the water becomes so rough that the passengers are in great danger to
be drowned if they cannot speedely get to land. In Argadia (as is reported)
grows a stone which being put to straw or stubble will kindle and set the
same on fire.

In Burquham is a cane wherein water falling it turns into white stones, and
in this province no rattes are found. In the sea at the mouth of the river of
Forth is a high rock out of the top whereof issues a fountain of fresh water.
About 10 miles from Edenbourgh is a fountain, on the water whereof drops of
oil are found, the which oil is medicinable. In Clidisdale is a mine of Gold,
and another of azure, and in the muscles and shelfish on the shore of Scotland
pearls are found.

SCOTLAND.
map of Scotland

IRELAND.
IReland is a soil uneven and hilly and the highest hills have standing lakes
on the tops, It has also many bogges and quagmyres and is generally watery
woodie, and moorish, yet has it notwithstanding in diverse places most fair
plains, which yet are but few in respect of the woods. It is a fat soil, and
apt to bring forth corn. The hills abound with cattle, and the woods with
wyld beasts. This I Will is more plentiful of pasture then of corn, of gras then
of grain yea the wheat-corne is small and withered, and not easy to be wynoed
with a fan. In time of harvest the rain scarsly permits the corn to be
gotten into the barn, so much is this I Will subject unto rain. It is plentiful
of milk and honey. Solinus and Isidorus affirm it to have no bees, but they
might more truly have written the contrary. No toade, adder, spider or venomous
beast is nowrished in this country, nor can live therein being brought
thither from any other place.

IRELAND.
map of Ireland

TERCERA.
THis I Will is called Tercera, because that of the Isles called Acores, it is the
third as the ly in order, to such as come out of Spain to sail westward. It
is plentiful of corn and fruit, and not without wine.

Madder which diers use for the dying of cloth red; does yield great comoditie
to the inhabitants of this I Will, for that it grows here abundantly.

The Oxen of this I Will excede in fairness and largeness all others in Europe.
Ceder grows here in such abundance that it serves for fuel.

The chief town of this I Will is called Angra which has a promontorie whereon
lies a strong forte called Brazil.

The Spagniards do also call this I Will Isola del buen Jesus. The ships coming
from the west Indies are accustomed here to take harbor in their return to
Spain.

Of these Isles of Acores there are seven in number, to wit Tercera, S. Mighel,
S. Marie, S. George, Gratiosa, Pico, and Fayal but the chiefest of name is
Tercera.

TERCERA.
map of Terceira Island (Azores)

SPAIN.
Spain being greater then France, and lesser then Germany, is environed with
the great Ocean and the Mediteraneum sea, except on the north-east side, for
there it is continent with France, from the which it is divided by the
mountains called the Pirenes, It is now one entire monarchy but in former
time has been divided into fourteen Kingdoms. By authors thus recounted vid.
The old and new Castilia, Leon, Arragon, Catalonia, Navarre, Asturia, Granada,
Valentia, Toledo, Galicia, Murcia, Cordoua, Portugal, and Algarbe.

Spain albeit it be not in all places manured because of the stonynesse of
sundry parts thereof, yet is it far more fertile then Africa, and in very many
places it yeildeth abundantly whatsoever is necessary for the use of man, As
very fair Wheat, Rice, Wine, Oil, Honey, Saffran, Sugar, Limons, Capers,
Citrons, Orenges, Pomgranades, and other fruytes. Rosmary grows there in the
fields in such plenty that it serves for fuel. It has also great store of
beasts both wild and tame, and yeildeth horses of such swiftnes that it was
said of them in old time (as a proverb) that they were engendered of the wind.

It has also diverse mines, as of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, and Lead,
and gold is not only found in mines, but even in sand on the sides of the river
Tayo. In sundry maritime places it yeildeth great store of Salt. The air is
pure and helthfull, it is little subject unto tempests, and is free from foul
and contagious mistes. According to a vulgar saying three things in Spain are
for the rarety of them very memorable, to wit, A bridge over the which water
runs, which usually runs under bridges, entending thereby the aquaduct of
Segouia. A town enuyroned with fire, meaning Madrid, the walls whereof are of
flint. And a bridge whereon ten thousand beasts are continualy pastured, which
is understood by the river Guadiana, which running into the earth hydeth it
self the length of seven leagues, and then coming forth again holds his
course as before.

SPAIN.
map of Spain

PORTVGAL.
THis country of Portugal is enuyroned about with other countries of Spain,
except on the west side, for their it bordereth upon the great western Ocean.

It is in Latin called Lusitania, taking this name (as is said) from Lusus
son unto the nynteenth King of Spain. Sundry fair rivers do take their
courses through this region, of which the river Tagus now called T^lo is the
principal, and was of old time more famous, for that his sands along by the
banck sides were mingled with gold.

The whole country is well inhabited, and albeit Portugal has little or no wine
yet Algarbe which is joined and reconed with it, yeildeth very good wynes.
Mountanous it is not, neither reported to have mines.

This kingdom began about the year of our Lord 1100, in this sort. Henry an
Earl of Loraine coming into Spain, showed himself very valiant, and had many
victories against the Saracins, for the which Alfonsus the sixth King of
Castilia gave him his base daughter Tyresia in marriage, and bestowed with her
this country upon him.

Of these twain came Alfonsus the first King of Portugal, the first that gat
out of the hands of the Saracins the city of Lisboa. He also overcame in one
battle five Kings, in memory whereof he bore in his arms five shieldes, as
in the arms of Portugal do yet appear. This kingdom albeit but little yet has
it enlarged it self in glory and fame even to the farthest bounds of the
world, and by the great trade of spices and other precious wares from the east
Indies has bin most mightily enriched. This trade began in the reign of King
John he second, and has continued with exceeding comodite, and the
augmentation of sundry tytles of other crowns and kingdoms. This realm of
Portugal after the death of Henry first Cardinal and lastly King (who succeeded
Sebastian that was slain in Africa) became with whatsoever belonged unto it,
to be under the obeisance of Philip the second King of Spain, and so
remains joined with the other kingdoms of Spain, in one entyre monarchy.

PORTVGAL.
map of Portugal

ANDALVZIA.
THis country has on the east side Granada, on the west Algarbe, on the north
the province called Magistratus S. Iacobi, and on the south the straight and
beginning of the Mediteraneum sea, commonly called the straight of Gibraltar.

On either side this straight are two most high mountains, to wit, Gibraltar
in Andaluzia whereof that straight takes name, and Abyla in Mauritania. These
two mountains are of many called the columns of Hercules, yet there are that
affirm the columns of Hercules to have bin two pillars of brass in the
temple of Hercules, which was in the I Will of Gades, now called Cadiz or Cales in
which they say was graven the charges which the building of the said temple did
cost, howbeit the certainty is altogether uncertain, whether the two pillars
of Hercules were these two mountains, or two artificial pillars of brass.

This country of Andazulia is the most fertile part of all Spain, for
abundance of all sorts of fruits, and great plenty of other necessary things.

The inhabitants are courteous and civil, and very opulent. It is replenished
with almost 200 syne towns, but the great and rich city of Siuil is the
Chiefest city of all this province.

The name it has of Andazulia is grown but by corruption, for the right name
is Vandazulia, of the Vandules, that here made there habitation, when by the
Goths they were chased out of other parts.

ANDALVZIA.
map of Andalusia

VALENCIA.
THe Kingdom of Valencia bordereth on the east side upon the Mediterraneum
sea, and is on all other sides enuyroned with other countries of Spain. The
chief city of this realm is also called Valencia, and of this city the whole
country takes name. Some authors do witness it received the name of a Kingdom
in the year of our Lord 162. There are two principal mountains in this
country, the one called Mariola, the other Penna G^lofa, which do produce many
sorts of medicinal herbs, for which cause diverse physicians and apothecaries
repair thither for simples. There is in this country at a place called in the
spanish tongue ^uriol, a mine of silver. And in a place called Aioder there are
stones found stryped with golden veins. At the promontorie of Finistrat are
certain mines of Iron, though of no abundance. About Segorbia is a quarry out
of which marble in times past was taken and sent to Rome. In Piacent Alablaster
is found, and in sundry places great store of Alum, Red-Oker, Lyme and Chalk.
This country yeildeth fine wool, which (as is said) comes of the race of
cotsold sheep transported out of England into Spain by license of King
Edward the fowrth in the fifth year of his reign. There is great comoditie
made in this country by the making of certain earthen vessels which the
Spagniards call Procellana.

This country was long inhabited of the Moors, until at last King James after
a long siege constrained them to leave the city of Valencia, out of the which
there departed at once more then fyfty thousand in number, who carried with them
all their riches, and left the city void, both of people and wealth. There is
not (as is thought) any corner of the world so replenished with goodly gardens,
abounding with such rare and excellent flowers and herbs, as is this country
of Valencia.

VALENCIA.
map of Valencia

GADES.
THe Spagniards call at this present this I Will Cadiz and corruptly it is called
Caliz. It is as divided into two parts, and so seems two Isles. In the lesser
is now the City of Cales, and in the greater was Iulia Gaditana Augusta, which
as Strabo says, was called Naples. The City of Cales is now a Bishops sea. By
most ancient authors it appears that this I Will was found out by the
Phenitians, and others hold that after them the Geryons inhabited here, whose
cattle was taken away by Hercules. In this I Will was a temple of this Hercules,
which for the founder and for Antiquity, religion, and riches, was very
famous. This Church says Mela is become holy because the bones of Hercules are
here buried. In the Temple of Hercules Ceasar did behold the picture of
Alexander the great, as Sueton tells us. There was a well which at full sea
yielded salt water, and at the ebb fresh. Sundry temples the pagans builded in
this I Will, as a temple of Jupiter, a temple of Juno, a temple of Saturn, a
temple of old age, and a temple of death. In these temples alters were erected
to the Gods of the year, to monthly Gods, and to Art and poverty.

The inhabitants of this province did in times past excel in navigations, and
they do not now degenerate from their anceters. Their chief commodities rise of
salt, and fish. This was the last I Will known in the world, as antiquity
believed. And there (they said) the Sun being weeried with running his daily
race descended into the Ocean sea, and took rest, and therefore this I Will is of
Statius called the Suns bed.

GADES.
map of Cadiz

FRANCE.
THe realm of France (as now it is limited) has on the north side the narrow
seas that deuyde it from England, westward it has the west Ocean, in the
southwest it joins to Spain, and directly south it bordereth upon the
Mediterraneum sea. On the Eastsyde to begin from the south downward unto the
north, it bordereth first upon Sauoy, then on the County of Burgundy
otherwise called La Franche Count, and so along by Lorraine, upon Luxembourg,
Heualt, and Artois.

This goodly kingdom is abundant in corn and wine and al sorts of fruits,
having plenty of cattle and foul and wants not all other necessary things,
mines it is not renowned to have, yet is it most rich and opulent, being
situate in the midst of the chief countries of Europe, and having trafike on
all sides.

It shall not be needful to show the three parts wherein Ceasar recounteth it to
have been divided of oldtyme, seeing both the limitts and inhabitants are since
altered. At this present it is divided into eight provinces, which are under
eight continual courts of Parliament. The first is the province of France
otherwise called the I Will of France, wherein the city of Paris is situate, In
which city the first court of parliament resideth.

The second province is Languedoc, the parliament whereof is in Toulouse. The
third Guienne, whose parliament is in Bourdeaux. The fowrth is Normandy, whose
parliament is in Roan. The fist is Burgundy, whose parliament is Dijeon. The
sixth is Dauphine, whose parliament is in Grenoble. The seventh is Prouence,
whose parliament is in Aix. The eight is Britannie, whose parliament is in Renes,
and under these eight provinces all France is contained, and limited for
recours of justice unto these parlaments.

FRANCE.
map of France

GASCONIE.
THis province of Gasconie is situate on the southwest side of France reatching
on thesaid side unto the Pireney mountains by the which France and Spain are
divided. On the east side it has Languedoc and on the north Guienne and
Arminac.

The people are valiant and warlyk. The country is very plentiful of all
things, but it chiefly abounds in wine, where with it not only serves it
self, but sundry other countries in Europe besides.

In the time of Carolus Magnus it was called the kingdom of Gascony. In this
country thesaid Charles the great marching against the Saracins of Spain did
lose in a battle forty thousand men, in which battle his noble nephew the
Earl Roland was slain. This country was first subdued unto France by Dagobert
the first of that name. In the year of our lord 1155 both it and all Aquitaine
came to be subject unto the crown of England, through the marriage of King
Henry the second of that name, with Elinor daughter and heyr unto William Duke
of Aquitaine. And it was lost in the year of our lord 1453. in the 31 year of
the reign of King Henry the sixth, so as it remained under the obeisan^e of
England about 300 years.

GASCONIE.
map of Gascony

POICTOV.
THis province of Poitou, called in Latin Pictauia is detryded into two parts,
to wit the Superior and Inferior. The upper Poitou is that which stretches
eastward toward the countries of Towrs and Berry, the nether Poitou is that
part which westward extends it self to the Ocean sea.

It is a country fruitful in Corn and Cattle rich in wynes and furnished with
great store of fish, And the great abundance of wyld beasts and foul, does
cause the delightful sportes of hunting and hauking to be here much used.

The chief city of this province is called Poitiers, having a notable
university chiefly for study of the Civil law, this city is of great
antiquity as appears by the Theater, Aquaduct, and monuments, which are
there yet remaining.

POICTOV.
map of Poitou

BRITANNIE.
BRitannie (called in time past Armorica) bordereth eastward upon the country
of Maine and a part of Aniou, toward the north it has the narrow sea and a
part of the country of Constantin, toward the west the maine Ocean, and
toward the south the country of Poitou. It is reconed in two parts, to wit
the higher and the lower Britany. There are in it nine Bishoprykes which are
divided into three distinckt quarters. Three of these which are, Cornuaille, S.
Paul and Treguiers, do speak the British tongue, and the inhabitants are
called Cornubians, Other three, to wit, those of Dol, Renes and S. Malo, do
speak the French tongue. The third being those of Nantes, Vannes and S.
Brieu, do speak both French and British.

The principal towns in Britannie are Nantes and Renes, but in Renes resydeth
the court of Parliament for the whole province. The chief haven of all Britany
is that of Breast. It is not to be omitted that the haven of S. Malo is guarded
with mastiues, which being thereto trained do there keep diligent night* watch.

It is generally a pleasant and fertile country, the earable land being as
good as can be desired, having also plenty of wood and pasture, and exceeding
great store of meadow ground. There are in it mines of Iron and lead, and in
some places silver* fine salt is there boiled through the heat of the Sun. And
the country through the many commodities thereof, and the sea trafike, is very
welthy.

BRITANNIE.
map of Brittany

NORMANDY.
Normandy has on the north side thereof the narrow seas, that separate
England and France, and on all sides else ir is enuyrond with several countries
and provinces of France.

From whence this Duchy takes name, the name it self of Normandy does
declare, to wit, North-mandie, that is the dwelling or region of the men of the
North, for from Norvvay othewise North-vvay, came Rolo (afterward called
Robert) with his Northmen, and of Charles the simple King of France he and his
people obtained here there habitation, about the year of our Lord. 9 12.

This province of Normandy is a most pleasant and fertile soil, so well
furnished of all necessaries as sildome any place better. It has great store
of flesh and fish, of corn, and vvood, much wine it has not there growing,
but is furnished with great store by the river of Scine, which coming through
Paris passes by Roan the chief city of this province. All the corn feilds,
as also the high ways and passages, are set and planted about with
frute-trees, espitially aples and pears, which yeildeth great abundance of
tider and perry, The river of Seine (as a foresaid) passing by Roan falls
into the sea at Haure de grace, or nevvhauen, where ships arryuing do come up
the river to Roan, which makes the city of great trade and trafique of
merchandise.

NORMANDY.
map of Normandy

ANIOV.
THe Dukedom of Aniou lies (northward) in the west part of France joining
upon Britannie. It is not great, howbeit very good, for that there is not any
country in France that exceeds it in fertillitie of soil. It has plenty of
wine, store of corn, and abounds in kyne, and sheep, and has great store
of fish through the many fishpondes therein, and above 36 rivers, whereof the
Loyre and the Main are the principal. It is beautified with pleasant meadows,
woods, forests and mountains, and in the mountains are quarries of freestone,
marble and slate.

The principal town of this Duchy is Angiers, situate on either side of the
river of Main. It is of great antiquity, which is witnessed by the ruynes of
a Theater not far from it. It has a very fair bridge over the river of Main
all buylt of free stone, It has also a famous university which was founded in
the year of our Lord 1387.

ANIOV.
map of Anjou

BERRY, OR THE COUNTRY OF BOVRGES.
BErry, otherwise called the country of Bourges, so taking name of this the
chief city thereof, lies in the midst of the realm of France.

The inhabitants of this country were in times past a free people, but in
process of time became with other like provinces to be under the Kings of
France.

Bourges (as is aforesaid) is here the chief city, in old time very famous,
and by Ceasar called Auaricum, and it is by few cities in France exceeded in
greatness.

In this city is a famous university, wherein the liberal sciences are
taught, which university was erected in time past by a Duke of this duchy,
who greatly favored good letters.

It has in many places marrish ground and chiefly about this city, by reason
of the sundry rivers and brooks, that pas by and about it, nevertheless it is
very fruitful, and abundant in all things that are generally else where found
in other parts of France.

BERRY.
map of Berry

LIMOVSIN.
LImousin called in Latin Lemouicu^, lies in the west part of France between
Berry and Xanctoigne, The chief city of this Vicontie is called Limoges, the
inhabitants are called Limosins or Limosians a very ancient people, and there
name having never been changed they are of some authors called Aborigines. The
chief city (aforesaid) of this province is of great antiquity, it was first
spoiled by the Romans, after that by the Goths, then by the French,
afterward again by Charles Martel, and lastly by Englishmen.

The soil about this city is fruteful and the city is not inferior to any in
all Aquitaine, in regard of trafike.

The country is woody and hilly, and therefore less fruteful then other
provinces of France, Chestunt trees are here very plentiful, and their fruit
is a great sustinance for the common people, and great store thereof is sent from
hence to other places and provinces of France.

The rivers that pas through this country are exceedingly stored with fish.

LIMOVSIN.
map of Limousin

ORANGE.
THis Prince-dome of Orange takes name of the principal city thereof, whith
is so called, and it is reconed (of some) to be within the limittes of
Prouence.

It is of great antiquity and of Ptolomey called the Colonie of the Aurasians.
It was in times past the heritage of the Princes and family of Chalon, and
often allied with the hows of Burgundy.

It is since fallen unto the hows of Nasau throwgh aliance made with the hows of
Chalon.

There is seen at the City of Orange the ruynes of one of the most fair
Theaters in the world and a wall of squared stone such as is scarsly found in
any place and at one of the gates stands a most goodly Triumphal-arck.

All which does argue the great antiquity of the place.

ORANGE.
map of Orange

SAVOY.
THis Dukedom of Sauoy, lies at the southeast end of France, and between
France and Italy. In the time that Hannibal passed the Alps it was called the
kingdom of Allobroges, so named of their King Allobrox, whose kingdom
stretching further then Sauoy now reatcheth comprehended also the province of
Dauphine.

The chief city of Sauoy is Chambery, and there is the residence of the court
of Parliament for the whole Duchy.

The nature of the soil is very different, for in some places it is fertile of
corn and wine, and in other places very barrain, fur trees it has very
many, and many chestnut trees. Here are to be seen those huge and immeasurable
mountains called the Alps, and rightly so called after the Latin word Albus,
that betokens white, for the higher tops of them being always white of the
snow where with they are covered; it see meth there a continual winter.

Many wyld beasts are harbored in these mountains, as bears, and wolves and
ce, there is also a kind of got which clambring and skipping upon the rocks
does often help himself from falling by his horns, where with he catches hold,
they being crooked and bending forward, like unto hooks. Here are also
certain beasts called the myce of the Alps, being ordinarily as great as
conies, but having long tails like unto rattes, heie are hares, that are white
in the winter and broune in somer.

This country is most barreyn toward mount Senis, where there are no meadows
in the valey, nor scarsly anything growing of worth, but passing over thesaid
huge mountain and coming down on the other side, it seems a new world, for
then begins the even plain and pleasant country of Piemont, so called for
lying at the foot of these mountains, and though it be not of Sauoy, yet is
it a Prince-dome belonging unto the Duke of Sanoy.

SAVOY.
map of Savoy

PROVENCE.
PRouence lies on the furthest side of France southward. On the southsyde it
has the Mediteraneum sea. On the eastsyde, some part of the Alps, and on the
other sides it is confyned with sundry other provinces of France.

This region being warmer then the other parts of that realm, does yield
fruits accordingly, for besides wheat which it yeildeth in all abundance, it
is full of Odoriferant trees, as of Oranges, Citrons, Olives, Pomgranades and
Figs, and full of marvelous fair Vineyards, the hedges are not of thorn or
brambles but of Pomgranades and other frut-bearing trees, to the end the very
hedges should yield profit as well as what is enclosed within them, the
unlabored and waste grounds of this country do yield marvelous plenty of
Rosmarie, Myrtle, Gineper and Sage. Palme-trees are also growing here, which
bear as good fruits as in Africa, here grows also Sugar, Saffron, and Rice.
And here the pure air yeildeth the gentle purgative called Manna.

Among the cities of name of this country Marseiles is not the least, for
having the best haven of all France, on the midland sea. Here is also the city
of Arles, heretofore much renowned, as also the city of Aix. wherein the court
of parliament for that part of France is holden. In this province lies
Auignion, which belongs unto the Church, and where sundry Popes for above 70
years together have made their residences. This city of Auignion among other
rareties has seven things of note, and seven again of each of them, to
wit, seven Palaces seven Parishes, seven Hospitales, seven Monasteries of
women, seven Colleges, seven Couents, and seven Gates.

PROVENCE.
map of Provence

THE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDY.
THe county, of Burgundy, the frenchmen call La franche Conte, that is to say
a free earldome, the limits of this earldome northward are Lorraine and
Germany, southward Sauoy, westward the Duchy of Burgundy, and eastward
Svvitserland.

Besancon and Dole are the two chief cities of this country. The former of
these being very ancient is the principal of all. It has as good and
pleasant a situation as any city else, being enuyroned with rich mountains,
plentiful vineyards and forests of goodly Oaks, and the river of Doux which
passes through the midst thereof does yield unto it very good fish.

Dole stands also upon the same river, and has a flourishing university in
all faculties of learning. In a part of this country there are salt pittes
which do yield most excellent pure white salt.

In that part called Arbois grows the excellent wine called vin d'Arbois.
The whole country (although but little) is both fruteful and well inhabited,
albeit it be said of Orgelet (a place where very industrious people dwell, that
live by clothmaking) that by reason of the rocks and mountains, the fields are
without gras, the rivers without fish, and the hills without wood.

THE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDY.
map of the county of Burgundy

THE DVCHIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
THis second or lower Burgundy now a Dukedom was in former ages a kingdom,
the kings where of did for the most part make their residences in the city
of Arles, so as the bounds of this kingdom stretched much farther then this
Duchy now does, the which paleth with Campaigne on the north side, with
Niuernois and Bourbonnoys on the west, with the country of Lions on the south,
and the county of Burgundy on the east. Of this Duchy Dijeon is the chief
city, it lies upon the river of Ouche, and here is held the tribunal or
court of Parliament for Burgundy, etc. The river whereon this city stands
is full of fish. The country is very frutefuul and yeildeth very good wine.

The Dukes of Burgundy have heretofore been very famous, and of great power
and opulence, and the people valiant.

The country takes name (as Saniulianus says) of a Burg or castle in the
valley of Ogue, and therefore called Burgogue.

It has besides Dijeon, diverse fair cities, as Beaunle, Chalon, Mascon, and
sundry others, among which, Autun shows it self to be of great antiquity,
where the ruynes of a great Theater are yet to be seen.

The cronicles of Aemylius do show, how about the year 1044, the whole country
of Burgundy was divided into two parts, to wit, into a Dukedom, and an
Earldome.

THE DVCHIE of BVRGVNDIE.
map of the duchy of Burgundy

LORRAINE.
THis Dukedom (accounted to be of Germany,) has on the east side the
country of Alsatia, in the south the county of Burgundy, in the west
Champaigne, and on the north the forest of Arden. It was heretofore a kingdom,
and called Austrasia, but then extending it self much farther then it now does.
It took the name of Lorraine of Lotbarius nephew unto Charles the great, and
was annexed unto the Empire under Otho the first.

The country is hilly, but wants nothing necessary for man's use, It is
furnished with cattle, and has very good meadows and pasture grounds, it
yeildeth corn and wine. It has mines of Silver, Tin, Copper, Iron and Lead.
Pearls are found in some waters in the valley of vaguy. The precious stone
called the Calcedony, with sundry other stones of worth are here fomid, as
also azure. More-ouer here is exceeding pure white salt, which is said to yield
yearly unto the Duke (all charges borne) 100000 Franckes.

There is a lake about 14 leagues in compass wherein (among other sorts of
fish) are carpes of exceeding sweet taste, commonly of three foot long and one
foot large this Lake being fished every three years does yield so much that
it makes in yearly value unto the Duke 16000 Franks.

Lorraine has many fine rivers, and the wholesome warm bath of Plombiers. The
chief city is Nancy, and there the Duke most commonly resydeth.

LORRAINE.
map of Lorraine

CALIS and BVLLEN.
OF all parts of the maine continent, this only part is in the view of
England, and England thereof is viewed. These two towns with their
territories, are paled on the east side with west Flaunders, on the west side
with the English or narrow seas, northward with the German Ocean, and
southward with Artois and Picardie. The country about Bullen is good and
pleasant, and inward into the land are hills, and some woods, which are
accounted portions or parts of the great forest of Arden, which the french
call Boys de morman. The country about Calis is unpleasant, low and warrish.
Calis of sundry authors is called Iccius Portus, but others atribute that name
unto Bullen. At Bullen is yet beheld a strong tower built by Julius Ceasar, and
of Englishmen called the old man.

The town and territory of Calis was subject to the crown of England, from
the year 1346 (what time through force of arms it was by Edward the third
taken from the french) unto the year 1557, when (the Lord vventvvorth being
governor thereof for Queen Marie) it was taken again by the French, so that
it remained in the possession of the English 210 years, and the town of Calis
became famous through the Staple of wool by them there holden.

In times past the town of Calis belonged unto Flaunders, after unto France,
then to England, and so to France agame, as has bin said, and in the year
1596 It was taken from the French through force, by the Archduke and then
Cardinal, Albertus of Austria, governor of the Netherlands at that time, for
the King of Spain, and in the year 1598 upon a peace concluded between France
and Spain it was rendered again to the French.

CALIS and BVLLEN.
map of Calais and Boulogne

VERMANDOIS.
VErmandois is almost enuyroned with Picardy, save that on the one side thereof
it joins upon Artois and Cambresy. It is a little province, but the name is of
antiquity, and the people thereof were of old called Veromandui.

The chief town hereof is called S. Quintins, which was long since called
Augusta Veromanduorum howbeit one author says that thesaid Augusta was two
miles from the town of S. Quintines, and was since called the Abbey of Vermond.

This was wont to be a Bishopryke, but S. Medard the fourteenth Bishop of
Vermandois translated that seat unto Noyon, in the year 524 when the Vandales
came into France.

Phillip the second King of Spain took this town by force of arms, in the
year 1557 with great discomfiture and loss of the French men.

In this country of Vermandois two notable rivers have there beginning and the
one not far from the other. The one is the river of Sum, which passing
through Picardie falls into the sea at S. Valeries. The other is the river of
Skeld, which passing through Cambressi and Tournay, into Flannders, comes unto
Antwerp, and so down into Zealand, is there received into the sea.

VERMANDOIS.
map of Vermandois

PICARDIE.
PIcardie accounted of old a part of Galia Belgica, has on the east side
Vermandois, on the west Normandy, and a part of the narrow sea, on the north
it has Artois and on the south Champagne.

The river of Sum which of Ptolomey seems to be called Phrudis, watreth
this country and makes it fruitful, and the towns to be furnished with all
necessary provision. The soil yeildeth great abundance of corn, and albeit
it has no wine, it is rather thought to proceed of the negligence of the
inhabitants in not planting vineyards, then through the unfitness of the soil
to nourish them.

The principal city of this country is Amiens, which is a Bishops sea,
ancient, and very famous, and as well fortified as any city in France.

Next unto this is Abbeuile, then have ye Peronne, as also the town of Guyse,
whereof the hows and family of Guyse takes name.

From whence the name of Picardie is deryued there are diverse opinions. Some
think that the Begardi should be changed into Picardos, which Caenalis will not
affirm of certainty.

Others do say that these people have the name of Picardes (and consequently
their country the name of Picardie) for having in war first taken up the use
of pykes.

PICARDIE.
map of Picardy

GERMANIA.
THis great and spacious country, has on the northsyde thereof the German
and Baltish sea, southward it confyneth with Italy, westward it reatcheth unto
France, eastward northerly it joins on Polonia and southerly upon Hungaria,
and within it lies the Kingdom of Bohemia. It is a country mightily
replenished with goodly cities towns and villages, and exceeding populus,
having therein many goodly rivers, whereof the Rhene, the Danubie, and the
Elbe, are the chief. It is divided into sundry Dukdomes, Earldomes, and other
governments, yet all in some sort depending on the Empire for here in Germany
the Emperor has his seat and residence for whose election Pope Gregory the
fyft (being of the hows of Saxony) ordained seven Princes electors, to wit,
three spiritual and 4 temporal, the spiritual are the Bishops of Magunce,
Cullin and Treuers. The 4 temporal are the Dukes of Saxon, and Bohemia (for
Bohemia now a kingdom, was then a dukdome) The Palsgraue of the Rhene, and the
Marquis of Brandenbourg.

The earth and air, as also the people of Germany seem much altered since
the time of C. Tacitus, who described the soil to be barren, the air not very
good, the country woodie and watrish, and the people very rude, and uncivil,
for now we find the air to be helthsome and good, the country fruteful, and
the inhabitants courteous and civil. It has now good wine growing in it, and
such abundance of corn in the east parts thereof that it sustayneth sundry
other countries, neither is it unfurnished of all other necessaries. It has
also mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron and other metalles. The people are
warlyke, very industrious, and many rare inventions have been by them found out.

GERMANIA.
map of Germany

INFERIOR GERMANY.
INferior Germany, containing the seauenteene provinces which the Emperor
Charles the fifth left unto his son King Philip the second of Spain, Is
corruptly of some strangers called Flaunders, and the inhabitants Flemings,
whereas Flaunders is but one of these provinces, and the inhabitants thereof
properly Flemings.

The names of the provinces are these. The Dukedomes of Brabant, Geldres,
Limbourg, and Lutzembourg. The Earldomes of Flanders, Artois, Henalt, Holland,
Zeland, Namure, and Zutphen. The Marquesat of the holy Empire. The Signories of
Friseland, Macklin, Vtreck, Ouerysel, and Grooning. The provinces, are
generally by the inhabitants called by the name of Nederlant which in English
is Netherland, and the people generally call themselves Netherlanders.

There are in it (as Lewis Guicciardyne affirms) the number of 226 walled
towns, diched about, and more then 6300 villages each village having a parish
Church, then are there Castles, fortresses, and noble men's howses a great
number. Some part of this country is very even and flat like unto Lombardy,
other parts are more high and hilly. It is very fruitful, having plenty of
corn, of flesh, and fish, some of which commodities are in some provinces more
or less abounding then the others, according to the nature and situation of
the place.

The people are marvelous industrious, and do excel in all arts and sciences,
whereby, as also by their great trade of merchandise, this country may well be
said to be one of the most pecuniary countries of the world.

INFERIOR GERMANY.
map of low Germany or the Netherlands

LIEGE.
THis Bishopryk joins on the north and west side unto Brabant, on the east on
the duchy of Limbourg and southward it extends unto Lutzembourg and partly
unto France. The air is sweet, the country exceeding fruitful in corn and
other grain, it has wine albeit but small, it has store of beasts, both
wyld and tame. It has exceeding good Iron, it has lead, and also gold.
Alablaster and very fair marble is dug out of the hills, and with great
labor and art of undermining Stone-coles are dug out of deep pittes, which
kind of cole was first discovered to be there in the year 1198, whereof
(besides those there spent) there is transported yearly to other provinces to
the value of more then 100000 ducates. Sr John Mandeuill knight and doctor of
physic, being borne in England; and having travailed so far, and through
somany countries and kingdoms, did not find a place that for the sweetness of
the air, the frutefulnes of the earth, accompagned with a very great freedom:
that better pleased him then did this country of Liege, where he chose to end
the rest of his days, and there died in the year 1272. The city of Liege is
the chief of all the towns in this country, wherein are 8 collegiat Churches,
with rich Canonries.

Tungres for the antiquity thereof is reconed next unto Liege, and the ruynes
without and within the town do (as well as old books) declare the oldnes of
this city, there apeereth yet the paued high way that reatched from thence
unto Paris. Some think the fountains to be about Tungres whose virtues Pliny
so much comendeth, but experience shows them to be at the Spaw.

LIEGE.
map of Liege

LVTZEMBOVRG.
THis Duchy is bordered on the northsyde with the Bishopryk of Liege and the
Earldome of Namure, on the south Lorraine, on the east the Mosel and the
Bishopryk of Treuers, and westward partly with the Mose and partly with the
forest of Arden.

The country is altogether hilly and woody, and much of the wood of late years
is turned to corn land. The chief cirie is of the same name that the whole
Duchy bears, but was by Ptolomey called Augusta Romanduorum: It lies part
on a hill and part on low ground.

The inhabitants do speak the high duitsch for the more part, except those
which dwell on the side toward France, for they use the french tongue.

By reason of the situation of this country being frontyred with so many
several jurisdictions it has been often subject to the spoil of enemies, and
many of the inhabitants have abandoned it and gone to live in other countries.

Lutzembourg was wont to be an earldome, til Henry the seventh Emperor and
Earl of Lutzemburg (as says Lewis Guicciardin) erected it into a Duchy.

LVTZEMBOVRG.
map of Luxembourg

HENALT.
THe earldome of Henalt has on the north part of Brabant and part of
Flanders, on the south it has part of Champagne and part of Picardie, on the
east it has the earldome of Namure and a piece of the country of Liege, and on
the west it has the river of Skeld, and a piece of walsh-Flanders.

This province is very fertile, abundant* in corn and cattle, with great store
of Orchardes, and many fish pondes. It has mines of Iron and lead, and hills
wherein are quarreys of marble. Stone-coles corruptly called in english seacole
are here found, though not so good as in the country of liege. Mouns is the
chief city and so ordained to be by Carolus* Magnus. The next unto this is
Valeneyne, called rightly val de cignes that is the valey of Swannes, for the
situation of the place is low and the rivers there about have bin wont to
nowrish many swannes.

About a league from Valencyne is the fair Abbey of Vicogne wherein is a
library stored with all sorts of rare book, many other walled cities there
are in this country among which is Cimay, the birth* place of John Frosard that
wrote a french cronicle.

About Barbancon glass for the glasing of windows is made, as also other
glasses.

HENALT.
map of Hainaut

ARTOIS.
IN this province Ceasar places the Atrebates, so called of their chief city
Atrebatum. at this present Arras: which now unto the whole province gives the
name of Artois. It is almost circuited by Flanders and Picardie, having the
first of these on the northeast sides, and the later on the southwest. It has
hereto fore belonged to Flanders, but afterward unto France, and by S. Lewis
King of France it was made an earldome, but in the agreement made in the year
1529 between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis King of France, the
first, it came to be under the hows of Austria. The air is very temperate, and
the earth fruitful, yiedling principally great abundance of corn.

Arras before named is the chief city, next unto lers S. Omer, which according
to the opinion of Ortelius, was that Iccius Portus, where Ceasar embarked
himself when he made his voyage to England, then Britannie, And that the sea
has of old time come unto this town is aparent by the often fynding of ankers
in digging in the meddowes and other places there abouts.

Not far from S. Omer is a lake wherein are certain little Isles, that with
acord or the wind, are made to pas up and down from the one side to the other.

ARTOIS.
map of Artois

NAMVRE.
THis earldome is enclosed between Brabant, Henalt and the country of Liege.

It is but a little county, very hilly, but a fine and pleasant region. It
abounds in mines of Iron, it yeildeth a black or brown marble, as also a
veyned marble of different colors, and here are Stone* coals also found as in
the country of Liege.

There are in it four fortified or strongly walled towns. The first is the
city of Namure, which is principal, and a Hishops sea, and situate where the
river of Sambre runs into the Mase.

The second is Bo^in^s, the third Charlemont, and the fowrth VValcourt.

The city of Namur takes name (as some say) of an Idol called Nanus, which
was placed on the top of the hill where now the castle stands, where to the
demaunders of things to come he gave answer, until the coming of Christ, by
whose coming this false God (as all the others which the Pagans honored) became
dumme.

NAMVRE.
map of Namur

BRABANT.
THe Duchy of Brabant is limited eastward with Geldres, westward with
Flanders, northward with Holland, and southward with the country of Liege. In
it is contained the Marquisat of the holy Empire, whereof Antwerp is the chief
town. The country is very pleasant and fruteful, but most toward the south.
It bears all kind of grain, and about Louayn it has vineyards, but they
yield a small kind of wine.

Campinia or Kempenland is the most barren part of all this country by reason
of the sandy heathes, howbeit it nowrisheth kyne and sheep, and the soil is
much bettered through the labor of the people. It has five woods, whereof that
of Sonien which begins near unto Bruxels and conteyneth about 7 Brabant
miles in circuit, is the chief. There are in it 26 walled towns, whereof the
most fair and famous city of Antwerp lying on the river of Skeld is the
principal in trafike and opulence, not only of this country of Brabant, but of
all the netherlandprouinces, and inferior to no city in Christendom. In one
day a man may pas from Antwerp to Macklyn (which albeit it be a province a
part yet lies it within the limitts of Brabant) from Macklyn to Bruxels, and
from Bruxels, to Louaine, and ride an easy pace, taking his repast by the way.
The first of these has the trafike of merchandise, the second the highest
court of Law, the third the court of the Prince, and the fourth the
university. The people of Brabant have many great and strong priueleges,
granted unto them by their former Dukes and Princes.

BRABANT.
map of Brabant

FLANDERS.
FLanders the best and fairest earldome in Europe has lying next unto it on
the east side Brabant, on the west the German Ocean, on the north it has
Zealand, but separated by some small parts of the sea, and on the south it has
Artois.

Whence this country took name it is diversely reported, the lykelyest is to
be of the lady Flandria for whose husband (the earl of Harlebeke) his great
service to Charles the great, the said Charles did of espetial favor give unto
the whole province her name. In old time it was as a wildernisse, and therefore
the governor was always called Forestier de Flandres. The whole earldome is
divided into 3 parts, to wit, Flemish Flanders, vvalsb Flanders, and Emperial
Flandres.

Gant is the chief city of all the country, being 7 Italian miles in compass,
it is very ancient and was before the time of Julius Ceasar called Odueum.

Bruges is the next and conteyneth in circuit 4 Italian miles. Then follows
Ipers, Lyle, Tornay, Doway, and sundry other. In brief there are accounted in
Flanders 35 cities or towns almost all walled, and such as are unwalled have
the privileges of walled towns. Of thorps or villages there are 1174 to wit
such as have their several parish churches.

The country is very fruteful and easily cultiued, fair horses are bred
therein, and the yeowes do ordinarily bring 2 lambs at a time, and very often
3. Twelve rivers take their passages through this province, the principal
whereof is the Skeld, certain Isles adjacent do belong unto Flanders as Cadsant
Osburg and Biervliet, in the later of these lies buried William Beuckelens,
who died in the year 1397 and was the first man that found out the manner of
salting and barrelling up of hering.

FLANDERS.
map of Flanders

GELDRES.
GEldres extends in the northwest unto the Zuder-sea, and south west it
confyneth with Brabant, eastward it has the Duchy of Cleue, and westward the
Signory of Vtreck.

It is divided into 4. several quarters, whereof the 4 principal cities are,
Nimmegen, Ruremond, Zutphen and Arnhem.

The country is very fruitful, having, come and wood, but it most exceeds
in meadow and pasture ground, by reason of the rivers of Rhene, VVale and Mase,
which do all take their passage through this country. Lean oxen are sent from
other parts to be here fatned, and in the year 1570 an Ox was brought from
hence to Antwerp, that weyed 3200 pound.

The people of all the inhabitants of the Netherland provinces have always
been reputed the most warlyke, and the country by war has bin most wasted.
They were of old time called Sicambri, as Henricus Aquilius in his compendious
Cronicle plainly proves, who also shows how it afterward took the name of
Geldres. It was sometime an Earldome, but Reynold the second for his great
valor whereby the made himself both feared and honored, being withal a great
iusticer, and having don great and faithful service to the Roman Empire, was
in an assembly or diet holden at Frankford in the year 1329 by Lewis the
Emperor, honored with the title of Duke, in the presence (as is said) of the
Kings of France and England, and of all the Princes electors.

GELDRES.
map of Guelders or Gueldres

ZELAND.
Under the name of Zeland are comprised all the Isles lying between Flanders,
Brabant, Holland and the sea. Whereof 7 are esteemed the principal, to wit
VValkere, Southbeuerland, Northbeuerland, VVolferdyk, Skovv, Doueland, and
Tole. These 7 with certain other of less account do altogether make an
earldome, which has in all 8 walled towns with some other that are unwalled
and 102 thorps, or villages.

The chief city of Zeland is Midlebourg situate in the I Will of VValkere, where
the staple of wine is kept, and in this I Will is Flushing, Campheere and Armuy.
And Midlebourg lying in the midst, takes there of that name.

Well may this country be called Zealand or Sealand; being so low that the sea
is at every high water higher then the land, and men standing in the meddowes
may see in looking upward the very keeles of the ships as they sail along, and
were it not for the sand-bancks or downs on the one side; and the banckes of
earth and fagots made on the othersyde* the sea would soon overrun it.

It is said for a proverb, that none of the 4. elements are good in Zealand or
Holland, the air is strong, the earth vnfirme (by reason of the marishnes) the
fire stinking (because it is made of turf) and the water salt and brackish.

Zeland notwithstanding brings forth fair corn, and the meddowes do
nowrish cattle.

ZELAND.
map of Zeeland

HOLLAND.
THe earldome of Holland, lies al along on the west side upon the German,
Ocean, with the creeks whereof it is almost enuyroned, having a great number of
waters and rivers every way passing through it. It is said to have the name of
Holland by reason that the earth through the vnfirmnes thereof seems hollow,
others affirm it to have taken the name of Holland of the Danes or Normans
that invaded it in Anno 837 (having before been called Batauia) for that they
called it Oland after an I Will so named in their northern region.

The country of Holland is like unto Zealand, very low, the earth soft and
weak, much of it being by the waters overflowed. All along the maine Ocean it
has through the mercy of nature the downs or sand-hilles that defend it from
the inundation of the sea, and in these downs are woonderful store of conies.

The meadow grounds for the feeding of cattle are so exceeding good; as the
great abundance of butter and chief transported from Holland into so many
countries does declare. The inhabitants do also reap great comoditie by their
wyld ducks and waterfoule, but espetially by their sea-fishing, and principally
by there hering-fang. Little or no corn grows in Holland, but they have it
from the east countries of Germany. VVood they have not, their fuel for the
most part is turf, their wood beth for howsing and shipping is brought from
Norvvay and other places. The chief city is Amsterdam the howses whereof are
built upon pyles of wood, which are driven into the watrish ground. The court
of Holand is kept at the Hage, which is no walled town, howbeit the fairest
village in all Europe, and situate in the most pleasant part of all the
country. The people are exceeding industrious, and the country full of towns
and cities.

HOLLAND.
map of Holland

FRIESLAND.
BOth east and west Friesland has all along on the northsyde the German
Ocean, and on the southsyde Westphalia etce.

Tacitus in his description of the manners of the old Germans parts
Friesland in Maiores and Minores, that is the greater and the lesser
freslanders* according to their power and habitation. The country is now
divided into east and west Friesland.

Generally it is very low, and the Somer being past it is not to be used: it
has little corn ground, but very notable meddowes, and yeildeth very fat oxen,
as also fair and great horses.

The chief city in West friesland is Grooning, and in East-friesland Embden*
Groening, with the territory thereof is accounted one of the seauenteene
Netherland provinces, but Embden belongs unto the earl of the same place.

The Frizons or Frieslanders are an ancient and warlyk people, being in old
time governed by a king of their own. Pliny says that an herb grows in
this country (which he calls Herba Britannica) which herb is good for the
fastening of loose teeth, and for the weakness of the legs and knees, and
espetial good for the disease called the Scorruie, which disease is scarsly
known but in these low-landes, and the remedy in lyk forte espetialy here to
be found.

FRIESLAND.
map of Friesland

WESTPHALIA.
THat Westphalia should take that name of the Goddess Vesta is very fabulous,
for the name is aptly significant in the self country language. It joins on
the northwest side with Friesland and on the northeast with the dioces of
Breme, on the southeast side it has the country of Padelborne, and on the
southwest the dioces of Cullen and part of the duchy of Cleue.

It was according to the opinion of Sebastian Munster the ancient habitation of
the Saxons. It has in it diverse earldomes, and Signories.

The people of this country are strong and fair, and good soldiers the country
is most woody and pasture ground, and very good for the nowrishing of cattle.
Dainty meats and delicacies are not he ere found with bacon beef and brown
bread the people do live very long and helthfully, and here is the best Bacon,
and the greatest store.

The chief city of westphalia is Munster, which in Anno 1535. the Anabaptists
having gotten into possession erected there a new common wealth, under their king
John of Leyden, who before had bin a tailor, and having endured the most
extremity of a hard siege, were at the last by the Bishop and true lord of
that city subdued punished and according to their demerits.

WESTPHALIA.
map of Westphalia

DITMERS.
DItmers called in latin Thietmarsia or rather Teutomarss lying at the mouth of
the river of Elbe, and where Cimbrica Chersonesus takes beginning, has on the
northsyde the river Eyder, on the east the dukdome of Holsteyn, on the south
the river Elbe and St^rmarsia, and on the west the German sea.

All the country is full of brooks and marish grounds, for which cause the
frutefulnes of the soil is the less praise worthy, and the name of Ditmers
betokens the nature of the place, for mers or meyrish with them, is the same
that marish is in English.

These people were of old accounted amongst the Saxons, but they are now
subject unto the king of Denmarck, and were subdued by force, in the year of
our lord 1559. by Aduphus the son of Frederik king of Denmarck, since which
time it always remains unto the king of Denmarckes eldest son.

DITMERS.
map of Dithmarschen

DENMARCK.
THis kingdom is by the sea denyded into sundry portions, the first is
eastward and called Scandia, which has on the west the kingdom of Svveeden,
the air thereof is good, and the country fruteful, having great store of
corn, flesh, and fish, it has also mines of Gold, silver, copper and lead 7.
The west portion of Denmarck is Iutia, called of Ptolomey Cimbrica Chersonesus,
which stretches it self out between 2 seas, not much unlike, though much
less, then Italy, having on the east side the German Ocean, and on the west
the Baltishsea. There are also belonging to Denmarck diverse Isles, whereof the
chiefest is Seland.

Iutland was in oldyme in habited by the Saxens, who afterward by the Danes
were chased thence. Munsterus says that Denmarck was a kingdom long before
the birth of Christ, and that of the first king thereof called Dan the country
took the name which it yet retayneth, but if Iunius be to be believed, then
has Denmarck taken appellation of the firrtres other wise called den trees
which do grow in the country in all abundance.

The inhabitants of this kingdom have in former ages borne their arms through
out Europe, and established their power in the most noble regions thereof: for
from hence came both the Goths and the Goths and the Longobardes.

DENMARCK.
map of Denmark

SAXONY.
THe name of Saxony heretofore common to diverse protinces now remains unto
two, to wit, the higher and the lower Saxony, high Saxony has the dignity
of the prince elector, and the principal cities thereof are Wittenberg and
Torga. Nether Saxony has the cities of Flamburg and Breme, and in the midst
lies the city of Brunsvvik. It joins eastward unto the marquesdome of
Brandenbourg, westward upon Westphalia, southward on Thuringia, and northward
it extends to the Germany sea.

Besides sundry necessary things for the use of man wherewith Saxony is well
furnished, it has diverse mines as of Silver, Copper, and Lead.

There is taken out of pits a certain kind of stone called in their tongue
Schyffer, for it lightly shelfereth or shiuereth, it is black of color and it
is mixed with copper and brimstone, and the copper by fire is gotten out of it.
When this stone is shelfered in pieces there are seen in it diverse veins of a
golden color, and which is a most wonderful woork of Nature, there apeereth
the pictures of diverse sorts of beasts, fishes, fowls, and serpens, as
perfectly as if they were drawn thereon by the art of a painter.

The inhabitants of Saxony are strong and hardy people, which is held to
proceed of there diet, which is nothing dainty or curious: they feed young
children with chewed flesh, rather then with pap or milk.

Wine grows not in Saxony, but their ordinary drinck is beer.

SAXONY.
map of Saxony

BRANDENBOVRG.
IN time fore-past all the country beyond the river Albis, vulgarly Elbe
whereof this Marquisdome of Brandenbourg was a parcel, was inhabited by the
Vandales. This province confyneth eastward with Polonia westward with Saxony,
Northward with Meckelburg and Pomerania, and southward with Mifnia and Silesia.

The chief city is called Brandenbourg, and thereof the whole Marquisdome
takes name, and the city it self took name of Brandus, a prince of the
Franckes.

Henry the Emperor surnamed the faukner besieged this city in winter, when the
waters about it were frosen, and his soldiers passing over the yse took it by
assault, he placed here a Marckgraue, and thus began the greatness of this
Prince who aftward be came (and so remains) one of the Princes electors.

The country is very fruteful, espetially in come, it has many fish-pondes
and meddowes, It has moreover vineyardes, which were first planted by the
Marck-graue Albertus.

At Francford upon the river Oder, which is in this marquisdome, is an
university, founded by the Marck-graue Ioachim, in the year 1506. near to
this city from the vyne-hilles runs a small brook which is length of time
conuerteth wood and other things thrown into it, into stone.

BRANDENBOVRG.
map of Brandenburg

POMERANIA.
POmery, whereof the Latin name Pomerania comes signifies in the vandalish
language a country lying near the sea even as this country (so named) does,
which al along the northsyde lies on the Baltish sea, on the east it joins
to Prusia, southward it has the Marquisdome of Brandenbourg, and westward the
Dukedom of Mekelbourg.

In this country of Pomerania and the confyning places the Vandales inhabited,
the people yet dwelling there being of that race, who after they were brought
from paganism to the Christian faith began to frame both their language and
customs nearer unto their neighbors the Saxons.

The country has many rivers and meynes or little lakes. The meddowes are very
good, on the higher grounds there are woods. Beasts both wyld and tame it
has great store of, and great plenty of corn, fish, butter, honey and wax,
and wants no necessary comoditie.

Amber is here gotten out of the sea, albeit not in such abundance as in
Prusia.

The chief city of this province (although there be other cities of more
antiquity) is called Stetin being very pleasantly situated upon the side of
the river of Oder.

POMERANIA.
map of Pomerania

SILESIA.
SIlesia lies eastward confyning on Polonia, southward upon Morauia, VVesterly
upon Bohemia, and northwest upon Lusatia.

This country has heretofore been many years under the dominion of the King
of Polonia, and afterward it came to belong unto the crown of Bohemia.

The chief city is Preslavv, which is built with a very great uniformity. The
inhabitants of the greater part of Silesia to speak the German tongue, the
rest the polonian language.

The country is hilly, yet has it many woods, and from the mountains of
Bohemia many rivers and brooks descending do take diverse passages through this
province, and increase the fertillitie thereof.

The gentlemen of this country are given to husbandry, which is not usual with
the gentlemen of other parts of Germany, and yet are they not-withstanding well
trained and exercysed in feats of arms.

SILESIA.
map of Silesia

AUSTRIA.
Austria, heretofore called the higher Panonia, has on the east part the
kingdom of Hungary, on the west it has Bouaria, toward the south the
mountains of Stiria, and on the north Morauia.

It is very fruteful, having many rivers and they for the most part do fall
into the river Danubius, which takes his course through this country. It has
such good store of wine that it therewith furnishes sundry other provinces of
Germany. The chief city is Vienna the walls whereof are said to have been
builded with the ransom that Leopold the duke did take of Richard the first,
King of England.

A little beneath the city of Greim there is in the river of Danubius a very
dangerous place for such botes and vessels as there do pas, the water whirling
about so very switftly: some have sought by line and plomet to have measured
the depth of this place, which hitherto none has been able to do, it is so
exceeding deep.

Polibius shows diverse reasons that through the heaps of sand scowred down
the rivers of Danubius Borystenes and others, the sea called Pontus Euxinus
(whereinto they fall) would be made innauigable, which experience the best
reason-teacher does show to be otherwise, and that sea no whit less nauigable
now, then in Polibius time.

Austria was first governed by Marck-graues, afterward by Dukes, and now lastly
by Archdukes.

AUSTRIA.
map of Austria

BOHEMIA.
THis kingdom lying in Germany, is compassed about with hills and woods, it
has on the north side Silesia, on the west Franconia, on the south Austria and
Bauaria, and on the east Morania.

The ancient inhabitants where the Boy, whereof the country took the name of
Bohemia, but by a people of Sclauonia they were vanquished. The language of
this country is not the German, but the Sclauonian tongue.

Prage is the chief city of this realm, now the more famous for the court and
residence of the Emperor. The river Multania vulgarly Vltania runs through
this city, and enters afterward into the river Albis, or Elbe. In wheat and
barley the country is very fruteful, beasts both wyld and tame it nowrisheth
in great abundance, among the wyld beasts are store of Bears, Reddeere, and
Ouroxen, this beast called the Ourox in the German tongue, and in the
Bohemian Lomi has growing under the neck as it were a bag, with water, and
being hunted; he casts forth thesaid water upon the hounds, who thereby
become as scortched or scalded. The country is rich in mines, which yield
gold, silver, quicksiluer, Iron, and sulpher. Stones of price and pearls are
here also found, wine it has reasonable store, and beer is here also used.

This kingdom was in former times a dukedom, until the year 1086, at what
time, as Munsterus says, the Emperor Henry the fourth made Vratislaus King of
Bohemia, howbeit some authors say that Vladislaus was the first King, and
advanced to that dignity by the Emperor Frederik.

BOHEMIA.
map of Bohemia

THE DIOCES OF SALISBVRG.
THis Dioces is in Bauaria, and the chiefest Bishopryke of the whole country,
it lies on the Southsyde of thesaid Duchy, and takes name of the city so
called, which is situated on the river of Saltza, the which coming from the
Alps passes by this city, and hereof some think the city it self to have
taken name, though others hold it to come of the salt pits out of which salt is
dug.

Julius Ceasar did here buyld a fortress calling it Iunania, which the
Germans in their tongue called Helfenberg, that is, the hill of help, aluding
therein unto the Latin name Iunania.

This place in the time and tyranny of Attila suffered great detriment.

S. Rupertus Bishop of worms having converted Theodon Duke of Bauaria to the
faith of Christ in the year 540, was the cause of the reparation of this
city, and became thereof the first Bishop, and there erected churches and
monasteries.

This Bishopryke has mines of gold, silver, copper, and Iron. Brimstone,
alum, and antimonie is here also found, and quarreys of marble stone.

The store of wyld beasts and foul do here yield much delight and exercise
of hunting and hauking. Among the Bishops of this Dioces, Bishop Ernestus (by
birth palsgraue of Rhene and Duke of Bauaria and a very learned man) is
renowned, for that he would travail abroad (yea into other countries unknown
and as a mean person) to do works of charity and piety.

THE DIOCES OF SALISBVRG.
map of the diocese of Salzburg

BAVARIA.
IN all Germany is not any province found where more and fairer cities are
then in Bauaria. The country is divided into 2 parts, to wit, the higher and
the lower Bauaria, It has on the northsyde Franconia, on the west Svvenia, the
Alps of Italy in the south, and Bobemia and Austria on the east.

The higher Bauaria which lies southward has diverse forests, lakes, and
rivers, and many wild beasts, as bears, wyld-swyne, and thowsands of stagges.
The cities of this part of the country are Monaco, where the duke most
resydeth, Ingelstat which has an university, Frising having a Bishops sea,
and sundry others.

The lower part is of both best inhabited, and through it passes the famous
river Danubius, the cities thereof are Regensburg, Passavv, Straubing and
Lantsbut etc.

The country is fruitful in wine, corn, cattle, and foul, but of all beasts
it most abounds in Swyne, whereof it furnishes diverse other provinces of
Germany.

If Strabe (who esteemed all Bauaria to be a wilderness) were now alive, he
might see it mightily changed: for that there are in it 34 cities, besides 46
fair marcket towns, 72 monasteries, and infinite thorps, castles, and lords
and gentlemen's howses.

Bauaria was sometime a kingdom, unto the time of the Emperor Arnulphus, for
then began it to be governed by dukes.

BAVARIA.
map of Bavaria

NORTGOIA.
THis province of Northgovv being accounted a part of Bauaria, lies on the
westsyde, next adjoining unto the forest of Bohemia. The chief city of this
country is Nuremberg, the castle whereof lying on a high place was sometime
called Castrum Noricum. The city is very strongly walled, having on the
walls 182 towers, it stands in a barten and sandy foil, but yet is very
rich, and has great trade and trasike through the great industry of the
people, whose Iron and copper woorcks are carried from thence almost to all
countries of Europe.

Some authors say that by the Emperor Conrade in the year 913 a Burgh-graue
was placed in this city, howbeit some apoint the time to have been in the
year 1140 by Henry then Emperor, but the burgers or citizens of Nuremberg for
a sum of money given by them to Frederic their fourth Burgh grave obtained the
government of the city to themselves, and left him to govern in the country
thereabouts.

In this province the Emperor Charles the great caused a ditch to be begone,
which should have been in length 2000 paces, and in breadth 300, whereby through
the help of the rivers Regnits and Altmul, he meant to have made a passage for
botes from the Danubius into the river of Rhene, which begone woork was
hindered by continual raynes, and the marishnes of the ground.

NORTGOIA.
map of Nordgau

FRANCONIA.
FRanconia, in the German tongue vulgarly called Franckenland has on the
southsyde Bauaria, on the west the river of Rhene, Bohemia on the east, and
Hassia and Thuringia on the north.

Out of this province according to the opinion of many very good authors came*
Faramond, with his Francks or Franc-men (so called because they were a free
people, and thereof since called Frenchmen) into Galia, which thereupon came
to lose that ancient name, and to be called France, and of some authors Francia
Occidentalis, or vvest-france, because this country of Franconia is called
Francia Orientalis, that is, East-france. Adriauns Iunius notwithstanding
holds a paradox that the Franckes that went out of Germany to inhabit Galia
did dwell much lower upon the east side of the Rhene. The most famous city of
Franconia is Franckford, where 2 very famous faires or martes are holden every
year, the one about midlent, the other in the midst of September. The
Emperor Charles the fowrth ordained Franckford for the place of the Emperors
election.

All Skirm-masters, to wit, masters of defense; through all Germany, must come
to this city, and be here allowed so to be, if by the burgers (which are
notable fensers) they are found to deserve tht name.

The Bishop of VVirtsberg is duke of Franconia. The country is pleasant and
fruteful, having store of vineyardes.

About the city of Bamberg grows so great abundance of Licoris that it is
transported thence with cartloades.

FRANCONIA.
map of Franconia

VVIRTENBERG.
THe dukedom of VVirtenberg in time past an earldome does join westward upon
the marquisdome of Baden, northward upon the territories of the Paisgraue of
the Rhene, and east and southward upon Svveuia.

It is very fertile and has many fair towns and thorpes, the principal
city is called Stutgard, and there the Duke keeps his court. There are such
fruteful vineyards about this city that the people have a proverb that if the
grapes of Stutgard were not gathered, the city would be drowned in wine.

Next unto this is the city of Tubing, which has an university, the which
was founded by the Earl Euerard in the year 1147. At the towns of VViltbad
and Zil, there are hot bathes, and at Gipping there is a fountain which
yeildeth water of a fine tartish savor which the inhabitants in their tongue do
call Saurbrun, which is in english, sower-bourne, or sower-water, and being
dronck it serves for a remedy against diverse diseases.

The castle of VVirtenberg whereof the country takes name is situate upon the
pleasant river of Neccar on the sides whereof grows a very good kind of wine
well known in German by the name of Neccar-vvyne.

VVIRTENBERG.
map of Wurttemberg

TIROL.
THis earldome of Tirol conteyneth a part of the Alps that deuyde Germany and
Italy, having on the northern side Bauaria, and on the southern side Italy.

The chief cities hereof are Inspruck, Bolzan, Tirol, Trent, Brixia, Bruneck
and Schvvatz.

This country is very rich in mines, and notwithstanding the hillynesse
thereof yet has it sufficient of all things for human sustenance.

About three German miles from the city of Trent lies a mountain called
Nausberg, which is in length 12 German miles and 3 in breadth.

Rodulph, the son of Albert Duke of Austria annexed by marriage this earldome
unto his other possessions, the same being also confirmed by the last will and
restament of the foregoing heir and possessor thereof.

TIROL.
map of Tyrol

SVITZERLAND.
SVitzerland called in Latin Heluetia, has on the southsyde Lombardy, on the
west side Sauoy, on the north the county of Burgundy and on the east the county
of Tyrol.

This people having taken all government from the Nobillitie, and divided the
country into 13 parts or Cantons, the magistrates of each chief town of these
cantons do govern the whole canton there unto belonging.

The 13 cantons are these, Zurick, Berne, Lucerne, Vri, Suits, Vndervvalden,
Zug, Glaris, Basel, Fribourg, Soleurre, Shafhouse, and Appenzel, and besides
these they are confederate with certain other jurisdictions. This country of
Suitzerland is held to be the highest land in all Christendom, and very
probably, for the exceeding high mountains thereof, from whence the rivers of
Rhene, Danubius, Po, Sone, and Rhosue, descending; do seek their passages
through lower regions, and hold their courses diverse ways, as the Danubie
eastward, the Rhene northward, the Po southeast, and the Sone and Rhosue
westward, which z rivers lastly joining in one do turn southerly and fall into
the sea at Marcels. It has many great lakes, one of them being upon a high
hill is not known to have any issue forth, nor by any channels coming to it to
be augmented.

There grows very good corn and wine, and such store of cattle is there
nowrished that oxen are sent thence to serve other provinces, both of Italy and
Germany.

SVITZERLAND.
map of Switzerland

ITALY.
Italy beginning in the northwest at the foot of the Alps, which deuydeit
from Germany and France extends it felf between the Mediteraneum and the
Adriatyk sea toward the foutheast, in the form of a man's arm. This famous
countries praise would rather require a large volume then so brief a
description as a page of paper will admit. The sweetness of the air, the goodness
of the earth, the fruteful vynes and olyue trees, the plenty of cattle, the
sweet rivers, lakes, and fountains, and the sea and havens about it, what
praise deserve they not.

There are in Italy very many fair and ancient cities, amongst the which the
chiefest is the maiestical city of Rome, whose glory both antiquity and
power has highly renowned over all the world.

The principal cities of Italy are commonly thus praised, Rome for holiness,
Naples for nobleness, Florence for fairness, Bononia for fatness of the
soil, Rauenna for oldnesse, Venice for ritchnesse, Milan for greatness, and
Genua for statelynesse. etc.

The people of Italy are generally very ingenious excelling in all excellent
arts and sciences.

ITALY.
map of Italy

FRIVLI.
FRiuli called in latin Forum Iulij, lies at the upper end of the Adriatyksea
or gulf of Venice, and not far from the city of Venice, on the east side it
has Istria, on the north the hills called Lapides, westward a part of the
Alps, and on the south the aforesaid sea.

This country has served for the door and entrance of sorrow and affliction to
it self and the adjoining countries, for that the Batbarians in times past did
here make their aryuall. It is on the one side plain and even, but afterward
it rises higher and higher, and grows steep up unto the high neyghbouring
mountains, it has notwithstanding fruteful feilds, and fair vineyards, much
wood both for fuel and maintenance of chase.

In the mountains are mines of all metals, as namely, Iron, Lead, Tin,
Quicksiluer, Silver, and Gold. There is also passing fair white marble taken
our of the quarreyes, and moreover Crystal, Beril, and other stones of price
are there found.

This country was subject unto the Romans so long as their gratnes endured:
afterward it was subdued by the Longobards, and governed by dukes, and now
lastly it belongs unto the Venetians, who account themselves the ancient
owners.

The chief city is Aquilea, sometime rich and famous, but since obscured
through the greatness and neerenesse of the city of Venice.

FRIVLI.
map of Friuli

ISTRIA.
IStria is almost a peninsula, it is situate on the upper end of the gulf of
Venice or the Adriatik sea, having the said sea on all sides save on the north,
for there it is joined with the continent of Croatia, and with the high
mountains thereof it is limited. In this province are sundry cities, the
chief whereof are Ca^od'istria, otherwise called Instinopolis, Parenzo, and
Pola, the later being famous both for the antiquity thereof and the
comodiousnes of the haven. It is said to have been builded by those of Colebe,
from whence the inhabitants of this country will seem to be descended, the
great antiquity in deed appears by certain Arckes and Towers yet remaining.
By Attila King of the Hunnes, this city (as many other) was sore spoiled.

About Cauod'istria the country is very fruteful, it brings forth wine and
oil, and has good meddowes for the nouriture of cattle, and it has also good
salt.

The high hill called Monte Maggior (which to the shipmen at sea does give the
first show of this country) is frequented by the apothecaries and seekers of
simples for the excellent herbs here growing, whereof some be very rare, as
else where scarsly or not at all to be found.

ISTRIA.
map of Istria

ZARA and ZEBENICO.
THe territory of Zara and Zebenico lying on the northeast side of the
Adriatyk sea (otherwise called the gulf of Venice) is almost an I Will but by
joining with the continent on the northsyde, it is a peninsula.

Zara was sometime called Iadera, it was a city where soldiers resided, strong
and foreseen of all necessary things, which was the cause of their often
resisting the venetians, and in fine their own subduing: In this city among
other antiquities, there lies the body of S. Simeon, which as says Peeter
Martyr of Angleria does yet remain whole and intyre, and that he wondered that
a dead body should so long remain whole and uncorrupted, which neither with
Mirrhe or any ointment has been conserved.

The city of Zebenico was of old time called Sic, it is not of that greatness
or fame that Zara is of, which is a fair and well built city and well situated
for the comoditie of the sea.

ZARA and ZEBENICO.
map of Zara (Zadar) and Sebenico (Sibenik)

THE DVKEDOME OF MILAN.
THis most pleasant part of goodly Lombardy confyneth eastward with the
territories of Parma and Cremona, westward with Piemont, Southward with the
mountains of Svvitzerland.

The city of Milan is the chief of all the cities of this duchy, and has
been even the balle of fortune to be tossed and transposed to and from somany
commanders. This city is very great, the buildings high and beautiful, and
the citizens excelling in all arts and sciences.

The Demo or great church is marvelous fair, being within and without
adorned with goodly imagery of white marble. The castle of Milan is held to be
the chiefest place of strength of all christendom. Many other notable cities
are in this duchy, and scarsly is their any one town or city to be found,
where the memory of war either at it or near about it does not yet remain.

The country is very even, having every where fine brooks of clear water
passing through it, as also some principal rivers, whereof the Po is the
chief, which beginning at mount Vesulus ends in the Adriatyk sea.

The soil is exceeding fruteful, and abundant in all things, as corn, wine,
flesh, fish, and all sorts of excellent fruits.

THE DVKEDOME of MILAN.
map of the dukedom of Milan

PIEMONT.
THis country is wholly on the west side and partly on the north and south
sides joined unto the Alps, and is the first plain and even ground that
begins at the foot of those mountains, and therefore rightly has the name
of Piemont: westward it joins unto the state of Milan, and is accounted as a
part of Lombardy.

It is a very pleasant and fruteful soil; yiedling good corn and wine, and
abundance of other necessary things, for human sustenance.

The chief city is called Turin, called heretofore Augusta Taurinorum, it is
very fair and beautifyed with goodly buyldings, containing both the court of
the Prince (who also is duke of Sauoy) the court of Parliament, and the
university. There are besides this city sundry other fine towns, strong
castles, and many villages. About a quarter of an Italian mile from the city
of Turin runs the famous river of Po. which in times past was called Padus
Eridonus.

PIEMONT.
map of Piedmont

THE TERRITORY of ROOM.
THis territory of Room long time since called Latium, is by diverse authors
diversely limited, but Leander begins it on the east side with the river
Liris, westward with the Tiber and Anien, and noorthward with the Appenynes.
This province has bin the beginning of the greatness of Italy, and the place
that has brought forth and fostered the greatest princes of the world.

The region is fruteful and watered with sundry rivers, diverse cities it has,
but the city of Room not only of this territory but of all the cities of
the world has achieved the greatest reputation. It was first builded by
Romulus in the year before the birth of Christ 751. It has contained within
it 7 hills, and the circuit thereof as says Pliny was 20 miles, and the
city and suburbs had 24 gates. There were also 734 towers about it, and in
them were the garrisons loged.

Now in our time is the ciruit of the city only 13 miles and it has some 365
towers.

Through the diverse destructions of this city it has bin mightily altered,
and the very form and fassion thereof wholly changed as also the number of
hills which in time of the heathen Emperors were named and reconed to be in
old Room, yet the river of Tiber (as of old) does still hold his course through
this city.

There are now to be seen many most goodly Palaces, fair Churches, and old
ruynes, the which ruynes do yet carry in them a certain maiesticall show of
that glory which in times past has been in this place. The residence of the
Pope is in this city and his chief Palace aioyneth unto the great Church of
S. Peeter. Besides all the Churches, and monasteries in Rome, there are more
hospitalles and places where all sorts of sick and diseased persons, are
relieved then in any other city in all christendom.

THE TERRITORY of ROOM.
map of the territory of Rome

THE TERRITORY of SIENA.
THis territore is accounted within the limits of Tuscane, howbeit lying at the
east end thereof, and having on the southsyde the Mediteraneum sea.

The soil is pleasant and fertile, yiedling corn, wine, oil, and other
fruits, The places toward the sea coast commonly called Maremma are not held so
good, by reason of the ilnes of the air, and are therefore the less inhabited.

The city of Siena whereof the territory takes name is very ancient, and
unto Pliny, Tacitus, and Ptolomey, was not unknown. Not only the gentlemen
but the gentlewomen also of this city are very studious (more then ordinarily
they are in other parts of Italy) and in their own tongue delighted in the
reading of books of philosophy.

In times past this territory was of larger bounds, and the inhabitants
maintained great war against the florentines, but at this present it is
subject unto the Duke of Florence.

THE TERRITORY of SIENA.
map of the territory of Siena

THE TERRITORY of PERVGIA.
THis territory is confyned in the north west with that of Elorence, southwest
with that of Oruieto, northeast with that of Vrbine, and southwest, with the
city and country about it of Assisie.

It seems a far of to be but a barren soil, but it is both fertile and
pleasant, full of towns and villages, and the air very good. Through the
midst of this region runs the river of Tiber, and not far from this river
(upon a hill) is the city of Perugia, whereof the whose territory takes
name: it is a strong city, and beautified with many fair edificies; as well
citizeus howses as churches: and in this city was borne the great and learned
lawyer Baldus.

The Lake of Perugia of the ancients called Lacus Trasymenus, is a very
pleasane lake, it is large and round in compass, not having any issue forth of
it, and it yeildeth abundance of good fish, but the taking fish thereout from
Easter unto the first of November is prohibited, to the end the increase of the
same be still maintained: about this lake are many Castles and villages, and
one among the rest of the villages is called Ossaia, where sometime the Romans
were by Hanibal overthrown, and this place seems to have the name of Ossaia
by reason of the bones of the there-killed Romans.

The lake conteyneth in circuit about 27 Italian miles, and in it are three
Islands two whereof are inhabited, with fishermen. There grows about the Lake
very good wine and great store of hemp and flax.

THE TERRITORY of PERVGIA.
map of the territory of Perugia

THE TERRITORY of ORIVETO.
EAstward from the territory of Siena lies this of Oriueto.

The air naturally is good, but is corrupted through the hemp which at
certain seasons* is laid to steep in the river of Pagia, where it yeildeth so
il a sent that it makes the very air noisome unto the inhabitants.

The town of Oriueto (which gives appellation to the whole territory) is
fituate upon a high rocky mountain, it is unwalled, but yet fortified by
nature through the strength of the place whereon it is buylt. It has a very
fair Church, the stone of the windows thereof being transparent so as the
son is seen through them.

There is among other imagery within the said Church the creation of Eve of a
rib of the side of Adam, which is held for so rare a piece of woorck that no
hand of man may amend it, The river Pagia runs close by the rock of Oriueto,
and afterward enters into the Tiber. Near unto Oriueto lies the mount
Pelio, which Leander weeneth to have taken name of the Pelij, which from the
mount Pelione in Thessalie came here to inhabit.

THE TERRITORY of ORIVETO.
map of the territory of Orvieto

THE MARCA of ANCONA.
THe Longobardes after their many victories in Italy appointed six rulers,
whereof four were dukes, namly, of Benevento, Spoleto, Turino and Friuli, the
two other were Marck-graues, the one of Ancona, the other of Treuigi: and
hereof it comes that this province sometime called Picenum is now named Marca
de Ancona, for Marck in duitsh betokens a limited province, and this on the
east side is limited by the river Tronto, on the south by the high Apenynes, on
the north by the Adriatyk sea, and by Romagna in the west.

The city of Ancona whereof the territory takes name lies on the sea
aforesaid, having a very good haven. The whole country is very fruteful, it is
stored with Orange and olive trees, and fair vineyards, and for the woorthynes
of the soil it is to be accounted among the best parts of Italy.

Between the town of Reccanato and the sea somewhat on a hilly place is the
famous church of our lady of Laureto, and in this church stands the hows (as
Leander writes) wherein the blessed virgin dwelt when she received the
salutation of the Angel Gabriel. This church is wonderfully enriched through
the gifts of many princes and other people that from diverse places do come
thither on Pilgrimage.

In the Appenyne hills (which in this province are higher then in the other
provinces of Italy where they extend) there is a grotte or deep cave where it
is said one of the Sibillaes had sometime her habitation. This Marca of Ancona
came to be of the territories of the Church in the time of Pope Clement the
seventh.

THE MARCA of ANCONA.
map of the March of Ancona

THE LAKE of COMO.
Within the bounds of Lombardy and on the north side thereof is the famous
lake of Como, called in latin Larius Lacus. This lake according to the account
of Strabo is 38 miles in length, and 4 in breadth, it lies north and south, and
at the south end thereof is the city of Como situated. About the midst of
this lake it extends as it were an arm toward the east. The river of Adda
passes through it, and as it were swimming over the own water of the lake.

There lies within it an Island called Comacina, which in former time has had
a strong fortress, wherein the Kings of Lombardy were wont to keep their
treasure and jewels, as in a place of good security.

Many towns castles and villages are placed about this lake, among the which
the city of Como is the most both of wealth and of fame, Out of this city
two lights have risen, whose glistering brightness has illustred their names
through the world, these I mean are the two Plinies, whose learning and
eloquence has merited their still during memory.

THE LAKE of COMO.
map of Lake Como

THE TERRITORY of PADVA.
THis territory is closed on the south side with the river Ladesse, on the
north with the small brook called Muson, with the gulf of Venice on the east,
and the Euganish mountains on the west.

Seven walled towns are belonging to Padua, and six villages, among the
villages Arquato Montanare is of fame, for having in the church thereof the
sepulcher of the renowned orator and poet Petrarcha, and thereon is his
epitaphe of his own making.

The city of Padua whereof the territory takes name; has of former time
been very famous, and one of the principal places of Italy: where unto the
ruynes which are seen in diverse places about it do give testimony, and among
these ruynes is the sepulcher of Antenor who is said first to have sounded it.

This city and country belonging to it after the many and different rulers
it has had is lastly come to be under the command of the Venetians, who have
repared the walls and strengthened them against the force of war: so as now
the mother rests under the fortnuate shadow of her daughter for that Venice
took first offspring from Padua.

Within this city, the phisisians have a marvelous fair garden, where in
are many rare herbs brought from far countries. Padua was the birthplace of
the right renowned Titius Liuius, as also of sundry other excellent persons.

The country about it is very pleasant, it yeildeth great abundance of corn,
which makes the purest white bread of all Italy: In like manner the wine
which grows here is very much esteemed, for the singular goodness thereof.

THE TERRITORY of PADVA.
map of the territory of Padua

THE IVRISDICTION of BRESCIA.
THis region whereof Brescia is the chief city, is bordered on the north with
the earldome of Tirol, on the south with the territory of Cremona, on the east
it has the Laga di Garda. and westward the country of Bergamo.

It is abundant in corn, wine, oil, and pleasant fruits. It has also mines
of Gold, silver, copper and alum: quarreyes of marble and much other good
stone. The hills, valleys, and plain grounds are so well inhabited, that
hardly is any province in all Italy better.

The city of Brescia commonly called the bryde of Venice, is both in old and
new books registered: and having passed many tumultuous changes; it now rests
under the tranquillity of the venetians.

There are in this country three lakes, to wit, Laga di Garda, Lago Idro, and
Lago D'Iseo. Lago di Garda does far exceed the two others both in same and
greatness, and is by old authors called Lacus Benacus, it is by tempests so
moved that it rather seems a sea then a lake, so high do the waves and
billows thereof arise. The river Sarca coming out of the mountains of Trent
does fall into this lake.

At such time as the venetians had war with Phillip Vesconte, Duke of Milan,
they found means to have their Galleys and other ships carried over hard and
steep hills, and so put into this lake, which was doubtless a wonderful
woork, and but that the verity is sufficiently known, might rather seem a
fable then a truth.

THE IVRISDICTION of BRESCIA.
map of the jurisdiction of Brescia

THE TERRITORY of VERONA.
THe town and territory of Verona being in Lombardy: is paled on the
northsyde with the Alps of Germany, on the west part it has the lake of
Garda, on the south the state of Mantua, and on the east the territory of
Vecentino.

Verona whereof the country about it takes name is accounted one of the chief
cities of Italy, and it is very ancient, having so fair a Theater that in all
Europe none is seen to have better withstood the force of devouring time then
this.

After the decay of the Roman Empire the Signorie of this city has been
under diverse different comaunders and it was 127 years governed by princes of
the noble family of the Scaligers. At this present it is under the rule of the
Venetians, and the strength thereof is much by them increased.

There is in this territoriea high hill called Monte Baldo which yeildeth great
variety of good and madicinable herbs which from thence are brought into
diverse regions.

Here are many pure and wholesome brooks and small rivers: one fountain among
other is not to be omitted, to wit, that in the valey of Policella by
Negarino, where in a hard stone is carved the two breasts of a woman; out of
the nipples whereof there issues continually certain drops of clear water,
which has so great virtue that a mother whose milk is dried up coming thither,
and washing her breasts with thesaid water obtayneth again plenty of milk.

The river Athesus, now called Ladice having but a small beginning in the
mountains of Trent, runs afterward so swiftly to Verona that through the
great swiftnes it is not nauig able yet running from thence in a more calmer
course it beats vessels, and entering into the gulf of Venice it makes there a
very good haven.

THE TERRITORY of VERONA.
map of the territory of Verona

THE TERRITORY of CREMONA.
THis territory lying in Lombardy is joined northward unto that of Brescia,
eastward with Mantua, south ward with Panna and Placenza, and westward with
Crema. The country is plain and even, and very fruteful, but abounding chiefly
in corn and wine.

The principal city is Cremona, and the name-giuer to the country about it,
rightly of the Poet Virgil it was called Miserable Cremona, in regard of the
many miseries which it has sustained, having been sundry times sacked and
given to the spoil of soldiers, the howses and palaces burnt, and the city
left waste and desolate. Afterward about the year 1248 it was again renewed,
and then was the high fair steeple builded that may be reconed among the
most accounted of in all Europe, howbeit after all this, this unfortunate
city came again to feel a new smarte, through the wicked wars of the
Gelphes and Gibellines.

Lastly; after many disastrous changes it came to be under the government of
the duke of Milan, and consequently now to belong unto the King of Spain.

It was first founded as says Tacitus in the time that Ti. Sempronius and P.
Cornelius were consuls, against the approaching force of Hanibal, and the Gauls
that inhabited beyond the Po, upon which notable river this city is situated.

THE TERRITORY of CREMONA.
map of the territory of Cremona

THE IVRISDICTION of CREMA.
THis jurisdiction is under the venetians, it lies in Lombardy, and has
confyning unto it from the east unto the west upon the south side, the state of
Milan: on the northwest side it joins unto the country of Bergamo, and
northeast unto the jurisdiction of Brescia.

The chief town is called Crema, the venetians have sought to have it made a
city (according to the right account of cities) but the townsmen for some
reasons have refused it, it is strong and beautified with fair buyldinges and
the inhabitants are very welthy, the country round about it is full of villages
and of many fair vineyardes, many fine and clear brooks do pas through it:
which do yield unto the inhabitants very good fish.

The most memorable thing of this city is of the long besieging thereof by
Fredericus Barbarossa, who in the end obtained and destroyed it, but after the
destruction of Cremona, this town of Crema was again builded up.

THE IVRISDICTION of CREMA.
map of Crema

TVSCANE.
TVscane in old time called Hetruria, and esteemed equal to the best parts of
all Italy lies al along from the south unto the west on the Mediteraneum sea,
on the northsyde it has Lombardy, and eastward a part of Latium.

Within the limits of Tuscane are diverse goodly cities, as Florence, Siena,
Pisa, Perugia, Viterbo, Luca, and others. Fair Florence is the first and chief
of all; where the duke of Florence who almost comaundeth all Tuscane, has his
principal residence. It is most pleasantly seated upon the river Arno, and by
thesaid river separated. The countty round about flourishes with fruteful and
beautiful trees, and yeildeth ahoundance of excellent commodities: within this
city are most goodly edifices, among which is the most sumptuous Church of
S. Maria Florida all of fair marble, there is also an old round temple of Mars
the gates whereof are of cast copper. There is the stately Palace of the Duke
before the which is a most goodly fountain with statuaes of white marble.

The famile of Medices has with sundry fortunes ruled this city, and the
rule thereof is still continued in that famile. The territories of Siena and
Perugia are in this epitome perticularly described.

The city of Luca albeit within the bounds of Tuscane is a free city and
state by it self. Viterbo lies not far from monte Fiascone, which yeildeth
the most excellent wine of all Italy. Pisa is situated somewhat near the sea,
and not far from the haven of Linorno.

TVSCANE.
map of Tuscany

THE KINGDOM of NAPLES.
AT the farthest and southeast end of Italy lies this kingdom of Naples, the
limits whereof are in the west the river Tr^nt^, in the north the Adritatyk
sea, the sea of Sicilia in the south, and the Ionish sea in the east. And
herein are enclosed besides a part of Latium, 8 of the goodliest regions of
Italy, as namely Terra di Lauora, Basilicata, Calabria inferiore, Calabria
superiore, Terra d Otranto, Terra de Barri, Puglia Piana and Abrazzo.

The country generally is mountanous yet are there also plain and even fields
and fair rivers, it is very fruteful, yiedling abundance of all necessaries,
it has also fair havens, as Gaeta, Taranto, Naples and Brindiso.

If we look into the histories of former ages we shall not see any known
kingdom in the world, that has seemed more vnforunate then this, having been
as it were the very butte whereat fortune has shot her sharpest-hedded
arrows, here have the Romans, the Goths, the Lougebards, the Greeks, the
Saracius, the Normannes, the Frenchmen and Spagniards, at several times, had
their several dominations.

It is at this present under the comaund of Philip the 3. King of Spain, who
has there his viceroy for the governing thereof.

The noble city of Naples which lends that name to the whole kingdom is
situate on the sea side, at the foot of pleasant hills, it is great and
spacious and inhabited with the nobility of the whole realm, who have herein
their goodly palaces and gardens, and so pleasant it is without the city by
reason of the fine walks and odoriferous trees that it seems an imitation of
Paradise.

Eight miles from this city lies the mount Somma of old called Veseuium,
accounted (though now it has left burning) among the burning mountains of the
world, and here Pliny the curious searcher of natural causes, showed himself
too curious, when of the fire he was consumed.

THE KINGDOM of NAPLES.
map of the kingdom of Naples

ABRVZZO.
THis territory lies on the north east side upon the gulf of Venice, other
wise the Adriatyk sea, and the other sides are limited with the rivers Tronto
Salino, and the Apenyne hills. From whence the name Abruzzo comes is
uncertain through the difference of opinions thereof.

This province is somewhat colder then the others of Italy, it yeildeth much
saffron (though not so good as that of England) and nowrisheth great store of
cattle.

It has sundry high and steep mountains, and that which is called Mount
Maiella is always covered with snow Monte de la Virgin is very famous for the
fair Church of the B. Virgin which is builded upon the highest part thereof.

The chief city is Aquila, but of no antiquity, Beneuento is very old, and
was first called Malenentum, as both Pliny and Liuius do witness, because the
wynd was there so forceible that a man fitting on horseback was thereby thrown
to the ground. Ortano is a place exceeding ancient, and there the ships out of
Epirus and Dalmatia do arryue with commodities for the fair or mart of
Lanciano, which lies 4 miles from the sea, and is a town of trafike. Sulmo is
well known through the famous poet Ovid, who here was borne, as himself does
tell us.

Ascoli is by Leander accounted among the chief towns of Abruzzo, and was the
birthplace of Ventidius Bassus, who of poor yea contemptible race (himself
being but a mule-keeper) was by the Romans made Consul, and a comaunder of
the world: of whose rising from so low estate to such greatness the poet Iuuenal
makes memory. Aquino where. S. Thomas the great divine and philosopher was
borne is also in this territory, and sundry other towns and cities of name.

ABRVZZO.
map of Abruzzo

SICILIA.
THis Island and kingdom lies in the Mediteraneum sea, and at the northeast
end thereof it is near unto the southeast end of Italy.

It is of diverse authors holden to have bin continent with Italy, and that the
force of the sea has broken through and divided it. It is a fertile country,
but most of all abounding incorne, where with sundry parts of Italy from
thence are served.

The whole I Will is divided in 3 parts, the first is called Valle di Demona,
herein is the city of Catania, more famous heretofore then at this present.
In this valley lies Mount Aetna, known through the world for the flaming syte
thereof, it was in opinion confirmed that the stuf or matter where through this
fire was caused was wholly consumed, and that therefore the fire was ceased,
but in the year 1536 the flame again burst forth to the great terror and
annoyance of the inhabitants there abouts. The city of Messino is also in
this part, having a comodibus haven and near thereunto is the dangerous
Caribdis, as much feared by sea as Aetna by land, but the danger is now far
less then of old, by reason that the hollow places on the land side being
stopped the sea yeildeth not such violence: and small botes may pas over there
as over a calm river.

The second part of the I Will is Valle di Mazzara and in it is the city of
Palermo and therein the Viceroy for the King of Spain with most of the
Nobility resideth there is a plain or spacious place, where Constanza
Normanna was delivered of Frederyk the second, under a pauilion, and would so
be delivered and not in any hovvs because it should not so be said that her
chyld-bearing was uncertain, or by stelth, and this she did for that she was
past the ordinary years of conception. The third part is Valle di Noto, and
heerin lies the ancient city of Syracusa, famous heretofore through the
infamous tyrants thereof. It is at this present much decayed.

SICILIA.
map of Sicily

SARDINIA.
THis I Will lies in the Midland or Mediterraneum sea, having Tunes in Africa
over against it; on the south side, and the I Will of Corsica on the north. The
air of this country is not held very pleasing, and espetialy in somer.

That side which lies toward Corsica is hilly, but that which is toward
Africa is more plain and even. It yeildeth much corn, and good wine, Olive
trees it has great store, but no oil is there made. Many horses are there
bred, and there are also wyld horses, which are less then the other, and of
less account. Here moreover is bred a certain heast called Musions, which in
other places is not found, the skin and hear thereof is like unto that of the
heart, the horns wreathing and turned like unto the horns of a ram, and it is
less in bigness then a heart it feeds and lives upon high mountains, and the
flesh of it is very good meat.

In this I Will grows the herb which in latin is called Ranunculus, the quality
whereof is such, that whosoever eats of it dies laughing.

Among the towns or cities of name of this I Will is Calaris, now called
Caglire, situate upon a hill upon the seasyde toward Africa, having a very good
haven, and in this city the Vice Roy has his residence.

SARDINIA.
map of Sardinia

CORSICA.
THis Island lies in the Mediteraneum sea having Sardinia ouer-against it on
the south side, and the state of Genna ouer-against it on the north.

It is nor easy to be manured by reason of the stonynesse of the soil, and by
reason of the hills that are in it, as writes Strabo, who adds withal that
the inhabitants (in his time) were of rude behauior: Howbeit they have long
since received the civility of Italy, and they are esteemed good soldiers.

It now brings forth very good wine, there are bred in it fair horses, and
hounds of extraordinary greatness; which serve for the chase of wyld beasts.
The Signorie or domination has sometime belonged to the Tirbenes, after that to
those of Carthage and lastly to the Romans, as Titus Liuius reports; and
under the Romans it remained until such time as the Saracins stretched over it
their powre-ful hands, but these being overcome by those of Genua, to Genua
was then the rule of this place transferred who kept thereof the government
until such time as those of Pisa gat it from the Geneuoises, from whom the
Geneuoyses, did in fine recover it again. It has moreover been belonging unto
the Church, but under those of Genua it now remains.

CORSICA.
map of Corsica

ISCHIA.
Diverse authors are of opinion this I Will now called Ischia and situate in the
Mediteraneum sea has heretofore bin firm land with Italy, and the lykelyhood
hereof appears by the rocks on the sea side toward Italy, where through the
hollownes of them it is seen how the sea has in length of time eaten out the
earth from among them, and also that the very soil and kind of earth is even
the same that is in Italy; on the side that is nearest unto this I Will. It is so
circuyted with stony rocks that there is hard coming to it and it also has a
very strong fortress; wherein Fernandino the son of Alphonso the second;
King of Arragon, retired himself, at such time as Charles the 8 King of France
was received into Naples.

It the year 1301 in the time of Charles the second King of Sicilia; certain
veins of sulphur (whereof this I Will is full) being kindled; the fire extended
diverse ways, and burnt a great part of the city of Ischia now called
Geronda, and through this fire which continued the space of 2 months; much
people and cattle were destroyed, and numbers of the inhabitants forced to flee
into the kingdom of Naples.

This I Will conteyneth 18 miles in compass, it yeildeth good wine, and in it are
diverse bathes of hot water.

ISCHIA.
map of Ischia

MALTA
SOuth from Cicilia lies this I Will of Malta (in the Mediteraneum sea) it was of
old called Melita: It is afaire I Will and well inhabited, on the sea toward the
southsyde thereof are highrocks* but toward the east and the north it is very
even and fruteful. It has a good haven where the knights of S. Iohnes
otherwise called the knights of Malta have builded a very strong town.

They of this order were called the knights of the Rhodes, but since the loss
of the Rhodes their residence has bin here.

There is mention made in the scriptures of this I Will by the name of Melita to
wit how S. Paul (in his journey from Jerusalem to Room) having suffered
shipwreck, came here on shore, and being bitten on the hand by a viper was not
hurt thereby: since which time as diverse authors do report, no viper or
venomous thing does live here.

The fame of this I Will has in our age been reuyued through the valor of those
worthy knights who to their vndying glory have so well defended it against the
attempts of the Turck.

MALTA.
map of Malta

CORFV.
THis Island of Corfu was heretofore called Coreyra, It lies at the mouth of
the gulf of Venice or Adriatyke sea, where the said sea conioyneth with the
Midland or Mediteraneum sea.

It is under the Venetians, who have in it a very strong fortified town called
by the name of the I Will. This place by the forces of Soliman the Turck was
besieged, at which time two venetian governors for the Signorie of Venice were
within it, and were of necessity constrained to put the unnecessary people
forth of it sin the night season) who remaining close without the walls,
between their mortal enemies and their vnhelpful freindes, their arose so great
a tempest and such continual rain that almost all the young children died
upon the laps of their mothers.

In fine Soliman being advertised by his Captains Barbarossa and Ajax that
the place was invincible, and that they were in despair ever to obtain it,
and fynding it to be so in truth; he leuyed his siege, and retired away his
forces.

During the being in this I Will of these miscreants they sent and carried away
with them into bondage and slavery (as writes Paulus Ionius) about 16000
christian souls.

CORFV.
map of Corfu

CANDIE.
THis Island of Candie of old called Creta, lies in the Mediteraneum sea and is
of great and ancient fame: the name it now has of Candia is of the chief
city thereof so called.

The country is full of hills and valleys, many woods there be, and most of
them of Cypres trees; which over the whole I Will do yield a sweet savor. Sirabo
and Pliny do write that in Creta (in english Creet) there are no damageable
beasts nor serpents. gotes there are great store, but no dear except about
Cydon.

The abundant vineyards of this I Will do yield excellent malmesey which is
thence transported into far countries and here also grows sugar.

Here only as Pliny faith grows the herb Dictamum where with the gotes (by
instinct of nature) know to cure themselves being wounded by the arrows of
the hunter. The 100 fair towns or cities that were of old reconed to be in
this country are now come unto three, to wit, Candia, Canea, and Rhetimo, but
in Candia the Potestate (that there administreth justice in behalf of the
venetians) has his residence.

The first inhabitants were rude and uncivil til Rhadamantus the son of
Jupiter did first bring them to oder and civility, after him came King Minos
who amended and amplyfied their laws.

Pordoneus says that on the northsyde of the I Will is a certain cave in the
earth; made by the hands of men; being 40 cubits in length and 4 in breadth
which to this day is called the grave of Jupiter, and there is his epitaph yet
to be seen.

CANDIE.
map of Crete

CYPRVS.
THis Island of Cyprus is one of the greatest of the Mediteraneum sea between
Sicilia and Syria, and it is the farthest I Will eastward of all the Midland sea,
and some think that it has been firm or continent land in times past with
Syria, and by tempests and force of the sea cut of and separated. It was of old
time called Macaria, by reason of the pleasantnes thereof. The chiefest
comoditie that it yeildeth is silk, which from thence in great quantity is
yearly brought unto venice. It has also very good wine and like unto the
malmesey of Creete, and salt is there also found.

It is said for a spetial comendation of this I Will that ships can therein be
buylt and wholly furnished with the own commodities of this country as not
needing to have ought unto them belonging to be brought from other parts: for
here are great and high trees both for buylding them and for their mastes, and
here is also pitch and flax, for fails and ropes.

Not far from the town of Lymise is a place which is so full of worms and
such like creeping vermin that no people can inhabit there. There is some
distance from this place a monastery wherein is kept many cattes which are let
out into the fields to diminish this vermin, and so taught, that by the sound
of a bell they are called home again unto the monastery.

There are in this I Will two famous cities, namely Famagosta and Nicosia, in
Nicosia the kings of Cyprus were wont to make their, dwelling but while the
venetians had the rule the Governor and garrisons their for them remained in
Famagosta, until such time as by Selym the Turkish emperor it was taken from
them. This I Will has been in tymss past divided into 9 kingdoms, but came
afterward to be all reduced unto one.

CYPRVS.
map of Cyprus

GREECE.
THis famous country of Greece was sometime called Hellas. It has on the west
side the Midland and Adriatyk sea, on the east side the sea called Archipelago,
on the south it has the Peninsula Morea and northward it is aioyned unto the
maine continent. The most famous Republykes hereof of old time were two, to
wit, that of Athens and that of Lacedemonia.

Sundry strange woundres have bin said to be in this country, as that the
river Melas made white sheep to become black and that the river Cephis made the
black sheep white, with sundry other things found to be no less fabulous:
and moreover that the sea called Euripus did in 24 hours 7 times ebb and
flow* so that Aristotle not wise enough to understand this secret of nature,
for shame and anger cast himself into the said sea, whereof it was said, that
because Aristotle could not comprehend Euripus, Euripus had comprehended
Aristotle.

Sundry most pleasant places were renowned in Greece of old time, as Helicon
and Parnassus, where Apollo with the nine muses had there residence. Hymeirus
ever green, Olympus, Pindus and Tempe, places exceeding delightful. Delphos,
where the Oracle was of Apollo, which was in this manner. In a rock was a deep
hole; out of the which issued a cold spirit like unto a vapor or wind; which
possessing the senses of the southsaiers they became as frantyke, and in their
frantiknes they ga^e their ambiguous answers to the demaunders, and foretold
things that were to come.

This noble country of Greece after all her flowrishing* lies now under the
subjection and stanery of the Turck.

GREECE.
map of Greece

ILLYRICVM.
Between the Adriatyke sea and the kingdom of Hungary were in old time two
famous regions, the one Illyricum, the other Dalmatia, but Illyricum being now
divided into many sundry provinces, as Schlauonia, Croatia, Carnia, or
Carinthia, Istria, Bosnia, etc. makes that the confynes of this country
(through diuersiue of the opinions of authors) are not easy to be set down.

Strabo says that this country has good havens, the soil is very fat,
divided into vineyards and Olive trees, exceptin certain stony places.

Among the country people some are found to have great bags growing under
their chinnes, which is said to proceed of their drincking of snow water,
which falls from the hills. The famous cities were Flamone, Segne, Iadere,
Scardone, Spalare and Epidaure, which being destroyed by the Goths, the
city of Ragusia is grown great through their ruynes, being now a city of
great trasyke, but of little territory, and accounted the least common weith or
republyke in the world, and is now under the protection of the Turck for the
which they pay a tribute of 12000 ducats by year.

In Carinthia is a city called Clagen, where they observe an old custom
albeit very rigorous, for if a thief be taken with the fact he is forthwith
hanged, without more a do: and they hang those also which are upon great
presumptious thought culpable of theft, and 3 days after judgment is given on
the case, and if the judges then find the party guylty is he left hanging on
the gallows til he fall thence, but if he be unguilty he is taken down,
and honestly buried, to make him amends.

ILLYRICVM.
map of Illyria

HVNGARIE.
THis kingdom begins on the south at the river Era, and on the north it
extends unto Polonia and VValachia, westward it joins to Austria, and
eastward unto Maesia. The people are strong and valiant, And scarsly is any
country found whereof the soil is more fertile, and the air more sweet and
temperate, or that has greater abundance of cattle and greater store of mines
then this, and wanting neither corn, wine nor great choice of excellent fruits
etc: in so much as diverse authors affirm if it were not so afficted through
continual war; but were wholly in the quiet possession of Christians it might
rather be preferred before all the provinces of the world, then after any one
of them.

Buda is the chief city of All Hungary, which King Sigismond beautified with
a fair Palace and other sumptuous edifices, Agria is also a comodious city
Cassouie is more ancient and so called after one Cassio a Roman. At Alba
regalis the ancient kings of Hungary are buried. But to the grief of all good
minds, the chief cities and best parts of this country are now in the
possession of the Mahometicall Tyrant.

The famous river danubie passes through this country, and in diverse places
is so large that in it are sundry Isles having rownes and villages in them.

The Emperor bears at this present the title of King of Hungary and has a
good part of the country and some good cities also in possession.

HVNGARIE.
map of Hungary

OZVVICZIN and ZATOR.
ON the south west side of Polonia bordering upon Silesia are these two
dukedomes of Ozwiczin and Zator.

In former time they belonged not unto the kingdom of Polonia, but were
brought unto it by Casimire the third, and Sigismond the first. The city of
Ozwiczin lies near the river Sola, which comes out of the confyning hills
of Morauia, and not far from this to wne falls into the river Vistula;
vulgarly called VVixel, The jurisdiction of the city the Germans call
Auschwitz, which King Casimire obtained by svvord-right in the year 1454.

The town of Zator is situate on the river Skauda, which falls also into
VVixel, and was gotten through force by King Sigismond the first, and so
annexed unto Polonia.

OZVVICZIN and ZATOR.
map of the dukedoms of Owicim (Auschwitz) and Zator

TRANSSILVANIA.
THis country called in latin Transsiluania; is of the Germans called
Seuenbergher-Lant, that is, the Seuen-hily country, of seven principal hills
where with (among other that be lesser) this country is enuyroned, It
confyneth on the west side with Hungary, and has Moldauia and VValachia
joining to it on the northeast and southeast.

The country albeit mountainous is very good, yiedling both corn wine and
cattle very abundantly. There are in it wyld oxen which have beardes under
their chinnes, and wyld horses whose manes do hang down to the ground. Mines
there are also both of gold and silver.

The chief city is called Hermenstat, but Alba-Iulia is the oldest.

The people are very valiant, and have been very victorious against their cruel
eastern neighbors the Turcks, from whose invasions they are much defended
through the mountains that enuiron the whole country even as a city is
enuyroned with a wall. The Ceculiernes are esteemed most valiant, these have
among them no difference between gentlemen and boores, but live all in an
ordinary state, Part of the Transsiluanians do speak the German tongue, but
these the Hungarian.

The Prince of this country is called the Vayuode and these vayuodes were wont
to be placed there by the kings of Hungara.

TRANSSILVANIA.
map of Transylvania

PRVSSIA.
THis country bordereth eastward on Lituania, southward with Polonia, northward
with Liuonia, and westward with Pomerania.

The Knights of the Teutonic or Duitsche order have here borne great
anthoritie, the which at last by the King of Polonia was abridged. Albert
Marck-graue of Brandenbeurg was the last great-master, who by an agreement with
k. Sigismond of Polonia left his habit and held this country in see of the
King, and so became duke thereof. It is now denyded into 2 parts, the one
belonging unto the King of Polonia, the other unto the duke of Prusia: who
keeps his residence in the city of Coningsperg. The sea shore of this
country does yield the fairest sort of amber, the which is as well drawn up out
of the sea with nets; as gathered on the sea side.

The country is marvelous abundant in corn and cattle, and well furnished with
fish, it has great store of woods and wildernesses. There are many Bears,
stagges, wyld swyne, and wyld horses, and a greater kind of buffulaes then are
in Italy or other parts, the wyld horses are never tamed being found not
serviceable through their weakness of back.

The beast Alces is heerfound, who resembles the horse in proportion, and the
heart in horns, saving that the horns be more brother, and are yearly cast;
and new grow again. In the woods and wildernesses are great store of bees,
which yield abundance of honey and wax.

PRVSSIA.
map of Prussia

POLONIA.
VVestward is this kingdom aioyning unto Germany, northward unto the Baltish
sea and Prusia, eastward unto Lituania, and southward unto Hungary.

It is divided into 2 parts, the greater and the lesser, the greater lies
toward the north, the lesser toward the south. Cracouia is the chief city,
and there the King keeps his court* it is also an university. Danske which
lies on the Baltish sea is a cittieof great trafike of merchandise espetialy
of corn the other cities are but meanly builded and of no great same.

The whole country is plain and vnhilly and therefore of the inhabitants
called Pole, which in their tongue signifies plat or plain. The people of
Polania, Lituania, Samogithia, Masouia, Volhini, Podolia, Russia and Moldauia,
are those which of old authors were called Sarmates. Lituania is great, but not
greatly inhabited, a beast is there found called Rosomacka, of the ordinary
bigness of a dog, having a face lyk a cat, and a tail lyk a fox, it feeds on
carren, and being full it forces it felf to pas between the narrownes of 2
trees and thereby voydeth all that it has eaten, and then goes to eat again
and returns to void it as before, and continues so long as* the carren (that
it feeds upon) lasts. Samogithia joins to Lituania, the country is cold,
and the people are strong and helthful, and do fare hard. Massonia yeildeth
much honey, and the inhabitants make their drinck therewith. Volhinia is very
fertile and full of towns and vilages. Podolia is of corn and gras so
abundant that the lyk is not known. Russia abounds in horses, oxen and
sheep. In this country in somer are certain woormes called Ephimere, which
being newly bred, do in the morning run upon the water, at none they have
wings and fly above the water, and they die before the Son setting: of these
woormes Aristotle speaks in his first book of beasts. Moldauia is a part of
walachia, the chief city is Sotschen, the people are good soldiers, is it
said that the regents of this country do cause their young children to be
marcked with hot irons, that thereby their descent may the more certainly be
known.

POLONIA.
map of Poland

LIVONIA.
LIuonia called in the German tongue Lysland lies on the eastsyde on Russia,
on the westsyde on the Baltish sea, northward an arm of the sea seperateth it
from Eniland, and southward it bordereth upon Prussia.

The chief city of this country is Riga, which is a place of great trafike,
as are the other principal places of Revel, and Narua.

The country is somewhat sandy, and not mountanous. Great woods there are, and
store of wyld beasts, as foxes, Martres, Sables, Ermynes and hares. It
yeildeth* wax, honey, wheat rye and furs. The people are not greatly
industrious nor wholly civil. The faith of Christ was preached unto them about
the year 1270, and diverse of the rude people are yet heathenish nor letting to
pray unto the Sun, and to the Moon, or to some great tree, or to one thing or
other, according as their blind folly leads them. When one of them is dead
they put with him into his grave an ax, bread, wine and meat, and some piece of
money, and bid him go his ways into the other woorld* where he shall reign
over the Duitschmen as they have reigned over him in this. They are subject
unto a certain order of Germane knights, that do rule and govern them. The
great master of which order keeps his court and residence at VVenden a town
situate in the midst of the country.

LIVONIA.
map of Livonia (Latvia and Estonia)

THE NORTHERN REGIONS.
THe Septentrional regions of Europe that hitherto are known, are first that
which is called the I Will of Scandia, which conteyneth the kingdoms of Sweden,
Norwey and a part of Denmarck: then the famous I Will of Albion, containing
England, Scotland, and Wales, and then are there the Isles of Ireland,
Friesland, Island Groeneland, Grecland, etc. and the rest yet undiscovered. Of
all which regions the realm of England is the principal and best part, by
reason of the goodness of the soil, and myldnes of the air, in that it lies
more to the south then any of the other.

Sweden is a country very mountanous, full of lakes and rivers, and abundant in
cattle and fish, having also mines of silver, copper lead and Iron. The chief
city thereof is Stokholme, builded upon pyles of wood, on the sea shore.
Norwey extending in length north and south has the Deucalidon Ocean on the
west side, and Sweden on the east, being from the same separated by high
mountains.

This country is full of rocks, howbeit the goodliest oaks of the world do
grow there, and thereof the wainscots and clabords are made. The chief city is
called Berghe.

The I Will called Frisland is not well known yet seems is about the bigness of
Ireland.

Island is famous through the great store of dried fish which is fetched
thence, and the burning hill Hecla. Groeneland is a very great I Will, and the
people by reason of the coldness of the country are feign to make their
dwellinges in the earth.

The further parts are yet undiscovered, and so is the I Will which Mercator
calls Grecland, and sundry other lesser Isles of these farthest northern
regions.

THE NORTHERN REGIONS.
map of the northern regions of Europe

RVSSIA or rather MVSCOVIA.
ON the north side this country has the Icysea, on the east side it has
Tartarie, on the south a part of Polonia and a part of Turkey, and on the
west Liuonia and the kingdom of Sweden.

The country is very great, it is for the most part even, and has many
meddowes, and in the Somer many standing waters; caused through the melting of
the snow. The black forest of Germany extends it self into this country, and
passes through it from the south to the north: in it are great store of wyld
beasts, as Elends, bears, black wolves etc. Wine or oil grows not here,
but wheat rye and other grain. Great store of wax, and honey it yeildeth, the
which is not made in hines, but in hollow trees. Mines they have not, nor
precious stones that there are found, but costly and fair furs good store,
and also flax.

The chief city where the great Duke or Emperor keeps his court is very
great and called Musko, lying on the river Musk^a: the howses are built all of
wood, not high but large, euety hows having a yeard or garden plot belonging
unto it. They are Christians, but of the Greek Church, and their date they use
not from the time of Christ but from the beginning of the world.

Their laws are very plain according to an ancient simplicity, no advocates
are admitted, but every man to tell his own tale for himself.

RVSSIA or rather MVSCOVIA.
map of Russia or Muscovy

TARTARIE.
AS there is a Sarmathia in Europe, so is this part of Asia (where the
Tartarians inhabit) also so called. It has on the northsyde the Scythian sea,
on the east the Eoish or east sea, on the south it has India, and on the west
the Caspium sea and Muscouie.

The country is wonderful great and spacious, having in it marvelous great
deserts, the people live not in towns or vilages but in tents; and remove
their dwellinges according to the seasons of the year, they eat sheep, kyen
and horses, their drink is water, milk and beer brewed with barley.

Sigismond Baron of Herbestein in Germany, recouneth to have understood of
Demetrius Daniel a man of much reputation among all the muscouites, that in the
country between the rivers of VVolga and Laick a certain feed (much like unto
the seed of a melon) being cast into the ground grows forth about 2 foot
high, and bears a most strange fruit like unto the shape of a lamb, which of
the people there abouts is called Bonarets, the stalk goes from the nauel into
the earth and there has his root: it has head, ears mouth, eyes and legs
and seems to have blood within it, but not flesh, for the substance is like
unto the meat of a creuis, it is covered with a thin skin it consumes the gras
or herbs growing about it, and endures so long as they last, the woules and
other raneuous beasts belight much to feed on this beast plant, and if this be
true (as it is for a truth reported) it is one of the most wonderful miracles
of nature. The royal palace of the great Cham who is Emperor of Tartarie is in
the city of Cambalu in Cathay, which city is buylt fouresquare and in
compass said to conteyne 24 German miles. The country is in sundry places so
very even and plain that wagons having sails like unto ships are driven
forward by the wind.

TARTARIE.
map of Tartary (north and central Asia)

CHINA.
THis great country of China lies in the furthest eastern side of East India,
over against the Island of Iaponia, on the northsyde of it lies Tartarie, on
the southsyde Canchinchina, on the west the Brackmani, and on the east the
Oriental sea.

The country except on the sea side is with a wall and mountain compassed
about, and is exceeding good and fruteful, and the people wonderful
industrious. It has plentiful mines of Gold, and store of Rheubarb. The
fields and hills are full of beasts both wild and tame, the sea and inland
rivers very fish-ritch, and numbers of familes dwell on the rivers in botes, and
do nowrish exceeding store of ducks. The dry grounds they sow with wheat and
barley, the moist and low grounds with rice and that 4 times in the year. no
part of the country lies unused to some profit, the very hedges are of roses,
and some of flax. They have great store of mulbery trees to the maintenance of
their silk worms. The inhabitants do sildom travel into other countries, and
other nations come not into theirs, but by espetial license. They eat not
setting on the ground as other people of Asia are wont, but at tables.

They are heathens in religion and believe that al things have been created.
They pray to the Sun, Moon and Stars, and also to the Devil to do them no
hurt: their priests marry not, but other men have as many wives as they will,
yet must keep hows only with one. They call their King the lord of the world
and the son of the Sun who when he goes to the field against the great Cham
of Tartarie, his army conteyneth 300000 foot and 200000 horse. Some say they
have long since had artillery and printing, but that they had artillery before
it was known in Europe is doubtful, printing they have had, but not such as
may be compared with the excelencie of ours, theirs being no other then
carractered stamps or forms of wood, and those thrust down (on their sort of
paper) as we use to seal our letters or set a marck or stamp.

CHINA.
map of China

INDIA.
ALl authors do hold East India for the noblest and greatest country couteyned
under one name. Tartarie only excepted.

It takes name of the river Indus, and of Strabo and Pliny, India is limited
by the river Indus in the west, with the mounts Tauri in the north, with the
Eoish sea in the east, and with the Indian sea in the south. It is a land most
fair and wholesome, yet the temperature somewhat different in sundry provinces,
by reason of the greatness thereof. It yeildeth fruit twice in the year,
freeing thereby the inhabitants from hunger and poverty, vast and steril
places there are also in India, but they serve for the habitation of sundry
sorts of wyld beasts.

And albeit no great store of corn grows here; yet has is barley and rice
and the Indians by rice, cheese milk, flesh, fish and delicate fruits, are
nowrished, and besides their store of frutebearing trees, they have great
reeds or canes whereout white honey like unto gum is pressed. Silk is here in
great abundance, beasts both wyld and tame are in infynit numbers, and
greater then in other places of the world, as Kyen, Camels, Lions, Dogs,
Elephants, there are also dragons and serpents, white apes, and camelions that
live by the air: and all sorts of the best kind of foul.

The spyces of India are known to all the world, Heben wood grows here and
the trees that yield frankensence: the shores or sides of the rivers do deliver
gold, and the sea fair pearls. Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Amatistes, Agates
and sundry other sorts of precious stones are found in this noble country.

The inhabitants of India are of different languages, different in apparel and
of different religions, some being Christians, some Mahometaines, some Jews
and some Pagans, The people are generally talle of stature, strong, and of a
tawny or brown color, and many do live to 130 years or thereabouts.

INDIA.
map of India

PERSIA.
THe name of Persia is very ancient, but the country was in times heretofore
far less then it now is. It has on the eastsyde of it part of Tartarie and
part of East India, on the south side, Sinus Persicus and part of the Indian
sea, on the west side it confyneth with the dominions which the Turk now
occupies in Asia, and on the north it has the Caspium sea etc.

The beginning of the greatness of this kingdom was in the year 1269, when a
noble persian of the city Ardenelim named Sophi (being also a Mahometain)
revolted from the Turk and beganby war to conquer countries, and his successors
have since both augmented their possessions and continued the great quarrel;
about the right successor of Mahomet.

The Persians are a more humane people then the Turks, not being so rigorous
against the Christians which live among them, and having among them noble and
gentlemen which the Turks have not. The country is very fruteful, except in
the mountanous and desert parts.

It yeildeth abundance of fine silk, and the best Iron for armor, and steel
for arms, of the whole world; is here found.

It has also rich mines, precious stones and pearls, and the fertillitie
thereof in many places may be compared unto that of the neighboring India.

PERSIA.
map of Persia

TVRKIE.
THe Turkish Empire, conteyneth the foutheast part of Europe the northeast of
Africa, and the southwest of Asia: so as it lies where these 3 parts of the
world do meet, and takes a part of each of them: howbeit the fargreater part
is in Asia, which far exceeds the parts both in Africa and Europe.

At Constantinople (which is in Europe) the great Turk keeps his residence.
This city was taken by force of Mahomet the eight Turkish Emperor, upon the
last day of May in the year 1453. after it had been besieged 54 days: and
after sundry other victories this Mahomet died on the first day of May in the
year: 481, and was buried in the said city of Constantinople.

In Europe is subject unto the Turk the greater part of Hungary, all
Bulgarie, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Morea, and sundry other provinces.

In Africa, Barcha and Egypt, besides the kings and kingdoms there tributarie
unto him. In Asia he has Natolia, and the two Arabiaes: and to the great
grief of Christians the country of Palestyne, where Christ our savior lived
and died, and many other provinces to long here to describe.

Both Christians and jews are suffered to live in this Turkish Empire under
tribute, and albeit the Turks do carry somewhat a better opinion of Christians
then of jews, yet are the Christian inhabitants subject to very great
inconveniences. The Turks according to the law of their great reputed prophet
Mahomet, are circumsised, they are forbidden to drink wine, and to eat swynes
flesh, and allowed to have many wives.

TVRKIE.
map of the Turkish (Ottoman) Empire

PALESTYNE.
THe old pagan authors called this country Palestyne, the Jews called it The
land of prontis, and Christians have termed it the Holyland.

It has al along on the west side the Mediteraneum sea, on the east side
Arabia, northward it has Mount Libanus, and southward it reatcheth down
toward Egypt and the Red sea.

This country was denyded among the 12 trybes of Israel, but after the time of
King Solomon it was denyded into a kingdoms. In this most noble country lived
the holy prophets. And the Son of God did here receive human flesh.

It was in former times so excellent above other countries that it was called
the land that flowed with milk and honey, but it is now greatly altered, the
sins of the inhabitants having deserved no better. Burcardus says that it
yet excels in yiedling abundance of pure wheat, and that with little
laboring of the ground. Roses, Sage, fenel and other flowers and herbs do
without the industry of man grow in the feilds.

The river of Jordan having his issue under Libanus runs through the lake of
Genazareth into the dead sea: the country half a days journey every way from
this sea is barren: by reason of the evil vapors and sauouis thereof. It
seems to have the name of Mare Mortuum because there is in it no living thing.

The ancient and famous city of Jerusalem is situate in a hilly place, Mount
Syon lies on the southsyde and Mount Gyon on the west. By the increased
greatness of this city the holy sepulcher wherein Christ was buried (having a
church built over it) is now within the walls. The mount of Caluarie whereon
our Lord was crucified is 108 foot from the grave, and there is a pauement to
pas from the Chruch to the place where the cross did stand, which rises in
height to 28 foot, and on the same rock the clifts and rentings do yet appear
which hapened at the death of our dear lord and savior.

PALESTYNE.
map of Palestine

NATOLIA.
NAtolia extends it self from Asia (where unto on the eastsyde it is aioyned)
and lies in length westward toward Europe, having on the northsyde Mare
Maggiore, and on the south the Midland sea, and at the west end the sea called
Archipelago. The Turks who now possess it do call it Little Asia. It
conteyneth Phrygia, Galathia, Bithinia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia,
Lycia, Magnisia, Capadocia and Comagena: all goodly countries and ancient
renowned provinces, some of them Kingdoms, yea a particular Empire of
Trehizonde; whereof Nicomedia heretofore a most noble city, appears now
but in the ruynes thereof. Nyce is also here to be seen where the famous
great Council heertofore was holden. Amasia is the chief city of Capadocia,
and was the birthplace of Strabo the wel-knowne Cosmographer. And the renowned
martyr and Patron of England S. George, was also of this country of Capadocia.

In Natolia are gotes which have that fine hear or rather wolle whereof the
thamlets are made. There are also sheep whose tails are of incredible
greatness, and conteyne 5 or 6, yea 8 or 9 pound of flesh. A certain beast
there is which is called Hyena, which draws dead bodies out of the graves
unto his den and their feeds on them, it is about the bigness of a wolf, and
the people of the country are of opinion that these beasts do understand their
speech, espetialy when they go about to catch them. These people are generally
held to be very crafty falls and deceatful.

NATOLIA.
map of Anatolia (Asia Minor)

EGYPT.
THis rich and ancient kingdom has on the north side thereof the Midland
sea, on the east the desert of Sues and the northern end of the Red sea, on
the south the country of Nubia, and on the west the land of Barcha.

In this country of Egypt it raineth not, but the river of Nyle ouerflowing it
at sundry times does make it of great fertility, and in the said river is a
pillar of marble whereon are made certain marks of the height that the water
does arise unto when the year will prove plentiful. The river is deep, and
great ships may pas on it, the great serpent called the Crocodile lives here;
and eats both men and horse and the fish of the river. The greatest city is
called Cairo or Alcaire, and it is marvelous great and of great wealth. Not far
from hence are the most wonderful Pyramides, upon the greatest whereof as
Pliny writerh 2060 men did continually woork for the space of 20 years, they
are builded four square, and from the foot unto the top do still grow sloping
less and less: a man standing on the top (for there is some space to stand or
go) and shooting a bolt out of a crosbow, the bolt in falling down will light
on the same Pyramide, which argues the greatenes of the space it carries
beneath at the foot, which greatness also apeereth in that it never yeildeth any
shadow from it. These Pyramides have been buylt by the ancient kings of Egypt,
to serve for their sepulchers and these sepulchers the Egiptians used for the
conservation of their dead bodies, which even at this present are found
vnrotten, and the flesh of them is called Mummia, and carried thence into other
countries to be used in medicyne.

The 2 principal sea-hauens of Egypt; are Alexandria and Damiata.

EGYPT.
map of Egypt

THE port of CARTHAGE.
THe country enuyroning the gulf of Golette otherwise called Sinus Cartha
ginensis; having at the south end thereof the city of Tunis is now after the
name of that city called the kingdom of Tunis.

It lies on the northsyde on the Midland sea, and almost directly over against
Sardinia, on the west it extends to Algiers, and eastward to Mesurata, and
all along on the southsyde it has the mountains that separate Barbary from
Biledulgerid.

This kingdom conteyneth 5 provinces, to wit, Bugia, Constantine, the
jurisdiction of the city of Tunis, Tripoli and Ezzab.

On the west side of thesaid Gulf are the ruynes of an aquaduct of the Ancient
city of Carthage, whereof but some sew ruynes else are left behind to testify
that once so famous a city has flowrished in that place, some number of
howses village-lyke to that it has bin, and about 25 shops of merchants are
now there to be found.

This city of Carthage is a true glass wherein the incertitude of this vain
world may be seen, and that no glory on earth can have everlasting durance.

THE port of CARTHAGE.
map of the port of Carthage

ABISSINE or the EMPIRE of PRESTER-IOHN.
THe great King and comannder of all Aethiopia and sundry other kingdoms and
countries is called of Christians Proster John, of the moors Arictabassi, and
of his own people Acegue, that is; Emperor.

His dominions are limited on the southsyde with the Mountains Lamae, on the
west with the kingdom of Congo and the river Nyger, etc. on the north with
Nubia and Bugia, that confyne upon Egypt, and on the east with the Red sea and
Synus Barbaricus.

The country generaly is very fruteful, and albeit there be little corn yet is
there other grain and other good fruits not found in Europe, vineyards they
have, but no olyue trees, yet make they oil of an herb called Gena. Of honey
and wax they have marvelous great store. They have al sorts of great beasts
as Elephants, Lions, Camels, horses, red-deere, kyen gotes etc. and they are
much endamaged by great multitudes of grashopers. Good mines of metals they
have, but not theskil to make use of them. They have 2 summers and 2 winters,
which are not greatly denyded by heat or cold, but by rainy and fair wheather.
The people are of a kind of tawny color, unseen in notable scyences, and
without knowledge of Physic. They have no coined money, but use pieces or wedges
of gold by weight. They are Christians, but hold many gross errors, both men
and women are circumsised, and they are Christened at 40 days old. They have a
book which is divided in 8 parts: which they believe the Apostles to have
written before their departure from Jerusalem. Mo^nasteries they have many,
both of men and women, wherein they do live stricktly, but it is lawful for
lay men to have 2 or 3 wives at once and deuorcements are also allowed. The
Emperor affirms him self to be descended from the line of King David, he has
no one settled place of residence, but remoueth from one province to another and
dwells in tents.

It is said he is not of the color of his people, but of a whyter and fairer
skin. He may surely be accounted one of the greatest princes of the world and
is esteemed able to bring to the feld a million of men, 500 elephants and a
great number of horses and camels.

ABISSINE or the EMPIRE of PRESTER-IOHN.
map of Abyssinia or the Empire of Prester-John

BARBARY.
ON the northsyde of Africa all along by the Mediteraneum sea and oueragainst
the south parts of Spain France and Italy, lies this country of Barbary.
and al along on the southsyde thereof are certain woodie mountains that
deuyde it from Biledulgerid, and in these hills are great store of wyld
beasts.

This country of Barbary is held the best and most fruteful part of Africa
and conteyneth 4. kingdoms or rather in deed provinces to wit Maroco, Fez,
Telesine and Tunis.

The inhabitants are of a duscish color and are called Barbarians of the word
Barbara which in the Arabee tongue signifies grumbling; because their speech
sounds in the ears of the Arabians as no perfect or clear pronunced speech,
but as a kind of grumbling, they were first Idolaters, and afterward converted
to the faith of Christ, yet at the length they came to Mahometisme wherein they
yet continue, and are for the most part subjects or tributaries to the Turck
except some few places which are in the possession of the King of Spain.

BARBARY:
map of Barbary

FESSE and MAROCCO.
AT the west end of Barbary are thease 2 kingdoms of Fesse and Marocco: that
of fesse lies of the twain more toward the north and the Mediteraneum sea,
that of Marrocco more inward and toward the south. The realm of Fesse takes
name of the chief city thereof, which is so called, and it is the greatest
city of all Barbary having in it 500 Moschees, to wit churches, wherein
their Mahometical service is said, for the inhabitants are Mahometaines as
those of Marocco also are, they are discourteous and uncivil, espetialy toward
strangers: they are of a pale-tauny color, and often subject unto agues by
reason of the vnhole somnes of the air.

The city of Marocco whereof that kingdom also takes appellation is not as
it was of old, having lost the third part of the wonted greatness thereof; as
the yet remaining ruynes do testify, and where were wont to be goodly edifices
there are now gardens and groves of palm trees. That which does now retain
any beauty therein; is the royal palace which the King Mansor caused to be
builded.

FESSE and MAROCCO.
map of Fez (Fes) and Morocco

THE TABLE.
A
AByssine 108 Africa 4 America 5 Ancona 71 Andalusia 12 Aniovv 20 Asia 3
Abruzzo 80 Artois 37 Austria 52

B
Barbary 109 Bauaria 55 Bohemia 53 Berry 21 Brabant 39 Brandenbourg 49 Brescia
74 Britannia 18 Burgundy county 26 Burgundy Duchy 27

C
Calis and Bullen 29 Candie or Creet 87 Carthage port 107 China 100 Como lake
72 Corfu 86 Carsica 83 Crema 77 Cremona 76 Cyprus 88

D
Denmarck 47 Ditmers 46

E
Egypt 106 England 6 Europe 2

F
Fesse 110 Flanders 40 France 15 Franconia 57 Friuli 62 Friesland 44

G
Gades 14 Gasconie 16 Geldres 41 Germany 32 Greece 89

H
Henalt 36 Holland 43 Hungary 91

I
Illyricum 90 India 101 Inferior Germany 33 Ischia 84 Istria 63 Ireland 8
Italia. 61

L
Larius lake 72 Liege 34 Limousin 22 Lituania 95 Liuonia 96 Lorraine 28
Lutzenburg 35

M
Malta 85 Marroc 110 Milan 65 Misnia 48 Mosscouie 98

N
Namure 38 Natolia 105 Naples 79 Nortgoia 56 Normandy 19 Northern Regions 97

O
Orange 23 Oruieto 70 Ozvviczin 92

P
Padua 73 Palestyne 104 Persia 102 Perugia 69 Picardia 31 Piemont 26 Poictou 17
Polonia 95 Pomerania 50 Portugal 11 Prouence 25 Prussia 94

R
Room territ. Russia 98

S
Salisburg Dioces 54 Sardinia 82 Sauoy 24 Saxony 48 Scotland 7 Sclauonia 90
Siena territ 68 Sicilia 81 Silesia 51 Spain 10 Suitzerland 60 Sweden 97

T
Tartarie 99 Tercera 9 Thuringia 48 Tirol 59 Transsilunia 92 Tunis 107 Turkey
103 Tuscane 78

V
Valencia 13 Vermandois 30 Verona 75

VV
Westphalia 45 VVirtenberg 58 The World 1

Z
Zara and Zebenico 64 Zator 92 Zeland 42

AN ADDITION OF CERTAIN MAPS UNTO THIS EPITOME OF THE THEATER OF ABRAHAM
ORTELIVS.

LIMAGNE.
THis region conteyneth the best part of the country of Auuergne: It is most
pleasant and delectable, with goodly forests, pure fointaines, hot bathes,
mines of silver and many sorts of good fruits and in it is a certain water
that turns things cast into it into stone. Here in is the chief city of
all Auuergne called Clerment, the which francis Belforest affirms, to have
been of old time that much renowned city Gergonie; where Vercingetorix King
of Auuergne was wont to keep his residence. In this city in the year of our
lord 1095 was hild the great counsel by means of Pope Urban the fifth about
the solicitation of Christian Princes to undertake war against the infidels for
the winning of the Holy land, and more Christian Princes and nobillitie were
here then met together, then scarsly can be remembered to have been at one time
and place in one assembly.

Here was also holden in the year 1374 a general meeting of the states of
France, under King Charles the fifth, about the expelling of the Englishmen out
of such strong places as they then possessed in Auuergne.

LIMAGNE.
map of Limagne

CHAMPAGNE.
THe name of this province is not ancient, the first known author that names
it Champaigne is Aimon, and as it seems it takes this appellation because it
is a champaine and vnhillie country.

It is frontyred on the east side with Lorraine, on the south with the Duchy
of Burgundy, on the west with Brie, and on the north it has Retelois.

It is very plentiful of wine and corn, and in it are sundry principal cities
and towns whereof Trois and Rbemes are the chief. The first being a rich
city of merchandise and where great store of paper is made, the other an
university and the staple for wynes of those parts: whereof the country
people have among them an old proverb, that he that has the purs of Troys and
the seller of Rhemes, is able to make war against the King.

The city of Rbemes is very ancient as apeereth by Ceasars comentaries, and
in this city the kings of France are wont to be anioynted.

CHAMPAGNE.
map of Champagne

TOVRAINE.
THis country of Touraine (being not great) has on the west side Anion, on
the south Poictou, on the east the territory of Blois, and on the north the
country of Maine and part of Veudome.

The chief city is called Towers, which may be reconed among the richest
cities of France, as well for the fertillitie of the country about it, seeming
rather gardens then feildes, as also for the industry of the inhabitants, both
in their trasike of merchandise and in their skill in the woorking and weauing
of silk, as fine and well as if it came out of Italy.

VVestward from Towers down the river of Loyre is the city of Amboise,
situate in a healthful air and most pleasant territory.

Upon the river of Indre (which falls in fine into the Loire) stands the
town of Laches, which has a fair castle the which through the situation of
the place is held impregnable, for that it stands on a rock.

In this castle was discovered a passage through an Iron gate into a deep cave
or dongeon, and therein was found sitting a Giant; resting his elbow upon the
side of the place where he sat and his head upon his hand; as if he had slept,
but being touched his flesh fell to duste, and the bones only remained: besides
him stood a cofer which being opened their was found in it white linen folded
together, but in the opening of it it brake in pieces. How this Gigant came to
be here so set seeing no records do show its it is left unto sundry supposals.

Diverse othergood towns there are in this territory, as Pa^tr^y, Chastillion
Cormery, Beaulieu and others.

TOVRAINE.
map of Touraine

THE TERRITORY of BLOIS.
Upon the river of Loyre and about the midway between Orleans and Amboys lies
the city of Blois, whereof the territory about it is accordingly named.

The soil is very fruteful, espetially in corn, and and the air so wholesome
that sundry noblemen being sickly; have been by their physicians aduysed to go
and live for the recovery of their health in this city or territory: for
which cause of holesomnes of the air diverse kings of france have not only
here much resyded, but have made it the nercery or place for the bringing up of
their children.

The city of Blois is very ancient, and at a place called Orcbeze which is
about two leagues from it; was sometime Ceasars Magasin, or the place of
provision of grain for his soldiers; in those parts.

In this territory was by a gentleman of the city discovered (in our time)
the very like earth both in cooler and kind which is found in the I Will of
Lemnos, the which physicians do call Terram Lemniam, and of the Turk is so
greatly esteemed that it is not permitted for any man to take thereof; but
license of those that have farmed it.

THE TERRITORY of BLOIS.
map of the territory of Blois

MAINE.
THe country of Man's or Maine has on the south side Aniovv, on the west
Britannie, on the north Normandy and on the east Vendome.

It is a country having therein many woods and forests, and therefore more
apt for chase and nouris hing of beasts then for corn or pasturage: yet is it
not unfurnished of corn feildes and fair vineyardes.

The city of Man's is the chief of all the towns of this duchy. It is fair
and populous, and seated pleasantly, the soil about it being made the more
fertile through the rivers of Haygne, Orne and Satre: which joining together
near this city: do all in one enter afterward into the river of Loire.

In the chief church of this city of Man's was christened in the year of our
lord 1133. Henry son unto Geoffrey suruamed the fair; earl of Anion and of
Maine, the which Henry as heir unto Maude his mother daughter unto Henry the
first King of England, came after to enjoy thesaid kingdom by the name of K.
Henry the second.

MAINE.
map of the province of Maine (France)

LANGVEDOC.
BY this Map is described the maritime part of the country of Languedoc, as
also a part of the maritime side of Prouence.

The province of Languedoc is in that part of France that of old time was
called Galia Narbonensis. It has on the east side thereof the river of Rhone,
on the west side Gasconie, on the south the mountains that denyde it from
Arragon, and a part of the midland sea, and on the north the country of
Quercie.

In fertillitie it aprocheth unto that of Prouence, according to the neernesse
of the place, lying on the west side thereof and being separated from it by
the river of Rhone.

Toulouse is the chief city of all this country, and therein is kept the
parlamental court which is accounted the second of all France and consequently
the next after that of Paris.

Montpellier is also of fame for the renowned university, espetially in the
study of physic.

There is also the cities of Nimes, Narbone and sundry others both of
importance and antiquity, as the ruynes or remainder of diverse most ancient
edifices do declare.

LANGVEDOC.
map of maritime parts of Languedoc and Provence

THE I WILL of FRANCE.
THe french do properly call this the I Will of France: wherein the citrie of
Paris and the town of S. Denis etc. are situate. It is not properly an I Will,
but somewhat compassed about with the rivers of Marne, Se^ne and Oyse.

It takes the name of France (as Andrew Thenet tells us) because the Frankes
(or Franchmen) that came out of Germany (when France had the name of Galia and
the inhabitants were called Gaulos) did here make their first settled abode, and
their chiefs did here begin to take upon them the tytles of kings.

The country is abundant in grain, and yeildeth exceeding store of poultrie
and other commodities. About the city of Paris espetialy toward Mount martyr
that kind of mortar for building; called plaster of Paris is found.

This exceeding great and most famous city (also called Lutetia) took the
name of Paris after Paris a King of the Celtes, though some have fabulously
affirmed it to come of Paris the Troyan. It is divided into; parts, City,
Town and University, the city is in an I Will of the river of Seine, and
people do pas by bridge to the town on the one side, and to the university on
the other.

This university was erected by Charles the great, at the solicitation of
Alcuinus, who was scholar unto Venerable Bede, and afterward preceptor unto
this Emperor, and with other learned men came out of England unto Paris; and
there in the streets demanded if any would buy wisdom, offering to sell it
them for the giving of them a place wherein to utter it. This city is the
chief seat and residence of the kings of France and the court of Parliament.
About 2 leagues from hence is the town of S. Denis, where in a goodly
monastery the sepulchers and monuments of the ancient kings of France are to
be seen.

THE I WILL of FRANCE.
map of Ile-de-France

DAVPHINEY.
THis province long since a part of the kingdom of the Allobroges, has on
the northsyde thereof the territory of Lions; on which side lies the base or
low part of Dauphiney, whereof the city of Vienna is the chief, on the west
side it is bordered with the Rhosne, on the east it joins to Sauoy, and on
the south unto Prouence: and this part is called high Dauphiney, and the
metropolitan city thereof is Embrun: howbeit Grenoble is the parlamental and
capital city of the whole country. It is said that near unto this city
is a fountain out of the which their issues both fire and water the which is
a most wonderful woork of nature, and incomprehensible to all philosophers. In
the Mountains not far from this aforesaid city is the great and chief hows
of the Carthusians who take their name of those cold and snowie mountains of
Carthusia. The people of Dauphiney being annexed unto the crown of France,
not by war or conquest; but by amity; have obtained to accept no governor but
of the blood royal of that realm.

The country in some places is very fertile yiedling store of corn and wine,
and the most infertil places do yield great abundance of chest-nuts with the
which both cattle and people are nourished, and so abundant they are in cattle
that they are able to furnish therewith other aioyning provinces.

DAVPHINEY.
map of Dauphine

THE SIGNIORIE of FLORENCE.
THis Signiorie of Florence the chief part of Tuscane is in the heart of Italy,
and in the midst* thereof is the ritche and beautiful city of Florence. In
this city in the year 1464 died Cosmo de Medicis a woorshipful citizen
thereof, from whom the Duke that now possesses both the city and country
and his predecessors are descended.

This Cosmo for his great wisdom wealth and credit was such; that it may be
thought there was never any private man (to wit without some title of honor) to
be unto him compared. The city of Florence by the goodly edifices which
therein he erected has bin greatly beautified. The most fair and sumptuous
Church of S. Laurence he there builded, as also the Church of S. Mark, and the
monastery of S. Verdiana. He built for himself so fair a dwelling hows that
the best masters in Architecture do admyre it. In the Fesulian hills he built
the monastery of S. Hierome; and another called the Abbadia.

In Mugelo he built a monastery of S. Francis. In Fresoli Carregi Cafayolo and
Tribio (places in the country there abouts) he built 4 magnifical palaces, and
in Jerusalem he built an hospital for pilgrims. He endued the monasteries which
he founded with competent lands and renenues, and the churches with vessels of
gold and siluor, fair hanginges, goodly paintinges and ornaments etc. His
son after his death perusing his books of accounts did find that there was
scarsly found any one citizen that was not one way or other in his debt And
notwithstanding his great opulence he did not in his port or apparel bear
himself otherwise then the other citizens, neither married he his children or
kin folks but among his neighbors and fellow citizens.

Thus much I thought good to ad in this place by occasion of this fair city
of Florence which is so ancient that the name thereof was not unknown to
Tacitus Procopius Agathias and other ancient authors. Touching the soil and
country becauseit is already spoken of in this epitome (in the description of
Tuscane) it is here omitted,

THE SIGNIORIE of FLORENCE.
map of the Signoria of Florence

APVLIA.
APulia otherwise called Terra di Otranto, is the furthest east end of Italy
and enuyroned with the sea save where it joins unto Terra di Barri, and
aprocheth unto Calabria. It seems one of the most temperate parts of the
world. Corn, fruit, and all sorts of pot-herbes and medicinal herbs are here
most excellent. The oats may be compard unto barley, and the barley unto
wheat of other countries. But the country with thease extraordinary good
commodities is not exempt from incomodities as extraordinary evil, for the
foil does here bring forth the serpent Tarantola; whose venim is cured by
instrumental music. Here are also certain water-serpents and gras-wormes that
poison and destroy the things which they touch.

Tarentum in times past was a town of this province, situated between 2 arms
of the sea, and thought impregnable. Calliopolis stands upon a promontorie
stretching out into the sea; with so narrow a passage unto it in some places
that 2 carts cannot pas together in front. Hydruntum which has a good haven;
is thought to have bin in times past the Metropolitaine city of all this
Peninsula. Brindezi is also a good and comodious hauen-towne the haven whereof
is chained up every night with 2 chains of Iron, fastened unto the rocks that
are on either side.

APVLIA.
map of Apulia (Puglia)

ISLAND.
IN the north sea south from Groneland lies the I Will of Iseland, so called
because immediately beyond it the Icie sea is accounted to begin.

In this I Will in somer when the Sun is in the Tropyk of Cancer there is no
night: and contrariwise in winter no day. The country is all full of high
hills and stony iockes, and the people do make themselves dwellinges in the
rock sides, and some do buyld themselves cabins of the bones of whales and
other fishes. Towns and villages are scarce among them, and not a tree is to
be found in the country; neither have they corn growing there, but the valeys
are so abundant in grass that they are feign to keep up their cattle from
overmuch eating; thinking they would else die of to great fatness.

They have wonderful abundance of fish; and much of it they do dry and so make
it stockfish. The I Will is divided into four parts and those according to the
four quarters of the world, east west north and south.

They are subject unto the King of Denmark, who yearly sends them a governor.
There Bishop (who is of the Lutheran religion) they have in great reverence.

They delight exceedingly in songs of the valiant acts of their fore fathers,
and every where in the stony rocks the doughty deeds of their predecessors
are graven and carved. Sundry of their hills are so high that they are always
covered with snow, yea somtymes the snow may be seen on the top of the hill
when the foot of it burns in flame; of these the hill Hecla is the chief and
it lies on the west side of the I Will. There are also 2 other burning hills,
the one is called Crosberg, and the other Helga and near unto mount Hecla are
heard diverse hideous and strange noises.

ISLAND.
map of Iceland

IAPPONIA.
BEyond the furthest continent eastward of all Asia and over against China;
lierh the I Will of Iapponia or Iapan, it conteyneth in length about 400 english
miles, and in breadth in some places but 20, and where it is largest not above
60.

It is divided into 3 parts, the first whereof conteyneth 2 kingdoms, to wit,
of Miace and Amaguco. In the second part are also 2 kingdoms whereof Bungi the
principal of al; is one, and Figen is another. The third part is divided into
four provinces and lies between the other two parts: and in the kingdoms
aforesaid are many several governments. The I Will is hilly and somewhat cold; and
rather unfruitful then fruteful in diverse places. Howbeit in some places they
gather in their grain in the month of May, and their rice in the month of
September, they make no bread of their corn; but a kind of potage.

They have neither eyle not butter, beasts they have both wyld and tame, but
they eat the flesh of the wyld rather then of the tame: they have a kind of
auersion from much seeding on flesh and therefore their greatest sustenance is
ryce and herbs, fish they also eat, and the fat of fish serves them in steed
of oil or butter.

Two mountains in this I Will exceed all the other, the one in wonderful height,
reatching above the clouds the other in casting forth flaming fire.

Many of these people have of late years (through the preaching of the
Jesuits) received the Christian faith, howbeit not al for foam do yet continue
in paganism, and have a custom diverse times to kill their newborn children,
thereby to avoid the trouble and charge of bringing them up.

IAPPONIA.
map of Japan

ROMANIA.
THe region which now is named Romania, the ancients called Thrace. It is the
furthest southeast part of Europe, and has on the east side the sea now
called Mare Magiore, of old Pontus Fuxinus: On the southsyde it has the sea
called Archipelago, on the west it has Bulgaria etc. and on the north Syrfia
and vvalachia etc.

In this region lies the ancient and famous city of Constantinople, of old
called Byzantium, and of the Turks that now possess it corruptly called
Stambol: the country lying about this city the Turks do call Galatie, and
near unto this said city is a little town called Galata, but more modernly
Pera and of old time Cornu-Byzantium. This country of Thrace or Romania is
neither of good soil, nor good air, but cold and barren, except toward the
sea side.

The principal cities thereof are, Abdera, Apollonia, Phinopolis,
Philippopolis, Nicopolis, Hadrianopolis, Selybria, Debeltus, Heraclea,
Lysmachia. and the chief of all the aforesaid city of Constantinople, called
Byzantium of Byza the founder thereof, and afterward Constantinople after
Constantyne the Emperor, of whom it also received new honor and new
augmentation.

ROMANIA.
map of Romania

THE TABLE UNTO THE ADDITION.
LImagne 1 Champagne 2 Touraine 3 The territory of Blois 4 Maine 5 Languedoc 6
The I Will of France 7 Daulphiney 8 The Signorie of Florence 9 Apulia 10 Island 11
Iaponia 12 Romania 13

Typis Henrici Svvingenij.


