THE HOPE of Peace.

By laying open such doubts and manifest untruths as are divulged by the
Archpriest in his Letter or Answer to the Books which were published by the
Priests.

Zacha. 8. Veritatem tantum and pacem diligite.

Love truth only and Peace. printer's device(?) of a griffin seated upon a
book

Imprinted at Franckford by the heirs of D. Turner. 1601.

The Preface.
TWo Books have been lately set forth by the Priests in the necessary
defense of their good name and fame, which were and are to this day so
irreuerently played upon, as people of all professions, fools and physicians
make up their morning and evening meditations with the most uncivil terms,
which they may devise against them. How sottish would that Cobbler have been
accounted in these days, who, being controlde by a Painter for presuming to
give his judgment of a Picture above the shoe, departed quietly, and would
not once reply upon Ne suitor vltra crepidam? Tractant Fabrilia Fabri was the
old saying, every man was to attend that which belonged to his Trade, but the
age is now returned in which S. Hierome lived, and of which he used this
saying, Scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim. Did. 19. can. nulli fas.
The Jesuits might have played with their Canon upon such as resisted the
Apostolical Decrees, and without blame have made a breach, yea and utterly
have ruinated those whom in such cause they should assault; but to disturb and
infect the air which has given them life with this breath; Hearken o ye
factious, ye are Rebels, ye are Schismatikes, ye are excommunicated persons,
Irregular, no better then Soothsayers and Idolators, and as Ethnickes and
Publicans was neither commendable in such as make show to immitate Jesus, nor
ever will be justifiable against those Priests, who at the sight of the Breue
gave an invincible argument of their obedience to Apostolical decrees, and
have a long time adventured their lives for the dignity of the Sea Apostolic
as far as the Jesuits have for any matter whatsoever. Other who either
immediately, or by others have a dependence of the Jesuits, some for want of
other inue^tio^, some to keep their tongues in ure, some to try who can utter
the most despitefull speeches against those Priests to whom perchance they
have been most bound, some to win all to go one way (which they may and do
full evil) must follow their dam, and crow after kind, least their spiritual
guides and grandfathers should abando^ them as a misbegotten brood. And while
they all every one at his Qu play their parts, as shrewd boys, while they
byte kick and scratch, cry that they cannot be let alone, they make a great
show as though they would most gladly embrace a peace. F. Garnet the head of
the Jesuits here in England solliciteth some to be a mean for peace, but with
such condition, as no satisfaction be talked on for the clamorous speeches
before rehearsed, and what has upon them ensued to many, who have with the
best deserved of Gods Church and a fresh offer of some things most seriously
promised at the first atonement, and not as yet performed. At the same time
fly Letters like Bats, and are showed in seret to such as have no list but to
lie still in a gross and affected ignorance, which manner of carriage what
else could it portend other the^ a defect of truth, largeness of conscience, a
fresh alarm to farther tumults? and if F. Garnet the Superior of the Jesuits
were of counsel thereunto, small is his sincerity (whatsoever his charity is)
which he pretends in his mock-offer of peace. The presumption that he was of
counsel to these Letters of M. Blackwell is grounded upon M. Blackwels
instructions, where after a commandment of unity between the Priests and
the Jesuits, the Archpriest is willed to seek the judgment and counsel of
the Superior of the Jesuits in the greater matters, Curabit Archipresbiter in
rebus maioribus iudicium quoque eius consiliumque acquirere; great folly it
were to shut this Letter of the Archpriests from his matters of great weight,
being an answer to seditious Books (as he terms them) and such as may
bring great hurt to the Church of God, and consequently an endangering of the
Archpriest to say that he did not take the advice and counsel of the
Provincial of the Jesuits herein (especially the Books concerning them as
much as him) F. Lister being always ready with his Canon. Nulli fas est vel
velle vel posse transgredi Apostolicae sedis praecepta, It is not lawful for
any to be willing or able to transgress the precepts of the Sea Apostolic.
With the which he, his fellow Jesuits, and the Archpriest also are persuaded
that the Priests are shaken, yea and brought to utter ruin. These Letters of
the Archpriest while we shall take the pains to answer for the instruction of
such as either upon their own ignorance have erred, or by the double diligence
of others have been misled, and show how we are dealt withal by the one,
while an offer of a mock-peace is tendered by the other, we crave no other then
indifferency in the Christian Reader, and nothing doubt but to discover the
drift both of him who dissembleth not himself or his intentions, and also of
the other who to color his own and his fellows misdemeanors in this matter
(as if he were no party, much less the principal maintainer of this faction
against us) pretends to be a stickler between the Archpriest and us.

Yours in all true hearty affection I. B.

The Copy of M. Blackwell his Letter.
My very Reverend, and very loving Assistants.
TO my great sorrow, two Books have been set out, by our dear Brethren, whom
all you love in the bowels of Christ, and who^ I have sought by all Fatherly
means to win and reduce to unity, great reason it had bin, that a thing
propounded to the Pope his holiness, should not with so great scandal of our
cause, and joy of our adversaries, have first been divulged to all sorts of
people, before it could possibly come to his sight and censure, and perhaps
never meant to be presented to him, although means must be made by me, that it
may come to his reading, and the view thereof will grieve him much, because he
loves, and every where desires peace.

It cannot be liked of, that we should write one against an other, and
therefore no other answer shall be sent now then this. And my desire is, that
all good Catholics, according to their duties, do think well of their
Superiors, and if they have any doubt, do suspend their judgments until they
hear the full deciding of the cause, for herein is touched the credit of all
Superiors in the world.

The principal points they touch are these.

1 The division at Wisbitch. 2 The sedition of the College at Rome, and the
government of their Seminaries. 3 The institution of our authority. 4 The
censuring them of schism. 5 The usage of the two Age^ts they sent to Rome. 6
The decrees I made, and the execution of them.
1 The first point was a thing being since ended with great edification, and by
the means principally of these, which are most condemned.

It concerns authority, it being more ancient, and having orders taken at
the atonement by their own consent. It is well known at Rome by whose means
they were disanulled, neither was it more unfitting for those which lived in
one house to mislike rules for such as voluntarily demanded and accepted them,
then to procure a sodalitie abroad.

2 The second point concerns the Superiors there, whose authority is most
grievously, and most daungerously contemned, who had the hearing of the causes,
and by great reason ought to make orders for the Seminaries, which they that
complain never built.

3 The third point is clear by his holiness Breue, and no less could be done,
then to accept the authority, and to accept it when it came at the first. For
I have desired to obey, and I signified then how unfit I was to have so great a
charge, and am ever ready to depose it for the love of God, and the profit of
his Church, upon the least knowledge of my Superiors will and commandment:
for my delight is not so much in it, as these authors do affirm, neither was
it published at any time with untruths nor by any such unseemly means, which
might give show of any little ostentation.

4 The matter of Schism was according to my opinion which now I retain, yet
with submission to holy Church, what I showed them was done in charity for
their better instruction and speedy reformation, which also was sent them by
me in secret, and therein no particular person was named, It was but an
arbytrarie matter discussed among the learned which brings no loss of
credit to either part, I gave them all express liberty to think what they
would herein, for it is but a matter of opinion, and therefore not worthy to
make a matter of contention, which part soever was true. I sought by learned
discourses and censures not so much the forwardnes of my opinion as of their
amendment. What I sent them to view was in manner of a Fatherly admonition, and
not to stir up or to feed a further discention. Our endeavors were for
peace, our allowance for our pains is their contentious and very scandalous
behauiours, for which they can have no excuse after three diverse Letters of the
Protector our superior: and not Protector only of the College, Nauar council.
1. de offic. Iudic. deleg. Iacobus Stroozzeus ab vrc. de officio vicar. Epi.
qui dicit esse comunem.
as they say, For before any Seminary was, we had a Protector of England,
whose Letters Pattents according to the best Canonists, were to be credited and
were to be received very obediently.

An atonement was made by which I hoped all variance had bin appeased, what
was said afterward or done by me, was done upon their provocation, for cease
they would not to write, to speak, to exact satisfaction, and to publish
untruths of us contrary to the order which I had prescribed, whereupon I was
enforced to write a large Latin admonition to one of them, and to an other an
English Letter, to gain a stay of wrongs, which were offered me about the
matter of schism.

5 For the usage of the two Agents sent to Rome, concerns the Pope and the
two Cardinals, and the Fiscall of the reformation ordained by his holiness
who were privy to all, and as one of these Cardinals appointed Judges not long
since have written, they were Interpretes voluntatis Papae, and non solum
iudices, If any inferior were culpable herein, meet it were to complain
privately to our Superiors, and not with great scandal to offend all
Christendom.

6 My decrees were necessary, for they contain nothing but prohibition of
things otherwise unlawful and partly also forbidden by Cardinal Caietane, and
the event shows how necessary they were, and the cause of their pains
inflicted (ipso facto) was because scandals and seditions could not be
prevented, for here I cannot well have the use of forum contentiosum, neither
could I cite or produce witnesses, nor conveniently meet with every one post
factum, And surely my censures have done good not to a few.

As for the execution of them since the appeal, I proceed upon other causes
then upon the appeal, which does not (as they imagine) take away authority,
but only if it be of validity, deuolueth the causes their specified to the Sea
Apostolic, If I require submission, an oath of obedience, of such as have
spread abroad such grievous complaints against me, it is but a slender
satisfaction for such injuries and not more then all use now to do at their
first mission, how much more where there was transgressio^ is so much to be
looked for.

And here I am to warn all to consider what hurt may come to the Church of God
by these seditious books, and therefore desire all to be dutiful in their
censure, and careful to hinder the divulging of such books now being
expected, and to be industrious in notefying unto all the truth.

The points contained confute themselves, though to my grief they discover
overmuch passion.

And whereas diverse of these whose names were subscribed to the appeal have
denied that ever they were privy to it, and I doubt not the most part of the
same never knew of any such slanderous writing, These shall be to exhort them
to signify so much to my self or else by writing or in person to some of my
Assistants, and they shall have me most ready to give them all manner of
comfort, and so I desire you to have a great care to compose all these
contentions and procure peace and by all fair means to recover such as by
infirmity have erred. The times are dangerous and enemies are watchful, many
are scandalized, the increase of Catholic Religion is hindered, God is
offended with these contentious proceedings, and therefore let us seek after
peace.

Surely, happy we shall be and blessed, for this our so godly a labor,
blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God, to
whose protection I commend you all, humbly desiring you to to pray for me, and
so I take my leave, this 23. of June. 1601.

G. B. Archpriest. Angl. Pronot. Apostolicus.

IN these Letters of the Archpriest are so many, and dangerous rocks against
which not altogether senseless people waste themselves, as it cannot be deemed
a labor blame-worthie so to discover them, as such as will may perceive them
before their case become desperate. Let his fatherly love, and care of his
dear brethren (as he terms us) be measured by his carriage toward us. For
our maintaining of our selves not to be schismatikes (a matter of opinion not
worthy (as here in his answer to the fourth point he confesses) to make a
matter of contention which part soever was true), how many has he suspended,
bereaved of their faculties, yea and interdicted, for which he has no color
to show any authority but those words in the Cardinals first Letters Post
debitas admonitiones ac reprehensiones fraterna charitate praemissas liceat
etiam paenis coercere Ecclesiasticis, It shall be lawful for you after due
admonition and warning in brotherly charity to punish with Ecclesiastical
penalties. Which sentence is presently limited by the words immediately
following, Oblatione nimirum facultatum vel suspensione, By taking away
faculties or suspending? How many have hereupon been disturbed out of their
places of residence? how many clean abandoned of their friends? how many have
been laid open to most wicked detractious tongues? how many in danger to
perish by famine having no other means to live the^ by the charity of such as
to whom they do minister the Sacraments? and for what? for maintaining an
opinion which were it true or false were no matter worthy to make contention
as M. Blackwell here confesses. Quis ex vobis patrem petit pane^ nu^quid
lapidem dabit illi, Luke 11.
etc. If any of you (says our Savior) asks bread of his father, will he
give him a stone? Or if he ask him for fish, in place of a fish will he give
him a serpent? Or if he shall ask for an egg, will he reach him a scorpion?
If no father would do this, how does M. Blackwell say that he has sought by
all fatherly means to win and reduce us to unity, having sought by the
aforesaid means to drive us to say against our own souls that we were
schismatikes, and to suffer others without any contradiction to lay it every
day in our teeth, for defending that which (as himself here confesses) was
not worthy to make a matter of contention, which part soever was true?

But to come to that which he thinks great reason, that is, that a thing
propounded to the Pope his holiness, should not first have bin divulged to all
sorts of people, before it could possibly come to his sight, and censure. What
if this were so little against reason, as the contrary had been great folly? for
who knows not, that the Jesuits do lie so in weight to intercept what
passes too and fro, that a small Letter can hardly and that very seldom
escape them? how then should this book by any secret co^ueyance soever have
gone without danger of being at their devotions, before it could come to the
Pope his view and censure? It might therefore with great reason have been at
the first propounded to all sorts of people, that thereby some one Copy or
other might come to his holiness his view; and if this course had been taken
in the divulging of these books, what reason has M. Blackwell to say that
perhaps it was never meant to be showed to his holiness? Could the Priests be
so foolish in M. Blackwells conceit, that they would make a discourse of their
miseries with petition to be relieved by his holiness, dedicate the book unto
him, and publish it in that manner, and never mean that it should be presented
unto him? how could M. Blackwell frame his imagination to this, who could not
but know long since, that of the 10. which were sent over for Rome, some of
his friends took the tithe where it was not due? What if that book which M.
Blackwell or his friend seized on were the book that was meant to have been
presented to the Pope, who were they then that perhaps never meant the book
should be presented to him? But the other 9. being safely delivered, as long
since we understood from Paris whether they were sent, perhaps his holiness
has had the view of one; and if M. Blackwel do know any thing to the contrary,
we will yield him most hearty thanks to make the means to have it come to
his holiness his reading, for we do assure him and all other who have made
doubt thereof, that it is our speeciall desire, as in time it will well be
seen, and the more grief his holiness shall take thereat, the less thanks
will they have who have so long a time deluded him with false informations, and
no doubt will provide in some better sort for a true and unfeigned peace to
continue among us. And therefore fear we the less that hereby we may be
charged to give any scandal to our friends, or joy to our adversaries, no man
being to be accounted a friend which should take offense where no cause is
given, or esteemed our adversary who would joy at our good, or the furtherance
of any honest cause, how contrary soever he may be to truth in some other
kind. Praeceptor vidimus quenda^ in nomine tuo eijcientem daemonia, etc.
Master (says Saint John to our Savior, Luke 9.
) we saw one cast out devils in thy name and we forbid him it because he is
not of our company, and Jesus said unto him, do not forbid him, for he who is
not against you is with you. Shall we then call them adversaries, who shall
rejoice at their relief, who are unjustly oppressed, and not rather pray vt
iustificentur adhuc and think our selves much bound unto them, whosoever they
be who shall favor or further us in our just cause? It cannot be liked of
(says M. Blackwell) that we should write one against an other. How shall we
conster this? was not and unto this day is not the Jesuits libell against the
Priests liked, wherein the Priests are called Rebels, Schismatikes, fallen
from the Church and spouse of Christ, excommunicated, irregular, infamous,
disobedient to Christ and his Vicar, factious, nothing better then southsayers,
and Idollaters, as Ethnicks and Publicans? Does not M. Blackwell in his
answer to the fourth point here write abroad that he retains his opinion
still that we were schismatikes, and commends this railing Libell of the
Jesuits for a learned discourse, and censure? And can the purging of us
Catholic Priests from these wicked defamations (being bound thereunto both
for the defense of our good names, which unless we will be accounted cruel to
our ^e^^^^, we cannot let lie bleeding to the death, and for their comfort
whose souls have a long time bin under our charge) be disliked by any honest
man? Is it to be thought that Gods cause can suffer dishonor in any course,
which is necessary for the recovery of his Priests their honor, and does he
not well deserve to be robbed of all that he has, yea and basted until all
his bones do rattell in his skin who upon envy that an adversary should joy,
would omit a necessary defense for his own relief? would there not be as many
houters as hearers of one persuading an other rather to let a third take away
all his lands and goods then bring it to a public trial under color of a
thing not to be liked that one should plead openly against an other? would
thieves desire to meet with better copesmates when they would enrich
themselves, or refuse a trial where such Judges should sit upon the bench? It
falls out many times that with less danger a man may take a Bear by the
tooth then awake a sleeping dog. Had not other means been before in vain
attempted for the remedy of what we have felt, or were not the present
extremities over great into which we are brought by the trump of every loose
tongue where before they were possessed with this spirit butter would not have
melted, we might have bin blamed for our publishing in this sort and laying
open thereby to the whole world who they are that disturb the peace, which
ought to have been maintained among us. And if any doubt hereof shall grow in
any, our desire is, as also M. Blackwell desires, that all do think well of
their superiors, and suspend their judgments until they hear the full deciding
of the cause, which, howsoever the desire of some be therein satisfied, is not
to withdraw their charity from the relief of Priests who want, for this is
not to suspe^d their judgment, but their charity, and not only to judge but to
punish also, much less do they suspend their judgments who turn Priests out
of their housen, or exclaim day and night against them, shut them from the
service of God, and divide themselves from them and their Catholic friends in
prayer and communication of Sacraments upon an opinion which was not worthy to
make a matter of contention, which part were true as M. Blackwel affirms in
his answer here to the fourth point. I wish the ignorance were such as it
might excuse, but I fear it is too much affected, where under pretense of
obedience it must not be seen where superiors have not done so well as they
might have done, and how those who are condemned generally as disobedient and
factious against their superiors have behaved themselves in all dutiful
manner to all superiors, which they knew, and how far they were bound to
show obedience. And if the Priests have been compelled to this hard choice as
either they must sustain infinite injuries, and obloquies, or redeem
themselves in this sort from so undeserved an oppression, no superior in the
world can justly find himself touched in credit, but such whom the Apostle
calls Principes and potestates mundi rectores tenebrarum harum. Ephesians. 6.


M. Archpriest gathers six principal points which he says are touched, and
makes answer to every one in order as he puts them down.

1.
The first is the division at Wisbich, to which he says that it was long
since ended with great aedification, and by the means principally of those,
which are most condemned. But he does neither name the parties, nor give to
understand who they are which condemn them. He used silence perchance in
this, because he must have named either those whom he would not, or those whom
he should not; for it is so well known as none without great want of modesty
can deny that M. John Mush and M. Richard Dudly two Priests now condemned by
the Archpriest Jesuits and their adherents came out of the North to their
great pains, and charge to Wisbich, and from thence to London, where after
that they had been often mocked by the head of the Jesuits, at the last with
marvelous importunity wroong from him certain Letters to his fellow Jesuits
at Wisbich, upon the sight whereof there was a peace made, such as it was, it
might have been much better, and speedier (as by this it seems) if it had
before so pleased the head of the Jesuits to have enterposed himself as
charity would he should have done, the head of the Faction at Wisbich being at
his command, and one who rather then so great a scandal should have risen for
his cause should have suffered himself to have bin cast over the Castle wall,
which in those tumults he affirmed some would do rather then the matter of
his preferment over all the secular Priests there and fellow prisoners should
not go forward. At an other time M. Alb. Dolman should have made peace, but
the Jesuit who should have been the Superior there under the title of an
Agent understanding of some co^ditio^s, which he liked not, a little before that
all should have been concluded found the means to rid him away. And I do
verily think that there are few who think, and none who know that the
division is as yet ended, which is no great aedificatio^, God pardon them who
are the cause thereof. And most unworthily are those scandalous proceedings at
Wisbich compared with the sodalitie which was to be procured abroad. For the
first foundation of them were detractious, and infamous speeches against such
as in all times among Christians have been had in great reverence, and their
faults (if they had any) were concealed, not published abroad to the world,
much less was it liked that any should be falsely objected against them, for
no such course was judged in those days to stand with the glory of God. The
drift of those proceedings was to make a Jesuit Superior over the secular
Priests, or to maintain that scandalous division which has even to this day
followed thereon, upon some other ground doubtless the^ that which their
favorites do most seriously urge, to wit that some of that society have been
the masters or trainers up of some of the secular Priests beyond the seas, for
by this argument every one whosoever is no Schoolemaister or trayner up of
youth, yea all Princes must yield themselves to be under the government not
only of those who were sometime their Schoolemaisters, but of every petty
Schoolemaister because once they have been trained up by some of that
profession; and such as have much greater knowledge, and facility in teaching
or training must humble themselves to every Punie because they themselves had
once masters of that profession of which this Punie is: and perchance no less
absurdity the^ this was that in Wisbich, when many grave, wise, and learned
men were to become subject to a Jesuit, because forsooth (as these favorites
of the Jesuits allege) the Jesuits have the bringing up of some Priests beyond
the seas. The sodalitie which was to be procured abroad was for such as
voluntarily would join themselves to live under rules, and superiors to be
chosen by themselves with the priuitie of his holiness, and without any
schism or faction against those who would not be of the Sodalitie. So that the
difference was very great between the humor of the Jesuits in that division
at Wisbich, and the peaceable endeavors of the Priests abroad, to which the
Jesuits having no very good liking, labored to effect what before they had
missed with a piece of more cunning, and by sinister means procured a
superior over the Priests, who upon peril of being every day to be put down,
must like whatsoever they should lay before him, and in the mean while they
must be of his privy counsel in matters of greatest weight, and allow of none
but such as are devoted unto them for his ordinary assistants.

2.
The second point concerns the superiors there, whose authority (he says)
is most grievously, and most dangerously contemned: he might justly be
accounted wise who should divine a right that which is meant hereby. There have
been as many visitations on the behalf of the Students, as of the Jesuits;
and as for the superiors, I have seen a Letter of Fa. Parsons own penning,
dated the 5. of April 1599. wherein he says that perhaps some one man's actions
in the government of the College at Rome, in some certain points were not so
much to Cardinal Allane his liking, and without perhaps the orders, which were
misliked, were by F. Par. contrary to his own promise brought into the
Seminary of Rome; where indeed there are new buildings but they were not at the
charge of the Jesuits, but of the College, and if it be richer in cha^bers,
it is poorer in vineyards, and in this new building there are very few more
the^ half so many students as were before the new buildings were erected, and
these few are so straungely divided, and debarred each others comfort, as
howsoever the Jesuits gain thereby, or joy thereat themselves, the students may
justly say unto them for all this great boast of buildings, Nec multiplicastis
gentem nec magnificastis laetitiam. That College was first an Hospital
founded by our Princes for the relief of such as went on pilgrimage to those
holy places, afterward it was endewed with an Abbacie by Pope Gregory of
happy memory the 13. of that name, and Doctor Lewis Bishop of Cassana bore
the name to be the erector of it as a College, as Cardinal Allane did of the
College at Rhemes now translated to Doway: and no dispraise to any, those two
Seminaries and their founders were those who brought England to that pass,
that as well the Laity as the Clergy thereof were admired throughout all
Christendom for their fortitude in Gods cause and faithfulness in all their
temporal affairs. And it is well known that these two were of those who
complained. The one at the very first beginning as one well acquainted with
the Jesuits courses, and had served that mirror of piety and wisdom
Cardinal Boromeo Archbishop of Millane, who discharged them of the government
of his Seminaries. The other somewhat with the latest, but yet in such sort as
Doctor Haddock who pretends that he was the Cardinals Nephew moved in spirit
after the Cardinals death writ unto a worshipful Knight in Spain these words
to my remembrance, Profecto been mortuus est si enim vixisset and sibi and
patriae suae maximu^ dedecus peperisset. He is dead in a good time, for if he
had lived he had most greatly dishonored himself and his Country. And why
mast. Doctor? forsooth he was carried away against the Jesuits by his Nephew
M. Hesket, M. Throckmorton, M. Fitzherbert, and all the Gentlemen of our nation
who were then at Rome, but especially by my Lord of Cassana through whose
means M. Doctor Haddock was discarded, as one that was factious against the
students in the behalf of the Jesuits, and lost thereby as he said himself a
Nephews part, which he had been promised often by the Cardinal and he most
certainly expected. The Seminaries in Spain have been builded by the Jesuits
means with no small sums of money, which perchance would have been much
better and with far more merit employed in the relief of poor afflicted
Catholics as well of the Laity, as the Clergy, who lived in exile, either in
Colleges, which for want were many times in ieopardie to have been dissolved,
or elsewhere abroad and famished, but the ice was broken, and the way made by
secular Priests before any Jesuits attempted it, as in all honest matters it
fares, and F. Parsons entered into their work, and brought it indeed to this
pass at which now it is by making the students do that of which since they
repent themselves and he has no great cause to glory in, as the subscribing
to the title of the Infant, and what else he would, having gotten their names
to three several blankes. But these Priests, who were in this sort the
founders of the Seminaries in Spain, although not the storers for lyme and
stone, were known very well to have been of those who did complain when they
lived, and the suruiuer is to this day one of them who do complain. Neither is
this to discover more then needs (although no doubt it be more then the
Jesuits and their favorites would have talked abroad the matter is so honest)
for what Letters are written, and published by them in all places wherein
themselves and their associates to win English Catholics insert not their
building of Seminaries, which the Catholics might have built with more ease
and less charge, if they consider what they are put to by reason of those
plots, by which the Seminaries have been built, and the often attempts made
against our Country upon the foolish hopes, which some have had upon those
plots? some likewise take exceptions that these matters are touched somewhat in
the censure upon F. Parsons Letter, but they consider not that F. Parsons drove
us to it by laying to our charge, that we were not so much hated of the
Council of England as the Jesuits, and Archpriest. His guilty conscience
gave him what he and his associates had deserved, although he thought it
policy to conceal the cause thereof, and to leave such an obloquie (as it
could not be taken for other) to every man to scan thereon, and to seek some
cause for that, which if they would they might see daily was void of all truth,
the greatest part without comparison of those who suffered having been such as
were not of the faction of the Jesuits, and shall we be blamed if we solue
those aenigmes which F. Parsons, and his fellows needlessly propose against us,
and leave to the worst sense which may be made of them?

3.
The third point he says is clear by his holiness Breue. Who calls this in
question? or how does this prove that no less could be done the^ to accept
the authority, and to accept it when it came at the first, which was a whole
year before the Breue came, and without not only a confirmation from his
holiness, but also without sufficient testimony to bind us to accept thereof
being to so great a prejudice to many, in which case a Cardinals testimony does
not bind any to believe that which is affirmed by him, much less if it
evidently contain falsehood, and suppose nothing else but falsehood for the
foundation? But neither was it so clear perchance as he thinks, for a Breue
may come from diverse places, and be called an Apostolical Breue, and his
holiness no w^^t acquainted therewith, and there was no small cause to suspect
so much of this, not only for that it was a confirmation of a thing done upon
so false a suggestion (to wit a division between the Seminary Priests in
England and the Catholics) as the contrary might very easily have been known
if any but dishonest men had been asked the question, but also for that it is a
confirmation of certain Letters Patents which we never saw, although the
Archpriest has showed two several Letters (if our memories fail us not) of
the institution of his authority. For this Breue is a confirmation of certain
Letters Patents by which M. George Blackwell is deputed by the Cardinal
Caietane an Archpriest of English Catholics, for the better government and
union of the Catholics of the kingdoms of England and Scotland: and those
Letters which M. Blackwell did obey so readily did only depute him Archpriest
of the Seminary Priests which are or shall be in England and Scotland, for
remedy of a dissentio^ suggested to be between the Seminary Priests and
Catholics in England, wherein who will may perceive a very great difference.
But to return to M. Blackwell his acknowledging himself how unfit he was to
have so great a charge, or his readiness to depose it for the love of God, no
man is to enter into his inward motions, but doubtless he did not long after
taunt those Priests, who were about the procuring of the sodallitie, of which
we spoke before, and in a triumphing manner writ abroad that their endeavors
were by this his authority brought to ruin. We could also prove that those
Letters of the Cardinals were not warm in his hands before he thought upon
the use of his authority against some in particular: yea and other who were
appointed to be of his privy council let not to utter at that time that
there were such courses to be taken against some, that they doubted whether
they would continue Catholic. M. Blackwell adds here also that his
authority was not published at any time with untruths. In the Books printed,
and sent abroad, it is said that he did not only publish his authority with
untruths, but being taken in the manner confessed as much, and that M.
Collington and M. Charnocke are ready to justify it before God, and the world
upon their oaths. And if they were both dead his own Letters of the 2. of
March following will prove it evidently enough, in which he has these words.

Lastly you quarrel against the Archpresbyter, and gladly you would bruise his
credit upon the roaring noise of an angry man, clouded in his understanding,
if not cloyed about his heart with two many fumes of ambition. Upon his
detractiue informatio^ you publish that ye Archpresbyter should report that he
had authority to excommunicate and to command to the Court of Rome, which now
upon better scanning his authority he goes from. Again showing his
instructions said they were made at Rome, and by the contents being convinced
they were made in England, could not deny it. Sir, the Archpresbyter has to
do about excommunications, and the sending to the court of Rome: for by his
Commission he is charged to specify all such rebellions and contumacies as
are too familiar with you, if they cannot be suppressed with his authority at
home, and to intimate the same to the Lord Protector his grace, and so by his
means to procure excommunication or the sending for to Rome for the redress
of such licentiousness. And for the particular instructions he never said they
were all made at Rome, but that his instructions made at Rome gave him
authority to set down rules about all particular matters, and cases of such
quality. And so those instructions which troubled the ears of your surly, and
froward Father, may be said in respect of their authority to have proceeded
from Rome. And thus the Archpresbyter whose name you put down in plain
Letters, that every body might view how you have graced him, Ipse liberatus
est a laqueo venantium and a verbo aspero, he has avoided your snare, and the
sharpness of your slanderous speech. The iniquity of proud persons has been
multiplied over him, but he hoping in our Lord has not been weakened. Thus
far M. Blackwell.

How many orders has M. Blackwell taken at Rome, when he has taken seven by
authority from Rome? Some instructions are confessed to have been showed which
were not made at Rome any otherwise then M. Blackwell may be said to have been
made Priest at Rome, or else what were those which troubled the ears of the
surly, and froward Father, and were then absolutely proposed among others as
instructions annexed to his Commission, but so palpably inserted, as he
confessed that they were of his own, notwithstanding he pretended to show such
as the Commission spoke of to be annexed unto it? at that time this shift was
not devised, that he had authority from Rome to make rules, and therefore
might propose what he would, and say it was made at Rome. But the plaudite in
the end with a Psalm might have been used upon some greater victory then this
poor shift was, that instructions might be said to have bin made at Rome,
because they might be said to have bin made by authority which came from Rome,
and that the Archpriest could excommunicate, because he could write to those
who could. But to say the truth what but untruth is to be expected in the
maintenance of that, which was begotten, bred, brought forth and nursed with
untruth? M. James Standish a secular Priest in show, a Jesuit by promise, went
as a secular Priest in the name of the secular Priests who never sent him, and
dealt with his holiness in this matter, fayning the consent of the secular
Priests thereto, which after his return in the hearing of diverse Priests, he
said was but an interpretatiue consent, and that he presumed that they would
give their consent. The matter being thus broached, as false a suggestion was
made for the furtherance thereof, to wit, a dangerous and scandalous division
in England among the Seminary Priests and Catholics (as it is evidently to
be seen in the Cardinal Caietanes Letters to M. Blackwell). The manner how it
was proposed, is in some part showed before, and the poor shifts which were
afterward made to salve the untruths then used. What false aduisoes were sent
into England by Fa. Parsons and M. Mar. Array about the handling thereof at
Rome are discovered in the English book; to which one more may be added to
show how in all places the surest Anchor of these proceedings has been
falsehood. Fa. William Baldwin among other aduisoes which he sent from
Flaunders to Paris, 25. Februa. 1599. writ to his friend that the two Priests
first requested that there might be no subordination. A pretty conceit when
all their Letters which they carried with them to his holiness demanded a
subordination. Secondly, that if needs there must be a subordination, then
some one which favored them might be created Bishop; for which they named D.
Gifford, Bagshaw, Collington, or Bishop. Is it likely that M. Bishop would name
himself to be made a Bishop? Fa. Parsons labored M. Charnock to name some of
these or some other which might have fitted such a turn, but because he could
not obtain of him to name any of these before he should see the names of M. D.
Barret and M. Doctor Ely, he caused M. D. Barrets name to be blotted out again
which was written in hope, and would not suffer M. D. Ely his name to be
written, nor any thing else concerning that interrogatorie: which manner of
carriage conferred with F. Baldwins Letter discovers a good will that F.
Baldwin should have written the truth in this point. Thirdly he affirms in
the same Letters that the two Priests should say that experience would teach
if they had not their request Quod indignabitur libertas si prematur these were
their words says F. Baldwin. Can any man think that they would so forget
themselves as to threaten the Pope to his teeth, if he would not grant them
what they would have? but if F. Bald. writ doubtless as he was informed by Fa.
Parsons, the greater is the confirmation of that which here we intend to show,
that is how it has from time to time been lulled a sleep with falsehood, and
therefore that the less this wonder is now that it is avouched by M. Blackwell
never to have been proposed with untruths.

4.
The 4. point is touching the matter of schism which he says was according to
his opinion, which even now he does retain. The head of the Jesuits sends
abroad his Letters, by which he signifies that he would not be ashamed to
humble himself to work a peace, can it be thought that he was not privy to
these Letters of the Archpriest, whose counsel the Archpriest in his
instructions is willed to use in matters of weight? or can M. Blackwell forget
that such an assertion of F. Robert Jones the Jesuit (being maintained by him)
made a breach of the general atonement which was made at the coming of the
Breue? and must he needs even while he exhorts to peace declare now that such
is his opinion, as void of all learning as it has been and is far from all
charity, and publish his want of both in the same moment? Is schism so small
a sin, as it is not worthy to make a matter of contention whether there were
schism or no? or were schism so small a matter as here it is made, is it
charity for M. Blackwell to publish his opinion in this sort, knowing that the
speech of such an opinion has divided men and their wives, father and
children, brothers and sisters, and the dearest friends, and has been the
cause of the division among Priests, and infinite sins (if detraction have
not lost the nature of a sin) in all sorts of people, to the perpetual
infamy as much as lies in them of Catholic Priests, who perchance have
deserved much better of Gods Church then they who have maintained so long the
opinion of schism against them? Can M. Blackwell expect any other thing of the
Priests against whom he still declares his opinion concerning this supposed
schism, then to write, speak, and exact satisfaction, having received so many
injuries by the like, and daily expect more? But now he salueth all in saying,
It was but an Arbitrarie matter discussed among the learned, which brings no
loss of credit to either part. I gave them all express liberty to think what
they would herein, for it is but a matter of opinion, and therefore not worthy
to make a matter of contention which part soever was true. Is it possible that
M. Blackwell can say that he gave all express liberty to think what they
would as in an indifferent matter, April. 1599.
who in some of his Letters calls it a soar, for the which F. Listers
Treatise of schism was such a remedy, 14. March. 1600.
as it must not be called in, until this sore were healed; In other Letters,
that our condemned deserts drew these names upon us, Factious, Schismatikes,
excommunicated persons, Irregular, as Ethnikes and Publicanes, and nothing
better then Southsayers and Idollaters. Why did he publish that he had received
a resolution from the mother City, that the refusers of the appointed
authority were schismatikes, and that he would not give absolution to any who
should make no conscience thereof, and gave direction that they should make
account thereof, and before they received the benefit of absolution make
satisfaction, the manner whereof he left to the discretion of a ghostly Fa.
not touched with the note of schism? Is this to give express liberty to all
to think what they would herein? 21. Feb. 1600.
Did he not also sufficiently express his mind in other his Letters, where he
declared his determination that hereafter whosoever had faculties of him should
first be content to recall his peevish opinion? did he not practice such
authority upon M. Benson when he would not give him any faculties unless he
would renounce the schismatic conuenticle? he declared also that M. Tho.
Moore had written in prejudice of the Faith, when he writ in our behalf
concerning this matter of Schism, whereupon neither his ordinary ghostly
father would administer the Sacraments unto him, nor his ghostly children
receive any of him, or be present when he celebrated. 29. May. 1600.
Are not all Ecclesiastical persons commanded under pain of suspension, and
loss of faculties presently to be incurred, and the Laity under pain of
being in the same sort interdicted, that neither directly nor indirectly by
word or writing they maintain the censure of Paris, although it were given
upon true informatio^, because it cleared us from schism and sin? and can it
now be justified, that he gave express liberty to all to think what they
would, as of a matter which was not worthy to make a matter of contention
which part soever was true?

How often heretofore has he commended that discourse of F. Lister the
Jesuit, and even now calls it a learned discourse and censure, as if the
dearth of learned discourses continued still? and for what is it so highly
commended? for that it proves a matter which were it true were it otherwise,
was not worthy to make any contention, and proves it very simply God wot, in
that only he heapeth infamous names out of his charity upon those against
whom it is intended. Yet leaast that the discourse should be called learned
without cause a principal reason is here touched, that the authority was
confirmed with three Letters of a Cardinal, and not only a Cardinal but a
Protector, and not only a Protector of a College, but a Protector of England.
Let us grant that we saw three Letters of such a Cardinal, although in very
deed there were but two showed unto us (unless the altering of the first be
accounted for one) and the one of those two was to this end that the
Archpriest should inform of the manners and behauiours of the troublesome (so
it pleased his grace to term those who did not take his Letters for an Oracle,
and yield themselves before they had sent to his holiness to understand his
pleasure in a matter thrust upon them upon most wicked and false suggestions,
and with more authority in some sort then ever any creature had, as under a
color of the greater glory of God, to dcbarre or throw a Priest out of his
place, where in time of persecution he had some moral security for his
safety, as well in respect of a convenient shelter, as for necessary
maintenance, having no livings of the Church to supply his wants) Let us I say
grant that we saw three, let us say 30, and stand to the judgment of learned
men, Gloss. in cap. sicut de sent. excom. Felinus in ca. ad eminentiam ibidem.
the cause is ours, that is to say, we were not bound to give credit to so
exorbitant a matter, and so prejudicial to many well deserving of Gods Church,
upon the testimony of a Cardinal, who also saying no otherwise the^ that he
had a commandment from his holiness to employ himself to make a peace
between the Seminary Priests and the Catholics (most injuriously belyed at
Rome to have been at variance) Pan. in cap. quod super fide instr. and in cap.
cum a nobis de testibus and attest. Zecchius de statu Ill. D. Car. number. 9. Sil.
verb. degatus 15. and verb. Testis 5.
and that it was the Popes will that there should be a subornation for certain
reasons given him by the Priests of England (which were never as yet known
what they were) made all the rest, either of himself, ignorant of English
matters, or by the suggestion of the Jesuits, between whom and the Priests
were all the controversies which were in England. Neither does it make any
thing to the purpose, to allege here that the Cardinal was Protector of
England, for this act of his was a subdelegaon, as appears by the words of
his Letter, Angel. verb. Testis 14. Armill. ibid. 7.
Te deligimus cui vices nostras pro tempore delegemus. We make choice of you
whom for the time we subdeligate in that charge which was committed to us,
which was to make a peace between the Seminary Priests and the Catholics who
were said to be fallen out, and not an act of Protectorship: so that if it had
been known here in England that he was Protector of England, yet it is as
impertinently urged in this place as the place out of Navarre for the credit
of a Protectors Letters, wherein no mention is made either of any Protector or
any Letters, he speaks there of a far different Officer which is called
Conseruator, whose office is otherwise set down, Cap. fin. de officio and pot.
Iudi. deleg. in sexto, then M. Blackwell uses his, and if Jacob Strozz. make
no more to this purpose then Navarre, these cotations might have been kept for
some other places: very probable it is that this Jacob Strozz. does handle
somewhat of a Conseruator as other Canonists do, and perchance nothing more of
Protectors the^ they do. The office of a Protector stretches not it self
farther then the Court of Rome, as may be gathered out of those words of the
Breue, Nationis Anglicanae apud nos and Apostolicam sedem Protector, Protector
of the English Nation here with us, Clement. si summus pontifer. de sent
excom. susp. etc.
and with the Sea Apostolic, and this phrase in the Breue does not make him
Protector of the English Nation, if before he were not. But put the case in
the best manner, and with the most advantage. We did no otherwise then we might
have done if the Letters had come from his holiness, Cap. si quando. de
rescrip. glosi ibid. cap. Cu^ teneamur de praebend. glos. ibidem.
for we made no demur but with mind to give a reasonable cause thereof, which
is lawful for any man to do.

5
The fifth point concerns the usage of the two Agents at Rome, which if it
has been showed to be not as of Agents but as of patients, as being cast into
prison before they were suffered to do the parts of Agenrs, examined,
afterward accused, not heard when they desired the copy of their accusation to
make answer thereunto, at which time only they were together to show their
readiness to do their duties, and after 14. weeks close imprisonment bidden
to consult of their matters for which they came to Rome, (three days after
that the Breue was gotten in confirmation of the authority) and
notwithstanding they put off their Caps to this Breue, and sent it into England
that all might do the like, they were banished out of their Country, and
confined without any allowance for their necessary maintenance, being men who
had spent all their life for and in the service of Gods Church. If this I say
have been showed without any blame laid upon the Pope Cardinals or Fiscall of
reformation, M. Blackwell should not now to save the credit of his particular
Patrons, with scandal insinuate that the Pope deserved blame, for it has
always been undoubted that the Pope was misinformed, and thereupon did what he
did, the Cardinal Caietane led altogether by the Jesuits, the other not to
contradict Caietane, the Fiscall at Caietans devotion, and no part of any
discourse made hereof, can warrant M. Blackwell to say that either Pope,
Cardinardinals or Fiscall were privy to all, for the Pope never heard them; the
Cardinals but in answer for themselves when they were brought before them to
be accused by a couple of Proctors appointed for the Archpriest, who after
they saw the two Priests resolute upon the point to answer their Libell or
Bill of accusatio^s, obtained of the Cardinals that it might not be delivered
unto them, so that hereby it is evident also that the Cardinals were not
privy to all, the Fiscall might hear or see their examinations or part
thereof, which are not to be taken as relations of all which they could say,
the Interrogatories being made at the discretion of F. Parsons, and their
answers cut off sometime as being too long, sometime as more fit for other
Interrogatories pretended to be made afterward. Who then with any reason can
say that these were privy to all? and if furthermore the Cardinals were
nothing but Interpreters of the Popes will, may not the truth be known without
the scandal of all Christendom, it being a thing very possible that the Pope
may be misinformed, and do that which afterward he may wish undone?

6.
The sixth point is concerning his decrees, which as he says were necessary,
for they contain nothing but prohibition of things, otherwise unlawful, and
partly also forbidden by Cardinal Caietane. We are not here to examine what
the Cardinal did partly forbid, being dead and buried long before some of the^
were made or could be thought upon, and was not living when any one of them was
made. M. Blackwell proves the necessity of them by the contents as is showed,
but if it be proved that they were unlawful prohibitio^s of things that were
and are lawful (although he had power to make such decrees) the ground of the
necessity of these which he has made will prove but a myer. The first Edict
(made 17. Ianu. 1599. as we account) forbids every man under grievous
penalties ipso facto to be incurred to divuldge any Books set out within two
years before, or after to be set out, by which his lawful estate should be
disturbed, or the fame of any Ecclesiastical person of the English Nation by
name be harmed. The cause of this decree was (as is therein specified) that
nothing should be attempted, intermedled, or published among us, that may be
offensive to our state, or to the increase of our troubles, or else to the
detraction of our Brethren. What if any man were so publicly injured as he
could not repair his credit but by publishing? does not the law of nature,
and Nations, allow him that defense? how then did this decree contain a thing
otherwise unlawful? but to come a little nearer, was there not a Book
published and sent into all parts of England, yea and beyond the seas by the
Jesuits, or their favorites, Entitled in general terms, Against the
factious in the Church, but applied particularly to us by the Archpriest (as
here he confesses in his answer to the fourth point) and can it be said to
be unlawful (if we had been so idle) to publish in our own defense against
that senseless, and sinful Libell? Senseless in running upon disobedience to
the Sea Apostolic, from which no Letter came to command any thing, nor to
testify that any other had authority given to command. Sinful in that upon
so weak a ground no wickedness was left vnlaid to our charge, nor any name of
infamy omitted, and as now M. Blackwell better advised confesses in his
answer to the fourth point in a matter of opinion, and therefore not worthy
to make a matter of contention which part soever was true. This Edict the^
forbad not any thing otherwise unlawful, but only (as it should seem) gave
liberty to any our adversaries to spread abroad any thing to the increase of
troubles, and detraction of the brethren, and debarred us only to publish
against the detractious Libelling of others, how just soever our cause might
be.

The second Edict or Decree made the 29. of May, 1600. forbids under
penalties ipso facto to be incurred, that no man directly or indirectly
maintain or defend in word or in writing the censure of the University of
Paris, (which had cleared us from schism and sin, in our forbearing for a
time to accept him in that authority upon causes there set down) whether it
were truly given or forged, whether upon true information or otherwise. Can it
be judged by any of reason to be a thing unlawful in it self to defend a
censure of the most famous University in the world, being given upon true
information as hear he supposes it might be? the presumption is so great in
this prohibition, and the decree so evidently convinced to be of a thing not
unlawful, as we need not here to stay any longer upon it.

The third Decree, dated the 18. of October. 1600. contains many prohibitions,
but that which M. Blackwell seems here most to urge, is the prohibition that
no man should ask an other or give his own name to any thing, with which he or
two of his assistants were not first made acquainted. And I incline to think
that he means this rather then the rest, for that conformably to his
assertion in this place, he said (a little after this Edict was made) that the
Cardinal Caietane did mean hereby that they who would give their names to
any thing, should not only acquaint the Archpriest therewith, but also get his
consent thereunto: so that if the Priests would by common suffrage have any
thing amended in him, or any of those, whom he thinks to be his friends, or
should attempt any thing necessary to be done in such place, where a bedroll of
names ouerpease (as they have found by experience) be the cause never so just,
they cannot give their names unto it without his consent. Now do I appeal to
any honest man, whether it be a thing in it self unlawful for any to give
their names, or demand others to any thing, which in reason they may think
necessary for the common good of Gods Church, or relief of their own
miseries? and if in such a case it be not a thing unlawful, how is this true,
which Master Blackwell here affirms, that his decrees contain nothing but
prohibition of things otherwise unlawful? Now that we have showed that the
things prohibited were not unlawful, but rather his prohibitions, and
consequently his first reason of the necessity of his Decrees of no force, let
us see how the event proves the necessity of them. Some who carry graie
hairs, (and if they would keep silence might go for very grave men, and
thought fit to be Councillors) discover their want too much of that wisdom,
and learning which they might have, and upon these decrees blunder it out (so
as Will Summers might find them) that who so reads the Books set out by the
Priests (by warrant of all just laws) in the defense of their good name, and
fame most injuriously taken from them by the seditious Libell of F. Lister, and
the sinful use of others their tongues, is excommunicated. Had any
excommunication been threatened (although the Archpriest could not do it) or
had any prohibition been made in the decrees that no man should read any of our
books, such grave me^ might have dreamed of such matters as they talk on, but
there being no mention either of the one, or the other in any edicts, how
comes Gravity (where little time, has bin or is spent in other studies) to
make such a co^iunctio^ of Nownes and Verbes, It is excommunication to read any
of these books? Some are also said to be excommunicated for bringing a Priest
a Breuiary to say his hours. Some carry scrowles about of such Priests names
as must not be dealt withal. Some will not hear their confessions. Some teach
that it is excommunication to be present at their mass. And for what? forsooth
for maintaining an opinion which was not worthy to make a matter of co^tentio^
which part soever is true: and seeking by lawful appeal to the Sea Apostolic
to have the controversy fully decided?

The Archpriest inflicte^ pains ipso facto to prevent scandals and seditions,
either those are no scandals and seditions, which are taken for such, or they
are very meanly prevented. But by what authority are penalties inflicted ipso
facto by him who throughout his co^missio^ has his order set down unto him
for his proceedings, that is, to admonish, reprehend, and chastise also when
need shall be by abridging faculties, or if necessity require by recalling the
faculties. And afterward, If any show himself disobedient, unquiet, or
contumacious, h^ may after due admonitions and reprehensions made with
brotherly charity punish him with Ecclesiastical penalties; that is to say by
taking away his faculties, or by suspension, until he amend. How is this order
kept in the Archpriests proceedings, when without any reprehension, or
brotherly admonition after a fault, he will scant hold his hand until the
fault be committed, but ipso facto the offendour is punished and how by any
degrees for example, by having his faculties abridged, and after if necessity
require it, by leesing them, or after this by being suspended? no such matter.
But all at once ipso facto, yea and more then this, he is interdicted, for
which there is no warrant in all the Commission; wherefore and also for that
the Archpriest did not observe the order prescribed him (being but a Subdelegat
under the Card. Caietane as appears in his Letters) all which he has done
in this kind is of it self void, Cap. cum dilecta de rescriptis glossa
ibidem. Cap. venerabili de officio and pot. iud. del. Hostiensis de offic.
Iudicis deleg. number. 7. and 10. Innoc. in cap. praedicta. S. Antonin. p. 3. tit.
9. c. 3. 1. and 10. Gemin. cap. Quia pontificali de off. and pot. Iud. del. in.
6. Ang. Arm. Sil. verb. Delegatus.
as it is manifest by the rules of holy Church, and those who comment thereon,
and therefore no good event (if there had been any) could prove the lawfulnes of
his decrees. But he could not well have the use of forum contentiosum, nor cite
or produce witnesses, nor conveniently meet with every one post factum. Were
they who put him in authority ignorant that here could not be any formal
Court kept? or can M. Blackwell say, that he cannot meet with any one post
factum, either himself, or by his Assistants, who in his Letters to his
Assistants, gives directions to examine such, as whose names are to the
appeal, upon such and such points? If he will deny that himself has written
to particular Gentlemen to give entertainment to such a man in particular to
examine the Priest there resident concerning his subscribing to the appeal,
and concerning his punishment therefore, his own Letters shall be brought out
against him? so that if it please him, it is evident enough that he can proceed
post factum, and therefore this is but a poor shift for the making of his
decrees in such sort, as they are with penalties, ipso facto to be incurred. As
for the good which he has done by these his censures, it has been no other
the^ to make some dissemble for a while, because they would not be said to be
suspended, or to have lost their faculties. And perplexe men whether they may
in this time of persecution go for the Sacraments. And for the execution of
his decrees, he may say that he proceeds upon other cause then upon the
appeal, but then he must promise comfort to such as here he takes notice
have need thereof, upon some other cause, then the subscribing, or having their
names put to the appeal, for this is an evident argument (whatsoever is
pretended) that some have had need of comfort for that act doing, but the words
of his Letter dated 16. April, 1601. to a Lay Gentleman, leave no place for
any doubt in this cause. This I write (says he) to make you privy of the
great spiritual danger, wherein you and all that receive any Sacraments of M.
Os. N. may be, if it be so that he has subscribed unto a seditious Pamphlet,
colored with the name of an Appeal.

The oath of obedience exacted by the Archpriest is beyond his Commission. And
the less to be listened unto, for that it is exacted as a satisfaction due to
him by such, as have appealed to Rome, upon no other causes, then were proved
out of his own Letters, and others of his Council, and are of that quality,
that neither he nor all his accomplices in those actions will ever be able to
make condign satisfaction to the Priests.

And here I could wish that me^ were not so carried away with the sound of
authority, having had sufficient knowledge of the Priests their carriage
toward all lawful authority by their behavior at the coming of the Breue,
and let not the name of a seditious book (the least point therein contained
not being to be controld, but by secret whisperings where it shall not come to
the examination) put men from seeing how they are deluded by such as mean them
no good, but labor now to lull them a sleep till they have gotten what they
would, and to this end bebarre them of all such helps, as whereby they might
be informed of the truth. The points neither confute themselves, nor will be
confuted by any. Neither are the books written in passion, but to move all
sincere Catholics to have compassion both of themselves, and of us, when they
shall see by these discourses under whose hands their souls are, and how
slight reckoning is made of the infamy of so many Priests for a matter not
worthy to make a matter of contention which part soever is true.

Concerning the names to the appeal. Howsoever some do comfort themselves,
they will hardly find any whose name was there without his consent, for
although perchance there were some causes particular to some, which were not
known to the rest, yet in the chief they all found themselves agreeued, and
desired remedy by way of appeal, to which they set to their hands, or sent
their consent by others to have their names set too, for which the Authors
will be brought forth if need require, to justify their consents, whose names
they caused to be subscribed: and since this matter came in question we have to
show the consents of some under their own hands, of whom the doubt was made.

But to grow to amend, all are to understand, that our desire is to have peace,
and for peace sake have we published these books, knowing that there is no way
so meet to work an unfeigned peace, as to have the truth known of these
proceedings, that thereby the soar may be searched to the quick, and not
healed as it was before, and brake out again presently after, by the
indiscretion of F. Jones a Jesuit, who, when all were quiet, affirmed that
they incurred the censures of holy Church, who should say Dogmatizando that we
were not Schismatickes. If we were Schismatickes we refuse not to stand to the
judgment of the Church. If we were not, we desire it may so be declared, as
there be no more strife raised thereon here in England, or elsewhere. F. Garnet
the head of the Jesuits, made lately a motion for peace, which if it had come
from the Archpriest, or if he had joined with F. Garnet therein, it might have
taken some effect, because these controversies were as well with the
Archpriest, as the Jesuits. But the Archpriest not joining in this treaty
which was begun by the other, the Priests could not think that it was
sincerely meant, in which they are now confirmed, because so soon as Fa.
Garnet understood by M. R. B. the 27. of July, that the conditions made at the
first atonement were not as yet performed by the Archpriest, The recalling of
M. D. Bishop, and M. Charnock home from banishment and confinement.
he noted for a party in this controversy, and that somewhat was expected, to
the same effect from the Archpriest (whom this matter most concerned) he
mistook it for a refusal to have a parley of peace, and so signified it to a
friend of his, upon the last of July; beside that in these Letters last written
by the Archpriest to his assistants in answer of our books (doublesse not
without the priuitie of Fa. Garnet, whose counsel he is to have in matters of
moment) he declares his opinion which still he retains that we were
schismatikes, in the which renewing of so grievous an infamy if we stir, it is
not without cause, for we lie still open thereby to those injuries, and
reproachful speeches which were used by Fa. Lister in his libel, and are now
so in the fashion abroad, that the fairest Catholic housen have now the
filthiest air, and all base scoldes who have the most impudent clackes, must
give place to their betters.

But as the Apostle says, Diligentibus deum omnia cooperantur in bonum: All
things turn to their good, who love God, which I hope we do, in seeking his
glory as F. Garnet knows we do, and witnesses as much in his Letters dated
upon Midsommer day last past, and his glory is our content, and in him we hope
to have peace, which also we wish to those who in their own consciences have
given us the greatest cause of offense, and pray for them, as we desire the
prayer of all good Catholics for us.

After that this answer to M. Blackwell his Letter was printed, an other copy
of the same letter came to our sight, which has caused us to amend the first
copy by way of Errata, although it contain nothing of moment more then the
first, except that in the 6. Page in the end of the first clause in answer to
the first point these words are wanting. It touches the greater part and
better part of that company there. To which if we would imitate others in their
insolent comparisons, we might say (and perchance with more truth) that the
lesser part was the better, and answer to that of the greater part, Stultorum
infinitus est numerus. The world is full of Fools. But remembering that saying
of the Apostle, Romans 14. What are you who judge an others servant? We can
conclude no otherwise then the same Apostle concluded, 2. Cor. 10. He is
approved, whom God commends. In the same 6. Page lin. 23. where (greatest)
must be put in place of (most grievously) (a word not likely to be so much
mistake) the sense might give that the Pope is contemned by the complaint of
the usage of the Scholars, if F. Parsons (as at other times) in his Letters to
F. Holt, dated 15. May, 1597. did not confess that he found errors in the
Jesuits their carriage toward the Scholars, and such, as if many of those
things had happened in their quietest College in Spain or Flaunders, they
would have put the peace out of joint.

Also page 8. in the margent Zecchius de rep eccle. is left out, who in his
Treatise de statu Ill. D. Card. Number 9. handling the office of a Protector,
says not one word concerning his Letters.

Errata.
Page 6 lin. 4. their. the other. l. 12 being. long. l. 15 It concerns. It
nothing concerns our l. 19. mislike. instituted. l. 23. most grievously
greatest. pa. 7 l. 2. accept execute. l. 3. d^s^ered. learned. l. 27. not. not
as a matter. page 8. l. 4. the best. the opinion of the best. ibib. credited.
credited dutifully, l. 16. Agents. Priests. l. 22. any. any one. l. 30. cause.
cause otherwise. marg. Strozzeus. Sbrozeus. Zecchius de rep. eccles. page 9 li.
9 an. and. l. 19. now. more. l. 21. The. Other. l. 26. slanderous. scandalous.
l. 30. you. you all. page 10 lin. 3. and. our. lin. 7. this our. this. 11. 23.
73. page 33. lin. 30. Strozz. read Sbroz.


