monumental frontispiece: top, a light-skinned, seated, female figure in
European dress with crown, orb or rudder, and scepter, between two globes;
left, a light-skinned, standing female figure in oriental or Mediterranean
dress holding a jar or urn issuing smoke; right, a dark-skinned, standing
female figure with a sun behind her head, half-naked, holding a flower-branch;
bottom, a light-skinned, prone female figure or amazon, naked, with bow,
arrows, and a net, holding a man's head, beside the bust of a female figure
THEATRVM ORBIS TERRARVM
GEOGRAPHI REGII.



THE THEATER OF THE WHOLE WORLD: SET FORTH BY THAT Excellent Geographer Abraham
Ortelius.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty
in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. 1606.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family, encircled by the order of
the garter, with lion and unicorn; above three crowned helmets topped by a
crowned lion holding a sword and scepter, a crowned lion, and a fleur-de-lis
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
The sway, by Sea and Land, great JAMES does bear,
His Birth, His Blood, These Kingdoms figure here:
But, were his several virtues to be crowned
A World, past thine, Ortelius, must be fownd.


TO THE MOST HIGH, MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST HAPPY PRINCE, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF
GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc.
JOHN NORTON HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HVMBLE AND FAITHFVLL SERVANT CONSECRATETH THESE
IMMORTAL LABOVRS OF ABRAHAM OR TELIVS, TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH.

funereal monument with a profile portrait of Abraham Ortelius, below three
figures: a haloed male figure or John the Baptist, semi-naked, with a cross and
banner; a male figure leaning on a spade; and a female figure examining a globe
with compasses; below a map of the eastern hemisphere ABRAHAMI ORTELII QVEM
VRBS VRBIVM ANTVERPIA EDIDIT, REX REGVM PHILIPPUS GEOGRAPHVM HABVIT, MONVMENTVM
HIC VIDES.

BREVIS TERRA EVM CAPIT QVI IPSE ORBEM TERRARVM CEPIT, STILO ET TABVLIS
ILLVSTRAVIT: SED MENTE CONTEMPSIT, QVA CAELVM ET ALTA SVSPEXIT CONSTANS
ADVERSVM SPES AVT METVS. AMICITIAE CVITOR, CANDORE FIDE, OFFICIIS, QVIETIS
CVLTOR, SINE LITE, VXORE, PROLE. VITAM HABVIT, QVALE ALIVS VOTVM. VT NVNC
QVOQVE AETERNA EI QVIES SIT VOTIS FAVE LECTOR.

OBIIT IIII. KAL. IVLII. ANNO MD.XCIIX. VIXIT ANN. LXXI. MENSS. II. DIES IIXX.

COLII EX SORORE NEPOTES B.M. POSS.

CONTEMNO ET ORNOMENTE MANV. A P O



THE LIFE OF ABRAHAM ORTELL, COSMOGRAPHER TO PHILIP THE SECOND, LATE KING OF
SPAIN, written first in Latin by Francis Sweert of Antwerpe, his familiar and
loving friend, and now translated into English by W. B, as great a lover of his
learning and virtues.
THe stock of the ORTELS flourished not long since, and lived in good state
and credit at Auspurg in Bayern, ( Augustam vindelicorum, the Latins called
it.) From that family came WILLIAM ORTELL, who about the year of our Lord 1460
left his native country, and seated himself in Antwerpe, (at that time one of
the famousest Mart-townes of the world) where he did many notable things
worthily deserving great commendation: among which that is most memorable, that
of his own proper cost and charges he caused a goodly cross of free stone to
be set up without the Emperors gate, in that place where the malefactors are
usually wont to be executed and put to death. Beneath this cross, at the base
or foot of the same, stood Mary and John, and beside them, a little farther
off, hung the two thieves; the one upon the right hand and the other upon the
left, upon their several gibbets. This William died upon the seventh day of
January in the year of our Lord God 1511, and was buried in the cloisters of
the Franciscane Friars in Antwerpe, leaving his son LEONARD ORTELL sole
Executor, and heir, not only of his goods and substance, but also of his
virtues and good qualities: For they report that he was a man so devout and
religious, that it was an hard matter to find him from his book, serious
meditation on heavenly matters. This Leonard married ANNA HERVVAYERS, and by her
had issue two daughters, and one some named ABRAHAM, (whose life we here
purpose to describe) borne upon the second day of April, in the year of our
Lord God 1527. He was even in his childhood of singular towardness, great
capacity and passing quick conceit, and, that which is very strange in youth,
he was never given to the reading of any trifles or idle vanities. Wherefore
his father purposing to make him a scholar, began first himself to instruct
him privately at home in his own house in the Latin and Greek tongues: (For
the old man was very learned in both these languages.) But see how these good
purposes were soon crossed by the untimely death of his most loving and kind
father! who departing this life, in the year of Christ 1535, left this his
son to be further informed and taught abroad by strange schoolemasters,
whose care and diligence to profit him, whatsoever their learning were, was
nothing so great and painful: notwithstanding even under these he made such
profit in the Arts and liberal Sciences, that he was not much inferior to
the best of his degree and time: For, as I said before, no vain pleasure, or
trifles, pastimes (which commonly are the overthrow of many yongue men) could
ever withdraw him from his settled purpose, or alienate his mind from his
book. Yet his greatest delight and commendation consisted in the knowledge of
the Mathematical sciences, which for the most part he studied and practiced
without an instructor, or teacher, atteining, only by his own pains and
industry, to the great admiration of others, even to the understanding of the
greatest and deepest mysteries of the same. In the thirtieth year of his age,
having many great matters in his head, and loathing to live idly at home in his
own native country, he began to entertain a conceit of traveling into
diverse and sundry foreign parts and countries of the world. To Frankford upon
the Main, by reason of the great Marts or Faires, there held at two several
times every year, he went very often. In the year of our Lord 1575, he went
with John Viuian of Valence, a Merchant, but a great lover of learning, and
Hierome Scoliers of Antwerp, to Liege, Trier; Tungren and Mentz: of which
journey and peregrination of theirs, there is at this day a book of his
exstant in print, wherein he has learnedly described the particulars observed
by them. In the year of Christ 1577, with Immanuel Demetrius of Antwerpe, he
traveled beyond the Seas, into England and Ireland. Italy, that nource of
great wits, that worker of strange woonders, that mother of reverend
antiquities and ancient monuments, he visited thrice. The third time that he
went thither, which was in the year 1578, he went in company of George
Houfnayle of Antwerp, who was so excellent a painter that he was greatly
esteemed and beloved of the illustrious princes, Albert and William, Dukes of
Bayern: of Ferdinand, Duke of Austrich; yea and of Rudolphus himself, at that
time Emperor of the Germans. But this his consort, to the great grief of his
friends and such as loved his singular qualities, left his life at Prage in
Bohemia, upon the thirteenth of January in the year of our Lord, 1600. This
man was worthy of longer life, if the Fates would respect men for their great
parts and excellent virtues. But so it is, that Death, like as the sithe in
Harvest, cutteth down, without distinction, as well the yongue as old. There
was nothing either in Germany or in France, that was worth the seeing, that
this our author had not seen and viewed with a censorious and judicious eye.
At length, having overcome so many tedious and toilsome travels, he returned
again to Antwerpe his native soil. There and then he began to apply himself
to benefit succedent ages, to write of those countries by him viewed and seen,
to set out in Charts and Mappes diverse places both of Sea and Land unknown to
former ages, to describe the tracts and coasts of the East and West, South and
North never spoken of nor touched by Ptolemey, Pliny, Strabo, Mela or any other
historiographer whatsoever: and lastly to bend all his forces to the framing of
that his THEATER, which now is beheld and read with such admiration and
applause of all men: in which work of his he was so generally well liked and
approved of all, that Philip the Second, that renowned King of Spain, graced
him with the honor and title of The Kings Cosmographer. He wrote also his
GEOGRAPHICALL TREASVRE, a very learned and pleasant work, in which the ancient
names or appellations, (yea and often times the new, by which they are now called
and known at this day,) of Mountains, Hills, Promontories, Woods, Islands,
Havens, People, Cities, Towns, Villages, Seas, Baies, Creekes, Straights,
Rivers, etc. are at one view instantly to be seen. Moreover, out of ancient
coins, for the benefit and delight of such as are lovers and studious of
antiquities, he set out The HEADS OF THE GODS AND GODDESSES, which afterward
were illustrated with an historical narration or discourse done by Francis
Sweert the younger. In the year of Christ 1596, he set forth THE IMAGE OF THE
GOLDEN WORLD, that is, A treatise describing the life, Manners, Customs, Rites
and Religion of the ancient Germans, collected and gathered out of diverse and
sundry old writers of both languages. By these his labors and travels he has
gotten and purchased unto himself an immortal name and credit amongst the
learned of all sorts. In company he was of an excellent discreet carriage,
passing courteous, merry and pleasant. Such was his singular humanity, that it
was strange to see how he did win and retain the love and favor of all men
wheresoever he became. His enemies he chose rather to overcome with kindness,
or to contemn them then to revenge himself of their malice. He did so much
hate vice, even in his own kindred, that he rather reverenced virtue in his
enemies and strangers. Vain questions, and subtle disputations of divinity,
or matters of religion, as dangerous and pernicious, he did always greatly
detest and abhor. A deep in-sight and sound judgment in any kind of matter,
he preferred before glosing eloquence and quaint terms. Present adversity and
dangers he always endured with more patience then fear of such as were
coming on and near at hand: and those which were bitter, more easily then
such as were doubtful and uncertain of event. He was a man which in his life
time did set as little by himself as any man could: For he never set his mind
much upon the wealth of this world, or ought of those things in the same,
having always in memory that his learned poesy CONTEMNO ET ORNO, MENTE, MANV,
I scorn and trim, with mind, with hand. For surely this man was led with
some heavenly spirit, which did so withdraw his mind from those earthly
cogitations, that he never took any thing in his life more unkindly then when
he was drawn from his books, which he always preferred before all other
things in the world beside. These great learned men following were his familiar
friends, and such as he did greatly love and reverence. In Spain Benedictus
Arias Montanus, that great linguist and grave Divine; and the reverend father
Andrew Schotte, borne in Antwerp, a learned Jesuit. In Italy, Fuluius Vrsinus,
Franciscus Superantius, and Johannes Sambucus. In Germany, Gerard Mercator,
that famous Cosmographer, James Monaw, Mark Velser, Ioachim Chamberlin, Jonas
Grutterus of Antwerp, and Arnold Milius. In France, Petrus Pithoeus, and
others. In the Low Countries, Iustus Lipsius, Laeuinus Tormencius, Nicolaus
Rockoxius, Cornelius Prunius, Balthazar Robianus, Ludouicus Perezius, Johannes
Brantius a ciuillian, recorder to the state of Antwerp, Johannes Bochius,
secretary to the same city, Francis Raphalengius, Christopher Plantine, John
Moret, Philip Gally, Otho Venius that famous painter, and Francis Sweert the
younger. In England, Humfrey Lloyd, the only learned courtiour of his time, and
William Camden, now Clarenceux, the painful and judicious antiquary of our
land. With all these and many other he was familiarly acquainted. To these he
wrote often, and from these he often received most kind and loving letters. He
was a great student of antiquities, and searcher out of rare and ancient
things. He had at home in his house, Images, Statues, Coins of Gold, Silver
and copper both of the Greeks, Romans and others: Shelfishes brought from India
and our Antipodes: Marble of all kind of colors: Torteises shelles of such
wonderful bigness, that ten men, sitting round in a circle, might eat meat
out of them at once: Others again so little and narrow, that they were skarce
so big as a pinnes head. His Library was so maruellously well stored with all
sort of Books, that his house might justly have been termed, A shop of all
manner of good learning, unto which men flocked from diverse places, like as in
former times they did to Plato's Academy, or Aristotle's Lyceum. This Ernest
and Albert, returning conqueror from the battaill at Hulsten, with other great
Princes, and men of all sorts, came in troops to see and behold. While he was
thus busied, and having now lived above threeskore and eleven years, he fell
sick in June in the year of our Lord 1598, and growing every day worse and
worse, at length, he yielded to nature and died upon the 28 day of the same
month. The Physicians affirmed that he died of an ulcer of the reins, which
Hippocrates writes will hardly ever be cured in old men. He was of stature
tall and slender; the hair of his head and beard was of a yealow color. His
eyes were gray, and his forehead broad. He was very courteous and affable. In
serious businesses he was very grave and sober, but without any show of
arrogant disdain: in mirth and jesting he was as pleasant, yet with that
moderation, that all was guided by the rules of Christian piety and modesty.
This deceased bachelour, Anna Ortell, a virgin his sister, who lived not long
after this her brother Abraham, (for she died in the year of Grace 1600)
caused to be buried and intombed in Saint Michaels, the Abbey of the
Praemonstratenses in Antwerp. He might well want the honor of a gorgeous and
costly tomb, who by the general consent of all men, had for his rare and
singular virtues deserved an everlasting fame and reputation. Francis Sweert,
the younger, gathered together the mournful verses of those poets and friends
of his, which did bewail his death, set them forth, and dedicated them to the
State and citizens of Antwerp. Iustus Lipsius, at the instant request of his
heirs, and for a perpetual memorial of their constant love and friendship
wrote that Epitaph which is in capital letters engraven upon his tomb.

ABRAHAM ORTELIVS CITIZEN OF ANTwerpe, and Geographer to Philip the second,
King of Spain, to the courteous Reader.
SEeing, that as I think, there is no man, gentle Reader, but knows what,
and how great profit the knowledge of Histories does bring to those which are
serious students therein; I do verily believe and persuade myself, that there
is almost no man, be it that he have made never so little an entrance into the
same, and touched them never so lightly, that is ignorant how necessary, for
the understanding of them aright, the knowledge of GEOGRAPHY is, which, in that
respect therefore is of some, and not without just cause called The eye of
History. For thou shall meet with many things in the reading of Histories, (I
will not say, almost all) which, except thou have the knowledge of the
countries and places mentioned in them, cannot only not be well conceived and
understood, but also oft-times they are clean mistaken and otherwise
understood then they ought to be: which thing comes to pass in many
discourses: but especially in the expeditions and voyages of great Kings,
Captains and Emperors: in the diverse and sundry shiftings of Nations from one
place to another: and in the traueils and peregrinations of famous men, made
into sundry countries. But seeing that this is a matter which even experience
it self does teach us to be true, there is no reason why I should stand long
upon the proof of the same. This so necessary a knowledge of Geography, as
many worthy and learned men have testified, may very easily be learned out of
Geographicall Chartes or Mappes. And when we have acquainted our selves
somewhat with the use of these Tables or Mappes, or have attained thereby to
some reasonable knowledge of Geography, whatsoever we shall read, these Chartes
being placed, as it were certain glasses before our eyes, will the longer be
kept in memory, and make the deeper impression in us: by which means it
comes to pass, that now we do seem to perceive some fruit of that which we
have read. I omit here, that the reading of Histories does both seem to be
much more pleasant, and in deed so it is, when the Map being laid before our
eyes, we may behold things done, or places where they were done, as if they
were at this time present and in doing. For how much we are helped, when as in
the Holy Scripture, we read of the journey of the Israelites, which they made
from Egypt, through the Red sea, and that same huge Wilderness, into the Land
of promise, when as looking upon the Map of Palestina, we do almost as well
see it as if we were there, I think any student in Divinity, or that History
has often made trial. Which things being so, how much those which are students
and lovers of Histories are combred, hindered and stayed, yea, and many times,
even while they are in their race and continued course, drawn back, it is an
easy matter to conceive, when either the description of all countries cannot
be gotten, or if they may be gotten, they are dearer then that every man's money
will reach and attain unto especially those that are but poor, or none of the
wealthiest. For there are many that are much delighted with Geography or
Chorography, and especially with Mappes or Tables containing the plotts and
descriptions of Countries, such as there are many now adays extant and every
where to be sold: But because that either they have not that, that should buy
them: or if they have so much as they are worth, yet they will not lay it out,
they neglect them, neither do they any way satisfy themselves. Others there
are who when they have that which will buy them, would very willingly lay out
the money, were it not that by reason of the narrowness of the rooms and
places, broad and large Mappes cannot so be opened or spread, that every thing
in them may easily and well be seen and discerned. For, that I may speak that
which is the truth, those great and large Geographicall Maps or Chartes, which
are folded or rolled up, are not so commodious: nor, when any thing is
peradventure read in them, so easy to be looked upon. And he that will in
order hang them all along upon a wall, had need have not only a very large and
wide house, but even a Princes gallery or spacious Theater. This I having often
made trial of, I began to bethink my self, what means might be found to
redress these discommodities, which I have spoken of, and either to make them
somewhat less, or, if possibly it might be, to take them all clean away. And
at length me thought it might be done by that means which we have observed and
set down in this our book, to which I earnestly wish that every student would
afford a place in his Library, amongst the rest of his books.

But that thou may the better understand, what it is that we have done in
this our Theater, and what it is that thou must exspect and look for in the
same; I think it not amiss in few words briefly here to declare unto thee.
First my purpose was to represent unto thy view whatsoever heretofore thou
had, or new have, in any Geographical or Chorographicall Chartes here and
there lately or long since set out that ever came to my hands, or were
possibly to be gotten for love or money. Of all countries whose descriptions
are set out in Geographicall Tables, we have selected one (for of some there
are diverse) which in our judgment seemed to be the best and most exact:
Which, notwithstanding that it were, by the first draught of the Author
somewhat large and broad, we have brought into that small form, as might agree
with this our work, and that the whole Map might be contained in one leaf:
or, which sometime thou shall observe we have done, as thou may see, that in
one leaf many might be contained and expressed: yet so as nothing, no never
so small a thing, is either omitted or altered that was to be found in the
greater: except it be this, which oftentimes thou shall find, that the names
of places and other things, which in the first Copies could hardly be read, in
these our Mappes we have so expressed, that they may perfectly be read of any
man. And sometime, where occasion did serve, or need require, and the place
would permit, unto the modern and usual names of certain places, we have
added the ancient names mentioned by old writers, but now vulgarly unknown.
Which, as we doubt not, we have done with the good-leaue and liking of the
Authors themselves: so I hope it will be a thing very well pleasing to all
such as are readers and students of old Histories and Antiquities. In those
Mappes, which have their Authors names written upon them, we have, as I said,
altered nothing at all, excepting two or three of the Marine tracts of the
Low Countries, which the Sea has much changed since the time that their
descriptions were first set forth: As for examples sake, in Flaunders, over
against Zeland, not far from the town Wateruliet, where by the goodness and
great benefit of Almighty God, long after that the description of this Country
was first set out, the Maine-land was much enlarged and had gotten an advantage
of the Sea: we there have altered the form of that Map, according as the
place is found to be at this day. The description of which plot of ground we
obtained of Master Mark Laurine, the Lord and owner thereof, a brave
gentleman, greatly renowned both for the noble stock from whence he is
descended, as also for his wisdom and great experience. But in other Mappes,
which had no name of the Author subscribed unto them, we were somewhat more
bold: for in these, in some places, at our discretion, where we thought good,
we have altered some-things, some-things we have put out, and otherwhere, if
it seemed to be necessary, we have put in. Of some Countries also, that we
might, as much as in us did lie, make up our just number and fill up our rank,
we have made some Mappes of our own, that there might as few Mappes be wanting
as possibly might be. In the abridgement and bringing of those Mappes, which
had as I said the names of the Authors added unto them into a lesser form, we
have used that faithfulness and diligence, that we hope to deserve thanks not
only of the Reader, but also even of the Authors themselves, or at least we
have dealt so in them, that no man need be ashamed of these of ours whatsoever
they be; yea he may as well acknowledge and take this little one of ours, for
his own, as that greater one first set out by himself. For we have
endeavored to the uttermost of our power in this our work, if it were
possible, to deserve thanks of the Authors, if not, yet by no means to
displease them: Not to follow or imitate that bad custom of some men in these
our days, who, that they may seem to the world to set forth some new thing,
do nothing else but alter the works and labors of other men, and oftentimes,
out of those which are good, to select that which is not good, and to sell it
commonly for the best: Sometimes by adding something at their pleasure, and in
some places again taking out and detracting something and withal either by
concealing the right Authors names, or setting to their own, or feyning a name
of some one or other, they think to please the vulgar sort with novelties,
that that their work may sell the better; and they may rake money together
they care not how: For we were not moved to undertake this labor by any
covetous desire of getting much by it, but even of a willing and forward mind
that we had to help and further those that had a love and affection to these
studies, not any whit respecting the gayning of any vain glory and
commendation by other men's labors. For what need we to make new Mappes, when
as the old Mappes of other men, now extant, would serve our turn? Some there
are peradventure, which will look to find in this our Theater more
descriptions of particular Countries, (for every man naturally, for the love
that he bears to his native soil, would, I doubt not, wish that it were here
severally described amongst the rest:) but let them know, that those which are
here missing, are not left out and omitted, either by our negligence, or for
that we were loathe to be at that cost and charges: but because that either we
never saw any such, or at leastwayes for that there never came any such to our
hands. If there be any man, which either has any such, or knows where there
may be had, him we would earnestly entreat, that he would be the means to
help us unto them, assuredly promising him, that we will, at our own cost and
charges, not without great thanks to him, and a most honorable mention of his
name, cause them to be cut and imprinted apart and by themselves, that
hereafter they may be inserted into this our Book, either in their own place,
elsewhere, as any man shall like best.

Of the Order also by us here observed in the placing of these our Mappes, I
think it not amiss, gentle Reader, to speak a word or two, and to acquaint
thee with our purpose: that if peradventure there be any man, which does
think that they ought to have been placed otherwise, we may either satisfy
him, if we may, or else excuse our selves, which is all, I think, that can be
looked for at our hands. First of all, we present unto thy view an Universal
Map of the whole world: Then, the four quarters or principal parts of the
same; to wit, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America: in this following dame Nature,
in which always before the parts can be, the whole, whereof they be the parts,
must of necessity first be. Next after these we have put the several and
particular Countries of these parts, beginning at the West part of the world,
in this following Ptolemey the Prince of Geographers, and almost all others
that have written of this argument: And so the Provinces and particular
countries of America do first put forth and show themselves: next to these do
follow the British Isles, after them Spain, and then France. From hence we
pass to Germany: whose Countries being after our manner diligently surueyed,
from Heluetia or Switzerland we passed over the Mountains into Italy, which is
the next country unto it Eastward, purposing also to view all the Provinces
thereof severally. From thence we crossed the Sea and sailed into Greece.
Whereupon going into Slauonia, we surueyed all the Countries severally which do
vulgarly speak the Slauonian tongue, (to wit, Hungary, Transsyluania, Polonia,
Scandia, and Russia.) Thus having finished Europe, we come unto the Isthmus or
Straight land, which is between the head of the River Tanais and the North
sea, which is in deed the bound of Europe and Asia: from it we step into Asia.
Which, after we have a while beheld, we left, and so passed into Africa, by the
Streights, or narrow piece of the Mainland, which runs between the Bay of
Arabia, and the gulf of Damiata, (Sirbonis lacus) made by the ouerflowing of
the Midland-sea. From thence passing through Egypt and Barbary we came unto
the Streights of Gibraltar, which we crossed, and at length came home again to
our own native country from whence we first set foot; like unto a trauailer
or a Pilgrim, which has viewed and travailed through many and sundry several
Nations and Countries, passing out of one into another, orderly as they lay and
were situate one by another, ouerskipping none, at last returns safely and
joyfully from whence he first set forth.

Thus far of the Mappes themselves: Now let us speak a word or two of the
backside of the same. Because we thought it would be a thing nothing pleasing
to the Reader or Beholder, to see the backesides of the leaves altogether bare
and empty we determined there to make a certain brief and short declaration
and Historical discourse of every Map, in the same manner and order as we
said we observed in the Mappes themselves; omitting nor concealing any man's
name, that we had occasion to use. Moreover to these also we have added a Table
of the names of all the Authors, that ever we knew or had; out of which,
those that are so disposed, may fetch a more ample and larger discourse and
description of the several Countries handled by them. Wherefore the students
of Geography shall have here, in the Authors thus named in order, and in the
Catalogue of the Authors of the Geographicall Tables or Mappes, which we have
set before this our work, and lastly in these Tables themselves, a certain
shop, as it were, furnished with all kind of instruments necessarily
required in such like business: out of which, if peradventure there may seem
any thing wanting, in his judgment, either to the finishing of any Book of
that argument, or more fuller descriptions of any Countries whatsoever, very
easily, or in deed without any labor at all he may see, from whence it may by
and by be fetched.

These things they are which I thought good to admonish the Reader of. It
remains now, that we do entreat every man, to take this our labor and
entertain it, with no other mind then it was by us both begun and finished,
and at length set out and Imprinted. Farewell, and wish well to Francis
Hogenberg, Ferdinand, and Ambrose Arsen, by whose skillful hands and
extraordinary great pains and diligence almost all these Mappes were engraven
and cut.

From Antwerp. this present year 1570.
THE FIRST TABLE.
A.
ASia. fol. 3 Africa. fol. 4 America. fol. 5 The Azores. fol. 15 Aniow. fol. 25
Artois. fol. 41 Austria. fol. 63 Austrich. fol. 63 Aprutium. fol. 84 Abruzzo.
fol. 84 Apulia. fol. 86 Asia the lesser. fol. 112 Egypt. fol. 112 Aethiopia.
fol. 113 The Abassinnes country. fol. 113
B.
BRitannicae insulae. fol. 10 The British Isles. fol. 10 Bretaigne. fol. 22
Berry. fol. 24 Bituriges. fol. 24 Blasois. fol. 25. Blois. fol. 25. Boulogne.
fol. 26 Burgundy the county. fol. 31 Burgu^dy the dukedom. fol. 32 Brabant.
fol. 38 Brandenburgh. fol. 56 Buchauia. fol. 57 Buchonia. fol. 57 Brunswick.
fol. 58 Bohemia. fol. 60 Bauaria. fol. 65 Bayern. fol. 65 Basell. fol. 68
Brescia. fol. 76 Barbary. fol. 1 4 Belid'ulgerid. fol. 114.
C.
CAmbria. fol. 13 Cumry. fol. 13 Culiacan. fol. 8 Cuba. fol. 8 Cadiz. fol. 20
Caliz. fol. 20 Calis-malis. fol. 20 Carpetania. fol. 20 Cenomani. fol. 22
Calais. fol. 26 Cimbrica Chersonesus. fol. 51 Chaczeola. fol. 70 Carniola. fol.
70 Cremona. fol. 57 Crema. fol. 75 Como lake. fol. 79 Corsica. fol. 83
Calabria. fol. 86 Corcyra. fol. 87 Corfu. fol. 87 Candia. fol. 89 Creta. fol.
89 Cyprus. fol. 90 Carinthia. fol. 94 China. fol. 106 The Cham of Tartary. fol.
105 Carthage haven. fol. 112 Congl. fol. 115
D.
DEscription of the world. fol. 1 Dutchland. fol. 33 Dania. fol. 51 Denmark.
fol. 51 Dietmarsh. fol. 53 Duringen. fol. 55.
E.
EVrope. fol. 2 England. fol. 12 East Friesland. fol. 50 Elba. fol. 87 Egypt.
fol. 112 Ethiopia. fol. 113.
F.
FAyal. fol. 15 France. fol. 21 Flanders. fol. 42 Friesland. fol. 48
Franklandt. fol. 59 Forum Iulij. fol. 72 Foruly. fol. 72 Friuly. fol. 72
Florence. fol. 81 Fesse. fol. 115.
G.
GAdes. fol. 20 Guipusco. fol. 20 Gallia. fol. 21 Germany. fol. 33 Germany on
this side the Rhein. fol. 34 Guelderland. fol. 36 Goercz. fol. 70 Grecia. fol.
91 Greece. fol. 91 Gorcz. fol. 94
H.
HIspaniola. fol. 8. Heinalt. fol. 40 Holland. fol. 47 Holsatia. fol. 52
Holstein. fol. 52 Hennenbergh. fol. 55. Hassia. fol. 55 Heluetia. fol. 69
Histria. fol. 70 Histria. fol. 94 Hungary. fol. 95. and 96. The Holy Land. fol.
111 The Haven of Carthage. fol. 112
I.
IReland. fol. 14 The I Will of France. fol. 25. Iuitland. fol. 51 Italy. fol. 71
Ilua. fol. 87 Ischia. fol. 88 Islands in the Archipelago. fol. 89 Illyricum.
fol. 92 Illyris. fol. 92 Istereick. fol. 94. and 95 Island. fol. 103 Iapan.
fol. 107 Iaponia. fol. 107 India in the East. fol. 108
K.
KArst. fol. 70 Karnten. fol. 94
L.
LA Man's. fol. 22 Limaigne. fol. 24 Lemosni. fol. 25. Lorrain. fol. 30 The
Low Countries. fol. 34 Lutzenburgh. fol. 35 Liege the bishopric. fol. 37 The
Landtgrauy of Hessen. fol. 55. Lunenburgh. fol. 58 Lacus Larius. fol. 79
Lotophagitis. fol. 87 Lemnos. fol. 90 Liuonia. fol. 100
M.
MArdel Sur. fol. 6 La Man's. fol. 22 Mansfield. fol. 55. Misnia. fol. 55 The
Marquesate of Brandenburgh. fol. 56 Munster Bishopric. fol. 59 Morauia. fol.
62 Milaine. fol. 74 Marca Ancona. fol. 83 Malta. fol. 87 Melita. fol. 87
Moscouy. fol. 104 Marocco. fol. 115
N.
THe New world. fol. 5 New Spain. fol. 7 Normandy. fol. 22 Narbone. fol. 29
The Neatherlands. fol. 34 Namur. fol. 39 Nurembergh. fol. 58 Nortgoia. fol. 66
Naples. fol. 85 Natolia. fol. 112
O.
OLdenburgh. fol. 53 Ozwieczin. fol. 100
P.
THe Peaceable sea. fo. 6 Peru. fo. 9 Pico. fo. 15 Portugal. fo. 17 Poitou.
fo. 23 Paris. fo. 25. Picardy. fo. 27 Prouence. fo. 28 Piemont. fo. 77 Padua
fo. 78 Perugia. fo. 82 Puglia. fo. 86 Polonia. fo. 98 Poland. fo. 98 Prussia.
fo. 99 Pomerania. fo. 100 Pomerland. fo. 100 Persia. fo. 109 Palestina. fo. 111
Presters John's empire. fo. 113
R.
ROme. fol. 79 Romania. fol. 101 Russia. fol. 104.
S.
THe South Sea. fol. 6 Scotland. fol. 11 Spain. fol. 16 Civil. fol. 18
Sauoie. fol. 29 Saxony. fol. 55 Silena. fol. 61 Salczburgh bishop. fol. 64
Strasburgh. fol. 66 Switzerland. fol. 68. and 69 Siena. fol. 83 Sicilia. fol.
87 Sardinia. fol. 87 Stalamine. fol. 90 Sebenico. fol. 94 Spruse. fol. 99
Scandia. fol. 102 The Sophies empire. fol. 109.
T.
TErcera. fol. 15 Tourain. fol. 25. Thietmarsia. fol. 53 Thuringia. fol. 55.
Tirol. fol. 70 Treuiso. fol. 78 Tuscia. fol. 80 Tuscane. fol. 80 Terra di
Otranto. fol. 86 Transsyluania. fol. 97 Thracia. fol. 101 Tartaria. fol. 105
The Turks empire. fol. 110
V.
VAlentia. fol. 19 Vermandois. fol. 26 Venacin. fol. 29 Verona. fol. 73.
W.
The West Indies. fol. 5 Wales. fol. 13 West Friesland. fol. 49 The Wandalls
Isles. fol. 52 Westphalia. fol. 54 Westphalen. fol. 54 Waldeck. fol. 57
Wirtembergh. fol. 67 Windesmarck. fol. 70
Z.
ZEland. fol. 46 Zerbi. fol. 87 Zara. fol. 94 Zator. fol. 100.
THE SECOND TABLE.
A.
THe Ancient Geography. fol. vj. Anglesey. fol. ix. Africa propria. fol. xxx.
Africa properly so called. fol. xxx Egypt. fol. xxxj. Argonautica. fol. xxxv.
B.
The British isles. fol. ix.
C.
COnwey. fol. ix. Circaeus mons. fol. xxij. Cyprus. fol. xxviij. Chios. fol.
xxviij. Cia. fol. xxviij. Creta. fol. xxviiij. Candy. fol. xxix. Corsica. fol.
xxix.
D.
DIomedes isles. fol. xxij. Dacia. fol. xxiiij. Delos. fol. xxviij. Daphne. fol.
xxxvij.
E.
EVrope. fol. viij. The Empire of great Britain. fol. ix. Etruria. fol. xx.
Euboea. fol. xxviij. Egypt. fol. xxxj. England. fol. xlij.
F.
FRance. fol. xj. The Foundation of the Empire. fol. xxxviij. xxxix. France.
fol. xliijj.
G.
GEographia Sacra. fol. j. The Geography of Holy Writers. fol. j. The Geography
of the Ancients. fol. vj. Goodwins sands. fol. ix. Gallia described by Strabo.
fol. xj. and xij. Gallia described by Caesar. fol. xiij. Germany. fol. xv. and
xvj. Great Greece. fol. xxij. Graecia. fol. xxvij. Great Britain. fol. xlij.
Galizia. fol. xliij.
H.
THe Holy land. fol. ij. Hibernia. fol. ix. Hellas. fol. xxvij.
I.
IVdaea. fol. iij. Iewry. fol. iij. Israel. fol. iij. Ireland. fol. ix.
Illyris. fol. xvij. Italy. fol. xviij. Italy of the Gauls. fol. xix. Isole de
Trimite. fol. xxij. Icaria. fol. xxviij. Islands of the Ionia^ sea. fol. xxix.
Iasons voyage. fol. xxxv. Ireland. fol. xlj.
K.
The Kings Monastery. f. xl.
L.
THe Low countries. fol. xiiij. Latium. fol. xxj. Lesbos. fol. xxviij. Lemnos.
fol. xxviij. Limbourgh. fol. xlv.
M.
MAn. fol. ix. Monte Circello. fol. xxij. Magna Graecia. fol. xxij. Moesia.
fol. xxiiij. Mar Maiore. fol. xxv. Mona. fol. xlvj.
N.
THe Navigations or voyage of Aeneas. fol. xxxiij.
O.
THe Orkeney isles. fol. ix. The Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. fol. xxxij.
P.
PAlestina. fol. ij. The Peregrination of S. Paul. fol. iiij. The Peregrination
of Abraham. fol. v. Pannonia. fol. xvij. Pontus Euxinus. fol. xxv. The
Peregrination of Ulysses. fol. xxxiiij. The Paradise of Thessaly. fol. xxxvj.
The Paradise of Antiochia in Syria. fol. xxxvij.
R.
THe Roman world. f. vij. The Roman empire. f. vij. Rhodus. f. xxviij. Rhenia.
f. xxviij.
S.
SHepey. fol. ix. Spain. fol. x. Sicilia. fol. xxiij. Samos. fol. xxviij.
Sardinia. fol. xxix. Sardegna. fol. xxix.
T.
TEnet. fol. ix. Tuscia, or Tuscane. fol. xx. Trinacria. fol. xxiij. Thrace.
fol. xxvj. Tempe Thessalica. fol. xxxvj.
V.
THe Voyage of Alexander the Great. fol. xxxij. The Voyage or navigations of
Aeneas. fol. xxxiij.
W.
The West Isles. fol. ix.
profile portrait of Abraham Ortelius Spectandum dedit Ortelius mortalib.
orbem, Orbi spectandum Galleus Ortelium. Papius
A P O VITAE SCOPVS



A DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.
THIS Map next ensuing contains and represents the portraiture of the whole
earth, and of the maine Ocean that enuirons and compasses the same: all which
earthly Globe the Ancients (who were not as then acquainted with the New world,
not long since descried) divided into three parts; namely, Africa, Europe, and
Asia. But since that discovery of America, the learned of our age have made
that a fourth part, and the huge Continent under the South pole, a fifth.
Gerardus Mercator the Prince of modern Geographers in his
neuer-sufficiently-commended universal Table or Map of the whole world,
diuides this Circumference of the earth into three Continents: the first he
calls that, which the Ancients divided into three parts, and from whence the
holy Writ bears record, that mankind had their first original, and first was
seated: the second, is that which at this present is named America or the West
Indies: for the third, he appoints the South maine, which some call
Magellanica, as yet on very few coasts thoroughly discovered. That this orb or
mass of the earthly Globe contains in circuit, where it is largest, 5400
German or 21600 Italian miles, antiquity has taught, and late Writers have
subscribed to their opinion. And these so manifold portions of earth (says
Pliny in the 11. book of his Natural history) yea rather, as some have
termed them, the prick or center of the world (for so small is the earth in
comparison of the whole frame of the world) this is the matter, this is the
seat of our glory. Here we enjoy honors, here we exercise authority, here we
hunt after riches, here men turmoile and tire themselves, here we move and
maintain civil dissensions, and by mutual slaughter make more room upon the
earth. And to let pass the public tumults of the world, this in which we
force the borderers to give place and remove farther off, and where we incroch
by stelth upon our neighbors lands: as he that extends his lands and lordships
farthest, and cannot abide that any should seat themselves too near his nose,
How great, or rather how small a portion of earth does he enjoy? Or when he
has glutted his avarice to the full, How little shall his dead carcass
possess? Thus far Pliny.

The situation of this earth and sea, the disposition of the several regions,
with their inlets and gulfs, the manners and inclinations of the people, and
other memorable and note-worthy matters are described by men of ancienter
times, such as follow: PTOLEMEY of ALEXANDRIA. CAIUS PLINIVS 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6
books of his Natural history. ARISTOTELES DE MVNDO written and dedicated to
Alexander the Great. STRABO in 17. books. SOLINVS POLYHISTOR. POMPONIVS MELA.
DIONYSIVS APHER and his Expositor. EVSTATHIVS. APVLEIVS in his book of the
World. DIODORVS SICVLVS in his five former books. MARTIANVS CAPELLA. PAVLVS
OROSIVS in the beginning of his History. AETHICVS and another of that name
surnamed SOPHISTA, not yet printed. JULIUS the Orator called by Cassiodore,
PRIMVS. BEROSVS described the antiquity of the World. ANTONIUS AUGUSTUS (if
the title be true) set down the Iournals of the Roman empire. SEXTVS AVIENVS,
the seacoasts. STEPHANVS, the cities. VIBIVS SEQVESTER, in an Alphabeticall
order, the Rivers, Fountains, Lakes, Woods, Hills, and Nations thereof.


By new Writers, as RAPHAEL VOLATERANVS. ABILFEDE A ISMAEL, in the Arabian
tongue. IOANNES HONTERVS; and HIERONTMVS OLIVERIVS: both in verse. BARTHOLIMVS
in the eighth book of Austria. SEBASTIAN MUNSTER, that learned Divine,
diligent Historian, painful Hebrician and Linguist, well studied in all manner
of learning, and unto whom the learned Student is so much beholding. ANTONIUS
the Archbishop of Florence, in his History, in the third chapter of the first
Title. DOMINICVS NIGER. JOHN AVENTINE in his second book of his Annals. JOHN
CAMERS in his Commentaries upon Solinus. GEORGE RYTHAIMER. IOACHIM VADIAN.
PETRVS IOANNES OLIVARIVS upon Mela. LAVRENTIVS CORVINVS NOVOF. ANTONIUS
VERONENSIS. GVALTERVS LVDOVICVS in his Mirror or Looking-glass of the World.
S. ISIDORE of SIVILL in Spain. MICHAEL of VILLANOVA, in his Commentary upon
Ptolemey. ZACHARIAS LILIVS VICENT. HIERONYMVS GIRAVA in the Spanish tongue.
ALEXANDER CITOLINVS, in his Typocosmia or Pattern of the World written in the
Italian tongue. VINCENTIVS BELVACENSIS in the Mirror of Histories the second
book. GVILIELMVS POSTELLVS Barentonius. Sr. JOHN MANDEVILL and his companion
in his travels. ODERICVS of FRIVLY. MICHAEL NEANDER of Soraw. GAVDENTIVS MERVLA
in his 5. book of memorable things. FRANCISCVS MONACHI, in his Epistle to the
Archbishop of Panormus. ANDREAS THEVETVS, FRANCISCVS BELLEFORESTIVS, and PETRVS
HEYNSIVS, in French: but this latter also in Dutch rythmes or verse. LAVRENTIVS
ANANIENSIS, in the Italian tongue. ANTONIUS PINETVS, in French: and he has
withal set forth many Tables and Mappes (as the title shows) of Countries,
Cities and Towns, as well of Europe, as of Afrike, Asia and America. JULIUS
BALLINVS, has put forth the Plots and drafts of the most famous Cities of the
whole world, with a brief historical discourse, written in the Tuscane tongue.
The same is done by GEORGIUS BRVNO, in Latin, but much more beautifully and
curiously. BENEDICTVS BORDONIVS, has described all the Islands of the World. So
also has THOMAS PORCACCIVS: both in the Italian tongue. WOLFGANGVS LASIVS, and
IOANNES GOROPIVS BECANVS, the original and shifting of the nations of the
same. PETRVS APPIANVS, and BARTHOLOMAEVS AMANTIVS, have gathered the ancient
Inscriptions: and so has MARTINUS SMETIVS, but with greater diligence and care
than ordinary. IOANNES BOHEMVS, and ALEXANDER SARDVS have written of the
manners, rites and customs of all nations and people of it. The same has
FRANCISCVS BELLEFORESTIVS done in the French tongue.
map of the world TYPVS ORBIS TERRARVM.
QVID EI POTEST VIDERI MAGNVM IN REBVS HVMANIS, CVI AETERNITAS OMNIS, TOTIVSQVE
MVNDI NOTA SIT MAGNITVDO. CICERO: HOMINES HAC LEGE SVNT GENERATI, QVI TVERENTVR
ILLVM GLOBVM, QVEM IN HOC TEMPLO MEDIVM VIDES QVAE TERRA DICITVR. Cicero. EQVVS
VEHENDI CAVSA, ARANDI BOS, VENANDI ET CVSTODIENDI CANIS, HOMO AVTEM ORTVS AD
MVNDVM CONTEMPLANDVM. Cicero. HOC EST PVNCTVM. QVOD INTER TOT GENTES FERRO ET
IGNI DIVIDITVR, O QVAM RIDICVLI SVNT MORTALIVM TERMINI? Seneca. VTINAM
QVEMADMODVM VNIVERSA MVNDI FACIES IN CONSPECTVM VENIT, ITA PHILOSOPHIA TOTA
NOBIS POSSET OCCVRRERE. Seneca.

EVROPA.
WHy Europe should be so called, or who was the first Author of this name, no
man as yet has found out; unless (says Herodotus in his fourth book) we
should think that the whole region borrowed this name from Europa daughter to
the King of Epyrus. This Pliny calls the Nurse of the victorious and
conquering people of all other nations of the world, most beautiful and far
surpassing the rest: and so it is sometimes compared to Asia and Africa, not
for his greatness and compass, but for his might and power. Certain it is,
that this part, being most plentifully inhabited, is for multitude of nations
inferior to neither of the other. The North and Western sides hereof are
bathed by the Ocean; the South coast is disioyned from Africa by the
Mediterranean sea. Then Eastward by the Aegaean sea (now called Archipelago) by
the Euxin sea (named at this present Mar Maggiore) by the lake of Maeotis (now
termed Mar delle Zabacche) by the river Tanais (commonly called Don) and by the
Isthmus or straight of the maine land, which is from the head or fountain of
this river directly unto the North Ocean; it is divided from Asia, according to
the opinion of Glarean. And thus it bears the shape of a Peninsula (which
signifies a place of the earth almost disioyned and cut from the Continent, and
so well near on every side environed with waters) as in the Table it self is
manifest. The head hereof Rome, was whilome conqueresse of the earth.

The regions thereof (as they are now called) are Spain, France, Germany,
Italy, Slauonia, Greece, Hungary, Poland with Lithuania, Moscouia, or more
significantly Russia; and that Peninsula which contains Norway, Sweden, and
Gotland. Among the Isles thereof the first place is due to Britany containing
England and Scotland; then follows Ireland, Groenland, Frisland, and Island:
all situate in the maine Ocean. In the Mediterran sea it has Sicilia,
Sardinia, Corsica, Candia, Maiorica, Minorica, Corfu, Negropont; and others of
less note, the particular names and situations whereof are to be seen in the
Table.

This our Europe, besides the Roman Empire reverenced of all the world, has in
all (if you add those fourteen, which Damianus a Goes reckens up only in
Spain) eight and twenty Christian Kingdoms: whereby you may estimate the
worthiness of this region. It is a place out of measure fruitful: and the
natural disposition of his air is very temperate. For all kinds of Grain,
for Wine, and abundance of Woods, it is inferior to none, but comparable to the
best of the others. It is so pleasant, and so beautified with stately Cities,
Towns and Villages, that for the courage and valor of the people and several
nations, although it be less in quantity and circuit, yet might it well be
accounted, and indeed of all ancient Writers has it ever been accounted
superior unto the other parts of the World: most renowned also has it been
both in regard of the Macedonian Empire, and the great command and power of the
Romans. The praises thereof you may read in Strabo, who in his third book,
and seven books following, has most learnedly and excellently described it.
Peruse also other ancient Geographers. Of late Writers, amongst other things by
the way, Volateranus, Sebastian Munster, Dominicus Niger, Georgius Rithaimerus,
in their Geographies, have endeavored to paint it out in his colors. But Pius
the second, Christopher Cella and Anselmus his brother have described it a part
and by it self.

Diverse Iournals over all Europe in a manner, together with the distances of
places, have been committed to writing by Cherubin Stella, John Herbacius, and
George Mayerus. The like has been done by William Gratarolus in the end of
his book, which is entitled, De regimine iter agentium, or A direction for
travelers.

map of Europe

AFRICA
THis the Ancients have diversely distinguished; but at this present it is
divided by John Leo of Africa, into four chief parts; Barbary, Numidia,
Libya, and the Land of Negros. BARBARY, which is accounted the best, they
circumscribe with the Atlantic and Mediterranean seas; with mount Atlas, and
with the region of Barcha bordering upon Egypt. NVMIDIA, called by the
inhabitants Biledulgerid, and abounding with Dates (for which cause the
Arabians call it by no other name, but the Date-bearing region) is bounded
Westward by the Atlantic Ocean; Northward by mount Atlas; it stretches East
as far as the city Eloacat, which is an hundred miles distant from Egypt;
and the sandy Deserts of Libya embrace it on the South. LIBYA the third part,
is named in the Arabian tongue Sarra, which word signifies a Desert. It
begins East from Nilus, and thence runs West as far as the Atlantic
sea; Numidia lies to the North of it, and the Land of Negros to the South. Now
follows the fourth part, which they call NIGRITARVM terra, either from the
inhabitants, which are of a black color, or from the river Niger, that
runs through the country. It is confined North by Libya; South by the
Aethiopick Ocean; West by Gualata; and East by the Kingdom of Gaoga. And here
we are to note, that according to this their division all Africa is included
within the Mediterran, Atlantic, and Aethiopick seas and the river Nilus;
wherefore Egypt and Aethiopia are accounted parts of Asia, which we
notwithstanding think more properly to belong to Africa: For the true
Aethiopia contains at this day Presbyter John's Empire, which by all late
Writers is ascribed to Africa. We therefore with Ptolemey judge that it ought
to be bounded by the Mediterran and Ocean seas, rather than by any river
whatsoever; and so it has the form of a Peninsula, being joined to Asia by an
Isthmos or small neck-land, which lies between the Mediterran sea and the
gulf of Arabia. The South part hereof was unknown to our ancestors, till the
year 1497, whereas Vasco de Gama first doubling the Cape de buona speranza or
of good hope, and sailing about Africa, came to Calicut in East India. This
Southern part by the Persians and Arabians is called Zanzibar.

At the foresaid Cape of good hope the inhabitants are exceeding black; which
we thought in no wise to omit, because all men suppose the cause of blackness
to be heat, and the nearenesse of the Sun; whereas here the Sun scorcheth no
more, than about the Straight of Magellan (if we measure the heat of the place,
according to the position of the heavens and distance from the Equinoctial
line) where notwithstanding the people are reported to be marvelous white. But
if we will needs ascribe this blackness to the scorching heat of the Sun, let
us consider, what makes the Spaniards and Italians look so white, whenas they
are equally distant from the Equinoctial with the inhabitants of the foresaid
Cape; namely the one toward the South, and the other toward the North.
Presbyter John's people are of a brown color; in Zeilan and Malabar the
inhabitants are coal black, yet all in one and the same distance from the
equator, and under the very same parallele of the heavens. * And on the
contrary, why did Herodotus and Pindarus describe such as inhabited the same
climate with themselves, namely Colchis, to be of a black color, and curled
hair? Herodotus in his Thalia makes the Indians black like the Aethiopians:
which the experience of our times confirms. I know Herodotus will have the
cause hereof to be the seed of the parents, which he says is not white, as
that of other people, but black. To whom Postellus also subscribeth, and
imputes the original of this blackness unto Chams curse. Against which
opinion I have nothing to allege. Let the truth of the matter rest upon the
authors credit. But this a man may think more strange; that in all America
there were no black people found besides a few, only in one place called by
them Quareca. What then is the efficient cause of this color? Is it the
dryness of the heaven, or of the earth? Is it perhaps some hidden property of
the soil? Or a kind of quality inherent to the nature of men? Or is it all
these united in one? But these things we leave to be considered by them, who do
more curiously search into the secrets of nature.

This portion of the world is called by the Greeks Libya, and by the Latins
Africa, because it is not molested with extremity of cold: or (if we may
credit Josephus) from Afer one of Abraham's posterity. Another deriuation of
the name you have set down by John Leo in the beginning of his first book of
the Description of Africa, who deriueth it from the Arabic theme Faraka,
signifying to disioine or separate; because it is disioyned from Europe by the
Mediterran sea; from Asia, as he says, by the river Nilus, or rather as the
best authors have taught, by the Arabian gulf called of the Greeks (...),
Mare rubrum the red sea: of the Hebrews (...) iam-suff, mare algosum vel
iuncosum the sedgie sea: of the Arabians the near inhabitants Bahci 'lkulzom
the sea alkulzom. Upon the like reason does Iul. Caesar Scaliger think that
Sicilia was so called of Seco which signifies, to cut, for that this Island
was thought of the ancients to have been a portion cut from the maine
Continent, and sometimes to have been joined to Italy. Others, after their
manner, nullo digno autore, nullo solido and certo argumento, do fetch the name
of Africa from Africus a king of blessed Arabia, whom they affirm to have
brought colonies hither and to have first inhabited the same.

The principal islands of this part (for here to express all by name, we
think it not necessary, because they are to be seen in the Table) are
Madagascar, the Canaries, the isles of Cape verde, and S. Thomas island situate
under the aequinoctiall, which abounds with sugar.

Among the old Writers none have particularly described this region. But
concerning the same read Salust his Bellum Iugurthinum; Hanno his navigations
about Africa, in Arrianus; and Iambolus his voyage, in Diodorus Siculus; and
likewise Herodotus his Melpomene. Barlaams narration of the inner Aethiopia or
India is extant in the Augustan Library. Of late Writers read Aloysius
Cadamostus, Vasco de Gama, Francis Aluarez, who traveled Aethiopia. But of all
others John Leo has most exactly described it; and Ludouicus Marmolius; and
Liuius Sanutus. John Barros also pron iseth a volume of Africa. Concerning the
river Nilus, the greatest in all the world, you have the letters of John
Baptista Ramusius and Ierom Fracastorius. Of Africa likewise you may read at
large in the second volume of M. Richard Hakluyts English voyages.

map of Africa AFRICAE TABVLA NOVA.
AFRICAM GRAECI LIBYAM APP:

EDITA ANTVERPIAE 1570.



The New World, commonly called AMERICA.
THat all this Hemisphere or halfe-rundle (which is called America, and in
regard of the large extension, The New world) should lie concealed from our
ancestors, till the year of Christ 1492, at what time Christopher Columbus a
Genoway first discovered the same; is a matter surpassing the measure of human
admiration. For considering both the diligence of ancient Geographers in
describing the World, and the commodious opportunity of most large Empires for
the searching out of new Regions, then also the insatiable avarice of mankind,
leaving nothing unattempted for the attaining of Gold and Silver, wherewith
these Countries incredibly abound; I have often wondered, how it could so long
have been hidden from our World. Some there are which suppose that this
Continent was described by Plato under the name of Atlas: my self also am of
opinion, that Plutarch speaking of the face in the body of the Moon, makes
mention thereof under the name of a Maine continent. Some think that Seneca
ravished with a Poetical fury, presaged the discovery hereof in these
Prophetical verses in the very end of the 2. Act. of Medea:

-- venient annis
Secula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet and ingens
Pateat tellus, Typhisque nouos
Detegat Orbs,
Nec fit terris vltima Thyle.
In English thus:

Long hence those years will come,
When The Ocean shall dissolve
Natures fast bonds and bars.
Then shall huge lands appear,
Typhis shall then detect
New worlds; nor Thyle then
Shall bound the paths of men.
Like to those Sibyllin verses, which (as Iacobus Nauarchus writes) were found
at the foot of the promontorie of the Moon (commonly called Rochan de Sinna)
upon the Ocean seashore, engraven upon a foure-square pillar, in the time of
Don Emmanuel King of Portugal, to this or the like purpose:

Voluentur saxa literis and ordine rectis,
Cum videas Occidens Orientis opes.
Ganges, Indus, Tagus, erit mirabile visu,
Merces commutabit suas vterque sibi.
In English thus:

The stone with mystic letters, row'ld shall be,
When West the treasures of the East shall see.
The Portugals and Indians (a thing admired)
Shall truck their wares, on either part desired.
Howbeit, that these verses are not ancient, but graven in our times; nor part
of Sibylles Prophesies, but counterfeit; I was advertised (being in hand with
the second edition of this my Theatrum) from Rome, by Caesar Orlando a
Ciuilian, in his letters, out of some printed works of Gaspar Varerius, in
which since that I my self have read the same. And afterward I found it
confirmed by Amil. Resende in his Antiquities of Portugale: namely, that in the
time of Don Emmanuel King of Portugale, one Hermes Caiado of the same country,
caused them to be engraven and buried in the earth: and when he supposed that
the marble began to corrupt with the moisture of the ground; pretending some
cause of recreation, he inuites his friends to a countrey-house of his, near
unto which this fained Prophecy lay hid. Wherefore being all set at meat, in
comes his Bailiffe with news, that his Laborers had by chance dug up a
stone engraven with letters. They all immediately run forth, they read it,
they admire it, they highly esteem it, and are ready to adore it, etc. See how
apt Caiado was to delude his friends. Marinaeus Siculus in his Chronicle of
Spain writes, that there was found in Gold-mines an ancient piece of coin
with Augustus Caesar's image upon it, and for the more confirmation of the
matter, that it was sent by the Archbishop of Consance to the Pope. But I am of
opinion, that it was there lost by the same family which first found it.
Josephus Acosta in his book De Natura noui orbis endeavors by many reasons to
prove, that this part of America was originally inhabited by certain Indians,
forced thither by tempestuous weather over the South sea which now they call
Mare del Zur. But to me it seems more probable, out of the history of the two
Zeni, gentlemen of Venice (which I have put down before the Table of the South
sea, and before that of Scandia) that this New world many ages past was entered
upon by some islanders of Europe, as namely of Groenland, Island, and Frisland;
being much nearer thereunto than the Indians, nor disioyned thence (as appears
out of the Map) by an Ocean so huge, and to the Indians so vnnauigable. Also,
what else may we conjecture to be signified by this word Norumbega (the name of
a North region of America) but that from Norway, signifying a North land, some
Colonie in times past has hither been transplanted? But why in mine opinion
the maine Ocean was never sailed by ancient Nauigatours, I have declared in my
Thesaurus Geographicus, speaking of OPHIR.

All this part of the World, (except the North tract thereof, whose Coasts are
not yet discovered) has in these last times been sailed round about. From
North to South it stretches in form of two Peninsulae or Demi-isles, which
are severed by a very narrow Isthmos or neck-land. The Northermost of the two
contains New Spain, the province of Mexico, the country of Florida and
New Foundland. But the Southermost (which the Spaniards call Terra firma)
contains Peru and Brasil. A description of all which regions the studious in
Geography may read in Leuinus Apolonius, in the Decads of Peter Martyr, and in
Maximilianus Transsiluanus, who writ all in Latin. Also to this purpose you
have many things worthy the observation in the Jesuits Epistles, and in
Maffeius his story of the Indies. Postellus also promises Discourses of
West-Indie-matters: and so does Fredericus Furius Caeriolanus.

These that follow have purposely written of America, but all in their
mother-languages, and for the most part in Spanish; but the better half of
them are translated into Italian.

PEDRO CIEcA DE LEON. GONSALVO FERNANDO DE OVIEDO. FERNANDO CORTEZ. PETER
ALVARADO. DIEGO GODOYA. ALVAREZ NVNNEZ. NVNNEZ DE GVSMAN. FRANCIS VLLOA.
FRANCIS VASQVEZ DE CORONADO. ANTONIE MENDOcA. FRIAR MARCO DE NIZZA. FERNANDO
ALARCHON. FRANCIS XERES. JOHN VERARZANO. AMERICO VESPVTIO. FRANCIS LOPEZ DE
GOMARA. JEROME BENZO, in Italian. IAQVES CARTHIER, and ANDREW THEVET, wrote in
French. JOHN STADEN, in Dutch.
Diverse of which Authors, and many that have written since, are translated
into English in the third volume of M. Hakluyts English Voyages.

map of North and South America or the new world AMERICAE SIVE NOVI ORBIS, NOVA
DESCRIPTIO.
Vlterius Septentrionem versus hae regiones incognitae adhuc sunt.



The peaceable or the south sea, called by the Spaniards MAR DEL SVR.
THis sea albeit unknown, yet was it not unnamed by ancient writers: for
Pliny calls it Ecum, and Orosius Orientale, that is, The East sea. Ptolemey
falsely terms it SINVM MAGNVM, A great bay; whereas he should have named it
MARE MAGNVM, A great sea. For of all the seas in the world it is the greatest
and the widest. In Paulus Venetus it is described under the name of Mare Cin,
(that is, as I interpret it out of Nubiensis Arabs, Bahci'ltzni vel alkini,
Mare Sinarum, The sea of China) and in Haithon Armenus (whom elsewhere we more
truly call Antonie Curchino) by the name of Mare Cathay. Well therefore might
it be named by the ancient and middle-age writers; but never was it fully
known and discovered, till Fernando Magellan a Portugale sailed thereupon.
Seen it was indeed, and as it were saluted in the year 1513, by Vasco Nunnez,
from the coast of Peru. But Magellan in the year of our salvation 1520. having
passed the straight by him found, and called after his own name (which it
hitherto retains, for every common Mariner calls it The Straight of
Magellan) with an heroic and Herculean courage entered this sea, which
uncertain it is, whether any ship before his had ever stemmed. For
meditating a voyage to the isles of the Moluccos, whereunto the Portugals
usually sailed from West to East; and intending to make thither a shorter cut
from East to West, he came at length unto them by this sea: in one of which
isles called Machian, he was slain in a skirmish. The course of his voyage was
this: Departing from Siuil with five ships, whereof one being his own, was
called by a name of good presage Victoria, he came to the fortunate or
Canary-isles; then to the Gorgones or Hesperides, now termed The isles of Cape
verde; and thence to the Straight abouenamed: which when he had found and past
through, he enters into this sea; where with a fresh and prosperous gale having
sailed upon the maine 40. days together, and beholding nothing but sea on all
sides, and still the sea; when he had crossed the South tropic he descried two
small barren and uninhabited isles: where notwithstanding, because they found
good fishing, they stayed two days and then departed, calling them the
Unfortunate isles. Now, they are known by the name of Tuberones, and the isles
of S. Peter. Then he proceeds on his navigations, and in the space of 3. months
and 20. days, having sailed over this vast Ocean 2400. leagues, he attained at
length to the Aequinoctiall, and thence to the desired Molucces. And because
(as we have said) he had for the most part a prosperous and no tempestuous
wind, he named this Pacificum or The peaceable sea, now called by the common
Mariner, The South sea, or Mar del Sur. Those that have written of the New
world, say, that this sea about those unfortunate isles, is most exceeding
deep, and that near unto the coast of Peru it yields pearls, and that
there are in it 7449. isles, so that some in our times not unfitly have called
the Western part thereof Archipelagus or A sea thick set with isles: seeing
this, like the Aegean sea (which is planted all over with the Cyclades, the
Sporades, and many other islands, and is called in the Italian tongue
Archipelago) is also with isles most notably replenished. In the bottom of
this sea Francis Vlloa and Antonie Digafetta do report, that there grows a
weed of 14. or 15. fathoms high within the water; and that it rises out of the
water to the height of some 4. or 5. fathom: so that sometimes you shall seem
not to sail through a sea, but rather through a green meadow. The place of
Aristotle in his book De Admirandis etc. does not much disagree from this;
where he writes of the Phoenicians which inhabited Gadyra, that when they had
sailed a while without the pillars of Hercules, they arrived at certain
regions abounding with weeds and slime, which were ouerflowed with the tides of
the sea. The very same affirms Iornandes in the beginning of his Getish
history; where he writes, that none could sail through the Ocean, being
impassable in regard of weeds or turfs, and for that cause unknown. Yea Pliny
and Antigonus out of Megasthenes have left recorded, that all the East Ocean
grows full of woods. And that the sea near Portugale should bear Oaks laden
with mast, Polybius reports in Athenaeus. Also, that the Bay Tree grows in
the Red sea, the same author affirms upon the credit of Pythagoras. Hereunto
you may add that of Theophrastus in his 4. book of the history of Plants,
cap. 7.8.9. and the testimony of Aelianus, lib, 13. de Animal. cap. 3. and
Strabo, lib. 16. and Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 103. lib. 6. cap. 22. and lib. 13.
cap. 25. and Plutarch in his natural questions concerning the face in the orb
of the Moon. All these are in some sort confirmed by Platoes fables or
histories in his Timaeus concerning the isle Atlantis; whose sea he affirms to
be vnnauigable by reason of the slime or oaze remaining of the same isles
inundation. But concerning the ship called La Victoria learn thus much: it is
not said amiss: Bare names often times things named do resemble: Manifest it is
by this ship, which under this happy name, the first voyage that ever she made,
was the only ship that carried away the victory of sailing quite over the maine
Ocean, for so many ages before. For departing from Spain, by the Straight of
Magellan, to the Moluccos, thence having doubled the Cape of Buona Esperanca,
and returned, whence she first put forth, she was the first of all ships and
inall ages, that ever circumpassed the whole earth. The same ship made out of
Spain a second voyage as far as S. Domingo and home again. Thither also she
made a third voyage; but in her return she was quite lost; neither was it ever
known what became of her. Antiquity would have thought she had been taken up
into the skies, and placed among the Constellations, like another Argo. Nor had
this prophetical verse of the peerless Poet been unfitly alleged in her
commendation: Then comes another Tiphys, another gold-fleeced Argo. Let Pliny
now cease to marvel, that out of a small hemp seed should grow that, which was
of force to carry up and down the globe of [his] earth. We in our age have
seen with the very same thing this world of [ours, much greater than his]
nauigated round about. Ours, I say: which that you may more perfectly
understand, do but compare the first Table of our Theater with the first of our
Parergon or By-worke, and you shall see the difference.

And here, I suppose, I shall not bestow my labor altogether in vain, by
adding certain particulars not commonly known, concerning the first discovery
hereof. Which by all our late Writers is not unworthily ascribed to Christopher
Columbus. For in the year 1492, he was the first man that laid it open, and
made it known, and communicated the use and benefit thereof to the Christian
world. Howbeit I find, that the North part of America (which lies nearest
unto Europe, and to some of our European isles, namely, Groenland, Island, and
Frisland; and is called Estotiland) was long since discovered by certain
Frislandish fishers, driven by tempest upon that coast: and afterward about the
year 1390, that it was reuisited anew by Antonie Zeno, a gentleman of Venice:
and that by the authority of Zichmi, then King of the said isle of Frisland, a
Prince in those times very valiant, and over all that sea, for his wars and
victories most renowned. Concerning this his expedition there are extant in
Italian certain Collections or brief extracts drawn by Francis Marcolino out
of the letters of Nicolas and Antonie Zeno gentlemen of Venice, who lived in
these parts. Out of which Collections I add this that follows touching the
description of this region. Estotiland (he says) abounds with all things
necessary for mankind. In the mids thereof stands an exceeding high mountain,
That you many better understand this relation, peruse our Table of America and
Scandia.
from whence issue four rivers that water the whole country. The inhabitants
are witty, and most expert in all kind of handicrafts. A language and letters
they have peculiar to themselves. Howbeit in this Kings Library there are
certain Latin books, no whit understood by them, which might perhaps before
that time be there left by some of their European neighbors that had traffic
with them. They have all kinds of metal, but specially gold, wherewith they
mightily abound. They exercise trade of merchandise with the people of
Greenland; from whence they fetch hides, pitch, and brimstone. The inhabitants
say, that toward the South there are countries rich of gold, and replenisht
with inhabitants. There are also many and great woods; out of which they have
matter for the building of their ships and cities; whereof and of fortresses
there are great numbers. Of the loadstones use in navigations they are utterly
ignorant. They also make mention of Drogeo, a region toward the South,
inhabited by Canibals, and such as are delighted to eat man's flesh; for want
whereof, they live with fishing, which they very much use. Beyond this there
are large countries and another New world; but the inhabitants are barbarous,
and go naked: howbeit against the cold of Winter they arm themselves with
beasts skins. These have no kind of metal: they live by hunting. For
weapons they use long and sharp-pointed staves and bows. They make wars one
upon another. Governors they have, and laws whereto they yield obedience.
Southward of this place they live in a more temperate climate, having cities
and idol-temples, wherein they sacrifice living men, whose flesh they afterward
devour. These have the use of gold and silver. Thus much concerning this tract
of land, out of the foresaid collections or extracts; wherein this also is
worthy the observation, that even then our European Pilots by means of the
loadstone sailed those seas. For I am of opinion, that there is not to be found
in any history a more ancient testimony touching the foresaid use of this
stone. And these things I was the willinger to adioyne to this Table, because I
see none of them that have written the histories of the world so much as once
mention this matter.

But concerning the loadstone or sea-compasse you are to understand, that the
first inuentour thereof was John Goia a citizen of Melfi, whom Alexander Sardus
in his book De inuentoribus rerum calls Flauius Campanus. For so write the
Italians, and so much is confirmed by Antonie Panormitanus in this one verse of
his: First Melfi Sailors taught, the loadstone how to use, and that in the year
of our Savior 1300. This Melfi called Amalphis in Latin, is a town situate
upon the seashore of Lucania. Goropius ascribes the finding out of this secret
to our Danes or Dutchmen; being persuaded hereunto, because the names of the
32. winds written upon the compass, are by all Pilots and Mariners, be they
French, Spaniards, or of what nation soever, expressed in the Dutch tongue:
which I confess to be true, if you except the Italians only: for they both
write and speak of these winds in their own mother-language. Howbeit seeing
all our nauigatours of Europe, be they Spaniards, French, English, or Dutch, do
express them in our language, I am verily of opinion, that as it was first
found and used by the Amalfitans or Italians especially within their own
Mediterran sea: so was the knowledge thereof from them derived unto our
Netherlanders, and most of all to those of Bruges; whose city at that time
(before all traff^que was reduced to Antwerpe) was a famous mart-towne, and
frequented by Italians, especially of Venice, as the foresaid Zeni report: and
according to the testimony of Peter Quirini, Christopher Fiorouanti, and
Nicolas Michele, who in this our Ocean suffered that horrible shipwreck which
we read of in the Italian volumes: witness also Lewis Cadamosta, who in his
Epistles written about the year 1454, affirms this city of Bruges to be a
Mart inferior to none else in all the North parts of the world. Wherefore,
that the citizens of Bruges received the vs^ of the sea-compasse from the
Italians, and out of Italian translated the names of the winds into their own
language, and that from them the other nations before mentioned borrowed this
knowledge, I see not well, how it may be denied. Of the nature and admirable
virtue of the loadstone you may read many notable things in Liuius Sanutus his
description of Africa, printed in Italian at Venice.

The isles or Solomon, which in this table you see described about Noua Guinea,
were not long since discovered by Oliver Mendanio, after he had conducted his
fleet out of the part of Lima in Peru, and had sailed over this huge Ocean: as
I find recorded in Josephus Acosta his 1. book and 17. chapter De natura
nouiorbis.

map of the Pacific Ocean region MARIS PACIFICI, (quod vulgo Mar del Zur) cum
regionibus circumiacentibus, insusisque in eodem passim sparsis, novissima
descriptio.
SPE ET METV.

GENIO ET INGENIO NOBILI DN. NICOLAO ROCCOXIO, PATRICIO ANTVERPIENSI,
EIVSDEMQVE VRBIS SENATORI, Abrahamus Ortelius Regiae Mts. geographus lub.
merito dedicabat.

1589.



NEW SPAIN.
THis Province was about the year 1518 forcibly subdued to the Spanish
government, under the command and conduct of Fernando Corlez: who with the
great slaughter of his own people, but far greater of the inhabitants
fighting for their liberty, conquered the same. It is a region rich of silver
and gold: for it has very many rivers yielding sands or grains of perfect
gold. Upon the coast of this country are many commodious fishings for pearl.
Salt lakes here are diverse, the water whereof through the heat of the Sun is
converted into excellent salt. Here is great abundance of Cassia fistula, and a
kind of fruit in the Mexican language called Cacao, somewhat resembling an
Almond: which is with them very highly esteemed; for hereof they make a kind
of drink, to their own taste most delicate. The seas and rivers belonging to
this country abound mightily with fish. Their rivers also breed Crocodiles,
whose flesh is food to the inhabitants. In these places this creature is for
the most part above twenty foot long. It is a country very mountainous and
beset here and there with most lofty and cragged rocks. So great is the
diversity of languages in these regions, that one cannot understand another
without an Interpreter. The principal Colonies to be seen in this Table,
which in New Spain have been planted by the Spaniards, are first Compostella,
the seat of a Bishop, and of one of the Kings counsels. Colima, by another name
called the city of the Purification. Guadalajara, a town most famous, and head
of the Kingdom of New Gallicia. Mechoacan, a Bishops sea also. Sacatula, the
city of Angels, a mother-towne and a Bishopric. Mexico, a Kingly city, or
rather Queen of all the cities in the New world; situate upon the bank of a
lake, or rather of a fenne: yea the very ground-plot of this city is so fenny,
that you cannot come thither, nor depart thence but over bridges and cawseys.
The lake adjoining is salt, being six leagues long and five broad. Fishes it
has none, but very small ones; which more aptly may be called worms than
fishes: of whose putrefaction, which is there caused by the heat of Summer, the
air is sometimes so infected, that it is most unwholesome dwelling there: yet
is it as much frequented with inhabitants and merchants, as any mart-towne in
Europe. It is a large city; for in compass it contains about three leagues.
The other lake adioining to this, is fresh water, and very plentiful of fish;
wherein also stand many towns. There are likewise a great number upon the
banks of either lake. In this city (as Jerome Giraua reports) there was by
Pope Paul the third established the seat of an Archbishop, in the year 1547.

This city was taken by the Spaniards 140 years after the first foundation
thereof; Montezuma at the same time being King, the ninth in number. A wonder,
how in so few years it should grow to such largeness and magnificence. The
nature, situation, and customs of this city and of the territory adjacent,
who desires more perfectly to know, may read the relations of Fernando Cortez.
Extant they are in the volume entitled Nouus orbis; and in the volume of
Nauigations printed at Venice in Italian: but especially John Gonsaluo, who in
his little book of China has a most large description of this region. You
have also many notable discourses hereof in the third Volume of M. Hakluyts
English voyages.

map of Mexico or Nova Hispania HISPANIAE NOVAE SIVAE MAGNAE, RECENS ET VERA
DESCRIPTIO. 1579.
Lectori, Partium longitudinis huius tabulae inituum non fumitur Ptolemaico
more ab infulis Canarijs, versus Orient; sed a Toletano Hispaniensis
meridiano, Occidentem versus.

Notularum circa Mexico explanatio.

a. Escalpucoleo. b. Tucuba. c. Istapalapa. d. Ximaloaca. e. Teutitlan. f.
Gucytitlan. g. Mexicalcingo. h. Culiacan. i. Catlavaca. k. Nicsquique. l.
Cinarantepec. m. Xiquicpico. n. Ocellotepec. o. Vcicilapa. p. Mimiapa. q.
Tecayuca. r. Chalcontengo. s. Tapalcapan. t. Tisquiquiac. u. Xilocingo. x.
Chiconantla. y. Techcistlan. z. Caltoca.




The Province of CVLIACAN.
THis Province of CVLIACAN is part of the kingdom of New Galicia. It was
discovered under the government of Charles the fifth, in the year 1530. In
this region is one only colonie of Spaniards called, The town of S. Michael.
Villages here are very many, built by the inhabitants; all which before the
Spaniards arrival were at their own liberty: yielding obedience to no King
or Governor. The region is indifferently furnished with things necessary. Out
of the mountains is dug great abundance of silver. The inhabitants are
addicted to war and robbery. They that dwell upon the coast, employ most of
their time in fishing; but the vplandish people live by hunting. They go
naked, covering only their priuities with a piece of Cotton. They have many
languages. They lodge for the most part in the open air. They are a most
beggarly nation.

CVBA and HISPANIOLA.
THis Island of Cuba is so called by the natural inhabitants; but by the
Spaniards Fernandina, and Joanna; and (as Peter Martyr reports) Alpha and
Omega. In length it extends East and West 300 Spanish leagues: containing in
breadth fifteen, and in some places twenty of the said leagues. The land is
very mountainous, but rich of gold, and excellent copper. Madder, which the
Apothecaries, because it is very apt to die wool and leather, call
Diers-madder, is here found in great abundance. It is in all places beautified
with thick woods, with rivers and pooles of fresh water: albeit there are
lakes naturally salt. The woods breed up Hogs and Kine in great plenty: the
rivers sometimes yield grains of gold. It contains six colonies or towns of
Spaniards: the principal whereof called Sant Jago, is the seat of a Bishop.
But Hauana is the chief mart and haven town of all the Isle. Two wonderful
things Gonsaluo de Ouiedo describes in this Isle: one, a valley extended
between two mountains some three Spanish miles in length: (the Ancients would
have named it, as in Gallia Narbonensi, now called Prouence, The stony field)
which brings forth round stones in so great abundance, that a man may lade
whole ships with them, being by nature framed so exactly round, that no
Turner can amend them. The other is a mountain not far from the sea,
whereout issues a kind of Bitumen or Pitch in so great a quantity, that it
runs into the sea, and there floats far and wide, according as it is
carried by the waves or winds. This Pitch, they say, is very commodious for
the calcking and braying of ships.

HISPANIOLA lies to the East of Cuba. This Isle by the first inhabitants was
called Quisquaeia, afterward Haiti, and Cipanga likewise. But the Spaniards
name it Hispaniola, and (of the principal city) San Domingo. The compass
hereof is 350 leagues. It is an Isle rich in Sugar, and it has many
Gold-mines. It is very strange that is reported concerning a little fly very
common in this Island, called by the inhabitants Cucujo, and as big almost as
one of the joints of a man's finger, having four wings, two very thin, and the
other two greater and harder, wherewith the thin ones are covered. This shines
in the night as glowe-wormes do with us. The force of this light is not only
in his eyes, sparckling like fire, but also in his sides, so that by lifting up
his wings, he shines more flying, than when he lies still. By the natural
courtesy of this little creature, all their chambers, they say, are so
lightsome even in the darkest nights, that a man may read and write very
plainly without the help of any other light. This light of theirs is augmented
by their number; so that many will give a greater light than a few. Whosoever des
res a larger description of these Islands, let him read the history of the New
world written by Jerome Benzo, Peter Martyr his Decads of Islands lately
discovered, and other writers of America.

map of Culiacan or Nova Galicia CVLIACANAE, AMERICAE REGIONIS, DESCRIPTIO.
Sciat lector; Auctorem Anonymum, qui hanc Culiacanam regionem, et has insulas
perlustrauit, et descripsit: regionum longitudines non ut Ptolemaeus, alijque
solent; a Fortunatis insulis, versus Orientem sumsisse: sed a Tole to Hispanie
vmbilico, Occidentem, ex eclypsibus ab ipsomet obseruaris deprae: hendisse.



map of the West Indies HISPANIOLAE, CVBAE, ALIARVMQVE INSVLARVM
CIRCVMIACIENTIVM, DELINEATIO


PERV.
THe Spaniards divide the South part of America into five regions, namely, The
golden Castilia, Popaian, Peru, Chili, and Brasil. Peru in times past before
the Spaniards coming thither was much larger, under the government of the
Ingas, than at this present, as Giraua and others write. Now they confine it
with Quito on the North, and with Puerto de Plata on the South. It was thus
named from a river and haven named Peru. At this present they divide it,
according to the situation thereof, into three parts; into Sierras, Andes, and
Plains. The plain country they call that which lies next the sea; Sierras
are the mountains; and Andes a region beyond the mountains toward the East.

The head-city of this country of Peru is Lima, otherwise called La ciadad de
les Reges, where the Kings seat, and the Chancerie of the whole Kingdom
remains. Also it is the sea of an Archbishop, who under his jurisdiction has
these Bishoprics following; Quito, Cusco, Guamanga, Arequipa, Paz, Plata,
Trugillo, Guanuco, Chacapoia, Puerto viejo, Guajaquil, Popajan, Charchi, S.
Michael, and S. Francis.

That this is the richest of gold of all the countries in the world, besides
many other, these few arguments do evidently demonstrate. Francis Xeres
writes, that in Cusco there were houses, whose pauement, walls and roofes
were covered quite over with plates of gold. Giraua reports, that the
inhabitants of the province Ancerna go to wars all armed in gold from head to
foot: their habergions, their brest-plates, their leg and thigh harness,
consist wholly of gold. The same author affirms, that out of certain
gold-mines near Quito is dug more gold than earth. Those that have written
the story of King Atabalipa, do agree in this, that he offered so much gold
to the Spaniards for his ransom, as the room wherein he was prisoner would
contain. It was two and twenty foot long, and seventeen foot broad: this he
offered to fill so high as he could reach upon the wall with his longest
finger; or if they thought better (mark also the infinite quantity of silver
in this region) he offered to fill it twice with silver even to the very roof.
It is also recorded, that the Spaniards at their first entrance upon this
country, shod their horses with gold and silver shoes.

This region in times past was governed by Ingas (which word signifies Kings,
or supreme Governors) of whom I find this catalogue or pedigree in Simon
Fernandez. The first was MANGOCAPA; him the Peruuians deny to have been borne
of a man, supposing that he was made out of a certain rock, which is to be
seen nere Cusco. This man of his wife Mama Guaco begat a son named
SICHEROCA. He being more warlike than his father, subdued many bordering
nations, and enlarged the limits of his Empire. Of his wife Mama Cura he had
issue LOCVCOPANGVE, the third Inga. This King thought it better to keep that
which his father had got, than with new conquests to augment his dominions.
Being very aged he took to wife Mama Anauerque; which brought him forth a
son, and successor, called MAYTACAPA. This successor of his joined the
province of Cusco to his fathers Empire. Of his wife Mama Yacchidela he begat a
son named CAPAC YVPANGVE who achieved nothing worthy of memory. He had also
by his wife Mama Cagna, a son called INGA RVCA. But neither did he in all his
life any memorable act; save that he took to wife Mama Micay, of whon he begat
many sons; concerning one of which named Yaguar Guacinga Iupangue, they
report this story: Being a child of three months old, he was conveyed away by
a certain Cacique to be murdered; but while they were consulting whether they
should kill him, or no; it came to pass that drops of blood trickled from the
infants weeping eyes: which they expounding as a matter prodigious, surceased
their intent of murdering him. In the mean time being found by a stranger, and
restored to his father, he proved a most valiant and warlike Prince; insomuch
that he subdued many bordering nations. He married Mama Chiquia, of whom he had
issue male VIRA COCHA, who succeeded him in his Empire, and enlarged it not a
little. After him reigned PACHACOTI his son borne of his wife Mama Yunto
Cayan. This Prince in martial exploits surpassing all his ancestors,
conquered diverse and sundry nations. He laid the first foundations of the
Castle of Cusco. After death he left behind him for his heir TOPA INGA
YVPANGVE begotten of his wife Mama Anabarque; who not only finished the castle
that was founded by his father, but treading also in his warlike steps, he wan
from his neighbors the kingdoms of Chili and Quito, annexing the same to his
crown. These common high ways most admirable to the world, from Cusco to
Charchas, and so to Chili, he was the first author of; which being all the way
built of Chasqui (or as we term them, wooden piles) he made the journey very
short: for by the benefit hereof he marched with a company of speedy footmen (a
thing incredible in our ears) the space of 120 leagues in three days: (for
before the Spaniards coming, the inhabitants never knew what beasts of carriage
meant.) This King left behind him above 150 sons. But GVAINA CAPA whom he
had by his wife Mama Oclo, he ordained to be his heir: who, albeit he had a
father so valourous, and so renowned both in peace and war; yet by his brave
exploits he far surpassed him: for he extended the bounds of the Peruuian
Empire a great way farther than before. The Common wealth he reduced into a
better form, he reformed many laws, and some he ordained anew. He took to
wise Coia Pilico Vaco; by whom when he could have no issue, he married diverse
others: of which wives he begat sons not only equal, but superior in number
to those of his father; the eldest whereof was GVASCAR, whose mothers name was
Raua Oclo. He had also another son named ATABALIPA. Between these two
brothers some dissension arising about the government of the kingdom,
Atabalipa remaining in Cassamalca, and Guascar in Cusco; Atabalipa marching
with an army against his brother, became Victor, took him, and carried him
captive to Cusco, in which place he afterward put him to death, and was there
himself also burned by the Spaniards. This was the end of these two brothers.
Whereupon MANGO Inga a third brother took the government map of Peru or the
Pacific Coast of South America PERVVIAE AVRIFERAE REGIONIS TYPVS. Didaro
Mendezio auctore.
map of Florida LA FLORIDA.
Auctore Hieron. Chiaues
Cum Priuilegio.

map of Guastecan or La Huasteca GVASTECAN Reg.
upon him (for Guaina Capa, as is aforesaid, had many wives and sons.) Mango
deceasing, appointed for his heir Inga XAIREMTOPA, who married himself to Coio
Cuxi Varcay daughter to Guascar. This man before he was crowned with Imperial
diadem changed his name, and called himself MANGO CAPA PACHVTI YVPANGVE. But
he submitted himself to King Philip, and became his vassal. This was done in
the year 1557. the sixth of January upon the very feast of the three Kings.
Concerning these Ingas, and their memorable acts Pedro Cieca de Leon promised a
peculiar volume: whether he has performed it I know not. Suffices thus much
to have been spoken of the Kings. Now let us out of three worthy eyewitnesses
add somewhat concerning the nature and disposition of the people. Jerome Benzo
of Millan, who lived many years in those countries, in his book of the New
world dedicated to Pope Pius the fourth, writes that the inhabitants of Peru
are naturally endued with a more sharp and subtle wit, than any other Indians
subdued by the Spaniards. The same author (speaking of them in another place;)
Mark my words (says he:) I can by no means be induced to believe that which
some report of them; namely, that they are addicted to theft, and that by their
laws, the least robberies deserve hanging. But who can imagine them to be
thieves, whenas they are neither covetous nor rich, esteeming nothing more base
than silver and gold? Of which, it they had a mind unto the same, they might
without controlment take as much as they would out of the Mines, like water out
of the fountain. Unless perhaps they have learned of the Spaniards to play
the thieues, who have planted their colonies in that country, etc. Bartholmew
de las casas a Spaniard of the order of Dominick, and Bishop of Chiapa, a great
city of the New world, in that volume which he entitled The destruction of the
Indies, and dedicated to King Philip; he calls them a peaceable, humble,
gentle, and harmless nation: and in another place, a simple, plain-dealing
people, void of all malice, most obedient and faithful, not only to their own
natural Princes, but also to Christians that have any command over them. And
if there be any in all the world, then these are of a most quiet disposition,
not given to brauling or tumults, nor greedy of revenge. Friar Iodocus de
Reijcke, by order a Franciscan, born in Mechilin, who in Quito a city of this
region, erected the first monastery of his order, writes in his letters (which
I my self have read) to the Guardian of the Franciscans at Antwerpe: All these
Indians (says he) thirst after the Gospel, and albeit they are barbarous, and
without learning, yet nature has taught them an excellent kind of government,
and behauior. Among them there was not a beggar found, notwithstanding they are
all poor in food and apparel. And a little after; With these people was found
so great justice and integrity of life, that therein they excel even those
which abound with books and learning. The same in another letter to the Friars
of his order in Flanders: It is (says he) a witty, bold, and warlike nation,
giving us hope of their easy conversion to Christianity, if they be not
discouraged therefrom by the Spaniards avarice. These letters, I think are not
printed: The very originals of them, according to his singular humanity and
favor to these my studies were bestowed upon me by the worthy citizen Adrian
Marselar, Senator of Antwerpe, being the said Iodocus his kinsman by the
mothers side. Also of this F. Iodocus mention is made by Ierom Benzo, and Pedro
Cieca a Spaniard, in their stories of the West Indies.

FLORIDA.
THis is part of North America. It is called by the name of Florida in regard
of the feast of Easter, which the Spaniards call Pascha Florida, because upon
that very day in the year of our Lord 1512, it was (as I read in Giraua)
under the conduct of John Ponce of Leon, first of all coasted, and discovered.
Theuet (like himself) writes, that it was so called, because it was all green
and flourishing. By the inhabitants it was named Iaquasa. The French have more
than once attempted to plant a colony here: but hitherto they were never able
in regard of the Spaniards ill will, who often expelled them from thence. It is
inhabited by a savage, forlorn, and beastly people. They live upon spiders,
ants, lizards, serpents, and other venomous, and creeping things. The region is
very fruitful, and rich of gold. Concerning this country James Cole my nephew
from the mouth of an eie-witnesse (as he says) writes unto me as follows:
The inhabitants are of a brownish color; but the Kings wives are black by a
kind of art. The King has power to give, or rather to sell wives to such as
are desirous to marry. A married woman being taken in adultery, she is for her
incontinency from morning till night bound with her back to a tree, her arms
and legs stretched abroad, and sometimes she is beaten with rods. Their women
within three hours after they are delivered of child, carry forth their
infants, and wash them in the river. They have no hatchets, nor spades, but of
stone. In stead of ploughes, they have certain wooden pickaxes, wherewith
they open the ground, and sow a kind of grain commonly called Turkish or
Ginny-wheat, whereof they have yearly two or three crops. They have also
Pheasants, etc. They sow in the months of May, June, and July; and reap
within six weeks after. Concerning this region read the book of Jacques
Morguez le moine.

GVASTECAN.
THis also is a region of North America, and part of New Spain. The
inhabitants are poor. Along the seacoasts, and the bancks of rivers, they
live for the most part of fish, but in the inland with Guinie-wheat, which they
call Maiz. Otherwise they are a people gentle enough. The Spaniards have
planted two colonies here: the one is called Panuco, of the river that runs
by it; and the other S. James, of the valleys. Not far from Panuco, near the
town called Tamatao, stands an hill with two fountains upon it; one whereof
disgorgeth black pitch; and the other red, which is scalding hot.

The BRITISH Isles.
THE EMPIRE OF GREAT BRITAIN included within the parallels 49. and 63. and the
Meridians or longitudes 9. and 26. bounded upon the South by France, upon the
East by Germany, upon the North and West by the Vast Ocean, disioined from the
rest of the maine land as High Admiral of the seas comprehends that Island
which at this day contains the kingdoms of England and Scotland, together
with Ireland over against it Westward, the circumiacent isles, the Orchades,
Hebrides, Man, Anglesey, Wight, the Sorlings, and many others of less note,
and were generally of the old writers with one consent called, BRITANNICAE
INSVLAE, The British Islands taking their denomination, as seems, from the
greatest of them, commander of the rest, which indeed is properly called
BRITANNIA, Britain. So named (not of that fained Brutus, the bloody
parricide, as the fabulous historian Geffrey of Monmouth, against all reason,
authority and truth of story, has hitherto made the world believe: nor of the
Welsh word Prydain or Prydcain, as the learned Britain Humfrey Lhoyd has
thought:) but of Brit, a Celticke word, which signifies Painted: For these
people, as Caesar and other old writers report, used to paint their bodies, and
therefore were called of the Gauls, their next neighbors, BRITONES: as those
people of the same nation, who to avoid the slavery and servitude of the
Romans, and withdrew themselves into the North parts, (from whom they
continually molested their colonies here), were of them, for the same reason,
in their language called, PICTI. The Greeks called it also ALBION, not of
Albion Neptunes son, which sometime sweied the scepter here, as some have
most fabulously taught; but of Alphion, the white cliffes upon the sea coast,
which first offer themselves to the eye of those which to this our land sail
hither from France: and indeed the Welsh poets call it Inis win, that is, as
Orphaeus the most ancient poet of the Greeks does interpret it, Nesos leu
caessa, and Leucaios Chersos, The white I Will, or The whiteland.

The first Inhabitants, which seated themselves here not long after the
universal Flood and Confusion of Babel, came hither from France, as by
Neerenesse of place, Likeness of language, Manners, Government, Customs and
Name is by the learned Clarencieux Camden, the only light of our histories, in
that his thrice renowned Britannia, evidently demonstrated. For to this day the
ancient Britans, the Welchmen do call themselves CVMRI, (not Cambri) as come
from Gomer, the son of Iapheth, (called of the Latins Cimber,) from whom are
descended the Celtae or Gauls. The Romans, a second nation, under the conduct
of Julius Caesar, about the year before the birth of CHRIST 54. entered
Britain and planted their colonies in diverse and sundry places of this Island.
The Scotts, observing the Roman legions to grow weak and their Empire to
decline, thereupon took occasion first to seize upon Ireland: then about the
year of CHRIST 446. great trouble arising in France, the Emperors were
constrained wholly to withdraw their forces from hence, and to leave the
Britains naked and open to the fury of the Pictes their enemies. From hence
ensued a double mischief: for first the unquiet and turbulent Pictes, thinking
that now the only opportunity was offered them to accomplish their desires,
thought to make sure work, called in the Scotts out of Ireland; combined
themselves together against the poor disarmed Britans: whereupon the Britans
were constrained, for safeguard of their lives and liberties, to call in, about
the year of CHRIST 440. the Angles, Saxons and Iuites, a warlike people
inhabiting along the sea coast of Germany, from the river of Rhein, unto
Denmark, to aid them against their violent enemies. The Normanes, lead by
William the Bastard, their Duke, took possession of Great Britain in the
year 1066. The Vandalles, Norweis and Danes, who by their piracies and
robberies a long time and often grievously vexed these Isles, never seated their
Colonies here, and therefore I pass them over with silence.

The form of Britain is triangular, like unto that figure which the
Geometers call Scalenum; or as Nubiensis the Arabian says, to the head and
neck of Alnaama, the ostrich, and therefore it may as well as Sicilia be called
TRINACRIA, The three-cornered I Will. The ancient Geographers did hold it, and
that deservedly, to be the greatest Island of the Maine Ocean; wherefore Solinus
says, it may well deserve the name of ANOTHER WORLD: and Matthew Paris for the
same cause calls it THE QVEEN or Empress of the Isles of the Ocean. In
respect of which large compass it has been in former ages divided into many
several jurisdictions and kingdoms: in the time of the Saxons, England the
South-east part into seven, and Wales into three. Great Egbert, in the year
800. reduced the Saxon heptarchy into a Monarchy. The Irish Princes, Nobles,
and Commons, after the incarnation 1172. united their Pentarchy to the crown
of Egbert, and swore allegiance to Henry the second King of England. Edward
the first, to these did knit, in the year after the birth of Christ 1282. the
triple crown of the Pety Kings of Wales. In these our days, the eternal
wisdom of the Great King of Heaven and Earth has cast all these, together
with the crown of Scotland, into one massy Imperial Diadem, and placed it
upon the head of our dread sovereign JAMES, lineally descended from those
mighty Monarchs, and shall (we doubt not) in time, add to these whatsoever
from them unto his Highness do belong.

BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, or the Empire of Great Britain contains Islands
Greater, and often mentioned in histories. BRITANNIA divided by the Romans into
Superior, the Higher, containing ANGLIA, England. CVMERIA, Wales.
Inferior, the Nether, now called SCOTIA, Scotland.
HIBERNIA, Ireland: upon the West of Britain.
Lesser, yet famous, belonging to England, from it South, Close to the shore of
Britain, VECTA, Wight. Upon the coast of France CAESARIA, Gersey. SARNIA,
Gernsey. And many other lesser.

West, From the point of Cornwall; SILLINAE, Silly, anno 145. In the midst
between England, Ireland, and Scotland, MONOEDA, Man.

Wales, MONA, called of the English Anglesey, of the Welsh, Tirmon. Scotland,
lying from it West; HEBRIDES, The West isles, in number four and forty.
North, ORCHADES, Orkney-iles: about thirty. THVLE, Schetland.





Of these British isles, (beside the ancient writers, Tacitus and Caesar)
read Henry Huntington, Polydore Virgill, John Mayor, Paulus Iouius, Gregory
Cenall in the 2. summa of his 3. book de re Gallica, Antony Sabellicus Enne.
10. lib. 5. William Paradine, Ieffrey of Monmouth, Ponticus Verumius, and Beda:
but especially M. William Camden Clarenceux his Britannia, whom when thou have
discreetly read, I doubt not but thou will think thou had particularly
surueyed the whole i will.

map of the British Isles including Ireland, Scotland, England, and Wales
ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, SIVE BRITANNICAR: INSVLARVM DESCRIPTIO.
Britannia oim insularum Occidentis and Septentrionis maxima and potentiss.
est: cuius potiorem hodie partem Angliam vocamus, ab Anglis videlicet Saxonum
gente, quae sub Valentiniano eam ingressa, tenuit. Haec veteribus Albion
dicebatur, ad differentiam, quum reliquae oe^s eo tractu Britannicae
dicebantur. Ab Occasu vicinam habet Hiberniam, hodie Irlandiam appellatam; and
regibus Angliae subditam.



Of SCOTLAND.
SCOTLAND, the North part of Britain, anciently called Albanie, and is of the
first inhabitants, (which they call the wild Scots, and dwell more in within
the land, retaining yet the old language,) at this day called Albaine, was
formerly called of the Romans, Britannia minor and secunda, as Lhoyd does
gather out of Sextus Rufus. This country is divided into 2. parts, by the rough
and craggy mount Grampius, (now Grantzbeen) whereof Tacitus makes mention. For
it beginning at the German ocean, near the mouth of the river Dee, coasting
along by Aberden, through the midst of the country toward the Irish-sea,
staieth at the lake Loumond. This Mountain was sometime the bound of the
kingdom of the Pictes and Scotts.

Scotland is fuller of mountains and more barren then England: Yet every where
it has many commodious ports and havens. For so is this country embraced of
the arms of the sea, that there is no house in it, as John Mayor affirms,
which is above twenty leagues distant from the salt water. In the valleys are
Lakes, meeres, pooles, rivers and fountains well stored with sundry sorts of
fish. In the mountains are champion plains, yielding great store of pasture
for cattle, and woods abounding with plenty of Dear. By the means of which
commodities it has been so maintained, that hitherto it might never be wholly
conquered: For in any eminent danger they presently fly to the woods and
bogges, for succor and refuge, where they have of venison and fish sufficient
store for provision of victual.

Scotland has many wonders, whereof some we have here set down out of Hector
Boethus. In Galloway says he, is a lake called Myrtoun, part of whose water in
the winter freezeth as other waters do, the other part was never known to have
been frozen in the greatest frosts that ever were. In the country of Carict
there are very great and large Oxen, whose flesh is very tender and of a
pleasant and delicat taste: Besides that, the fat never waxes hard, but is
always thin in the manner of liquid oil. The Sea that washes the coast of
this province, is very rich of oisters, herrings, congers, cockels, and other
such like fishes. In the province of Coyl about ten miles from the town Aer,
is a Stone, hardly twelve foot high, of 33. cubits thick, called of the
inhabitants, The deaf stone: For although you shall make never so great a
noise, nay if one shall shoot off a piece of ordinance on the one side, it
shall hardly be heard on the other side, except one be a good way off from it,
for then the sound may easily be perceived. In Lennox, which Ptolemey calls
Lelgouia, (Lelannonia, as I conceive out of Ptolemey, but I think our author
meant Selgouiae, which is far from this place) there is a very great lake,
which they call Loumond, above twenty four miles long, and eight miles broad;
It contains thirty Islands, whereof diverse have villages well inhabited, with
Churches and Chapels dedicated to the service of Almighty God. In this three
things are especially worth the observation. For the fishes there, most
wholesome and good, have no sins. The water often times, when the winds are
most calm and still, is so boisterous and rough, that it affraieth the best
experienced watermen from putting forth to cross the same: For the wind being
alaied the boats are taken in their midde-course, and are tossed with such
danger, that except some commodious haven shall fortune to be near hand, many
times they are ouerturned and cast away. Lastly, there is an island in it, very
good pasture for the feeding of cattle, which swimmeth and moves every way as
the winds drive. It is credibly reported, that there is a stone which grows
in Argadia (Argathelia or Argile) which if it be covered but a while with straw
or flax, it will set it on fire. At Slanis, a castle in Buquhan, there is a
cave of a strange nature. For the water that droppeth into it in continuance of
time is turned into a very white stone; and if within a certain number of
years they should not be taken out, it would have been long since filled up
with them. In this province there is no ratte ever seen; and if so be that any
should be brought in thither, it will not by any means live there. In the
country of Fife great store of a kind of black stone is dug out of the
earth, (we call it sea-coale) a most excellent kind of fuel. At the mouth of
the river Forth, in the maine sea there is a very high rock, out of whose
top a spring of fresh water, (a great miracle of nature) does run
abundantly. About two miles distant from Edinburgh, is a spring, upon the
top of whose water, dropps of oil, do continually swim, in such sort, that
if you take none from off it, there will be never the more: and if you take
ought from thence, there will be never the less. This oil is good against the
roughness of the skin. Thus far of the strange things of this Realm.
Scotland in the country of Drisdaile has a mine of Gold, in the which also is
found that which they commonly call Lazure. It has also mines both of Iron and
Lead.

The inhabitants which possess the South part, on this side the mount
Grampius, are more civil and humane: and do speak the English tongue. Those
which dwell in the North parts, are a rough and more hard kind of people (they
call them The wild-Scottes) and do wear mantles and skirts died with Saffron
after the Irish fashion, and go barelegged. They speak the Irish tongue. And
as the Language of Scotland is of two sorts, so are their manners as diverse.
These Marianus Scotus calls High-land-men, the other, I mean the
wild-Scottes, they call Low-land-men.

The chief city of Scotland is Edinburgh, there is the kings seat, and the
castle of Maidens, often mentioned in histories. Saint Andrew, and Aberdon are
two Universities. The city Glasow is the Archbishops sea. The town of Perth,
commonly called S. Iohns-toun, is the only town in Scotland that is walled
about. Of the wood Caledon, (whereof Ptolemey and other ancient writers have
recorded.) There is scarcely any mention to be found, only about the town of
Sterling, there remains some show of the name. Thus far of the kingdom of
Scotland: now it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the islands, that lie
round about the same, and do belong unto that crown.

The HEBRIDES, (commonly called the West-iles,) both for bigness and number do
excel the rest. Hector Boethus says that they be in number 43. But here he
reckons up the i will of Man as one of them, which is not subject to the
kingdom of Scotland, but is under the allegiance of the King of England;
neither do I think that it was ever accounted of the ancients among the
Hebrides. The first of the Hebrides is Aran, (otherwise called Boeth) then
Hellaw and Rothes. Not far from these is Alize, where are great plenty of
Barnacles, which they call Soland-geese The greatest of all and the most famous
is I Will, a fertile soil for corn, and rich for veins of metal. Then Cumber
and Mule. Near unto these is Ione, memorable for the tombs of Kings long since
buried there. Next unto this is Lewis, last of all is Hirth situate in the 43.
degree of latitude. Thus Boethus calls them. But John Mayor the Scot names
them thus, Argila, Aranea, Awyna, Butha, or Rothsaya, and Leuisora. In these
islands are those geese, which they call Clakes, (Gyraldus calls them
Bernacles) which Boethus affirms to breed of the sea and of rotten wood; and
not to grow upon trees, as the common sort believe and have published in their
writings. For if you shall cast, says he, a piece of wood into that sea, in
continuance of time, first worms do breed within the wood, which by little and
little become to have heads, feet and wings: at the last being fledge and
grown to their full growth, to the bigness of a goose, they attempt to fly,
and do sometimes swim and sometimes use their wings as other Sea-foule do.
Beyond the Hebrides, are the ORCHADES, (or the Orkeney isles,) of which the best
is Pomona, famous for the Bishops-sea, a goodly Church, and two strong castles.
One of these John Mayor calls Zeland, which is 50. miles in length. In these
grow no manner of trees, nor any wheat, and yet otherwise of all other sorts of
grain they are very fertile. It breeds no serpent or venomous beast. In
Scotland they buy the barrell'd butter: the inhabitants having abundance of
Barley whereof they make a most strong kind of drink, and are very great
drinkers; yet, as Boethus says, you shall never see a drunken-man, or mad
man, one bestraught or a natural fool amongst them. The same author
affirms the like of the inhabitants of the isles of Scetland: but this is no
wonder, amongst them that drink naught but water. All the wealth and
commodities of these Scetland-men consist in Stockfish, and hides of beasts.
In the Hebrides they use the Irish tongue: in the isles of Orkeney they speak
the Gottish language. M. Iordanus in his map of Denmark says that the
Orchades are subject to the kingdom of Denmark: yet we know them to belong to
Scotland under the title of a Dukedom. But se what we have written of this in
the discourse to the map of Denmark. Of Scotland and of the islands adioining
thou may read more at large in Hector Boethus, John Mayor, and John Lisley,
Scottish-men which have written the histories of this their country.

map of Scotland SCOTIAE TABVLA.
Miliaria Scotica.

Cum Priuilegio.



Of ENGLAND.
THe South part of the Island of Britain, is, as we have said before, divided
into two parts. That part which is toward the East, abutting upon the German
Ocean, is of the Angles, a people of the Saxons which seated themselves there,
in their language called ANGLIA, or England, that is, the Angles land. The West
part, which is severed from that other by the rivers Seuern and Dee, and does
use the ancient British tongue, is of the same Angles or Englishmen called,
WALLIA or Wales: yet the Brittan or Welshman calls himself Cumro; and his
country Cumria; the English Saissons; and their country, Lhoegria: neither do
they know, or at least they will not acknowledge, what England or an Englishman
does mean: So great difference there is between the languages of the several
nations of this Island.

All this South part, England, I mean, and Wales, has their proper king, unto
whom many Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons and great Noblemen are subject and
obedient. It is a country at all times of the year most kind and temperate.
The Air is thick, and so it is much subject to winds, clouds and rain: and
therefore in regard of thickness of the air it is neither oppressed with too
much heat or too much cold. For it is found true by experience that although it
be more Northerly than Brabant, Flanders, and other foreign countries, yet
here the winter is never so bitter nor the frost so eger as in those parts. It
has every where many hills, (without wood and water,) which notwithstanding
do bring forth very small and short grass, an excellent feed for sheep: and
therefore infinite flocks of sheep do bespread them, which either by reason
of the kindness of the air, or goodness of the soil, do yield most soft
wool far finer than those of other countries. And for that this country
breeds neither woolues nor any ravenous beast, you shall see in diverse places
flocks of sheep upon the hills, and dales, green pastures, commons,
fallowes, and corn fields; into which after the crop is off, every man, by a
certain ancient custom does put in his cattle in common, to wander here and
there without a shepherd. This indeed is that Golden fleece, in which
especially the riches of the inhabitants does consist: for an huge mass of
gold and silver, is by Merchants, which thither flock from all quarters for
such like wares, yearly brought into the Island, and there does continually
rest, for that it is by proclamation forbidden that no man may carry any money
out of the Realm. It abounds also with all sorts of cattle, except asses,
mules, camels, and elephants. There is in no place of the world greater and
larger dogs, nor better.

The soil is very fat and fertile, and naturally brings forth, beside all
sorts of corn and pulse, all manner of things, only the firre-tree, and, as
Caesar says, the beech tree, although that now it has in diverse places
plenty of beeches. The ay-green Bay tree does in these Northren countries no
where thrive better. Such abundance of Rosemary here does grow in all places
and that so high, that they often times do fence their gardens therewith. Wine
they have none, for the grapes seldom here do ripen, and is amongst them
planted rather for shade and pleasure, then for his fruit and profit. There is
in no country in Christendom more Crows than here, a kind of foul very
harmefull: for it does not only spoil the ripe and standing corn, but
as soon as it is shot they will stock and dig it up with their bills, so
that the husbandmen are feign at that time of the year to set Boys in the
fields with bow and arrows (for they are not afraid of men's voices) to skarre
them away.

The Ocean or maine sea, which beats upon the coast of this Island, abounds
with all manner of Fish: of which the Lucius, or Pike, as they commonly call it,
they esteem as a deinty dish, and therefore they often take it out of fenny
pooles and rivers, and put it into their fishponds and wears; where being
purged and cleared from that muddy savor, feed with eeles and other little
fishes, he grows exceeding fat and of a wholesome and pleasing taste. This
fish (which is a very strange thing) being brought alive into the fishmarket to
be sold, they open his belly with a knife, to show how fat he is: if he be
not sold, yet of that wound he dies not, but the slitte being sewed up, and
presently put into the pond, amongst the slimie tenches, it is by and by healed
again. There are no where in all the world either more dainty Oisters, or
greater store.

It yields also Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron, although no great quantity
of either sort: but of Lead, and Tin, (the Latins call that Plumbum nigrum,
this Plumbum album) in their kind the best, is here found in great abundaunce,
and from thence is transported to foreign nations.

The people are tall of stature, well favored and fair countenanced, for the
most part gray eied, and as in manner of pronunciation they much resemble the
Italian, so in proportion and feature of body and manners they little or nothing
differ from them. They shape their apparel much-what after the French fashion.
The women most fair and beautiful, do go very decently and comlily attired.
They feed most-what on flesh. The drink which they use, and do make of malt,
is indeed very good, wholesome and pleasant; much sought after in the Low
countries, and therefore conveyed thither in great abundance. At their meals
both dinners and suppers they fare well, daintilie, liberally, and are very
merry and pleasant. In war they are courageous and hardy, good archers, and
cannot abide delays and lingering; and therefore when they join battle and
come to blows, one part shall soon be utterly overthrown, for the conqueror
seiseth all into his hands. They build no Castles; yea those which their
ancestors have built in former ages, and now are decayed, ruinous and ready
to fall, they care not for the reedifying and upholding of them. Cities they
have, and many fair towns, goodly hamlets, streets, and villages. The chief
City, mart-towne, and imperial seat of their Kings is LONDON, situate upon
the river of Thames: joined with a fair stone bridge of twenty piles, very
goodly arched. Upon this bridge are houses so built on each side, that it
seems almost to be a continual street, not a bridge. This of the nature of
the soil, temperature of the air, manners and behavior of the people, we
have for the most part gathered out of Polydore Virgill his history of
England: for he has very curiously there described this Island. In England
these things are famous and worth the observation, as this verse shows, Mons,
and fons, and pons, ecclesia, femina, lana: Of rivers, and mountains, stone
bridges and wool: Fair women, and Churches, England is full.

IRELAND, is subject to the crown of England, so are diverse other lesser isles,
as Wight, Man, Anglesey, (the ancient seat of the Druydes, the Welshmen call
it, Tirmon mam Gumry, Man the mother of Wales, the Latins, this MONA, that
other MENAVIA) and those which now we call the Sorlinges (the Greeks called
them CASSITERIDES.) Gernsey and Gersey with other small islands about them,
although they be hard upon the coast of France, yet they do belong unto
England. Humfrey Lhoyd has so curiously described England together with the
Antiquities thereof, that others before him may justly seem to be accused of
great negligence. Him did Alexander Neuill follow in his history of the
Rebellion in Norffolke, which he intituleth Norwicus. Daniel Rogers my kinsman
has written a book of the manners, laws and customs of the ancient Brittans.
The same author is also about to write of the command and jurisdiction that the
Romans had in Britain.

map of Ireland, Southern Scotland, England, and Wales, including a table of
English and Welsh counties and their features ANGLIAE ET HIBERNIAE ACCVRATA
DESCRIPTIO, VETERIBVS ET RECENTIORIBVS NOMINIBVS ILLVS TRATA: ET AD D. GVLIEL.
CAMDENI BRITANIAM ACCO^MODATA Nominibus Antiquis vel praeponitur vel
postponitur.
Ioannes Baptista Vrints Geographicarum tabularum calcographus, excud.
Antuerpiae


pedigree or family tree of King James VI of Scotland and I of England,
stemming from William the Conqueror PROGENIES REGVM ANGLIAE AB GVILIELMI
CONQVEST. TEMPORIBVS VSQVE AD HVNC DIEM. Anno Dn^i. 1605.
SERMO. INVICTISSIMOQVE IACOBO MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REGI,
IOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS ANTVERPIANVS, D. DEDICAT.



WALES.
THe discourse of this province, we have composed out of a certain fragment of
our singular good friend Humfrey Lhoyd, which not long since we caused Birkman
to imprint, for the benefit of those that are students of Geography. CAMBRIA,
says he, the third part of Britain, is divided from Lhoegria, (or England if
you please so to call it) by the rivers Seuern and Dee, otherwise it is on all
parts confined with the Irish sea (the Geographers commonly call it Oceanus
Vergiuius) it was so named (as they dream) of Camber, the third son of
Brute. The Welshmen call it Cymri, the English Wales, and the Latin WALLIA.
This part only of this whole British island does still enjoy the most ancient
inhabitants being indeed the true natural Brittans: and do yet retain the
British tongue, and cannot speak one word of English, which is a language
made especially of the misture of the Dutch and French tongues. Wales they do
at this time divide into three provinces, Venedoth, Powis-land, and Dehenbarth.
Under Venedoth the i will Anglesey, (famous long since, and accounted for the
ancient seat of the Druides,) is contained. The inhabitants in course of life
and fashion of apparel do follow the English: and are an idle people not
willing to labor or take pains, bragging much of their gentilitie, and do give
themselves rather to the service of Noblemen and to follow the court, than to
trades and occupations. Here hence it is that you shall find few Noblemen
through out all England, which has not the greatest part of his followers and
servants (in which thing Englishmen do surpass any other nation whatsoever)
Welshmen borne: for being men that are fed with whitmeats or butter and cheese,
they have nimble and able bodies, fit for any manner of service. Moreover being
men of haughty minds, and in extreme penury and beggary challenging unto
themselves to be nobly descended, they delight rather to go brauein apparel
(like unto the Spaniard) then to get goods or pamper their bellies, and do
soon learn courtlike behavior, and therefore they are of the English
Nobility for service preferred before the English. Yet of late here they have
used themselves to dwell in cities, to learn occupations, to trade as
merchants, to go to plough, and to do any manner of business good for the
commonwealth as well as the English: nay in this thing they excel them, that
there is no man so poor amongst them, but for a while will set his sons to
schole to learn to write and read, and those whom they find to be apt, they
send to the Universities, and cause them for the most part to give their minds
to the study of the civil law: Here hence it is that the greater part of
those, which in this kingdom do profess the Civil or Canon law, are
Welshmen borne. You shall find also very few of the common and meaner sort of
people but can read and write his own language, and after their fashion play
upon the Welsh harp. Now also they have the Bible, and common prayer book
printed in their own tongue, a language, as we said, used of their ancestors
and wholly different from the English. And as in old time long since being a
people (as Tacitus reports) impatient of the least wrongs that might be
offered, they were always together by the ears and cutting one another
throats; so now for fear of law, (to which they are more obedient, then any
other nation) they will wrangle and contend one with another, as long as they
are worth a groate. These few observations we have gleaned out of Lhoyd, to
whom we send the Reader that desires more of the particulars of this country.
Syluester Gerrard, a Welshman has described Wales in a several treatise.
Read also the Iournall of Wales. Moreover William of Newbery in the 5. chap.
of his 2. book has many things of the nature of this country, and manners of
the people. To these you may adioine Polyd. Virg. and those things which Robert
Caenalis has written in the sum of his 2. book, de re Gallica.

This Cymri, or (as the English call it) Wales belongs (that we may here by
the way say something of this) by an ancient decree, to the King of Englands
eldest son, or daughter if he fail, to the Kings heir, I mean, who is to
succeed next after him: and he is called as soon as he is born, The Prince of
Wales: and that in the same sense, as in Spain and Portugal they call the
Kings heir, The Prince; and in France, The Dolphin.

Ieffrey of Monmouth writes, that in these parts of Wales near the river of
Seuern, there is a poole which the country people call, Linligune. This, says
he, when the sea flows into it, enterteineth the waters like a bottomless
gulf, and so drinks up the waves that it is never full, nor ever runs
over. But when the sea ebbeth, the waters which before it had swallowed do
swell like a mountain, which then do dash and run over the banks. At which
time if all the people of that shire should stand any thing near the poole,
with their faces toward it, so that the water shall but dash into their clothes
and apparel, they shall hard be able to avoid the danger, but that they shall be
drawn into the poole. But if ones back shall be toward it, there is no danger
at all, although he should stand upon the very edge of the same. This is the
story, I have named the author, let him approve the truth of the same. Of Mona
the island upon the shore of this country thou have the opinion of Humfrey Lhoyd
in his epistle which we have adioined to the end of this book. Of this also
John Leland in his Genethliacon of Edward Prince of Wales, thus writes: This
Island says he, being conquered by the English, changed the name, and was
called Anglesey, that is; the island of Englishmen. Polydore Virgill, a man of
great reading, and good judgment in many matters, is of another opinion. He
labors with all his forces to prove Menauia to be Mona. If the name, which
yet it retains: If the city Caernaruon, which is over against it upon the
maine, do take his denomination from hence and is called Aruon for Ar-mon: If
that same very short cut over, of which the Roman writers do speak: If the
nesse or promontorie Pen-mon, that is, as the word signifies, The head of Mon:
If the huge bodies of trees, and roots covered over with sand, which daily are
dug out of the shore of Tir-mon: If the firre-trees of maruailous length,
which in squally grounds are here and there found within the earth in this
Island, do not sufficiently prove that that was anciently called Mona, which now
we call Anglesey, I know not what to say more then that I have read this in the
14. book of Cornelius Tacitus his Annals, Excisique luci saeuis
superstitionibus sacri, etc. Felling the woods consecrated to superstitious
services, etc. The same Leland in another place has these verses of this
Island: Insula Romany Mona non incognita bellis,
Quondam terra ferax nemorum, nunc indiga siluae,
Sed Venetis tantum cereali munere praestans,
Matter vt a vulgo Cambrorum iure vocetur, etc.
Tyr-mon in former times, (thus witness writers old,)
was full of stately woods, but now li'th bleake and cold:
The soil is passing good, of corn it yeeld'th such store
That Welsh-mens nurse it is called, as we have showed before, etc.


map of Wales CAMBRIAE TYPVS Auctore HVMFRE DO LHVYDO Denbigiense Cambrobritano.
Aliquod Regionum huius tractus synonyma, prout Latin, Britannice and Anglice
etiemnum appellanture Cambria, L. Cambry, B. Wales, A.
Venedotia, L. Gwynedhia, B. Northwales, A.
Demetia, L. Dyfet, B. Westwales, A.
Ceretica, L. Ceredigion, B. Cardigan, A.
Pouisia, L. Powijs, B.
Dehenbart, B. Sutwales, A.




IRELAND.
IRELAND, which the Greeks and Latins call HIBERNIA, others IVERMA and IERNA,
the Irish themselves call Eryn. From hence strangers, taking it from the mouth
of the English, which pronounce e, the second vowell with the same sound that
other nations do sound i, the third vowell, have made, as it seems Irynlandt,
compounded, as is apparent, of the Irish Erin, and the Saxon or Dutch Landt,
which afterward was contracted, for more commodity of speech and roundnesse of
pronunciation, into Irland, from whence the Latins framed IRLANDIA. The first
inhabitants which seated themselves in this Island came hither, as may be easily
demonstrated from Britain or England, not from Spain, as some most absurdly
have written. For the abridgement of Strabo does flatly call these ilanders,
Britains: and Diodorus Siculus says that Irin is a part of Britain:
wherefore it was justly of all old writers called, INSVLA BRITANNIA, One of the
British isles. About the year of CHRIST, 400. in the days of Honorius and
Arcadius the Emperors, at what time the Roman Empire began to decline, the
Scotts, a second nation entered Ireland, and planted themselves as Orosius
writes, in the North parts, whereupon it was of them called, SCOTLAND.
Syluester Gyraldus Cambrensis about 400. years since described this Island in a
several treatise. But because that this book as yet is not set forth and
therefore not common and every where to be gotten, we will out of it gather so
much as this narrow room may contain, not doubting but we shall worthily
deserve great thanks at the readers hand for the same. Listen therefore to his
words:

Ireland, next after England the greatest Island of the known world, has the
greater Britain upon his East side, upon the West only lies the vast and wide
Ocean; on the North three days sail from the coast of Ireland lies Island,
of all the Northren isles by far the greatest. Britain is almost twice as great
as Ireland: for seeing that the length of both runs the same way from South
to North; that is, about 800. miles long, and about 200. miles broad: this from
Brendam hills to the isles Columbine otherwise called Thorach, is about eight
days journey, that is 400. miles long at the least. Ireland contains in all
176. Canweds. The word Canwed is a compound word, used as well of the Welsh as
Irish, and signifies a circuit of ground containing within it 100. villages.

The soil of Ireland is uneven, full of hills and dales, soft and squally,
full of woods, bogges and fennes. Upon the tops of the highest and steepest
hills you shall often find great ponds and bogges: yet it has in some places
most goodly plains and champion, but in respect of the woods they are very
little. The ground is very fat, and fertile for Corn. The mountains abound
with sheep, the woods are full of Dear: and the whole i will generally is better
for pasture, then for eareable ground, much better I mean, for grass then
corn. For the kernelles of wheat are here so dwined and small, that they may
hardly be dressed with any manner of fan. That which the Springtime does
bring forth and flourishes for a while in Summer, the dripping and watery
Autumn will hardly suffer kindly to ripen or tidily to be inn'd. For this
Island is more subject to blustering winds, outrageous storms of rain and
floods, then any other country under the cope of heaven. It is very rich of
honey and milk. Solinus and Isidore affirm that it has no Bees: but by their
leave if they had more diligently examined the matter, they might have on the
contrary written, that it wants vines, but is not altogether void of Bees.
For this Island neither now has, nor ever had any vines: But of Bees it has,
(as any other country) great plenty: which notwithstanding would here, as I
think, swarm in far greater number, if it were not for the venomous and
sour ewgh-trees which in all places of the Island do grow in great abundance.

The Island is every where crossed and watered with many goodly rivers; of which
the principal are these: Auenliss, runs by Dublin: Boand (or Boine) through
Methe: Banna, through Vlster: Linne, by Connagh: Moad, by Kenelcunill, Slechey,
and Samayr: Modarn and Furne, by Keneleon: There are also very many other
rivers, whereof some issuing forth of the bowels of the earth and from their
clear fountains, other immediately rushing forth of lakes and fennes wandering
here and there divide and part the Island into many goodly provinces and
shires. For under the foot of Bladina hill (now called Bliew Blemy) three
famous rivers do arise, commonly called, The three Sisters, (for they bear the
names of three sisters:) Berne, (Birgus, now Barrow) which runs by Lechlin:
Eoyr, Neorus, they call it Nore, by Ossire: and Swyre, by Archfine and Trebagh;
near Waterford they kindly salute one another, and so falling into one
channel they quietly toward the sea. Slane, runs by Wexford: Boand, by
Mead: Auenmore, by Lismore: and Simen, by Limiricke. And indeed amongst all
the rivers of Ireland, Sinnen bear'th the bell, not only for his goodly
greatness, long and diverse wanderings through the country, but also his great
plenty of dainty fish. For it arises out of a very large and goodly lake,
which divides Connagh from Munster, and spreads it self into two branches
running two contrary ways: one of them tending toward the South, passes by
the city Kelleloe, and then enclosinge round the city Limiricke, with a direct
course and large stream for an hundred miles and upward, running between the
two mountains, emptieth it self into the Brendan sea. The other not much
less then the former, dividing Mead and the farther parts of Vlster from
Connagh, running with a crooked course turning this way and that way, at last
hides it self in the Northren ocean: So that this river does separate the
fourth and West part of the Island from the other three, like a midland stream
running from sea to sea. For this Island in former ages was divided almost into
five equal parts, namely into North Mounster, South Mounster, Leinster, and
Connagh.

This country has diverse goodly Lakes. The sea coast abounds plentifully
with all manner of seafish on all sides: the Rivers and Lakes are stored with
great variety of fresh-fishes: especially with these three sorts, Salmons,
Trouts, and Eeles. The river Shynen swarmeth with Lampreyes. But there are
wanting many other sorts of good fresh-fish of other countries, as Pikes,
Perches, Gogeons, and almost such fish as come not from the sea or salt waters.
On the contrary the Lakes of this Island have three kinds of fish, which are no
where else to be found. For they are somewhat longer and rounder then Trouts,
very white fleshed, passing sauery and pleasant, very like unto the Hallibut,
(Vmbra our author calls it) but that they are much bigger headed. There is
another kind very like to herrings, as well for proportion and bigness, as also
for color and taste. There are a third sort, in all points like trouts, but
that they are not spotted. Yet these sorts of fish are only seen in the Summer,
in the Winter they never appear. In Mead, near Foner are three Lakes not
far distant one from another, each of which has certain fish proper to it
self, not found in any of the other two; neither do they I mean, ever come
one at another, although there be most convenient passages by reason of the
river which runs from one to another: nay if it shall chance that the fish
of one lake be carried to another, either it dies within a while after, or
returns unto his own lake again.

This Island breeds greater store of Falcons, Hobbies, and sparrow-hawkes,
then any other country whatsoever. Here Eagles are as common, as kites are in
other countries: and they flock together in such companies, that often times you
shall find an hundred in one company. Here are also great store of those
fowls which they call Bernacles, which nature brings forth in a strange and
wonderful manner: they are like the wild goose, but somewhat less. For they
are bredde of the fur blocks, which are tossed along by the shore in this
manner: First upon the blocks you shall see as it were a certain gelly: then
the reeds and other sea-weeds staying the logges, being enclosed in shells, (for
the better fashioning and safe preserving of them) they hang by the bills,
until in process and continuance of time they wax of a competent bigness,
and be covered with feathers, either they fall into the water, or by the
benefit of their wings they lift up themselves aloft into the open air. I my
self have many times and often seen with these same eyes many very small
bodies, of these kind of birds hanging upon on block on the sea coast,
enclosed in shells and fully fashioned. These tread not as other fowls do,
they ley no eggs, they never sit. And therefore in certain places of
Ireland in Lent and upon other fasting days, it is lawful to eat these
fowls, as if they were not flesh, nor come of flesh. There are also here
great store of a kind of foul of a doubtful shape, or double nature, which
they call an Aurifrise, less then an Eagle, but greater then a hawke, having
upon one foot sharp talants, cloven and griping: the other whole footed, not
made to cletch or carry any thing, but only fit for swimming; a strange and
admirable work of sporting nature. Here are certain birds which they call
Martiners, less then a black bird, cut tail'd like quails, but differing from
them in this that their bellies are white and their backs black. A strange
thing it is to tell of these birds: that if they being dead shall be kept map of
Ireland Eryn. HIBERNIAE, BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Irlandt.
Cum Priuilegio

in a dry place, they will never stink: and being laid amongst apparel or
other woollen things they will keep them safe from the moth. And that which is
much more admirable, being dead and hanged up in some dry place, every year
they shed their old feathers, and new come up in their stood. In the North part
of Ireland they have great store of Swans. Storks through out all the I Will are
very rare, and those which they have are black. They have no Partridges,
Phesants, Magge-pies nor Nightingales. It has almost all kind of wild beasts.
The Stagges beer are so fat, that they are scarcely able to run: and those
which are the least amongst them in bigness of body, do excel others in
stateliness and goodly branching of their horns. We never in any place saw
greater plenty of Bores. They have also many hares, badgers, and weasils. The
bodies of their cattle, beasts, dear, and fowls, are in their kind less
then in other places. Hallow dear, goats and hedgehogs they have none at all;
as also Moles, or if any, they are very rare: but of mice they have such
infinite plenty, as no where more. Of wolves and foxes they have many; but no
manner of venomous creatures. For the Spiders and Nents here are neither
venomous nor hurtful. The country is never shaken with Earthquakes, and
scarce once in a year shall on hear it thunder.

From these natural things let us pass unto those strange wonders which
nature works in these out-countries of the world. In North Mounster there is
a lake wherein are two Islands, a greater and a less: the greater has a
Church, the lesser a Chapel. Into the Greater never any woman, or living
creature of the female kind might ever come, but it would die by and by. This
was often proved by bitches, cattes, and other creatures of that sex. In the
lesser no man did ever die, or could die of a natural death. In Vlster there
is another Lake in which there is an Island of two diverse qualities; one part of
it having a church consecrated to the service of Christianity is very
beautiful, goodly and pleasant. The other very rough, over grown and
unpleasant, is said to be bequeathed to Devils and evil spirits. This part
has in it nine caves or trenches, in any of which if a man do chance to sleep
all night, he is presently assaulted by the evil spirits, and all the night so
grievously tormented and vexed, that by the morning he shall scarce be able to
breath and will be almost half dead. This place is called of the country
people, The purgatory of S. Patricke. There is also a spring or fountain in
Mounster, with whose water if any man shall wash himself, he will presently
become hoary or gray headed. I my self saw a man who washed the one half of
his beard with this water, and the hair became white, the other remaining
black as it was before. On the contrary there is in Vlster a fountain, in
which if any man wash his hair, he shall never be horay or gray headed. In
Connagh there is a fountain of fresh water upon the top of a very high
mountain, which ebbeth twice in 24. hours, and flows as often, in this
imitating the unconstant motion of the sea. There is a fountain in the farther
and North part of Vlster, which by reason of the great coldness of it, in
seven years space turns sticks and wood cast into it, into stone. In Connagh
there is a fountain only kind and wholesome for men: but for cattle and other
such kind of brute beasts pestilent and dangerous. There is a fountain in
Mounster, which if any man shall touch, by and by the whole country will be
ouerflowed by storms of rain.

The people of this country do wear course black mantles or rugges (for the
sheep of this Island are black) and they put them on as rudely and
unhandsomely. They use also little hoods which hang down to their shoulders. In
riding they use no saddles, boots, nor spurs: but with a rod sharp and
tapered at one end, they prick forward their horses, and make them run.
Their bridles are such as do serve both for bitte and reign, so made as their
horses only used to grass, are never hindered from eating. They go into the
field to war, naked and altogether unarmed. They use three kind of weapons,
long spears, darts, and battell-axes. The people is wild and very uncivil:
they delight in nothing more then to live idly, and liberty they prefer
before great riches. I only observed the people to delight much in musical
instruments and in that to deserve some commendation. These briefly we have
gleaned here and there out of the history of Gyraldus Cambrensis, diligently
retaining the tenor of his own phrase: which we have thought good to translate
word for word as they are delivered by our Author, that succedent ages might
see, either the credulous simplicity of former times, or how time does alter
countries, people and manners of men. And because we have spoken before of S.
Patricks purgatory, it shall not be amiss to add to those former this
discourse of it, taken out of the twelfth book of Caesarius, his history of
Things worth the remembering. When as S. Patricke, says he, converted this
nation to Christianity, and they made a doubt and believed not that men should
be punished for their sins in the world to come, he by earnest prayer
obtained this place at the hand of God: the manner of the place is thus: There
is a deep pit or trench, enclosed round with a wall; there are also certain
Regular Canons: No man is so great a sinner, to whom they enioine any greater
penance, then to abide all one whole night in that purgatory. If any man be
desirous to enter in, first, making his confession, they administer the
sacrament unto him, they anoint him, perfume him and instruct him, thus: Thou
shall see this night say they, the assaults of the Devil, and the horrible
pains of hell, but they shall not hurt thee, if thou have but the name of
Jesus always in thy mouth: But if thou shall yield to the flattering
enticements, or terrible threatenings of the Devil, and so shall cease to call
upon the name of Jesus, thou art surely but a dead man. Then in the evening
putting him into the pit, they shut up the door, and coming again in the
morning, if they presently find him not, they look no farther for him. Many
have died there, and many have gone home again, whose visions have been
written of the foresaied friars, and are showed to such as are desirous to see
them.

IReland, says M. Camden, according to manners of the people, is divided into
The wild Irish, and The English pale: but according to the ancient
jurisdictions and natural situation of it, it is more fitly divided into five
parts, (and indeed it once contained five kingdoms) Mounster in the South,
Leinster in the East, Connagh in the West, Vlster in the North, and Methe
almost in the midst and heart of the land. MOVNSTER, Memomia, the Irish call
it Mown, (sometime divided into West Mounster, which in Ptolemeys time the
Gangani, Luceni, Velabri and Iterni did inhabit: and East Mounster, possessed
then of the Vodiae,) comprehends now these seven Shires; Kerry, Limiricke,
Cork, Tiparary, Holy cross, Waterford, and Desmond. Of which Kerry and
Tipararie were sometimes county Palatines. LEINSTER, Lagenia, (they call it
Leighnigls) a fertile soil, and wholesome seat, possessed sometime by the
Brigantes, Coriondi, Menapij, Cauci and part of the Eblani. Now it is divided
into these counties, Wexford, Caterlogh, Kilkenny, Dublin, Kildare, The Kings
county, The Queens county, Longford, Fernes, and Wicklo. METHE, ( Media, the
Irish call it Mijh, in the midst almost of the country,) the other part of the
ancient possessions of the Eblani, for his great fertility, either for corn or
grass, fish or flesh, pleasant situation and healthful air, multitude of
people, strength of castles and towns, commonly called, as Bartholomeys English
reports, The chamber of Ireland, was lately divided into East Methe and West
Methe.

CONNAGH, Connacia, (they call it Connaughty) where long since were seated the
Auteri and Nagnatae: now it contains these shires, Clare, Letrimme, Gallawey,
Rosecomin, Maio, Sligo. The whole province although it be in many places
fertile and pleasant, yet it is every where full of dangerous Bogges, dark
Woods, Creeks and Baies, convenient Stations and Harborough for ships.

VLSTER, Vltonia, (the Irish call it Cui Gully, the Welsh Wltw,) a large
country, every where full of great Lakes, thick and huge woods, in some place
resonably fruitful, in others lean and hungry, but in all places green and
pleasant to the eye, and therefore it maintains great plenty of cattle. Here
in Ptolemeys time inhabited the Voluntij, Darni, Robogdij, Vennicny, and
Erdini, at this day it contains these shires, Louth, Down, Anwimme, Monalion,
Tiroen, Armagh, Colrane, Donergall, Formanagh and Cauen.

On all sides round about Ireland in the sea, (as also in the baies, rivers,
lakes and fresh water) are here and there many small islands, whereof some are
fertile, others wast and barren, of which to speak severally would require a
larger discourse then here we are allowed.

Coelestinus Pope of Rome, in the year of CHRIST, 431. sent into Britain
Paladius a Bishop, as Prosper Aquitanus writes, to purge it of the Pelagian he
esie, wherewith it was but lately distained: and by this means also at the
same time, caused Christian religion to be planted in Ireland. Palladius died
in Britain before he had brought to pass that which he came for; whereupon
Patricke, a Britain, and of kin to Martinus Turonensis, was by Celestine
put in his place, who with such wonderful success did preach the Gospel in
Ireland, that he converted the greatest part of that i will unto Christianity,
that he well deserved the name of The Irish Apostle. From hence after that at
sundry times, diverse colonies, if I may so use the word, of learned and
religious men, were sent into sundry parts of Europe, and were not only the
great patrons and planters of the Gospel there, but founders of Monasteries,
cities, and towns, as schools of that profession. In those bloody wars of
the barbarous Saxons, all schools of learning in Britain were shut up, and
all religion almost wholly banished, so that whosoever was desirous of
instruction that way, was constrained to seek for it in Ireland; and after
these wars ended, those which returned brought with them, not only the Irish
letters, (which yet the same charecters common to both nations, do plainly
show) but also liberal arts and sciences, which together with Christianity
they taught the Saxons.

To these the Reader may adioine such things as Henry of Huntington, Polydore
Virgill, William Newbery, John Mayor, and others have written of this in their
several histories. Daniel Rogers has set forth a description of this Island in
verse dedicated to Thomas Phediger. And M. William Camden in prose has most
exactly described the same in his Britannia. But Richard Stanihurst, a worthy
gentleman this country man borne, has this other day put forth a several
treatise of the history and state of this island. Baptista Boazio has described
it in a map apart by it self, dedicated to the late Queen Elizabeth: and my
good friend M. Speed, with no less care and diligence has done the same in
his Imperium Brittannicum, or Empire of Great Britain, lately set forth and
dedicated to his Highness.

The Isles of the AZORES.
SOme are of opinion, that these Isles situate in the Atlantic or West Ocean,
are so named by the Spaniards, from a kind of Hauks which they call Azor. And
in the plural number Acores. One writes, but fondly, that they are so called
from the French word Essorer, which signifies to dry or wither. In Latin a
man may call them Accipitrarias, or the Isles of Hauks, and in Greek (...).
Our Netherlanders term them De vlaemsche eilanden, that is, The flemish
Islands, because they are thought first to have been discovered by certain
Flemish Merchants of Bruges. At that time (they said) they could find nothing
upon them but trees (especially great store of Cedars) and woods, and fowls,
of diverse sorts; and thither they sent inhabitants to possess and manure the
said Isles. Afterward they submitted themselves to the Portugales, under whose
government they yet remain. Jews Marmolius fol. 38. reports that they were
discovered about the year 1455. Undoubtedly ancient writers knew them not:
yet might they name them perhaps. For whether they specified them under the
name of Cassiterides, I cannot be assured. The Spanish fleets laden with Indian
commodities, do usually in their return touch at these Isles, before they
ariue at Lisbone, or Cales. One strange thing have I heard concerning the
soil, or the heavenly influence, or (if I may so say) the Genius of these
Isles: For sailing from these parts of the world toward America, so soon as
you are past the said Isles, you are freed from gnats, fleas, lice, and all
kind of noisome vermin, which beyond the Acores do immediately die, and come
to nothing. They are in number nine, and thus called by the Portugales. The
Isle of S. Michael, Tercera, S. Georges Isle, Pico, Fayal, Flores, Cueruo, and
the Isle of S. Marie: all which we will particularly entreat of.

TERCERA.
THis Isle is called Tercera, because it is the third in order as you sail
from Spain. And from this one, the common mariners confusedly call the whole
nine by the name of Terceras. It abounds with corn and fruits, neither is it
destitute of wine. The Inhabitants are greatly enriched by their Madder,
wherewith clothes are died red. In this Isle grows plenty of this commodity,
especially about the places commonly called Los Altares, and Falladores. Angra
the head city is most strongly fortified with an impregnable rock or bulwark
called Brazil. This Isle also from the name of our blessed Savior the
Spaniards call Isola del buen Jesus.

PICO.
THis Isle was so named from a mountain therein rising sharp in form of a
round Pyramid or Sugar-loafe. For whatsouer is naturally of that shape is by
the Portugals called Pico. This hill is three miles high: within it is hollow,
and full of darcke caves. At the foot of this mountain Eastward, there is a
spring of fresh water, which sometimes discharges fiery streams, and stones
burning hot; and that with so great force and violence, that it sends them
packing as it were with a current, by steep and lower places, even to the sea,
whereas of the multitude of these stones is made a promontory or headland
commonly called Misterij. It is distant from the said fountain 12. miles. At
this present it stretches a mile and half further into the sea, in regard of
the continual increase of this heap of stones. They are much deceived which
write that this Isle was so named from the bird called Picus Martius, in
English the woodpecker.

FAYAL.
THis Isle is so named of the Beech-tree. For the Portugals call the Beech
Faya: and a place planted with Beeches Fayal. That here are yet in this Isle
certain families of the Flemish race which first inhabited the same, namely
such as are called Bruyn, Vtrecht, etc. I have learned from a Portugale of good
creditte. Linschott also an eyewitness, in his Iournall published in Dutch,
writes that in this very Isle there is a river called by the Portugales Ribera
des Fiamengos, or the river of Flemings; and says further that all the
Inhabitants of this Isle came originally out of Flanders, and that they do as
yet much favor the Flemish nation.

Concerning the residue, namely Flores, so called of abundance of Flowers:
Cueruo, of Crows: Gracioca, of pleasantness: or the Isles of S. George, S.
Marie, and S. Michael, so denominated of those saints (for it is usual with
the Spaniards to name places after the same Saints upon whose days they find
them) I have nothing to add: save that Theuet is mistaken, in that he falsely,
and carelessly ascribes the same mountain unto S. Michaels Isle, which we have
truly and fully described in Pico. Of these Isles somewhat you may read in the
History of Jerome Conestagio, touching the Union of the Kingdom of Portugale
to the crown of Castile. And also in the 97. Chapter of John Huighen van
Linschoten his East-Indian iournall.

map of the Azores ACORES INSVLAE.
Priuilegio Imp. et Reg. May. necnon Ordinum Belgicor. ad decennium.

Longitudo huius descriptionis sumta est a meridiano I Ptolemaei, Occidentem
versus.

Has insulas perlustrauit summaque diligentia accuratissime descripsit et
delineauit Ludouicus Teisera Lusitanus, Regiae Maiestatis cosmographus.


SPAIN.
SPAIN is resembled by Strabo unto an Ox-hide spread upon the ground. It is
around environed by the sea, save only where it is divided from France by the
Pyreney-mountaines. On the East it has the said Pyreney-mountaines, which from
the Temple of Venus, or the Promontory stretched forth near Illiberis (now
Colibre) runs along to the British Ocean; and this is the very narrowest
part of Spain; insomuch (says Vaseus) that when I traveled through Biscay, I
remember that from the hill of S. Adrian, if my sight deceived me not, I saw
both seas, namely the Ocean near at hand: and as far off as I could
discern, the foame-white waves of the Mediterran sea. North it is bounded by
the Biscain sea; West, by the Western sea; and South, by the Straight of
Gibraltar, and part of the Mediterran sea.

Spain is divided into three Provinces; Baetica, Lusitania, and Tarraconensis.
Baetica on the North is enclosed with the river Anas, now called Guadiana;
West, with that part of the Atlantic Ocean, which is between the mouth of
Guadiana, and the Straight of Gibraltar; South, with part of the Mediterran sea
called of old Mare Balearicum, extending from the Straight last mentioned, to
the Promontory of Charidomus, now called Cabo de Gata; and Eastward it is
bounded by an imaginary line, drawn from the said Promontory by the town of
Castulo to the river Guadiana. It is called Baetica of the famous river Baetis
which cuts the whole Province in twain. This river springing out of the wood
or forest anciently called Saltus Tygensis, runs into the Atlantick-ocean,
and is at this day called by an Arabian name, Guadalquibir, that is to say, The
great river. This province of later times, of the Vandal inhabitants, was
called Vandalicia, and at this present by the same word corrupted Andaluzia.
Lusitania conteines Algaruc and the greater part of Portugale.
Lusitania confineth North upon the river Duero, from the very mouth thereof,
to the bridge over against Simancas; West it bordereth upon that part of the
Atlantick-ocean which ebs and flows between the outlets of Duero and
Guadiana; South, upon Andaluzia; and East it fronteth Hispania Tarraconensis,
now called Castilia, etc. even from the ancient Oretania to the foresaid bridge
over against Simancas. Lusitania was thus named from Lusus the son of
Bacchus, and Lysa, one of Bacchus his companions: whereupon it is sometimes
called of Lusus, Lusitania; and sometimes again of Lysa, Lysitania. The residue
of Spain pertains to the province called Tarraconensis, of the city
Tarracona which is the head of all that province; a city (says Strabo) most
notably fit for princes in their travels to retire themselves: and here the
Emperors kept their chief jurisdiction. This province contains the kingdom
of Murcia, and likewise Valencia, and Arragon, with Catalonia, also Castilia
Vieja, the kingdom of Navarre, part of Portugale between the rivers Duero, and
Minho, the kingdom of Gallicia, Asturia, and all Biscay. Hitherto Vaseus in
his chronicle of Spain, who entreats of this argument more at large. Read
also Marinaeus Siculus, Marius Aretius, Damianus a Goes, Francis Taraffa, the
bishop of Gerundo, Annius Viterbiensis; and in Spanish Florian del campo, and
after him Ambrosio Morales: with all those other Writers of Spain that Vaseus
in the fourth chapter of his Chronicle does recite. Stephan Garibayo in his
Chronicle of Spain, divided into twenty books, describes the kingdom of
Navarre. John Mariana likewise not long since published a volume concerning
Spanish matters. Among the ancient Writers you must peruse Caesar, Strabo, and
the rest, which Damianus a Goes in his book called Hispania does nominate:
also the Panegyric speech of Latinus Pacatus, and Claudianus de laud Serenae.
Unto these you may add the first book of Laonicus. There is extant also a
little Travelers Breuiate written in Spanish by Alonco de Meneses, containing
almost all the ordinary voyages in Spain, wherein also are noted the
distances of places.

Three memorable things (as writes Nauagierus) are prouerbially spoken of
Spain: the first, A bridge, over which the water runs (whereas it runs
under all other bridges) namely the water-conduct at Segouia: the second, a
city compassed with fire, that is to say, Madrid, because the town-walles are
of flint: and the third, a bridge, whereon are daily fed ten thousand head of
cattle; whereby is signified the river Guadiana, which hiding it self under
ground for the space of seven miles, does then break forth again. Albeit this
last is a thing sprung rather out of the peoples vulgar opinion, than out of
truth; as Don George of Austria Governor of Harlebeck, an eyewitness most
worthy of credit, has informed me, being a man conversant in all kind of
history, and a a wonderful searcher and admirer of natural Philosophy.

The islands belonging unto Spain, whereof ancient writers have made mention,
at the Celtick promontory, or Cape Finister, are the Cassiterides, which at
this present are not to be found in the ocean. Also Insulae Deorum, otherwise
called Cicae, and of late times Islas de Bayona: Londobris named also Erythia,
and now the Burlings: Gades in old time dedicated to Hercules, now commonly
called Cales. All these are in the Ocean. In the Mediterran sea you have
Ophiusa now called Formentera. As likewise the two Gymnesiae, or Baleares, at
this present called by distinct names, the one Maiorca, and the other Minorca.
The coast of Minorca is beset round about with huge mountains: but at the
entrance of the haven the roots of these mountains are leuelled into a plain,
till they meet, at so narrow a distance, on the other side of the shore, that
no ships can enter the harbor, but with a gentle gale of wind. The haven is
named Mahon, being a most beautiful, and commodious place; for it stretches
almost four miles in length, with many inlets, all which serve for the
harboring of ships. From hence arises a perpetual ridge of mountains, on
which the inhabitants cut down great plenty of wood. At the utmost part thereof
on the mountain-tops is built a city. Contrariwise the greater Island has a
plain shore, and most high and barren mountains in the midst. A city there
is of one and the self name with the Island, very large and fairly built. They
use the laws of the Castilians, and do much resemble them both in language and
manners. This description of the isles Maiorca and Minorca we have borrowed out
of N. Villagagnon his discourse of the expedition to Alger. Who desires to know
more of these isles, and of the inhabitants disposition, may read Bernardin
Gomez his sixth and seventh books of the life of James T. King of Arragon. That
Philip King of Spain possesses the greatest Empire in the world, since the
worlds beginning, we have proved in our Theater printed in high Dutch.

map of Spain REGNI HISPANIAE POST OMNIVM EDITIONES LOCVPLESSI MA DESCRIPTIO.


The Kingdom of PORTVGALE.
PORTVGALE is improperly called Lusitania; for neither is all Portugale
comprehended in Lusitania, nor all Lusitania in Portugale: yet can it not be
denied, that the better part of Lusitania is subject to the King of Portugale.
Portugale is divided into three regions, Transtagana, or that which lies beyond
or South of Tagus, the river of Lisbon, as far as Guadiana; Cistagana situate
on this side or North of Tagus, as far as the river Douro; and Interamnis.
Transtagana border upon that part of Andaluzia, which from the river Guadiana
extends to the limits of Castilia Nuoua. Interamnis I call that which lies
between the rivers Douro and Minho, a region no less pleasant than fruitful.
This Interamnis or River bounded province, is wholly out of the limits of
Lusitania; unless rejecting the former description, we will rather incline to
Strabo, who says that the greatest part of Lusitania is inhabited by the
Callaici. The length of this region is twelve leagues, and the breadth, where it
is largest, is twelve leagues also; being in other places but six or four
leagues over. And in this so small a portion of ground, besides the
Metropolitan church of Braga, the Cathedral of Porto, and other five
Collegiate churches, there are above 130. monasteries, the greater part whereof
are endowed with most ample revenues: and also to the number of 1460. Parish
churches, as one writes. Certain it is, that within the peculiar Diocese of
Braga there are accounted 800. Whereby you may easily conjecture both the
fruitfulness of the soil, and the ancient devotion of the inhabitants. But of
the pleasantness what need we speak, whenas within this one province are
found above five and twenty thousand springing fountains; bridges most
sumptuously built of square stone almost two hundred; and havens for shipping
to the number of six? These things therefore I thought not unfit to be
remembered, because the goodness and worth of this Province is in a manner
unknown. To the East hereof adioyneth the province called Transmontana, that
is to say, on the other side of the mountains; it abounds with excellent
Wheat, and strong Wine, and contains within it the city Braganca, which is the
head of a most large Dukedom. Thus much out of Vaseus. Peter de Medina
reckons and names in this Kingdom of Portugale sixty seven cities or walled
towns.

To the Kingdom of Portugale at this present belongs the Kingdom of
Algarue, which is nothing else, but the South part of the whole Kingdom toward
the sea. For the King entitles himself King of Portugale, of Algarue, of
Guinie, of Aethiopia, Persia and India. This Kingdom first began about the
year 1100. For until then, as also in ancient times, it went altogether under
the name of Spain. Marinaeus thus writes of it: One Henry Earl of Loraigne,
a man of most undoubted valor, coming out of France achieved great exploits
against the Moors. In regard whereof Alonso the sixth, King of Castile gave him
in marriage his base daughter called Tiresia; and assigned for her dowry part
of Gallicia contained in the kingdom of Portugale. Of this marriage afterward
was born Alphonsus, the first King of Portugale, he that recovered Lisbon from
the Moors. Who having vanquished five of their Kings in one battle, left unto
posterity, as a monument of this exploit, his arms consisting of five
scutchions. Oliver a Marca in his Chronicle published in French, more
particularly blazeth the arms of this kingdom. At first he says, it was a
plain silver scutchion without any portrature; afterward in regard of the
five vanquished kings there were five scutchions imposed; and in every of the
five scutchions five silver circles, in remembrance of the five wounds of our
Savior CHRIST, which in time of the battle miraculously appeared unto Alphonso
in the skies; or (as others report) for that being wounded with five mortal
wounds, by the providence of Almighty God he escaped death.

Read also Jerome Osorius, Marinaeus Siculus, and Sebastian Munster. Of the
original of this Kingdom read the first chapter of John Barros his Decades
of Asia. Athenaeus in his eighth book and first chapter writes somewhat of
the fruitfulness of this Region, and the excellent temperature of the air.
Lisbon the chief city of the Kingdom, Damianus a Goes describes in a
peculiar Treatise. Concerning the antiquities of Portugale there is a book
written by Andrew Resende.

The Portugales Dominions at this present are very large; for they extend even
from the Streights of Gibraltar, along all the Sea Provinces, and the Islands
adjacent, as far as China, and the Isles called Lequios.

map of Portugal PORTVGALLIAE quae olim Lusitania, nouissima and exactissima
descriptio, Auctore Vernando Aluaro Secco
GVIDONI ASCANIO SFORTIA^ S.R. E. CARD. CAMER. Achillas Statius. Sal.

L^^^^tanicus V^r^^^^ (...) descripta tibi obgentes n^^tr^ p^^^i^^^^ (...),
G^ido Sforti^: Hinc homines (...) p^^^^^ti, (...) Orbis terrara^ po^^^^ o^i^^^
(...) in Pr^ re^^^^runt: in^ (...) quid^^ (...) As^^^ (...)? re^^^^ nationes
Jhesu Christ^ (...), religionemque (...) V^^^ R^^^^ XIII. Cale^^^ (...). A^^^^.
M.CCCCC.LX.



The Diocese of SIVILL, being part of ANDALVZIA.
THE Diocese of the Church of Civil is situate in that province of Spain,
which in rich commodities, and a kind of fruitful and peculiar bravery
excels all the rest. This beautiful province the ancients, of the river
Baetis, called Baetica: but late Writers have named it VVandalicia, or
Andaluzia of the Vandals, who about a thousand years past ouerran the same. The
said Diocese or territory, of all the regions and territories in Spain, is
rightly esteemed the most happy, both in regard of the multitude and ciuility
of the inhabitants, and of their riches, and ouerflowing abundance of all
things; this being confirmed even by the verses of the Grecians, who attribute
the Elizian pleasures and delights unto this tract, which bordereth upon the
West Ocean. This territory contains here and there almost 200. principal
towns, besides a great number of villages; so that there are now more towns
under the jurisdiction of this one diocese or convent, than there were of old
in all four together: for (as Pliny writes) they prescribed laws but only
to 175. towns. And how small a number will these seem to be, if those hundred
thousand villages be accounted, which only in the territory of Civil, called
by the Arabians Axarafi, were by King Ferdinand received into loyal allegiance
together with the city it self? which notwithstanding after the departure of
the Moors, became the greatest part of them desolate: howbeit the limits of
this as they differ much from the ancient precincts of Spanish diocesses; so do
they come nearer to the form prescribed by King Vamba unto all the Cathedrals
of Spain. For this diocese has on the East the territory of Corduba; West
the frontiers of Algarue; North it lies over against that part of Portugale
which is called The government of Saint Iago: but the residue toward the South
is enclosed with the diocese of Cadiz and the Ocean sea. Principal towns
here are very many, especially the royal city of Civil, most largely and
pleasantly situate upon the bank of Baetis, and environed with beautiful and
stately walls. This famous river Baetis or Guadalquibir springing out of the
forest called in times past Saltus Tugiensis, and holding on his course by the
chief cities of his adopted province, does from this noble city, known of
old by the name of Colonia Romulea, continue his streams in a channel
nauigable and abounding with fish, to the Western Ocean, for the space of
threescore miles, the banks on both sides flourishing with Oliuets, Vineyards,
and most admirable sweet Gardens, perfumed with the delectable and fragrant
odor of Citrons.

Now Civil both for churches and houses is the gallantest city in all Spain,
and for the neat attire of the Citizens, and a kind of seemelinesse to them
only peculiar, is inferior to no city in all the world. Here religion, the
study of liberal arts and the practice of gentlemanlike exercises are in their
prime. And so infinite are the riches and treasures included within the walls
of this city, as never the like in old time could be found in any Kingdom or
Empire how great soever, the Roman only excepted. For this being the richest of
all the cities of Europe, largely distributes over all Christendom that
unspeakable wealth, and before these last times never dreamed of, which it
fetches as it were from another world, that from hence was first discovered.
Wherewith also it abundantly furnishes the very barbarous and savage nations,
inhabiting the inmost part of Africa and Asia. It is most apparent, that for
certain years together in the account-books of the
Indies-contractation-house, there was most faithfully registered an hundred and
more millions of gold. So that hence a man may conjecture, that so much more
was concealed by those that brought it, for fear lest the King for some
certain time should have borrowed it. What may we then think of the infinite
and incredible mass of riches which from their first discovery of America till
this present, has hither been transported; two fleets yearly returning into
Spain, laden in a manner with no other kind of merchandise, but gold and
silver, and for the most part balasted with both? But these (you will say) are
foreign and far-fetcht commodities. It is so rich therefore of it self, that it
pays for yearly tribute unto the King, to whom it is most loyally devoted, a
million and an half of gold: so much as many Princes can scarce raise out of
their whole kingdoms. Here reside for traffike innumerable multitudes of
strangers, besides whom of late years there have been found 24000 Citizens
householders, divided into 28. wards. The first of these wards is famous both in
regard of the name, and the church of S. Mary, than which all Christendom has
not a more excellent, if you consider the large and magnificent building with
the beauteous and admirable ornaments, and the steeple likewise of exceeding
higth, from whence signs are given at certain hours, wherein stands a lofty
pinnacle of most curious workmanship, out of which you may behold a most
glorious prospect over all the city, and the fields adjacent. What should I
here describe the royal magnificence of the kings castle; than which the Kings
of Spain have none more gorgeously built, or pleasantly situate? Or to what
purpose should I recount the sumptuous palaces of Dukes, Earls and Nobles; or
the neat houses of Citizens, with their crystal fountains, green arbours, and
odoriferous gardens? with silence I omit the ancient water-streames disfused by
arches through all parts of the city; and those later ones, which by the infinite
cost, and industry of the Senators and Citizens of Civil, have for public
delight been conveyed to the place commonly called Hercules pillars; where by
planting of trees they have converted a large fenny quagmire into a most
beautiful grove, leaving fair and broad spaces for men to walk, run, and
disport themselves in. Now the gardens without the city, fraught with all
variety of pleasures, and those stately houses in the fields, bordering upon
Baetis, who can sufficiently commend? Out of which they may daily behold ships
coming in both from the old and new world. For Civil the queen of the Ocean,
being placed as a mediatresse between both, conioines them together by
prosperous nauigations, and rich trafficks. Tedious it were to set forth the
majesty of the Kings palace, or of his castle at Triana. This Triana is a
fair suburb on the farther side of Baetis, inhabited almost with three
thousand Citizens, and joined to the city map of Seville in Andalusia, Spain
HISPALENSIS CONVENTVS DELINEATIO, Auctore Hieronymo Chiaues
Priuilegio Imp. et Regiae Maiests.

by a bridge of timber. But whosoever considers the richness and fertility of
their fields, abounding with all kind of grain, may justly acknowledge it a
most bountiful and prodigal work of nature, which here above all other
places seems to muster; and distribute her pleasures and treasures for the
solace and benefit of mankind.

Next unto Civil in authority and greatness Caesariana, alias Xeres de la
frontiera, and Iulia firmitas now called Astigi, which in old times were
colonies of the Romans, do excel all other towns and cities. Carmona and
Vtrera may well be termed the two granaries and storehouses of Civil. Next
follows Marchena, called out of ancient stony monuments, I know not how
truly, Martia Colonia; and Arcobriga, being the lord-ship towns of the most
illustrious ducal family of the Ponces. To these you may add Vrsao, called of
old Genua Vrbanorum, and at this present Osuna, the most honorable and rich
dukedom of the Girones, ennobled with an University. For oil, corn, and
wine Constantina, Cacalla, and Maronio do principally excel: Nebrisa likewise
situate at the mouth of Baetis, the most happy native soil of Aelius
Antonius, the restorer and author of the Latin tongue in Spain, is famous for
antiquity, and inferior to none in plenty of Corn. Also in the very bay
whereinto Baetis discharges his streams, upon the headland called of old
Luciferi Promontorium, stands the town which we now call Solucar or Sant
lucar, the rich mart-towne of the Gothish Dukes, and very commodious for the
west-Indan fleets. Other principal towns of this Diocese for breuities sake
I omit.

The soil in all this tract is most miraculously plentiful of wheat, wine,
and oil, and of all kind of grain, wherewith it supplieth remote and foreign
countreies: and how deservedly might Pliny have preferred this part before
Italy, had not he, an Italian, carried a greater affection to his own
country? yet Spain by him: wheresoever it borders upon the sea, is commended:
which praise of his we understand especially of that part of Andaluzia, which
pertaines to the Diocese of Civil, because it lies open to the maine Ocean,
and to the gentle blasts of the west. The sky here is most favorable, smiling
always with a temperate and most amiable aspect: the people borne to piety and
good arts, excelling in sharpness of wit, and surpassing others in a bold
kind of courage and towardliness of mind (which is in a manner peculiar, and
hereditary to this nation) will in no case suffer themselves either in offices
of courtesy, or in exploit of war, to be excelled by any nation.

The Archbishop of Civil, next that of Toledo, is the highest prelacy in all
Spain; whilome it had eleven suffragan Bishops, as appears out of the
subscriptions of counsels: namely, the Bishop of Corduba, who now is under the
Jurisdiction of Toledo: The B. of Iliberis, who after the expulsion of the
Moors, removed to the Metropolitan sea of Granada: The B. of Ilipa or Elepla,
of late called Pennaflor, which town is now destitute of a B. sea, and
subscribes to the authority of the church of Civil. The Bishopric of
Tuccitan, now called Martos, and in old time Augusta Gemella Colonia, at this
present destitute of a B. and under the Jurisdiction of Gienna. The Bishopric
of Malaga, which now is suffragan to Civil. The Bishopric of Aegabria, now
called Cabra: it has no prelate, but belongs to the church of Corduba. The
bishopric of Asindia or Asidonia, now called Medina Sidonia, subject to the
B. of Cadiz, the episcopal sea being removed from Gadisea, others call it
Asidonia; it is now said to stand not far from that place, where Xeres is
situate; unless you will say, that in the same tract it retained one and the
selfsame name. It had also the Bishopric of Ossonoba nere Pharo a town in
Algarue, the Moors named it Eruba, afterward it was incorporated into the
church of Siluis, which before being a member of Civil, was by Pope Paul the
third made Suffragan to Euora, which himself had advanced to a Metropolitan
sea. The bishopric of Abdera, which was translated to the sea of Almeria, and
is now Suffragan to Granada. The bishopric of Astigi, which now is ingraffed
into the church of Civil. The bishopric of Italica, seated in a most noble
colonie of the Romans not only citizens, but also Emperors and Generals, which
standing six miles from Civil, on the other side Baetis, was in ancient times,
when S. Gerontius the martyr was bishop, a place highly reverenced. Out of this
town sprang Traianus, Hadrian, and Theodosius, three great and renowned
Emperors. It is commonly called Old Civil, the vast ruins thereof being now
scarce extant, a woeful spectacle of the mutability of humane things, by so
much the more to be lamented, in that the forlorn fragments of that most
beautiful and large Amphitheatrum, which now lie scattered and disiointed,
renew a more sad memory of the ancient greatness and magnificence.

At this time the Archbishop of Civil has for suffragans the bishops of
Malaga, of Cadiz, and of the Canary-isles. The majesty, dignity and wealth of
this church we cannot in few words decypher. Suffices that we do gather out of
their own audits and accounts, that the archbishops yearly revenues amount to
above 100000. ducats. The principal of the church under him have clearly
more than 30000: the whole society of the church is allowed 120000. which are
divided among 40. Canons, 11. priuileged priests, 20. fellow-portionaries or
pensioners, and so many halfe-pensioners; yet so, as the Canons and priuileged
priests have such daily allowance, as by the year comes to 2000. ducats a
man, the pensioners have less than so much by a fourth part, and the
halfe-pensioners are allowed only a third part. Next unto the Archbishop the
greatest authority remains in the Deane, whose dignity is esteemed worth 5000.
ducats a year. Besides, here are in this church 20. mass priests, which from
their number we call Vicenarios; who for their nightly and daily orizons, are
allowed every day amongst them all 200. ducats and above: also there are 200.
other priests, who out of their private chapels do raise stipends sufficient
for their maintenance. Rich benefices in this diocese there are to the number
of 600, many whereof are valued at 1000. some at 2000. ducats by the year:
and of lesser cures, which are called chapels or chanteries, almost 2000. Here
are likewise many cloisters of monks and nuns, wherein their religion and the
study of their divinity flourishes, most of them in yearly revenues being
able to dispend 6000. ducats. There stands a monastery of Carthusians most
sumptuously built upon the bank of Baetis within view of Civil, which has
25000. ducats by the year. Long it were to reckon up all their hospitals,
whenas within Civil only there are above 120. very richly endowed, many with
8000. and some with 15000. ducats of yearly income. Thus much of this region
or diocese, out of the relation of Don Francisco Pacheco. Concerning Civil
and the territory thereto adjacent you may read at large in the Iournall of
Nauagierus.

The Kingdom of VALENTIA.
PTolemey calls the people inhabiting this part of Hispania Tarraconensis,
Heditanos. Pliny names the region Edetania. It seems that in Strabo they are
called Sidetani, and in Liuy, Sedetani. (Pliny also mentions the people
Sedetanos, and the region Sedetania, but diverse from these; as appears out of
his third book and third chapter.) In this tract stands the city of Valentia,
albeit Ptolemey ascribes it to the Cotestani, a nation bordering not far off.
From this city, as from the principal, all the whole region is denominated,
and it contains the ancient Hedetania, Cotestania, and part of Ilercaonia.
This province put on the title of a kingdom, about the year of our Lord 788.
as you may read in Peter de Medina, and Peter Antonie Beuthero.

It is situate upon the Mediterran sea, and is refreshed with the streams of
Turia, a river so called by Salust, Priscian, and Vibius: by Pomponius Mela,
Durias, and by Pliny, Turium. Now they call it Guetalabiar, which is an
Arabicke name imposed by the Moors, and in English is as much to say, as pure
and clear water. It is a river not very deep; but in regard of the
euerflourishing banks, bedecked with roses and sundry kinds of flowers, most
exceeding pleasant. It is on both sides from the very fountain to the outlet,
naturally clad with beautiful and shadie woods: every where you may behold the
Withy, the Plane, the Pine Tree, and other trees, never disrobed of their
leaves: so that Claudian wrote most truly of it; Fair Duria, with flowers and
rosy banks adorned. There is also the river Sucro, which by a new name they
call Xucar. Two hills here are among the rest, one called Mariola, and the
other Pennagolosa, that is, The rock of dainties; whereunto from other places
resort great store of Herbalists and Physicians: for upon these hills grow
great abundance of very rare plants and herbs. They have also a siluer-mine at
a place called Buriol, in the way from Valentia to Tortosa. In a place likewise
named Aioder are found certain stones interlaced with golden veins. At Cape
Finistrat there are yron-mines, and so are there by Iabea. About Segorbia,
there is yet mention of a quarrey, from whence Marble was wont to be conveyed
to Rome. In Picacent they dig Alabaster, and all the country over Allume,
Oker, Lime, and Plaster in great abundance. But the greatest riches of this
country consists in earthen vessels, which they call Porcellan: which may
perhaps be the same that ancient Writers call Vasa Murrhina. These are made in
diverse places of this kingdom so curiously, and with such art, as the best
Porcellans in Italy, (whereof in all countries such reckening is made) can
hardly be preferred before them. Who desires to know more of the excellency of
this region, and how fertile it is of all things, especially of Sugar, Wine and
Oil; let him read the 9. 12. and 13. books written by Bernardine Gomez,
concerning the life of James the first, King of Aragon.

Among the cities of this kingdom, Valentia is the principal, and the sea of
a bishop; which bishop (as Marinaeus Siculus and Damianus a Goes do report) may
dispend 13000. ducats by the year. Amongst all the Valentias of Europe, this
(says Bernardin Gomez) is called by the French, Valentia the great: for it
contains 12000. houses, besides the suburbs and gardens, which have as many
houses almost as the city it self. Peter de Medina writes, that in this city
there are above 10000. wells of fountain water. An exact description thereof
you may read in John Mariana his 12. book and 19. chap. It is so beautiful,
as the Spaniards in a common proverb say, Rich Barcelona, Plentiful Saragoca,
and Fair Valentia. Pliny calls it a colonie of the Romans. He says, it is
three miles distant from the sea. That this city of ancient time was called
Roma of Romus the king of Spain, Annius out of Manethon, and Beutherus out of
the Annals do report: let themselves auow it. In an ancient inscription it is
named COLONIA IVLIA VALENTIA. It retained the name of Rome (says the same
Beutherus) until the Romans subdued it. Who having enlarged and beautified the
same, called it Valentia, a name signifying the quality of the place. Here was
a council held in the year of our Lord 466. It is a city of venerable
antiquity, where even till these our days remain many ancient marbles with
inscriptions of the Romans graven upon them, whereof some are in the custody of
the said Beutherus and Ambr. Morales.

The territory of this city is for the greatest part inhabited by a people
descended of the Moors, retaining as yet the speech and conversation of their
fathers and grandfathers, which I learned of that most worthy and famous man
Frederick Furius Caeriolanus natural of Valentia.

map of Valencia, Spain VALENTIAE REGNI, olim CONTESTANORVM SI PTOLEMAEO,
EDETANORVM SI PLINIO CREDIMVS TYPVS.
Cum priuilegio ad decennium 1584.



GADES: otherwise called CADIZ, CALIZ, or CALIS-MALIS.
Under the name of Gades, Strabo, Pliny, and some other Writers give notice of
two islands. Mela, Solimus, Dionysius and Ptolemey make mention but of one,
which together with the city, they call Gadira. They that will have two Gades,
call the one, The greater, and the other, The lesser. This (as writes Pliny
out of Philistides, Timaeus, and Silenus; and Strabo out of Pherecides) was
named Erythia, and Aphrodisea, and they call it also Iunoes Island. By the
inhabitants also it was properly called Erythia, and Cotinusa, by the
Carthaginians Gadir, and the Romans named it Tartesson, as the same Pliny
writes. At this present there is but one only isle (and that very much
diminished by the oceans violent waves) which the Spaniards call Cadiz, and
corruptly Caliz, and our countrymen (I know not upon what ground) Calis-Malis.
In the lesser of the two foresaid isles stood the town of Gades; and in the
greater, Iulia Gaditana Augusta; which before, as appears out of Strabo, was
called Neapolis. Now they call both town and island Cadiz. It is the seat of a
Bishop, who also is entitled Bishop of Alger.

This Isle was first discovered and inhabited by certain Phoenicians of Tyrus,
as is evident out of most ancient records. Upon this isle some are of opinion,
that the Geryones afterward planted themselves, whose droues the Egyptian or
Tyrian Hercules forcibly drove away. At one corner of the isle stood the temple
of this Hercules, famous both for builders, superstition, riches and antiquity.
Why it should be holy (says Mela) his bones there buried are a sufficient
cause. Upon the other corner Strabo affirms the temple of Saturn to have been
erected. In the said temple of Hercules, Caesar found the image of Alexander
the great, as Suetonius in his life reports. A fountain there was very
wholesome to drink, which with a strange kind of contrariety diminished at the
flood, and increased at the ebb of the sea. In this temple (as the same author
affirms) were certain brazen pillars of eight cubits, whereon were engraven
the costs bestowed in building of the same. Here also the same author out of
Artemidorus acknowledges a temple dedicated to Juno. Dionysius describes
therein the temple of Age and of Death, and tells of certain altars consecrated
to the Year, to the Month, to Art, and to Poverty. Hercules pillars are here
extant (says Isidore) and here grows a kind of tree like a palm, with the
gum whereof the glass of Epyrus being mingled, is turned into a precious stone.

The inhabitants of old were famous for their skill in navigations, and from
this their ancient traversing of the seas, they do not as yet degenerate. But
their principal gain consists in making of Salt, and in catching of Tunies:
for which they have every year an ordinary fishing. These fishes being cut in
pieces, pouldred and barrelled, are dispersed all Europe over.

This isle was esteemed by antiquity the worlds extreme Western limit;
whereupon says Silius Italicus in his first book, And Gades the utmost bounds
of men, etc. Also in his 17. book: Gades lands farthest end; And Calpe,
bounding Hercules; And Baetis crystal streams, That bathe Apolloes steeds.
For here the Poets feign, that the Sun being weary of his days labor,
drencheth himself in the Ocean, and takes his rest: wherefore Statius also
calls it, Gades the Suns soft bed. Yea at this very time our Netherlandish
Mariners call the Westermost Cape of this isle (which by the inhabitants is
named El cabo de San Sebastian) Het einde der Werelt, that is to say, The
Worlds end. This ancient inscription found upon this isle, is by Appianus in
his book of Inscriptions alleged out of Cyriacus of Ancona, as follows:
HELIODORVS INSANVS CARTHAGINIENSIS AD EXTREMVM ORBIS SARCOPHAGO TESTAMENTO ME
HOC IVSSI CONDIER, VT VIDEREM SI QVISQVAM INSANIOR AD ME VISENDVM, US QVE AD
HAEC LOCA PENETRARET. In English thus: I Heliodorus, a mad Carthaginian
commanded in my last will, that they should in this tomb bury me at the worlds
end; to see if any more frantic than my self would come thus far to visit
me. But that all this inscription is counterfeit and new, I learn out of
Anthony Augustinus his eleventh chapter of ancient coins. Concerning this isle
you may read more at large in Strabo, and Philostratus. And of the city read
Brunus in his volume of cities.

GVIPVSCO.
GVIPVSCO is a part of that Northern tract of Spain called of old,
Cantabria; it borders upon the kingdom of Navarre, and the Pyreney mountains,
which divide it from France, and it is bounded Westard by the province of
Biscay.

The inhabitants in Ptolemey are called Varduli. At this present some call it
Lipuscoa, others Lepuscoa, but corruptly, as Stephan Garibaio, borne in the
country, writes. Some ancient records of this country do not undeservedly name
it The wall and fortress of Castile and Leon. It is a mountainous place, every
where so abounding with iron and steel, that for quantity and goodness of
this metal it is excelled by no other region in the world. Wherefore from
hence to their great commodity, all the neighbour-countries are abundantly
supplied with all kind of iron-tooles and instruments. Here likewise they make
warlike armor and artillery, as namely Great ordonance, Harquebuzes, Caliuers,
Harness, Swords, etc. so good, and in such plenty, as people of all nations
are desirous to have them. They themselves also are a people very warlike. So
that this region a man may rightly call Mars his armory, and the inhabitants
his workmen. Such as dwell upon the coasts, spending the greatest part of
their time at sea, reap unto themselves great profit, by taking Newfoundland
fish called Baccalaos, and Whales; of whose fat they make great quantity of
Traine-oile. Here also they boil Salt, mixing it (I know not for what
purpose) with Oats, and with Hempe-seed.

The head city is Tholosa, situate at the confluence of the rivers Araxis and
Oria: others there are also of note, as Placencia, swarming with Smiths:
Motrico, or rather Monte de Trico, so called of the rock Trico, that hangs
over it. The port of Sant Sebastian, which is the largest and most commodious
upon all the coast. Hither people of sundry nations do traffic. At first it
was called Hicuru, afterward Don Bastia, and corruptly Donastia, which in
signification is all one with Sant Sebastian. For Don in the Biscain tongue
signifies Saint, as Santo in Spanish. But by the inhabitants it is commonly
called Vrumea. For this region differing altogether in language from the
residue of Spain, has many towns called by diverse names, according to the
difference of languages; some whereof I thought good here to note, for the
benefit of those that read histories. The sundry names therefore of diverse
towns in Guipusco are these that follow: Salinas, alias Gaza, both signifying
salt. Mondragon, alias Arrasale. Monreal, alias Dena. Aspeitia, alias
Vrasueitia, and Saluatierra de Traurgui. Olite, alias Ariuierri. Renteria,
alias Villanueua de Oiarcum. Penna Oradada, alias Puerto de Sant Adrian.
Elicaur, alias Licaur. Marquina, alias Elgoiuar. Azcoytia, alias Vrazgoitia,
and Miranda de Traurgui. Araxa, Arayca.


Also the hill Aralar is called Arara, and the river Vidoso, Vidorso, and
Alduida, and Beyouia. This river runs between Spain and France. In
describing this region Stephan Garibayo is very copious, in the 9. 10. 11. 12.
13. and 14. chapters of his 15. book. And Florian del Campo writes somewhat of
it in his first and second chapter. And Nauagierus in his Iournall affirms,
that there is so much iron and steel dig'd out of the mines of Guipusco, as
yields 80000. ducats of yearly gain. The words of Pliny in his 34. book
and 14. chapter, are not (I think) to this place impertinent. Upon the coast
of Cantabria (says he) which the Ocean affronteth, there is a craggie high
mountain, a thing very admirable, wholly consisting of the same matter [he
means iron.]

CARPETANIA.
THis region lies in the very heart of Spain, which Pliny and Liuie call
Carpetania. The people called Carpetani were known unto Strabo, and the
Carpitani with.i. by Ptolemey. Polybius calls them Carpesios; and so does
Liuie in some places. Their chief city is Toledo. The description whereof you
may read in Nauagierus, Pedro de Medina, and George Brunus. All Carpetania is
not set down in this Table, but that part only from Toledo Eastward.
Concerning Toledo, because I have not read it in any other author, I will add
that which Roger Houeden in the second book of his Chronicle of England
reports: He calls it Tulette, and these be his words: In this city there is
an hill, out of which are daily taken above a thousand camels loads of earth,
and yet it never decreaseth: for though you dig never so deep an hole, yet by
the morrow, if any rain fall, it will be filled up again. The earth taken out
of this hill is transported to the neighbor provinces, and sold, to wash men's
heads, and their apparel, as well Christians as Pagans. The said Roger lived
about the year 1200.

map of Carpetania, or Toledo in Castile-La Mancha, Spain CARPETANIAE PARTIS
DESCR. 1584.
Cum priuilegio Imp. et Belgico, ad decennium.

map of Guipuzcoa, Spain GVIPVS COAE REGIONIS TYPVS.
Vardulorum, sieve

map of Cadiz, Spain HANC INSVLAM PERLVSTRABAT, ET SVA MANV DEPINGEBAT GEORGIUS
HOEFNAGLIVS ANTVERPIAN. BELGA.

Dum extendar.



FRANCE.
ALl that tract of land from the river of Rhene included by the Ocean, the
Pyreney mountains, the sea Mediterran, and mount Appennine, as far as
Ancona, the ancient Writers by one general name called Gallia. For Westward by
the Pyreney hills it is disioyned from Spain: North it borders upon the
French and British Ocean: East the river Rhene and the Alps from sea to sea
include it, in like manner as the Pyreney mountains do West: South it is
accoasted by part of the Mediterran sea over against Prouence. It was called
Gallia, in regard of the peoples whiteness: for the high mountains and the
heavens rigor exclude the heat of the Sun from this part: hereof it comes,
that their white bodies change not color. Wherefore the Graecians name the
Gauls or ancient inhabitants of France, Galatas, in regard of their milkewhite
color: for (...) in Greek, signifies Milk; from which name the Latins have
called them Gallos. This deriuation the greatest parts of Writers do approve:
yet some there are that deride it, supposing them rather to be so called of
rain, which in Hebrew is Galah, and in the old British language Glau, as who
should say, A most ancient nation, rained upon, and drenched in the very flood
of Noah. This region of theirs was of old divided into Gallia Cisalpina, which
in regard of us lies beyond the Alps, being that part of Italy, which at
this present is called Lombardie: and Transalpina, which is included within
these five bounds, namely, the river Rhene, the Ocean, the Pyreney mountains,
the Mediterran sea, and the Alps. This Gallia Transalpina by Caesar in his
Commentaries is divided into three parts: Belgica, Celtica, and Aquitanica.
Belgica which is environed by the Ocean sea, and the rivers of Rhene, Marne,
and Senie, using most part the Dutch tongue, and at this present called the
Low Countries. Celtica or Lugdunensis, which is comprehended within the rivers
Garomne, Marne, Senie, and Rhosne. It is now called France. For the Celtae were
subdued by the Francks of Germany: so that at length they were named Western
Francks, from whom the province it self is denominated. Aquitanica before
named Aremorica, which extends from the river Garomne to the Ocean, and to
the Pyreney mountains. West and by North it is confined with that part of the
Ocean which is called the Bay of Aquitane. Westward. it has Spain: North,
Celtica or France properly so called: and South, the country of Prouence. It is
now called Gascoine, and the inhabitants differ both in stature, and language
from the residue of France.

These are the ancient limits of the Gauls. Howbeit the country of the
French, which at this day bears the title of a Kingdom, and is commonly
called the Kingdom of France; has not so large extension: but toward the
North only is so much the narower, as it is cut off by an imaginary line from
Strasbourg upon Rhene to the port of Calais; and it comprehends all that tract
of land, which is contained within this line, the Ocean sea, the Pyreney
mountains, the sea Mediterran, and the Alps.

Postellus in his book of the whole world, reckons up the peculiar Shires, or
Provinces of this Kingdom in manner following: In the East it has Prouence,
Sauoie, Swisserland, Bressia, Borgogne, Lorraigne, Champanie, Henault, Cleue,
and Flanders: on the North, Picardy, Normandy, and Bretaigne: on the West,
Bretaigne, Aniou, Poictou, Xantoigne, and Gascoigne: and on the South,
Gascoigne, Bearne, Roussillon, Dauphnie, Vellay, Forest, Auuergne, Limosni,
Perigort, and Angolesme. East of Poictou lie the provinces of Bourges, Bourbon,
Beaioulois, Lionnois, the County of Burgundy, Auxerrois, Niuernois, Berry,
Tours, Vendosme beyond Aniou, le Beaulse, Gastinois, Valois beyond Sens, and
not far off le Perch, Druise, and le Man's near Bretaigne. And thus at this
present are these Provinces named. But albeit Postellus accounts Sauoy,
Swizzerland, Loraigne, Henault, Cleue, and Flanders among the Provinces of
France, yet are they not now under the government of this Kingdom: for all of
them have peculiar princes, not subject to the crown of France.

Concerning the French King, Villa Nueua reports two memorable things: First,
That in the Church of Rhemes there is a vessel full of neuer-decaying oil,
sent from heaven, to anoint the Kings of France at their coronation. Secondly,
That the same Kings do heal the disease called in English, The Queens evil,
only with touching the place affected.

All France is described in a large volume, by Robert Caenalis; read also
concerning the same argument Gilbert Cognatus Nazorenus; Johannes Marius;
Chassanaeus in his twelfth book De gloria mundi; Postellus in his book Of the
whole world; Aimon in the beginning of his story of the Franks; Sebastian
Munster; Belleforest; Theuet; and other Describers of the world. Touching this
region also, and the disposition of the inhabitants, you may learn somewhat
out of the second book of Laonicus Chalcocondylas of Athens. Of ancient
Writers Caesar surpasses all. Diodorus Siculus in his fifth book, and Ann.
Marcelinus in his fifteenth book have many notable things concerning this
region. Likewise Claudius Champier of Lions wrote in French a Treatise of the
first originals of the principal towns in all France: Symphorianus, father to
this man, discourses of the rivers, and the miracles of waters and fountains
in France. The city of Paris is described in verse by Eustathius a Knobelsdorf;
and the city of Lions by Champier.

map of France GALLIAE REGNI POTENTISS: NOVA DESCRIPTIO, IOANNE IOLIVETO AVCTORE
Candido lectori S.D.

Gallia tota iam olim non ob opes solum, and virtutem bellicam, quibus semper
pres titit, verum etiam ob continentia and disciplinam, que summum apud illos
locum habuit celebris fuit. Nam and artium illustrium, et Graecae etiam lingue
peritia excelluit, matre vt arbitror Massilia Graeca vrbe, in maritima ora
Prouinciae sita, ad qua^ quonda^ disciplinaru gratia ud ex ipsa vrbe Roma missi
su^t qui docere^tur.



BRETAIGNE and NORMANDY.
THis Table represents that part of Gallia Lugdunensis which stretches
toward the Western Ocean. The ancients named it Armorica. Here stands
Neustria, corruptly so called of late years for Vestria or rather Westria,
(according to some, Westrasia) as much to say, as a Western region. The
occasion of this error both in pronunciation and writing, was for that the
French wanting a double V, do always in stead thereof write a single V: and
because u in this small form differs not much from n, hereupon it is likely
that Westria was prodigiously changed into Neustria. In which Neustria at this
present are situate the regions of Bretaigne and Normandy, which in this Table
we present unto your view. NORMANDIA so called of the Northern people that
ouer-ranne it (for Nord in Dutch signifies North, and mannen men) which
Northern people were Danes and Noruegians: who having by force subdued this
region, planted themselves here in the time of Lotharius the Emperor.
Concerning the situation and nature of this place, these are the words of
Gaguinus in his seventh book: Normandy is adorned and fortified with one
Metropolitan, six cities, and ninety four strong towns and castles: most of
their villages also being built citie-like: through which Province a speedy
traveler shall hardly pass in six days: it abounds with fish, cattle,
and plenty of corn; being in all places so fraught with pears and apples,
that the people make all their drink of the same; and yet send great quantity
to other countries. They exercise clothing, and are notable quaffers of cider.
They are naturally a wily people; subject to no foreign laws; living after
their own fashions and customs, which they most obstinately maintain:
cunning they are in sleights and suits of law; whereupon strangers are loath to
have any dealings with them; being otherwise well addicted to learning and
religion. Moreover, they are very apt and valiant in the wars, many of whose
worthy acts against strangers are recorded. Thus far Gaguinus. Of the
quality of this region you may more largely inform your self out of Henry
Altissiodorensis his fifth book of the life of S. German. It abounds, as
Caenalis makes report, with all things necessary for man's life, wine only
excepted, which the soil does not yield. The chief city is Rouen (in English
commonly called Roan) which has a most learned Senate, or Court of Parliament,
that execute justice, and decide the controversies of the whole Province. Here
are also great Merchants, by means of whose traffic the city is known
far and near. In this city there is a church dedicated to the Virgin Mary,
beautified with a most lofty steeple, wherein hangs the greatest bell in all
France, weighing forty thousand pounds, as these French verses graven thereupon
do testify.

Ie suis nominee George d' Amboise,
Qui plus que trente six mil poise:
Et si qui bien me poysera
Quarante mil y trouuera.
In English:

George de Amboise my name rightly sounds,
I weigh more than thirty six thousand pounds:
Whosoever poiseth me well
Forty thousand may tell.
This George, after whose name the bell is called, was Archbishop of Roan,
about the year 1500. who considering that in his Diocese (such was the
scarsitie of oil, as it would hardly be sufficient for the time of Lent)
granted to his Diocessans in stead thereof the use of butter, conditionally
that they should pay six halfepence Tournois a piece: with which sum of money
he caused the said steeple to be built; which thereupon is yet called Latour de
beur; that is, The steeple of butter. The antiquities, and other memorable
matters of this city, F. Noel Taillipied has described in French in a peculiar
Treatise. Thus much of Normandy.

BRETAIGNE bordering upon the coast of Normandy, is the utmost province of
France toward the Ocean. Some think that this was of old called Aremorica.
Sure I am that Caesar describes cities which he calls Aremericas upon this
coast. But Pliny and Sidonius do name the inhabitants Britannos, placing them
upon the river of Loire. The Middle-age writers call them Brittones, which name
they yet retain. Pliny most aptly calls this region, The godliest Peninsula
of Gallia Lugdunensis. In a fragment of the Frankes history I read that it was
once called The horn of France; from the shape thereof, as I suppose. Robert
Caenalis is of opinion, that the Brittons being named Hermiones, took occasion
by way of allusion unto this name, to make choice of those arms which they now
bear, commonly called Ermines, with weasels tails, and the native color of
black in a field argent etc. This region he says is somewhat dry, and not
very fruitful; more apt to bear millet than wheat. Their fields (says he)
they call lands. It seems more properly to be named Eremorica than Aremorica.
For they make larger leagues between town and town, namely of three miles;
which is no slight argument of a barren soil. Hereof the conjecture seems not
improbable, that it was called Brutannia, of nourishing or feeding brute
beasts. So many of their towns (as antiquity reports) are denominated from
flocks and droues: as for example, Pullinaicum, a pullis equinis, from
horse-coltes; Filicieriae, now called Fulgeriae, alias Foulgeres, of braky
grounds; also Rhedones, a Rhedis, that is to say, of carts which carry
commodities long and tedious iourneys: which I rather believe, than that it
first borrowed the name from Brutus. Thus far Caenalis: let the truth
thereof stand or fall upon his credit. More concerning these countries you may
read in the same author, and in Belleforest; but especially in Bertrard
Argentre, who has published a large volume of the same in French. Read also
Elias Vinetus upon Ausonius his poem of Cupid crucified.

LA MAN'S; the inhabitants whereof were in old time called CENOMANI.
Pliny in his third book and ninth chapter puts the Cenomani amongst the
Volsci near Massilia. Ptolemey and Strabo do place them about Brixia in
Italia Transalpina, which is on this side Padus. Other Cenomani be found in
Gallia Lugdunensi, by Ptolemey and Pliny lib. 4. cap. 15. or by Caesar in his
seventh book De bello Gall. Howbeit the latter two call them also by a surname
Aulercos. And these are they, whose region we propound in this Table. The
inhabitants now call it La Man's. The situation of this country, and of the
several towns, you may read in Theuet, Belleforest, and Caenalis; out of
whom I thought good to borow this one special note concerning a certain river
and a lake. His words be these [speaking of Sarte a river in this Province:]
Sarte being come to the bridge commonly called Noien, as far as the town of
Malicorne, how plentifully and miraculously it abounds with fish, may appear
by this one example; that not many years past contrary to men's usual
expectation, here was taken a carpe of an ell and handful long: his tongue (if
we may believe the common report) weighed six pounds: which is confirmed also
by a monument written upon the Bishops palace. They say, that not far from
this place in the tract of Sagona, there is an exceeding deep lake, (it is
named The causey-foord, for it ends at the place commonly called Gay Chaucey)
out of which lake are taken carpes of so huge bigness, that one of them will
suffice a mean family for an whole week together: the experience whereof,
following the Court, I learned in the town of Blois. Hitherto Robert Caenalis
in his story of France.

map of Le Man's, in Maine, France CENOMANORVM Galliae regionis, typus. Auctore
Matthaeo Ogerio. La Man's.
map of Brittany and Normandy Neustria. BRITANNIAE, et NORMANDIAE TYPVS. 1594.
Cum privilegio decennali.



POICTOV.
AMongst the people of Aquitaigne some there are called by Ptolemey and Pliny,
Pictones; by Caesar and Strabo, Pictones with i in the first syllable; and by
Ammianus Marcellinus, Pictauos: Ausonius names the country Pictonicam
regionem: but later Writers call it in Latin Pictauia. The inhabitants in
their own language, term themselves Poicteuins, the region Poictou, and the
head city Poictiers, which perhaps is all one with Ptolemey his Augustoritum.
The opinion of some who affirm it was thus named of the Pictes, I hold
altogether fabulous: for out of Classical writers it is apparent that Pictones
is an ancienter name than Picti. Poictou is now divided into the Lower and the
Upper: The Lower Poictou we call that which ends Westward upon the sea of
Aquitaigne: and the Upper, which lies Eastward toward Tourain and Berry:
South it confines upon Xantoigne, Angolesme, and Limosin: and North upon
Brettaigne and Aniou. It is a country most fertile of corn and cattle; rich
in wheat and wine; and abounding with fish. Wild-fowle and beasts here are
great plenty, and for that cause much hunting and hauking.

In this region are contained 1200. Parishes under three Bishoprics, namely
Poictiers, Lucon and Maillezais. The principal places besides these, are
Roch-sur-yon, Talmont, Meroil, Vouuant, Meruant, Bresuire, Lodun, Fontenay le
Conte: All which be in the Upper Poictou. In the Lower are situate Niort,
Partenay, Touars, Moncontoul, Hernault, Mirebeau, Chalstelleraudt, etc. The
head of all these is Poictiers, which next unto Paris is the principal city
in all France, and is for the most part environed by the river Clain. The
antiquity of this town sufficiently appears out of the Theater (commonly
called Arenas) as likewise out of Gallienus his Palace, and the Arches of
Water-conducts as yet extant, which the inhabitants call Arceaux de Parigne:
all which are Monuments of the Romans government in this place. Howbeit before
their coming, this city was seated upon another plot of ground, as may be
gathered out of the writings of Ammonius and Ado. For they make mention of a
place called Old Poictiers, whereat (they say) was the division of the
kingdom between Charlemaine and Pipin Kings of the Frankes. Also in this
table upon the very same river of Clain toward Chastellerault, you may see a
place called Vieu Poictiers, that is to say, Old Poictiers. The town of
Talmont or rather Talon du Monde; (in English, The heel of the World) is so
called by the French, because it stands upon the utmost border of this country
toward the Ocean: as if therefore it were to be esteemed the extreme part of
the World.

Over against the shore of Poictou lie these islands: Oleron, (by Pliny named
Vliarius) at the mouth of the river Charente, called by Ausonius Charantonus
fluuius, and by Ptolemey, Canentelum. L'isle de Rez, opposite to Rochell,
abounding with wine, whereof it is named. The isle Noir, or Marmonstier, which
yields plenty of salt. The isle Aulonne which in this Table is rather a
Peninsula, this abounds with wine and salt: as does another little isle
called Chauet. The Map also represents unto you L'isle de Dieu, or Gods isle:
and that likewise which is called Nostre-dame de Bouin. By Saint Hillary the
Apostle of Aquitaigne, Ecclesiastical Writers affirm, that this region was
converted to Christianity. A more exact description hereof you may read in
Belleforrest, who will refer you from himself to John Bouchet his Chronicle
of Aquitaigne. Something you may learn out of Antony Pinetius in his
description of Cities. Theuet likewise is to be perused. Concerning this region
also John de la Hay wrote a peculiar Treatise in French.

map of Poitou, France POICTOV.
PICTONVM VICINARVMQVE REGIONVM FIDISS DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Nobili Dn^o Petro
Rogiero Pictone, Regiae Mtis Galliae consiliario, etc.



The region of BERRY, called of old BITVRIGES.
THe people Bituriges are mentioned in most of the ancient Geographers. Pliny
calls them Liberos: and says they were also named Cubos. The country is now
divided into the Upper and the Lower. The principal city (called at this
present Bourges) was named by Caesar (as some think) Auaricum. Theobald
Fagotius citizen of the same, writes that the territory adjacent is exceeding
fruitful, and wants nothing that all France may afford; that the city is
ancient, as appears by diverse notable monuments; that it is a town of great
traffic; that they have an University flourishing with all kind of
learning, insomuch as it may well be called The Honor of the liberal Arts,
and A Mart of learned men. But concerning the original of this city, and the
deriuation of the name, let us give ear to John Calmey, who writes thereof in
manner following.

In the year of the worlds creation 1791. one Gomer of the nation of the
Gauls, bringing a Colonie into this region of the Bituriges, planted the same
in the chief city, the name of Ogygis being by Noah his grandfather imposed
for honors sake upon the inhabitants: which by them for the favor and love
they bare to their founder descended of Ogygis, was afterward changed: and they
named themselves Bitogyges, which in the Armenian tongue signifies, The
posterity of Ogygis. But as words by custom are often times corrupted, (for,
to make them familiar, or more proper, we will not stick to add, detract, or
alter some letters or syllables) so the name of this country and of the chief
city, either by the force thereof, or by the appointment of a certain Prince
named Biturix, changed the name of Bitogyges into Bituriges. Amongst other
opinions some hold that it was called Bituris quasi Biturris, of two ancient
Towers which sometimes stood in this city: whereupon a certain Grammarian
has written this verse; Turribus a binis, inde vocor Bituris; that is, Of
Towers twain Bituris I was named. Thus much out of John Calamaeus his book of
the original of the Bituriges, from whence also we have borrowed this Table.

LIMAIGNE.
THe length of all this region which some ab alimonijs or victuals call
Alimonia; others of the fat and slimie soil Limaigne, being part of Auuergne,
which for shortness of time, and in regard of the high hills and low valleys,
and the crooked windings and turnings, we could not exactly measure. The length
hereof (I say) from the bridge of old Briuata, as far as Ganao (abounding
with Corn, Wine, Honey, Cattle, Horses, Saffron, Nuts, Pot-hearbs, Pastures,
Woods, Fountains, Rivers, Bathes, Marle, Lakes, Siluer-mines, Honorable
families, Strong fortresses, and Rich merchandise) stretches about twenty
leagues; and the breadth almost eight leagues. But we describing only the more
fruitful and inhabited part, do in the Table following comprehend about eight
leagues in length, and almost seven in breadth, placing the towns and villages,
according to the scale vnder-annexed. Thus far the Author in a Treatise
entitled, A godly and speculatiue Dialogue, by him written in Italian, where
you may see the very Table which I have here put down.

In the lower part of this Table stands a mountain with a small town named
Gergoie. This is Gergouia in Aruernis, near the river Elauer, whereof Caesar
in his seventh book of the French wars makes mention.

map of Berry, France REGIONIS: BITVRIGVM EXACTISS: DESCRIPTIO PER D. IOANNEM
CALAMAEVM
map of La Limagne, France LIMANIAE TOPOGRAPHIA GABRIELE SYMEONEO AVCT.


The Dukedom of ANIOV.
THe people and country of the Andegauenses, are by Ptolemey placed in Gallia
Lugdunensi. The country at this present is called Aniou, and the people
Angeuins. In times past it went under the name of an Earldom, but since the
year 1350. it has been adorned with the title of a Dukedom. East it
confineth upon Tourain and Vendosme. West it bordereth upon Bretaigne. Poictou
bounds it Southward, and the Counties of Maine and La Val on the North.

It is a country not very large, but for fruitfulness inferior to none other
in France: the wine of Anjou excels all other French wines. Neither is it
destitute of other commodities requisite either for the necessity or the
pleasure of man's life, being every where beautified with Rivers, Mountains,
Woods, and Meadows. It abounds with cattle great and small, and with fish.
All this their Rivers and Meadows afford them. Out of their Mountains they
dig Marble, and a kind of blew Slates, wherewith they cover Churches and
houses. The common people call them Ardoises.

This Region is watered with so many Rivers, Freshets, Fountains, Fish-pooles,
Lakes, and Pondes, that some are of opinion, it was heretofore called Aeguada,
or Aguada, of the abundance of waters: for in the Aquitaigne tongue they call
Water, Aigues. The principal Rivers, besides others, are Ligeris, which the
inhabitants do name Loire, calling it likewise The Father of French rivers.
Into this River, within the compass of Anjou, do fall the rivers Vienne, Diue,
Thouets, Layon, Leure, Guiuatte, Maine, Seure, Loir (a river diverse from
Ligeris, for it falls thereinto, and is called by late Writers Ledus) Aution,
Oudon, Maienne, Brionneau, Loss, and Erdret, etc. So that there run about
forty Rivers through this Province.

It has diverse fair cities, the principal whereof is called Angiers: perhaps
the same which in Ptolemey is named Juliomagus. This being the head city of
all the Region, is built on either side the river Meduan, and joined together
by a stone bridge. The antiquity hereof is evident out of certain ancient
ruins of a Theater which hang over the City, and are called by the common
people Brohan. Here sometimes are old coins found. Lewis the second in the
year 1389. established an University in this place. There be also other
towns of note, as Saumur, Beufort, Bauga, etc. Most of the premises for the
illustration of this Table, we have translated out of Belleforest his French
Munster. To whom, he that will, may add Theuet.

map of Anjou Anjou.
ANDEGAVENSIVM DITIONIS VERA ET INTEGRA DESCRIPTIO.

Licino Guyeto Andegauense auctore.

Cum Priuilegio. 1579.



The territory of PARIS: commonly called, THE ISLE OF France.
IN a certain Iournall of France I read this description of the territory of
Paris. The Isle of France stretches from the town of Saint Denis as far as
Rossy and Montmorency: and so it comprehends all the land within the winding
nookes of Seine, toward Normandy one way, and toward Picardie another way.
The occasions of this name were (as Andrew Theuet reports) in that the
Frankes coming out of Germany planted themselves first in this place, and
here their Captains took upon them the title of Kings: and also for that the
Rivers Marne, Seine and Oyse do in a manner compass it around. Yet all the
Region being comprised within these three Rivers pertains not to the said
isle, but only that part which is near unto Paris. My opinion is, that this
division might be made, when the sons of Clouis sharing the whole Kingdom,
limited and included within these bounds the dominions of him who bare rule at
Paris, and was only called the King of France. Howbeit, now this division is
not observed, seeing that certain Cities of Picardie, Brie, and other
Provinces are comprehended within the same. But let us hear the opinion of
Belleforest also: After the death of the great King Clouis, France was divided
after a new manner; for out of one King sprang many, and he only was called The
King of France, who governed at Paris: wherefore the Isle of France is the true
and ancient jurisdiction of our Kings; albeit Pipins posterity began to
neglect it, and afterward the Parisian territory fell to them by inheritance,
who enjoyed the Crown of all France.

map of Paris, France L'Isle de France. PARISIENSIS AGRI DESCRIP.


The Dukedom of TOVRAIN.
THis region is not very large, being on every side so restrained with
bordering Provinces. West thereof lies Anjou and part of Poictou; from the
first it is severed by the confines of Saumure; and from the second by the
river Creuse: whereupon stands the city of Chinon subject to this Dukedom of
Tourain. South also lies part of Poictou, along the river Creuse, to La port de
Pills, which diuides Guienne from Tourain: and Berry in like sort from whence
it is separated by Chastillon situate upon the river Indre. East, not far from
Loire, the river of Cher diuides it from the province of Blois, and from part
of Berry: and North it is severed from the territories of Maine and Vendosmois
by the river Loire: upon which river is built the city of Tours, and it
imbraceth the same on the part of S. Lazarus suburbs. This river also bends his
course to the town of S. Anne, and to the suburb called Rich: for East, West,
and South it touches the river Indre; and North, all the region toward Anjou
and Maine. To the Dukedom and government of Tourain are subject these cities,
Chinon, Lodun, Touars, Langestz, Amboise, Loches, Chastillon upon Indre,
Montrichard, besides other places and fortresses of Barons. But the cities
which I have named are of best note, and as it were the principal members of
the whole Dukedom. Concerning every of which I will speak more largely,
having said somewhat of the Metropolitan: whereunto belong the third part of
Bishop-townes, which in times past were under the ancient jurisdiction of
Lugdune. For under the third received division of Diocesses apperteining to the
Primacie of Lugdune or Lions, are comprehended Tours, La Man's, Angiers, Rhenes,
Nants, Cornevaile, Vannes, S. Poll de Leon, Tregoir, Dol, S. Malo, S. Brieu.
The Turones therefore of such antiquity, and their city the head of so many
Nations, Julius Caesar reckons in the first rank of the people of France:
and so likewise do other ancient Writers. Ptolemey places them upon the river
Ligeris: and Ammianus Marcellinus in Secunda Lugdunensi. But in Caesar they are
oftener mentioned, and that very plainly, especially at the end of his eleventh
book De bello Gallico. This done (says he) and all France being at quiet, so
great an opinion of this war surprised the Barbarians, that even those nations
which inhabited beyond Rhene, sent ambassadors unto Caesar, promising to give
him pledges, and to obey his commandments. He therefore having ended his
wars, and put his legions in garrison among the Carnutes, Andes, and Turones,
which were cities near unto these places, departed for Italy. Hence you may
gather, that they were not enemies to the Romans, but rather Caesar's followers.
Gregory Turonensis often calls them Senatores Romanos, for they enjoyed the
liberty of Free-denizens, which was granted to none but such as were the
Romans dear friends, and linked unto them in most firm league. The Touranois
are held to be one of the richest people in all France, both for the
fruitfulness of their fields (which they deservedly call The Kings garden) and
also for their excellent manner of government, and the industry of their
Citizens, who are especially addicted to traffic, for which purpose their
nauigable river stands them in great stead. They have also attempted of late to
make silk, than which Italy affoords no better. At the East part of Tourain,
upon the river Loire, stands Amboise, built in a most excellent and choice
seat, and a delicate pure air: so that this place especially, the French Kings
have chosen to retire and solace themselves in. The city of Montrichard situate
on a plain, is on the one side fortified with Rocks and Woods, and hemmed in on
the other side with Meadows and delightsome Fields. Without the city are houses
under ground with Gardens and Vineyards on the tops of them. Loches upon the
river of Indre, has a castle both for pleasantness, largeness, munition and
situation, almost incomparable: for situation (I say) both by Art and Nature
impregnable. Pautruy, Chastillon, Cormery, Beaulieu, and other cities of this
Dukedom, are described by Belleforest, unto whom I refer the Reader.

map of Touraine, France Touraine. TVRONENSIS DVCATVS et CONFINIVM GALLIAE
CELTICAE DESCRIPTIO.
Perlustrata and descripta haec regio est ab Ysaaco Franco Regio Aedili, nec
non in ea provincia Viarum magistro. Anno Domini M.D.XCII.

Complectitur hic ducatus latitudo ab aequinoctiali versus Arcticum ad 47.
gradum, 49 minutos porrigitur. Longitudo vero ab Occidente in Orientem ad 21.
gradum and 27. minutos extenditur.

Les Isles de Loire,
1. Chaumont 2. Des Chams 3. S. Iehan 4. Le Chasselier 5. Tribon et du Ianover
6. Mahondeau 7. Roche corbon 8. Torcay 9. Vaugon est 10. Maille 11. Buysson
Bretenay 12. Drovineau 13. Bec decher 14. Voletz 15. S. Martin 16. Cappel
blanch 17. Petit S. Marin 18. Sauget 19. Les Isles de chose 20. Monsoreau




BLAISOIS, or the territory of BLOIS.
THis territory of Blois confineth East upon Orleans and part of Gastinois;
West upon Tourain; South upon Salloigne and part of Berry; and North upon
Vendosmois and Le Beaulse. That portion of the city of Blois which looks
toward Le Beaulse, stands partly upon hills and rocks, and partly upon plain
ground; which uneven situation makes the ways and passages somewhat uneasy.
Howbeit this inconvenience is no disgrace to the City, nor discourageth
Travelers to frequent it: for the fruitfulness and fair beauty of the whole
Province makes it amiable, and the excellent temper of the air, populous: It
being for plenty of Wheat, Wine, and other necessaries for man's life, to no
Province inferior: for it is all shadie, and full of Woods, Vineyards, Rivers,
Brooks, Pooles and Fountains: so that Nature has infused a wonderful
fatness into this soil, with such a temper of heat upon the hills near
about the city, as causes their Vineyards exceedingly to prosper. Wherefore
this Province participating with Le Beaulse and Salloigne, excels them both
in their own commodities. For abounding with Wheat no less than Le Beaulse,
it far surpasses the same in Wines, in other kinds of grain, and in plenty
of water. For pleasantness it matcheth Salloigne, from whence, though it be
severed but the breadth of the river Loire, yet is not the fruitfulness thereof
empair'd by the others sandy barrenness. Wherefore that part of Le Beaulse
wherein Blois is situate, has more abundance of wood and water than the
residue; and the frontiers of Salloigne next adjoining may ascribe their
fruitfulness to the good neighborhood of this territory. Neither can the old
said saw, That it is best dwelling in Salloigne, and best inheriting in Le
Baulse, be severally, but jointly applied to Blois. That the air is most
wholesome and temperate, I appeal to multitudes of great and honorable
personages, who being oppressed with most grievous diseases, do repair
especially to this Province for the recovery of their health. Yea the Kings
children are nursed and trained up in the city of Blois: for which cause it is
called The Kings city. Amongst the rarities of this province, one there is that
can hardly be found in the whole Kingdom besides, namely a vein of that
earth, which is commonly called Terra Lemnia or Sigillata, being of the same
force and efficacy with the true earth of Lemnos. All this description we have
taken out of Belleforest.

LEMOSIN.
THe Province of Lemosin consists of two Regions, the Higher and the Lower;
both being subject to one government. They are divided insunder by the castles
of Massere, the rivers Bresdasque and Bezerre, and those of the region called
La March de Lemosin. The higher part extends from Puy, the first village in
the way to Paris, as far as the river Bredasque, for the space of nineteen
leagues or forty French leagues. The very same distance it has from Vareille
(which stands a mile from Souterane) to the foresaid river. It is plentifully
watered by the river Vienne, which the inhabitants call Vignana, and Bezerre
abounding with rivers, crabs, and by other small Freshets: so that all the
whole country is very moist and fertile, and excellent pasture ground for great
and small cattle, which do here mightily increase. The principal city of the
higher province called Limoges is accounted one of the most famous and ancient
cities of all France: situate partly in a valley toward the river of Vienne,
and the town and church of S. Stephen; and partly on an hill, toward the
suburb of S. Martial. The length far surpasses the breadth, extending North
and South. It is strongly fortified with walls and ditches, and abounds with
water derived from a notable Fountain in the highest part of the city, which
serves likewise both to water their horses, and to cleanse their streets. But
the ruins of the ancient walls, yet standing in the next Vineyards, do
plainly show, that the City in times past, was much larger than at this
present. For first the Romans surprised it, and afterward the Goths, as
witnesses Sidonius Apollinaris, when he has reckoned up all the cities of
Aquitaigne sacked and destroyed by them. The Francks also miserably afflicted
it. After them Charles Martell laid it waste. And lastly, the English made
spoil thereof. Notwithstanding at this time, for the bigness, it is accounted
one of the richest cities in the whole Kingdom; being very well ordered and
governed in regard of the Court of Parliament there, as likewise the authority
of the Vicount, the Kings Eschequer, and the assembly of the Consuls in
Merchants affairs, which they commonly call The Burse. Thus much and more,
concerning this region, writes Belleforest.

map of Blois, France Blaisois. BLESIENSIS TERRITORII hanc tabulam, describebat
Ioannes Temporius Blesis, anno Messiae nati 1592. epoche Christianae 1590.
Mundi 5610.
Le Blaisois contient en longitude d'Occident en Orient depuis S. Ouin iusques
a Brinon 25 lieuez en latitude de l'Equateur verse le Nord, depuis Chasteauroux
iusques a Rabestan 40. lieues.

La cincture de la terre est divisee en 360. degrez, a chascun degree donnons
25. lieues. Toute la terre contient 9000. lieues.



map of Limousin, France LEMOVICVM TOTIVS ET CONFINIVM PROVINCIARVM QVANTVM AD
DIOECESIM LEMOVICENSEM SPECTANT NOVISSIMA ET FIDISSIMA DESCRIPTIO.
Io. Fayanus M. L. describebat.
Homere Demosthene et Archimede ensemble
Lymoges a nourry ou la Virtue sassemble,
Muret, Dorat, Fayen, trois excellens Esprits:
Muret son Demosthene et Dorat son Homere.
Fayen son Archimede ayant sa ville Mere
Sa Province et son Plan heureusement compris.
IOACHIN BLANCHON.

CALAIS and BOVLONGNE.
THis Cart contains the description of that North-western part of France,
which the English were masters of from the year 1347. until the year 1557. At
what time the Duke of Guise Lieutenant for the French King took it by force of
arms. The towns of Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres the English from time to time
have furnished with able garrisons. And Calais has heretofore been the Staple
for Woolles and other English commodities. Concerning the tract of Boulongne,
thus says Robert Caenalis, in his 2. book, and 3. Perioche De re Gallica. Of
Gessoriacum, a port of the Morini, I may well say with Meierus, that it is now
truly called Boulongne upon the sea shore, from whence there is a very short
cut to Dover on the English coast. But the Docke or place for building ships
(called Nauale Gessoriacum, which Bilibaldus falsely affirms to be Gaunt) I
think rather to be Castellum, now named Cassell. Some by another name call it
Petressa and Scalas, commonly Scales. Moreover, by the situation of Boulongne
one may easily conjecture, whether it were Portus Iccius or no. Wherein that no
man may doubt, let us learn this one thing out of Strabo, That the sea between
Portus Iccius and England, was just 320. stadia or furlongs over: which make in
all 40. miles. But the later Maps contain between Boulongne and Dover 17.
English, which are longer than Italian miles, and from Calais 18. Whereby it is
manifest, that from Boulongne to Dover it is but a very short cut: wherefore
Portus Gessoriacus the haven, and Nauale Gessoriacum the docke, are not all
one: which docke whosoever thinks stood where Calais now stands, I will not
greatly contradict him. Thus far Caenalis.

This very place of Boulongne is described by Arnoldus Ferronius (who continued
the French history of Paulus Aemilius till his own time) in manner following.
There is (says he) Base Boulongne, and High Boulongne. The base town was
unwalled before the coming of the English. There stands the church of S.
Nicholas, and a cloister of Franciscans: the English sea beats upon this
town. Near unto this Frierie, which is not far from the sea, there is a
very commodious place to pass for England. It is distant from the higher
Boulongne about 100. pases or somewhat more. But Boulongne the higher is
environed with most strong walls, and with high ditches compassing the walls.
All this region is full of that sand, which those that dwell on the coast call
hot sand. Whereupon they will have the name of Boulongne to be derived of the
French word that signifies such kind of sand, notwithstanding we know it out
of Ammianus Marcellinus to be an ancient name. Thus much out of Ferronius.
Concerning these matters read Diuaeus also.

VERMANDOIS.
THis Region which of old the Veromandui inhabited, still retaining the
ancient name, is at this present called Vermandois. From hence the rivers of
Some and Schelde fetch their original. Here in times past (as Robert Caenalis
witnesses) stood the city called Augusta Veromanduorum, now raced all save a
Monastery which remains. This city was the sea of a Bishop, but under
Medardus the Bishop thereof it was translated to Noion, as Carolus Bouillus
reports. Howbeit the place yet holds the ancient name, and is called
Vermand-abbey. Wherefore they seem to be in an error, that think the town
of S. Quintins to have been Augusta Veromanduorum. Concerning the people of
this region, read Peter Diuaeus in his book of the antiquities of Gallia
Belgica.

map of Caleis and Boulogne, France CALETENSIVM ET BONONIENSIVM DITIONIS
ACCVRATA DELINEATIO.


map of Vermandois, France VEROMANDVORVM EORVMQVE CONFINIVM EXACTISSIMA
DESCRIPT. Iohanne Surhonio Auctore.


PICARDIE.
THe name of Picardie, as all that write of France do affirm not to be
ancient; so the original or deriuation thereof none of them can render.
Caenalis dares not say, that it was so called of the Begardes. Belleforest
flatly denies it, supposing the Picardes to be somewhat ancienter than the
Begardes. Some think that they were so named of the warlike weapon called the
Pike; which, as they imagine, was here first invented. Certain it is, that the
province of Picardy was larger in times past: for we read that Artois, with a
part of Flanders, as far as the river Lis, and the county of Boulogne, were
all comprehended under the name of Picardy. The region which is now properly
called Picardy, extends not so far as the Map it self.

This Region is part of Gallia Belgica, whilom inhabited by the Ambiani,
Bellouaci, and Veromandui, or (as Ptolemey calls them) Romandui. The river
Sum, which some think to be Ptolemey his Phrudis, refreshes the wole
country, and makes it most fertile of all kind of grain, and the towns and
cities to abound with all necessaries: for it yields such plenty of wheat,
as it is called by an usual proverb, The Barn or Granarie of Paris. It has
no vineyards; which defect some think is rather to be imputed to the sloth of
the inhabitants, than to the intemperature either of the soil, or of the
climate.

The cities here, of principal note, are Amiens, in Latin Ambianum, famous
both for antiquity and the Episcopal sea. It is environed around with the
river Sum. Wherefore some fondly think it to be named Ambianum, ab ambitu
aquarum, because it is compassed with waters. It is one of the strongest towns
in all France. The vulgar suppose it to have been built by the soldiers of
Alexander the great. Under the diocese of Amiens is Abbeuile, the name whereof
is new, as appears by the deriuation, which in Latin is Abbatis villa, that
is, The Abbats town: for out of an Abbey it increased at length to the
greatness and form of a city. It is now the head city of the county
Ponthieu; which region is so called, a multitudine pontium, of the multitude of
bridges; because it is in diverse places pestered with Marshes and Fennes.
Picquenie stands in this province also; built as the common sort imagine by one
Pignon a principal soldier of Alexander the great. Likewise in Vermandois you
have the town of S. Quintins, which many suppose to have been Augusta
Veromanduorum, being the ancient seat of the Earls of Vermandois, and the head
of that region. Peronne so often spoiled in wars, who can be ignorant of?
Guise also seems to be a Fort against Lutzenburgh. Hence the Guisian family
derive their name. Other cities there be of less moment, as Corbie, Roye,
Nelle, Hen, Cattelette, Mondidier, etc.

In a little French pamphlet entitled Chemins de France, or the ways of
France, Picardy is divided into three parts; The Lower, The Higher, and Picardy
properly so called: wherein are contained the Regions of Vermandois, Retelois,
Tartenois, and Tirasse. Picardy properly so called is described in this our
Table.

map of Picardy, France PICARDIAE, Belgicae regionis descriptio. Joanne
Surhonio auctore.
Cum Imp. et Reg. priualegio decenn. 1579



PROVENCE.
THat portion of France which ancient Writers called Narbonensem and
Bracchatam, Caesar and Pliny do comprehend under the name of Prouincia: part
whereof is contained within the rivers Rosne and Durance, the Alps, the river
Varo, and the Mediterran sea, the inhabitants as yet call by the name of
PROVENCE. Petrarch writes it was sometimes called Regnum Arelatense. The
middle-age writers call it Prouinciam Viennensem tertiam. It bordereth West
upon Languedoc, North upon Daulphine, East it is confined by Piemont, and South
by the Mediterran sea, and the Isles Stoechades. This ever was and now is
accounted the most fertile region of France: for Strabo says it yields all
sorts of fruits that Italy affoordeth. If we may credit Belleforest, it
bears sugar about the town of Years. Manna is here gathered, as the same
author affirms. The principal cities of this province are Massilia,
commonly Marseille, which was the ancient Ionica Colonia, of the Phocaean
Greeks, being as Caesar 5. Civil. reports, compassed by the sea on three sides;
and on the fourth side, having a passage to the land. Strabo writes, that the
haven is in form of a Theater, and that within compass thereof they have
docks for the building, and a storehouse for the furnishing of ships. Here was
a temple of the Ephesian Diana, and another of Apollo Delphicus. The citizens
were treble-tongued, speaking Greek, Latin, and French, as S. Jerome
reports out of Varro. Of this city read more largely in the 43. book of
Trogus Pompeius, and in a Panegyricke speech uttered before Constantine the
great by Anonymus or one unnamed. The city Arelatum commonly Arles, upon the
river of Rhosne; which by Ausonius is named Arelas or Gallula Roma; as likewise
double Arelas, because (as learned Vinetus observes) it was heretofore by the
said river divided in twain. Now it may well be called single Arelas, looking
of a far other shape, and all situate upon that side of the river which is
toward Italy. This, Ammianus makes the renown of many cities. And Suetonius
says, that here was a Roman colonie planted by Tiberius the Emperor his
father. Procopius affirms, that it was heretofore the head city of the
Burgundians. Next follows Aquae Sextiae, so called (says Strabo) because that
very Sextius which subdued Salyes, built this city after his own name, and
after the name of certain hot bathes in the same place. Now it is corruptly
called Aix. These bathes Strabo in his time supposes to have turned cold, and
so Robert Caenalis at this present affirms, that they have lost their ancient
virtue. The Parliament of the whole province is here resident. Of this city
Gabriel Simeonius writes, that he never saw either a more pleasant place, or a
more courteous people. Then have you the city Cabellio, now called Cauaillon.
Tarascon retaining still the ancient name. Carpentoracte commonly Carpentras.
Vasio now Voiton: the same with Forum Vocontiorum, as some think. Taurentum
and Telo Martius, which some now interpret to be Toulon. Forum Iulij, now
Frejus. Olbia which perhaps is Years. Antipolis, Antibe. Segusteron, Cisteron.
Vintium, Venze. Glanatica, Glandeues. Dinia, Digne. Tecolata thought to be S.
Maximines. Grinicensis, Grass. All famous for antiquity. Moreover, here is
the town of S. Baume, situate upon a craggie hill, in which is a cave; where,
the inhabitants hold opinion, that Mary Magdalen did penance, and ended her
days. Likewise at the mouth of Rhosne the reader may see on the one side the
field called La Craux; and on the other side La Camargo This last named (they
say) is miraculously fertile of wheat. And Belleforest thinks it to be called
Camargo, a castris Marij, of the camp of Marius here pitched. Whereas the
other named La Craux, is out of measure barren, yielding naught but stones: for
which cause it is by ancient Writers most aptly called Campus Lapideus, or The
stony field. The isles adjacent to this province are the Stoechades,
dispersed, as Pomponius writes, from the shore of Liguria or Genoa as far as
Marseille. Pliny makes them three in number, naming each. And Strabo says
there are three of importance, and two small ones, not worthy to be mentioned.
About these isles grows most excellent Corrall, as Pliny witnesses, which
Belleforest reports still to continue. In commendation of this province,
Petrus Quinqueranus Bishop of Sens, has written a peculiar volume.

On this side the river Durance, this Region bordereth upon that part of the
Popes jurisdiction, which is commonly called Conte de Venacin, in Latin
Comitatus Venuxinus, and Veneticus, wherein stands the City and University of
Auignon, which in times past was the Papal sea, namely from Pope Clement the
fifth in the year 1300. till Gregory the second, for the space of 60. years.
Petrarch then called it The French and Western Babylon. Besides other notable
things in this city, seven there are, seven times told, right worthy the
admiration; namely, seven Palaces, seven Hospitals, seven Parishes, seven
Nunries, seven Colleges, seven Frieries, and seven gates. Not far from hence
is the valley of Chisa at the head of the river Sorgues, a place so highly
magnified by Petrarch, as he often calls it his Helicon and Pernassus. This he
made choice of as an hermitage to weane himself from worldly cogitations. A
man (in my conceit) not of the ordinary cast of Writers, and whom I may boldly
and deservedly call, The Christian Seneca.

map of Provence, France PROVINCIAE, Regionis Galliae, vera exactissimaque
descriptio. Petro Ioanne Bompario auctore.
Cum Privilaegio decennali Imp. Reg. et Brab. 1594



The coast of NARBONNE.
THE principal places along this coast William Paradine describes in these
words: Arles was a colonie of the Sextaine, as some Writers do affirm.
Standing upon Rhosne it is environed with Marshes; wherein at this present are
a breed of fierce and untamed Kine. Whilome it was a famous Mart-towne, as
Strabo writes in manner following: Narbo (says he) the most frequented Mart of
this Region, stands at the outlet of the river Araxis, by the lake
Narbonensis: but upon Rhodanus the town of Arles, a Mart of no small
importance, is situate. Near unto Arles are those hot bathes, where Sextius
(says Strabo) built a town after his own name, calling it Aquae Sextiae. The
cause why he built it was to place a Roman garrison there. Here were the
Cimbrislaine by Marius, as writes S. Jerome. Aurasio, now called Orange,
famous in times past for the government of the Gabali, or Cabilonenses; wherein
I saw the ruins of an huge Theater, and a mighty wall excellently built of
square stone, the like whereof I doubt whether all France can afford. There
stands also at the gate toward Lions a triumphall arche, with a tilt or
turniment of horsemen engraven thereupon, which we long beheld with great
delight. To this city belongs Nemausum, now called Arenas, a place renowned
for the ancient Theater there extant. Here is a most wonderful passage under
ground, passing thwart under the very channel of Rhodanus, to the city which
stands afar off. Here likewise you may see the Palace of Plotina, built by
Adrian the Emperor, as Spartianus reports, etc. Thus much out of Paradine.
But of all others, most exactly John Poldo d' Albena has described this city,
and set forth the antiquities in picture, with the situations and ancient names
of the places adjacent. Of this argument read Strabo in his fourth book: and
Gunterus a Poet of Genoa. The original of this Table my friend Mr. Carolus
Clusius of Arras gave me drawn with his own hand.

SAVOIE.
SAVOIE stands on this side the Alps, the Prince whereof called the Duke of
Sauoie, is Lord of the Region of Piemont. The head city is Chamberi (of old,
as says Caenalis, called Ciuaro) wherein the Senate or Parliament resideth.
This region some think was named Sabaudia from certain people called
Sebusiani, and as others suppose, of the Sabbatian fourds. But Bouillus renders
another reason of this name. For this region (says he) in regard of the narrow
passages (as being situate among the Alps) and of the scarsitie of inhabitants
was all ouer-pestered with thieves, which either robbed or murdered such
travelers as passed that way. Hereupon a certain Nobleman having obtained it
of the Emperor under the title of a Dukedom, expelled by force of arms all
the said thieves and robbers, and made the way most secure for travelers. This
done, he caused it afterward to be named Salua via, commonly Sauluoy, that is,
The safe way, which before was called Mala via, alias Mauluoy, The evil or
dangerous way: hence the Latins call it Sabaudia. Hitherto Carolus Bouillus.
Whether it be a fable or an history, I appeal to the authors credit. This
one thing I am sure of, that the word SAPAVDIA is often used in the book
called Notitiae prouinciarum, for a name of one of the provinces of Gallia
Narbonensis.

But here also I think it not amiss to annex the description of this province
out of the history which Paradine wrote of it. His words be these: That region
which in Latin is now called Sabaudia (commonly Sauoy) ancient Writers named
Allobroges. And it contains all that tract, which in times past the Sabbatij,
Ingauni, Intimelij, Hiconij, Tricorij, Vicontij, Lepontij, Latobrigi, Medualli,
Centrones, Catoriges, Veragri, Nantuarij, Salassi, Tharantasij, and Seduni
inhabited. The regions therein comprised at this present are thus named: Sauoy,
the county of Geneua, the Marquisat of Susa, the county of Morienne, the
Baronisse of Tharentaise, Brengeois, Foucigni, Chablais, Val de Oste, Pais de
Vaul, Pais de Geis, and some others. The Duchy of Sauoy has under it the
region of Piemont, adorned with the title of a Princedome. Also the region of
Bresse, wherein are the counties of Varaz, Mountrueil, Pont de Vaulx, Bagey,
etc. Out of ancient monuments it is apparent, that this region in times past
bare the name of a Kingdom; especially in the days of Hannibal: who being
ordained vmpire between Bronchus and his brother about the government of this
country, compounded their quarrel, and restored the kingdom to the eldest,
whom his younger brother had expelled; as Liuie reports in his 21. book. Florus
also affirms, that Betultus (or as some read it Betuitus) the King of this
place, was taken captive by Fabius Maximus. And sundry authors do make
mention of King Cottius in the time of the Emperor Augustus, of whom the
neighbour-alpes were called Cottiae. More concerning this region you may read
in Philibert Pingonicus.

The County of VENACIN.
THe County of Venacin, named in Latin Comitatus VENVXINVS, and by Caenalis
VENETICVS, and the Popes territory also, because it is under his jurisdiction;
is part of that region in France now called Prouence, and of old Narbonensis
secunda. The principal city is Auignon situate upon the Rhosne. It is the
Popes town, and held for a while the Papal sea. In this county are three
Bishoprics, where law-matters also are decided, namely Carpentras, Cauaglion,
or L'isle, and Vaurias. In this Table is comprehended also the Princedome of
Orange, so called of Orange the chief city, being famous in Sidonius and
Ptolemey under the name of Arausio. Pliny and Pomponius call it Arausia
Secundanorum. COL. ARAVSIO SECVNDANOR. COH. 33. VOLVNT. is found graven upon an
ancient stone. More concerning this region you may read in Belleforest and
Theuet.

map of Narbonne, France GALLIA NARBONENS.
map of Savoy, France SABAVDIAE DVCAT. Auctore Aegidio Bulionio Belga
Scala milliarium.

map of Avignon, France VENVXINI COMITATVS NOVA DESCR. Auctore Stephano
Ghebellino.


LORRAIN.
THE bounds of Lorrain in times past extended much farther, for it comprehended
in a manner all the whole region lying between the river Rhene, and Scheld, and
the mountain Vogasus. All which was divided into the higher, and the lower.
The lower Lorrain contained Brabant, Haspengow, Guelders, and Cleue. In the
higher were the Bishopric of Liege, with the counties of Lutzenburg, and
Limburg: as likewise the duchy of Maesland, the county Palantine upon Sur, and
the territory of Hundsruge: together with this present Dukedom of Lorrain
retaining as yet the ancient name Lotharingia, imposed by Lotharius son to
Ludouicus Pius, unto whose share it befell: lying in the midst between
Westrasia (or as some unskillfully call it Noastria) which fell to Charles, and
Austrasia to Lewis Lotharius Brethren. This therefore I think not amiss more
largely to describe, not in mine own words, but in the words of Symphorianus
Campeggius, sometimes a famous Physician of Lorrain, LORRAIN (says he) ioineth
East upon Alsatia, commonly Elsas, South upon Burgundy, West upon Champaigne,
and North it is bounded upon the Forest Arduenna. This region albeit compassed
with lofty Alps, is notwithstanding so fat and fertile, as it need no supply
from the neighbour-prouinces: it abounds with cattle great and small, with
meadows, corn, wine, fishpooles, high woods, healthful bathes, saltpits,
iron, copper, lead, tin, silver, precious stones, looking glasses, Calcidons,
and is watered by sundry rivers: four whereof are famous above the rest. Mosa
the first of these four springing out of mount Vogesus (of which mountain a
great and a good part of Lorraine is named Le bois, and Le forest de Voige) and
running along by Neufchasteau, a town very commodious both for pleasant
situation, and wholesome air: divides the duchy of Bar from Lorraine, and
casts it self into one of the channels of Rhene, before it falls into the
sea. Mosella the second begins Southeast, not far from the town of
Rimeremont; wherein is a monastery of Nuns, all gentlewomen, endowed with
large revenues. About six miles from hence are certain hot-bathes whereunto
resort great multitudes of people to cure themselves of sundry diseases. Then
runs it along with swift streams to the towns of Espinall, Charms, Toul
(which in old time was called Leuca) and Mediomatrices, now called Metz: not
far from whence it falls into the Rhene, at a city of Germany called of old
Confluentia, and now Cobolentz. Between these two rivers near the town of
Vitell, is a double fountain severed like a man's nosethrills, from whence the
small river Vena issues: which sometimes is sandy, and sometimes miry, and for
the most part very unseemly and forlorn: the waters whereof are commonly
dried up in June, except the pooles, which the swelling and violent streams
have made so deep. Murtha the third river falling from certain rocks of
siluer-mines, holds on his course through the valley of S. Didier, wherein is
S. Godeberts fountain, which is generally reported to be medicinable for many
diseases. The said river runs along by the town of S. Didier, and then by
the towns of Raon and Luneuill: all which both for natural situation, and for
rampires, and walls are places of singular defense. Then follows the town of
S. Nicholas generally famous both for abundance of merchandise, and multitudes
of miracles. Lower down the river stands Nancey, the principal town of
Lorraine, a place for munition, and fortification of great importance. First it
is compassed with two ditches of exceeding depth, and a double wall: also it
has four most admirable bulwarks, with plenty of warlike engines and
artillery. Murtha falls into Mosell. And Sartha the fourth river running along
the confines of Westereich, a province subject to Lorraine toward the East,
holds on his course by the towns of Sarburg, Saralben, Sarprucke, with
others, and then falls into Mosell.

Now whereas Lorraine abounds all over with special commodities; many of
them we will omit, and speak only of the most principal. First therefore the
mountains of this province do in all kind of mineralls excel even the
Pyreney mountains: wherein, not to speak of the rest, there are diverse
siluer-mines, so abounding with that kind of metal, as it is incredible what
commodity it yields to the whole country.

There are also salt-mines, out of which is dug most pure, sauorie, and
snow-white salt: which yields yearly to the Duke, all charges deducted,
100000. francks.

Here is found likewise a kind of matter, whereof they make looking glasses
and drinking glasses, the best, by all men's confession, in Europe: nor is there
in any place the like to be had.

Also Calcidons of so extraordinary bigness, that I my self saw at the
Bishops of Toul, a great cup made of one whole piece.

Item, the Lazul (or Azure stone) representing most excellent colors. A
mineral out of which the miners raise exceeding gain.

In the valley of Voige are fountains (a matter memorable, and not to be
omitted) so abounding with a kind of pearls, and precious stones, as the
greater part of Germany does use them: which all Lapidaries and Iewellers of
other countries do not only approve, but also prefer before the stones and
pearls of the Indies.

There is a lake of fourteen miles in compass, stored with carps of huge
bigness; for they are generally of three foot long, and a foot broad; which
for pleasantness of taste, are (in mine opinion) to be preferred before all
other standing-water-carps in Europe. The lake is fished with nets every third
year; the fishing whereof (as every man knows) yields the Duke of Lorrain
16000. francks.

Moreover, Lorrain abounds with wheat, wine, cattle of all sorts, woods,
excellent horses, which surpass the Turkish horses in courage, the Spanish in
swiftness, and the English in stature. In brief, for tall men and beautiful
women; and all things necessary for man's life, it is inferior to no other
country. Thus far Symphorianus.

Francis Roseus very lately wrote a large volume of the pedigree, and famous
acts of the Dukes of Lorraine. And I my self in mine Itinerarium, or Iournall,
have published some things of this Region not unworthy the remembrance.

map of Lorraine, France Lorraine. LOTHARINGIAE NOVA DESCRIPTIO.
Scala milliariorum Lotharingicorum.

1587.

Cum Priuilegio decennali



The County of BVRGVNDIE.
THere are two Burgundies; the lower called Regia, entitled with the name of a
Dukedom; whilome the country of the Aedui: and the higher named Imperatoria,
adorned with the title of a County or Earldom, commonly called LA FRANCHE
COMTE, that is to say, The free County. This of old the Sequani inhabited. It
is represented in this Table. The confines hereof to the North are Lorraine and
upper Germany: to the South, Sauoy, and Bresse: to the West, the lower
Burgundy: and to the East, part of Switzerland. It is at this present divided
into three partitions or governments; The Upper, the Lower, and that of Dole.
The cities of the upper are GRAY, one of the principal of the whole
government, situate upon the river Araris, or Saone, rich in sundry kinds of
merchandise, and bravely built. On the one side it is endowed with most large
and fruitful fields. VESOVL. It has strong walls, beautiful houses, and
fair vineyards. MOMBOSON, IVSSEY, and PALMA standing upon the river Dubis, or
Doux. PORT-SVR-SAONE, upon the river Araris, or Saone, with CROMARAY,
MONTGVSTIN, and FAVLCOGNEY. The cities of the lower Burgundy are: SALINS, a
large city, so named in regard of certain salt and high fountains; for here
is excellent white salt made, which is carried hence in carts to the neighbor
countries, and yields great revenue to this region: SCODINGA, situate in a long
straight valley, extending in length between a double ridge of high
mountains, which bear vines in such places as are most open to the Sun: it
is exceeding strong, being fortified with two castles, and diverse lofty
turrets. ARBOIS, seated in a most pleasant soil, and abounding with all
necessaries, especially with excellent and durable wine. It has large suburbs
on all sides. It is environed with ditches, but such as they make gardens upon.
Round about it are mountains of most beautiful prospect, watered with clear
springs, and clad with fruitful vines, and sightly woods. It is called Arbois
ab Arboribus, because it is so planted with trees: POLIGNY a fair town,
fortified with stately walls and towers; the castle called Grimonia lying
within it: and on the one side it has mountains of woods; and on the other
side hills set with vines, the wine whereof is principal good. PONTARLIER,
situate in a low valley between two mountains, on the bancke of Dubis. Not
far hence stands the strong castle of Iura or Ioux, on the top of an
exceeding high hill; so that for situation it is impregnable. NOZEROY, founded
upon an open hill, in the very navel or midst of this region. All the houses
in a manner are built of stone: the Prince of the country has here a castle,
called The Leaden castle, because it is covered with lead. Here is a Fair kept
four times in the year. In times past this town, before it was walled, was
named Nucillum, of the abundance of hazel-nuts that grew round about it.
CHASTEL CHALON, built and named by the Emperor Charlemaine, both pleasantly
and strongly situate. MONTMOROT, upon a steep mountain planted with vines.
ORGELET, abounding with merchandise. The inhabitants are industrious and
painful, and exercise themselves in clothing. Their fields are barren, for
they are full of hills and craggie rocks; whereupon is grounded a common
proverb, which says, That Orgelet has fields without grass, rivers without
fish, and mountains without woods and groves. The cities of Dole, are first,
DOLE it self, the head city of the province, a nurse of all learning, and
especially of the civil law, most pleasantly situate upon the river Dubis,
adorned with bridges, walls, and invincible forts. The houses, churches and
schools, both for greatness and curious building are most delightful to the
beholders. QVINGEY, a most ancient town, situate upon the bancke of Love.
ORNANS, standing also among high mountains by the river Love. LA LOY, a most
ample village. ROCHFORT a pretty little town. VERCELLES with ruinous and
deformed walls. In this county stands BESANCON, a city Imperial, and
Metropolitan of both Burgundies: the description whereof, because I cannot
condignly express in this page, being exactly performed by Gilbert Cognatus,
Paradine, and George Bruno in his volume of cities; I cease here to speak any
farther. For since their books are so easy to be had, I refer all students to
them. To these also you may add Robert Caenalis. It were to be wished that
Cognatus had not frustrated the hope of students: for he promised in a book,
to restore and bring to light ancient Burgundy, together with a particular
Map, and the old and new names of places. But we have hitherto expected him in
vain. Howbeit, not long since Lewis Gollusius published concerning this
County in French, a great and peculiar volume.

map of the County of Burgundy, France BVRGVNDIAE COMITATVS.
Hugo Cusinus, sive Cognatus patriam suam sic describebat.

1589. Cum Privilegijs Imp. Regis, et Brabantiae. ad decennium.



The Dukedom of BVRGVNDIE.
THat part of France which the Aedui whilome enjoyed is now called The Dukedom
of Burgundy. It is limited North by Champaigne and Gastinois: West, by
Niuernois and Burbonnois: South, it borders upon Lionnois: and East the river
Rhosne diuides it from Sauoy and the county of Burgundy. The head city in
times past was Augustodunum: but now Diuio, or Diuionum, as Gregory Turonensis
in his third book calls it, or as the inhabitants, Digion has gotten the
superiority; for here the supreme court of Parliament for the whole Dukedom is
holden. It is seated on the bancke of Oscarus (commonly Ousch) a river
abounding with fish, in a fertile and plentiful soil, the mountains adjacent
yielding strong and excellent wines: as the said Turonensis reports, who most
learnedly describes it. Some think it was built by the Emperor Aurelian; but
others affirm it to be much ancienter. It is a city both by art and nature
most strongly fortified against all hostile attempts, certain new forts being
lately added. Belna (commonly Beaulne) is the second city of the Dukedom,
famous for the wines of Beaulne, which all men commend. This City is fairly
built, being impregnable in regard of a Castle which Lewis the twelfth erected
here. It has an hospital comparable for building to any Kings Palace. Here
also is the seat of the high court of Chancery. In the territory adjacent was
built by Duke Otho about the year of our Lord 1098. the abbey of Cistertium;
in a woody and clammy soil, which some think was so called in regard of
certain Cisternes there dug. Under the jurisdiction of this Monastery
Belleforest reports, that there are 1800. other Monasteries of Friars, and as
many of Nuns.

Next follows Augustodunum (which some, though upon no sufficient grounds of
antiquity, suppose to have been called Bibracte) now Auttun. That this city
of ancient times was most large and populous, it is evident out of sundry
authors, and especially out of Caesar. Here are yet extant mighty ruins of a
Theater, of Statues, Pillars, Water-chanels, Pyramides, and many other
monuments of antiquity. Likewise here are daily dug up coins, little
vessels, and other such ancient fragments. This city has endured two
memorable overthrows: one by Caesar in his French wars; and the other about
the time of Galienus the Emperor. But it was afterward reedified by
Constantine the son of Claudius, as the Panegyric of Eumenius, calling it
Flauiam Heduorum, does testify. And at this very day it is adorned with
stately temples, and other buildings for public uses.

Then have you Matiscona Caesaris, or Matisconense castrum Antonini, where he
places in garrison the tenth Roman legion. It is now called Mascon. Of old it
was graced with the title of an Earldom. It joins the bancks of Araris by a
bridge. Here, the Lords day of the Christians began first to be hallowed, as
Paradine reports out of the Edict of Guntram. The relation of the city of
Mascon, Philip Bugnonius has elegantly, and briefly set down. Cabilonum, now
Chalon, upon the bancke of Araris also, anciently called Orbandale, as
reports Peter Sanjulian. By Antoninus the foureteenth Roman legion was here
put in garrison. It was of old the royal seat of Guntram, which
notwithstanding afterward Lotharius son to Ludouicus Pius so destroyed and
abolished with fire, as he left no mention at all of a city: yet now it is
very rich, and a place of great traffic. Also toward the North you have
Semur, a fair town built upon an high ground. As like Castillon, Flauigni,
Soloigne, Noiers, with others, the description whereof, because this page
cannot well contain, I refer the Reader to Belleforest, a diligent Surueyer
of these parts. Only one thing I will add out of the foresaid Sanjulian. He
against the opinion of all other Writers, deriueth this word Burgundy, not a
burgis, that is, from the boroughs or incorporate towns built in this region,
but from one particular place called Burg Ogne. In the territory of Langren
about the river Tille, between Luz and Tille-castle, he says there is a
plain which the inhabitants call by no other name but Val d'Ogne: where in
times past stood a famous borough or city. Hence without all question he
affirms, that the Burgundians, or as they are commonly called Burgognons, do
borow their name; and holds those Writers much deceived, that report them, as
vagabond people, to have come out of Sarmatia, Scandia, or the fennes of
Maeotis to inhabit this region; indeuouring to persuade all men that they were
the first and most ancient inhabiters of this country.

The limits of Burgundy were larger in times past, as appears out of sundry
authors. For some there are that bound it South by the Mediterran sea; East,
by the Alps and the river Rhene; North, by mount Vogesus; and West, by the
river of Loire, and Seine. Then, classicke Writers record, that it was governed
by Kings, whose royal seat was Arles. It was divided into the Duchy and
County of Burgundy, about the year 1034. as the Chronicle of Aemilius
testifies. Of the Burgundians Paradine and Nicolas Vignier have professedly
written in Latin, and Peter Sanjulian in French. Of the ancient Aedui read
Nazarius his Panegyricke pronounced before Constantine the Emperor.

map of the Duchy of Burgundy, France BVRGVNDIAE INFERIORIS, QVAE DVCATVS
NOMINE CENSETVR, DES. 1584.

CVM PRIVILEGIO IMPERIALI ET BELGICO AD DECENNIVM



GERMANY.
GERMANY, the greatest and largest country of Europe, is distinguished by
many names: the limits whereof by authors, according to every ones several
time, are so diversely described, as they seem, applying themselves to the
peculiar ages wherein they lived, to give notice of a threefold Germany;
namely, the ancient, that of middle ages, and Germany as it is now taken. The
ancient is that of Berosus, which he circumscribeth by the Rhene, the Ocean,
the river Tanais, the Euxine sea, and the river Danubius. That of middle ages
is the same which Tacitus, Ptolemey, and Pliny, all of one time acknowledged:
whereof, because it is sufficiently known out of the authors themselves, I
hold it needless in this place to make any description. But Germany as it is
now taken, we do confine by the German or Dutch tongue; which learned Goropius
Becanus in his volume of the antiquities of nations, most wittily and learnedly
shows to be the ancientest language in the world. Wherefore all those
countries which at this day use the same language, we comprehend under the name
of Germany. And so the greatest length thereof stretches from Calais on the
West to the river Vistula or VVixel Eastward: and the largest breadth from the
German and Baltic seas to the Alps. The names of the several regions are
these, Flanders (the most Westerly) Brabant, Zeland, Holland, Frisland,
Denmark, Meckleburgh, Pomerland, Prussia, which extends beyond the river
Vistula toward the Baltic sea: as likewise the ancient and new Marquesates,
Saxony, Westphalia, Gelders, Cleueland, Iuliers, the Bishopric of Colen,
Hessen, Turingen, Misnia, Lusatia, Silesia, Morauia, Bohemia, Franconia, the
Bishopric of Mentz, Lutzenburg, the Bishopric of Triers, the County
Palatine, Elsas, VVertenberg, Sueuia, Bauaria, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia,
Tirolis, and Switzerland next unto France. There be also more names of petty
regions, but such as are either of no great moment, or comprehended under the
former. And albeit Bohemia speaks not the German but the Sclauonian tongue,
yet because it is situate in the midst of Germany, and the King thereof is one
of the Prince-electours, it is also numbered amongst the German provinces.

This country of Germany, which for the present is adorned with the title of
the Roman Empire, is so replenished with beautiful and strong cities, castles,
villages and inhabitants, as it is no whit inferior to Italy, France, or
Spain: for corn, wine, and rivers abounding with fish, it may compare with
the most fruitful regions Here are fountains of water, hot bathes, and
salt-mines in abundance: and for plenty of metals, namely, gold, silver,
lead, tin, brass, and iron, no country shall ever go beyond it. Moreover,
you shall no where find more courteous and civil behavior, more honest and
comely attire, more skill and furniture for the wars, nor greater store of
nobility. This is the place that whilome (as Cornelius Tacitus affirms) was
either darkened with woods, or drowned with fennes. Such changes can succeeding
times affourd, as says the Poet.

Of late Writers it has been diligently described by Beatus Rhenanus, Munster
in his Cosmography, Franciscus Irenicus, Johannes Auentinus in his Chronicle of
Lyonnois: Briefly by Bilibaldus Pirkeimerus, Johannes Bohemus Aubames: Gerardus
Nouiomagus, Conradus Peutingerus, Conradus Celtes a Poet, Iacobus VVimfelingius
of Sletstade, Aimon in the beginning of his French story, and Henry Pantalion
at the entrance of his first book of Prosopographia. Sebastian Brand has set
down many iourneys, distances of places, and courses of rivers in this
country. The river Rhene is described by Bernard Mollerus in verse, and by
Magnus Gruberus in prose. John Herold has written two short Treatises of this
region: one of the Romans most ancient stations in old Germany; and another
of certain colonies of theirs on the shore of Rhaetia. Gaspar Bruschius
published a volume of the monasteries of Germany. Of ancient writers Cornelius
Tacitus most exactly described it in a peculiar Treatise: whereon Andraeas
Althamerus, Iodocus VVillichius, and lately Iustus Lipsius have written most
learned Commentaries. Diverse other Writers of Germany, which we have not as
yet seen, are reckened up by Francis Irenicus, in the first book and second
chapter of his Exposition of Germany. But here I think it not amiss to
allege the testimony of Laonicus Chalcocondylas a stranger, namely of Athens,
concerning this country and the inhabitants. Thus therefore he writes in his
second book: This nation is governed with better laws than any other of those
regions or peoples that inhabit toward the North or West. It has many noble
and flourishing cities, which use their own laws, most agreeable to equity.
It is divided into sundry principalities, and is subject to Priests and Bishops
adhering to the Bishop of Rome. The most famous and wel-gouerned cities in the
upper and lower Germany, are Norinberg a rich city, Strasburg, Hamburg, etc.
The nation is very populous and mighty; rules far and wide all the world
over; and in greatness is second to the Scythians or Tartars. Wherefore if
they were at concord and under one Prince, then might they well be deemed
invincible, and the most puissant of nations. As touching their bodies, they
are very healthful, and want nothing. Nor is there any nation that I know
governed by better laws. Thus much and more concerning this people and
country, who list may read in the same author.

map of Germany Deutschlanndt GERMANIAE TYPVS.
Per Franciscum Hogenbergium conciunatus Anno partae salutis M.D.LXXVI vbiorum
Coloniae.

Cum Gratia et Priuilegio.

Magnifico, Nobili ac Praecellentj viro ac Domino, D. Constantino a Lyskirchen,
florentissimae Agrippinensis Reipub. Confuli Seniori, Franciscus Hogenbergius
nuncupat.



GERMANY on this side RHENE, commonly called THE NETHERLANDS or THE LOW
COUNTRIES.
THis Table represents not all the Lower Germany, but only that part which
King Philip, son to Charles the fifth, challenged by right of inheritance.
And it contains these 17. Provinces; the Dukedomes of Brabant, Limburgh,
Lutzenburg, and Guelders; the Earledomes of Flanders, Artois, Henault, Holland,
Zeland, Namur, Zutfen; the Marquesat of the sacred Empire; the Signiories of
Frisland, Mechlin, Vtreight, Ouerissell, and Groemingen. Regions as civil and
as well manured as any in the world; wherein (according to Guicciardin) are to
the number of 208. cities fortified with walls, rampires, or ditches; and
villages with churches above 6300, besides a great number of hamlets, castles
and forts. And this tract (beginning from the East maretine part at the river
Amisus, commonly Eems, the bound hereof toward the Ocean) has these bordering
Princes: the Earl of East Friez, the Bishop of Munster, the Duke of Cleue, the
Archbishops of Colen and Triers, and the French King, along the Southwesterne
shore as far as the river Aa, the extreme Western bound of these Provinces.
The air, though it may seem ouer-moist, is notwithstanding most healthful,
and agreeable to the constitution and digestion of the inhabitants; who are
here very long lived especially in Kempenland, the Northermost part of
Brabant. It is every where watered with rivers; and sufficiently adorned with
woods and groves, either for pastime of hunting, or beautiful prospect.
Mountains it has none, save only about Lutzenburg, Namur, and in Henault,
where it rises in some places into hills. It abounds with corn and fruits
of all sorts, and medicinable herbs. Here also grows great plenty of that
grain, which commonly is called Buckwey, but the people corruptly pronounce it
Bockwey; as if you would say, The Beech-herbe: for the seed or grain (albeit
less in form) is three-square, altogether like the nut of the Beech. So as it
may truly be called Beech-mast, or if you will (...). Whether this simple were
known of ancient times, let Herbalists enquire. Howbeit, in some sandy
places, which the inhabitants, in regard of abundance of heath or linge, call
Heath-ground; as in Kempenland the North part of Brabant, it grows not in such
plenty. But this kind of heath yeeldes such excellent feed for cattle, as
(by the confession of neighbour-countries) their flesh is as pleasant and
delectable to a man's taste, as any other. This region I suppose, that Pliny in
his 17. book and 4. chapter most truly describes, when he says: What better
feed than the pastures of Germany? And yet under a thin flag you have
immediately a mould of barren sand. It breeds no creatures hurtful to
mankind.

All the foresaid regions, the greatest part of strangers (most ignorantly
mistaking part for the whole) call by the name of Flanders, and the inhabitants
Flemings, whereas Flanders is but a part only, and but one Province of the
seventeen; as in the Table you may plainly see. These therefore are in as
great an error, as if a man, to signify Spain, should name Castilia,
Andaluzia, or any other particular Province: or speaking of Italy, should
mention Tuscan or Calabria etc. or discoursing of the whole kingdom of France,
should nominate only Normandy or Bretaigne, etc. and so should imagine himself
to have spoken of all Spain, all Italy, or all France.

These regions John Goropius Becanus in his Becceselanis has most learnedly
described, as likewise Peter Diuaeus of Louaine, and Hubert Thomas of Liege.
Johannes Caluetus Stella, a Spaniard, writ in his own language a Iournall of
King Philips progress through all these Provinces; wherein you shall find many
particulars worth the reading, that give great light to the knowledge of these
countries and cities. But whosoever desires to have more full and absolute
instructions of these places, let him peruse Guicciardin; and he will then
think, that he has not read of these Provinces, but seen them with his eyes.
Lately also David Chitraeus in his Saxon history has written both largely and
learnedly of the same argument.

Whereas the inhabitants in most places speak both the Dutch and French
languages, and the country for traffic and other occasions is frequented by
Spaniards and strangers of sundry nations; hence it is that diverse cities,
towns, and rivers, are called by more names than one: for every man calls
them according to his own language, by a name much differing from the proper
name used by the inhabitants. The ignorance of which multiplicitie of names
has made some authors (otherwise not to be discommended) to fall into
intolerable errors: and amongst the residue, Dominicus Niger in his
Geographie; who puts down Anuersa in stead of Tarauanna; and Antorpia (which
notwithstanding in the copy printed by Henrick Peterson he corruptly calls
Antropicia) he places upon the bank of Tabuda, thirty leagues from Tarauanna;
whereas all men know, that Antorpia and Anuersa signify one and the same city
of Antwerpe. Likewise Machelen and Malines, Leodium and Liege, Nouiomagum and
Nieumeghen, Traiectum on the Maese and Trait (for which he falsely writes
Trecia) he supposes to be two several towns, each couple; whereas in very
deed they signify but one. The city Raremutium also he most grossly affirms
to be called Liege: and in another place he will needs have the same Raremutium
to be named Rhamon: but by his description I conjecture, that he means by his
Raremutium and Rhamon nothing else but the town of Ruermond. So Rhenen a city
of Guelders standing on the bank of the river Rhene, in regard of the
affinity of name, he takes to be all one with the Bishopric of Rhemes in the
Province of Champaigne in France. But being utterly unacquainted with the state
of our countries, his errors may seem the more pardonable. Howbeit, lest
others, studious in Geography, should fall into the like absurdities, I thought
good to annex unto this page the common synonymas or sundry names of certain
particular places.

Antwerpen in Low Dutch, in Latin Antuerpia and Andouerpia; in High Dutch
Antorff, whereof in Latin they call it also Antorpia; the Italians term it
Anuersa; the Spaniards and French men Enberes and Anuers. Aken in Dutch, in
French Aix, and in Latin Aquisgranum. Hertoghenbosche, in Fr^^ch Boissedue,
and in Latin Silua ducalu. Loeuen, in Latin called L^uanium, and in French
Louuain. Lisle, in High Dutch Kijsel, in Latin Insula. Liege, in High Dutch
Luyck, in Latin Leodium. Coelen so called by the inhabitants, in French
Coloigne, and in Latin Colonia Agrippina. Dordrecht, by contraction we call
Dort, in Latin Dordracum. Macheien, in Latin Mechlinia, and in French
Malines. Tournay, in High Dutch Dornicke, and in Latin Tornacum. Arras in
French, Atrecht in Flemish, and in Latin Atrebates. Mabeuge, in Latin they
call Malbodium. Tienen, in French Tilemont. Namur, the Brabanters call Namen,
in Latin Namurcum. Maestricht, and by contraction Tricht, is by ancient Latin
writers named Traiectum ad Mosam. Viset, in High Dutch Weset. S. Truyen, in
French Centron. Thionuille in French, Ditenhosen in High Dutch, and in Latin
Theodonis villa. Terrewanen and Terrenborch in Flemish, Terouenne in French:
Tarnanna in ancient Latin writers. It was wont to be the seat of a Bishop, but
now it has the name only. Gulick, in French Iuliers, in Latin Iuliacum. Mons,
the Flemings call Bergen. Geersberge, which I hear is also called S. Adrians,
and in French Grammont. Ioudoigne, those Brabanters that speak High Dutch call
Geldenaken. Gemblours, an abbey with a small city, in Latin Gemblacum. Soigni
in French, in Flemish Senneke. Halle, in French Nostre Dame de Hault.
Cortrijck, Courtray in French, Cortracum in Latin. Coomene, in French Comines.
The river Maese, in French is called Mense, and in Latin Mosa. The river
Scheldt, in French Escault, is by Julius Caesar and Pliny called Scaldis. The
river Liege in French, is in Flemi h named Leye.
map of the Netherlands and Belgium DESCRIPTIO GERMANIAE INFERIORIS.


The Dukedom of LVTZENBVRG.
THis region as we see many others, is so named of Lutzenburg the principal
city: but why it should be thus called, we cannot easily conjecture. At first
it went under the title of an Earldom, and afterward was advanced to the
dignity of a Dukedom, and so till this present continues. Some say it was
thus advanced by Wenceslaus King of the Romans; others, by Charles the fourth:
howbeit Conradus Vercerius ascribes it to Henry the seventh, the first Roman
Emperor of that family. I find in ancient manuscripts, that the first Earl
of Lutzenburg was one Sigisfridus, and that he was the son of Tacuinus Duke
of Maesland.

In former times Lutzenburg was part of Triers. It stretches from the wood
Arduenna to Mosella (a river by Ausonius much celebrated.) The countries
bordering upon this Province, are part of France, Loraigne, Metz, Triers,
Mamure, and Liege. It is in most places mountainous and woodie; but here and
there also well manured: and of late we see their woods every where turned up
and converted into most fruitful fields. The people are for the greatest part
Dutch, and yet their country joins hard upon France, and they are accustomed
to the language and fashions of the French. This Dukedom contains in
compass, as says Guicciardin, seventy of our Flemish miles. Within it are
seven Earledomes, many Baronies, and great store of gentlemen. Cities there are
with stone walls to the number of twenty three, besides those that the fury
of war has laid desolate: with 1168. villages, and sundry castles of
importance.

The principal city is called Lutzenburg or Lucemburg; for I find it both
ways written, but without any choice: because both the true manner of writing
and the deriuation is uncertain. Some think of the river Elza running by this
city (which perhaps was Antoninus his Alizontia) that it might be called
Elzenburg, and corruptly Lelzenburg. Others refer it to the fabulous history
of the Inchantresse Melusina. But my purpose is neither to prove nor disprove
such opinions. Here resideth the chief Counsel, and the highest Court of
justice. The city is of sufficient force, but unequally situate: for standing
partly on a hill, and partly in a low and steep valley, it appears of a very
uneven shape. Then have you Arlune standing on the top of a hill, a town very
beautiful, where at this present are found sundry monuments of antiquity,
which Count Peter Ernestus has caused to be transported to his stately Palace
in the city of Lutzenburg. Some are of opinion that the Moon in time past was
here after a Gentilish manner adored, and that it was called Arlune, quasi Ara
lunae, that is, the altar of the moon. Others imagine, that these cities
following borrowed their names also from the residue of the planets; as Iuosium
(commonly Iuoix) from Jove or Jupiter; Sathenacum (now Soleure) from Saturn;
Virtonium (alias Verton) from Venus; Maruilla (or Maruille) from Mars;
Malmedium (Malmedi) from Mercury. Some interpret Malmedi, Montem maledictum,
The accursed mountain; saying that it was so called, because here the Emperor
Valentinian lost his army. Next follows Rademacherne. Also Thion-uille, on
the bank of Mosella: it is the fortress of the whole region, and a town most
defensible against all hostile attempts. Grauenmachern and Coningsmachern, two
small towns situate upon the same river. Dechrij stands upon the river Saur.
Echternach, containing a famous Abbey. Vinden likewise. Also the town of
Bastoigne, the principal mart of the whole region, standing near the wood
Arduenna. Here you have in like sort, Naufchastelle, Danuiller, la Roche, and
Durbis, towns not altogether unworthy to be mentioned: as likewise Sant Vit,
March, Chiney, and Ferta. All which are more amply described by Guicciardin.
Regino in his second book makes mention of mount Adromare about Thion-uille,
where Charlemaigne was wont to ride a hunting. More concerning this region you
may read in our Itinerarium or Iournall.

map of Luxemburg LVTZENBVRGEN SIS DVCATVS VERISS. DESCRIPT. Iacobo Surhonio
Montano auctore.
Cum Priuilegio Imp. and Regiae Maiestatuum.



GVELDERLAND.
GVELDERLAND the seat of the ancient Sicambri (as most Writers are of opinion)
has to the North thereof Frisland, together with an inlet of the German sea,
commonly called Suiderzee; East it confineth upon the Duchy of Cleue; South
upon Gulick; and West it affronteth Brabant and Holland. It is a champian
country, destitute of mountains, but all over replenished with woods and
groves. It abounds with all necessaries, especially with corn; and their
green rank meadows yield such plenty of feed for cattle, as even out of the
farthest part of Denmark they bring hither their starued droues for succor.
It is watered with three famous rivers, namely Rhijne, Maese, and VVaele. It
contains the county of Zutphen and the region called De Veluvve. The Veluwe
is almost an isle, which being situate between a branch of Rhijn that runs
by Arnhem, and the river Yssel, stretches to the Suyder sea; it is meanly
fruitful and not altogether void of woods, mountains, and hills. Some think
that the inhabitants of this place were wont to be called Caninfates.

The Dukedom of Guelders has two and twenty cities compassed with walls and
ditches, and above three hundred villages. Nieumegen upon the VVaele is the
Metropolitan; a city very populous, and gallantly built, and famous in regard
of the mint that is there. The greatest part of the citizens using trade of
merchandise are exceeding rich. The territory of this city is adorned with the
title of a Kingdom. Next follows Ruremonde, situate where the river Roer
falls into the Maese. It has in my remembrance been a Bishopric. Zutphen,
at the mouth of the river Berkel, where it discharges it self into Yssel. It
bears the title of an Earldom. It has a rich College of Canons, and is
under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Munster. Arnhen stands upon the bank
of Rhijne. This is the seat of the high Court of justice, and of the Chancery.
The Clergy of this town are subject to the Bishop of Vtrecht. HATTEM a town
well fortified upon the river Yssel. ELBVRG on the shore of the Zuyder sea.
HARDERVVIIK, upon the same shore. Here likewise you have WAGENING, TIEL,
BOMMEL, BRONCHORST, DOESBVRG, DOTECHEM, SHEERENBERG, governed by a peculiar
prince under the name of an Earldom; LOCHEN, GROLL, BREDEVORD, GELRE which
perhaps gave name to the whole region; STRAELEN, VENLO, a town upon the bank
of Maese fortified both by art and nature; WACHTENDVNCK, of ancient times the
city of Hercules, in the Dukedom of Iuliers. Besides these there are other
small towns of note; which though now either by fury of war, or injury of
time, they are unwalled; yet they do enjoy the freedoms and privileges of
cities. Their names be Keppel, Burg, Genderen, Bateburg, Monteford, Echt,
Culeburg, and Buren; both which have a peculiar Lord as Bateburg also. Under
Earl Ottho the third, this region was mightily enlarged; for he compassed with
walls, and endowed with privileges the towns of Ruremond, Arnhem, Harderwijk,
Bemel, Goch, and VVagening, which till that time had remained villages. In the
Chronicle of John Reigersbeg written in Dutch, I find this region in the time
of Carolus Caluus to have been called by the name of Ponthis; and that it was
by him in the year 878. erected to a Signiorie. Then in the year 1079. this
Signiorie of Ponthis was by Henry the third adorned with the title of an
Earldom, and called the Earldom of Guelders: and the first Earl thereof
was Otto a Nassau. It went under the name of an Earldom till Reinhold the
second. But whenas this Reinhold not only for his valor and mightiness grew
terrible to his neighbors, but renowned in regard of his justice, his piety
and fidelity toward the Roman empire; he was at Frankford in a solemn and
royal assembly by Jews the Emperor consecrated Duke; in presence of the King
of England, the French King, and the Princes Electours, in the year of our
Lord 1339.

Some say, that in the time of the Emperor Carolus Caluus, toward that place
where the town of Gelre now stands, there was a strange and venomous beast,
of huge bigness and monstrous cruelty, feared all the country over, which
lay for the most part under an Oak. This monster wasted the fields, devoured
cattle great and small, and abstained not from men. The inhabitants affrighted
with the novelty and vncouthnesse of the matter, abandoned their habitations,
and hid themselves in desert and solitary places. A certain Lord of Ponth had
two sons; who partly tendering their own estate, and partly also the
distress of their neighbors, assailed the beast with singular policy and
courage, and after a long combat slew him. The said Lord therefore not far
from the Maese upon the bank of Nierson, for the perpetual memory of his
sons exploit, built a castle which he called Gelre; because when the beast
was slain, he often yelled with a dreadful roaring noise, Gelre, Gelre: from
whence they say, began the name of the Guelders. Thus much out of the Chronicle
of Henry Aquilius a Guelder borne. More concerning this Province you may read
in Francis Irenicus; but a most large description hereof you shall find in
Guicciardin.

map of Gelderland, Netherlands GELRIAE, CLIVIAE, FINITIMORVMQVE LOCORVM
VERISSIMA DESCRIPTIO Christiano Schrot Auctore.


The Bishopric of LIEGE.
IT is a common and constant opinion, that those which we now call Leodienses
or Ligeois are a German people named of old Eburones. A relic or monument of
which ancient name remains as yet in the village Ebure, a German mile distant
from the city of Liege. And this very place (as I suppose) is described by Dion
lib. 40. under the name Eburonia. Howbeit certain it is, that the jurisdiction
of Liege stretches much farther than that of the Eburones did of old. Of the
Eburones mention is made by Strabo, Caesar, and Florus. Dion calls them
Eburos: and late Writers barbarously term them Eburonates. Themselves in their
mother tongue (which is a kind of broken French) they call Ligeois: but in
high Dutch Lutticher, and Luyckenaren. The deriuation of Eburones and
Leodienses, whosoever desires to know, I refer him to the antiquities of Goropius
Becanus, and to a small pamphlet of Hubert Leodius.

This region takes up a great part of ancient Lorraigne: for it contains
under the name of the diocese of Liege, the dukedom of Bouillon, the
marquesat of Franckmont, the county of Haspengow, and Loots, and many
Baronies. In this region besides Maestright, half whereof is subject to the
Duke of Brabant, there are four and twenty walled cities, a thousand seven
hundred Villages, with Churches and many Abbeys and Signiories. The names of
the cities are these following; Liege upon Maese, the seat of a Bishop, after
which all the whole country is named: Bouillon Franchemont, Loots, Borchworm,
Tungeren, Huy, Hasselt, Dinant, Masac, Stoch, Bilsen, S. Truden, Viset, Tuin,
Varem, Bering, Herck, Bree, Pera, Hamont, Chiney, Fosse, and Couin, as
Guicciardin does both name and number them. Moreover Placentius writes, that
part of Maestright was added to this diocese by the donation of Pori Earl of
Louaine. The territory of this city is called the county of Maesland in the
ancient records of Seruatius abbey, built here by King Arnulphus in the year
889. Now this county is usually called Haspengow.

It is a region exceeding pleasant and fertile of all things, especially on the
North part, where it joins to Brabant; for there it abounds with corn and
all kind of fruits, and in some places it yields wine. But on the South
frontiers toward Lutzenburg and France, it is somewhat more barren,
mountainous, and ouerspred with woods; here yet being some remainder of
Arduenna the greatest forest in all France, as Caesar writes. This is the
outward hiew of the country; but in the entrals and bowels thereof it is
enriched with metals and sundry kinds of marbles; as also with sea-coales,
which they burn in stead of fuel; and all these so surpassing good, as in a
common proverb they usually say, that they have bread better than bread, fire
hotter than fire, and iron harder than iron. By their iron (than which all the
provinces around use neither better nor indeed any other) they raise a great
revenue. Nor with any other more forcible fire do the Smithes and Bearebrewers
in all this part of the Low countries heat their furnaces than with these
mineral coals of Liege; which are of so strange a nature, as water increases
their flame, but oil puts it out. The smell of this fire or smoke, though it
be somewhat loathsome to those that are not accustomed with it, yet salt being
cast thereupon, it smells either but a little, or not at all. But concerning
these coals, you may read more at large in the Tables of Namur and Henault.

This region they say was converted to the faith by S. Materne the first Bishop
of Tungeren, about the year of our Lord 101. For the Bishopric which is now
at Liege, was then at Tungeren, and there continued till the year 498, what
time it was by S. Seruatius translated to Maestright; where it remained till
the time of S. Hubert the Bishop, who in the year 713. removed it to Liege,
where it continues till this present. Touching this Province read more
largely in Guicciardin, Hubert of Liege, and Placentius. To whom you may add
Francis Roserius his description of Loraigne.

map of Liege, Belgium LEODIENSIS DIOECESIS TYPVS.


BRABANT.
THe Dukedom of Brabant is in such sort circumscribed by the rivers Maese,
Scheld, Sambre, and Dender, as it no where ouerpasseth them; nor does it in all
places stretch so far: for on this side the Maese lies a great part of the
Province of Liege. But (that we may describe the bounds hereof more perfectly)
it has to the North, Holland and Guelders; East, the Bishopric of Liege;
South, the counties of Namure and Henault; and West it is divided From Flanders
by the river Scheld. It is a goodly and pleasant country, exceeding fertile,
and abounding with come and fruits of all sorts, especially to the South of the
river of Demer. For the North part thereof, namely Kempenland, is somewhat more
barren and sandy. Howbeit, this part is not altogether fruitless: for Iacobus
Spielegius writing to Guntherus of Genoa, affirms that the husbandmen of
Brabant are so industrious, as they make the driest sands to bear wheat. Also
to head-cattell and sheep, the greatest part whereof (as we read in Homer of
those Libyan sheep) are horned; it yields most pleasant and plentiful
pasture. And now by the industry and incessant labor of the husbandmen it is
daily so manured; that where in times past there was nothing but unprofitable
sand-heaps, you may at this present behold, to the great benefit of the
inhabitants, most fruitful corne-fields. On the East part of this Province
there is a kind of bogge or quagmite called Peele, the ground whereof (as
Pliny reports of the fields Gabiensis and Reatinus) trembles under a man's
foot; neither can it be passed by horses or wagons, but only in Winter, when
the upper crust thereof is hardened with frost.

This region contains the Marquesat of the sacred Empire (the chief city
whereof is Antwerpe) as likewise the Marquesat of Bergis, the Dukedom of
Arschot, the Earledomes of Hochstraten, Megen, and that of Cantecroy lately
erected by Charles the fifth, etc. It has also woods and forests, abounding
with wild beasts of sundry kinds: the principal whereof are Grootenhout,
Grootenheyst, Meerdael, Zauenterloo and Soenien the greatest of all, containing
in it for the space of seven miles compass sundry villages and monasteries.
Hunting and hawking (except in these five woods, which are reserved for the
Princes own game) are free for all men. The people are so iocund, as they
seem scarce to feel the inconveniences of old age; which frolike disposition
of theirs has given occasion to their neighbors round about to use this jest:
The longer the Brabanter lives, the more fool he. The air is exceeding
wholesome: for when the plague has been most vehement in all the regions
adjacent, Brabant has often most wonderfully remained free.

This Dukedom of Brabant has six and twenty cities environed with walls and
ditches. And they are these following: ANTVVERPE situate upon Scheld, the most
famous mart not only of Germany, but of all Europe; and one of the strongest
cities in the world; being much beautified with the steeple of S. Mary's built
an incredible height of white marble. The palace lately built, is scarce to be
matched in all Europe. BRVSSEL, abounding with sweet fountains. Here for the
most part resideth the Prince; and therefore is this town so much frequented
by Nobles and Courtiers. LOVAIN, a large city, containing Gardens, Vineyards,
and Pastures within the walls: well may you call it The habitation of the
Muses; for which purpose in the year 1426. John the fourth Duke of Brabant
established here an University, which flourishes with all kind of learning.
The territory of this city makes Brabant to glory of her vintage. Then
follows MACHELEN, famous for the court of Parliament there instituted by Duke
Charles of Burgundy in the year 1473. HERTOGENBOSCH, a town of no small
importance, containing an excellent Grammar school, and inhabited in times
past with a most warlike people. TIENEN upon the river Ghette, from whence are
brought great store of cheeses. Here stands the church of S. Germans, whereunto
belongs a college of Canons. LEVWE, where the noble ale is brewed. NIVELLE. In
this city there is a chanterie of Nuns, whereinto none but ladies of great
nobility can be admitted. The Gouernesse of this chantry the Nuns themselves
choose by voices, yet with the consent of the Prince, and the Bishops
approbation; and she is called the lady of Niuella. Also the temporal and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the town and adjoining territory soly
belongs unto her. ARSCHOT, situate on the river Demer, bearing at first the
title of a Marquesat, but since by Charles the fifth advanced to a Dukedom.
BERGEN ap Zoom, so named of a small river that runs through it; a town
heretofore of good traffic, but now by the neighborhood of Antwerpe not so
frequented of foreign merchants. MEGHEN, situate upon the Maese. BREDA, a town
most fairly built. Here stands the Palace of the Earls of Nassau, so
gallantly begun by a most skillful architect, that being once finished, it may
(I think) be preferred before all the Princes houses in this region.
MAESTRIGHT, a large, populous, and rich city; which though it seems to lie
without the bounds of Brabant, acknowledges the Duke of Brabant as her
sovereign Lord. STEENBERGEN upon the seashore. In times past it was a
flourishing mart town; but now it is almost brought to nothing. LIERE, so
beautiful and pleasant a town, as many noble men make choice thereof as a
place of recreat and solace. VILVORDEN. Here is a strong fortress, and the
castle of the Duke. GEMBLOVRS. The Abbat of this town bears the greatest
sway in causes both ecclesiastical and temporal. IOVDOIGNE for the
holesomnesse of the air in times past the nurserie of the young Princes of this
region. HANVT, heretofore reported to have been an Earldom, situate in a
most fertile place. LANDEN, esteemed of some the most ancient town in all
Brabant. HALEN, almost utterly ruinated by wars. DIE, built on either side
the river Demer, a spacious city, the inhabitants whereof gain much by
clothing. SICHENEN, a town upon the same river. HERENTALS, that maintains it
self also by clothing. EINDHOVEN, in the midst of Kempenland, upon the river
Dommel. HHLMONT, whereunto adioyneth a castle.

Some places here are also which in Dutch we call Vrijheden, or Free towns;
which though they be not fortified with walls and ditches; yet because they
enjoy the privileges and immunities of Princes, we think not altogether
unworthy the naming: Osterwijck, Orschot, Turnhout, Hoochstraten, Duffel,
Walen, Merchten, Asche, Wernen, Duisbosch, Hulpen, Waure, Brain, Genappe,
Gheel, Arendonce, and Dormal. Here are seven hundred villages, with
parish-churches that have steeples and belles; a great many of which villages
are adorned with titles of dignities. Also under the government and
jurisdiction of Brabant are certain regions beyond the Maese, as namely the
duchy of Limburg, the county of Dalem, the state of Valkenburg, etc. Besides
all which, it has many other places of importance: but it is not our purpose
here to make relation of all. John Seruilius published a brief treatise as
touching a conspiracy of the people of Guelders against this country of
Brabant, where you shall find many furtherances to the better knowledge of
this region. But in Guicciardin his description of the Low countries you shall
not only read of these places, but even behold them with your eyes: so
curiously has he described them. The antiquities and memorable acts of this
country my learned friend M. John Gerard is now in hand withal. All which we
earnestly expect that he will ere long publish. The ancient inhabitants of this
region were called Ambiuariti and Aduatici. Concerning whom read John Goropius
Becanus his Becceselanis.

map of Brabant, with inset map of Mechelen, Belgium BRABANTIAE DESCRIPTIO.
Valkenborch
MACHLINIAE VRBIS DOMINIVM.
Stemmate et eruditione claro Dn. Hadriano Marsselario, patricio Antwerpiensi;
Ab. Ortelius dedicab. L. M.

Cum Imp. Reg. and Brabantiae privilegio decennali, 1591.



NAMVRE.
THe region of Namur is at this present endowed with the title of an Earldom.
Whether it was thus named of the principal city, or that the city assumed
this name from the region, remains as yet uncertain; as likewise the
original of the word it self. The inhabitants call it Namur, and the high
Dutch Namen, but the true signification of the word they are utterly ignorant
of. For those that affirm that an Idol called Nanus, was of old worshipped,
and delivered answers and oracles upon the same hill whereon now the castle of
Namure is situate, and that afterward, when Christian religion began to shine,
this Idol waxing mute or silent, the whole region of Namure was so named of
Nanus mutus; do (I think) report fables, without the authority of any
approved writers. Meierus affirms, that anciently it was called Neumur, as
much to say in Latin as Nouus murus, a new wall.

Upon this region do border the provinces of Liege, Brabant, Henault, and
Lutzenburg. It is watered by Maese and Sambre, two nauigable rivers. The
country is neither mountainous nor plain; but raised here and there into
little hills, and depressed into valleys: the woods, whereof the greatest is
called Marlaigne, yield plenty of game for Gentlemen. It abounds with things
necessary for man's life. Here are many yron-mines. Here also they dig a kind
of stony or mineral coals, which in Dutch we call Steenkolen: the inhabitants,
as likewise the Ligeois (for they are found with them also) term them Hoille;
the learned call them (...), as much to say as Stone-coles. The nature of these
stones is most wonderful: for whereas oil increases the flame of all other
fuel, these burn more vehemently by casting on water, and are quenched with
oil. With these coals the inhabitants and bordering nations (for they are
transported hence into other countries) do make lusty fires: and Black-smithes
do soften their iron better with this, than with any other fiering. Here are
quarries also, out of which are cut marbles of exceeding hardness, both
black, brown, and parti-colored; wherewith the churches and houses of the
regions adjacent are maruellously adorned. By means of which marbles the
people of Namure reap no small benefit.

This county has four walled towns: Namure, Bouuignes, Charlemont, and
Vallencure. NAMVRE, as has been said, is the principal city, and of late is
become the sea of a Bishop: it is right commodiously situate, namely at the
confluence or meeting of the rivers Maese and Sambre: it has bridges to pass
over both rivers. Here is the chief tribunal of justice for the whole region.
BOVVIGNES stands upon the Western bank of Maese, a town in times past
glorious for building, and populous for inhabitants; but now so deformed and
ruined with often wars, as it has lost the greatest part of her beauty.
CHARLEMONT is a most impregnable castle, so named and built by Charles the
fifth, near the bank of Maese, on the top of an hill, by a village called
Giuet. Neither is VALENCVRE a town of small moment. Also within this county,
besides diverse Abbeys, there are 82. villages, of which Floreu, Vascie, Samson,
and some others, are so large and beautiful, as they may well be compared with
towns. This region of old bare the title of a Marquesate: but about the year
1200. it was converted into an Earldom. The people are very warlike, and most
loyal to their Prince. They speak French. This region (as the rest of the
Low countries) is exactly described by Guicciardine.

map of Namur, Belgium NAMVRCVM, Comitatus.
Io^es Surhon describ.

Cum Imp. et Regiae Mtis priuilegijs. 1579.



HENAVLT.
LEssabaeus writes (upon what ground, I know not) that this Province was of
old called Pannonia, because the rusticke god Pan was here worshipped; then
Saltus carbonarius or The cole-forest; and afterward, The lower Picardie. But
at length it was named Hannonia of the river Haysne, that runs through the
midst of it. The inhabitants call it Henault, and the Germans Henegow, which in
the ancient language of the place signifies The field of Hainault. For Gow in
Dutch signifies a field. Another deriuation also of the name of this country
is produced by Carolus Bouillus in his discourse of the variety of vulgar
languages.

To the West of this Province by Flanders and Artois; on the North Brabant; and
Brabant again with part of Namure and Liege upon the East; and South it is
bounded by Champaigne a Province of France. A country as pleasant, and as well
stored with woods, lakes, fountains, meadows, and pastures, as any other in
all these parts. The inhabitants are warlike, and toward their Prince most
loyal and serviceable. Their liberty or freedom they usually boast of in a
common proverb, saying: Pays de Hainault tenu de Dieu and du soleil, that is,
The Province of Henault holds of God and of the sun. Which proverb Nicolaus
Brontius in a discourse of his published in commendation of this region,
interprets in two Latin verses to this effect: Star-guiding Jove and Phoebus
bright,
Of this place only challenge right.
In length it contains about twenty, and in breadth sixteen miles. In which
space (as Guicciardin reports) it comprehends four and twenty towns, and
above nine hundred and fifty villages or hamlets. Robert Caenalis reckons up
in this Province two thousand two hundred petie villages with Churches and
steeples. At this present it bears the title of an Earldom: and it
contains within it one Princedome, eight inferior Earledomes, twelve Peers,
two and twenty Baronies, six and twenty Abbeys, with other titles of
dignity, which are to be seen in Guicciardine.

The principal cities are Mons and Valenchienes: the last whereof situate upon
the river Scheld, where it begins to be nauigable for boats and barks, is a
town very large and strongly walled. The townsmen for the most part employ
themselves in trade of merchandise; and reap exceeding gains by a kind of
cloth which they call Fussets, great quantity whereof is wouen in this city,
and carried from hence to the furthest parts of the world. Mons stands upon
the little river Trouille, almost in the very midst of all the region. A town
very sufficiently fortified against all hostile attempts. The citizens enrich
themselves by a kind of stuff commonly called Say, whereof great abundance
is here made. Here are besides the towns of Condet, Halle, Angie, Maubeuge,
Auesne, Beaumont, Chimay, Quercey, the retiring place of Mary, sister to
Emperor Charles the fifth, who built there a most stately and sumptuous Palace,
which was then highly esteemed; but afterward by the French King Henry the
second quite burned and defaced. Here also is Bauacum commonly called Bauais,
which some think to be Baganum or Bagacum mentioned by Ptolemey. Others are of
opinion, that Caesar in his commentaries calls it Belgium. Howbeit Hubert of
Liege thinks it not to have been so mighty in Caesar's time, but rather most of
all to have flourished under Constantine the Emperor: which he gathers by
the ancient coins here daily dug up in great quantity, with the said
Emperors image upon them. In the marketplace of this town stands a pillar of
stone, at the foot whereof the inhabitants say that all those ways begin,
which with an high and direct passage extend from hence to all parts of France.
These ways (they say) were made by Brunchild. And even till this day they are
called after his name. For the French commonly term them Chemins de Brune
hault; albeit the high Dutch call them de Rasije. There are as yet extant in
sundry places some broken remainders of these ways. Bouillus notes certain
wonders of them; namely, that they are higher than the fields on either side;
that they lie most directly between the principal towns of France; and that
they are paued with flint-stones, whereof all the fields adjacent are
destitute: so that with admiration a man may imagine, that these flints either
sprang out of the earth, or rained down from heaven, or by a greater force
than man's hand were gathered all the world over for the grauelling of these
ways. Also upon the frontiers of this region toward the river Maese, in the
way to France, you have Charlemont, Marieburg, and Philippeuille, most strong
garrisons against the incursions of the French: being built and so named by
Emperor Charles the fifth, by Mary his sister, and by K. Philip his son.

This region abounds with iron and lead-mines. Here are found also sundry
kinds of marbles; as black, white, and parti-colored; right commodious for
the adorning of the palaces and sepulchers of Kings and great Nobles. Likewise
here is dug great plenty of lime. Also a kind of stony and black coals,
hardened in the nature of pitch, which the inhabitants use for fuel in stead
of wood. And here also are made those thin transparent panes of glass, by
means whereof unseasonable winds and weather are fenced out of houses and
churches; and this glass excels all other that is made in any place
besides. More you may read in Guicciardine, and in a peculiar discourse that
Iacobus Lessabaeus has written of this region. Also Hubert Thomas of Liege in
his book de Tungris and Eburonibus writes thereof many memorable things.

map of Hainaut, Belgium NOBILIS HANNONIAE COMITATVS DESCRIP. Auctore Iacobo
Surhonio Montano.
Pays de Haynault tenu de Dieu et du Soleil.

Cum priuilegijs Imp. et Regi Maitis ad deconn. 1579



ARTOIS.
THat the Atrebates were not the meanest people of Gallia Belgica, Caesar
himself is witness. They are and have been a warlike nation, retaining as
yet their ancient name. The head city called in Latin Atrebatum, was of old
the Metropolitan also of Flanders; now it is named in French Arras, whereof the
region adjacent and all the whole Province is called Artois, as if you would
say Arratois, casting away the middle syllable. Hereupon by a new Latin name
they call it Artesia. The whole region was by S. Lewis the French King adorned
with the title of an Earldom: and the first Earl thereof was Robert the same
Kings brother, as writes Vignier. It is very large, extending from the
frontiers of Cambresis, Picardie, Henault, and Flanders, even to the Ocean sea.
It was in times past subject to the Crown of France; but now by means of the
peace between Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis the first the French
King, concluded 1529, it is an absolute state of it self. It has two famous
cities, namely, Arras and S. Omer: the principal towns be Air, Hesdin, Lens,
Bethune, Bappames, S. Paul, Lillers, and Perne; all which places are subject to
the King Catholic. The cities of Boulogne, Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres (which
are also within the bounds of this County) are the French Kings: for Pontieu
is now abolished. It has also diverse fortresses and strong holds, besides an
incredible number of noblemens castles, which they use for dwelling houses. It
contained of old two famous bishoprics, namely Arras and Ponthieu: but since,
Ponthieu in the year 1553. was utterly destroyed, the jurisdiction thereof was
distributed to three Episcopal seas; namely, S. Omer, and Ypre for the one
half, and Boulogne for the residue. Bailiwicks or Hundreds, being the
principal members or parts of the whole County, it has nine; namely, that of
Arras, of S. Omer, of Ponthieu, of Air, Hesdin, Lens, Bappames, Auen,
Bredenard, and Aubignie. Under the Bailiwicke of Arras are comprised Boulogne,
S. Paul, Perne, Bethune, and Lilers; but Calais, Guisnes, and Ardres do by
ancient right belong to S. Omer. Likewise the Earl of Artois had other
inferior Earls to his vassals, as namely, the Earl of Boulogne, of S. Paul,
of Arcques, of Blangie, of Faukenberge, and of Syneghen. Now also it is
augmented with the Princedome of Espinee, and the Marquesate of Renty. But how
Boulogne first exempted it self from the jurisdiction of Artois, it is
manifest out of histories: for after a certain Earl of Boulogne was attainted
of treason against the French King, the King upon that occasion seizing upon
his Earldom, it ever since denied homage unto Artois. Wherefore the Earl of
Artois losing the one half of his right, assumed directly to himself homage
or fealty over the county of S. Paul (which before was feudatarie to the Earl
of Boulogne) saying often times, that he would not be deprived both of his
homage and vnder-homage: so that hitherto the Princes on both sides have used
this custom; namely, that Boulogne no more acknowledges Artois, nor S. Paul
Boulogne. Howbeit about this point in the latter treaty of peace 1559. there
was some variance; wherefore the matter being referred to Commissioners,
remains as yet undecided, the King of Spain holding still possession. It is
commonly supposed, that Calais (the next port of the continent unto England)
was by Caesar called Portus Iccius, from whence he sailed out of France
thither. But if we more thoroughly consider the matter, we shall find it to have
been another Port, namely, the town of Saint Omer, which that it was of old
an haven and a most large inlet of the Ocean sea, even the high cliffes, which
in a manner enuironing the city, do plainly demonstrate, besides infinite other
arguments and relics of antiquity, which (though no man should affirm it)
do most evidently convince, that the territory adjacent was in times past
covered with sea; the truth whereof is till this day also confirmed by common
and constant report. Yea Sithieu the ancient name of the city (for who knows
not that the name of S. Omer is but new) manifests the same. As if it were
derived of Sinus Itthius or Iccius. Also that the said have was in the province
of the Morini, which Virgil and Lucan do call the farthest people. And that
this is most true, an attentive Reader may by many arguments easily gather both
out of Caesar his entrance and return from England. Neither can the space of
thirty miles or thereabout, which he says the island is there distant from
the maine, hinder my belief in this point; whenas the violence of the sea
(especially in so narrow a place) may easily either add or diminish. Nor does
the distance of the sea there from the maine to the continent much differ.
Suffices thus much to have been said concerning Portus Iccius. Whether we
have hit the truth or no, let others judge. Moreover, this Province has three
Bishoprics, to wit, Arras, S. Omer, and Boulogne; one and twenty Abbeys, and
seven Nunries; besides many Couents and Hospitals. It has many rivers also;
the principal whereof are Lys, Scarpe, Aa, Canche, and Authy, besides others
that are nauigable.

Great is the number of villages and hamlets thorowout the whole province. The
soil is most fertile and abundant of all corn, and especially of wheat.
Wherefore in the ancient French tongue some write it was called Atrech, that is
to say, The land of bread. Nor is it destitute of woods and groves, especially
toward the South and West. The garments of the Atrebates or Artesians S.
Jerome in his second book against Iouinian notes for precious. Also the
Artesian mantles Vopiscus celebrateth in the life of the Emperor Carinus.
Likewise the same Jerome and other authors affirm, that in his time it rained
wool in this province. This region, as others also adjoining, Guicciardin has
most notably described.

map of Artois, France Artois. ATREBATVM REGIONIS VERA DESCRIPTIO. Johanne
Surhonio Monteusi auctore.
Illustri ac amplissimo viro Domino Christophoro ab Assonleuille, equiti aurato
Domino ab Alteuilla R.Mts. consiliario primario. Ab. Ortelius in hanc formam
compraehendebat, et dedicabat

Cum priuilegio Imp. et Regiea Maitis.



FLANDERS.
THe extreme part of Europe, opposite to England and Scotland, environed by
France, Germany, and the Ocean, is called by the inhabitants, The low
countries, or lower Germany: but the French and all strangers in a manner call
it by the name of Flanders. But in very deed Flanders has not so great
extension. For albeit Flanders properly so called was larger in times past; yet
at this present it is bounded by Brabant, Henault, Artois, and the Ocean sea.
This they divide into three parts, namely, Flanders the Dutch, the French, and
the Imperial; which last part (because it never acknowledged any superior,
besides the Prince of Flanders) they name also Flanders proprietarie. The Dutch
Flanders has these cities; Gant, Bruges, Yperen, Cortrijck, Oudenard with
Pammele, Newport, Furnas, Bergen, Sluise, Damme, Bierflet, Dixmud, Cassel,
Dunkerke, Greueling, Burburch, and Hulst. The French Flanders, L'isle, Doway,
and Orchies. And Flanders Imperial or Proprietary, Aelst, Dendermond,
Geertsberg, and Ninouen. The principal rivers are Scheld, Lys, and Dender.
Most part of the region is pasture-ground, especially toward the West: it
breeds fair oxen, and most excellent and warlike horses. It abounds with
butter and cheese; and yields wheat in abundance. The inhabitants are most of
them merchants: and of flax (whereof they have in Flanders great plenty, and
excellent good) and wool (which is brought them out of Spain and England)
they make great quantity of linen and woollen cloth, which they disperse far
and wide. This Province of Flanders has 28. walled cities, 1154 villages,
besides fortresses, castles, and noble men's houses. Among which Gaunt is the
greatest city. Whereof Erasmus of Roterdam in his Epistles writes in manner
following: I am of opinion (says he) if you look all Christendom over, you
shall not find a city comparable to this, either for largeness and strength,
or for the civil government and towardliness of the people. So far Erasmus.
It contains in compass three Dutch miles. It is watered by three rivers,
which divide it into twenty inhabited isles. For multitude and beauty of houses
Bruges excels almost all the cities of the Netherlands; so famous a mart in
times past, as (says Iacobus Marchantius) by that means the name of Flanders
obscured all the regions round about. Yperen stands upon the river of Yperlee,
very commodious for Fullers. By clothing it grew in times past to an huge
bigness, till the English and men of Gaunt besieging it, cast down the large
suburbs, and greatly diminished the same.

As it is said in a common proverb, that Millan for a Dukedom excelles all
Christendom; so does Flanders for an Earldom. It has certain prerogatives:
for the Prince thereof writes himself Earl of Flanders by the grace of God:
which clause is proper to the style of Kings. For it is given (says Meierus)
to no Duke, Marquis, or Earl in Christendom, but only to him of Flanders:
whenas all others usually add, By the clemency, or By the assistance of God,
etc. He had in times past sundry officers peculiar to a King; as namely his
Chancellor, his Master of the horse, his Chamberlain, and his Cupbearer; also
two Marshals and ten Peers, as in France. The arms of this region in times
past were a scutcheon Azure, divided by five Crosse-barres of gold with
another small red scutcheon in the midst. Now it is a black lion in a golden
field; which some are of opinion, he took for his arms, together with the
other Netherlandish Princes, when they set forth on their expedition toward
Syria in the company of Philip of Elsas: for at that time the princes of
Flanders, Louaine, Holland, Lutzenburg, Limburg, Brabant, Zeland, Frisland,
Henault, etc. changing their ancient arms, assumed to themselves lions of
diverse colors.

The greater part of Flanders was from the beginning under protection of the
French Kings; but now it is at liberty, and absolute of it self; being
released by Emperor Charles the fifth, Earl of Flanders: who in the treaty of
Madrid quite shook off the French yoke. This region Guicciardine has most
diligently described, and Iacobus Marchantius most learnedly. You may read
also Iacobus Meierus his ten tomes of Flanders affairs.

map of Flanders, Belgium Ad autographum Gerardi Mercatoris, in hanc formulam
contrahebat, parergaque addebat; Ab Ortelius.



ZELAND.
LEuinus Lemnius of Zirichzee, in his book De occultis naturae miraculis, Of
the bidden secrets of Nature, amongst other things writes thus of Zeland, his
native country: That this Marine tract, says he, was notvnknowne unto the
ancients, it may out of Cornelius Tacitus easily be gathered; although not by
the same name, that at this day it is known by: but of a custom and common
kind of salutation and speaking one to another, which acquaintance and friends
of this province do use at their meetings: therefore he calls them by the
name of MATTIACI, when he thus writes: In the same jurisdiction are the
Mattiaci, a nation very like the Bataui, but that those, in regard of the
situation of their country, are more desperate and courageous. Whereby he
gives to understand, that although they are next neighbors and do border upon
the Bataui or Hollanders, (so called of the hollownesse and lowness of the
ground) so that they might justly be accounted one and the same people, yet are
only distinguished by the name of their customary salvation; and being nearer
the Sea, are more hardy and audacious; (as indeed they are,) and for manhood,
wit, policy, craft, deceits, cunning in buying and selling, and diligence in
getting, and ways to enrich themselves, they do far excel them. And in that
he calls them Mattiaci, I conceive it, that they were not so named either of
any place or captain, but of that fellowlike salutation, as I said, and usual
manner of speaking one to another usual amongst them, to wit, of Maet, which
in common speech and friendly meetings, signifies a fellow and companion in
all our actions, bargains, contracts, and dangers; of all our purposes,
counsels, labors and trauailles: a copartner and consort in any thing
whatsoever we take in hand or go about, etc. For the name of Zeland is not
ancient, but is lately invented, and made of Sea and Land, as who would say
Sea-land, a country or land bordering upon the sea: for it is enclosed round
with the ocean, consisting of fifteen Islands, although it be not long since
the raging Sea did great hurt in this country, by whose violence and
ouerflowing, a good part of Zeland, (his dammes, walls and banks being rent
and broken down,) was overcome of the salt water and laid level with the sea:
notwithstanding certain of them do remain, of which especially three do
continually wrestle with the boisterous billows of the sea, and do very hardly
defend themselves with infinite costs and charges against this rude and unruly
element. Of these first Walcheren (Walachria) does offer it self to the eye of
such as do sail to these coasts; so named either of him that first entered and
inhabited in it, or (as I guess) of the Gaulls (Galli) which much frequented
this country; who of the Low-countrie-men are yet called Walen; or of that part
of Britain which lies upon the West side of it, and is called Wales, the
most gentlemanlike and brauest nation (you may believe him,) amongst the
English, and descended also from the Gaulles, which their language as yet does
manifest etc. From hence Northward or somewhat declining toward the East is
Scouwen Scaldia, the Latins call it of the river Sceldt, which runs by it
and here falls into the sea etc. Suytheuelandt, so named of the situation of
it toward the South (to distinguish it from another distant from it Northward
and therefore called Noortheuelandt) a large and most goodly tract of ground,
coasting along the shore of Flanders and Brabant, although of late years
having suffered great damage and loss, it is now much less and narrower.
Thus far Lemnius. Tritthemius in the Annalles of the Franks names
Middleborough the chief city of these Islands Mesoburgus Meyer; calls it
Mattiacum, more like a Latinist, then a true Geographer. More of these thou
may read in the forenamed Lemnius, who has most excellently well described
all the Islands of Zeland, and the cities of the same. To these if thou will,
thou may adioine Lewis Guicciardine, and I know not what else thou can seek
for further satisfaction. There are also certain Annalles of these Islands,
written in the mother tongue by John Reygersberg. But for an incomme, thou
may also to these former add the descriptions of the cities of the
Low Countries, done by Adrian Barland. Of the people of this province these
verses are commonly spoken: Crescit nequitia, simul crescente senecta;
In Zelandinis non fallit regula talis.
The worse they wax, as they grow old;
In Zelanders this rule does hold.


These Islands are situate between the mouths of the rivers Maese and Sceldt,
bordering on the North upon Holland, on the East upon Brabant, on the South
upon Flanders; on the West upon the Germane sea. James Meyer thinks that
Procopius calls these Arboricas. Yet Petrus Diuaeus is of opinion that this
place of Procopius is corrupt, and for Arborichas it ought to be read and
written, Abroditos.

That these are those Islands, I do verily believe, unto which Caesar, in his
sixth book De bello Gallico, affirms that he forced a part of the army of
Ambiorix Prince of the Eburones: which, as his own words do give to
understand, did hide themselves in Islands, which the continual motion, or
ebbing and flowing of the sea had made. It is also very probable that Lucane in
his first book aimed at these Isles, in these his verses: Quaque iacet littus
dubium, quod terra fretumque Vendicat alternis vicibus, cum funditus ingens
Oceanus, vel cum refugis se fluctibus aufert. Ventus ab extremo pelagus sic axe
volutat, etc. -- They come in troops amain, From where th'vncertaine shore
does lie, that is nor sea nor land, But both, by course, as raging Tethys
flow'th and ebb'th again: Or as the wind with rolling waves all calmed does
stand, From North to South thus carrying to and fro: etc. And that which the
same Author in his ninth book sometime did speak of the Syrtes or
Quicksands, one may now not altogether unfitly apply to these Islands, where he
thus speaks, -- Primam mundo Natura figuram Cum daret, in dubio terrae
pelagique reliquit: Nam neque subsedit penitus quo stagna profundi Acciperet,
necse defendit ab aequore tellus: Ambigua sed lege loci iacet inuia seeds. When
as this massy world by Nature first was framed, A doubtful case it seemed how
God would have it named: For neither could the earth receive the ocean deep,
Nor land well able was his own from sea to keep: The place so dangerous is,
that none to it dare go; And whether sea or land it be, men skarce do know. Yet
now these our Islands are habitable, and easy and safely to be come unto, by
the industry and labor of man, and not by the benefit and nature of the place.

map of Zeeland, Netherlands ZELANDICARVM INSVLARVM EXACTISSIMA ET NOVA
DESCRIPTIO, AVCTORE D. IACOBO A DAVENTRIA.
Cum priuilegio.



HOLLAND.
THus Erasmus of Roterodam, an Hollander does describe Holland, his native
country: Most learned men, says he, do agree in this, and that upon great
probabil ty, that that island of the Rhein upon the maine sea, which Tacitus
makes mention of in his 20. book, is the same that now they call HOLLAND. A
land that I must always both highly commend and reverence, as to whom indeed I
owe my life and nativity: And I would to God that it lay in my power to do it
again as great credit, as it has done me honor and good, for the which I am
much bound to praise the Lord. For in that that Martial does accuse this
nation rusticitatis, of clownish simplicity; and that in that Lucane calls
the same trucem, rough and uncivil, either it is nothing to us, or else I deem
both to be interpreted as a great commendation unto the same. For what nation
in former times has not been somewhat rude and uncivil? or when were the
Romans more to be commended, then when they knew no other art or mystery but
husbandry and discipline of war? If so be that those things which then were
said of the Hollanders, some man shall stand in they may be verified of them
now; what greater praise can be attributed to Holland, my native country, then
if it may truly be said to loath those jests of Martial, which he himself
calls nequitias, knaueries? And I would to God that all Christians had such
ears, as these Hollanders had, that they might either not entertain those
pestilent conceits of that Poet, or at the leastwise would not be delighted
with them. If any man please to call this clownishnesse, we do willingly bear
that slanderous reproach, as being a thing common to us with the good
Lacedaemonians, with the old Sabines and the worthy Catoes, so much commended.
And Lucane, as I think, called the Hollanders truces, rough, in no other sense
then Virgill calls the Roman acer, stout and hardy. Otherwise if any man do
respect their homely and plain manners, there is no nation more prone to
ciuility and courteous humanity, in which there is less cruelty or surly
sternnesse; they are of a good nature, plain, void of all treachery and guile,
inclined to no notorious vices: only they are a little too much given to their
pleasure, especially in banqueting: the reason of which I judge to be the
wonderful plenty of all manner of things provoking them thereunto: and that
partly by reason of the foreign commodities brought unto them, for that not
only it possesses the two mouths of the goodly rivers Maese and Rhein, but
also for that the greatest part of this West coast is continually washed with
the maine sea: partly by reason of the natural fertility of the country,
which every where is watered with many great and nauigable rivers well stored
with fish, and so has abundance of pastorage and most fat meadows. Moreover
the fennes and woods afford infinite store of wild-foule: and therefore they
constantly affirm that there is no country in the world, which in so little
compass and plot of ground contains more cities and towns, not very big in
quantity and circuit, but for state of commonwealth and government excellent.
For cleanliness and near keeping of their houses, the Hollanders do bear away
the bell from all other nations whatsoever, by the judgment of Merchants which
have traveled over the greatest part of the world. Of mean learned men there
is no where greater plenty. The reason why many of them come not to the height
of that exquisite learning, especially of the ancients, is their wanton and
riotous life, or for that they esteem more of honesty and virtue, then great
learning: For it cannot be denied but that they have good wits, as is manifest
by many arguments: although indeed it does not appear by me, whose gift that
way is not great, as in nothing else. Thus far Erasmus in his Chiliades.

This country of Holland almost wholly enclosed like a Peninsula, with the sea,
and the mouths of the rivers Maes and Rhein, is not very large, as being in
compass not more then 60. Dutch miles: yet it comprehends 29. walled cities,
which are these, DORDRECHT, about an hundred years since by a deluge and
ouerflowing of the sea made an island: by this 4. rivers do run. It is a
mighty city, inhabited of very wealthy citizens, and beautified with most
gallant buildings both public and private. Here is a great concourse of
Merchants: for in it is held the staple of Rhenish wine, corn, timber, and
other wares and merchandice which are brought down by the Maes and Rhein into
these countries to be sold. HAERLEM; this is the most stately and greatest
city of all Holland, situate in a most pleasant place. Hard without the town
walls is a very fine grove, whither the citizens upon festival days, do
withdraw themselves, for their pleasure and recreation, after their labor and
toilesome business. This town is famous for clothing, where it is certain that
there are ten or twelve thousand clothes yearly made. Here the citizens do
persuade themselves the mystery of printing was first invented and practiced.
DELET, so named of Delft, which in their language signifies a ditch. Here
also the townsmen use clothing. Moreover in this city, they brue good beer,
which from hence in great plenty is transported into Zeland. This town in the
year 1536. suffered great loss by fire, the greatest part of it being utterly
defaced. LEIDEN, upon the Rhein, not far from his mouth where it sometime did
fall into the sea, which now you may perceive to be stopped and choked with
sand. It is thought to be the most ancient city of this province: for some do
think it to have been so named of a Roman legion which sometime wintered in
this place. Certain antiquities are here yet to be seen to this day. GOVDE
upon the river Isel, in that place where it meets with the river Goude or
Gouwe, whereof the city took his name. It is very populous. AMSTELREDAM, most
stately built upon the inlet or bay called Tie, the most populous and frequent
Mart town of all these parts. In every street almost, like as in Venice, a man
may pass from place to place, by boat as well as by foot, to dispatch his
business. Here daily from Norway, kussia, and other Northren countries, as
also from Spain, France, England, etc. great store of ships do arrive and
ancher; so that sometimes you shall see at once two hundred or three hundred
fail of Merchants ships ( hulks they call them) to ride heereat anchor.
Therefore this city for traffic, is commonly held to yield to none but
Antwerp. ENCKHVISEN, upon that sea, which they vulgarly call in their language
Suyderzee. Famous even in foreign countries for the building of great ships.
HOORN, situate also upon the same bay. Here in May is kept a fair, where
there is sold such infinite store of butter and cheese, as is wonderful.
ALKMAER; this place for plenty of butter and cheese does excel all other
cities of this province. PVRMERENDE, famous for the castle or palace of the
Count Egmond. EDAM, for building of ships and good cheese, deserves also to
be remembered amongst the rest. Moreover MVNNEKENDAM, WEESP, NAERDEN, and WEERT
may not be forgotten. OVDEVVATER, here grows great store of hemp, so that
here they make almost all the nets, ropes and cables which the Hollanders and
Zelanders do use in fishing. SCOONHOVEN; as who would say, At the fair
Orchards. Here is continual fishing for Salmons, where also is held a Staple
of this commodity, as we said there was of wine at Dordrecht. Next after these
do follow ISELSTEIN, VIANEN: Item LEERDAM, ASPEREN, and HVEKELEN, three little
cities round in a circle upon the river Lingen, not about 500. pases one from
another. GORICVM and WORICHVM, situate, upon the bank of the river Wael, one
over against another. Gorichum has a very goodly and beautiful castle. A man
may justly call this town a city of store of all manner provision: such a market
is here daily kept of such things as are necessary for the sustenance of man's
life, which are from thence transported by ship unto other countries, but
especially to Antwerp: Lastly, there are HVESDEN, ROTERODAM, SCHIEDAM, and both
the MOVNTS, the one known by the name of S. Gertrude, the other of the number
of Seven; Seuenbergen I mean, and Geertruydenberge, for so they call them.
Other towns there are, which sometime were walled: which although at this day
we do now see them to want, either by the rage of violent war, or by reason
of other misfortunes, yet they still enjoy their old liberties and fredoms. Of
this sort Medenblick Beuerwijck, Muiden, Neuport, Vlaerdingen, and Grauesande.
Moreover in this province there are above four hundred villages, amongst the
which the Haghe, (which they call Earls Haghe) does far excel the rest. This
town Guicciardine thinks for bigness, wealth, beauty and pleasant situation
to surpass all other in Europe whatsoever: for it contains two thousand
houses: of which the Princes palace, built like a castle fortified with a
wall and dich, where the Privy courts of Justice are held, is one. Near unto
is a dark or thick groan, which by reason of the singing of birds, and sight
of Dear, is both to the ears and eyes most pleasant and delightful. I might
more justly call it Comopolis, a city like town; and may boldly compare it
with Ctesiphon a borough in Assyria, situate upon the river Tigris, much
magnified of all ancient writers: of which Strabo writes, that that town is
equal to a city for command and bigness, and was the place where the Parthian
kings did use to winter, when they were desirous to spare the city of Seleucia.

Under the Jurisdiction also of Holland are certain Islands, as Voorn, (with
the towns Geervliet, and Briele,) Goereden, or Goere, (with a town of the same
name: Somersdijcke, Tenel, and diverse others. The diocese of Vtrecht, governed
not long since by a Bishop, in which were 5. cities, yielded it self to be
subject to the jurisdiction of Holland, in the time of Charles the fifth
Emperor of Rome. This country is so enclosed with the sea, severed by rivers,
lakes, creeks and ditches, whereby it is divided as it were into certain plots
and quarters, that there is no city nor village here, to which one may not go
as well by water as by wagon. Neither is there any place in the whole province,
from whence one may not easily in three hours space, go to the sea.
Chrysostomus Neapolitanus has described this Olland, (for so he writes it) in
an eloquent letter of his directed to Count Nugarolo. Of this read the history
of Holland, compiled by Gerardus Geldenhaurius and Cornelius Aurelius, as also
Peter Diuey, but especially Hadrianus Iunius his Batauia. Of the wonderful
store and abundance of this country, read Lud. Guicciardine. Of the ruins of
the Roman armory or storehouse of munition, which the country people call, The
British castle, (which is upon the shore of the Germane ocean, at a village
called Catwijcke opzee, not far from the city Leijden) and of the inscriptions
in marble there found, we have not long since set forth a peculiar treatise
dedicated only to that argument.

Of the province of Vtrecht, which now is under the command of Holland, and is
likewise described in this Map, see the history of Lambertus. Hortensius
Monfortius.

map of Holland, Netherlands HOLLANDIAE ANTIQVORVM CATTHORVM SEDIS NOVA
DESCRIPTIO, AVCTORE IACOBO A DAVENTRIA


FRIESLAND.
THat the Frisij, a most ancient nation, did long since inhabit along the sea
coast, near the mouth of the river of Rhein, where also at this day they
dwell, it is very apparent out of the records of ancient writers. For Ptolemey
places them above the Busactores (or Busacteri, the people of that province
which now is called Westfalia, as some think) between the rivers Vidrus, (they
call it Regge) and Amasius, now called Eems. Tacitus, who reports that they
were of good account amongst the Germans, and along by the sea coast to dwell
on each side the Rhein: divides them according to their power and greatness of
command, into Maiores and Minores, the Greater and the Lesser: he moreover
affirms that they dwell round about certain huge Lakes, such as were capable
of the Roman fleet. The same author names certain Frisios Transrhenanos,
Frieslandmen, dwelling beyond the Rhein: which he says did rather mislike the
avarice of the Romans then their command. Julius Capitolinus in the life of
Clodius Albinus the Emperor, says, that these Transrhenane Frieslanders were
by the same Clodius Albinus discomfited and overthrown. Pliny mentions
certain Islands of the Frieslanders (insulas Frisiorum) in the river of Rhein:
and the Erisciabones, a kind of people between Helium and Fleuum, two mouths
of the Rhein, where it emptieth it self into the maine sea.

It is manifest therefore that the Frisij, anciently did not pass the river
Eems: but at this day they are further spread Eastward, almost as far as the
river Weser, (the old Geographers called it Visurgis.) Who also otherwise of
them sometime, were designed by the name of the Chauci; (or Cauchi, for diverse
authors write it diversely) it is out of all doubt. And beside these up higher,
even in Denmark, in the confines of the little province Dietmarsh, there dwell
a people vulgarly known by the name of Strandt Vriesen, that is, Frieslandmen
inhabiting upon the sea coast. These it may be were those which Ptolemey
calls Sigulones. Saxo Grammaticus, and Albertus Crantzius, calls this
Frisiam Eydorensem, (of the river Eider upon which it bordereth) and Frisiam
Minorem, the Lesser Friesland, both of them making it a branch sprung from
those ancient Frisij. Cornelius Kempius in his description of Friesland,
divides the whole country into seven Zelands, that is, marine shires, you may
term them. The first is upon the West of the river Fleuus or Isel, and now is
called Waterlandt: Then Westergoe, as who would say, The West-land: The third
Oestergoe, that is, The East-land. These three he says are commonly known and
contained under the name of WEST FRIESLAND. The fourth is about the river Isel,
where the cities Dauenter, Swool, Hasselt, Steenwijck and Wollenhoue are
seated. The fifth contains the liberties of Groeningen: The sixth that part
which they call East- Friesland. The seventh is from the river Weser, beyond
Elbe, even unto the little river Eyder. Otherwise this country of the Frisij,
is vulgarly divided into three parts, East Friesland, West Friesland, and
Middle Friesland, which of some is called Groningen.

Ptolemey names three towns of the Frisij, Manarmanis, Phleum, and Siatutanda:
Fleum Castellum in Tacitus is the same as I think that Phleum is in Ptolemey:
the same Tacitus also makes mention of Cruptoricis stipendarij villa the
Manor of Cruptorix the stipendary: Item, the grove of Baduhenna, where he
greatly lamenteth that 900. Romans had their throats cut, and where another
supply of 400. men, after that they had a suspicion of treason, did one kill
another. The same author writes that in his time Hercules pillars were here
still remaining. The brave courageous mind of this nation and high conceit of
their own valor, is manifest by the history of Verritus and Malorix, two of
their princes. For these (as Tacitus reports) going to Rome, and finding Nero
the Emperor busied about other matters, amongst other things which were
usually showed to barbarous people, they came into Pompeys theater, that they
might behold the greatness of it. While they sat idly there upon the
scaffolds (for they were not carried away altogether with the sight of the
pastimes, as if they never had seen such before) they question about the
differences of estates, what or who was a knight, and where sat the Senators,
they observed some to sit in the Senators rooms in a strange habit: and
demanding who they were, after they heard, that that honor was given to the
Ambassadors of those nations which for valor, and amity with the Romans did
excel others, they cried out with a loud voice, THERE ARE NO PEOPLE OF THE
WORLD, THAT FOR PROVVES AND FIDELITY DO GO BEFORE THE GERMANS: and thereupon
they left their places and placed themselves in the Senators room: and it was
well taken of the beholders, as a token of their ancient spirit and earnest
emulation of virtue. Nero made them both freemen of the city of Rome.

Pliny writes in the third chapter of the fifth book of his natural
history, that amongst the Frieslanders there grows an herb which they call
Britannica, having long black leaves; and a black root. The juice of this
herb is pressed also out of the root. The flowers by a proper name they call
Vibones: which being gathered before any thunder is heard, and eaten, do wholly
preserve a man from that danger. This herb is not only good and medicinable for
the sinews, and diseases of the mouth, but also against the Golne or Squinancy
and biting of Serpents. Whether this herb be at this day certainly known, and
by what name, I desire to be informed of our learned Herbatists.

Whether that the inhabitants of this province be those same Frisij, or whether
happily they took their beginning and name from the Phrygians of Asia, as some
would have it, or from others of other places, (for Strabo acknowledges also
certain Phrygi in Illyria, about the Ceraunian hills) I leave to the learned
to determine. The idle fables of those men I cannot chose but laugh at, which
do think that these Frisij came into this country from Fresia, a province of
India. If I were delighted with fables, I had rather with Hanibald fetch the
name of this people from their king Frisus, the son of Clodio. The writers of
middle age, especially the French, do call them, as I have observed, Frisones,
by a name framed of the French word Frisons, by which the Frenchmen at this day
vulgarly do call the people of this province. They retain even to this day the
ancient name. For they are commonly, amongst themselves in their own language,
called Friesen, by which name also they are known throughout all Germany.

They were converted unto Christianity by S. Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, at
that same time when Zachary was Pope of Rome. There is a strange history of
Rabod Duke of Friesland, who when he should by Baptism have been consecrated
and adopted into the number of Christ's flock, he demanded to what place his
Grandfathers and Greatgrandfathers were gone before him: and when he understood
that they were all gone to Hell, he returned back again saying, that he had
rather be with his ancestors. Whether of this Rabod our word Rahoudt, whereby
in our Mother tongue we signify a knave and a wicked fellow, were derived, I
cannot tell. Suffridus Petrus Frisius has written generally of the Frisij, in
a several and peculiar treatise dedicated wholly to this argument: Cornelius
Kempius and others have done the like: But Vbbo Emmius Frisius Gretensis of all
has done the same most learnedly.

map of Friesland, Netherlands Oost end West vrieslandte beschryuinghe.
VTRIVSQVE FRISIORVM REGIONIS NOVISS: DESCRIPTIO. 1568.


WEST FRIESLAND.
FRiesland at this day is by the river Eems divided into West- Friesland and
East- Friesland. West Friesland, whose description we here do offer unto thy
view, does by a most ancient right challenge unto it self the name of
Friesland, and was always esteemed the better. For this country had his proper
king, until the days of Charles the Great: after whose death this province
was diversely vexed and suffered many grievous storms of frowning fortunes ire,
although indeed before that time also it had often been assaulted and battered
by the Danes and Norweies. Yea and the raging Ocean, a continual and most
noisome enemy of this country, by ouerflowing, beating upon it, tearing and
rending his walls and banks has much molested the same, and yet it will not
suffer it to be quiet. Lastly, how it has of later days been troubled by the
Bishops of Vtrecht and Earls of Holland, I think there is no man but does
well remember. But at length, in the days of Charles the fifth, a very
peaceable prince, it enioied peace and rest from all former troubles. At this
day they do divide it into three parts; Westergoe, Oestergoe, and Seuenwolden:
which again are distinguished into 29. Gretanies, (as they vulgarly call them
in their mother tongue) Courts or principal places appointed for the executing
of justice. Moreover in this map there is described the territory of the
renowned city Groningen: as also that tract which they call Ommeland: to these
are adioined Ouerysel, Drent, and Twent, countries of a fat and fertile
glebe, well inhabited, full of villages and hamlets, breeding also great plenty
of cattle.

The cities of West Friesland are thirteen, GROENINGEN, the more famous for
that it brought forth the learned Rodolphus Agricola: DAM, LIEVVERDT with a
fair castle: here is kept the Court or place of Parliament and Chancerie, as
they commonly call it: DOCKVM, the place where the famous Mathematician Gemma
Frisius was borne: FRANICHER, a common palace, and place of retreit whither the
Noblemen and Gentry of this country do for their pleasure retire themselves:
BOLSART, SNEECK, where Ioachim Hopper a very learned and worthy man, was borne:
ILST, SLOTEN, HARLINGEN, upon an arm of the German ocean; (which they call
Suyderzee,) has a commodious haven; guarded with a strong castle to defend it
from the impechment and assault of the enemy: WORCKVM and HINDELOPEN, upon the
same bay: Lastly, STAVEREN, which in time past has been a mighty city, but now
having endured many bitter storms and inundations of the sea, it is nothing so
renowned nor great. There are beside these 490. villages or parishes, of which
diverse are endowed with great privileges, and have many rich farmours: It has
many Monasteries; so that for the beauty of their towns, husbandry of the
land, and stately Abbeies, Friesland gives place to no other country
whatsoever. That in this province are many gentlemen descended from honorable
families, having their houses and farms in diverse places of the shire, and no
Barons or free Lords, the cause is partly by reason of the foresaid
casualities, and partly for that they being contented with their own estate and
liberty, have not followed the courts of foreign Princes.

Petrus Oliuarus in his annotations upon Pomponius Mela, where he speaks of
West Friesland, writes, that within so little a circuit of ground he never
saw so many parish Churches. There were, says he, which do allege this to
have been the cause of that multitude of Churches: they report that there arose
a great contention amongst the nobility of this country about their places in
those Churches, every one contending for the highest seat: and when as this
contention grew every day worse and worse, they determined, as many as were
able, to build them several Curches, every man upon his own demaines: and so
every man might take the highest room in his own seat: and here grew the
cause of building so many Churches. Thus far Oliuarius, where also thou may
see many things else worth the reading. Moreover read Albertus Crantzius, his
Saxonia. But he that desires a more ample knowledge of this province, let him
have recourse unto the description of the Low countries done by Lewis
Guicciardine. Aelsius Edouardus Leon Frisius has described this country in
Heroike verse, dedicated to D. Viglius Zwichemus: Cornelius Kempius, and
Suffridus Petrus have done the same at large in peculiar treatises. The learned
Hieronymus Verrutius did this other day promise to set out the antiquities of
this Country.

map of West Friesland, Netherlands FRISIA OCCIDENTALIS.
SIBRANDVS LEONIS LEOVARDIENSIS DESCRIB. Cum priuilegio Imp. et Reg. Mtm. ad
decennium. 1579.

Antiquae Frisiae situs sub. Augusto Imperatore, ut fertur.



EAST FRIESLAND.
THat the Frisij, did not in former times inhabit this tract, but the Cauchi,
there is none, I think, that doubt. Beside Strabo, Dion, Suetonius,
Paterculus, and Ael. Spartianus, Ptolemey, (who distinguishes them into The
Greater, and The Lesser,) does make mention of this people. Ptolemey places
the Greater Cauchi, between the rivers Weiser and Elbe: the Lesser, between
Eems and Weiser, where now these Frieslanders, which we call East-Frieslanders,
at this day do dwell. Of the Cauchi, Pliny in the first Chapter of his
sixteenth book, thus speaks: In the North we have seen, says he, the
countries of the Cauchi, the Greater and the Lesser, (as they are termed)
altogether void of wood and trees. For by an huge inlet there, twice every day
and night by courses, the sea runs in amain, confusedly covering whatsoever
generally the earth brings forth; leaving it doubtful which is sea, and
which is land. There the silly distressed people get them up to the tops of
high hills, or mounts raised, by labor and industry of men, (according to the
height of the highest tide, as they find by experience,) and thereon they build
their poor cottages: where they dwell like sailers floting on the waters, when
the ocean flowing encloseth them round: or like those which have suffered
shipwrake, when the waters ebbing return back again: and then they go out to
fish about their cabbines, when they observe the fish to follow the tide. They
have no cattle, they live not upon milk and whit-meats as their neighbors
do, they hunt not any wild beast, as being far from any shrubs or bushes
where they may hide their heads. Of Reike, a kind of seaweed, and rushes
growing upon the washes and boggy places they twist cords, whereof they make
their fishing nets: and taking up a kind of muddy earth with their hands,
drying it rather with the wind, then with the sun, they use it for fuel to
dress their meat, and heat their limbs, stark and stiff with the cold
blasts of the Northren winds. They have no other drink but rain water, which
they catch and keep in ditches in the porches of their houses. Yet these
nations, if they be at this day conquered by the Romans, they count it no
other but slavery and bondage. So it is indeed, fortune is favorable to some
to their own hurt and hinderance. Thus Pliny writes of this people; who
wondereth that they preferred liberty, before the tyrannous command of the
Romans, or rather, as I think, he enuieth that they were freed from their
yoke. For neither is it yet so wonderful a thing as he would make it, for a
free nation, before all things else whatsoever, to maintain their liberty:
which is excellent a thing in his judgment, o Pliny, whom thou thy self do
highly commend before all other, who persuades us to maintain the same with
the uttermost hazard of our life: and affirms it worthily to be desired and
preferred not only of man, but also of brute beasts, before all things in the
world beside.

This country in former times was divided into many Signiories; which severally
were governed by their several and proper Princes, even unto the time of
Frederick the third, Emperor of Rome; who gave this whole country unto one
Vlricke, and created him Earl of the same, in the year after Christ's nativity
1465.

The soil of this tract is so rich of all necessary things, that it seems
not greatly to stand in need of the help of neighbor countries. Yea it does so
plentifully abound with diverse things, as Horses, Oxen, Cattle, Hogs, Wool,
Butter, Cheese, Barley, Oats, Wheat, Beans, Pease, and Salt, that from hence
every year they convey great store of these commodities unto foreign
countries. This County has but two walled cities, namely, Eemden and Awricke.
Of which EEMDEN, situate at the mouth of the river Eems, is the common
Mart-towne of the whole province, for concourse of Merchants especially famous,
which indeed is caused by the commodiousnesse and opportunity of the haven,
which does thrust it self so far up into the heart of the city, at such a
great height and depth, that it does easily receive and entertain great
ships, full laden, with sails stricken into the very midst of the same.
This city is much beautified with the sumptuous palace of the Prince, a
gorgeous Church, the Yield hall, and the goodly houses of the private citizens.
AVRICK, by reason of the woods and groves which on all sides almost do enclose
it, is inhabitd for the most part of Gentlemen and Noblemen, where they
recreate and delight themselves with Hawking and Hunting. In the territory of
this city, there is, as Kempius reports, a place called Iyl, enclosed round
with a wall, beset with bushes, a commodious dwelling for Hares and Dear: in
which as in a Park or warrein they maintain a great number of these kind of
beasts, which none dare take under a great penalty: but they are reserved for
the Earls disport and pastime when he is disposed to recreate himself with
hunting. In the confines also of this city Awricke, is a little hill rising
somewhat high, (commonly they call it Obstalsboom or Vpstalsbom) where the seat
of Justice or Court leet for the whole shire is ordinarily held. Here they
were wont every year, out of all the Zelands, to meet in the open and wild
fields, and there by the most skillful and approved lawiers, such as best knew
their customs and laws, to end and determine all controversies arising between
man and man. In this precinct also are diuen castles, villages and farms. Of
hamlets and end-waies, such is the number, that often times one does touch
another. The greatest part of which both for beauty of their houses and
streets, as also for multitude of inhabitants and strangers, do so excel, that
they may foe honor and greatness contend with diverse cities of Germany.

The people do give themselves either to traffic as Merchants, or to get
their livings by occupations and handy-crafts, or by playing the husbandmen and
tilling the ground. With their neighbors and forreners they speak in the
Dutch tongue, amongst themselves they use a peculiar language, proper to that
nation and not understood of strangers. They are comely apparelled, yea even
the very country people, so that a man would take them to be citizens. The
women wear a kind of attire and apparel much differing from that of other
nations. They bind up all the hair of their had into one lock, and that, set
out with diverse silver and gilt spangles and buttons, they let to hang behind
their back. Their head they bind up in Summer with a caull of red colored
silk, behung with silver spangles, but in the Winter they wear an hood of
green cloth, wherewith they do so cover their whole head, that skarsely one may
see their eyes: this kind of attire they call an Hatte. Their upper garment (
huick of loose gown) which they wear abroad, from the head to the foot is
pleited with many small pleits, and is so stiff with silver and gilt wire or
plate wouen into it, that when it is put off, it will stand upright. This
sometime is made of red, sometime of green cloth. In this country of
East-Friesland there are also two other counties, the one called Esens, the
other Ieueren, bearing the names of their chief towns. Of the situation of
this province, nature and manners of the people, read Vbbo Emmius.

map of East Friesland, Netherlands FRISIA ORIENTALIS
RIDERIAE PORTIONIS facies, ante inundationem, qui postea sinus maris factus
est.



DENMARK.
SAxo Grammaticus has thus described Denmark: DENMARK, says he, parted in
the midst by the boisterous sea, contains a few small parts of the maine
continent, severed and disioined one from another by the breaking in of the
ocean winding and turning it self diverse ways. Of these IVTIA, Iuitland, is,
in respect of the greatness and beginning, in the entrance of the kingdom of
Denmark. Which as it is in situation first, so running out further, it is
placed in the utmost borders of Germany. From whose company it being parted by
the intercourse of the river Eydor, it runs with a larger breadth toward the
North, even to the bank of the frith of Norwey (he calls it Fretum Noricum.)
In this is the bay of Lemwicke, (Sinus Lymicus) abounding with such store of
fish, that it alone yields as much provision of victual to the inhabitants,
as all the whole country beside. To this is adioined FRESIA, (Strand Friesen) a
province much lesser, which lying more low then Iuitland in plain and champion
fields, receives from the sea ouerflowing it, great strength and heart, and is
very settile for come. Whose inundation or violent tide, whether it do bring to
the country people more profit or damage, it is hard to say: For in
tempestuous weather the Sea breaking in through the creeks wherein the water
was wont to be contained, such a world of waters often times does follow and come
into the country, that diverse times it runs over not only the fallow fields,
but drowneth also whole families with their goods and cattle. After Iuitland,
the i will FIONIA, (Fuinex) does follow upon the East, which a narrow arm of the
ocean sea does sever from the maine land. This island as upon the West it
looks toward Iuitland, so upon the East it has the i will SEELAND, ( Sialandia,
he calls it) an island much commended for the great abundance of all manner of
necessary things that it yields: which for pleasant situation is thought to
excel all the provinces of this kingdom, and is supposed to be in the midst
of Denmark, indifferently situate between the one end of the same, and the
other. Upon the East side of this, an arm of the ocean runs between it and
SCONE, ( Scania, Scandinauia, Basilia and Baltia called by diverse authors) a
part of Norwey or Swedland. This sea yearly affoordeth great gain to the
Fishermen. For this whole bay or gulf of the sea, is so full of all sorts of
fish, that the fishermen often times do catch such store and therewith they so
freight their boats, that they have no room to stir their oars: neither do
they here use any nets or other means to take the fish, but many times they
are taken only with the hand. Moreover HALLAND and BLIEKER, ( Blekingia he
names it) two provinces, issuing forth from the maine land of Scone, like two
arms from one and the same body of a tree, are, by many spaces and by-corners,
adioined and knitte to Gotland and Norwey. Thus far Saxo Grammaticus. See
also Albert Crantzius, Sebastian Munster, and the Ecclesiastical history of M.
Adams.

The kingdom of NORVVAY, is subject to the crown of Denmark, as also the i will
GOTLAND: Item, (if you will give credit to Mark Iordane in his map of
Denmark) the islands Groenland, Island, Hetland, Feroa, and the Orkneys. Yet we
have said before that the Orkney isles do belong unto the kingdom of Scotland,
under the name and title of a Dukedom. Olaus also says, but falsely as I
persuade my self, that the i will Gotland does belong unto the kingdom of
Swedland.

GOTHIA, or the i will Gotland is a good ground for the feeding and bringing up of
cattle, horses and oxen. There is plentiful fishing, fowling and hunting. It
is very rich of a kind of fair marble, as also of all manner of things
necessary for the maintenance of man's life. In it is the goodly town Visbui,
sometime the most famous and frequent Mart of all Europe. There are yet
remaining certain ruins of marble, sufficient testimony of his ancient
greatness and beauty: at this day it is now renowned for the fair Abbey of
Benedictine Friars; and the Library there containing about 2000. books of
sundry authors, rare and ancient manuscripts. Thus far out of Olaus Magnus
and Iacobus Zieglerus.

CIMBRICA CHERSONES US, now called IVITLAND.
CImbrica Chersonesus, out of the which the Cimbri, about the year 105. before
the incarnation of Christ, issued forth and spread themselves in other
countries of Europe, to the great terror and affrighting of all Italy,
stretching it self from the river Elbe into the North about 80. miles,
contains many large and goodly shires. It is a part of the kingdom of
Denmark, which M. Adams names Daniam Cismarinam, Denmark on this side the
sea. In the entrance of it, as one comes out of Saxony there stands
HOLSTATIA, Holstein, which old writers, for that it is disioined and severed
four the rest of Germany, toward the North, by the river Elbe, (Albis they
called it) named NORDALBINGIA: and for that it was always accounted the
uttermost Northren bound of the Roman Empire: and therefore Henry surnamed
Auceps, the Fowler, Emperor of Rome, about 650. since, had here in the city
of Sleswicke somewhat beyond the limits of the Empire, a Lieutenant and
Lord-warden of the Marches. Holstein contains three principal shires,
WAGRIA, STORMAR, and DITMARSH: of the which Federicke the Emperor, about 106.
years agone, made a Dukedom. The next province, from the river Eydore, which
is the furthest bound of Holstein, even unto Kolding, contains the Dukedom
of Sleswick, so named of Sleswick the chief city, and ancientest mart town of
this country. For in former times this country was entitled by the name of the
Dukedom of Iuitland, which Waldemare the great-grand-child of Abel king of
Denmark first held by homaga from Erick their king, about the year of Christ
1280. The male line of the Kings and Dukes failing, and the Dukedom of
Sleswick and the kingdom of Demnarke being united and knit into one body,
Queen Margaret heir to the three crowns, granted the Dukedom of Sleswick to
Gerard Duke of Holstein, on this condition; that he should acknowledge his
tenure from the king of Denmark. The rest of Cimbrica Chersonesus called North
Iuitland, stretching it self toward Norway, by Scagen, (a town by reason the
quicksands and the shallow sea there, well known to sea men,) grows sharp and
narrow like a wedge. This province is broadest about Aleburgh, a mart town
upon an arm of the sea, which they call Lymford: for there it falls into
Iuitland, and pearceth almost quite through the same Westward, dividing
Wensussel (only a very narrow space except) from the rest, making it a
Peninsula or Neckland: from thence spreading it self into a greater breadth,
enclosing and compassing many goodly islands, putting forth many elbowes and
branches, it distinguishes and boundeth diverse shires and countries. In this
Bay is that Island, which Otho the first, Emperor of Rome, about the year
after Christ's incarnation 960. when as he passed with his army from the one end
of Iuitland to the other, called Ottonia: whereof the whole tract about this
I Will is called Otthesunt, or vulgarly Odsunt. That island is now called Tyrhalm:
so named, as I guess, of Tire the mother of king Harald: who, after the
departure of the Emperor Otho out of Iuitland, caused all the country from
Sleswick Northward, to be fenced with a wall and deep trench. In that Island at
this day there is a village called Odby: where they suppose that the Iuites
overthrew the Emperor and his forces. Thus far the author of this chart,
has written of this whole province.

map of Denmark DANIAE REGNI TYPVS.
CORNELIUS ANTONIADES DESCRIPSIT.
Cum Priuilegio.



map of Jutland, Denmark CIMBRICAE CHERSONESI nunc IVTIAE descriptio, auctore
Marco Iordano.
Cum priuileio decenn. 1595.



HOLSATIA, vulgarly called HOLSTEIN.
OF Holstein thus Crantzius in the seven and twentieth Chapter of his fifth
book of the history of Saxony: Holstatia took the name of a vulgar word of
thar language: for that the country is woody and full of forests, to
distinguish between these parts and the other near adioining, which are
moorish and green pasture grounds. The Saxons call the inhabitants Holsaten,
that is, people dwelling amongst the woods: on the contrary those which dwell
in fenny countries they call Merstude. Thereof the Latins have formed he names
Holsati, Holsatia, (Holsaten and Holstein) like as the French and Italians are
from their own languages wont to enrich the Latin tongue. Upon the East, this
country is bounded by the river Bilene, on the West by Store, on the South by
Elbe or Elue; on the North by Eydore, which in time past was the furthest bound
of Denmark. From this river Eastward the Wandalles or Vandalles otherwise
called Wagers did inhabit: of whom that province was named WAGRIA, of an
ancient (and sometime a populous) city of that name, now a poor village little
inhabited, without wall, trench, rampart or fence: the houses are covered with
reeds gathered in the fennes, homely and country like: it runs out Eastward
as far as the river Trauenna. Notwithstanding that part of the country, which
from the river Bilene by Elbe declineth toward the river Store, and of that
river is called Stormare, leaves but a little ground to the old Holsatia, from
Store to Eydore. For the Dietmarshers a people inhabiting in mournish and fenny
places, do claim a freedom and privilege from the jurisdiction of any other
Prince. This Crantzius in his time wrote of the state of Holstein then.
Whereupon it is apparent that Holstein was divided into Thietmarsh, Wagria, and
Stormare. The same Crantzius and others, do also call these Holsaters,
Transabianos and Nordalbianos, as situate beyond and upon the North-side of the
river Elbe, called of the Latins Albis. Ado names them also Northuidos, under
whom are contained, as the same author and Helmoldus do write, the Stormaren,
Holsaters, and Thietmarshers.

He that wrote of the wars between the Danes and Dietmarshers, (his name we
know not) does describe these countries somewhat otherwise then those forenamed
writers have done. For he affirms that Holstein, as now it is called,
generally does comprehend the Dukedom of Sleswicke, Wagria, Stormare,
Dietmarsh, and Iuitland, with certain other lesser countries and islands; as
namely, Angle-land, Swant-land, and Wensusset anciently called Cimbrica
Chersonesus. But this limitation is somewhat too large: for the same author
does presently after write, that Holstein properly is bounded with those four
rivers, within which Crantzius does restrein it. Although that Annonius the
Monk, as he cites there, in steed of the river Eyder does place upon the
North, the wall and trench which the country people call Denwerk. And this is
that Holstein which this our Map presents unto thy view. That the Cimbri a
warlicke people did long since inhabit this tract, it is very apparent out of
the writings of most approved authors.

In Wagria or Wagreland, Crantzius reckons up these cities; Oldenburgh,
Luthenburgh, Niestade or Nigestad, Todesto, Zegebergh, Plone etc. In Stormare,
Hamburgh, Reinoldesborgh, Itzeho, Niemunster etc. Dietmarsh has no cities,
only there they dwell in streets and villages: and of it we have before written
at large in his proper place. Of the country of Sleswicke, read David Chytraeus
his Saxon history. Where also he speaks much of Hamburgh, a city belonging to
this Dukedom.

The Islands belonging to the WANDALLS.
THey are three Islands perteining to Pomerland, RVGIA, Rugen, VSEDAMIA, Vsedom,
and WOLLINIA, Woollin, the more famous for their three Market towns, Vineta,
Arcona and Iulina. VINETA, a goodly town of Vsedome, which Conrad the second
Emperor of Rome, surnamed Salignus, by the help of Canutus king of Denmark,
destroyed in the year of Christ, 1036. having stood in flourishing estate
about 250. years together: the quarrel grew, as they report, for that they
had used certain Christian Merchants trading thither, very despightfully and
cruelly. It was not situate, as Crantzius affirms, near the mouth of the
river Diuenow, or upon the East side of the creek, where the new lake emptieth
it self into the sea. For it is from thence seven miles Westward, two miles
Southward from the strong castle Wolgast. At this day the foundation of it is
yet to be seen in the sea, about thirty furlongs from the shore, or from the
fisher-mens cottages in Damerow. It seems to have been welnigh as big as
Lubecke. Toward the latter end of winter, the ice of the marine quarters there
about are gathered together and do stay upon these breaches, and often times it
appears a far off like a Castle or Bulwark. Here the Seals (Phocae) do
cast their young and bring them up in the summer time, (the East sea being
calm,) upon the cragges and rocks there. And been they sleep upon the tops
of the cliffes and rocks which am above the waters. These do much hurt to the
poor fishermen that dwell here about; eating up the laxes and other fishes,
which they catch with hooks.

ARCONA, now the seamen vulgarly call it Ormunde. In the neckeland of Rugen,
was Wittow or Witmund, as the Hollanders call it, of the high white chalkie
cliffes upon the seacoast. This island is divided into many small isles and
neck-lands: It has in all 28. parish Churches. Waldemare king of Denmark, in
the year of Christ, 1168. spoiled Arcona. Ottocare king of the Romans and of
all Italy, was borne in Rugen, as also diverse other famous captains, renowned
in histories, and registered by Francis Ireney. In our time it has brought
forth many learned noble men, which have been of the Council to Kings and
great Princes.

IVLINVM, now Wollin, stood longest. This overcame the fleet royal and great
armado of Swein the first, king of Denmark, and took him thrice in three
several battles at sea; yet was three times rescued and released our of their
hands again. Iulinum stood in that place or there about where now the town
Wollin is seated, as the monuments in the places near adioining do
sufficiently testify. Saint Otto Bishop of Bamberg, the Apostle of Pomerland,
in the year 1124. in this town baptized 22000. men. Here the Prince of
Pomerland erected a Bishops sea, and Albertus the first Bishop of Pomerland,
was first installed Bishop of the same. Yet the citizens and people about
Iulinum did soon fall back to paganism and do again adore their idol
Trigilaff, and utterly forsook Christ: and therefore fire fell down from
heaven, and wasted the city. Waldemare also presently after the fire, two
years, after the overthrow of Arcona, rased Iulinum to the ground. There is
also the I Will Gristoe, over against and within kenning of Camin. These things as
I have here set them down, were written unto me from Colberg, by M. Peter
Edling. See Saxo, Helmold and Crantzius.

map of Holstein, Germany HOLSATIAE DESCRIPTIO. Marco Iordano Holsato auctore.
Cum gratia et Priuilegio.



map of Rugen, Usedom and Wolin, Germany RVGIAE, VSEDOMIAE, ET IVLINAE,
Wandalicarum insularum Vera descriptio.
1584.



THIETMARSIA, or DIETMARSH.
OF the MARSI, descended from Marsus, Strabo the ancient Geographer speaks:
and says that many years since they went from the coasts about the Rhein,
into a low and moorish country. Of these are come the THEVTOMARSI, or, as they
commonly pronounce the word, the Thietmarsi, (the Dietmarshers) who about 400.
years agone, were governed by the most ancient family of Staden, many of which
they treacherously slew, and so at length they made themselves free, by killing
and banishing all their Nobility. Henry, surnamed the Lion, Duke of Saxony
subdued them: but he being outlawed by the Emperor Frederick, Walemare king
of Denmark seized upon the country, and when as he used their help against
Adolph Earl of Holstein and the Lubeckers, they revolted unto the enemies, by
whom the king was overcome at the village Bornhouet. Thus again being restored
unto their liberty, least they might seem to be Anarchi, subject to no
Jurisdiction, they shrouded themselves under the patronage of the Archhishop of
Breme, and him they acknowledged for their Prince: but yet they would never pay
him tribute or subsidy, nor ever would be obedient to his laws or commands.
Often the Dukes of Holstein have attempted wars against them, and always they
suffered the repulse. Frederick the third, Emperor of Rome, gave the country
to Christian the first, king of Denmark, under the title of a Dukedom: whose
son John, making war upon them in the year 1500. lost the day, all his
forces being overthrown, himself with a very few hardly escaped by flight,
leaving behind him the greatest part of the nobility of Holstein. After that,
they grew more insolent by this victory, and often greatly troubled and molested
the Duke of Holstein. Adolph son of Frederick king of Denmark, heir to the
kingdom of Norway, and Duke of Sleswicke and Holstein, not being able to
endure their male-part insolency, in the year of Christ 1559. mustereth his
men, gathers a great army, to whom Frederick the second, king of Demnarke,
and John his brother, join their forces. These armies thus united, set
forward, and presently take Meldorp, with all the South part of the province.
Then after a few days respite, they led their forces along by Tilenbrugge,:
against whom the Dietmarshers out of Hemmingstade make head with all their
power, and met the enemy before the town Heyde; entending to force the
soldiers to retire being wearied with a tedious march: but often repelled, and
yet charging again afresh, at length they are beaten down, killed, forced to
fly, and the town is taken and fired. There were slain that day about 3000.
Dietmarshers. Duke Adolph laboring like a valiant captain, to keep his men in
array, and to bring them on again which began to fly, received an hurt. This
battle was fought upon the thirteenth day of June. The Dietmarshers having
received this overthrow, submitted themselves to the King and the Dukes, and
obteining pardon, they were again received to grace: and thus Dietmarsh, which
for many ages together by force of arms had defended and maintained their
liberty, became subject to the Dukes of Holstein. This the author of this
Map, which here we have inserted into our Theater, has written of this
country. See also Albert Crantzius his Chronicle of Saxony. Christianus
Silicius, a Dane, has lately set forth a little Treatise, in which he has
described these wars between the Danes and the Dietmarshers, and other things
which do much make for the better understanding of this tract.

OLDENBVRG.
THis country took his name from Oldenburg, the chief city. Albertus
Crantzius in his Metropolis in the fifteenth chapter of the third book,
writes that this is one of the most ancient Earledomes of Germany: for in the
thirty chapter of his second book, he reckons Widekind, Duke of Saxony, who
lived in the time of Charles the Great, amongst the Earls of this country.
Iraenicus affirms that this city was repaired by Charles the Great, who also
there dedicated a church to S. John Baptist, consecrated by Edalgarge the
Bishop. In this I think he is deceived, that he reckons this city amongst
the cities of the Wandalls, and describes it upon that coast. For this is
another city different from that; and is in VVagria, a province of Holstein,
nothing near Pomerland. This the VVandalls called Stargard, the Danes
Brannesia; each according to the propriety of his own tongue, as the same
Crantzius writes. The author of this Map thinks that the Ambrones, (a
people which went into Italy with the Cimbers, and were slain and overthrown
by Marius, as Plutarch records) dwelt here about, and their name yet to
remain amongst that people which they call Amerlanders. The same he thinks
of the Alani Saxones, which he verily believes to have sometime dwelt about
the lake Alana in this province, upon each side of the river Alana (both in the
Map are written Ana) even as high as the castle Oria; and at this day to be
called Lengener, as who would say Alani, and Auerlenger, that is, the Alanes on
the further side. Andrew Hoppenrode in his book of Pedigrees, has something
of the Earls of this County. But David Chytraeus has written the best of any
man of it, in his history of Saxony.

map of North Holstein, Germany THIETMARSIAE, HOLSATICAE REGIONIS PARTIS TYPVS.
Auctore Petro Boeckel.


map of the County of Oldenburg, Germany OLDENBVRG COMMIT.
Laurentius Michaelis describ.


WESTPHALIA, or as vulgarly it is called WESTPHALEN.
THis country seated between the rivers Weiser and Rhein, runs out toward
the South almost as far as Hessen, his North border abutteth upon Friesland.
The famous rivers Eems and Lip, (Amasis and Lupias) besides some other of
lesser note, do run through this country. The soil is reasonably fertile;
but of those things rather that do belong to the maintenance of sheep, cattle,
and such like beasts, than men. It yields diverse kinds of fruits, as apples,
nuts, and acorns, wherewith they feed and fat their swine: for of these they
have great store, the gammons and legs of which, dried in the smoke, are from
hence far and near transported and carried into foreign countries: for the
gammons of Westphalen bacon are accounted for a dainty dish at great men's
tables. These also that country people do sometime eat raw, and take it for a
sauory meat. It is more fertile about Susate and Hammon, but most rich of all
commodities, in the province of Paderborne and Lip. The diocese of Munster
is good meadow and pasture ground: as also that tract which is about Weisser in
some places. It is woody all about Surland and the county of Berg. About Collen
and the county of March it is not without some vein of metal. The people
are goodly men, of a tall and comely stature, strong and able bodies, and
courageous stomach. It has many good soldiers, well trained, and ready at an
hours warning.

The Counties and Noble houses which do belong to this Country, are, in the
judgment of Roleuinge, the County of Benthem, Tekelenburgh, March, VValdecke,
Spigelberg, Dinstlaken, Oldenburg, Diephold, Rauesburg, Limburg, Arnsburg,
Ritburg, Lip, Buren, Rekelinchuisen, Ludinchuyssen, Steenuord, Horstmare,
Borchlo, Brunckhorst, Gemme and Cappenberg: to these also Hammelman adds,
Delmenhorst, Lingen, and Sterneberg. The people about the tract of Collen and
in March, are the Surlandi: the Bergenses, which dwell in the mountains and
such as are subject to the Duke of Cleeueland: the Emeslandi, in the
Bishopric of Munster and the inhabitants about the river Eems, and toward
Friesland: the Slachterlandi, in the same province near Cloppenburg: and the
Norlandi, (that is, the Northren people) in the tract of Osnaburg: lastly, the
Delbruggij, in the diocese of Paderborne.

The chief cities of Westphalen properly so called, are Munster, Dusseldorp,
Wesall, Oldenburg, Osnaburg, Mind, Herworden: and of less note Widenbrug, and
Coesueldt.

Some do account the ancient and true Saxony, to be Westfalen: and do think it
to have been inhabited long since by the Cherusci, whose Prince or General,
Tacitus and Velleius do write to have been that same Arminius, who slew
Quintilius Varus the Roman, and put his three legions to the sword.

Herman Hamelman has set out the description of this country in a several
treatise; out of whom we have gathered this brief discourse: he names and
cites for his authors Werner Roleuing, Gobeline, and others mo of less note,
writers which yet I have not known. The studious Reader to these may adioine
Albert Crantz his Saxony. Item David Chytraeus his history of Saxony, where he
has a large and learned description of this country. Of this province this
rythme and proverb is commonly spoken by travelers.

Hospitium vile,
Cranck broot, dun bier, langhe mile,
Sunt in Westphalia,
Qui non vult credere, loop da.
Lodging base hard bed,
Kentish miles, small drink and brown bread,
In Westphalen be,
He that will not beleeue't, let him go see.
map of Westphalia, Germany WESTPHALIAE TOTIVS, FINITIMARVMQVE REGIONVM
ACCVRATA DESCRIPTIO.
Qui olim Saxones, postea se Ostphalos et Westphalos dixere: Visurgi flumine
distinctos: Ostphalorum autem Vocabulum in Saxonum denuo euanuit. At Westphali
in hodiernum usque diem nomen retine^t. Vetusque tanquam spurium respuentes.

Cum Imp. et Reg. Mtm. priuilegio ad decennal. 1579.

Christianus Schrot Sonsb. descripsit.
Cum Priuilegio.



SAXONY.
ALthough this Map do bear the title of Saxony, notwithstanding it
contains not all Saxony: for the true and ancient Saxony was comprehended in
former times between the rivers Elue and Rhein, according to his uttermost
length: the breadth of it was restrained by the Germane sea, and the river
Eydore, and the borders of Hessen and Thuringen. Brunswicke was almost in the
center and midst of it. But now it is not bounded with those or such like
natural bounds, such as rivers and mountains are; but it is confined by other
Princes signiories and countries. Therefore Saxony at this day is divided into
the Upper and Nether. The Upper or High Saxony is that which this Map does
represent, and is graced with the title of a Dukedom: whose Duke also is one
of the Princes Electours, which have their voices in the choosing of the
Emperor. The chief towns of this province are VVitteberg and Torga. Of
Saxony and the antiquities of the same, Albert Crantz has written a whole
volume. M. Adams also in the first book of his Ecclesiastical history, has
some things of this country worth the reading. Hamelman has set out the
histories of Saxony and VVestfalen. They that do desire to know the situation,
buttes and bounds, and famous acts, let them read VVitichinde and Sebastian
Munster. Pet. Albinus Niuemontius very lately, and David Chytraeus, have
written very learnedly of this province.

Of the Marquesate of BRANDENBVRG, LVSATIA, (Laussnitz) and VOITLAND, countries
which we have also described in this Chart, take these few lines; The
Marquesate of BRANDENBVRG, one of those provinces which in old time were
inhabited of the Wandalls, is divided at this day into the Old and the New; by
this runs the river Oder, by that Elue, Albis the Latins call it. In the
old Marquesate the chief city is Brandenburg, whereof the whole country took
his name. The New has the city Franckford: vulgarly called Franckford upon
Oder, to make a difference between it and that which is situate upon the river
Meyn. Here is an University, and a great Mart kept twice every year. At
Berline; is the Princes court ordinarily kept. Him, of the Marquesate they
commonly call the Marquess: he also is one of the Prince Electours.

VOITLAND is a little shire subject to the Marquess. This Aeneas Syluius
calls Aduocatorum terram, and Praetorianam, the Sollicitours or Controwlers
land, framing a word from the Etymology or true meaning of the German name;
for Voyt, in the Dutch tongue signifies a Sollicitour or Controwler. So called
for that sometime the Prince of this country was one of the four controwlers
of the Roman Empire. The towns of better note are these, as Gasper Bruschius
thus reckons them up in Munsters Cosmographie: Curia Regnitiana, Renitz
court, commonly called Hoff, (so named of the rivers which run by it and
there falling into Sala,) a great city and very populous, beautified with the
goodly and stately Church of S. Michael, a large Monastery of Nuns, and two
rich Hospitalls. Plauhenium, or Plaun; a city with a castle. Olsnitz, which
the castle Voytzberg, near adioining. Adorff, and Weidonium, (Weyda as I
think) a fair town, with certain Abbeies about them, Milford and
VVhite-crowne, Geraw Scletz, and whatsoever is between the Hoff and Cygney,
standing upon the river Elster, (Hallestra, the Latins call it.) Near unto
this is Feichtelberg, that famous mountain bearing plentifully the stately
Pine-trees, out of which four rivers do arise and run, (a very strange work
of Nature) unto four quarters of the world: namely, Egre, Meyn, Nabe, and
Sala. VVolfangus Iobstius has written a curious description of the Marquesate
of Brandenburg.

LVSATIA, Laussnitz, is divided into Ober Laussnitz, and Nider Laussnitz, the
Upper, and the Nether: it is also is a part of Saxony, as Rithaymer
testifies. It lies between the rivers Elue and Oder, and the Bohemian
mountains. Sometime it was a part of Meisen, (Misnia,) and was adioined to it:
but the Bohemians; who labored by all means to enlarge the bounds of their
kingdom and command, at length seized it into their hands. The people in
manners, conditions and language do not much differ from the Silesians: only
they are distinct from them by name, and jurisdiction, as governed by several
Princes. The name and appellation of Lusatia, is somewhat near in sound to the
name of Elysij, or Lygij, which it is certain, as Ioachinus Cureus writes,
sometime dwelt here about. Their chief cities are Gorlitz, and Sittaw, and
some others. The river Neiss runs through the midst of this country.
Gasper Peucer, has this other day in Elegiacke verse, described the same in a
pecular treatise. MISNIA, (Meisen) and THVRINGIA, (Thuringen) are described and
set out in their several tables, which we have hereafter inserted into this
our Theater of the World in their proper places. A portraiture and draught of
these countries, shaddowed and counterfeited out of the Geographicall Chart of
John Criginger, which was imprinted at Prage in Bohemia in the year of Christ
1568. we have adioined to this our work.

map of Saxony, Germany SAXONIAE, MISNIAE, THVRINGIAE, NOVA EXACTISSIMAQUE
DESCRIPTIO.
Cum priuilegio



The county of MANSFIELD.
MANSFIELD, a part of Old Saxony, is thought to have been so called of
Mannus: the second king of the Germans: For Mansueldt, in this country speech,
seems to signify nothing else, but The field of Mannus. Which deriuation
Ascanien, another place not far from hence, denominated, as some men do verily
believe, of Ascenez, the first author of the Germane name and nation, does
seem strongly to confirm. Here also is Ascher leuben, which in their
language is as much to say, as, The house of Aschenez. There is also a lake,
which of Ascenez, is called Ascherslebische see. This country has upon the
East, the river Sala, the territories of the Archbishopricke of Magdeburg, and
the Diocese of Merseburg: on the South lies, Turingen; on the West, the
Counties of Swartzburg, and Stolberg, the Principalities of Sangerhouse,
Anhalt, and Asseburg. So that these Earls of Mansfield (which are also called,
The noble Lords of Heldrungen) have these princes their near neighbors: the
Archbishop of Magdeburg, the bishop of Merseburg, the Prince Electour of
Saxony, the Landgraue of Thuringia, the Duke of Saxony, the bishop of
Halberstade, the Prince of Anhald, the Lord of Bernburg, the Earls of
Swartzburg and Stolburg, the Lords of Werther and Asseburg.

When, or by whom, this province was graced with the title of an EARLDOME,
Andrew Hoppenrode, in his book, which he has written and set forth of the
Petigrees of the Saxon Princes, plainly confesses that he is altogether
ignorant. Notwithstanding this same author, and with him Syriacus Spangeberg,
do auerre it to have been very ancient, by this, that an Earl of this
country, called Herger, did live in the days of Great Arthur, that renowned
king of the Britans, and was one of those, which together with the rest of the
worthies of this king, were first made Knights of the order of the Round Table.
Now this king Arthur, we know lived about 542. years after the incarnation of
our Savior Christ. But if there be any man that shall think and object, that
this story of the Round Table is too fabulous to confirm this our assertion,
yet this is certain and cannot be doubted of, that in England, almost in the
midst of the kingdom, there is a town called Mansfield, situate betweeene
the rivers of Trent and Rotheram, not far from the city of Nottingham.

This county contains also four other counties: namely, ARNSTEDT, WIPRA,
WETHIN and QVERNFVRT, all which in former times had their proper and peculiar
Earls, but now at this day beside the count Mansfield they have not any one.
In this county also there is the county Palatine of Saxony. Moreover there are
beside these certain other Lordships and Principalities, as thou may see in
the Map. The chief and principal cities are MANSFIELD, EYSLEBEN, WIPRA and
LEIMBACH.

This country is very full of Mettall-mines. Here out of the earth are dug
those sleitstones, which they call Scheyffersteyn, such as scarcely are to be
found, as Sebastian Munster writes, in any other place of the world beside. It
has also certain stones laden with Copper, which being burnt in the fire and
then steeped and washed in water do yield the metal, and together with it
some good store of Silver. But this is a wonderful strange pranke, that Nature
here in sporting manner usually plaieth, which the same author there speaks
of well worth the observation: namely of a great Lake in this country well
stored with diverse and sundry sorts of fish: all which kinds of fish, together
with the paddockes, frogs, newts, and such other things living in this lake,
are found so curiously expressed and shaped out in stones, as we have to our
great admiration beheld, as it is a very hard matter at the first sight upon
the sudden to discern them from the natural living creatures of that kind, and
that so liuelily that thou shall be able presently to distinguish one from
another and to call them by their several and proper names. Some of these I
have, given me by Peter Ernest, the most renowned and illustrious Earl of this
country, and worthy Governor of the province of Lutzenburg.

There is a Lake in this country, which, by reason of the saltness of the
water, they call Gesaltzen, into which, if the fishermen shall cast in their
nets over deep, they will presently be sienged and schorched even as if they
had been burnt or drawn through the fire, as Seuerinus Gobelinus, in his
history of Amber, reports. The same author writes that near unto Eisleben,
there was not long since a piece of Amber found as big as a man's head.

Syriacus Spangeberg did promise to set out the history of this country,
wherein all the cities, castles, villages, mountains, woods, rivers, lakes,
mines etc. should severally be described; together with the Antiquities,
Records, Petigrees, and such other historical matters of the same.

map of Mansfeld Land, Germany MANSFELDIAE COMITATVS DESCRIPTIO. auctore
Tilemanno Stella Sig.


The Principality of HENNENBERG.
THe terrirory and precinct of the Princes of HENNENBERG, a part of East
France, how large and wide it was, you may see by this our Chorographicall
Map; the buts and bounds of it are thus: Upon the West and North it has
Thuringen, and the great forest, which of this country is called Durynger
Waldt; (whose head on these parts does divide Thuringen from Frankenland) on
the South it is confined with the river of Meyn, and the bishoprics of
Bamberg and Wuitzburg. Moreover the East part is enclosed with that great
mountain which the country people do call, Die Rhon, or Rosn: upon the same
side also it has the Diocese of Fulden, and the province of Hessen. This
country is wonderfully stored with dear, wild foul, fish and such other
things necessary for the maintenance of man's life. It has also some Mines of
metals, especially of iron, whereof great store is yearly from hence, to the
great gain and commodity of the inhabitants, transported into foreign
countries. It is watered here and there with many and diverse fountains,
heads, or springs of the river Visurgis, which in these parts they call Die
Werra, but mo^e properly, it is of some in other places called Die Wesser,
which indeed the name of the Abbey Vesser does seem to approve for truth:
which Francis Irenicus and Wolfgangus Lazius do verily believe to have been so
denominated of Wasser, which in the Germane is as much to say, as water, in the
English.

Of the first beginning and original of this house or family of Hennenberg, by
reason of the negligence of the writers and Historians of those times, we can
determine nothing for certainty, beside this, that in the time of Attila and
Charles the Great, some authors do make mention of the Princes of Hennenberg,
which also were Earls of Frankland and Burggraues of Wurtzeburg. So again in
the time of Henry the first, Emperor of Germany, Gottwald and Otto of this
house of Hennenberg, served valiantly in defense of the Empire against the
assaults and inrodes of the Vgri. Item the Boppones, two learned men of this
family, in the years of Christ 941. and 961. were bishops of Wurtzeburg, and
governed that sea with the great applause and praise of all men. But the true
pedigree of these Princes is derived from BOPPO, who in the year of our Lord
1078. following Henry the fourth, the Emperors side, in the battle fought
between him and Rudolph the Switzer, near to the city Melrichstadt, valiantly
fighting was honorably slain in the field. After him succeeded his son
GOTTEBALD, first founder of the Abbey of Vesser, for the Monks of the order of
the brotherhood of the Praemonstratenses: After him followed his son
BERTHOLD; then BOPPO the Second, next him BOPPO the Third, all which succeeded
one after another in a right line. This Boppo the Third had by his second wife
Iutta, of Thuringen, HERMAN, whose son BOPPO the Fourth died, leaving no
issue behind him: But by his first wife Elizabeth, of the family of the
Princes of Saxony, he had HENRY, who had issue HENRY the Second, HERMAN the
Second, and BERTHOLD the Second: Henry had issue BOPPO the Fifth; whose son
BERTHOLD the Third died without issue. But after Herman these Princes, HENRY
the Second, HERMAN the Third, FREDERICK the First, GEORGE the First, and lastly
FREDERICK the Second lineally descended one from another, successively governed
this province. This Frederick had issue HERMAN, who by his wife Margaret, of
the family of Brandenburg had two sons, BERTHOLD the Fourth, and ALBERT, both
which died in the year of our Lord God, 1549. and left no issue behind them.
Then of the line of Berthold the Second, third son of Henry the First,
succeeded BERTHOLD the Fifth, who for his singular virtues, wisdom,
experience, and excellent gifts other ways, was in the year after Christ's
incarnation, 1310. by Henry of Lutzelburg the Emperor, with the general
consent of the whole company of the Electours, installed one of the Princes of
the Empire. And after that, for the same his virtues, and for that he was in
managing all manner of businesses a most prudent, faithful and fortunate man,
by Lewis the Fourth, the next successor in the Empire, much set by and greatly
esteemed. In his time, this whole province as it is here set out, in this our
Chorographicall Chart, was subject to him and to other Princes and Earls of
Hennenberg then living. But HENRY his son dying without issue male, the
greatest part of this country, by the marriage of his three daughters,
KATHARINE, SOPHIA, and ELIZABETH, fell unto the Marquesses of Misnia,
Burggraues of Noriberg, and Princes of Wurtenburg, which two last selling their
portions, the bishop of Wurtenburg did much enlarge his diocese. JOHN, the
second son of Berthold the first, by his wife Adelheida of the house of
Hessen, had by Elizabeth of the family of Luchtenburg, a son named HENRY the
Fourth, who by Mechtilda, or Mawd, daughter to the Marquess of Bath, WILLIAM
the First, who by his wife Anna of Brunswicke, had WILLIAM the Second, which by
Katharine, Countess of Hanaw, had issue WILLIAM the Fourth, begotten of his
wife Margaret daughter to the Duke of Brunswicke. This William had by his wife
Anastasia, daughter of Albert, Prince Electour of Brandenburg, seven sons,
and six daughters, namely WILLIAM, and CASPAR, which died in their infancy:
JOHN, Abbot of Fulden: WOLFGANG and CHRISTOPHER, which two died bachelours:
GEORGE ERNEST and BOPPO the Sixth: This Boppo, after the death of his first wife
Elizabeth daughter to the Marquess of Brandenburg, married Sophia, daughter to
the Prince of Luneburg; he died upon the fourth of March in the year of our
Lord 1574. leaving no issue behind him. He was a very godly, prudent,
magnanimous and curtuous Prince. That other, George Ernest, after the death of
his wife Elizabeth daughter to the Duke of Brunswicke, married Elizabeth
daughter to the Prince of Wurtenburg, and at length upon the seven and
twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord God 1583. yielded to Nature
and died in the seventy and third year of his age, being the last Prince of
that stock or family. The description of this province of Hennenberg, as here
it is set down, at this day is subject unto diverse Princes: the greatest part
of it, belongs to the Duke of Saxony, the rest to the bishop of Wurtenburg
and the Landtgraues of Hessen. A more large and exact description of this
Stock and Family, if any man be desirous to have, may be learned out of the
Genealogy or Pedigree of M. Sebastian Glaser, sometime Chancellor of this
Principality of Hennenberg.

HASSIA, or, The LANDTGRAVY of HESSEN.
THe country of HESSEN, which sometime was an EARLDOME, and now graced with
the title of a LANDTGRAVY' was in old time possessed by the CATTI, as almost
all writers generally of our time do verily believe; only Albertus Crantzius,
to my knowledge, is of another mind; for he labors to make the world believe
that these Catti, were those people which now are called Saxones. This province
has upon the East, Turingen; upon the South, Frankenland; upon the West,
Westphalen; upon the North, the Duke of Brunswicke, the bishop of Minden, with
other princes are near neighbors. It is a country very fertile of all manner
of things necessary for the maintenance of man's life. It bears no vines, but
upon that side only that lies upon the Rhein. MARPVRG, and CASSELL are the
chief and principal cities of this country. Whereof this latter is adorned
with the Princes court, and concourse of Nobles, Gentlemen and other brave
gallants following and attendant upon the same: the other is graced with a
goodly University; well frequented with students from all places near
adioining round about. In this Landtgrauy there are also diverse other Counties
or Earledomes, as CATZENELEBOG, ZEIGENHEIM, NIDA and WALDECK, of all which now
this Landtgraue writes himself Lord. But listen what Eobanus Hessus, that
worthy poet, in a certain congratulatory poem of his, written and dedicated
unto Philip the Landgraue of this country, upon occasion of the victory
achieved by him at Wirtemburg wherein he does by the way thus speak of the
nature and situation of this province, and withal something also of the manners
of the people.

Qualis Hyperboreum prospectans Thraca Booten Gradiui domus ad Rodopen,
Hemumque niualem Circumfusa iacet, gelidis assueta pruinis, Gignit in arma
viros duratos frigore, quique Aut Hebrum, Nessumque bibunt, aut Strimonis
vndas: Talis and ipsa situ, talis regione locorum Et fluuijs siluisque
frequens, and montibus altis Hassia: naturae similes creat alma locorum Ceu
natos in bella viros, quibus omnis in armis Vita placet: non vlla iuuat sine
Mart, nec vllam Esse putant vitam, quae non assueuerit armis. Quod si
tranquillae vertantur ad otia pacis, Otia nulla terunt sine magno vana labor:
Aut duro patrios exercent vomere colles, Aequatosque solo campos rimantur
aratris (Namque and planicies segetum foecunda patentes Explicat innumeras, and
plenamesse colonos Ditat, and ipsa sibi satis est,) aut ardua syluae Lustra
petunt, canibusque feras sectantur odoris, Venatu genus assuetum, genus acre
virorum; Aut leges and iura ferunt, aut oppida condunt Fortia, non solum bello
munimina, verum Quae deceant in pace etiam, oblectentque quietos. Quid sacros
memorem fontes? quid amoena vireta? Quid valles ipsis certantes frugiferacis
Vallibus Aemoniae? dulces quid vbique recessus Musarum loca, confessu loca
digna Dearum? O patriae gelidi fontes, o flumina nota, O valles, o antra meis
notissima Musis! etc. Thus much in English prose briefly. Hessen, in situation,
nature of the soil and temperature of the air, is a country of all the world
most like unto Thrace; Which by reason that it is much ouerhanged with many
tall and stately woods; beset and enclosed between the snow-top'd mountains
Hemus, Rhodope, Pangaeus and Cercina; watered and served with the chill and
frozen-streamed rivers Hebrus, Nessus, and Strimon, does breed an hard kind of
people fit for all manner of service and toilesome travel. So here as if they
were descended from mighty Mars, their chief delight is in the wars, no other
kind of life does please them half so well, nay they hold it otherwise no life
at all, or at least that that man is not worthy to live that does not
especially delight himself in martial feats and deeds of arms. Yet if all be
still and warlike Mars do sleep, they cannot abide to live idly and to spend
their time at home: For then they either do give themselves to husbandry and
to follow the plow (For here the large and open champion ground do with great
advantage repay the husbandmans hire and pains:) or else in hawking and
hunting, they do through think and thin, darkest woods and most bushy forests,
over hedge and ditch, highest hills and lowly vales follow their game most
laboriously: others do take as great pains in ordering and ruling the
commonwealth, ending of controversies and seeing that the laws be duly kept
and executed; others do busy themselves in building and fortifiing of towns
and c^ties, making them not only defensible against the assault and battery of
the enemy in time of war, but also gorgeous and beautiful to the great delight
and aston^shment of the beholders in time of peace. What should I speak of the
goodly wholesome springs, the pleasant green meadows, pastures and valleys
which for fruitfulness may justly contend with those of Aemonia, that fertile
country of Greece, so much commended by Poets and Historians? Of the sundry and
manifold pleasures and deligh^some places, brooks, and clear running waters
of this country? etc.

map of Henneberg, Germany HENNEBERGENSIS DITIONIS. vera delineatio.

Cum Privilegio decennali, 1594.



map of Hesse, Germany HASSIAE DESCRIPTIO, IOANNE DRYANDRO AVCTORE.
Cum Gratia, and Privilegio decen. 1579



THVRINGIA, OR, DVRINGEN.
THis Province was sometime a Kingdom, at this day it is onley graced with the
title of a LANDTGRAVY. It is seated between the two rivers Sala and Werra.
Upon the North it is bounded with that great wood, which the Historians call
Sylua Hercinia, and of them is called Hartz. On the South it has the vast
forest of Thuringia, Duringer Waldt, they call it. The length of this country,
which is equal to the breadth, is about twelve Germane miles. In this narrow
compass, (as I remember not long since Hugh Brinkhorst, an Englishman, a
citizen of Erford, my good friend, did tell me) there are 12. COUNTIES or
Earledomes, and as many ABBEIS, which they call Gefurstete Abtyen) 144. CITIES,
with so many MARKET TOWNS, (Mercktflecken) 2000. PARISHES, and 150. CASTLES.
It is a passing fertile country, and of wheat and such like corn it yields
greater plenty than any other country of Germany whatsoever. Whereupon George
Agricola doubted not to call it Sumen Germaniae, The Sweetbread of Germany.
Here yearly grows great plenty of woad ( Isatis, the Latins call it) which
from hence is transported into other countries, to the great gain and
commodity of the inhabitants: It is an herb or weed much used of Diers, to set
the more perfect and durable color in wool or woollen cloth. Here some are of
opinion that sometime the SORABI did inhabit. Reinerus Reyneckius in his
book, which he wrote of the Original of the Myssen (Mysni) does think these
Tyringetae, to be nothing else, but as one would say Tyringotae, that is, The
Goths of Thuringia, and thereupon their city Gothen, or Gotha, he makes no
question, took the name. Zacharias Riuander, in the Dutch tongue has set out
a peculiar treatise containing a description of this country.

The Metropolitan or chief city of this province is Erford, which is held to
be the greatest city of all Germany. The crystal and nimble streamed Gera
runs almost through every street of this city, as we there beheld to our
great delight and exceeding commodity of the people inhabiting the same. In it
there is a mount upon the which does stand a goodly Monastery of Friar
Benedictines, dedicated unto S. Peter. Here also is a stately church, built by
Boniface bishop of Mentz, and dedicated to our Lady Mary, the blessed Virgin.
This church has a bell, famous all Germany over for the huge bigness of it
and massy weight.

MISNIA.
THis country is by John Garzo of Bononia, an Italian, thus described: This
province, says he, is seated upon the river Elbe; on the Eastside the Vindali,
the Bohemi on the South, the Saxons on the North, and Libonotria, or the
Eudoses on the West, are near neighbors to this country: it is contained
within the rivers Sala and Muldaw: beyond the river Sala the Thuringers dwell.
In it are many rich and wealthy cities, and diverse strong castles. Here
sometime, as Ptolemey testifies, the Calucones and the Danduti did inhabit.
But Libonotria was possessed of the Herthanae, Eudosi, Varini, and Suardones,
all which afterward were generally called Serabi. The country is very fertile
of all manner of grain; so that it is able, in regard of the great abundance
thereof, to serve almost all the neighbor countries near adioining: Neither
does it yield such great store of wheat only, but also of wine; honey, and
cattle. Thus far out of the same Garzo.

The head city of this province is Meissen (Misna) of which the whole country
took the name. The river Elbe (Albis) runs hard by the walls of this city.
Here is a very goodly and strong castle. Dresden, where the Prince does
ordinarily keep his court, is a city also situate upon each side of this river
Elbe, cross over the which a goodly bridge does pass from one part of the
city to the other. Torgaw, also stands upon the same river, where there is
brewed an excellent kind of beer, and is thereupon called by the name of this
town Torgaw beer. Item Leipzig, situate upon the river Pleisse, is the
greatest and wealthiest market town in all these parts: hither the Merchants
do flock, from all quarters far and near, to the Mart that here is held
thrice every year. Here also is a pretty University, translated hither, as
Munster says, from Prage in Bohemia, about the year of our Lord 1408. This
town is very goodlily built and has many fair houses, but especially the
Guild Hall, where the Aldermen usually meet, not long since repaired with great
cost and expenses, is of all others most gorgeous. The people are very neat,
cleanly, courteous and humane. Beside these there are diverse other pretty
towns, as Zeitz, Schreckenberg, Naumburg, and Freiberg, a rich town by reason
of the Gold-mine near adioining. Here in old time dwelt the Hermanduri, as
Munster, with other good authors does teach us. The Original, Famous acts,
Remooues or colonies and great Commands of this nation are set out not long
since by Georgius Chemnicensis in the Latin tongue, by Reynerus Reyneckius, and
at large by Petrus Albinus Niuemontius, in the Germane tongue. Of LVSATIA, a
province also contained in this map, we have spoken before, at the Map of
Saxony.

map of Thuringia, Germany TVRINGIAE NOVISS. DESCRIPT. per Iohannem Mellinger
Halens.
Cum Priuilegio



map of Meissen, Germany MISNIAE ET LVSATIAE TABVLA Descripta a M. Bartholemaeo
Sculteto Gorlit.


THE MARQVESATE OF BRANDENBVRG.
THe Marquesate of Brandenburg runs out in length threescore German miles.
Upon the West it bordereth upon Saxony, Misnia, and Meckelburg. Upon the North
it is bounded by Pomeran, Stetin, and the Cassubij. His East part rests upon
Polonia, and Silesia. On the South it has Bohemia, Lusatia, and Morauia. It is
divided into Old-march, Middle-march, and New-march. This Marquesate also
contains within his jurisdiction the Lordship of Cothuss or Cotwitz: of
Peilzen, Bescaw, and Storkaw, all in Nether Lusatia: the Dukedom of Crossen
in Silesia: the Earledomes of Rapin, Stolp, and Vierad. To it also does belong
the little Province Prignitz. It has three Bishoprics, Brandenburg,
Hauelberg, and Lubusz situate in Middle-march. Moreover beyond the river Oder
it has the city and shire Sternberg. OLD-MARCH begins at the Desert of
Luneburg, and so extends it self unto the river Elbe. It is confined with
the Diocesses of Magdeburg, Halberstadt, and Meckelburg. The inhabitants long
since were the Senones Sueui, and in some places also the Angriuarij, with the
Teutones. In this coast are seven cities of no small account, Tangermundt upon
the river Elbe, in that place where the river Angra or Tonagra (now Tanger)
vnlodeth it self into Elbe, sometime the imperial seat of the Emperor
Charles the fourth. Stendal the principal city of this shire, where there is
a church of S. Nicolas (they call it Thumstift) of regular Canons of the order
of S. Barnard, commonly called Ordo Cistertiensium, first founded at Gistertium
(now called Citeauz) a place in Gallia Narbonensi. Soltwedel, divided into two
cities, the Old, and the New. Gardeleben, with a castle called Eischnippe. As
also Osterburg, Werben, and Senohuse now Sehausen, so named perhaps of the
Senones a people that sometime dwelt here about. Arnburg, with his castle
situate upon the river Elbe, Bismarch, Beuster, Bueck standing not far from
the Elbe, Kalbe, and Neflingen, which they otherwise also call Letzlingen.
Besides these towns it has seven monasteries richly endowed with temporalties
and secular jurisdiction, and diverse Nunries, as Arntsehe, Damke, Diestorff,
Crewessen, and Niendorff. The breadth of this country being equal to the
length, is not above eight Dutch miles; and yet in it are at the least 465.
villages of good note. MIDDLE-MARCH begins on the other side of the Elbe,
and stretches it self unto the rivers Oder and Spre (sometimes called
Sueuus.) It is watered with the river Hauel, and other small brooks of less
account. In former ages it was inhabited by the Sueui, or Switzers. The soil
is very fertile, especially for corn. It has many Woods, Fish Ponds,
Pastures, and Meadows: as also certain Vineyards first planted here by Albert
the Marquess, surnamed, The bear. Brandenburg his chief city; is by the
river Hauel divided into two parts: this is called The New city; that The
Old: and was so named of Brandon sometime a captain of the Franks. Here is
held the general court of justice for the whole country. Many privileges and
great liberties have (by emperors, kings, and princes) been granted to this
province; a token or monument whereof is the statue or image erected in the new
city, holding in his hand a drawn sword, whom the citizens call Rowland. Not
far from this city is the territory of Hauelan, so called of the river Hauel
that enuirons it. Also the monastery of Lenin of the order of S. Bernard. After
Brandeburg follows Rathenaw upon the Hauel: Spandaw with a castle upon the
river Spree: likewise Coln and Berlin severed by the same river. In Berlin is
the Princes court at this present. Berlin was so named either of Albert the
Marquis surnamed Bear, or, as others hold opinion, of wild bears that haunted
this place when the foundations were first laid. Colne was so called of
Colliers that in great numbers inhabited the same in times past; or rather of
the Latin word Colonia. Frankford upon Oder was anciently reckoned in the
number of the Hanse-townes; in which regard at this present it pays no tribute
to Lubeck, nor to any other cities of that association. It has three marts
every year. Here is a College or University founded by Ioachim the first
marquis of that name in the year 1506. Not far from the Abbey of Carthusians
in this city runs a small freshet springing out of a vine-bearing hill,
whereinto whatsoever is cast, hardens into the nature of a stone. Other
towns there be also, as Brietzen surnamed The loyal: also Belitzen, and
Bernaw, where excellent beer is brewed. Bellin seated by a foord of the little
river Rhien: Mittenwald, Monnixberg, Bisental, Blumbergen, of the diocese of
Brandeburg, Botzaw with a castle; Falkenhaghe with a castle sometimes belonging
to the Templers, Frienwald, and Oderberg. Here marquis Albert the second of
that name built a castle in the midst of the river, to constrain passengers to
pay toll. Then have you Fridland, a cloister of Nuns, with a little borough.
Frisach of the diocese of Brandeburg, Gereswald, Grimnitz, Grunheid,
Grunwalde, and Koppenick, four parks of the Prince with castles annexed.
Hochelberg a village, Landsberg, an obscure place with a castle of great
antiquity, Lichen a small town; Liebenwald with a park; Nawen; Putstam a
little town with a castle; Newstadt, Eberswald, and not far from thence
Chorin a monastery of Bernardines. Mulrosa a small borough and a village;
Sarmunde, Sconbeck, with a park; Strausberg, Trebin, Bernewijck a little
borough; Zendenick a cloister of Nuns; Zossa a small borough with a castle;
Stendel, Swet; Wrusen, not far from Odera; Lietzen, Selow a small borough
with many villages and hamlets. This middle marquesat contains eight and
twenty Dutch miles in breadth, and so many in length.

NEVN-MARCH is divided from the middle by the river Odera, about that place
where the river Warta falls thereinto, nere the town of Kustren. The said
river of Warta begins in Poland, and waters this region at the city of
Lansberg, and the towns of Zandock and Sonneberg. The head city of this
marquesat is Kustren, reedified by the marquis John, son to Ioachim the
first, who to his exceeding charge fortified the same, and there established
his court. Other towns there be, as Landsberg upon Warta, Koningsberg,
Bernwald, and Bernsteine, a small borough with a castle, Bernwijchen, and
Berlinichen, or the town of New Berlin. Then have you the city of Arnswald,
the borough of Them, Soldin whilome the principal city, Furnstenfield a
small borough, Dramburg, Driesen, Falkenberg the town and castle situate on
the confines of Pomerlandt: also Himelstedt a cloister of Nuns, Kalis a
village, Kartaw, and Lepen two little boroughs, Morgenwald an Abbey, Morni a
small town, Nieuberg a village, Nurnberg, Reitz with an abbey of the knights
of the Rhodes, Quartzen containing the palaces of noblemen, Schiffelben a town
that bears the name for good beer and excellent Armorers. Moreover, you have
Osmund, Sconflis, Woldenberg a small borough, Sciltberg a village, Zeden a
little town with a monastery, and Zandock a petie borough upon the river
Warta. The circuit of this new marquezat is about four and twenty Dutch miles.

Now the whole marquezat of Brandeburg, with the regions above mentioned
thereunto subject, contains five and fifty cities of importance, threescore
and four towns, sixteen boroughs commonly called Marcktflecken, eight and
thirty castles or noble men's houses, ten parks, seventeen monasteries of men
and women. This region also yields Coral, the Eagle-stone or the Aetites,
and the saffron-coloured stone called Schistus, with other gemmes of no less
account. Thus much out of the Dutch discourse of Wolfangus Iobstius. You may
read also Munster and Irenicus, and David Chytraeus his story of Saxony.

map of Brandenburg, Germany BRANDEBVRGENSIS MARCHAE DESCRIPTIO.

Marchionatus hic primum erectus fuit ab Henrico I. Imperatore, ao. 923.
fuitque eius primus marchio nomine Henricus. Olim enim sub ducibus Saxoniae
erat.



BVCHAVIA or BVCHONIA.
IN this province stands the Abbey of Fuld; concerning the original and
situation whereof thus writes Munster: FVLDA is the head city of that part of
Germany, which in times past some called Buchonia; others the forest or desert
of Buchauia, namely of Beech-trees, wherefore at this present we call it
Fagoniam and Fagunetum. And that this name is derived of Fagus (a beech,) the
name of a town therein called Fag or Fach, not far from the high hill
Taurus, does plainly import. This region is situate between Turingen,
Frankenlandt, Hesse, and Wederaugia, bordering on the confines of all the said
regions, and lying as it were in the center of them. For towns, castles,
villages, rivers, pooles, woods, fields, hortyards, sweet fountains, and
fruitful soil (so far forth as the asperitie of these regions may affourd)
it is none of the meanest parts of Germany; notwithstanding it bears no
vines at all. The rivers are Fuld (whereof the city that it runs by is called
Fuld) Hun, Guerra, and Vlster. The whole country is full of woods abounding
with oaks and beeches. The little villages near the city they call Celles, in
token of the order of the Benedictins there dwelling in times past. But the
chief grace and ornament of this region is the ancient and magnificent Church
of S. Savior, which the memory of S. Boniface makes most renowned, by whose
means the city of Fulda was first built and enlarged, being before but a waste
wilderness. For this being the Church of that most ancient monastery, was
before the town anno 655. erected in the time of the Emperor Pipin, father to
Charlemaigne. More you may read in Sebastian Munster. Sundry particulars also
concerning the original of this Abbey, and the deeds of the Abbats, you shall
find in the Chronography of Valentine Muntzer published in Dutch: where he
says, that the ground-plot of this city of Fulda before the building thereof
was called Eulenloch, that is, The den of Owls. And where the Abbey of S.
Peter now stands, it was of old named Eulenbergh, or The hill of Owls.

THE COVNTIE OF WALDECK.
THis County contains a part of Hesse; it is a fruitful region, and watered
with many rivers: the principal whereof abounding with fish, is called Eder,
and is said to yield grains of gold. Then have you also the rivers Dimel,
Twist, Ahra, Vrba, and Ither. The soil affourds both corn and wine. Also it
has mines of silver, quicksilver, copper, lead, salt, and alume. The
principal places are the city and castle of Waldeck, which gives name to the
whole region. Astinchusen, Dudinchusen, Landawe, a city and castle, with the
town and castle of Mengerhusen, where the Earl at this present holds his
court: the town and castle of Roden, in the territory whereof is much hunting:
Wetterburg a castle most pleasantly situate between Twist and Ahra: the old
and new town of Wildung distinct both in name and place; near unto which are
certain mines that yield both gold, copper, and silver. Here are likewise
fountains of sower water. And here they brew the best beer in all the
country. The castle of Eisenburg, in the fields whereof, as at Wildung, is
dug up gold and iron mine. Here also they dig a kind of stones, which they
burn in stead of coals. The castle of Eilhusen most gallantly seated, and
divided by a river from Vrba. Corbach a strong city: the castle and town of
Newburg; the castle Ither, and the monastery of Werben, etc.

map of Buchonia, Germany BVCHAVIAE, sieve FVLDENSIS DITIONIS TYPVS. Wolfgango
Regrwill auctore. 1574.


map of Waldeck, Germany WALDECCENSIS COMITATVS DESCRIPTIO ACCVRATISSIMA.
Cum Priuilegio. Caes. et Reg. Mts. decennali.

Iustus Moers describ. Anno. 1575.



The Dukedomes of BRVNSWIICK and LVNENBVRG.
THese two regions are at this present subject to one Prince. They are both
named of the principal cities, Brunswijck and Lunenburg. The city of
Brunswijck was about the year 860. built by Bruno the son of Ludolphus, who
(as Crantzius says) first erected a street or borough, calling it Brunonis
vicus, whereupon the whole city has ever since been called Brunswijck. A
place of great renown, situate in the midst of Saxony, upon the river Onadri,
which falls into the Weser. The beginnings of this town were small. Howbeit
in process of time, and by degrees, it is now grown to such state, riches,
and strength, as the Princes thereof are worthily called Dukes of Brunswijck.
But it was very long first. For of ancient times they bare only the title of
Lords: but under Frederick the Emperor, in the year 1235, renewing their
style, they were ordained Dukes. This is one of the seventy Hanse-townes. From
which society, by a general Council of all the said towns held at Lubeck
anno 1381, they were excluded, in regard of a most cruel and bloody sedition,
wherein the greatest part of their Aldermen they slew, and the rest they
banished. And so they were deprived of the benefit of the said society for
eight years, until they had done public penance and satisfaction. From which
time they were admitted anew into the said incorporation of the Hanse: that is
to say, to be partakers of all privileges granted by Princes and governors of
former times to all that were free of the said society, in those four famous
marts; to wit, London in England, Bruges in Flanders, Bergen in Norway, and
Nouogrod in Russia. Their tutelary saint or protector they hold to be S.
Anthor the Confessor, whilome Bishop of Triers. For the honor of whose body,
because it could not be brought within their city walls, they erected a
monastery under the title of S. Giles, then near unto the walls; but now (the
city being enlarged) within the same. Thus much out of Crantzius his story of
Saxony and Wandalia. The praise of this city you may find in Aeneas Siluius
his 23. chap. of Europe. The city of LVNEBVRG, built about the year of Christ
1190. upon an hill named Calcarium, was so called, not (as the ignorant
imagine) from Idolum lunae the idol of the moon, which Julius Caesar, or I wot
not who, did there consecrate; for this is but an old wives tale;) but from a
place not far off by the river Elmenou called Luna, where there has for many
years continued a cloister of Nuns. It is a city of great strength,
environed with ditches and walls. The citizens greatest traffic is for salt:
for here are most plentiful and rich salt pits, out of which they raise
exceeding gains. For salt is here boiled in great quantity, and vented from
hence both by sea and land to Hamborough, Lubeck, and other places. These
salt-mines were first found in the year of Christ 1269. This city of Luneburg
with the territory adjacent, is in a peculiar Treatise described by Lucas
Lossius. Of Hildesheim five miles distant from Brunswijck, M. Antonie Mockerus,
a citizen thereof, has written also a peculiar discourse.

In this Table upon the river Weser or Visurgis stands the city of Hamelen;
concerning which, the learned and famous Physician D. Arnold Fretaghius wrote
to me in a letter the story ensuing; his words be these: I chanced of late to
light upon a Saxon, and a Chronicler of Saxony. He reports, that 130. years
ago the city of Hamelen, under the jurisdiction of Duke Ericus, being
exceedingly pestered with mice, there came a iugler that offered his service to
the townes-men to drive them away: this offer was most acceptable unto them,
because they could keep nothing in safety from those mischievous vermin.
Being agreed with the townes-men, by the sound of a bell he draws all the mice
out of the city. Then he demands his promised hire. They deny it him. Well,
in a great rage he departs the city, and within a year after returns; and
sounding the same bell which before he had used to conjure the mice, he drew
after him unto an hill not far off, a great number of the citizens children;
whither being come, both they and he immediately vanished. A girl of the
company, either for weariness, or by Gods appointment, stays a good distance
behind: who returning home, and being asked what she saw, makes report, that
her fellows were gone up the hill with the iugler. Then every man runs to
seek his child; but in vain: for from that time forward they could never
know what was become of them. Having read this, I judged it either to be a
fable, or (as it is in very deed) a most wonderful and strange narration.
Discoursing therefore with certain citizens of this place, I made mention
hereof. They all affirmed it to be true, and said, that the year, the day,
and the number of children that were lost, was registered in the records of the
city of Hamelen: and it is yet a custom among them, in their bonds and
covenants which they write in an ancient hand, to use this form or clause of
speech, Don onser kinder ausgangh, that is to say, From the departure of our
children. And they say, that the way or street through which they were led, for
the perpetual memory of their mishap, was called by the inhabitants, Die
Bungloese straess: and that it is not lawful thereto ring a bell. If you have
perhaps read this story heretofore, I do now call it to your remembrance. If
you know any thing that may stand me in stead, I pray you impart it as leisure
and occasion shall serve. Fare you well, and love your Fretaghius. From
Groenninghen the ninth of November 1580.

A description of the territory of NVRENBERG.
OVt of Pighius his Hercules Prodicius I have thought good to set down the
original and description of this place: his words be these: When the barbarous
Hunnes ouerran a great part of Europe, and oppressed also the people Norici
inhabiting Bauaria, certain principal families of them for shelter and refuge
fled unto the forest Hercynia, planting themselves in a commodious place by
the rivers of Pegnitz and Regnitz; and so upon an hill by nature strongly
situate, and free from hostile incursions, they built them a rude and homely
castle, as the Chronicles of Bauaria do bear record. Within a while their
number was increased by the neighbour-husbandmen and the shepherds of the
forest Hercynia: and so of a medley of diverse sorts and professions of people,
they grew at last to the bigness of a town. But giving themselves to a base
and dissolute kind of life, without governors, without laws, and continually
molesting the neighbor Provinces with riots and robberies, it seemed good to
the German Emperors to send thither a colonie of old soldiers, which might
serve in stead of a garrison for the place, to bridle their outrages, and to
prescribe unto them laws of civility. Some report, that Henry of Bauaria
first brought it into the form of a city, adorned it with the church of S.
Giles, enacted laws, and environed the castle with a larger wall. Also, that
Conradus the second joined it to the Empire: for at the beginning it was a
popular estate. One only civil discord in the time of Charles the fourth,
changed it into an Aristocratia, or government of a few principal persons: by
which means the whole authority came into the hands of the Senators; who
ever since have used such equity and moderation in their government, as there
has not at any time in so great a multitude of common people, and diversity
of nations, grown any notable sedition or pernicious mutiny. In the city
there are three degrees of people, that is to say, Senators, Merchants, and
Artizans. Ancient and honorable families there are 28. out of which always
are supplied new Senators: who all of them are six and twenty in number.
Thirteen of these, called Burgomasters, do consult of matters of Estate: and
the other thirteen they call Scabins, who being always assisted by three
stipendarie lawyers, do upon Court and Leet days execute justice and decide
controversies among the citizens. It is forbidden by their ancient laws, S.W.
Herberts opinion confirmed.
that any professed lawyer, or any that bears the title of a Doctor, should
be admitted to their senate, or to the government of their Common wealth. Out
of either of the said halfes or thirteenes they choose every Lunar month or new
moon a new Consul; so that every year the chief magistracy falls by
turns for the space of a month to every man of both the foresaid thirteenes.
Five there are of the same company, that in criminal causes do make inquiry,
give sentence, and allot punishment to malefactors. They have likewise a Judge
or President for their suburbs, who executes justice among the pesants and
villageois. Out of the same company also, they yearly elect two Treasurers, men
of sufficient years, credit, and honesty, who take charge of the customs and
revenues of the whole city, and have the receipt and disbursing of the same.
All the said magistrates, and others that have any authority, are chosen only
out of the foresaid number of Senators. Two hundred there are yearly
nominated out of the three Estates and the whole city, who once a year, or
upon any urgent occasion, being assembled by the magistrates, do sit in common
counsel. The State or company of merchants, albeit very great and honorable,
are freed notwithstanding from all public offices, and endowed with most ample
privileges: wherefore following their private traffike, they do in this city,
as in a common warehouse, hoord up the riches not only of Europe, but of the
most remote countries and islands in the world. The laborers and artizans,
which are the last and meanest degree, are suffered to have no conuenticles nor
meetings private or public in the city; no solemn banquets nor festival
assemblies of many together, unless it be for a matter of religion or some
great funeral: for they hold it a thing pernicious to the public
tranquillity, having found by often experience, that most dangerous factions
and seditions have grown of such popular meetings, where people in their
drunkenness dispute of the Commonwealth: and that the like tumults have
bereft many cities of their liberty, and brought great calamities upon them.
Now if any quarrel or dissension arise among the common sort, it is not
referred to the Masters or Wardens of their crafts and mysteries, but to the
Senators themselves; who presently appoint two arbitratours, to search into
the cause, and to do their best to compound it. If they can not bring it to
agreement, then it comes before the Senate; who having awarded the matter, do
under a grievous penalty impose silence to both parties. With great severity
they punish fightings, brawles, injuries, and private quarrels, for the
maintenance of public peace: insomuch as a man would think, that Minos and
Rhadamanthus gave daily sentence upon their judgment seats. Thus far Pighius
concerning the original, the magistrates, and the common wealth of this city.
More you may read in the same author. The territories adjacent being
naturally barren and sandy are by the industry of the people made fruitful.
In the same territory stands Altorff, where not many years since the States
of Nurenburg instituted an University. Nurenburg is watered by the river
Pegnitz, which it crosses with many stone-bridges. In compass it contains
eight miles. It is compassed with a double wall, whereon are 183. turrets,
besides castles and fortresses. Concerning the original, situation, manners and
customs of this city, you have a notable discourse written by Conradus Celtis
a Poet laureat.

map of Brunswick-Luneburg, Germany BRAVNSVICENSIS, ET LVNEBVRGENSIS DVCATVVM
VERA DELINEAT.


map of Nuremburg, Germany NORIMBERG. AGRI, FIDISSIMA DESCRIP.
Habet urbs Nurenberga plateas et vicos 52. puteos aquarum 16. fontes ex
arborum truncis emanantes 12. pontes lapideos 11. publica balnea 13.

Cum priuilegio decennali, Imp. Reg. and Cancel. Brabantiae 1590.



FRANKENLANDT.
FRANKENLANDT is partly plain, and partly mountainous: the mountains are not
very steep, nor the plains very fruitful; being for the most part sandy. In
many places the hills be set with vines, do yield pleasant and delicate wine;
especially about Wirtzburg. There are great store of woods, and much hunting.
The country is subject to many governors: notwithstanding they call the Bishop
of Wirtzburg Duke of Frankenlandt. The Bishops of Mentz and of Bamberg have
many places here. And the Count Palatine enjoys a great part. Here the
Marqueses Orantes are seated. And here are many imperial cities also.

As touching Norimberg, it is doubtful whether it belongs to Frankenland or
Bauaria: by the name, Bauaria should seem to challenge it. For Norimberg is as
much to say, as Mons Noricus, The Norick hill: whereby it appears, that it
was the city of the Norici. And after the Norici succeeded the Boiari or
Bauarians: and now that portion of country that lies between Danubius and
Norimberg, is called Noricum. Howbeit the city is in the diocese of Bamberg,
which belongs to Frankenlandt. The inhabitants of Norimberg will be accounted
neither Bauarians nor Frankes; but a nation differing from both. It is a
stately city, with churches, castles, and houses, most sumptuously built. It
stands upon the river Pegnitz, in a barren and sandy place, which increases
the peoples industry: for they are all either artizans or merchants: so that
they are exceeding rich, and bear a great name in Germany. It is a place most
fit for the Emperors court, a free city, and seated almost in the midst of
Germany.

Between Bamberg and Norimberg lies Forchaim, a town famous for snow-white
bread. The inhabitants suppose that Pilate was here borne. Thus far Aeneas
Siluius in his description of Europe. Read also Johannes Aubanus, Hermannus
Comes Nuenarius, Tritthemius the Abbat, and John Auentinus, who thinks that the
principal city thereof Wirtzburg was of old called Poeonia.

THE BISHOPRIC OF MUNSTER.
OF this Bishopric thus writes Sebastian Munster in his Cosmography.
Charlemaine erected a third Bishopric in the midst of Saxony, now
Westphalia, in Myningrode, a place which afterward in regard of a famous
Monastery there founded, was called Munster; and there he ordained as Bishop
one Ludgerus borne in Frisland. Whose successor Hermannus consecrated the
Monastery and Church on the other side the water, to the honor of the blessed
Virgin Mary. Which Monastery in short time so mightily increased, and became so
famous, that it gave name both to the City and Bishopric; so that the old
name of Myningrode being abolished by little and little, it began to be called
the City and Bishopric of Munster, which name remains even till this present
day. Hitherto Munster out of Crantzius. Concerning this Bishopric, and that of
Ozenburg, read the Saxony of Albertus Crantzius, and Hamelman his
commentaries of Westphalia.

This City anno 1533. received great damage by the Anabaptists, who expelling
the citizens, usurped the same; and choosing a King out of their rabble, they
held it almost a year against the Archbishop of Colen and the Duke of Cleue,
who besieged it with a strong army. But the Bishop at length growing Master,
punished both them and their King, as they deserved.

map of Franconia, Germany FRANCIAE ORIENTALIS (VVLGO FRANCKENLANT) DESCRIPTIO,
AVCTORE, SEBAST. A ROTENHAN.
map of Munster, Germany MONASTERIENSIS ET OSNABVRGENSIS EPISCOPATVS
DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Godefrido Mascop Embricense.
Cum priuilegio.



BOHEMIA.
IOannes Dubrauius in his Bohemian story describes this region in manner
following. Bohemia is situate in Germany. East it extends to Morauia and
Silesia, and west to Bauaria. Austria bordereth to the South, as Saxony and
Misnia do Northward. It is in form of a Theater environed around by the forest
or woods of Hercynia. Wherefore there is no great difference between the length
and the breadth, containing not much above 200. miles a piece. Charles king of
Bohemia, who afterward was Emperor, divided it into 12. regions, of which one
only he named after the river Vultaw that runs through Prage: the other
eleven he called by the names of their principal towns; some of them being so
harsh of pronunciation, that a man shall hardly speak them, unless he be a
Bohemian borne or very skillful in the language. The chief Bohemian towns
lying toward Morauia are Mutha, Chrudima, Konignigretz, Pardubitz, Litomitz.
Toward Bauaria you have Glatow, Domazlitz, Misa and Tachow. On the side
toward Austria the principal town is Buduitz, with Cromlawe, Trebon,
Hradeck: as likewise on the Misnian side stand Pons, Cadana, Chomutawe, Austia:
and on the Silesian quarter Iaromir, Glacitz, Curia, and some others. In the
heart of the country the principal towns of note are Cuttenberg, Kolim,
Pelsin, Veron, Zateckz, Launa, Slana, Lytomerick, and Tabor. But the head city
of all is Prage, being so great, as it contains three fair cities within it,
namely, the new, the old, and the little town, which is disioyned from the two
former by the river Vultaw. Their Buildings both Public and private are
stately and magnificall. This city has two castles; one called Vissegard,
whilom the Kings palace, but now waste and almost desolate, by means of civil
wars. Again that other castle that over looks the little town, as it is
named, so it well deserves the title of the Royal or princely castle. For it
resembles rather a city then a Castle; filling up so great a room with the
walls and buildings. Of public edifices, the Church built by King Charles
before mentioned; and the Castle erected by K. Vladislaus, late deceased, are
the most memorable. And as Prage of all their Cities has the preeminence; so
has Elbe (called by Tacitus renowned and famous) of all their rivers. Howbeit
concerning the fountain of this river Tacitus writes skarce soundly, namely
that it springs in the region of the Hermonduri. For it arises not among the
Hermonduri, but rather out of certain Bohemian mountains lying open to the
North, upon the frontiers of Morauia, which the ancient Bohemians call
Cerconessi. From which mountains this river refreshes and waters the
greater and better part of Bohemia; and then having augmented his streams by
the influence of Vultawa, Egra, Satzawa, Gitzera, and Misa his
neighbour-riuers, continues his course and name through Misnia and Saxony to
the maine Ocean, being all that way enriched with abundance of Salmons. But the
smaller rivers and freshets of Bohemia yield in some places grains of gold,
and in others shell-fishes containing pearl. Here also you have certain hot
bathes both pleasant and medicinable. And all the whole country so abounds
with grain, as it affoordeth plenty to the neighbour-regions. Wines there are
no great store: and those of the country so weak, as they last but a very
small time. Howbeit they have saffron of the best, excelling both in color,
smell, and moisture, three principal properties to choose that commodity by.
There are siluer-mines so exceeding rich, that were it not for some small
quantity of flint that insinuates it self into the vein, you should have
nothing but perfect silver: whereas in other countries those mines are esteemed
of high price, that hold a quarter or a fifth part, or at the utmost one half
of good silver. They find also plenty of gold-ore in certain mines which take
their name of a place called Giloua. It is reported that the Kings of Bohemia
have had grains of pure gold brought from thence weighing ten pound a piece.
Neither are they destitute of baser metal: namely, tin, lead, copper, and
iron. And sometimes they find in those mineral rocks, the carbuncle, the
Saphyre, and the Amethist. Next unto their mines there is nothing of greater
account to the Bohemians then their waters replenished with carps: which I have
declared more at large in a peculiar book treating of fish-pondes. Now let us
decypher the disposition of the inhabitants. In brief therefore, both in
manners, habit, and stature of body the Bohemians resemble the Lion king of
beasts, under whose constillation they are subject; that is to say, if you
consider either the largeness of their limbs, their broad and mighty
breasts, their yellow shag-haire hanging over their shoulders, the harshnesse
of their voice, their sparkling eyes, or their exceeding strength and courage.
The Lion carries a kind of contempt and disdainefull pride over other beasts,
and hardly shall you vanquish him, if you assail him by force. Neither does
the Bohemian in this respect degenerate but soon shows his contempt toward
other nations both in word and deed, and discouers his arrogancy both in his
gate, gesture, and pomp. Being set light by, he grows impatient; in any
enterprise he is as bold as a Lion, and most firm and constant till he has
brought it to execution, but not without a touch of ambition and vain glory.
Moreover like a lion he is greedy of his meat, and very curious in the
dressing and seasoning thereof. And their neighbors the Saxons have taught
them to carouse both day and night. And by reason of their neighborhood the
Bohemians differ not much from the Germans in other qualities. Hitherto
Dubrauius, by whom also the original and ancient dwelling place of this nation
is described. They brew excellent ale in this country, calling it Whiteale.
They speak the Sclauon tongue, calling themselves Czecks, and the Germans
Niemecks. Under the style of this kingdom are also comprised the regions of
Morauia, Silesia, and Lusatia. Likewise in the year 1315. the city Egra became
the warehouse or principal mart town of the Bohemians. Concerning the region
it self you may read more largely in Aeneas Siluius; and of the people, in the
first book of Martinus Cromerus his Polonian story. Unto these you may add
Munster, Rithaimer, Crantzius in his description of Wandalia, and Sabellicus
En. 10. lib. 2. Panthaleon Candidus wrote of late seven books entitled
Bohemaidos. Prage the head city of this Kindome, is peculiarly described by
Georgius Handschius. The Map it self we borrowed out of the Table of Ioannes
Crigingerus, published at Prage 1568.

The diverse appellations of certain cities in this Kingdom we thought good
here to put down out of Munster. For the names of all their cities, are by the
Bohemian pronounced after one manner, and by the German after another.

Bohemian names. German names. These cities are immediately subject to the King.
Praha, Prag. Plzen, Pilsen. Budiciowize, Budwis. Kolim, Coeln. Cheb, Eger.
Strzibre, Misz. Hora, Kuttenberg. Tabor, Taber. Zatetz, Satz. Litemierzitze,
Leitmiritz. Launij, Laun. Rockowinck, Rakowinck. Klattowy, Glataw. Beraim,
Bern. Most, Bruck. Hradetz, Gretz. Auscij, Aust. Myto, Maut. Dwuor, Hoff.
Laromiertz, Iaromir. Bohemian names. German names. These cities are subject to
the peers of the kingdom. Dub, Ath. Piela, Wiswasser. Gilowy, Gilaw. Krupka,
Graupen. Loket, Elbogen. Hanzburg, Hasenburg.

The river Albis is called by the Germans Elbe, and by the Bohemians Labe.

The Bohemians call the river Molta by the name of Vltawa.

map of Bohemia, Czech Republic REGNI BOHEMIAE DESCRIPTIO.
Bohemiae longitudo latitudoque peue par, nam retundam faciem ex
circumiacientibus montibus accipit, cuius diametru^ trium dierum itinere
expedito absoluitur: quoru^ montium quae ad Septentrionalem plaga^ vergunt
Sudetae appellantur, ardui sane ac praecipites, vbi Gabrita silua ingens
extenditur, qui montes cum alijs Danubio proximis vnde Albis fi se proripit in
coronam cocunt, quos vndique profundissima nemora latissime occupant: Hercinia
enim silua vniuersa^ Bohemian compraehe^it.



SILESIA.
JOhn Crato one of the Emperors counselors, and his principal Physician,
has for the benefit of the studious in Geography, out of his relations of
Silesia, imparted thus much unto us.

That we may not be scrupulous about the name of the Silesians, nor (as some
have done) derive it from the Elysian fields: we are out of ancient writers to
understand, that the same region which they now possess, was formerly
inhabited by the Quadi. For Quad in the Saxon or old German tongue, has the
same signification that Siletz has in the Polonian or Sclauon. For they were a
people that resorted hither out of sundry places, more addicted to war than
peace, destroyers rather than builders, and impatient of all superiority. The
first King that bare rule over them was Boleslaus a Polacke. He was borne in
the year of our Lord 967. his mother a Bohemian, niece to Duke Wenceslaus by
the brothers side. A son of his called Mieslaus, in the year 1001. was
married to Rixa daughter of Erenfrid County Palantine, niece to the Emperor
Otho the third, by his sister Melchitis: and this man was the first that
received the kingly diadem from Otho the third. But after his decease the
Polonians having by sedition expelled out of their kingdom the Emperors niece
and his son Casimire, Conradus the Emperor reserving to himself a certain
tribute, annexed Silesia to the crown of Bohemia. This Emperor was an
Vratislauian borne, and perhaps gave the name of Vratislauia to his native
city, which is now commonly called Breslaw. But hereof I cannot certainly
affirm ought. This one thing is not to be doubted, that the Silesians had no
affection toward the Polonians, whenas by the practice and industry of John
the first king of Bohemia father to the Emperor Charles the fourth, they
united themselves to the Bohemians. Some there are (by what authority or
opinion I know not) which affirm that in the same place where Breslaw now
stands, was built in times past by a Prince called Liguis, the city of Budurgis
mentioned in Ptolemey. For it is apparent out of histories, that Mieslaus Duke
of Poland, who was first created King by the Emperor Otho the third, and in
the year 965. embraced Christianity, did anno 1048. erect a wooden church or
chapel to the honor of S. John Baptist. Whereby you may gather, that in those
days there was no great matter of building at Breslaw. Moreover, Gotefridus
the first Prelate of that church being an Italian, preferred the village of
Smogra before the city of Breslaw, having there his Schole and College.
Likewise about this time it is thought that the foundations of other the
principal cities of Silesia, namely of Lignitz, Glogaw, Luben, etc. were laid:
for out of monuments and Annals no certainty can be gathered, whenas the
ancientest writings in all Silesia are the letters of the Emperor Frederick
the second, which were written in the year 1200. all the residue being
consumed and lost, either by fires or invasions which have been very terrible
in these parts. But by the good endeavor of Frederick Barbarossa, Silesia was
both pacified, and so distributed among the sons of Vladislaus king of
Poland, that it seemed not altogether to be dismembered from that crown. But
when the Polonians perceived that Silesia grew full of Germans, and that the
Princes began to favor them; rejecting the lawful heirs, they advanced to
the kingdom of Silesia one Vladislaus Locticus, a cruel enemy to the Germans.
This was the occasion that they betook themselves to the protection of John
king of Bohemia; who being son to the Emperor Henry the seventh, married the
daughter of Wenceslaus king of Bohemia, and was invested into the kingdom
1302. Wherefore after the decease of this John of Lucelberg, Silesia was
subject to twelve Bohemian kings one after another, six whereof were Emperors,
one a Bohemian, another an Hungarian, five of the house of Austria, two
Polacks, but descended from Austria by the mothers side. Of the Polonian race
remained as yet in Silesia the Princes of Lignitz and Teschnitz: for those of
Munsterberg derive their pedigree from George king of Bohemia. Vratislauia the
head-city of Silesia being burnt to ashes in the year 1341, began then so
stately to be built of stone, as at this present both for order and beauty of
houses and largeness of streets, it is little inferior to any of the cities
in Germany. Concerning other more true ornaments of a Commonwealth, I shall
not need to speak, seeing it is manifest to all Germany, that scarce in any
other region there are to be found so many Schools, such numbers of learned
Professors, and of excellent wits. It beseemes me not to speak too gloriously
of my countrymen; yet thus much I may boldly say, that there is almost no
Princes court, nor any famous commonwealth, where the virtue and learning of
the Silesians finds not entertainment. The gentlemen likewise albeit addicted
to tillage and good husbandry, yet are they so warlike withal, that no
indifferent Judges can deny, but that by their valor the remainder of Hungary
is defended. It is a region very fruitful of corn, especially in one place
above the rest, which is most carefully manured by our people. It abounds
with fish-pooles. The famous river Odera confineth it East and North, and South
it is divided from Bohemia by Sudetes. But the situation best appears in the
Map. Of Silesia you have somewhat written by Aeneas Syluius, and by others
which are ignorant of the country. But Laurentius Coruinus could have brought
more certainties to light, had not the age wherein he lived been fatally
overwhelmed in ignorance. Thus much John Crato concerning his native country
Silesia. It contains twelve Dukedomes; one Bishopric, the Bishop whereof
has his residence at Neisse, and sometimes at Breslaw: for there is a
Cathedral church and a College of Canons. Here are four Baronies also. In
this region about Striga and Lignitz is found a kind of medicinable earth,
commonly called Terra sigillata, like that of Lemnus, and of equal force; some
quantity whereof Iacobus Manouius Citizen and Senator of Breslaw has often
bestowed upon me.

The Chronicles of Silesia were of late written by Ioachimus Curious, wherein he
has so curiously described the situation and the antiquity of their towns and
cities, the government of their state, and their memorable acts, that the
studious may here find an absolute history. I am informed by Iacobus Monauius,
that Francis Faber has described it in verse also.

map of Silesia, Poland SILESIAE TYPVS A Martino Helwigio Nissense descriptus
et Nobili doctoque viro Domino Nicolao Rhedingero ded.


MORAVIA.
MORAVIA is thus described by Ioannes Dubrauius in his Bohemian story: Morauia
was called of old Marcomania, because it confined upon Germany at that place,
where Dariubius enters Hungary. For Mark in high Dutch signifies a limit or
confine, and thereupon Marcomanni are such as inhabit the borders of a
country. Concerning these people Arrianus in his relation of Germany, the
farthest of these nations (says he) are the Quadi and Marcomanni, then the
Iazyges a people of Sarmatia, after the Getes, and lastly a great part of the
Sarmatians. Howbeit, at this present, because it is bounded by the river Mora,
from the same river the inhabitants are called Moraui, and the country
Morauia. On three sides, as it now stands, it is divided by mountains, woods,
forests, or rivers; on the East from Hungary, West from Bohemia, and North from
Silesia: for on the South part toward Austria it is plain, being some where
separated therefrom by the river Thaysa, and in other places by another obscure
river. The principal river in Morauia is Mora, which enuironeth the chief
city called Olmuntz, and from thence running into Hungary, discharges himself
with his tributary streams into the channel of Danubius. For Mora receiving
into his bosom the river Nigra; and that of Switta, whereon stands the city
Brin next in dignity to Olmuntz; also Thaysa, which glideth along by the city
Znaim famous for the death of Sigismund the Emperor; and lastly Igla passing
by the city Igla; renders up his own and his neighbors substance to the
great and renowned Danubius. But the river Odera springing not far from
Olmuntz, retains his name to the Ocean sea. Some think it is called by
Ptolemey Viadrus. Odera is so named of a word borrowed from fowlers, which call
their watch-towers for the spying and taking of birds, Odri; and such towers
you have now in Morauia at the fountain of Odera. Neither must we here omit
the river Hana, which albeit sometimes scant of water, yet does it so moisten
the neighbour-fields, being thereby the fertilest in all the region, as the
husbandmen in regard of their plentiful increase, call them the fat of
Morauia. Here also more than in other places are found the silver and gold
coins of M. Antoninus, of Commodus, and other Emperors. Which is a manifest
argument of ancient wars between the forces of the Empire and the Marcomans
in these parts.

This one thing is most worthy the admiration, that in Morauia there is a kind
of Frankincense and Myrrh, not distilling out of trees as in other countries,
but dug from under the ground, in one place only called Gradisco, where till
this present is found not only Frankincense called Male frankincense in regard
of the resemblance it has with the privy parts of man; but also in the shape
of other members both of man and woman. And of late VVenceslaus of the noble
family surnamed a Quercu, as he was making a foundation for the bank of a
fish-poole in his field of Sterenberg, he found the entire body of a man,
consisting all of Myrrh, the which distributing unto his friends, and
remembering me among the rest, bestowed on me more than half an arm, which I
used often for a perfume.

The inner part of the region is arable, an exceeding fertile and fat soil,
and most apt for corn: as the hills for vines, being more favorable to
Bacchus than the hills of Bohemia; wherefore it excels for abundance of
good wine. And it is so generally manured, and has such plenty of husbandmen,
that unless it be in forests and desert places, here is no pasture at all for
the feeding of cattle. For the rest, both in speech, fashions and customs,
they are like the Bohemians. Hitherto Dubrauius.

In the year 895. the people of this region were instructed in the Christian
faith by S. Methodius, at the procurement of Arnulphus the Emperor. Under the
Emperor Henry the fourth, in the year 1086. this country, together with
Lusatia and Silesia, was annexed to the kingdom of Bohemia. Their language is
mixed, for the greatest part speak Bohemian, and the high Dutch is used only in
cities among persons of best account. This Province (as Dubrauius writes)
yields plenty of wine, but not of the strongest; such (says Rithaimerus, and
I my self have so found it by experience) as exempteth not the drinker quite
from care. Duglossus in his Polonian story says that the name of the river
Odera signifies in the Henetian tongue, inundation or robbery. Olmuntz the head
city of this region, and the seat of a Bishop, is described by Stephanus
Taurinus in his Stauromachia. Concerning Morauia, besides Dubrauius, read
Aeneas Siluius in his Bohemian story.

This Map of Morauia first drawn by Fabricius, but afterward corrected by
diverse gentlemen of the country was sent me by John Crato Counselor and
principal Physician to the Emperor Maximilian the second a bountiful
favorer of these my studies. He gave me also this catalogue of towns called
both by German and Bohemian names.

The Dutch names. The Bohemian names. Behemsche Triebaw, Trzebowa Czeska.
Landskron, Landskraun. Schirmberg, Semanin. Sciltperg, Ssilperck. Hanstadt,
Zabrzch. Zwittaw, Swittawa. Merherische Tribaw, Trzebowa Morawska. Neustadt,
Nowy Miesto. Deutstbrodt, Niemeckybrod. Iglau, Cziblawa. Budwers, Budegowice.
Weissenkirch, Hranitza. Plos, Pzin. Drosendorff, Drosdowice. Freyen, Vranow.
Schtignitz, Trztenice. Holsterlitz, Hosteradice. Mislicz, Moristaw. Ioslwitz,
Iaroslaiwice. Dayex, Diakowice. Grustpach, Hrussowamy. Maydpurgk, Dewczihrady.
Auspitz, Hustopecz. Nuslau, Nosyslaw. Tischain, Itza. Schwartz Wasser, Strumen.
Selowitz, Zidlochowice. Brin, Brno. Olmutz, Holomane. Prostnitz, Proslegew.
Wischa, Wyskow. Austerlitz, Slawkow. Kremfier, Kromerziz. Vngerischbrod,
Vherskybrod. Goeding, Hodomin. Lumpenburg, Brzetislaw. Altmarck, Podiwin.
Ostra, Ostracia.

map of Moravia, Czech Republic MORAVIAE, QVAE OLIM MARCOMANNORVM SEEDS,
COROGRAPHIA, A. D. PAVLO FABRITIO MEDICO ET MATHEMATICO DESCRIPTA; ET A
GENEROSIS MORAVIAE BARONIBVS QVIBVSDAM CORRECTA.


AUSTRIA or AVSTRICH.
GEORGE RITHAYMER, in his Abridgement of the situation of the world, describes
Austrich under the name of Pannony the higher, in these words: Pannony the
higher (says he) toward the East abbutteth upon the river Leyth. Ptolemey
makes the river Rab his Eastern bound. Upon the West it is bounded with the
river Onasus, and Noricum which is a part of Bayern. Some do on that coast
limit it with the mountain Caetius: on the North with the river Tey and the
country Morauia: for so far at this day it does extend it self on that
side. Upon the South coast it rests upon the mountains of Steyri.

The soil is good and fertile of all manner of corn, and is such as is manured
and tilled with small charge. In that part which is beyond Donaw and is called
Marchfield, where long since the Chetuari and and Parmecampi were seated, the
husbandman falloweth his land with one poor seely jade only. Marle, without
which their land in Bayern is lean and barren, what it means the husbandmen
of Austrich know not. It bears so good Saffron, as no other in the world may
compare with it. It affoordeth Wine passing wholesome and agreeable to the
nature of man. Althamerus upon Cornelius Tacitus his Germania writes that it
yields plenty of Ginger in a mountain near the town Hamburg in the
midst of Austrich or Pannony.

It has many ancient and famous cities: notwithstanding those of greatest note
are Styre, Vadenhoff, Melck, Castle, anciently called Claudionum, Crembs,
Cetro castle now called Zeisselmaur, Saint Hippolytus, the two Newberies, one
surnamed of the Abbey, the other of Corn. Petronell a village now, but in old
time a great city, as his foundation, ruins, and heaps of stones and rubbish
do testify. The new city Pruck upon the bank of the river Leyth and Hamburg:
out of all the most famous is VVien sometime called Flauiana and Iuliobona,
renowned for the University and School, than which there is none that has
brought forth more excellent and greater Mathematicians. This city is round
beset with Vineyards. The houses of the citizens are stately and beautiful, so
that they may seem to give entertainment to Princes, and are built with large
and open windows to let the air in and out: and therefore they are never
pestered and offended with close and bad air; for that every private house
has either his several courtyard or backside. Hither is great concourse of
foreign nations from all countries of Europe. Here is great plenty of all manner
of provision necessary for the maintenance of man's life.

The rivers of Austrich are Donaw, sometime the utmost border of the region,
but now it runs through the midst of the same; Onasus, Drawn, Erlaph, which
at Cella (or Zelltal, famous for the Church of the Virgin Marie) arises out
of a most pleasant lake: Draisn, Ypsie, Melck, Marck. These do sever Morauia
from Austrich: Camb a notable river for sundry sorts of fish: Leytte, and
Swegad in which are Crefishes or Crabs of a most pleasant taste. Thus far
Rithaymer.

Of the original and reason of the etymology of the name of this country,
this report Lazius in his Commentaries of VVien does give. The name of Austria,
(says he) was invented of late, about four hundred years since, of the blast
of the South wind called of the Latins Auster, which wind in this country
blows often: or of the similitude of the German name; (which I think to be
more likely) for the Kings of the Franks called the East border of their
Kingdoms Ostenrich, like as the West part they termed Westenrich.

This region long since was first governed by Marquesses, then by Dukes; and
lastly by Archdukes; to whom it is now subject: as is more at large to be seen
in the said Commentaries of Lazius. The ancient arms of this country were
five Larkes Ore, in a field Azure: but Lupold the Marquess, the fifth of that
name, of an accident or event that befell him, was licenced by the Emperor to
alter his coat, and to bear a field Gules with a fesse argent: for that in the
siege and assault of Accon he was all over embrued with blood, only his girdle
excepted. More thou may read of this in Munster and Cuspinian. The
description of Austrich is to be seen in Bonfinius in the end of his fourth
book fourth Decade of his history of Hungary. Pius the second in his
description of Europe cites an history of his, written of this country:
which notwithstanding as yet it was never our chance to see. The same author
has in his Epistles passing well described Vienna or VVien, the chief city
of this Province.

map of Austria AVSTRIAE DESCRIP. per WOLFGANGVM LAZIVM.


The Bishopric of SALCZBVRG.
FRANCIS IRENICVS says, that of the five Bishoprics of Bayern, this is the
principal, and the Bishops sea (termed of Aeneas Syluius the Metropolitan
city) whose description we have here set down, is by Munster thus described:
Julius Caesar entending to make war upon the Germans, caused a very strong
castle to be built in the streights of the mountains, whither his soldiers in
danger might retire themselves; and from whence they might have succor when
need required; and therefore it was called Castrum Iuuauiense, in the German
tongue, Helfenberg. The river upon which it stands, called Iuuauius, is
thought by some to have given the name to this castle, of which also the city
afterward built, was named Iuuauia. This city has Fennes, Plains, Hills
and Mountains round about belonging to it. The Fennes yield pastures; the
Mountains hawking and hunting. But this city having long since flourished for
a few years, in the time of Attila the King of the Hunnes, sustained many
inrodes and incursions, and was miserably wasted with fire and sword. Afterward
about the year of Christ 520, whenas S. Rupert, descended of the blood royal
of the Franks, was invested Bishop of the sea of Worms, and after the death
of Childebert was driven from that his Bishopric, Thedo Duke of Bayern
entertained him at Ratispone with great joy and solemnity, and was baptized of
him, with his Nobles and Commons. Rupert the Bishop going on visitation, and
traveling about by Noricum even unto Pannony, preaching the Gospel, converted
many to the faith of CHRIST; and coming unto the river Iuuaue, where sometime
the city Iuuawe had stood, but now ruined, decayed, ouergrowen with bushes,
and without inhabitant; and observing the place fitting and convenient for a
Bishops sea, he obtained the possession thereof from the Duke, stocked up the
trees and bushes, and finding the foundation of the buildings, he erected there
a Church, which he dedicated unto the honor of S. Peter. Also by the
bountiful magnificence of the same Duke, he erected a Monastery of the order
of S. Bennet, and governed the Bishops sea four and forty years etc. The
same author in that place reckons up also the rest of the Bishops and
Archbishops of this sea. See Auentinus, who thinks this city to have been
of Ptolemey called, Poedicum.

This city is seated amongst the Alps. Some do think it to have been named
Saltzburg, of Salt, which in the country near adjoining, not far from
Reichenhall, is dug out of the earth in great plenty. Yet who does not see
it, not to be called of them Saltzburg or Salisburg, but Salezburg of Salcz or
Salczach the river, upon which it is built and situate, like as Insperg,
Instadt, of the river In; Iltzstadt, upon Iltz; Regensperg, upon Regen; not
far from this place, and a thousand such every where to be observed.

The territory and liberties of this city is rich of all sorts of mettels, as
of Gold, Silver, Brass, and iron. Here is also found Vitrioll, Brimstone,
Alume, and Antimonie. It has also some quarries of Marble. VViguley Hund has
set forth a catalogue of the Bishops of this city. The Iournall of Antoninus
makes mention of Iuuaue. But Gaspar Bruschius thinks the more ancient name
of Iuuaue to have been Helfenberg: and of that the name Iuuaue to have been
formed, which in signification is the same. Pighius writes, that he has read
these verses in the chief church of this city.

Tunc Hadriana vetus, quae post Iuuauia dicta,
Praesidialis erat Noricis, and Episcopo digna
Rudiberti seeds, qui fidem contulit illis
CHRISTI, quam retinet, Saltzburgum sero vocata.
Thus verbatim in English.

Where Hadriana old did stand, which since they Iuuaue called,
(A garrison town to Roman State) there Robert was enstall'd
First Bishop of the sea, who them did bring to cheerful light
Of Gospel clear, which yet they hold, it now is Salczburg hight.
map of Salzburg, Austria SALISBVRGENSIS IVRISDICTIONIS, locorumque vicinorum
vera descriptio Auctore Marco Secznagel Salisburgense.
Qui patriae adfert ingenio suae Illustre nomen, Laudibus excolens Dignus
fauore est, praemioque Quem sequens veneretur aetas

Cum Marcus ergo fecerit hoc opus Grato tuum, te quaeso, foue sinu Salczburga
ciuem, ges tiensque Posteritatis honor cinge.



BAVARIA.
BAyern or Bauiere, called of the Latins Boiaria, or as others like better,
Bauaria, was inhabited in former times by the Narisci, Vindelici and Norici.
The Nariskes, which now are called Nardge, the river Donaw parts from the
other two. The Noricks did enter at the river In, and do decline toward the
East and West, even unto Hungary and Italy. The Vindelicks were contained
between the rivers Like, Donaw, Isara, Inn and the Alps, which Ptolemey
calls Penninae. All this part now is under the dominion of the Dukes of
Bayern, and does wholly rest in the name of Bayern. Bayern is divided into the
Higher and the Lower. THE HIGHER is situate under the Alps, and toward the
South. This is combred with many marshes, huge lakes, swift streams, dark
and fearful woods. Besides bears, bores, and such like wild beasts, it has
many herds of stags of an hundred years old, which no man may hunt without
the Princes leave, but under a great penalty. It is a good soil for
pastorage, and for the feeding of cattle. It yields yearly great plenty of
Apples, Barley, Oats, and such like corn, although not of all sorts: it is
inhabited but here and there. The cities of this country are Munchen upon the
bank of the river Isara, a most goodly and famous city, and the Dukes seat.
This city continually mainteineth Lions. Many men do think it to surpass all
the cities of Germany for beauty. Ingolstadt, adorned with a public
University. Beside these, there are Freising a Bishops sea, Wasserburg,
Neuburg, Rosenhaim, Auensburg, etc. THE LOVVER BAYERN is more fertile, and
better inhabited: and by reason of the rivers Donaw, Isara, and Lauar, it
brings forth Vines. His cities are Regensburg, which some call Ratisbone,
formerly called Augusta Tiberia, situate upon Donaw: whose suburbs upon the
opposite bank of the river, are joined to it by a fair stone bridge. Patauium
commonly called Passaw, at the mouth of the river In, where it falls into
Donaw, famous for his Bishops sea: Strawbing, Landshut, Dinglesing, Osterhoff,
and diverse others.

This country generally is reasonably fertile: as of Salt, Corn, Cattle,
Fish, Woods, Birds, Pastures, Dear, and of all such things necessarily
required to the maintenance of man's life, either for apparel or victual, it
is sufficiently stored. It breeds many swine, feeding and fatting them with
mast and wildings, in such sort, that as Hungary affoordeth Oxen, so this Swine
to the most countries of Europe. Salt, Cattle and Corn are transported from
hence, and sold into foreign countries. Wines are from other places, as out of
Italy, Istria, Rhetia, Rheni, Nicker and Pannony, conveyed hither. But no
Province of Germany is beautified with more and finer cities: for within his
borders (as Philip Apian in his Map of Bayern writes) it contains four and
thirty cities, six and forty towns, ( Mercktflecken they call them)
threescore and twelve monasteries, beside an innumerable company of villages,
castles, and noblemens houses. In it Salczburg is the Metropolitan city and
the Archbishopricke, which has under it many Suffragans, as of Trent, Passaw,
Wien, etc. The people do rather give themselves to husbandry and grasing than
to warfare, neither do they delight in merchandise and traffic; they be much
given to drinking and venery. They seldom travel forth of their own
country. The first author of this nation was Alemanus Hercules, the eleventh
King of High Germany. His name as yet is preserved in this country in the
village and castle Almonstain, and the river Aleman. In time past this country
was ruled by his proper King until the days of Arnulph the Emperor: him, as
the Parthians, Arsaces; the Egyptians, Ptolemey, they called Cacan. After that
it had Dukes, which as yet it reteineth. Mark, a certain disciple of S. Paul,
converted this Province unto Christian religion, and he was the first Bishop of
Laureacke, which Bishopric afterward was translated unto Passaw. Thus much
out of Auentine, Munster, and John Auban of Bohemia.

map of Bavaria, Germany BAVARIAE, OLIM VINDELICIAE, DELINEATIONIS COM PENDIVM
Ex tabula Philippi Apiani Math.
Cum Priuilegio



NORTGOIA, or the County Palatine of BAYERN.
THe other part of Bayern which is on the other side Donaw, and runs out
beyond the Bohemian wood, is called in our time (and long since was) Nortgoia,
having Noremberg for the chief city, from whence the country, as some men
think, took his name. And although that Noremberg be no ancient city, yet
his castle, situate upon the top of an hill, is very ancient. This region
has many towns, monasteries and villages, especially Amberg, which in the
year of Christ 1300. was enclosed with a wall. Awerbach, Sultzpach, Castle
Munster, (where in old time the Princes of Nortgoia have held their Court)
Eger, Beierut, Eister, Napurg, Newenstadt, Rewenkelm, Kemnat, Krusen,
Greuenwerdt, Eschenbach, VVeiden, Pernaw, Pleistein, Herspruck, Rurbach,
Neumarckt, Tursenrut, Elbogen, Cham, Schonsee, Kunsperg, Stauff, etc. Which for
the most part do belong unto the Palatine Princes. For Lewis the Emperor and
Duke of Bayern, in the year of CHRIST 1339. made such a division, that of the
whole province of Bayern, the province of Nortgoia should be subject unto the
Palatine Princes, except only certain towns which should belong to the
Emperor: and many also that did appertain to the crown of the Empire, in
time past have been pawned to the Princes of Bayern.

In this Province, between Bamberg and Neremberg, in the East, toward the
town Eger, there is a great mountain called Fichtelberg, out of which do
issue four rivers, Mean, Nabe, Sala and Eger. This mountain contains in
compass about six miles, it brings forth diverse kinds of metals: it
yields the best blew color, which commonly they call Azure. In the top of
the mountain there is also found Tin, and many caves, out of the which in
former times metals have been dug: generally all that whole province every
where swells with mines, especially of iron, by which means the Nortgoians
do yearly reap great profit. Otherwise the soil is hard and rough, although
in some places it does bring forth good store of grain, and is excellent
pasture ground. This Province of Nortgoia contains one of the four
Earledomes or Landtgrauies, which long since were erected by the Emperors,
namely, Luchtenberg, which takes his name of the castle Luchtenberg,
notwithstanding that the Princes of that jurisdiction do keep their Court in
the town of Freimbd, and sometime in Grunsfelden, the situation of which town
thou may see in the Map. The Earl which now possesses the place, is
called George, it I be not deceived, descended from his progenitors Albert and
Frederick. This Earldom has not grown unto such greatness as the other
three, which in process of time are much enlarged, both in possessions and
command, and especially the Landtgrauie or Earldom of Hessen. Thus far
Sebastian Munster. See also Pius the second. Of the beginning of the County
Palatine of this Province read Francis Irenicus. Conradus Celtes the Poet has
most excellently described Noremberg the chief city of this Province: and of
late also Pighius in his Hercules Prodicius. Gasper Brusch of Egra has
described Fichtelberg (a mountain plentifully bearing Pine trees) in a
peculiar treatise.

The territory or jurisdiction of STRASBVRG.
THe book of Records (Notitiarum liber) makes mention of Argentoratensis
tractus, the precinct of Strasburg. It takes his name of Argentoratum or
Argentina, as others name it, now called Strasburg. This tract is a part of
Holst, where in time past the Triboces or Tribocci did inhabit, as Rhenan,
Munster, and others do think. It is apparent out of old records, that it has
been sometime under the jurisdiction of the city Trier. Afterward it was
governed by Earls (although not in that sense in which commonly the word is
used now-a-dayes) yet they notwithstanding were subject unto the Duke of Mentz,
as the foresaid book of Records does show. At this day it is dignified with
the title of a Landtgrauie. Besides many things in this city worthy of
commendation, there is a most stately steeple upon the chief church, whose
height is such, that it does not only exceed all the rest of all Germany, but
as I think, of all Europe. It is, as Munster has left recorded, five hundred
seventy four foot high. Those of VVien in Austrich do think their steeple
upon the Church of S. Steven, in height to exceed all others, yet that is, as
Cuspinian reports, but four hundred and four score foot high. The steeple
of S. Paul of London in England, was in height five hundred thirty four foot,
as the learned M. Camden affirms. Ours of the Church of our Lady at Antwerp,
is but four hundred sixty six foot high. But whether the Geometrical foot
used by the Architects of these several cities in measuring, be equal or not,
let them seek which are more curious in these matters. That ours of Antwerp,
for workmanship and beauty, does excel all those others, I, which heretofore
have seen all the forenamed, dare affirm. Of this territory of Strasburg
read Beatus Rhenanus his first book of his German histories.

map of Bavaria, Germany PALATINATVS BAVARIAE DESCRIPTIO, ERHARDO REYCH
TIROLENSE AVCTORE.


map of Strasburg, France ARGENTORATENSIS AGRI DESCRIPTIO. Ex tabula Danielis
Spekel.


The Dukedom of WIRTEMBERG.
Johannes Pedius Tethingerus in his history of the famous acts of this
country, describes this Province thus: The country of VVirtemberg; says he,
in the very entrance almost of high Germany, most pleasantly abbutteth upon the
coast of Switzerland, situate especially upon the bancke of the river Nicher,
(some do think it in former times to have been the ancient seat of the
Charitini) whose jurisdiction is very large. On the East it bordereth upon the
Sueui, Vindelici and Norici: On the West upon the County Palatine of Rhein,
the Prince Electour, and Marquess of Baden: lastly it comprehends the
mountains of Swartzwald, the Blacke-wood. On the South the mountains of Arbon
and the Alps of Switzerland (so the inhabitants do call the higher mountains
of that country) do jointly ouerlooke it. On the North they have the Franckes
their neighbors, and not far off also, is Othos wood. And therefore the
jurisdiction of VVirtemberg can not more fitly take his begginning, than where
Nicher arises, which springs from a small fountain out of the high hills
of Arbona in the Dukedom of VVirtemberg, near unto the villages Schwenningen,
in the confines of the town Villing, not much more than five hundred pases
from the fountain of Donaw. Not far from his fountain it passes by
Rotwell, and leaving upon the left hand the head of Blacke-wood, upon the
right, Switzerland Alps, runs by the Duchy of VVirtemberg with a wandering
and crooked course (so saluting here and there certain noble men's castles, and
towns of the Roman Emperors) from his first rise the space of five days
journey more or less, being with diverse little streams from sundry places
increased and laden, and so made nauigable, at Heydelberg falls very swiftly
into the Rhein.

The whole country, by reason of the nature of the soil, whether for tillage
or otherwise in respect of the fertility, is not every where alike. For that
part where Nicher arises, and which bordereth upon the Blacke-wood, as also
that which is abbuttant upon the Alps of Switzerland, (situate between Donaw
and Nicher) is somewhat rough, unapt for vines, but yielding indifferent good
pasture for cattle. The soil within the Alps is stony, yet very good for
corn: in like manner by the sides of Blacke-wood, the land is sandy of a red
color, which notwithstanding is reasonable good corn ground. Every where the
nation is much given to breed and bring up cattle. Nere unto the forest of
Blacke-wood there are recorded to be these Lordships, subject unto the Duchy of
VVirtemberg: Hornberg, Schultach, Dornstad, Nagold, VVildberg, Kalbe, VVilde
bath, Newenstade. By the Alps, or near unto them, these Lordships, Baling,
VVrach, Blawbeyren, Heidenheim, Tuthing upon the bank of Donaw, by the which,
as by a certain trench, they are severed and divided. But every where the
confines of the jurisdiction of VVirtemberg do gather themselves into a ring,
as it were, enclosed with a large band, to the places near to Nicher. But
whereas Nicher does spread it self into the champian fields, there it is not
only more kind for temperature of the air, but also the soil is more fit for
tillage. Every where are rivers well stored with fish, wholesome springs,
pleasant lakes, goodly valleys. Every where hills beset with Vines,
well-grasing pastures and meadows, fertile fields, forests of woods and groves,
in the which are great store of Beeches, many Oaks, innumerable companies of
Deeres, large pastures, abundance of cattle: in all places plenty of Wine,
Corn and Apples.

Upon the brinke of crooked Nicher, here and there, are many goodly cities;
some of them of reasonable greatness, others not so big; but for building
and beauty very glorious. In the higher country, upon Nicher do stand
Hernberg, Tubing, Nurting, Kurch: then Stutgard, which being built as it were
in the center of the province, is the chief city and the palace of the
princes of VVirtemberg, and excels all the other cities in buildings,
multitude of people and greatness. About the lower coast of Nicher at this day
do flourish VVabling, Schrondorff, VVinida, Bachanauge, Brackenauge, Binnicke,
Bessicke, Bieticke, VVinsberg, Megimill, Lauff, Greining, VVahing. Next unto
Statgard are Bebeling, Lenberg, Cannostade: all which cities have their
several Lordships, many strong villages, men and munition. Moreover, generally
the people of this country is for their manhood, humanity, constancy and
religion very renowned. The towns (as I said before) are not so great, but are
sumptuously built; whereof some are sufficiently fortified by nature and
benefit of the place; other some by the industry and labor of man. The
villages are so well inhabited, that they are not much inferior to pretty
towns: their houses are of timber, but very artificially built. The castles
are fortified by nature and situation, as also by the ingenious art of
fortification, and so are not easy to be surprised: so that a man would think
that another Laconia were yet extant amongst the Switzers; such is the
excellency of the men both at home and abroad.

This Dukedom has his name of VVirtemberg an ancient beacon, which now is
situate in the midst of his territory, not very far from Stutgard, yet upon
somewhat a rising ground and hilly place, is neither for his strength nor
building any terror to the enemy. But according to the custom of their
ancestors, who trusted rather to their swords of steel, than walls of stone,
it was notable for the pleasantness of the place, only commendable now for his
antiquity, having a most goodly prospect round about; above are the woods of
Beech, beneath are the fertile hills of Vines etc. The late Dukes of
Wirtemberg for many ages past, held their Court in this tower, taking from
thence their name, their stock, and their arms, as is to every man very
apparent. There are which think, that the Dukes of Wirtemberg have had their
offspring from the Tuscans or Rhaetians: others from the French. Whether of
these opinions are more probable, I much regard not, for in a thing altogether
uncertain I affirm nothing constantly. It is certain that they were
strangers: whether they came first forth of Italy or from France, that as yet
is not certainly known, etc. Thus far John Pede.

map of Wurttemberg, Germany WIRTENBERG. DVCATVS Accurata descriptio; In qua
omnia eius Opida. Monasteria, pagi, nemora; flumina et riuuli alicuius nominis,
diligentissime exprimuntur. Auctore Georgio Gadnero
Cum Priuilegio Imp. and Regiae M. 1579.



The Precinct of SWITZERLAND.
THey which divided the Empire of Germany into certain Bands or Circles (
Kreis they commonly call them) they made Switzerland the fourth in order, now
in all they record ten: it is certain, as approved histories do mention,
that at first Switzerland was a Kingdom, but afterward reduced unto a
Dukedom. Notwithstanding at this day there is none of the Princes of Germany
which is graced with the title of Duke of Switzerland: for it is now divided
amongst many Princes. One part has accrued by lot of inheritance unto the
house of Austrich: the duke of Wirtemberg enjoys the greatest part: in it
there are many free cities, and such as do belong unto the crown of the
Empire: many are subject unto the Duke of Bauiere. There is none of the old
writers which does not make report of this Nation, as of the most noble and
ancientest of all Germany. It is clear out of Ptolemey, Strabo, and other
authors, that heretofore they were seated upon the river Sweue and Albis. But
now at this day it is the utmost province of all Germany, for it abbutteth upon
the Alps. It is bounded by Bayern, Frankenland and Alsatia or Elsas, on every
side round about. In old time this country was called Alemanie, of the lake
Lemanus (vulgarly now called Lac de Losanne or Lac de Geneue, the Germans call
it, Ienfferlee) as some think.

The country, as John Auban in that worthy work of his, De moribus gentium,
describes it, is partly champian, partly hilly. The soil is fruitful, of
which there is no part which lies untilled, excepting that which Lakes,
Mountains or Woods do possess. In it are many woods; and therefore the nation
is given much to hunting and hawking: they have abundance of corn, and great
store of cattle. The whole province by reason of the holsomnesse of the air
is every where replenished with goodly cities, villages, castles and bulwarks
strongly fortified as well by nature as art. About the mountains it yields
iron, silver, and other metals. The nation is populous, stout, audacious, and
warlike: and therefore Plutarch calls it, The most excellent nation of all
the Germans. Whose renown is recorded to be such and so to be enlarged, that
for valor and feats of arms it seems to have deserved the Empire of the
whole world: which indeed it has most gloriously for the space of somewhat
more than an hundred years enjoyed. Thus far out of John Auban, where thou
may at large see the customs and manner of life of this nation.

Augusta Vindelicorum, Augspurg upon the river Lech, and Vlm upon Donaw, are
the most famous cities of this province at this day. There are also Campodun,
Memmingen, Werd, Nordling, and others, of which thou may read in Munster.
Donaw, the greatest river of all Europe, here takes his beginning, and passes
through the midst of the country. This river, laden with threescore streams
(which Cuspinian, according to the report of Collimitius, describes by name
and order) emptieth it self into Pontus Euxinus (the Greeks now call it,
Maurothalassa; the Italians Marmaiore; the Turks, as Busbequius affirms,
Cara-denis, that is, The blacke-sea) by six huge mouths. Every one of which
mouths are so great, and the stream so violent, as Pliny says, that you
shall observe the sea to be ouer-mastered and driven back the space of forty
miles, and so far the water to be perceived to be sweet. Of this country and
his people and first inhabitants, see the ancient Geographers: and of the
latter writers, John Auban of Bohemia, Munster and Irenicus, who affirms that
Naucler has penned certain books only of this argument, and that Berno a
certain Abbat has written many volumes of this nation. In the upper part of
this Map you see a little province commonly called Kreichgey; David Chytraeus
has described it in a several treatise.

The territory of BASELL.
THis Map contains that coast, in which long since the Rauraci and the Cis
Iurani did inhabit, as also the Waste of Heluetia. The Rauraci in time past,
according to the opinion of most men, were contained between the rivers of
Rhein, Byrsa and Ar, and those mountains which from Iurassus do reach hither.
At this day it is for the most part under the jurisdiction of Basell. In it as
yet is there a village upon the Rein, distant a Dutch mile from Basell, called
Augst, sometime the chief city of this nation, and was called Augusta
Rauracorum; but now it is become a base village: notwithstanding many apparent
signs of decayed buildings, which as yet do testify his antiquity, we have
seen to remain and be yet extant there. The country is rough, full of many
cragged rocks, and every where shadowed with thick woods: yet is very well
inhabited and manured: so that even in the mountains, besides the goodly
pastures for cattle, of which it is greatly stored, it bears plentifully
very good wine and corn.

Sequani CisIurani did long since reach from the mountain Iura, even unto the
bank of the river Rhein. Now this part is called Sungow, and the Higher Elsas,
and is subject for the most part unto the Dukes of Austrich.

Brisgow and Blacke-wood, commonly called Swartz-wald, possess the other bank
of the Rein. Here the waste or wilderness of Heluetia is placed by Ptolemey.
Brisgow is very well replenished with cities and villages, and is very rich in
corn. The common people for the most part live upon Vintage. The jurisdiction
and government of this country is divided between the Archdukes of Austrich
and the Marquesses of Bath. Of this shire thou may see many things in
Munster. Christian Vrstise in a peculiar treatise has most exactly described
the city of Basell. In like manner Aeneas Syluius, afterward called Pope Pius
II.

map of Basel, Switzerland BASILIENSIS TERRITORII DES CRIPTIO NOVA. Auctore
Sebastiano Munstero.

Miliaria Germanica duaru^ horaru^ itineris



map of Schwyz, Switzerland Circulus sieve Liga SVEVIAVE, Vulgo Schwa bische
Kraiss.


HELVETIA or SWITZERLAND.
THe Heluetij (which as Eutropius says were in time past called Quadi) Caesar
writes to have been divided into four Pagi. At this time they divide it into
thirteen parts, which they call Cantones or Angules. Heluetia they now call
Switzerland and Eydgnoschafft, of the league and confederacy which they have
made between themselves.

Some men do think this country to be the highest of all Europe, for that it
is wholly almost situate within the Alps, the highest mountains of the same
Europe, and because the greatest rivers of the same, Rhein, Rhodan or Rosne,
and Po, springing from hence as from a very high place, do run into diverse
coasts of the world. This country is every where full of steep hills, deep
valleys, great lakes, clear springs and brooks. These mountains do appear
white with continual snow, so that to those which behold them afar off, they
seem to be nothing but hard stone: yet notwithstanding the Meadows after they
have been burnt, are found to be very fat. In them are fed sheep and kine,
from whence great profit arises unto the inhabitants. For from thence whey,
(as Oswaldus Molitor writes) cheese, butter, and other white meats are made in
such abundance, that not only Switzerland is glutted with such things, but also
the nations nere adjoining are from thence very plentifully served. For they
are transported from hence into Sweueland, beyond the mountain Iura into
Italy, and into diverse other places. And that which may hardly be believed, as
the same man affirms for certain, that of twenty kine the yearly profit is
one hundred crowns, and all charges borne which is bestowed upon
housekeeping, men-seruants, and maid-seruants. Here-hence it is, that so great
a people is possibly able to live and be maintained in so strait a place and
little plot of ground.

The thirteen Cantones of this country (as we said they are commonly called)
are, as Glarean reckons them up, Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Wry, Schwitz, Siluan,
Tugi, Glaron, Basell, Friburg, Solodurn Schafhusen, and Keiser-stul. The
government and charge generally of the whole country is in the hands of those
Cantones: for the rule or government of Heluetia is an Anarchia, and is not
subject to the command of any Prince. These, when there is any thing that
falls out which concerns the whole country or government of the same, do
meet all jointly together, and do determine upon that which they think meet:
otherwise several magistrates do govern the several cities. These cities
therefore are linked together by a certain bond of friendship and league,
whereupon they are called Eydtgnossen, that is, joined in one covenant. Those
of Rotweill, Sangall, Doggenburg, and Lepont, have combined themselves also to
those thirteen Cantons, with the like bond of amity.

Heluetia is situate (that we may describe it in the plainest manner) between
the river Rhein, S. Claudius mountain, the lake of Geneua, (which of the
Latin writers is commonly called Lacus Lemanus) and Italy. Upon the East it
has the county of Tiroll: upon the South, the Duchy of Millan, and the
country of Peimont: upon the West it bordereth upon Sauoy: the other part of
it lies upon Burgundy, France, and High Germany.

We said, that Switzerland amongst the mountains does contain many valleys:
of which some there are, that do tend from the tops of the Alps toward Italy,
inhabited of diverse kinds of men. For Giles Schude writes, that those which do
inhabit the vale of Augusta or Val de Osta, where in times past the Salassi
dwelt, are for the most part all Merchants factors. In Cesie vale they are
almost all Stone-cutters and Masons. From Oscell vale do come Cutlers or
Smithes, which do make sword-blades, and knives, and such as do turn wooden
dishes and trenchers. All the inhabitants of the vale Vegese are
Chimney-sweepers, and so that slouenly kind of men, which live by sweeping of
chimneys, and are wont to wander up and down through Germany, France, Italy,
and even as far as Sicilia, are bred here. In the vale Galanch they are all
either dressers of Rosen, or Basket-makers. But these like beggars wander from
country to country: yet all the rest do live upon their trades.

Besides that which Caesar, Strabo and other ancient writers have written of
this country, thou may read many other things in Giles Schude, Vadian,
Francis Niger of Bassana, Munster, Henry Glarean, and Oswald Molitor in the
commentaries upon him; as also in John Stumpe, who has written an huge volume
of this nation. To these you may adioyne John Rhellicanes his commentaries upon
Caesar. Josias Simler has set forth a book of the province of Vallesia and of
the Alps. The same man has in hand a work of Switzerland in general. Nicolan
Stupan of Rhetia promises a description of Rhetia. For the estate and
government of the common wealth of this country see John Bodine in his
Methodus historica. Anthony Pinet in his description of cities, has diligently
described the political estate and peculiar regiment of the Commonwealth of
Berne. Giles Schude, Henry Glarean and others do contend and differ about the
ancient language of the Heluetij. I do think that they never used other than
now they do. But we do send such as are more curious students in the dialects
of languages, unto the work of John Becan which he calls his Becceselana.

map of Switzerland HELVETIAE DESCRIPTIO, AEGIDIO TSCHVDO AVCT.


The County of TIROLL.
THe Earldom of Tyroll was adjoined unto the house of Austrich, in the year
after Christ's birth 1360. by Rodulph the son of Duke Albert. This County is
so rich in Silver mines, especially near the town of Schwatz, that it may not
only be preferred before a rich Dukedom, but also may justly seem to compare
with a large Kingdom. For it pays yearly unto the Prince (as Cuspinian in
his history of Austrich reports) three hundred thousand crowns of gold.
Moreover in it is found absolutely the best brass, when as scarce other where
not any is found that will abide the hammer. This province is situate almost
within the Alps, between Bauiere and Italy. The chief cities in it, are
Oenipons, now commonly called Inspruck, where the Princes Court of this region
is ordinarily kept, where also the Councell-table and Parliament for this
province and for Austrich is held. There also did we behold with admiration the
house of the Lord Mayor, upon the roof all guilt over with infinite cost and
charges. Next unto it is Bolzan the Mart-towne; and the castle of Tyroll, of
which the whole country took his name. Then Trent, famous for the general
Council held there within our remembrance. This is subject unto the Dukes of
Austrich, yet partly unto the Bishops of that sea, and is placed in the
confines of Germany and Italy, whereupon almost all the inhabitants do
understand and speak both the languages. Then Halla, in which salt is made and
boiled, which from thence is transported into the countries near adjoining.
The Bishopric of Brixia, and the town of Briomeck, with a castle which
belongs unto the same Bishop. Then Schwatz, where every year great store of
silver, as we said before, is dug out of the earth. Verona, etc. But that
(which we have not thought good to conceal) of Munster, is well worth the
reading. There is, says he, an hill called Nansberg, three miles from Trent,
extending it self twelve miles in length, and three in breadth; in which there
are three hundred and fifty Parish-Churches, two and thirty Castles, besides
Salt and many pleasant and sweet smelling fruits. In it all things do
abundantly grow, which are necessary for the maintenance of man's life. But of
this County see more at large in the same author. Ianus Pyrrhus Pincius of
Mantua, has learnedly and at large set forth the history of Trent in twelve
books.

Of GOERCZ, KARST, CHACZEOLA, CARNIOLA, HISTRIA, and WINDISKMARKE.
OF Windiskmarke, Istria, and Goerez, we must speak hereafter, and therefore
in this place we will sursease to say ought of them. Of Carnioll, Karst, and
Chaczeoll (to say the truth) I know not what to write. Something
notwithstanding, that otherwise than in the other, I do not deceive the
expectation of the Reader, that shall not be unpleasant unto those which do
admire the wonderful works of the Almighty, I will speak in this place.

There is a place in this Map, which the inhabitants call Czyrcknitzersee, of a
little town near unto it, called Czyrcknitz, Lazius says that Strabo calls
it the Mere of Lugey, it is situate in the province of Carnioll. This place (so
I call it; for whether I may more truly term it a lake, a park, or a field, I
know not) as the same Lazius has, every year yields corn, fishing and
hunting. But here I think it best first to set down his description out of
George Wernher a little more at large: It is enclosed, says he, on every side
with mountains, and is in length about a mile and a half, but in breadth
somewhat less. In many places it is eighteen cubits deep, and where his
depth is least, it is equal unto the full height of a tall man. Out of the
hills round about on every side certain small brooks do run, each from his
several channel; from the East coast three; from the South, four. Every one
of these the farther they run, the less water they contain; for the earth
so continually soaketh it up, that at last it is wholly consumed by certain
stony ditches, so framed by nature, as they do seem to have been made and
cut out by the art and industry of man. Lazius thinks them to be certain
signs and arguments of the sailing of the Argonautes under the earth. Here
the waters do so mightily swell, that by no means they may be received:
whereupon it comes to pass, that the ditches do in such manner swell back
again, that neither they only do not receive the water, but also what they
have received, they power back again so exceeding swiftly, that a nimble
horseman by running shall hardly be able to avoid the violence of the stream.
Therefore which way soever the waters shall find any way out, they issue forth
and spread themselves so broad, that they make a great lake. These waters do
return almost as swiftly as they came, yet not by those ditches only; but the
ground every where almost does so receive them, as if they were powered through a
sieue. This when the inhabitants do perceive will come to pass, they by and by
stopping the greater passages to the uttermost they may, they run thither to
fish by great troops: which is not only a pleasant passe-time to them, but also
is very gainful and profitable. For these fishes being salted, are carried out
in great plenty unto the neighbour-regions round about. Then the lake being
dried, succeeds an harvest, on that part where the soil is sown; and the
same is sown again before the next flood It is so fertile of grass, that
every twenty days it may be mowen. Who is it, that which here does not admire
the wonderful works of sporting nature?

map of Tryol, Austria and Italy Rhetiae alpestris decriptio, in qua hodie
TIROLIS COMITATVS.

Ex tabula Wolfgangi Lazij. quam Joan Mayor Viennensis aedidit.
Cum Gratia et Priuilegio.

map of Slovenia and Northern Croatia GORITIAE, KARSTII, CHACZEOLAE, CARNIOLAE,
HISTRIAE, ET WINDORVM MARCHAE DESCRIP.
Haec tabula concinnata est ex corographijs. Wolfg. Lazij. cuiinsima Histriae
pars ex alterius descriptione addita est.



ITALY.
Italy the chief province of the world, as it has often changed the name
according to the alteration of times and states: for it was called Enotria,
Ausonia, Hesperia, Saturnia. etc. so also his bounds and borders are diversely
described by diverse authors: notwithstanding in later ages it is thus bounded.
First, by the river Varus; then by a straight passing by Alps Coctiae, now
called Monte Genebrae; by Mount Adula, or S. Gothardes hill; the Alps of
Rhetia or Monte Braulis, and hills adjoining; then by the river Arsia the
utmost border of Istria: thus it is bounded upon one side, the other sides do
abut upon the sea. Ptolemey describes it in the form of an Isthmos or
Peninsula, which the sea incloseth on three sides, the other is walled by the
Alps. The ancient writers do liken it unto an Oke-leafe: the latter do set
it out not without great resemblance in the proportion and shape of a man's
leg from the hippe unto the sole of the foot. Italy has the mountain
Apennine as it were a ridge or back passing along from one end of it to the
other, like as we see in fishes the ridge bone to run along from the head
unto the tail. This mountain, which arises out of the Alps, where they
decline from the lower or Mediterranean sea, when as almost with a straight
course, nere Ancona, it tends toward the Higher or Adriatique sea, and there
seems to end; yet from thence again declining from that sea, it passes
through the midst of Italy toward the Brutij (now Calabria inferiore) and the
Sicilian straights. Elian affirms that in times past there were in this
country 1197. cities. Guido a Priest of Rauenna, out of Iginus, which six
hunnred years since wrote of the cities of Italy, writes that in his time
there were but seven hundred only. Blondus divides Italy into 18. provinces;
Leander, into 19. and their names are these:

The old. The new. LIGVRIA Riuiera de Genua. ETRVRIA Toscana. VMBRIA Ducato di
Spoleto. LATIVM Campagna di Roma. CAMPANIA FELIX Terra di Lauoro. LVCANIA
Basilicata. BRVTII Calabria inferiore. MAGNA GRAECIA Calabria superiore.
SALENTINI Terra d' Otranto. APVLIA PEVCETIA Terra di Barri. APVLIA DAVNIA
Puglia Piana. SAMNITES Abruzzo. PICENVM Marca Anconitana. FLAMINIA Romagna.
AEMILIA Lombardia di qua dal Po. GALLIA TRANSPADANA Lombardia di la dal Po.
VENETI Marca Treuigiana. FORVM IVLII Friuli, and Patria. HISTRIA Istria.

Pliny, according to the opinion of Varro, makes the lake Cutilius, in the
territory of Reatino, to be the center of all Italy. Near unto this lake is
the territory of Rosella (called of Virgill, Rosaea rura velini; Velino's
fields bedecked with roses sweet) of all Italy the most fertile: which
fertility was such, as Varro witnesses, that a rod being left in it over
night, the next day it might not be seen for grass; and therefore it is
called Sumen Italiae, The sweet bread of Italy. In former ages they have
reported, that the plain of Stellate was the goodliest and best soil of all
Italy; but now, as Blondus says, the places about Bonony and Mutina do far
surpass the rest. Sabellicus, according to the common report of the common
people, attributes these epithets unto the chief cities of Italy: Venice the
rich, Millane the great, Genua the proud, Florence the fair, Bonony the
fertile, Rauenna the old, Rome the holy, and Naples the noble. But the
commendation of this country, set out by Pliny, with as great a majesty of
words, as that country does excel the rest of the countries of the world, I
cannot but I must needs, before I pass from it, set down in this place by way
of digression; for so he speaks of it in his third book and fifth chapter:
ITALY the nurse and mother of all nations, chosen by the providence of God, to
add a luster to the very heavens themselves, to unite dispersed kingdoms, to
temper and mollify their rude and uncivil manners, to draw the dissonant,
barbarous and savage languages of so many diverse people, by the intercourse of
one refined speech to a conference and parley, to teach civility to men, and
briefly to make this one a common country for all the nations of the world.
But what shall I say more? Such is the excellency of all places, that any man
shall come unto, such is the majesty of all things, and of all people which do
possess it. The city of Rome, which in it seems only to excel, and to be a
worthy face for so glorious a neck, with what words or eloquence may I
express it! How beautiful is the countenance of Campania by it self! how
great and many are the glorious pleasures and delights of the same! That it is
manifest that in this one place nature has showed all her skill in a work
wherein she meant especially to delight. And now indeed such is the vital and
continual holsomnesse of the temperate air, such fertile plains and champian
grounds, such sunny banks, such harmless forests, such cool and shady groves,
such fruitful and bountiful kinds of woods, such fertility of corn, vines
annd olives, such goodly flocks of sheep, such fat beeues, so many lakes, such
store of rivers and fountains every where watering and bedrenching it, so many
seas, havens or ports as it were bosoms of the land every where open and ready
to entertain and receive the traffic of all lands, and it self running into
the sea as it were willingly offering it self and earnestly desiring to help
and succor mortal men distressed in the same. I do omit to speak of the
fine wits, natures and manners of the people of the same, as also of the
several nations overcome by it partly by valor, and partly by humanity. The
Graecians themselves, a nation exceeding prodigal of their own praise and
glory, have judged so of it, calling a great part of it Magna Graecia, Great
Greece.

Of the ancient writers Caius Sempronius, Marcus Cato, Polybius in his second
book, but most exactly Strabo, as he does all things else, have described this
country. Of the latter historiographers, Blondus, Johannes Annius Viterbiensis
in his commentaries upon Berosus, and other authors imprinted together with
him. Pontanus in his first book of the famous acts of King Alphonsus,
Volaterrane, Sabellicus, Bernardus Saccus, and Dominicus Niger, but most
exactly Leander, Gaudentius Merula has most excellently described Gallia
Cisalpina, which indeed is not the least part of Italy.

map of Italy ITALIAE NOVISSIMA DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE IACOBO CASTALDO PEDEMONTANO.


FORVM IVLII, FORVLY, or FRIVLY.
THe original of the name of Forum Iulij, Leander says, diverse writers have
diversely sought and censured. Some do think it so called of Julius Caesar.
Blondus seems to affirm it to have took his name of the city Forum Iulij.
Antiquities do testify that this region has been called Aquilegia, of
Aquilegium his chief or metropolitan city. Lastly, it is certain that it is
called Patria of the Venetians: which name as yet also it reteineth to this
day. Blondus says, that it was long since called Liburnia: but from whence,
when, or for what cause it was so called, he shows not. The first that had
here ought to do, were the Euganei, Veneti, Troiani, Galli; and after those,
the Romans: under whom it did continually persist, so long as the fortune and
majesty of the Roman Empire did stand sound and whole: which at last
declining, it came into the hands and jurisdiction of the barbarous nations
which oppressed Italy, especially the Lombards, and so remained unto the time
of Charles the great. After that, the government thereof was in the power of
the Patriarch of Aquileia, until at length the Venetians (desirous to enlarge
their territories on this side) reduced it wholly under their jurisdiction, who
at this day possess it.

The situation of the region is thus: It begins from a plain abbuttant upon
the sea, and so by a little and little increasing, first it rises up in little
hills, and then into very high mountains, which almost on every side so
enclose his borders, that this plain environed about with the tops of
mountains as with a wall, shows like a Theater, it is open but at one narrow
straight, by the which, as by a gate, ferrying over the river Sontio from
Taruisio, it may only be entered. The other borders of it, the Alps on every
side do limit: and therefore not to be come unto but by the seaports or
valleys of the mountains, or else over their tops. It has upon the seacoasts
very many havens. In this most goodly country are large champians watered with
many pleasant streams, and those fields exceeding fertile: for it abounds
with vines, yielding a kind of wine, which Pliny reckons and commends for
the best, and calls it Vinum Pucinum, of the place. The mountains of this
country are very rich almost of all sorts of metals; to wit, of Iron, Lead,
Tin, Brass, Quicke-siluer, Silver and Gold. They have also Marble, white,
black, and party-colored: Precious stones; as Carneols, Berylls, etc. and
crystal. Here are all sorts of fruits, and apples of a most excellent taste:
Woods both for fuel, timber, and hunting, most stately: pleasant and
beautiful meddowes, and pastures most excellent pasturage for cattle. The
air is temperate. The fields of themselves do abound with all things
necessary for the use of man, as also for pleasure and delight. The people of
this country are most apt not only unto all arts and liberal sciences, but
also for all merchandise and such other trades of life. The most famous cities
in it are Aquileya, adorned with the title of a Patriarchy. This city Mela
names, The rich: In times past it was the seat of the Emperors, and therefore
it was called, Another Rome, and was in compass twelve miles. In it there have
been accounted long since an hundred and twenty thousand citizens. The great
prosperity and flourishing estate of this city, especially grew by the great
thronging hither of Merchants; for that from all quarters almost of the world,
by reason of the great commodiousnesse of the place, easy and safe entrance
unto it as well by land as by sea, merchandise were conveyed to this city as to
a common warehouse. That great trade of merchandise ended together with the
fortune of the city, the Venetians growing mighty, and drawing unto
themselves all means of trade and traffic: so that now of a most flourishing
and populous city, it is almost wast and desert. Vtina, which also is called
Vtinum (the Italians vulgarly call it, Vdene; the Dutch Weyden) situate in a
plain, has a strong castle built upon the top of an hill, raised by the
labor and industry of man, containing at this day forty furlongs in
compass. Tergeste Trieste upon the sea shore, a colonie of the Romans.
Goritia, sometime (if I be not deceived) called Noreia. Here are many monuments
of great antiquity to this day remaining. The city Austria (many think it in
old time to have been called Forum Iulij) situate in the straights of the
mountains, is a place strong and fortified by nature. Through the midst of it
does run the river Natiso, upon the which is a fair stone bridge. S. Daniels
town seated upon a very high and steep hill. Porto Gruaro, upon the South
bank of Limine. Then Spilimbergo, Marano, Montfalcone, and others, of which
thou may read in Leander, out of whom we have drawn this brief
description. Johannes Candidus has written an history of Aquileia, whose
copartener in his labor and travel Leander writes to have been Gregorius
Amasaeus. Of the monuments and antiquities of Aquileia, Sabellicus has written
six books which are every where to be gotten.

map of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy FORI IVLII ACCVRATA DESCRIPTIO. Cum
Priuilegio.

Ex Bibliotheca Nobilis et doctissimi Ioannis Sambuci, Imperatoriae Mats.
Historici. 1573.

IVLIAE ALPS,

IAPIDES, ET CARNI.



The liberties of the city of VERONA.
THe city of the Cenomanes, situate in Gallia Cisalpina, or as now they call
it, Lombardie, is within the jurisdiction of the Venetians; a city most
stately built upon each bank of the river Adese, but conjoined by four fair
bridges. The same river as it does divide it into two parts, so it does almost
on every side enclose it round: so that it is not only a commodity unto the
city, but also a defense and ornament unto the same. The soil of this tract
is excellent good, yielding many things necessary and profitable unto it; Great
store of oil and corn, yielding yearly great gains unto the country people
by selling and transporting it to foreign nations; Woll for finenesse excelling
the other sorts of Italy. The city is most excellently and pleasantly seated,
beautified with fair and goodly buildings, as well private as public. It has
many famous monuments of antiquity worth the regarding: amongst the which is
the Amphitheater, which the common sort call Arena, The sand; of all those
which remain in Italy or in other places of Europe, the whollest and least
defaced either by injury of times, or rage of barbarous nations. Moreover, a
triumphall arche, in whose inscription this city is termed COLONIA AUGUSTA
VERONA NOVA GALLIENIANA. There are also other monuments, which here for
brevity sake we must omit.

The liberties or ground belonging to this city is in length, from the little
town Baruchello, unto Riua (which is on the farther side of Lago de Garda)
sixty five miles: in breadth, which begins at La torre delle confine, unto
Riuoltella, forty miles: and contains in all 1443378. fields (so the common
people of Italy call the measure whereby they measure their lands, Seardeonius
interprets it Akers) whereof 1223112. are fertile, 220266 are barren: which
notwithstanding daily (by the industry and diligence of the husbandmen) are
made more fruitful.

There is in this tract a very high mountain (the Map places it between
Lago de Gardo and the river Adese) which they call Baldo. This hill is very
well known to Herborists and Apothecaries, which flock hither from all
quarters, and do gather many kinds of herbs and roots necessary in Physic,
and good and wholesome for the use of man.

There is also here in a certain vale called Policella, a place named
Negarina: where there is a very hard stone to be seen, having upon it teats
carved to the just fashion and proportion of a woman's breasts; out of the which
pappes water does continually distill and drop; wherewith if a nurse or a
woman giving suck do wash her breasts dried up by sickness or any other
mischance, it presently draws down the milk again. There are also other
waters of this country, given by the benefit of nature, both pleasant and
profitable. But the studious Reader desirous to know more of this territory,
let him read Blondus and Leander, he shall be, I dare boldly affirm,
satisfied at the full. Torellus Sarayna has written a whole book of the
antiquities, original, government and policy and famous men of the city of
Verona. Georgius Iodocus Bergamus has described Lago de Garda or Benacke lake
in verse in five books. Julius Caesar Scaliger has sounded forth the praise of
the city Verona and the lake Benacke in his funeral oration.

map of Veneto, Italy VERONAE VRBIS TERRITORIVM, a Bernardo Brognolo descriptum.
1579. Cum Priuilegio. decannali



The Duchy of MILLANE.
LEander in the description of Italy, (after a long discourse of the
government of this Duchy) makes this relation of Millane his chief city:
The city Millane, says he, is so conveniently seated, that besides the great
store of fruit which the ground of his territories do yield, out of Gallia
Cisalpina or Lombardie, all things, as well for pleasure and delight as for
profit and necessary use in man's life, may be easily transported thither. It
is so great, that it may well compare with the greatest cities of all Europe.
It has very long and large suburbs, by which it is greatly augmented some of
them so huge, that they may contend for bigness with other great cities of
Italy. Notwithstanding of late years they suffered great wrecke, by reason of
the mortal wars and continual troubles between Charles the fifth and the
French and Venetians. By which they were by fire and sword almost utterly
overthrown and destroyed, although now by great diligence and industry of the
citizens they are reedified again. Wide and deep diches full of water do
compass both the city and suburbs: by which on every side by boat and barge
such great store of provision is brought unto it, that there is not any thing
here which is not to be bought at a reasonable rate. It is very admirable in
my conceit, to record the great abundance and plenty of all things necessary
for the use of man. So many there are and such diverse sorts of Artificers
here, and so great a concourse, as is wonderful and may scarcely be told:
whereupon that common byword of the vulgar sort did arise, He that would
repair all Italy, must first pull down Millane: to wit, that by this means
out of his holes and nests the swarms of Artificers might be dispearsed into
all quarters of Italy. The city has very stately and beautiful buildings:
especially the gorgeous and sumptuous edifice, which they call The house,
reered with infinite charge, and such wonderful workmanship, that there is
but a very few Churches of the whole world that may be compared, unto it,
whether you respect the huge greatness, and ingenious Architecture, or the
price of the Marble and rare work of the same: for that not only every way
within and without it is beautifully trimmed and pargetted over with white
marble, but also it is bedecked with a wonderful imagery, wrought in Marble
with exceeding cunning. Beside very many famous Churches and Chapels
especially Grace church, and Praechers church, situate over against the most
strong Castle of Porta Iouia: having an Hemisphere made by Lewis Sfortia the
Duke of Millane: underneath the which he together with his wife lie buried,
enclosed in a tomb of the best marble. To this Church is adjoined the stately
Abbey of the Friars Predicant, with a goodly Library and a very fair Chamber
or Hall trimmed about with the story of the supper of Christ and his Apostles,
an admirable piece of work, done by the hand of Leonardo Vincio a Florentine
sufficiently approving the great skill and cunning of the ingenious workman,
by the judgment of all men experienced in the Art of painting. There are very
many gorgeous houses of private citizens every where to be seen within the
city. The Castle of Porta Iouia, is the strongest and best contrived
fortification in all Christendom, which hitherto could never be surprised and
forcibly taken by any enemy. There are besides these very many excellent
buildings in Millane, which here I must pass over with silence. Thus far
Leander, who does excellently describe the rest of the towns and places of his
territories of this city. See also Volateran in his Geography, Georgius
Merula, Bernard Arlun, and Bonauenture Castillion, who has written a several
Treatise of the Insubres, of their ancients seats and antiquities. Moreover
Bernardine Corius has written the Millane history in the Italian tongue.
Laonicus Chalcocondylas also speaks something of the happy estate of this
city, and amongst other things he does excellently describe and set out the
fable of the Dragon, which made this city desolate in the time of the
Mariangeli, from whence the arms and cognizance of this city were devised, as
is very likely. But it will not be amiss to adioine to these the opinion of
Procopius, who writes that this city does surpass the city of Rome in
greatness, multitude of citizens, and other great blessings of God.

Liguria also, which in this Chart is wholly described, is bounded with the
rivers Varo and Magra, the Apenine mountains and the Ligusticke sea, (a branch
of the Mediterranean sea) now called Leonino. This now they call Riuiera di
Genoa, of Genua his chief city. This city long since had enlarged his
dominion unto Tanais: for it had Theodosia (now called Caffa) under his
subjection: as also the Isles of Cyprus, Lesbos, and Chios, with Pera the city
of Thrace. At this day it has the command of all Liguria and the Island
Corsica. It is a famous Mart town, whose most valiant and stout citizens have
gotten to themselves, by merchandise and traffic almost into all parts of the
world an honorable name and renown together with great riches and large
possessions. Austen Justinian Bishop of Nebia has most curiously compiled in
the mother tongue the history of Genua: which also very lately Petro Pizaro,
and Herberto Folietta have done in the Latin tongue. Moreover Francis Petrarch
has written something of this City in his holy Iournall and Laonicus in his
5. Book.

map of the Duchy of Milan, Italy DVCATVS MEDIOLANENSIS, FINITIMARVMQUE
REGIONV^ DE SCRIPTIO, AVCTORE IOANNE GEORGIO SEPTALLA MEDIOLANENSE.
Cum priuilegio.



The liberties of CREMONA.
THat this city is very ancient, all men may see by that saying of Virgil,
Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae. O Mantua great thou sitt'st too
near unto Cremona poor. Yet Liuy and others do report it to have been
reduced to a Colonie of the Romans long before that time, to wit, about the
year 536. after the building of Rome. This city is placed in Gallia Cisalpina
(now called Lombardie) amongst the Cenomans, as Ptolomey records, or in the
tenth province of Italy, as Pliny affirms, upon the bank of the river Po.
The soil of his liberties is Champion ground, very fertile of all manner of
grain, as also of wine: other things which are necessarily required for the
preservation of man's life, are plentifully conveyed thither by the benefit of
the stream. It has endured many bitter storms of fortune having ben often
sacked and spoiled: First, in those furious wars of Mark Antonie, when as
the territories of this city, Augustus Caesar being victor, were given unto
the soldiers. Then again in the time of Vitellius, after the battle at
Bebriacke, 40000. soldiers assaulted and sacked it: the company of
freebooters, swaggerers, and base slaves was such, as Tacitus affirms that
they regarded nothing whether it were profane or holy all was fish that came to
net. Only Mephitis templum standing without the walls, was untouched, whether
by Gods providence or strength of the place I know not. Again it was spoiled
by the tyranous and roguish Goths and Vandalls, then by the barbarous Lombards
about the year after Christ 630. Moreover it abode the violent assault of
Frederick surnamed Aenobarbe, or Barbarosso, who beat down his walls, and
laid them level with the ground. After this the Civil wars between the
Guelfs and Gibellines especially raged here; in the year, 1312. Lastly, under
the government of the vicounts of Millane, and tha^ under his Duks, it began
again by little and little to sprout up and recover it self. Under these
hitherto it has prosperously and peaceably enioied the estate of a flourishing
commonweal. This city has a castle, above all other in Italy, most strong
and fearful to the enemy. Here is also a turret of a wonderful height, far
exceeding all the rest of this Country: whereupon it is famous in this their
common byword and rhyme which they use, Vno Petro in Roma, vno portu in Ancona,
vna turre in Cremona. One Peter in Rome, one haven in Ancone, and one turret in
Cremone. Lewis Cauitellius an Aldermans son did lately set forth the
histories of this city. The author of this same map has put forth a book of
the antiquities and worthy acts of the same.

The Jurisdiction or liberties of the City CREMA.
CRema a town in the confines of Millane, is a Castle and place of garrison of
the Venetians. This, as Leander affirms, under the government of the same
Venetians; has so incresed in multitude of citizens, and goodly buildings,
that it may well be accounted amongst the most famous places of all Italy.
Wherefore they use to say in a common proverb, in their vulgar tongue, Barleta
in Puglia, Pratum in Toscana, Crema in Lombardia: signifying the excellency,
stateliness, and richesse of these three places. The Venetians have often
assaied to adorn the town with the title of a city: but the citizens, fearing
that whereas now it is accounted amongst the best towns, it shall then be
reckoned amongst the meanest cities, have hitherto withstood that their
purpose. It is seated in a pleasant plain, in compass large and wide,
fortified with a strong wall, famous for wealth, very populous, and abounding
with all things necessary: for the soil of the territory and liberties of
this town is very fertile, and yet by the great diligence and industry of the
husbandmen, it is daily bettered and amended. Many brooks, well stored with
diverse sorts of fish, do every where water this province. Blondus writes, that
after that Frederick Barbarossa had spoiled Cremona, he built Crema in
scorn, to hinder and disgrace it. There are others, as Leander witnesses,
which do think it to have been built by the citizens of the city Parasium,
which was overthrown and rased to the ground by the Bishop of Millane, for
heresy which it maintained: and therefore they called it Crema, in memoriam
Crematae patriae, in memorial of their native city burned and spoiled. But
this I leave to the judgment of the discreet Reader.

map of Cremona, Italy AGRI CREMONENSIS TYPVS.
Antonius Campus pictor Cremonensis descripsit, 1579.
Cum Priuilegio.



map of Crema, Italy CREMAE DITIONIS DESCRIPTIO.
Lectori Ne tabula hoc loco omnino vacua extaret, hoc Cremae territorium a
quodam patriae studioso descriptum hic studiosis exhibere placuit.



The liberties of BRESCIA.
THe liberties of Brescia now possesses part of that coast where in time
passed the Cenomanes dwelt: and extends it self in length 800. furlongs, or
100. miles; in breadth 400. furlongs, or 50. miles, as Elias Capriolus
affirms: it is situate between the lakes Garda and Iseo: the Alps and the
river Oglio. These fields, as John Planer writes, are worthily accounted
amongst the most delightsome champions of Lombardie. For it has, as Baptist
Nazario says, Gold, Silver, Brass, Lead, Iron, Alume, Marble, both Porphyrie
and Serpentine, as they call it, barley colored with black and green, Pliny
calls it Ophites; and other stones of great price; as also the Marchasite,
which aunciently has been called Pyrites, or The fire stone.

The city Brixia, whereof this territory took his name; as yet reteineth the
same his ancient name: for the inhabitants do call it Brescia, the which for
his riches and beauty they term in that common proverb of theirs, The Bride
of the city of Venice. There is not any of the old writers, either Historians
or Geographers, which do not make mention of this city. Trogus Pompeius writes
that it was built by the Galli Senones. Liuy says, that it is the chief city
of the Cenomanes. Pliny in his Epistles of this writes thus unto Iunius
Mauricus, Brixia is that city which constantly retains as yet much of that
grave modesty and old frugalitie of our ancient Italians. It has been graced
with the title of a Duchy, for so I find written in Diaconus his 5. book of
Lombardie in the 36. Chapter. But because that none of the late writers, (that
I may say naught of the more ancient) have described this city more learnedly
and eloquently, than Pighius in his Hercules Prodicius, thou shall hear him
speak in his own terms. Brescia which is seated at the foot of the
mountains, may contend with most of the cities of Italy, for antiquity and
stateliness of buildings, Julius Caesar Scaliger, a famous Poet of our age,
has thus described it in this Epigramme; Thou Brixia great which proudly
ouerlook'st the boornes and lowly plain, by due desert now justly may the
sovereign Empire claim. Thy healthful seat, thy pleasant fertile soil, thy
people wise and nation stout, If civil discord had not crosst, long since had
brought about, That where long time thou have been thrall, and stoop'st to
others lore; Thou might have lorded over those, to whom thou serud'st
before. For this City by reason of civil discord and dissension, being
subdued under the yoke of the French and their next neighbors the Insubres, or
the Millaners, has endured much misery: yet now at length, under the
peaceable government of the Venetians, it is grown very wealthy, a great
market well furnished with all things necessary, very populous and inhabited of
a wise and discreet nation. The shire is very fertile of oil, wine, corn, and
most excellent fruits of all sorts. It has also some rich veins of Mettalls,
but especially of Iron and Copper; whereof arises to this city great gain
and commodity. Liuie and other good authors report, That Brescia was built by
the Galli Cenomanes, about the time of the Roman kings, which afterward the
Romans, having subdued all that part of the country of the Gauls which lies
beyond the river Po, reduced under their jurisdiction. It is apparent out of
Liuie, how firm it sometimes stood with the Romans, especially in those most
dangerous wars between them and Hanniball. Some would have it to have been
made a Colonie present after the end of the League-warre, when as Cneius
Pompeius Strabo, the father of Pompey the great, planted colonies in Verona and
other cities beyond the river Po. Not long after, by the favor of C. Caesar,
it together with other cities there about, obtained the freedom of the city of
Rome, and after that it is wonderful how it flourished under the Roman
Emperors, so long as the greatness of that Empire stood unshaken: This,
diverse monuments of Antiquity, which as yet remain in this city and in the
liberties of the same: as namely many goodly inscriptions of marble, statues,
pillars, and Epitaphes of famous men, do constantly auerre, by which the former
greatness of this city may easily be gathered. Thus far Pighius.

Baptista Nazario wrote a several Treatise of this city, in the which he
sets down all the inscriptions of the ancient monuments of this country.
Helias Capriolus has comprised the whole history of this city in 12. books.
Gaudentius Merula, in his tract of the original and antiquity of the
Cisalpines, speaks somewhat of it, as also Chrysostomus Zanchus, writing of
the original of the Orobij and Cenomanes, likewise Leander Albertus and lately
Andrete Paccius in his sixth book of the Wines of Italy. There is in this
province a town called Quintianum, 20. miles south-eastward from Brescia,
near to the river Ollio, of the which John Planer a citizen of the same wrote
a small Treatise, who in an Epistle of his to Paullus Manutius, does highly
commend it both for learning and chivalry. Whether this be that Quintianum, of
which Optatus after speaks, I leave to the learned to determine.

The river Mela or Mella; of which Virgil makes mention, does run through
the midst of this shire; as also Catullus in this verse affirms, Brixia
Cygnaea positus in specula, Flauus quam molli percurrit flumine Mella. Old
Brixia placed amidde the brooks, as guardian of the Swans, The river Mella
kindly greet'th, and waters all his lands. This river retains the name of
Mella unto this day. Notwithstanding it runs not by it now, as you may see,
although not far off from thence it passes through his liberties. The little
river which runs along by the city, is now called Garza: but I think that
in old time it was also called Mella. And I think I may truly affirm, that
the river Mella, when it approaches near unto the city, spreads it self
into two channells, both of them retaining the same name, do make a
riuer-iland, (like as Nilus makes Heracleopolites,) and then again falling
into one stream still keep the name of Mella, and having so, heavily laden,
run for many miles together, at length it vnladeth it self into the river
Ollio.

But before I finish the discourse of this Map, I have thought good to say
somewhat of the Lakes of the same. The lake Benacus (called of the poet
Catullus, Lydius) Capriolus thinks to have been so named of the city Benaco,
sometime seated upon his brinke, a mention of which to this day remains still
in a village called Toscolano, which thou see upon his west side, standing
upon a brook of the same name. A memorial of this city is preserved in an
ancient monument, whose inscription Manutius sets down in his
Orthographie. This lake is now called Garda, of the castle Garda placed
opposite unto Benaco upon his east bank. This lake, as Alexius Vgonius writes
in a letter of his to Cardinal Poole, abounds with store of fish, which for
goodness do far surpass all others. It is enclosed on every side with most
pleasant hills: into it from all quarters the clear fountains flow. Goodly
meddowes, vines, olives, beeches, laurel, and cedars; besides towns,
furnished with all manner of necessary provision, like a crown beset it round
on every side: so that nothing at all of those things may further be desired,
which may make a champion country either beautiful to the eye, or commendable
for profit and commodities etc. While I was writing of this, there came into my
mind what speech I once had of this lake, with that most learned good man
Benedictus Arias Montanus, (for we both had seen the same, although not at the
same time) in which we both did protest either to other, that we never in all
our lives had seen a place either more pleasant for situation, or more
delightsome to the eye, so that it was no marvel that Catullus did so highly
commend in his Epigrammes, that his Sirmion, and the waters of this lake. The
other lake in this Cart is Sebinus or Seuinnus (for Pliny uses both) made by
the river Ollio. This now they call Iseo, of a town of the same name situate
upon his bank. There is also another lake which they call Idro; by what name
it was called of the ancients, or whether by any, I do not certainly know. I
know, that a certain learned man does hold it to be Brigantinus Lacus, whereof
Pliny speaks; but why I am not of his opinion, I have showed reasons in my
Geographicall treasure.

map of Brescia, Italy Bresciano BRIXIANI AGRI TYPVS. Brixia, Cygnaea supposita
in specula.
Cum priuilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Belgico. 1590.

Milliaria Italica december



The Dukedom of PIEMONT.
THat province which was formerly called Taurinorum regio, is now termed
Piemont or Pedemont, for that it is seated at the bottom of the Alps, which
do divide France and Sauoy from Italy, and so is as one would say, The
province at the foot of the hills. The bounds of this country are thus: on the
East, the river Po: on the South, the Alps of Liguria: upon the West, the
Alps of France: on the North, Riuiera di Duria: It has many goodly fields
full of pleasant and fruitful hills, which yield corn and other sorts of
grain, excellent wines and fruit great store. It is well replenished with
Cities, Towns, and Villages.

Under the government of the Lombardes it was called, The Dukedom of Taurine,
(so named of the city Taurin.) By them it was first reduced into the form of a
province, under the jurisdiction of a Duke. The government of the Lombardes
being come unto a period, it was made subject to the Kings of Italy, who were
always chosen by the Emperors: after that it was governed by diverse Petie
Kings: and long since, in later ages it was accounted as part of the
jurisdiction of the Princes, Earls, and Dukes of Sauoy, until the year 1536.
when as Francis the first King of France took a great part of it: and now it
is again restored to the Duke of Sauoy. The chief city of this Province is
Turin, seated at the mouth of the river Dorra, where it falls into Po. This
city Ptolemey, Pliny and Tacitus call Augusta Taurinorum. That this city in
old time was a very famous city, it may easily appear, in that it was a
colonie of the Romans. It lies at the foot of the mountains, it is four
square, and has four goodly gates. It is very famous for the rich Isle and
state of the citizens, and is adorned with many goodly buildings, amongst the
which the Cathedral Church is most beautiful. It has an University of all
manner of goodly learning: and is very well served with all sorts of provision
of victual. The country is of a very good and fertile soil, especially
toward the East and South, having Valleys most rich for veins of Iron. Paulus
Diaconus affirms that Taurin was the seat of the Lombardes: unto whom it was
subject until Desiderius their king was overcome and taken by Charles the
Great: and then it was brought under the subjection of the Kings of Italy,
Emperors, Countes, Montferrate and Marchions, and Dukes of Sauoy; to whom at
this time it is obedient. Near the head of the river Po toward Ripell (or C.
de Revel) and Paisana, are quarries of most excellent Marble.

Upon the North side of the fountain of the river Po, begins a certain
pleasant valley called the Vale of Po, or (as the inhabitants term it) the
Vale of Luserna, of the town Luserna which stands in it. It runs out in
length thirty miles, and is not above four miles broad. In the entrance of
his Eastend, is Mambrinum; in the end toward the West is a very high stone
cross. The people of this place are commonly called, The Christians, but in
some manners and customs which they use, they scarce follow the strickt rules
of Christianity: nay they do observe most ungodly and wicked rites and
ceremonies: amongst which this is one; That once in a month they observe one
day, in the which all meeting in a Church, after a collation made by their
filthy and wicked Superintendent, at night, the Candles being put out; without
any choice or regard, they fall like brute beasts unto their beastly Venerie.
This we have taken out of Leander, where thou may read, if thou please,
many other such like things. Dominicus Niger also has written of this Country.

Paradine in his description of Sauoy writes, That the Dukedom of Piemont
does contain in it, beside goodly Cities, great and populous (which are in
number five) more then fifty Towns well fortified and beautiful; and also
two hundred Borrowes, walled and fenced with Fortresses and Castles. And that
it has Earls, Marquesses, Barons, and other sorts of Nobility, all subject
to the Duke of Sauoy.

Thou see also in this Chart the description of Montferrate, which at this
day is under the dominion of the Dukes of Mantua: of the which Blondus thus
writes: At the river Taner the famous County of Montferrate begins, whose
bounds are the river Po, on this side: and the Mount Appennine, on that side:
the river Taner from his fountain unto his mouth where it falls into Po, and
on his upper side the hills next to Moncalerio, where Piemont begins. The
province of Montferrate is almost wholly subject unto the Marchions, the most
noble house of Italy, descended from the Constantinopolitane Emperors, which
have held that tract these 150. years. Thus far Blondus. Merula also in his
sixth book of his history of Vicounts, has written something of this Country.

map of Piedmont, Italy PEDEMONTANAE VICINORVMQVE REGIONVM AVCTORE IACOBO
CASTALDO DESCRIP.
Cum priuilegio.



The Liberties of PADVA.
THe territories of Padua (which is a part of the Marquesate of Treuiso) in old
time was more large, now it is contained within these bounds: On his South side
runs the river Athesis, (now called Ladessa:) on the North, coasteth the
little river Muson: upon the East, lies the gulf of Venice: upon the West,
are Montes Euganei, and the province of Vincenza. Whereupon this verse was
engraven in the ancient seal of the City, Muso, mons, Athesis, mare, certos
dant mihi fines. The Mose, the Hills, Ladessa and the sea enclose me round.

It is in compass 180. miles. In it are 347. villages and hamlets. Unto the
court leet of Padua now do belong these seven goodly towns, Montiniano, Castro
Baldo, Atheste, Monselesse, Pieue di Sacho, Campo S. Piero and Citadella. As
also these six villages, Miran, Oriaco, Titulo and Liuiano, Arquado famous for
great Petrarchaes tomb, Consyluio, and Anguillaria. There are also in this
territory the mountains called Euganei, famoused by the poets; near unto
which is Abano a village seated upon the Spring Abano, often mentioned by
Claudian and Martial: Also Cassiodorus in his Epistles writes that
Theodoricus K. of the Goths gave order for the repairing of them. The
fertility of the soil of this province of the liberties of Padua is such,
that of those things which necessarily are required to the sustenance of man's
life, it yearly transporteth unto the neighbor cities and countries round
about great abundance, without any dearth or want to the inhabitants. Their
Wines are very rich, hunting, fowling and fishing here are very common. It is
so well watered with brooks and rivers, that (to the great gain and profit of
the inhabitants) there is no country village above five miles distant from a
river. This great plenty and abundance of all things, they brag of in this
their common proverb, saying; Bononia lagrassa, Padua la passa: that is, Padua
for fertility, does surpass rich Bononia. Thus far of the shire: now
something of the city, whereof that took his name. It is seated in a flat
every way crossed with pleasant rivers. The city is very strong, enclosed with
a broad deep water ditch, with high and thick walls, and is very populous.
It has a goodly large common without the city, wherein the enemy that will
besiege it, shall not find a place to shroud himself: A Session-house (the
Yield hall, we call it) most stately and sumptuous all covered over with lead:
An university most famous of all Europe, begun, as they report, by Charles
the Great, finished by Frederick the eleventh, in the year of our Lord 1222.
and forty years after that confirmed by Vrbane the fourth Bishop of Rome.
There is in this city an Orchard (which they call the Physicians Garden) in
form round and very large, planted with all manner of strange herbs usual in
Physic, for the instruction of young students in the knowledge of Herbs and
Plants; a singular and worthy work. Clothing is the chief trade of the
Citizens, a matter of 600000. pounds return yearly and more. This we have
taken out of Bernardino Scardeonio, who has written a whole volume of the
situation, liberties, antiquities, famous men, and things worthy of note of
this city: he that is desirous to see more of this, let him read him; and if he
please, to him he may adioine Leander his description of Italy. Of the fennie
places described upon the seacoast, thou may read Cassiodore his twelfth
book Variar. Dedicated unto the Admiral and Masters of the Navy.

Of the Liberties of TREVISO.
BLONDVS in his description of Italy, making The Marquesate of Treuiso, the
tenth province of Italy, in it places these famous cities, Feltre, Belluno,
Ceneda, Padua, Vicenza and Verona: the head of which he makes Treuiso, whereof
the whole province took his name. The goodly river Sile, which for clearenesse
and swiftness of his waters is inferior unto none, passes by this city,
running Eastward, about ten miles from the same, is nauigable, and falls into
the Adriaticke sea. Many little brooks run through the town, which is
compassed with a strong wall, and is very populous; it is beautified with many
stately buildings, both Churches, and private houses. The country adioining to
Treuiso is most pleasant and rich, yielding all manner of things necessary to
the use of man and beast: For in it is a very large plain, yielding not only
great store of all sorts of grain, and excellent wines, but also it has many
goodly pastures, feeding abundance of cattle. Neither are his mountains
altogether craggie and barren. But his lower hills are set with vines, olives,
and other fruit trees, and afford plenty of Dear, pastime for the hunter. In
this country are many fair Towns; For on the East and North sides of the same
are, Opitergium (now Oderzo, as I think) Coreglanum, (or Conegliano) both upon
the river Mottegan: Serraualle, Motta, Porto Buffole, and Sacile; these three
last are situate upon the river Liuenza. To these are to be added the County
of S. Saluador, Colalto, S. Paulo, Cordignan, Roca di val di Marino, Cesarea
(Cesana, I take it,) and Mel. On the West and South are Bassianum, (Bassan)
Asolo, Castrum fratrum (Castelfranco) Nouale, and Mestre. Moreover in it are
diverse End-waies, villages, and hamlets. But he that desires to understand
more of the situation, antiquities, famous men, and other matters worthy of
record of this province, let him have recourse to the most learned John
Boniface, who has a while since set forth a most exact and absolute history
of it. There is also extant a description of the country of Treuiso, done in
verse by John Pinadello, but as yet it is not imprinted. Thus far the Author
has discoursed upon this his Map: to which I trust I may with his good
liking add this out of Zachary Lilly his Breuiary of the world. TARVISIVM,
now Treuiso, a goodly city belonging to the Signiorie of Venice, (of which, of
all ancient writers, Pliny did first make mention,) brought forth Totilas, the
fifth and most famous king of the Goths; from whom it first began his
greatness, and to arise to that dignity that now it has obtained, that the
whole province of Venice should be called The Marquesate of Treuiso. For
Totilas gathering together a great army conquered all Italy, and entering the
city of Rome did sack and fire it. Certain have affirmed that the city
Treuiso was built by the Trojans, upon the fair river Sile, which falls into
the Adriaticke-sea. The city it self for walls, castle and water is very
strong; for bridges, private houses, and Churches, very beautiful; and for
diverse merchandise very famous. It has great store of corn, wine, oil, fish,
and fruits. The country has very many castles and villages: but worthy men
commended for Religion and wisdom, virtuous life and civil conversation, do
especially commend this city. Thus far out of Lilly.

map of Padua, Italy PATAVINI TERRITORII COROGRAPHIA, IAC. CASTALDO AVCT.

Milliaria.



map of Treviso, Italy TARVISINI AGRI TYPVS Auctore Io. Pinadello Phil. et I.
C. Taruisino.


The Lake of COMO, sometime called LACVS LARIVS.
LACVS LARIVS, (which now they call Lago di Como, of Como the ancient town
adioining unto it) took his name of the Fenducke, a bird which the Greeks
call Larus, and the Latins Fulica, of which it has great plenty. It runs
out from North to South in length forty miles; it is beset round with
Mountains, whose tops are covered with groves of Chesse-nut-trees: the
sides, with vines, and olives: the bottoms with woods, which afford great
store of Dear for game. Upon the brinke of the Lake, are many Castles seated:
amongst the which on the South side, is Como, a fair town, built by the Galli
Orobij, or as some think, by the Galli Cenomanes. Afterward Julius Caesar
placed a colonie there, amongst which were five hundred Grecian gentlemen, as
Strabo testifies: whereupon it was called Nouum Comum. It is seated in a most
pleasant place, that one would judge it a kind of Paradise or place only
sought out for pleasure and delight: for upon the fore-side it has the goodly
Lake, on the backe-side the champion plains well manured, and fertile of all
sorts of fruit: Unto which you may add the wholesome and sweet air. Of the
brazen statue long since taken out of this city, see Cassiod. 2. Variar. cap.
35. and 36. This town brought forth the two Plinies, men worthy of eternal
fame, in whose honor and memory, the citizens caused these Inscriptions to be
engraven in marble upon the front of S. Mary's Church, which we wrote out in
the year of CHRIST 1558. in our return from Italy.

Upon the right hand of the door.

THE STATE AND CITIZENS OF COMO HAVE GRACED C. PLINIVS SECVNDVS, THE MOST
WORTHY FREEMAN OF THEIR CORPORATION (A MAN OF A PREGNANT WIT, HONORABLE FOR
DIGNITIES, FOR LEARNING ADMIRABLE, WHO IN HIS LIFE TIME OBTAINED THE LOVE AND
FRIENDSHIP OF VESPASIAN THE EMPEROVR, BORE MANY GREAT OFFICES, EXCELLED ALL
VVRITERS OF HIS TIME IN ELOQVENCE AND VARIETY,) WITH THIS TITLE AND STATVE.
Such honor great and worthy fame me Pliny did adorn:
But much it grac'th me more what here is set.
Upon the left hand.

TO C. PLINIVS CAECILIVS SECVNDVS, THEIR VVEL-BELOVED CITIZEN, WHO HAVING BEEN
CONSVLL, AVGVR, AND BORNE ALL OFFICES IN THE VVARRES, A FAMOVS ORATOVR, POET
AND HISTORIOGRAPHER: MOST ELOQVENTLY WRITTEN OF THE WORTHY COMMENDATION OF
TRAIAN THE EMPEROVR: BESTOVVED MANY BOONES AND BOVNTEOVS FAVOVRS UPON HIS
NATIVE COUNTRY; GRACING THE SAME WITH ETERNAL CREDIT: THE STATE OF COMO FOR
THESE BENEFITS DID HERE PLACE THIS MONVMENT THE FIRST OF MAY, IN THE YEAR
1498. At home in peace, abroad in war, each office have I borne:
I lived, I di'd, and still I live as yet.
But why may I not to these adioine the words of the same Pliny, in his second
book unto Caninius, writing thus? Do thou study? or do thou angle? or
jointly do thou both? For the Lake affoordeth store of Fish; the woods
plenty of Dear: the priuatenesse of the place does give great occasion of
study. The same author, in his 4. Epistle unto Licinus Sura, has a story of
a certain strange spring not far off from this Lake. Paulus Iouius has most
excellently described this Lake in a several Treatise, out of the which we
have drawn this our Map befitting our purpose. Moreover Cassiodorus, in his
eleventh book of Varieties unto Gaudiosus, has most exactly painted out the
same. Benedictus Iouius and Thomas Porcacchius have written the histories of
Como. Read also Leander in his Italia, and Dominicus Niger in his Geographie.

The territories and liberties of the City of ROME.
OF the city of Rome, (sometime the Empress of the world, and Liberties of the
same, because this place cannot bear so large a description as his worth does
deserve, and for that it is better to say nothing at all of it, then to say
little, I think it best only to reckon up those famous authors which have
written of it at large, and to refer thee to them for further satisfaction.
Of which the more ancient are, Q. Fabius Pictor, Sex. Rufus and P. Victor. Of
the later writers, Blondus in his Italia, Fabius Caluus of Rauenna, Bartho.
Marlianus, Andreas Fuluius, Georgius Fabricius, Lucius Faunus, Andreas
Palladius, Pyrrhus Ligorius, and Lucius Maurus. And very lately Io. Iacobus
Boissartus. Iacobus Mazochius has gathered and set out all his old Epigrammes,
Fuluius Vrsinus the Noble houses, and Ulysses Aldroandus the statues of the
same. Hubertus Goltzius, with no less art then diligence, and great expenses,
has expressed in form of a book the table of his Fasti, most cunningly cut
in brass.

map of Lake Como, Italy LAKII LACUS VULGO COMENSIS DESCRIPTIO, AVCT. PAVIO
OVIO.


map of Rome, Italy TERRITORII ROMANI DESCRIP.


map of Friuli, Italy FORI IVLII, VVLGO FRIVLI TYPVS


TVSCIA.
THe bounds of Tuscia, (which in time past was called Hetruria) are on the
East, the river Tyber: on the West, Macra: on the South, the Mediterran sea: on
the North, the Apennine mountains. It is a most goodly, beautiful and
pleasant country. The people are very ingenious and of a subtle wit,
indifferently fit either for peace or war: for all manner of humane
litterature, or for trades and merchandise. The nation has always been
superstitious and much given to devotion in religion, as is apparent out of
ancient writers. The sea coast toward the Tyrrhen or Mediterran sea, is for the
most part in this our age full of Forests, as also it was in the time of
Vopiscus, as he witnesses in the life of Aurelian; especially a little beyond
the river Arno, until one come beyond Plumbino. The inner part of the country
is almost as much oppressed with Mountains.

In it are these cities, more famous than the rest, Florence, Siena, Luca,
Perugia, Pisa, Viterbo, etc. FLORENCE, or as they call it Fiorenza, is situate
upon each side of the river Arno, conioined by four fair bridges: it is a most
goodly and beautiful city, whereupon commonly they call it Fiorenza la bella,
Florence the fair: as if indeed it might seem to be the flower of all
Italy. For it is adorned with stately buildings, as well Churches and religious
houses, as of private citizens. Amongst all other the Church of S. Maria
Florida, wholly ouerlaid with Marble, arched with a roof of an admirable
workmanship, near to which is built a goodly steeple for the bells, all of
fine marble: not far from which stands the ancient Temple of Mars, of form
round very ingeniously built, and of a cunning workmanship, now dedicated to
S. John Baptist. The doors of this Church are of cast brass; a very rare and
curious piece of work: especially those which are next to the Church of S.
Maria Florida, are such that all men of judgment and experience must
absolutely confess that in all Europe beside, the like are no where to be
seen. But to reckon up all the worthy buildings of this city, as well sacred
as profane it were too tedious and would require more paper than this our
purposed discourse will bear; He therefore that desires to know more of the
particulers more at large, let him read Leander.

SIENA lies upon the top of an hill, round begirt with high rocks of
Tophus-stone, gorgeously bedecked with many noble men's houses: amongst the
which is the great and large Church of our Lady, equal to the stateliest and
sumptuousest Churches of all Europe; whether you respect the worth and price of
the Marble whereof it is built: or the excellency of the work and
workmanship of him that made it. Besides that there is a most stately house of
tree stone built by Pope Pius II. with many other goodly houses. Worthy of
commendation and record is the large and beautiful market place, with Branda
the pleasant fountain always full of most clear water.

PERVGIA is seated upon the mountain Apennine, the greatest part of the
country arising with goodly pleasant hills, fertile of strong Wines, Oiles,
Figs, Apples, and other sorts of most excellent fruits. Beneath the city at
Asisia, as also toward Tuder, near Tiber, the pleasant champion fields do
spread themselves, yielding plenty of wheat and other kind of grain. The city
by reason of the nature of the place is very strong, adorned with gorgeous
buildings both of religious houses and churches as also private citizens:
together with a famous and large fountain in the midst of the city. It is
very populous and the citizens are very ingenious and of courageous stomachs,
apt indifferently either for any manner litterature or for service in the field.

PISA, long since has been a famous city and many ways richly blessed, not
only before the flourishing estate of the Roman Empire, but even when it was
at the full height: as also many years after. Many famous Marine-conquests,
which it has made, by which it brought the I Will Sardinia subject to their
command, do avouch this to be true. Panormo a fair city of Sicilia they won
from the Saracens: and of the booty and spoils taken in that war, they
began to build the great Church, which they call DOMNVM, as also the beautiful
palace of the Bishop. It has an University or School of all manner of
Liberal Arts and Sciences, whose foundation was laid in the year of CHRIST
1309.

VITERBO lies in a pleasant and spacious champion having the Cyminian hills
(now of this city called Mont Viterbo) upon his backeside, stately for many
fair buildings and works of rare Art, amongst which is a famous fountain,
from whence issues water in such abundance as is wonderful.

LVCA is seated in a plain, not far from the hills foot, a city of goodly
buildings. The people are neat, wise and ingenious; which have most discreetly
retained and kept their liberty of a long time whole in their own hands,
although they have been often assaulted by their neighbors. See more at large
of this in Leander.

Myrsilus the Lesbian, Marcus Cato in his Origines: and their Expositor Ioannes
Annius Viterbiensis, (who also wrote a several treatise of the antiquities of
Hetruria) William Postell, Volaterranus, and Laonicus Chalcocondylas a Grecian,
in his sixth book, and others have described this province: Ioannes Campanus
has written most elegantly of the Lake of Perugia.

map of Tuscany, Italy THVSCIAE DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE HIERONYMO BELLARMATO.
Me Ianus tenuit primus, formataque ab illo
Imposui leges populis, and nomina Ponto,
Inferno, and Supero: missos auxique colonos,
Imperiumque Italos trans fines; foedera natis
Dum seruata meis, sed me discordia preaeceps,
Romuleae genti domitam seruire coegit:
Quae deous antiquae longo post tempore linguae
Auxilij male grata mei, male grata laborum
Abstulit, and mansit nomen quod Thura dedere:
Archades aut Ldi quod vel mutare Pelasgi
Non ausi sacras quibus has concessimus oras.
Cum priuilegio.



The Signiory of FLORENCE.
OF the city of Florence read Blondus, who in his view of Italy reports thus
of it: They commonly affirm, says he, that this city was first begone by
Sylla's soldiers, unto whom this part of the country was by Sylla assigned:
and because they first began to seat themselves ad Arna fluenta, about the
river Arno, they then entitled it by the name of FLVENTIA. And indeed Pliny,
who of all the old writers first mentions this place, says that the
Fluentini were seated near the river Arno. These soldiers came hither about
the year after the building of the city of Rome, 667. whereupon it appears
that Florence was founded about 83. years before the birth of Christ. This
city suffered much wrecke in the time of the wars of the Goths. Yet was it
never, either by Totilas, or any other of those ragings Tyrants, utterly rased
or spoiled: And therefore that which some do write of the repairing of Florence
by Charles the Great, I can by no means allow when as the histories of Charles
written by Alcuinus his schoolmaster, do only mention his keeping of Easter
here at two several times, as he went by this way toward Rome. It was
preserved from a great hazard of utter overthrow, which it was like to have
fallen into, by the manhood of one Farinata Vbertino, when as they of Pisa,
Siena, and others of Tuscane, meeting at a market in a consultation by them
held, having generally determined to raze Florence to the ground, said stoutly:
That while he lived, he would never suffer his dear Mother, which brought him
up, by them to be spoiled. Therefore Florence partly taking by force, and
partly by other means drawing to their part the Fesulanes, about the year of
Christ, 1024. was much enlarged in wealth and authority: at which time also
Henry the first Emperor of Rome, built the goodly Church of S. Miniate near
the walls of Florence. This city was twice within a little while, in the year
1176. miserably defaced, by casualty of fire. From which time it first began to
be governed as now it is by the Priori, (the masters of the twelve companies)
and a Standard Bearer, Gonfalonerio, they call him. One of the first
Gonfalonerios was Stroza, a nobleman borne, of a great house. The goodly
Minster which in our time, by the ingenious direction of Philippo Brunalitio, a
Florentine, was most stately arched, and dedicated to our Lady, was begun in
the year of our Lord 1294. Four years after that was that gorgeous Palace,
where now the Priori, or Aldermen do keep, first founded. And five years
after that was the Pomoerium, (the prospect, or wast ground, round about the
city) leuelled and the walls of the city enlarged. Pistorio was the first city
that the Florentines subdued under their command, as Leander, in his
description of Italy, affirms upon the testimony of Aretino: where also he
has these words, of the diverse forms and different manner of government of the
same; After that it was repaired, says he, by Charles the Great, they yearly
chose two Consuls or Sheriffs, who with the assistance of 100. Senators or
Aldermen, should govern the city. This form of commonwealth being altered,
they created the Decemuiri, the ten, called of them Antiani, about the year
of Grace, 1220. as Volaterran affirms, or as Blondus says in the year 1254.
After that in the year 1287. having redeemed their freedom of the Emperor
Rudolfe for 60000. crowns, as Platina writes, the Decemuiri, (the ten) were
reduced to Octouiri, (eight) and were called the Priori, (the masters of the
companies) over whom was set the Standerd-bearer, called by them Gonfalonerio
di Giustitia, the Lord chief Justice; which office they were to hold but two
months, and then others were to be elected. This form of policy, for as much
as I can gather out of historiographers, was since that time thrice altered.
First in the year 1343. when the Florentines bought Luca of Mastino Scaligero
for 5000. crowns; their forces being overthrown by the enemy, they were
constrained to demand aid of Robert King of Naples, and obtained Gualterio
Gallo a captain of Athens for their general, who by great subtilty and
cunning getting the rule of the city, went to the Court and there deposed the
Priori, and other Magistrates from their office. Yet he enioied not his usurped
authority long, for the people at the persuasion of Angelo Accieuolo Bishop of
the sea a Friar predicant, rose up in arms, and deposing the Tyrant, restored
the Priori and Confalonerio to their places again. The second alteration of
this Commonwealth happened in the time of Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome,
when as his son Caesar Borgia, Duke of Valence, (never laboring to bring
home again Peter, John and Julian, the sons of Laurence Medices, who but
lately had been banished) at length brought the matter so about that the
office of the Gonfalonerio should be given to Peter Soderine for a perpetual
and standing office: who together with the Priori chosen every two months,
after the ancient custom, most wisely behaved himself and orderly governed
that Commonwealth: until at length being expelled by Raimundo Cordona
Ambassador of Ferdinand the King of Arragon and Naples, (who was to restore
John Cardinal Medices, and his brother Julian,) in the year of Grace 1412.
and erecting the ancient manner of government, which continued until the year
1530. In the mean time, although the city were commanded, at the discretion
and direction of the Popes Leo the tenth, (which was John Medices,) and Clement
the seventh, (which was Julius Medices) the bastard son of Julian, the first
Cardinal Cortonesse, having the wardship, and being Guardian to Hippolytus the
son of Julian the second) and of Alexander, the bastard son of Laurenznio,
the nephew of Peter the second. Yet notwithstanding the ancient Magistrates
were chosen after the custom formerly used. In that same year therefore, when
as three years before, the Emperors soldiers besieging Clement the seventh
in Hadrians castle, the city shaking off the yoke of bondage, obtained
freedom, and endeavored by all means to retain the same, Philip the Prince
of Aurange leading the army of the Emperor Charles the fifth. Clement
entreating that Alexander his nephew, whom before he had entitled Duke of
Penna, to be brought again into the city, forced it being much distressed for
want of victual to yield to the obedience of the Emperor. Charles the
Emperor at the request of Clement the Pope presently created Alexander
perpetual Priour: and thus the offices of the Priori and Gonfalonerio were
utterly taken away. Then, when the Emperor Charles had created Alexander Duke
of Florence, and given unto him in marriage Margaret his bastard daughter, in
the year of our Savior, 1535. and two years after that, before the seventh
day of January, Laurence Medices, the son of Peter Francis, that he might
set his native country at liberty, as he pretended, had miserably slain him.
Cosmus Medices the son of John Medices was created Duke in his room. Thus
far Leander, unto which I may adioine these words of my kind friend M. John
Pinadello: When it was known says he, to Pius the fifth Pope of Rome, that
Cosmus Medices, Duke of Florence, had at that time taken great pains for the
maintenance of the Church and Religion, and spared no cost in the wars
against the heretics, in the year 1570. in the month of February coming to
the city, crowned him in Aula Regia, the Kings hall (a place in Vaticana so
named) and gave him and his successors, the title of, The great Duke. In whose
Crown the Pope caused these words to be engraven, PIUS QVINTVS Pont. Max. ob
eximiam dilectionem, and Catholicae religionis zelum, praecipuumque iustitiae
studium donauit. that is, Pius the fifth Bishop of Rome, in token of great
love, earnest zeal of Catholic religion, and constant maintenance of true
Justice gave this. Thus far in few words of the Offices, Policy and
Jurisdiction of this city.

I think it not amiss here to adioine another short discourse, because it is
rare, and not altogether from the purpose: It is thus as Syffridus Presbyter
reports in George Fabricius his history of Misnia. Otho the third Emperor
of Rome, lying at Mutina with his wife, the Empress fell in love with a
certain Earl: but when as he by no means would consent unto her, she so
diffamed him unto her husband, the Emperor, that he commanded him to be
beheaded before ever he had examined the matter. Who before he was beheaded,
entreated his wife, that after his death by the trial of Hoate Iron, she would
approve to the view of the world, how wrongfully he was put to death. The day
came, when as the Emperor sat to hear the causes and complaints of widows
and Orphans. Together with these came the late Countess, bringing in her hand
the Earls head: and demands what death that Judge is worthy of, that had put
a man to death wrongfully? The Emperor answered, He is worthy to lose his
head. She says, Thou art the same man, who at the false suggestion of thy wife
did unjustly cause my husband to be beheaded. The which when as the widow
approved unto him by the manner of trial by hot iron, the Emperor yielded
himself into the hands of the widow, willing to abide his deserved
punishment. Notwithstanding by the mediation of the Bishop and the Nobility, he
obtained of the Countess respite for ten days, then for eight, then for
seven, lastly for six. After the end of which days, the Emperor having
examined the matter, and being assured of the truth, gave sentence against his
wife, that she should be burned at a stake, and giving four castles unto the
widow, redeemed his life. These castles are in the Bishopric of Luna in
Hetruria or Tuscane, and they are called after the names of the days of
repreeue, The tenth, The eighth, The seventh, and The sixth. Thus far
Syffridus, which I thought good to set down in this place, for to my knowledge
no man else has left any record of these castles: neither are they named in
this Map by our Author, notwithstanding that he has described the country
most curiously.

map of Florence, Italy FLORENTINI DOMINII, FIDELISSIMA ET NOVA DESCRIPTIO.
Auctore D. Stephano Monacho Montisoliueti.


The liberties of PERVGIA.
Johannes Campanus writing of this country, affirms that although he had
travailed and viewed many countries, yet he never saw in all his life a more
pleasant country, and better manured then the country of Perugia. All things
seem wast and wild to those that are far off, but if you shall come more
near, nothing may be found more glorious either in respect of the husbandry of
the land, or wholesomnesse of the air, or fertility of the soil. The river of
Tiber runs through the midst of this country, and kindly waters the
same. Not far from which is the city Perugia, situate upon the Mount
Apennine, built long since (as Trogus Pompeius affirms) by the Achaians; and
of the twelve cities of Hetruria it is the chief. It was called Augusta by the
Emperor Augustus, as the Capital letters half a yeard square, graven upon
the gate, do declare. This city, in regard of the nature of the place, is
invincible, richly beautified both with religious and private buildings of
great state, and is very populous. This city above all the cities of Italy
has been evermore most fortunate and happy, having retained the same state
and government little or nothing altered, which it enioied before the building
of Rome; and that which afterward it had, (in the time when Rome was ruled by
Kings, Consuls, Emperors and Tyrants) at this time it reteineth. Yet it has
endured many and diverse grievous and bitter storms. For in the time when Fabius
Maximus was Consul, as Liuie reports, 4500. of his citizens were slain. In
the days of the Triumuiri, Augustus besiedged it, and forced it to great
distress for want of victuals, took it and rased it to the ground, and was
wholly defaced with fire, except only the Temple of Vulcane, as Appian
records. Afterward it endured the seven years siedge and battery of the
cruel Tyrant Totilas, and at length was sacked and spoiled etc. Now it is
subject to the Pope of Rome, and has a famous University, which was erected
about the year of CHRIST, 1290. as Middendorpius has written. Here in the
time of our grandfathers, flourished the most renowned Ciuilians, Bartholus and
Baldus.

In the precincts of this city is Lago di Perugia, the lake of Perugia,
anciently called LACVS TRASVMENVS, famous long since for a great overthrow
here given by Hanniball to the Romans; Appianus calls it Lacus Plestinus,
but for what reason I know not. It is in compass, as the foresaid Campanus
writes, about thirty miles. The water of it is very clear and pure, there
are no rivers which run into it, neither has it any issue forth, yet is his
water so exceeding sweet, that any man would think it were fed from some
running fountain. It has in it three Isles, whereof two, which are toward the
North, are close together; the one called the Greater, the other the Lesser: (
Maiores and Minores) This is wast and not in habited, only it has a Church
situate upon the top of an hill. The other, which is near to the liberties
of Cortona, contains about 200. families. The third, which is toward the
South, and is bigger then the other two, is very populous and well inhabited.
The inhabitants almost give themselves wholly to Fishing; they sow little
Corn: yet they do not neglect to plant vines. For wood, fuel and fodder they
go out into the fields and woods near adioining. Amongst the records of Lewis
first Emperor of Rome, there is mention of these three Islands, where he names
them MAYOR MINOR and PVLVENSIS, (now Polueso) where I perceive that they yet
retain their ancient names. No boggs, fennes, or spuing meeres do impech the
shore: this is full of Olive gardens, which upon the hills on every side do
adorn the Lake, and are for their wonderful fertility very beautiful. In the
plain which is between the Lake and the Hills, there is such abundance of
Hemp and Flax, so that in all Hetruria or Tuscane, there is not more. No
country yeldeth better Wines or sweeter Apples. The kinds of Fishes in the lake
are not many, but the abundance is wonderful; in which it far excels all
other Lakes of Italy: here also the fishing continues all the year long,
yea even in the dead of winter, which no other Lake in all Italy affoordeth.
These fish in the winter are carried into Tuscane, Vmbria, and Picenta: to Rome
also they drive much cattle daily to be sold. The same Campanus affirms,
that here they take a pickerell partly colored, spotted with diverse green
specks, of the which he reports strange wonders: namely, that it does
engender with serpents, and from thence it gets those strange colors. (The
common people, says Iacobus Greumus, in the twentieth chapter of his first
book, verily believes that lampreies do engender with serpents, which Pliny
holds for a fable, notwithstanding that he often seems to be much
delighted in writing of fables. Athenaeus also writes, out of the report of
one Andreas, that these Lampreies which are bred of the viper, if they bite,
the wound is deadly, which opinion he afterward reclaimeth as false.) Again he
tells of a Pike that lying upon the dry land, which when a fox assaied to
catch, one of his feetstooke fast in his teeth; and both were found dead.
Pliny in his second book, chap. 107. testifies that once this whole Lake did
burn.

map of Umbria, Italy PERVSINI agri; exactissima nouissimaque descriptio:
auctore Egnatio Dante.
Cum priuilegio Imperatoris, Regis, and cancellariae Brabantiae, ad decennium
1584.



The territories of the city of SIENA.
CAesar Orlandius a famous Ciuillian of Siena, sent from Rome this Map,
together with a brief history of the city, taken out of a larger work of his,
(as he confesses in his private letters to me, written of the original of the
same, to be inserted into this our Theater of the World.

The city of Siena, says he, is so ancient, that of his first beginning there
is nothing to be found in any approved old writers. For that some do report it
to have been built by the Galli Senones, which under the conduct of Breanus
their general, about 363. years after the building of Rome, in the space of
seven months (as Polybius and Plutarch have recorded) wan the city, it cannot
be proved out of any good author. For John of Salisbury, which first broached
this opinion, (who for that he entitled his history by the name of
Polycraticon, is therefore called Polycrates, or of others Polycarpus,) in the
seventeenth chapter of his sixth book, brings no authority for this his
assertion. And himself confesses in the twenty and fourth chapter of his
eighth book, that he was not familiarly known to Pope Adrian the fourth. Now
it is apparent to all the world that Adrian the fourth sat in the Papal seat,
but from the year of Christ, 1154. unto the year 1159. and therefore the
testimony of John of Salesbury, concerning the building of Siena, so many
years before he was borne, is of no validity at all.

Cornelius Tacitus in his twentieth book of his Annals, calls this city
Colonia Senensis. Which words of his can by no means be understood of the
other Sena, (which at this day also is in the country Piceno, and is vulgarly
called Senegallia,) as some have fondly imagined. For in the time of Tacitus
and Pliny that city of Piceno, was not ever called Sena, but Senogallia, or
Senogallica, or Senogallia, as is most manifest out of the words of Pliny and
Ptolemey. For Pliny reckons Coloniam Senensem, amongst the mid land Colonies
of Hetruria; and not many lines after he places Senagallia in the sixth region
of Italy. Ptolemey not only in the Latin copies printed, but also in most
ancient manuscript Greek copies, places Sena amongst the mid-land cities of
Hetruria, but Sena Gallica, (for so he terms it) amongst the cities of the
Senones, near Ancona and the Temple of Fortune.

When this city first was made a Bishops sea, although as yet it be not
certainly known, yet this is certain, that amongst the 46. Bishops, or there
about, all of them neighbors to the city of Rome, (which in the first Roman
Synod in the time of S. Hilary Pope of Rome, and first of the name, assembled
together in the year of Christ 465.) Eusebius Episcopus Senensis, was one of
them. Again in the second Council of Lateran, under Pope Martin the first, in
the year of Grace 652. amongst the subscriptions of 125. Bishops, these are
named, Maurus Caesenatis Ecclesiae episcopus. Maurus episcopus S. Senatis
ecclesiae, in the same manner and form that Clusinus Roxellanus and Fauentinus,
Bishops, do call their Churches Clusinatem, Roxellanatem, and Fauentinatem. In
like manner amongst the like number of about 125. Bishops, who subscribed unto
the Epistle of Agatho Bishop of Rome, which the Legate sent unto the six
general Council at Constantinople, held in the year 573. carried with them,
this subscription is found, Vitalianus episcopus S. ecclesiae Senensis.
Whereupon it is manifest that no man may cavil and say, that Episcopus
Senensis, is the same that Episcopus Senogalliensis: or that for Episcopetus
Senatis, it should be written and read, Episcopus Caesenatis. As also for that
out of Pliny and Ptolemey, before mentioned, it is plain, that even in their
days, that Sena of Picenum; was not called Sena, but Senogallia: Moreover also
because in the forenamed Council of Lateran, not only Episcopus Senatis, but
also Caesenatis and Senogalliensis, named by one and the same name, subscribed
severally. Lastly, Venantius Episcopus Senogalliensis, subscribed also to the
second and fourth Synods of Rome, summoned by Pope Caelius Symmachus, about the
year of Christ 498.

Furthermore Pope Pius the 2. borne in Siena, in the year 1459. (which was the
year of his creation) advanced the Church of Siena from a Bishops sea unto the
dignity of an Archbishopricke, and assigned the Bishops of Suano, Clusino,
Crassetano, and Massano Suffraganes to the Archbishops of Siena, and their
Churches subject to that sea.

This has Caesar Orlandius written, of the original and antiquity of Siena,
his native country, to be published, for no other cause, as he protests, then
that the fond opinion of Blondus, and others which have written otherwise of it
then the plain truth is, might wholly be rased out (if it were possible) of
the minds of all men.

Claudius Ptolemeus Senensis, in his sixth book of epistles to Gabriel
Caesano, has most elegantly described Monte Argentario.

MARCA ANCONA.
IN former times this region was called Picenum, now they call it Marca Ancona,
of the head city of the same. Sometime it was called Marca Firmiana, of a town
in this province, as Blondus has given out. It lies between the rivers
Isaurus, (now called Foglia,) and Trento, and between the Hadriaticke sea, and
Mount Apennine. It is manifest by ancient records that the Piceni, Vmbri and
Senones, were long since seated in this tract. The country is a fertile soil,
yielding in great plenty all manner commodities, but especially for fruit trees
and corn it does far excel other places. Silius Italicus, does highly
commend it especially for olives.

The head city, as we have said, is Ancona, so called of his situation, for
that being seated upon the promontory Comerano, it lies out into the gulf of
Venice like an arm or elbow. Whereupon the ancient comes of this city, (which
here often times are found within the earth) are observed to be stamped, with an
arm holding a pen in the hand. The Haven of this most ancient city, was made
by Traian the Emperor, as an inscription in Marble does give to understand.
Here is also Aelia Ricina, otherwise since that called Ricinetum, (and at this
day now, Recanati), is a town situate upon the top of an hill, where we saw
the Mart or Fair (which there is kept at certain times of the year) unto
which they come almost from all quarters of the World. Not far from hence is
the Church of S. Maria Lauretana, with the hamlet Loreto, enclosed with a very
strong wall. The gorgeousness of this church and holiness of the place is
such, that so soon as one shall set foot within the doors, it will strike him
into a great admiration. This Church is well furnished with all manner of
weapons and engines, both for offense and defense against the assault of
Pirates. The village is inhabited almost of none else but Cooks, Ostlers,
Shoemakers and such like fellows, which attend here ready to do any
business, for such as resort hither almost all the year long in great numbers
for devotion: and to provide and serve them with such things as they want.
Here is also the town and castle called Fabriano, whose inhabitants do almost
altogether live by making of Paper, which thereof is called Charta Fabriana.
There are also many other goodly towns in this province, which are excellently
described in Leander. Franciscus Pamphilus has also written in verse a
description of this Shire.

The Mount Apennine in this place hangs over this country with craggy topps
exceeding high, in which is that huge cave that they call Sibyllas cave, (in
their language Grotta de la Sibylla) and which the poets feign to be the
Elysian fields. For the common people do dream of one Sibylla to be in this
cave, which here possesses a large kingdom full of gorgeous buildings and
Princely palaces, beset with pleasant gardens, abounding with many fine wanton
wenches and all manner of pleasures and delights: all which she will bestow upon
them, which through this cave (which is always open) will go unto her: and
after they have been there the space of one whole year, they have free liberty
given them by Sibylla, (if they please) to depart, and from that time, being
returned unto us, they affirm that they live for the rest of their time, a
most blessed and happy life. This cave is known also to our countrie-men by
the name of Vrow Venus bergh, that is, The Lady Venus mount. Whereupon they
vulgarly sing certain Dutch rimes of one little Daniel (for so the ballad
calls him) who after that he had lived a whole year in this cave, at last it
repented him of this kind of life, therefore here he leaving his Love
departs, goes to Rome, comes to the Pope, confesses his sin, and
desires to be absolved. The Pope not deeming the sin to be venial, the
staff which by chance he had in his hand, (withered and dry) sticking it into
the ground, said, that his sins should then be pardoned when this staff
shall bear Roses. Daniel by this answer despairing of his salvation, went
away very heavy and discontent, and presently taking two of his nephews, his
sisters sons with him, returns again unto his Paramour. Within three days
after the staff was observed to put forth blossoms: Daniel was sought for up
and down, but could no where be found: For they do believe that he spent the
rest of his life in this cave. But the story of this ballade is a worthy matter
for a poetical head, and to be deemed as true as the rest of their fictions.

CORSICA.
CORSICA an Island of the Mid-land sea, was anciently inhabited of diverse
nations. At this day it is divided into two parts. The East part, they call
Banda di dentro, The inner side: the West part opposite to this, Banda di
fuori, The outter side. That end which is next to Italy, Di qua da i Monti, On
this side the mountains: That next to Sardinia, Di la da i Monti; beyond the
Mountains. Yet the people of what part soever, in respect of the situation of
the mountains, do call one another Tramontanesse, but himself Cismontanum.
The island is very hard to be entered or come unto; as being on all sides
enclosed with steep and high hills. The inner part is almost wholly
mountainous, and therefore is no very good corn ground: yet is it highly
commended for rich wine, being transported to Rome, of the place is called
Vinum Corsicum. It breeds Horses of great stomach, and Hounds of
extraordinary bigness. Here i^, as Pliny affirms, the beast Musino, a kind
of ram which in the steed of wool bears an hairie shagge like the goat:
now they call it Mofoli. Strabo speaks of this beast in Sardinia, as if it
were proper to that island. The Italians do account the inhabitants of this I Will
for valiant and stout soldiers. Ancient writers have affirmed that here is
found a kind of bitter Honey. The Tyrrheni first possessed this Island, and
afterward the Carthaginians: from these the Romans took it, who held it
until such time as the Saracens drove them out: these the Genowaies at length
expelled. Then being taken by the citizens of Pisa, it became subject to the
Bishops. Lastly, it was brought again under the obedience of the Genowaies, to
whom at this day it does belong. Leander Alhertus has so exactly described
this Island, out of the Commentaries of Augustine Justinian, that a man may not
easily find what moreover may be added or desired.

map of Siena, France SENENSIS DITIONIS, ACCVRATA DESCRIP.
Cum Priuilegio.



map of Corsica, Italy CORSICA.


map of March, Italy MARCHA ANCONAE, OLIM PICENVM. 1572.


APRVTIVM, now called ABRVZZO.
IN the kingdom of Naples there is a province which they call Abruzzo, the
Latins anciently named it, Aprutium: why it was so called, as it is
uncertain, so, that it took not his name of the Brutij, as some have been of
opinion, I make no question. Some there are which think it so named ab Apris
of Bores, for that the country being foresty and full of woods, it swarmeth
with wild hogs: other some do derive it ab asperitate montis Apenini, from
the cragginesse of the mount Apeninus, which here in this tract is very
hideous, steep and high. The greater and better sort of writers do believe that
in it some part of the ancient name of Praetutiana does as yet remain. For
Volaterranus, Blondus, Domi. Niger, Leander and Scipio Mazella do persuade
themselves, that the Samnites, (and amongst them the Praetutiani) the Peligni,
Marucini, Ferentini, Vestini; Marsi, Caraceni and Albenses, have formerly
inhabited these places. It is bounded at this day on the North side, by the
Hadriaticke sea: on the West, by the river Tronto, anciently called Truentum:
on the East, by Fortoro, in old time named Frento: upon the South it has the
mount Apenine, although in some places it stretches it self beyond the same.
This province Alphonsus the stout, king of Arragon, divided into two parts,
Abruzzo the nether, and Abruzzo the higher. Abruzzo the higher which we have
described apart by it self, is severed from the Nether by the river Pescara,
which old writers called Aternus. Scipio Mazella in his curious description of
the kingdom of Naples, affirms that this country is by situation and nature
of the place very strong, and inhabited by a stout and sturdy nation; and the
soil is very fertile of wines and cattle. The chief cities of it are,
Aquila, Interamna or Teramo, Amatrice, Atri, Pin: and long since here have
stood Amiterno, and Furconio, both now defaced, yet of their ruins and ashes
is raised Aquila some five miles off, built upon the top of an hill, as
Volateran and others have written. This city is seated in a place most fertile
of all manner of things necessary: so that the Cabbadges here ( cauli capucei,
they call them) do often weigh, as Mazella reports, sometime thirty, sometime
forty pound; and therefore Martial said not amiss, Nos amiternus ager
felicibus educathortis; In Amiternoes fertile fields we live and spend our
days. The fields before this city, do yield such great plenty of Saffron,
that thereof yearly they make 40000. ducates. Here is once a year kept a
great Fair. It has 110. Churches. Near this city, as Blondus says, is a
stone, from under the which runs a stream of oil, which they call Oil of
peter, or Petroleum: and is desired and sought for of many, but of the Almaines
and Hungarians it is more esteemed, then of the Italians. The same author
records that the country people showed him a Peare-tree growing upon an hill
not far from the head of the river Pescara or Aterno, shooting up in such a
sort, that the water falling upon it, divides it self into three parts, which
become three great rivers, Velino, Tronto and Pescara, running three diverse
ways. Amiterno, in former times a goodly city, famous in histories, and the
native country of Salust the noble historian, can hardly be discerned where it
stood: yet Blondus says, that they do yet show some pieces of the Theater,
Temples, and Turrets. Mazella affirms that there yet do remain the Temple of
Saturn, the tomb of Drusus daughter, and a triumph of the Samnites engraven
in marble, a memorial of their happy victory obtained against the Roman army,
ad furcas Caudinas. Teramo long since called Interamnia, for that it is situate
between three rivers, Fiumicello, Trontino and Vitiole, is the head city of
this province; whose Bishop is graced with many titles and dignities, and the
lord of the soil is called by the name of the Duke of Teramo. Adria the
ancient colonie of the Romans, is now called Atri. Some do think that the
Emperor Hadrian was borne here, and of it took his name, as also the
Hadriaticke sea, now called Mare superum, the higher sea, the Gulf or Bay of
Venice. Furconium sometime has been a famous Bishopric, whose Bishops are
often mentioned in the Councels and Synods held 800. years since, at Rome or
other places of Italy. At this day only some small mention is to be seen of
it: for it was destroyed by the Lombardes, and the Bishops sea, was by Pope
Alexander the fourth, from thence translated unto Aquila. The arms of this
country, as Scipio Mazella writes, is an Eagle argent crowned, standing upon
three mounts ore, in a field Azure. He that desires to understand more of this
country let him repair to the forenamed Authors, who I doubt not will
satisfy him to the full.

map of Abruzzo, Italy APRVTII VLTERIORIS DESCRIPTIO.
1590.

NATALIS BONIFACIVS SEBENIICENSIS DESCRIBEB.


The kingdom of NAPLES.
THis kingdom generally comprehended between the Adriaticke and Mid-land seas,
from the river Fronto and Fundi, a city situate upon the lake Fundano, unto the
Frith Messina, (the Latins call it Fretum Mamertinum or Messanae, the Italians
el faro di Messina) contains nine most rich and goodly countries of Italy:
namely these; A part of Latium, Campania felix, Lucani, Calabria, Magna
Graecia, Salentini, Apuli Peucetij, Apuli Dauni, and Aprutium. The gallant city
Naples, which gave the name to the whole kingdom, seated between the sea shore
and the foot of most pleasant mountains; has a temperate and wholesome air,
with most sweet fields about it: and therefore in this our age, Princes, and
Noblemen do resort hither, as much as ever heretofore: for almost all the
Nobility of this whole kingdom do spend most of the year in this city, and
all for the most part have here most beautiful and stately houses: so that
the frequent throng of Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Knights, Doctors,
Barons, and Noblemen, is here so great, that there are very few cities of the
world which in my judgment, in that respect may compare with Naples. The city
in compass is very large and wide, gorgeously built and seated, as I said,
between the sea, and the goodly pleasant hills, strongly walled and fortified,
especially that part which was done of late days at the commandment of
Charles the fifth. The buildings either of Churches or private citizens houses
are most beautiful and stately, with diverse Castles and Towers almost
invincible. But amongst the rest, the house of the Duke of Grauina, and the
Prince of Salerno, do far excel. The streets of the city are very fair and
straight. There are four Courts, which they call Seats, Capuana, Nida,
Montana, and S. Georgio, where the Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and other of the
Nobility do meet to consult of weighty matters and public businesses. The
strong Castles are these; Castello nouo, which Alphonsus the first raised and
entrenched with very great charges and expenses, so that now it may be
accounted one of the most defencible fortification of all Europe. Next to this
is Castello Capuano; which now is employed for place of meeting for the state
in consultation, for matters of the kingdom and city: Then is, Castellum oui,
a little distance without the city, standing upon a rock (the ancients called
it Meagrum) compassed round with the sea. Beside these is Castellum
Santemerense, upon a cliffe, looking over the walls of the city, lately
fortified very strongly by Charles the fifth. Without the walls, upon the South
side of the city, there is a Block-house in the sea, a work of wonderful art
and cunning workmanship, built for the defense and safeguard of the Haven,
continually full with ships almost from all quarters of the world. Here also
is an University where all manner of Arts and Liberal Sciences are taught and
professed, unto which there is great concourse of students from all places of
the kingdom. Thus far Vbertus Folietta, in a Treatise of his, which he wrote
and entitled Brumanum.

Without the walls of this most stately city, there are most pleasant sweet
fields, yielding all manner of things necessary, not only for the maintenance
of man and beast, but also such as serve for pleasure and delight: Especially
with all manner of Corn and Grain, and of rich and strong Wine such plenty,
that he that has not seen the great store both of Corn and Wine that one
Aker of ground does yield, may hardly be made to believe it. The Hills and
Mountains in this place are very fertile, and full of most excellent fruits:
and some of them, enclosing the lowly plains in manner of a Theater, do
afford plenty of Dear and game for the Nobility. Moreover about Naples are
most pleasant and fine Orchards, planted with Medicinal plants, and such like
goodly fruit trees, every where resounding with a most sweet noise of
brooks and streams running to and fro: every where most fragrant and
odoriferous smelles do offer themselves unto your senses, such is the abundance
of Myrtill, Laurel, Gelsemine, Rosemarie, Rose-trees, etc. in every corner.
To be short, the beauty, delightsomnesse, and elegancie of all places round
about is such, as it does almost exceed the capacity of man's wit: no man
need to wonder why in former times, as well as now, the Noblemen so much
delighted to dwell here. This we have taken out of Leander, where many other
things may be read of, who has described the whole kingdom, this City, and
the Liberties thereof, very curiously, that indeed it is not necessary to
send the Reader unto any other Author but Scipio Mazzella, (which in a
several and peculiar Treatise, has with extraordinary pains, and diligence,
set out, in the Italian Tongue, a description of this kingdom. There is also
in Print a little book, written by Alexander Andreas, of the war between
Philippe King of Spain, and Paul the fourth Pope of Rome, out of which the
Reader which is not satisfied with this discourse of ours, may here and there
pick out something, concerning this kingdom, worth the noting and not
triuiall. The book is set out in the Italian tongue by Hieronymo Ruscello.
John Baptista Caraffa, Pontanus, and Pandulfus Collenutius, have written the
histories and chronicles of the kingdom of Naples: in the which they in diverse
places speak much of the situation of this country. Gabriel Barry, has very
curiously described Calabria, his native country, as Sanfelicius has done
Campania.

map of Naples, or Southern Italy REGNI NEAPOLITANI VERISSIMA SECVNDVM
ANTIQVORVM RECENTIORVM TRADITIONEM SCRIPTIO, PYRRHO LIGORIO AV
Cum priuilegio.



APVLIA, now called PVGLIA, or TERRA DI OTRANTO.
WE have composed this discourse following of this country, out of the
treatise of Antony Galatey, which he wrote of the situation of Iapigya now
called Terra di Barri. This country, says he, in respect of his situation, is
seated in the most temperate place of the world. Of diverse authors it has
been diversely called by sundry names. Aristotle and Herodotus called it
Iapygia, others, Peucetia, others, Mesapia: others, Magna Gracia, Great Greece:
others, Apulia: others, Calabria: (for that which now is called Calabria, was
anciently called Brutia.) The corn, herbs, and fruits of this country are of
the best. The oats of this soil, is as good as the barley of other countries:
and the barley, as good as their wheat. Melones of a most pleasing taste, and
Pomecitrons do every where grow in great plenty. Physic herbs of greater force
then other where, are here in all places very common. The air is very
wholesome, the soil is neither dry, nor squally or moorish. But these so
great gifts and blessings of God are intermedled with some mischief and
danger: for here nature does breed a most venomous and pernicious kind of
spider, (the Greeks do call it (...) or (...), the Latins Phalangium and
Araneus) whose poisonous bite is only cured by Music or Tabret and Pipe.
Here is also the venomous serpent which the Greeks call Chersydros, the
Latins Natrix terrestris, the Land snake; we call it, if I be not deceived, an
Adder: and here is a kind of Locust, which hurt and mar all things they light
upon. The cities of this country, long since more famous, were, Tarentum, now
Taranto, proudly seated between two seas exceedingly stored with fish, in form
somewhat like a long Island. This city in all men's judgment is invincible.
Callipolis (now Galipoli, Pliny called it Anxa) is a city situate in the end of
a promontorie or forland, shooting far out into the sea, but with such a
narrow Isthmos or necke-land, that in some places there is scarce so much as a
cartway. It is very strong and round beset with high cliffes; from the maine
land there is only one entrance, in the which is a very strong Castle.
Hydruntum, of them called Otranto, is the chief city, and (which is somewhat
more,) Metropolitan of the whole Peninsula, or Demi-ile, and that not without
cause: for whether you respect the antiquity of it, the virtue and humanity of
the citizens, joined with valor and great magnanimity, it has ever been of
them accounted for a very famous and worthy city. It has a very good and
capacious haven, but against the raging blasts of the North wind not so safe.
It was sometime very strong and defencible, but now it lies almost level with
the ground. The fields adioining are very fruitful; full of springs and
always green. From hence Montes Cerauni, certain hills of Epirus, (now called
Cimera and Canina) may easily be descried. Here is the end of the Hadriaticke
and Ionian seas, as Pliny testifies. Brundusium now called Brindisi, a famous
city, has as notable a haven as any in the world else where; the inner haven is
enclosed with castles and an huge chain: the outer haven is here and there
beset with rocks and small Islands; but his mouth is by Alphonsoes means, so
stopped and debt up, that there is no entrance, but for little ships and
barges. It has been in former time a very populous city, now it is little
inhabited. These are the chief marine cities. He that would know more
particularly of the ancient names, situation, antiquities, and private stories
of the mid-land cities and towns, we refer him to the learned discourse of
Galatey, written of this his native country: to which if he please to adioine
the description of Leander, I persuade my self the thirsty Reader shall not
know what else he may demand.

CALABRIA.
GAbriel Barrius Franciscanus has very curiously described Calabria in five
books: which are imprinted at Rome with as little heedfull diligence. Out of
him we have culled these particulars following: CALABRIA, says he, a country
of Italy, in form and fashion not much unlike a tongue, lies between the
upper and nether seas. It begins at the nether sea, (the Greeks call it
the Tyrrhen sea, the Latins the Mediterran or Mid-land sea,) from the river
Talao, which runs into the Bay of Policastro: at the upper sea (the Ionian
sea, the Grecians term it) from the river Siris (otherwise sometime called,
Senno) and coasteth along until it come to the streights of Faro di Messano,
and the city Regio: and so being divided longwise by the mount Apennine (here
they call it Aspro monte) it ends in two capes or promontories, the one
called Leucopetra, (of them Capo de Leocopetra) the other Lacinium (vulgarly of
them called Cabo delle colonne, or Cabo dell' Alice.) Not only the plains and
champions, but even the hilly places, like unto Latium or Campania, are well
served with water. Whatsoever is necessary for the maintenance of man's life,
this country does yield in great abundance, it needs no foreign commodities,
but is able to live of it self. Calabria generally is a good and a fertile
soil, it is not combred with Fennes, Lakes or Bogges, but is always green,
affoording good pastorage for cattle, and excellent ground for all sorts of
grain. The fountains and brooks are many, and those passing clear and
wholesome. The sunnie hills and mountains, open to every cool blast of wind,
are wonderful fertile for corn, vines, and trees of diverse kinds, whereof
arise great profit to the inhabitants. The valleies are pleasant and fruitful.
The shady groves and woods do afford many pleasures and delights. The goodly
meddowes and pastures are richly decked with herbs, and sweet smelling flowers,
and euer-running streams. And amongst other, here is great plenty of Medicke
fodder, wherewith they feed and fat their cattle. Here also grow many
excellent physic herbs of sovereign virtues against diverse and sundry
diseases. It brings forth diverse plants, as the Plane tree, Vitex or Agnus
castus, the Turpentine tree, the Olive tree, Siliqua Siluestris, Arbute or
Strawberry tree, wild Saffron, Madder, Liquirise, Tubera or Sowbread. It has
also some hoate baths, continually distilling from their fountains, which do
cure aches and many other like maladies. In diverse places there are springs of
salt water, whereof they make a kind of brine or pickle. It is well watered
with many fine rivers, and those stored with sundry sorts of fresh fish. The
sea also on each side yields great plenty of fish, both tunies, sword-fishes,
and lampreies. There in many places is found the best Coral, both white and
read. Here is most pleasant hunting and hawking: for in these quarters diverse
and sundry sorts of wild beasts do lodge; and as many birds and fowls do
breed and build: wild boares, hearts, hindes, goats, hares, foxes, lynces,
otters, squerrells, martens, badgers, ferrets, porkupines, tortuses, both of
the waters and of the mountains. Of fowls, phesants, partridges, quails,
wood-cocks, ring-doues, crows, etc. as also of many kinds of hawks it is every
where full. It maintains some herds of cattle and flocks of sheep and goats.
It breeds excellent horses, very swift and of great stomach. Metals here
were found in old time, and now also it abounds at this day with diverse kinds
of mineralls: having indeed every where mines of gold, silver, iron, salt,
marble, alablaster, crystal, marchasite, red-lead, or vermillion, copperas,
alume, brimstone etc. many kinds of corn, wheat, siligo, beerbarly, rye,
trimino, (we call it, I think, Turkey wheat) barley, rise, and of sesamum
infinite store. It abounds also with all kind of pulse, ( legumina the
Latins call them,) oil, wine and honey, and those in their kinds the best.
There are here every where orchards thick set with oranges, limons, and pome
cittron trees. Here also is made great plenty of excellent silk, far better
then any kind of silk made in other places of Italy. The Cotton tree
(Gossipium,) grows here plentifully. But what shall I speak of the kind
temperature of the air? For here the fields both winter and summer are
continually green. But above all things, there is nothing that does argue the
same more soundly then that airy dew or heavenly honey, which they call Manna,
that every where distilleth from above, and is here gathered in great
abundance. So that that which the Israelites in the wilderness did admire and
hold for a strange wonder, here kind nature does afford of her own accord. It
is adorned also with many goodly market towns, where marts and faires are kept
at certain times of the year. Here in some places still is observed the
ancient custom of the Romans used at funerals and burial of the dead, where
a chief mourner ( Praefica, they called her) is hired to go before the rest of
the mourners and she to guide their mournful ditties and to keep time in
their howling lamentations. The funeral being done and all ceremonies
performed, the dead man's friends and kindred, bringing their meat and iunkets,
do banquet altogether at the dead man's house. The women of this country
naturally, for modesty, and for that the waters of these places are good and
wholesome, drink naught but water. It is a shame for any women to drink wine,
except she be very old, or be in childbed, etc. See more in the same author.
Cassiodore also in his Variar. has in diverse places many things of this
country.

map of Puglia, Italy APVLIAE, QVAE OLIM LAPYGIA, NOVA COROGRAPHIA.


map of Calabria, Italy CALABRIAE DESCRIP. Per Prosperum Parisium Consent.
Cum Priuilegio decennali.



SICILIA.
THere is not one either of the ancient Historians or Cosmographers, that has
not made mention of this Island, or curiously described the same: especially
Strabo, Pliny, Solimus and others. Diodorus Siculus calls it, The sovereign
of all other Islands. Solinus in like manner writes of it, That whatsoever this
country breeds either of the nature of the soil, or invention of man, it is
little inferior to those things which are esteemed of greatest worth. Of the
later writers, Vadianus has thus set it out in his true colors: SICILIA, not
only for richness of the soil, (for which cause it was of the ancients
dedicated to Ceres and Bacchus, and was accounted the Garner of Rome) but also
for the multitude and antiquity of his towns, famous acts, victories and
quarrels between the Romans and Carthagians, both contending for the mastery,
is more famous then any other Island whatsoever. In Plinies time there were 72.
cities: at this day they report it to contain twelve Bishoprics, of great
jurisdiction and large diocesses. The Dukes of Swevland possessed it a long
time. It was assaulted and taken by the English and Lorreiners, especially at
that time when they made their voyage into the Holy land, against the impious
Saracens. Lastly, it fell unto the Kings of Arragon, and so at this day it
remains under the obedience of Spain. Neither is there any other Island, that
I know, in the whole world, that both Greeks and Latins have indifferently,
partly in respect of the goodness of the soil and situation, partly for the
great accidents that here have happened, by their writings made more famous.

He that would be further satisfied of the particulars, let him read Benedictus
Bordonius, who has in one book comprised a discourse of all the Islands of the
World: Leander Albertus, Dominicus Niger, Franciscus Maurolycius, Marius
Aretius, all which have most learnedly described the same: Lastly, Thomas
Fazellus, that countrie-man borne, who has most curiously and liuelily
described the true countenance of this his native soil: where you shall find
the particular story of the mount Aetna, (now called, by an Arabicke name Monte
Gibello) of which also Petrus Bembus has put forth a several Treatise. Tully
has written something of this Island, in his orations against Verres.
Thucydides in his sixth book has very well laid down the history of the
original and first inhabitants of the same as Diodorus Siculus has done in
like manner, in his fifth book. Hubertus Goltzius has out of ancient coins,
added great light unto the histories of this country.

SARDINIA.
SEbastian Munster, in his Cosmography has an excellent description of this
Island, done by Sigismundus Arquerus Calaritanus a Sicilian. The same is
described by Leander Albertus, Benedictus Bordonius, Nicolas Leonicus, besides
that which you may read of it in old writers, amongst whom Pausanias has
written some things that are not common. This Island, the state of the Roman
Empire decaying, came into the hands of the Saracens, from whom it was again
won by those of Pisa: Now, together with the kingdom of Sicilia, it is
governed by the Spaniard.

MALTA, sometimes called MELITA.
QVintinus Heduus, has passing well described this Island and has set forth a
peculiar Treatise of the same. The landing of S. Paul and his shipwrecke here
upon this coast, has made this Island famous. But not many years since, by the
overthrow of the Turks huge navy, the knights of Jerusalem to their eternal
fame, manfully defending the assault, it is now again made more famous. See
also Fazellus of this i will.

ELBA, anciently called ILVA.
THis Island in these our days is in subjection to the Dukes of Florence, and
by a strong castle newly built it seems to be very defensible and safe
against the invasions of the Turks. Of the new order of knighthood, by the
name of the Knights of S. Steven, (answereable to those of Jerusalem in Malta)
instituted in the year 1561. by Cosmus Medices Duke of Tuscane, read Caelius
Secundus, in his history of the wars of Malta. That this Island had many
veins of metal, it is clear by the report of ancient Cosmographers. And now
Leander says it has a rich mine of iron, where also the Loadstone is found,
as he writes. Matthiolus tells that from hence Liquid alume, is brought and
conveyed unto us. Diodorus Siculus in his fifth book has a large description
of this Island, where he calls it by the name of Aethalia.

CORCYRA, now CORFV.
IT is an Island of the Hadriaticke sea, subject to the state of Venice. In it
is a very strong castle of the same name, where is continually maintained a
garrison against the Turks. Beside the ancient Geographers, these later writers
Volaterranus, Bened. Bordonius, and Nicolas Nicolay, in his Eastern
observations, with others, have described this Island.

ZERBI, of old writers called LOTOPHAGITIS.
THe overthrow of the Christian navy near this Island which happened in the
year of Christ, 1560. has made this island more famous. Of the situation,
bigness, and governors of this Island, read Johannes Leo Africanus, in his
fourth book of his description of Africa.

maps of Sardinia and Sicily (Italy), Corfu (Greece), Djerba (Tunisia), Elba
(France), and Malta INSVLARVM ALIQVOT MARIS MEDITERRANEI DESCRIPTIO.
Cum Priuilegio.



The I Will ISCHIA.
THat this Island has been in former times called AENARIA, ARIMA, INARIMA, and
PITHECVSA, Homer, Aristotle, Strabo, Pliny, Virgill, Ovid, and other good
writers are sufficient witnesses. Now it is called ISCHIA of the name of the
city there, built upon the top of an hill, in form somewhat like the
Hucklebone, as Hermolaus Barbarons testifies, which of the Greeks is named
Ischia: or rather of the strength and defenciblenes of the place, as
Volaterranus thinks. Although it be sure that these be but synonymes of one
and the same island, yet Mela, Liuie, and Strabo, do seem to make Aenaria and
Pithecusa two distinct isles: as also Ovid may be thought to do in these verses:
Inarimen Prochitamque legit, sterilique locatas Colle Pithecusas, habitantum
nomine dictus. By Inarime he saileth, by Prochyte i will, by barren Pithecuse, A
town on top of lofty cragge, where wily Apes do use. Where by Pithecusas,
as I think, he understands the city ancientlie, (as also now it is,) of the
same name with the whole island. Which, although now it be observed to be joined
to the I Will, yet in former ages it was called Gerunda, and was apart and
disioined from the i will, as Pontanus, a man of good credit, does testify in his
second book which he wrote of the wars of Naples: where he affirms, that
in his time it was joined unto the Island by a causway made between them.
Prochita not far distant from hence, (which Pliny does write to have been
severed from Pithecusa) does show that this was sometime adioined to, and
sometime disioined from this Island. The same author does affirm, (which
Strabo also does approve,) that all these sometime were cut off from the maine
continent, and to have been part of the cape Miseno. This does the forenamed
Pontanus in his sixth book confirm, in these words: That Aenaria, says he,
was cut off, from the maine continent, many things do demonstrate: namely,
The torn rocks, The hollow ground full of caves, The nature of the soil, like
unto that of the continent, lean, dry, and spuing out hot springs and
fountains. It breeds flaming fires in the midst of the earth, wherefore it
is manifest that it contains much Alume. Andreas Baccius, in that his famous
work of the Bathes of the whole world, writes, that this island does
counterfeit Campania, (of which it was sometime a part) not only in respect of
the fertility of the soil, but also for likeness, and similitude of the
bathes. Erythraeus upon the 9. book of Virgills Aeneiads, does think it to be
called Arima, of a kind of people or beasts so named: and that Virgill was the
first, that when he translated that of Homer, (...), of the Ionicke preposition
(...), and (...) altering the declension and number, did make the new word
Inarime. Yet Pliny in the 6. chapter of his 3. book and Solinus surnamed
Polyhistor, are of a contrary opinion, which do affirm it to be of Homer also
called Inarime. And as the same Pliny reports, it was called Aenaria, for the
ships of Aeneas put into harborough here: and Pithecusa, not of the great
store of Apes there found, but of Coopers shops or warehouses. But this opinion
the same Erythraeus in the foresaid place labors to overthrow, as not
altogether consonant to the truth, for that of tons made for this purpose, he
protests that he has not read of in any author whatsoever. Yet Seruius in
my judgment seems upon the forcited 6. of Virgils Aeneads, to stand for
Pliny, where he says, that by Cumae there was a certain place named Doliola,
that is, if we should interpret it, Tons. And it is more likely, that this
Island should take the name from that place, with which sometime it was united,
according to the opinion of these good authors, rather then of apes, (for I
regard not the fable of Ovid) of which beasts none are here, or ever were.
That this Island from the beginning has been subject to earthquakes, flames of
fire, and hot waters from thence often breaking out, we are certified by Strabo
and Pliny. The mountain which Strabo calls Epomeus, and Pliny Epopos, now
they call it S. Nicolas mount, which for the same cause they report to have
burned inwardly at the bottom: and being shaken with an earthquake to have
sometimes cast out great flakes of fire. Here hence arose that fable of Typhon
the giant, (whereof you may read in Homer, Virgill, Silius Italicus, (who
calls him Iapetus) Lucane and others) as the same Strabo interprets, which
they fable to lie underneath this hill, and to breath out fire and water. That
it is on every side wonderfully fertile, of the last writers, Io. Elysius,
Fran. Lombardus, Io. Pontanus, Solenander, Andreas Baccius, and especially
Iasolinus the author of this map, has showed abundantly: who in it does
reckon up, beside the 18. natural bathes which others have written of 35.
other, first discovered by himself. The same author also beside these baths
does make mention of 19. stoues or hot houses, ( fumarolas they call them) and
5. medicinal sands, sovereign in Physic for the drying up of raw humors. Of
this fire here in the bowels of the earth, Aristotle in his book of the
Miracles of Nature, affirms that here are certain stoues, which do burn
with fiery kind of force and exceeding fervent heat, and yet never do burst
out into flames: But Elysius, Pandulphus and Pontanus do report the contrary.
There is a place in this Island Ischia, about a mile from the city of the same
name, which, of the raging fire that happened here in the time of Charles II
in the year 1301. is at this day called Cremate. For here the bowels of the
earth cleaving in sunder, by the flashing fire that flamed out, a great part of
it was so consumed, that a small village being first burnt down, was at the
last utterly swallowed up. And casting up into the air huge stones,
intermedled with smoke, fire, and dust, which falling again by their own force
and violence, scattered here and there upon the ground, made a most fertile
and pleasant island, wast and desolate. This fire continued the space of two
months, so that many, both men and beasts were by it destroyed: and many
shipping themselves and their goods forced to fly either to the islands near
adioining, or to the maine continent. Yet this island for many things is very
fruitful: for in it there are excellent good wines and those of diverse kinds,
as that which they call Greeks wine, Latin, Sorbinio and Cauda caballi. It
bears good corn about S. Nicolas mount. In it the Cedar, the pomecitron, and
the Quince tree, do grow every where most plentifully. Alume and Brimstone are
found deep within the earth: it has had long since some veins of gold, as
Strabo and Elysius have written, and now has as Iasolinus affirms. About the
hill, (commonly called Monte Ligoro) there is great store of phesants, hares,
conies, and other wild beasts: near the cape of S. Nicolas they take much
fish, and withal find much Coral. Not far from thence is the haven Ficus or
Fichera, where the water boileth so hot, that in it flesh or fish are sodden in
a short time, and yet notwithstanding it is of a pleasant taste and very sauory.
There is a fountain which they call Nitroli, in which this is admirable, that
besides his great virtues for the cure of certain diseases, if you shall lay
flax in it, within three days at the most it will make it as white as snow.
Whereupon the author of this Table says, that this i will for bigness, good
air, fertility of soil, mines of metal, strong wines, does far surpass the
other 25. islands which are in the bay of Naples. Between the foreland called
Acus, the needle, and that other named Cephalino, there is a great cave, or
safe harborough for ships, especially for pinnaces and those lesser sorts of
ships. Here it is like that Aeneas landed, of which Ovid speaks: as also
Pompey, when as he sailed from Sicilia to Puteoli, whereof Appian writes in
his 5. book of Civil wars. In this same Island over against Cumae, there is a
lake in which there is continually great plenty of Seamews or Fenducks ( Larus
or Fulica) these are very gainful and profitable to the inhabitants. The words
of Pliny speaking of this island are worth the noting. In the same, says he, a
whole town did sink: and at another time by an earthquake the firm land
became a standing poole, stagnum he calls it: (although that the ancient
printed copies for stagnum have statinas; in which place the learned Scaliger
had rather read statiuas, meaning standing waters.) The same Pliny has left in
record, that if one here shall cut down a Cedar tree, yet it will shoot forth
and bud again. Liuy says that the Chalcidenses of Euboea did first inhabit
this island: yet Strabo says they were the Eretrienses. But these also came
from the i will Euboea. I am of opinion that Athenaeus in his 9 book, although he
names it not, yet he means this island, which he affirms he saw, (as he
sailed from Dicaearchia unto Naples) inhabited by a few men, but full of
copies. There is also near unto this, Prochyta, an island so named, not of
Aeneas his nurse, but because it was profusa ab Aenaria, severed from Aenaria,
or as Strabo in his 5. book affirms from Pithecusae. Notwithstanding in his
I. book he writes that it was sundered from Miseno: yet both may be true: for
as well this, as that by inundations and tempestuous storms were rent off from
the maine land. The poets same that Minas the giant lies under this Island, as
Typhon does under Ischia. Of which Horace in his 3. book of Poems writes to
Calliope. Andreas Baccius writes thus of this i will; It is a little i will, says
he, but very pleasant, rich of metals and hot bathes, notwithstanding for the
continual fires, which the continual tides of the sea do kindle in it, as
Strabo writes, it never was much inhabited. It retains still the ancient
name; for they now call it Procida. Of this island you may read more in Scipio
Mazella, in his additions unto the tract of Elysius of the Bathes of Puteoli.

map of Ischia, Italy ISCHIA, quae olim AENARIA. Ab Aeneae class hic appulsa
sic nominata.
Ne mireris lector, si Septentrionalem plagam non superiorem (ut moris est) sed
contra, inferiorem regionem spectare videas: Id namque data opera fecimus, Quo
utilior, magis necessaria, atque amoenior Insulae pars, verusque eius Situs in
conspectu Caietae, Cumarum, Prochytae, Baiarum, Puteolorum, et Neapolis obviam
iret.

Omnia autem haec constant ratione Circini semper indubitata, exceptis
Mediterraneis locis, circumvicinis Insulis, and Montium aliquot, atque
crematorum lapidum quantitatibus; Quae tum situs, tum ornatus, and perspectivae
gratia ponuntur.

JULIUS IASOLINVS DESCRIB.


CANDIA, sometime called CRETA.
CReta, which now they call Candia, is bigger then Cyprus, but lesser then
Sicilia, or Sardinia: unto which islands only in the Mediterran sea it is
inferior. Yet for worth and fertility it is equal to the best. Ancient
Historiographers do affirm that once it was famous for one hundred cities, and
therefore was called Hecatompolis. In the time of Pliny it had not above forty.
At this day, as P. Bellonius testifies it has not above three of any account,
that is, Candy, a colonie of the Venetians, (whereof the whole island is now
named,) Canea and Rhetimo. The compass of the island is about 520. miles. It is
every where full of mountains and hills, and therefore the inhabitants are much
given to hunting. There is in it never a river that is nauigable, nor any
venomous or hurtful beast. The excellent wine, which they here call Maluasia,
and is from hence transported almost into all countries, has made this island
famous all the world over. This kind of wine old writers called Pramnium, as
Bellonius records. Volaterran is of opinion that it is called Maluisia, for
Aruisia, by the addition of one letter. And he furthermore adds, that that
kind of vine was first brought into Creta from the cape Aruisium in the i will
Chios, (now Scio) and therefore the wines were called vina aruisia. Here is
great store of Cypress trees, (whereof they make their ships,) which are of
such great height, as Dom. Niger reports, that it is a most goodly fight to
behold. In this island was the Maze or Labyrinth built by Daedalus after the
pattern, as Pliny says, of that in Egypt. A mention of which, as George
Alexander, the Lieutenant of this island for the Venetians, affirms in
Volaterran, do remain unto this day.

There is a mountain, says he, cut through, hollow every way with many
windings and turnings, and has one only narrow and strait entrance. The
guide, a man that well knows the place, goes before with a burning torch,
directing the way in and out, and showing the strange cranks in the dark
corners. But Peter Bellone, a curious searcher of ancient monuments and
antiquities, and one that in our age diligently viewed this island, says that
this in old time was a quarry of stone, not a Labyrinth. (Notwithstanding that
the people of the country do so call it) which indeed is more probable, seeing
that Pliny affirms that in his time there remained no sign of it. But of
this place take this description of P. Bellone, There is a place between
Gnosium and Cortina, which having been observed to be very convenient for the
cutting and digging out of stone, the country people made there a Stone-mine
(lapidicinam) out of which when as many stones were dug there were many
windings and turnings left, so that he which by himself will venture to go up
and down in this stone-pit, he shall light upon many crooks and by-waies, and
may easily loose himself. Near to the river Leth, is this
falsly-supposed-labyrinth, the which if any be desirous to see, he must needs
use the help of some one or other of the country people of the next village, to
go in before him with candle to guide and direct him. But in it such a number
of Battes do lodge, that except a man do take great heed they will by their
flying up and down, put out the candle with their wings. In the bottom of the
pit are found great heaps of Battes dong, and their little young ones yet
hanging upon the sides and walls. The dammes when they can no longer fly, do
not cleave and stick to the wall, nor stand upon their feet, but there they
hang upon the beams and rafters, as our Battes do in the clifts of timber and
holes of walls. Thus far Bellonius. (The like story unto this, altogether as
Bellonius reports it, in my mind I have seen, when as for recreation I
traveled from Rome to Hostia, and in my journey at the haven of Traiane I went
under the ground, first hiring mine host to go before me with a light, that I
might view the ruins of the same.) It was anciently dedicated to Jupiter,
because that here, old folks did think, he was bred, and brought up, and at
length buried. Bordonius affirms that upon the North side of this island there
is a great cave underneath the earth, made by the labor and industry of man,
forty cubits in length, and four in breadth: which at this day they call
Jupiters tomb, and that upon the head of it yet to this day his Epitaph
remains written in great Capital letters.

Strabo writes that the people have been long since accounted for the best
Mariners, as being wholly environed with the sea: and from thence arose that
byword, Cretensis mare nescit, A Cretian has no skill in sailing. They have
of old been very infamous for their leuity, deceit, lying, and other such like
vices: Here hence sprung these proverbs, Cretiza cum Cretensi, Cretensis
Cretensem, Cretensis cum Aeginate, E Creta raptus. etc. of which thou may
read in Erasmus his Chiliades. Wherefore they are also ill reported of by S.
Paul for the same faults. But I fear me least that which has commonly been
spoken of the Cretian, may indeed be truly verified of many other Nations, nay
I would to God that all Nations wheresoever all the world over were not in this
of kin to the Cretians.

L. Caecilius Metellus Creticus first brought this island under the command of
the Romans, about the year 685. after the building of Rome: Afterward it was
subject to the Emperors of Constantinople; Then it was given to Bonifacius of
Monteferrato: by whom it was sold to the Venetians, in the year of Christ
1194. to whom at this day it does belong. Amongst the ancient Geographers
Strabo has curiously described this island: Amongst the latter writers Domi.
Niger, Volaterran, Vadian, Zieglerus, and Bened. Bordonius, have done the like.
But most excellently of all others and exactly Iodocus Ghistelius in his
journey to Jerusalem, and Bellonius in his observations. Iodocus a Meggen,
also has something of this Island, in his Peregrination to Jerusalem, worth the
observation and reading. We are beholding to that brave nobleman, The
Honorable Sign. Francisco Superantia, a Gentleman of Venice, not only a lover
of the Mathematics and earnest student of Geographie, but a worthy esteemer of
all manner of learning.

Certain Islands in the sea ARCHIPELAGO.
THe Aegaean sea (now called Archipelago) contains many islands, as the
Cyclades, Sporades and diverse others, of which, some of the chief we have
described in this plotte. NEGROPONTE, sometime called Eubooea: his chief city
then was called Chalcis, now they call it Negroponte, whereof the whole island
took the name. It was not long since wholly subject unto the Venetians: from
whom it was taken by the Turks about the year of Christ 1471. It yields
great plenty of oil, corn and wine, and is of all things that the earth
brings forth, very fertile, especially it affoordeth very good wood for the
making of ships and galleys, as Anonymus reports, who wrote of the sacking
and taking of it. The inhabitants (which is almost generally true in all the
isles of this sea) are partly Greeks, and partly Turks: but each uses his own
language and religion. NICSIA, in old time Naxos, is accounted one of the most
fertile islands of this sea. It yields good store of Wine. Some do think that
here is a vein of Gold, but such is the sloth and negligence of the people,
that yet it is not known where about it is. Here is a kind of Waspe whose
sting they report to be deadly. Here are very many Battes. It was sometime
belonging to Iohanni Quirino, a nobleman of Venice: afterward it came into the
possession of a certain captain named Iacobo Crispo, whom Solimus the Turk
drove from hence. Therefore it is now inhabited by Turks and Jews.

SANTORINI, of the ancients called by the name of Therasia. This Island rises
by little and little even from the shore unto the midst, until it become an
high mountain, upon whose top is placed the castle Scaro. The people for the
most part live by fishing. This also, as the other, is under the command of the
great Turk. SCIO, the old writers called it Chios, is all full of trees and
mountains: it is watered with many small brooks. Vinum aruisium, (they now
call it Maluasia) was from hence first transported into Candia. This island only
breeds the Mastiche-tree, whose gum from hence is conveyed all Christendom
over. Andronicus Palaeologus the Emperor of Constantinople gave it to the
Genowaies, who possessed it until the year 1465. when as Soliman by a wile
gatte it from them. The women of this i will are commended above all other for
favor and beauty. Of this you may read in Laonicus his tenth book. RHODVS,
still retains the ancient name. It has a city of the same name, very strong
and defensible, with a very large and capacious haven. It is the more famous
for the Colossus of the sun, a statue or image seventy cubits high, which
being broken off at the knees by an earthquake, was ouerthrown and fell to the
ground. Certain Egyptians, as Domi. Niger reports, in the time of Constance
the Emperor, passing the sea from Alexandria to Rhodus, amongst other things,
overthrew this Colossus, brake it in pieces, and with the brass did lade away
900. camels. It was given by Emanuel Emp. of Constantinople unto the knights of
Jerusalem, which for a long time and often did valiantly defend it against the
furious assaults of the Turks, until in the year 1522. when as Solomon
besieging it round by sea and land; they were forced to yield it up, and to
fly into the i will Melita. Of these see more in Theodoricus Adamaeus. STALAMINE,
this the Gretians in old time called Lemnos. Of it read that which we shall
write in the description of Cyprus. MILO, former ages long since called it
Melos. In it is a mine of Silver, where also is found the Sardoine, a precious
stone. METELLINO, old writers called it Lesbot. It has a city of the same
name, shaken and ruined by an earthquake. They are under the government of the
Turk, as the other, yet they retain their old language and religion. CERIGO,
in old time they called it Cythera. SCARPANTO, the ancients named it Carpathus,
or as Homer writes it Crapathus: whereupon the sea about this place was called
Mare Carpathium. It is situate almost in the midway between Candia and Rhodus.
It is in compass forty, or as others affirm, fifty miles. Eustathius in his
commentaries upon Homer, says that it is craggy and every where mountainous
and full of hills, and was called Porphyris in old time of the great abundance
of Purples, (a kind of fish, whereof comes the purple color) found in this
sea: and Tetrapolis, of the four cities in this island. From this island sprung
that proverb, Carpathius leporem, as the same Eustathius delivers out of
Julius Pollux. It is spoken of those which do so do a thing, that afterward
being done, they do repent them of it. Because these Ilanders first brought in
hares into this country, and within a little while after, when they perceived
how they eat and spoiled their corn, they destroyed them again. It has many
Havens, but those very narrow, shallow and dangerous. The inhabitants do speak
the Greek tongue, and profess the Religion of the Greek Church, but are
subject to the jurisdiction and government of the Signiory of Venice. You may
read more of these islands in Bordonius and Porcacchius, which in the Italian
tongue have written peculiar treatises of Islands.

map of Crete, Greece CANDIA INSULA


map of the islands of Lesbos, Cythera, Karpathos, Naxos, Therasia, Milos,
Lemnos, Euboea, Rhodes, and Chios, Greece ARCHIPELAGI INSVLARVM ALIQVOT
DESCRIP. METELLINO CERIGO SCARPANTO NICSIA SANTORINI MILO STALIMENE NEGROPONTE
RODVS SCIO



CYPRVS.
CYprus does justly challenge his place amongst the greater Islands of the
Mediterran sea. The form of the Island is much longer than it is broad. The
Metropolitan or chief city is Nicosia. Famagosta also is a most goodly city,
the Mart-towne of the whole I Will, and very rich in regard of the commodious
haven and great customs and toles there paid. It is inferior to no Island that
I know: for it yields plenty of wine and oil: it has also sufficient corn
to find it self. Moreover it has had some veins of Brass or Copper, in
which veins there was also found Vitrioll and Rubigo aeris, the rust of
brass, simples of sovereign virtue in the practice of Physic. In it does
grow in great plenty, the sweet cane (canna mellis) out of which they do boil
Sugar. It affoordeth an excellent kind of strong wine, as good as that of
Candy, which they call Malmesey. There is a kind of stuff made there of goats
hair, which now we call Chamelett, the Italians Zambelloto. This Island sends
over diverse commodities into other countries, whereof they yearly raise great
profit and gains; it does not much stand in need of any foreign commodities or
merchandise. The air is not very wholesome nor healthful. The people
generally do give themselves to pleasures, sports and voluptuousness: the
women are very wanton, and of light behavior. The fruitfulness of it is so
great, that in old time they called it Macaria, that is, The Blessed Island; and
the lasciviousness of the nation such, that vulgarly it was supposed to have
been dedicated to Venus the Goddess of love. It is 427. miles about, and 200.
long, as Bordonius has recorded. The Venetians do hold it by right of
inheritance, and is under them governed by a Lieutenant or Praetor. Diodorus
Siculus in his 16. book says, that in this island were nine goodly cities,
which had their several petie Kings, by whom they were governed; all
notwithstanding subject to the King of Persia. Inferior towns also were
commanded by their proper Kings.

But that the fertility of this i will may better appear, I think it good to set
down that commendation of Ammianus Marcellinus, which he has left behind him
of it; Cyprus, says he, is so fertile and abounds with such variety of all
things, that without the help of any foreign commodities, only of themselves it
is able to build a ship from the keel to the top sail, and send it to the
sea ridged and furnished with all things necessary whatsoever. Sextus Rufus
also has these words of it; Cyprus; famous for wealth and great riches,
tempted the poor and needy Romans to invade it, so that we held the
possession of that island iniustly and rather for gain, then for any right we
had unto it. But this, o Rufus, is not, as they say, mercenary commendation of
the Roman valor.

Amongst the ancient writers, Strabo, Mela, and other Geographers have
described this Island: Of the latter, Benedictus Bordonius in his treatise of
Islands: Vadianus, Pius the second Pope of Rome, Domin. Niger, Sabellicus,
Volaterran, and Iacobus Zieglerus passing well: Stephanus Lusignanus, has in
the French tongue written a peculiar book of this Island.

STALAMINE, sometime called LEMNOS.
LEmnos, an Island of the Aegean sea, lies over against Thrace, (Romania)
between the Peninsula or Neck-land of Thrace, and the mount Athon of Macedonie.
Famous long since for Vulcanes shop, and now as much talked of for the
medicinal earth (which of the Physicians is called Terra Lemnia) that here is
dug out. At this day this i will, is called of the Turks and Italians,
Stalamine. It is 100. miles about, as Bordonius affirms: And is a plain and
champion country, in respect of the Islands round about it. On the East side, as
Bellonius reports, it is lean and no good corn ground: between the South
and West parts, where it is more moist, it is much more fertile. Anciently it
had two cities, Myrina and Ephestias: this latter is wholly desert and not
inhabited, is now called Cochino. That at this day is a town of small account,
situate in a Demy-ile or Peninsula, joined to the Island by a narrow neck or
Isthmos; at this day it is called Lemno. In this island, as Pliny testifies,
there was a Labyrinth, the third in estimation from that of Egypt. But
Bellonius narrowly seeking for his foundation, could not find any mention of
it: nor any of the country that could show him any more then certain pieces of
it. The same author affirms that there are yet remaining in it 75. villages.
The earth which anciently was called Sphragida and Terra Lemnia, commonly Terra
sigillata, is now, (as in old time it was wont) dug out of the ground not
without a certain kind of superstitious ceremony, every year upon the sixth
day of August; and at no time else. For upon pain of death, it is decreed that
no man either privately or openly shall go thither to dig out ought. The
place where it is dug out, they call Vulcanes mount. Of the kinds of herbs,
serpents, and fishes which are here very common: and of the ceremonies and
with what ado the earth, that is called Terra Lemnia, is taken out of the
ground, and of diverse other peculiar things of this island, read the first book
of P. Bellonius his Observations. Andreas Matthiolus also, out of the letters
of Albacarius, unto Angerius Busbechius, has a curious description and
discourse of the ceremonies used in the digging out of Terra sigillata, in
those his learned commentaries upon Dioscorides. Of this also read Hodoeporicum
Bizantium Hugoris Fauolij. He that desires the old ceremonies of digging out
of the same, let him have recourse to Galen his nienth book and second
chapter, De Medicam. simplic.

map of Cyprus CYPRI INSVLAE NOVA DESCRIPT. 1573.

Ioannes a Deutecum. f.
Cum Priuilegio.



map of Lemnos, Greece LEMNOS INSVLAE descriptionem ex Petri Bellonij libro de
Auibus, hoc in loco tanguam parergon adiecimus.


GREECE.
GReece, which sometime was as it were the mother and nurce of all good
learning and disciplines, of a rich and wealthy country, and which by his
valor and magnanimity was Empress and Prince of the better half of the
world, is at this day driven to that state (such is the mutability and
inconstancy of fortune, which turns all things vpside down) that there is no
part of it but either it is subject to the Turk and enthralled to his slavish
servitude, or else it is under the command of the Venetians, or tributary to
them. The Turk possesses the greater part: the Venetians do only enjoy
certain islands in that sea. Those which are under the Venetian government are
in better state, in respect of Religion, than those which are subject to the
Turk. Those which are under the obedience of the Turk, do conform themselves
to their manners, as likewise those which are commanded of the Venetians; do
imitate the behavior of the Venetians. Yet all of them do live in such great
darkness of ignorant blindness, that in all Greece now there is not one
University or school of liberal sciences: neither are they desirous to have
their children taught so much as to write and read. And all of them generally
do speak their ancient language, but much corrupted, although some of them do
speak more purely then others. Yet their modern language does come more near
to the old Greek, then the Italian to the Roman or Latin tongue. Those which
dwell in cities subject to the Venetian jurisdiction, do speak Greek and
Italian: but the country people only Greek: those which dwell in cities
commanded by the Turk, do speak Greek and the Turkish tongues; those in the
villages and vpland places, only Greek. They have also at this day, as (also
they had in former ages) diverse and different dialects; for the people of one
province do speak more pure; they of another shire more barbarously and
rudely: whereupon that happens to this country, which is incident to other
parts of Europe, that one does mock and scoff another pronunciation, which
to his ears seems rude and clownish: so that the Boys of Constantinople do
mock and laugh at the forreners; for their pronunciation and diverse accenting
of words different from them. Much like as the Italian, which speaks the
Tuscane: or the French which speaks French: or the Spaniard, which speaks
the Castillian languages, do flout and hiss at those which are brought up in
other countries of the same kingdoms.

But that we may set out in the best manner the whole course of life of this
nation, I think it necessary to distinguish the Nobility and citizens from the
common people and baser sort of men: for they which are of greater reuenews and
of better credit, do use the habit and fashion of apparel of those Princes to
whom they are subject, so that those which are governed by the Venetians, do
imitate the Venetians: those that are subject to the Turk, the Turks. But the
common people under whose jurisdiction so ever, as well within the maine land,
as the ilanders, do yet retain something of the old customs of the Greeks:
for, for the most part all of them do wear the hair of their head long
behind, and short before: and do use great double cappes. The Ilanders in the
form of divine service, all of them both in rites and ceremonies, as well as in
Ecclesiastical government, do not any whit vary one from another. All the
Greeks generally, after the Turks manner, have not much household stuff,
neither do they lie upon feather-beds, but in steed of them they use certain
pillowes, stuffed with flocks or wool. All of them do hate delaied wine, that
is, wine mingled with water, and to this day they keep their old custom of
carousing and liberal kind of drinking, especially the Creets. Yet in this
they differ from the Germans; in that these provoke one another to drink
whole cups, those do sippe and drink, smaller draughts. Whereupon Graecari,
was then (and now still is) used, for Inebriari, to be drunken. But because
that in drinking they use certain laws or ceremonies, I cannot pass them
over with silence. First, their tables are very low, and they drink by turns,
no man ever skipping his course: so that if any man shall call for wine out of
order, that is, before his turn come about, it is held for a very unmannerly
part. He that can fill wine best, holds the wine pot, and he alone fills
out for the rest in order as it comes to their course. In those their
drinkings they use a certain little kind of glass without a foot, so that it
cannot be set down but every man must drink all out, and may not leave one
drop in the glass. Sometime they challenge one another to drink after the
Dutch fashion, and then they embrace one another, and hold hands, and one
kisseth the hand of him to whom he drinks, and first lays it upon his
forehead, then he stroaketh and kisseth both his cheeks: but in this kind of
drinking they observe no order as before. And because they drink a very strong
wine, and that in small draughts, and so do heat themselves very much, they
have always by them a great tankerd full of water, whereof they drink every
foot large draughts to cool themselves again: for otherwise they should
scarsely be able to alay their thirst. No women may be present at their
drinkeings. The old custom used of the heathen of mourning for the dead, is
still observed at this day all over Greece, and countries near adioining:
which is a very foolish manner: for as soon as one is dead, the women meet
together in a certain place; and at the break of day they begin a kind of
lamentation or howling, striking their breasts, tearing their cheeks, twiching
and pulling their hair, they keep a pitiful and ruefull ado to see to. And
that these ceremonies may be done more solemnly, they hire one woman above the
rest with a most shrill loud voice, to lead the rest and guide their voices,
that their rests, or pauses as they call them, and the accents may better be
distinguished: and in this mournful song they set out the praises and virtuous
qualities of the party deceassed, from his cradle even to the last hour of his
death. etc. These we have taken out of the first book of P. Bellonius his
observations, where thou may see many things more worth the noting.

Amongst the old writers, Strabo and Mela described this country, but Pausanias
more curiously and with greater diligence. Of the latter, Nicolas Gerbelius and
Wolfangus Lazius; who also cites one Antony Vrantz Bishop of Agria, who had
trauailled it all over, and has lately set out a more late description of the
same, with the modern names and appellations of places. To these you may add
the Hodoeporicum Byzantium Hugonis Fauolij, and the Oriental observations of
S. Nicolaij, Andrew Theuet, Peter Bellone etc. Peter Gill has most exactly
described Bosphorus, (the Latins call it Stretto di Constantinopoli; the
Greeks now, Laimon; the Turks, Bagazin) and the city Constantinople. Appian
also in his fourth book of Civil wars, has many things which make much for
the description of Thrace.

map of Greece GRAECIAE VNIVERSAE SECVNDVM HODIERNVM SITVM NEOTERICA DESCRIPTIO.
Iacobo Castaldo Pedemoniano Auctore.
Cum priuilegio.



ILLYRICVM.
ILlyricum, or, (which pleases others better) Illyris, is a country upon the
coast of the Hadriaticke sea, opposite to Italy. The bounds of this province
according to diverse authors, are diverse. For Pliny does assign it but a
narrow room between the rivers Arsia and Titius. And Ptolemey he extends the
confines of it as far, namely from Histria, up as high as Macedonia, all
along by the sea coast: and his vpland or more inner parts, he makes to reach
even unto the skirts of Pannonia and Moesia the higher. Pomponius Mela and
Dionysius Alexandrinus do yet make it far greater, ascribing to Illyricum all
that tract of the Hadriaticke sea that is between Tergestum and Montes
Ceraunij, and affirms withal that the Illyrij do dwell beyond the river
Danaw. For Mela does account the river Danaw amongst the rivers of Illyricum.
Strabo also in his seventh book of his Geography, says that the Illyrij, do
border upon Macedonia and Thracia. But Appianus Alexandrinus does yet make it
more large then any of those former writers: for thus he writes of the
Illyrij. The Greeks, says he, do call all those Illyrij, which dwell between
Chaonia, and Thesprotis, (beyond Macedonia and Thracia) up as high as the river
Ister: for this is the length of this province. The breadth of it is the space
betwixt Macedonia and the mountains of Thrace, even unto Paeonia and the
Ionian sea, and so butteh upon the Alps, which is about five days iournies
length. His length is thrice as great as the breadth etc. And a little after,
the same author has these words: The Romans do generally comprehend under
that of the Illyrij, not only those before cited, but also the Paeones beyond
them, together with the Rhoeti, Norici, and Mysij which inhabit Europe, and
whatsoever Nations else do border upon these, which they leave upon the right
hand that sail up the river Ister: and again that they may distinguish the
Hellines from the Greeks, they call them by their several and proper names:
otherwise generally they are by one name called Illyrij: For even from the head
of the river Ister unto the Ponticke sea, they commonly term them Illyrici.
Thus far Appianus. Suetonius, in the life of Tiberius Caesar testifies in
like manner that the bounds of Illyricum are thus large at the left.

Sextus Rufus, who lived in the time of Valentinian the Emperor, ascribes
seuenteen provinces to Illyricum: Two of the Norici, the two Pannonies,
Valeria, Sauia, Dalmatia, Moesia, the two Dacias, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia,
two Epirus, Praeualis and Creta.

Some do think that these countries were so named of Illyrius the son of
Polyphemus: others of Illyrius the son of Cadmus. Strabo writes that all the
sea coast of Illyricum, with the islands adioining, is furnished with many good
havens: when as contrariwise the whole coast of Italy over against this, has
none at all. It is a hot country, as Italy is, and very fertile of many sorts
of grain, famous for olives and vines: except certain places which are
altogether rough and vntoiled. The high country which is above this is
altogether mountainous, cold and snowie, especially that which is toward the
North. The country people in old time were much given to robberies and
theeuing, but now they be somewhat more civil. They dwell for the most part in
houses of timber, thatcht with straw, excepting only a few marine cities, in
which their buildings are a little better. Thus far Strabo. Amongst the which
the chief is Ragusi, anciently called Epidaurus, a city famous for the Mart,
as well as for the politic government of their commonwealth. Not long since
it was a free city, now it is tributary to the Turks, and for that (as
Nicolaus Nicolaius witnesses in his Observations) it paieth yearly to the
great Turk 12000. ducates of Gold. A description of this you may read of in
the tenth book of Martin Barlet of the life of Scanderbeg.

Thus far generally of Illyricum: now I think it not amiss to speak
something of this our Map which does not comprehend all Illyricum according
to the judgment of the forenamed authors, Pliny only excepted who does
restrain the bounds of it, as we said, into a more narrow room. There are in
this Chart Histria, Slauonia, Dalmatia, Bosnia, Carinthia, part of Carniola,
and part of Stiria: all almost tributary unto the kingdom of Hungary, except a
few provinces abuttant upon the sea, which belong to the Venetians. The Turk
has subdued the greatest part of them to his obedience. All which countries
almost are described in their several Tables in this our Theater, and
therefore in this place we speak nothing at all of them. Only I think it not
amiss to add this one story of Stiria, That this country does breed those
Strumosi, that is, a kind of people subject to wennes, and that there are often
seen some with such huge great wennes, that they do hinder their speech: and a
woman giving suck (as Aubanus writes) does cast it over her shoulder like a
sack or wallet, least it should let the child from taking the breast. And
indeed we in the year 1558. iournied from Frisach by Vienna to Venice, where
we saw to our great admiration, a man whose chin beginning at his ears was
almost as broad as from shoulder to shoulder, and hung down even to his
breast. I say, not without great admiration, against that of Inuenall, Quis
tumidum guttur miretur in Alpibus? It is no wonder great, to see the wenne
amongst the Alps. They commonly attribute the cause of the wenne to the water
and air which here the inhabitants do use, and draw into their bodies.
Rithmaimer this countryman borne, in his treatise of the situation of the
World, has a peculiar description of Stiria. Of Bosina read D. Chytraeus his
Chronicle of Saxony. Of these Illyrians read more at large in Dominicus Niger,
Volaterran, and Lewis Verger in the Cosmography of Sebastian Munster, as also
Laonicus Chalcondylas, who in his tenth book Notiliar, has written something
of this country worth the reading. All this tract, except those shires which
border upon Germany, does speak the Slauonian tongue: which, (that I may say
something of it by the way) of some is now called Windish, was thought to be
that, which the Latins called Lingua Illyrica, the Illyrian tongue, and at
this day is very far spread, as being generally spoken of all the nations
inhabiting between the Gulf of Venice, and the North sea. For the inhabitants
of Istria, Dalmatia, Bosna, Morauia, Bohemia, Lusatia, Polonia, Lithuania,
Pruthenia, Scandinauia, Bulgaria, and Russia that wide and large kingdom, and
many other neighbor counrries, up as high almost as Constantinople do speak
that tongue; so that it is also much used amongst the Turks:

map of Illyria, encompassing Slovenia and Northern Croatia SCHLAVONIAE,
CROATIAE. CARNIAE. ISTRIAE. BOSNIAE, FINITIMARVMQVE REGIONVM NOVA DESCRIPTIO,
AVCTORE AVGVSTINO HIRSVOGELIO.


The other Map of ILLYRICA.
I Had purposed, as I promised in the Preface to this book, to have set out of
every country but one Map or Table: and that as exact as might be: therefore
when the famous man Johannes Sambucus had sent unto me a more absolute
description of this country to be inserted into this our Theater, I had
determined to have left the other out. But as it is often times both delightful
and profitable to know diverse opinions of one and the same thing, so also I
persuade my self, it will not be altogether unprofitable sometime to see the
different descriptions of sundry authors of one and the same country. Again
lest the studious and diligent Reader should miss in this our last edition,
that which was to be had in our first, we have thought good to retain also
as well the one as the other: and to place it here in this place as an in-come
or by-matter. I doubt not but it will be a thing well pleasing to all students
of Cosmography.

map of Illyria, encompassing Slovenia and Northern Croatia ILLYRICVM.
JOAN. SAMBVCVS ORTELIO SVO, S. Mitto hanc quoque tabellam qua necessaria
confinia Pannonia declarantur, fluuiorum and aliquot locorum situs
Hirschuogelij recte mutaui, Angelini autem studio plurima adieci, et interualla
correxi, vt parum quis si cum Hirschvogelij haec coniungat desiderarit, si qui
errores sint, dies certiora docebit. Viennae, Vale, 25. October. 1572.

Cum Imperatoriae and Regniae Maiestatis Priuilegio.



The Dukedom of CARINTHIA, or KARNTEN, and the County Palatine of GORCZ.
THis Dukedom of Carinthia, (which as Rithmayer affirms should rather be
written Carnithia) has upon the East and North Steyrmarcke, upon the West and
South the Alps and Friuli. Carniola is part of this province. In this country
are many valleies and hills very good wheat grounds: many Lakes and Rivers;
amongst the which the chief is Drauus, or as they now call it Dra. The more
famous cities of this tract are, S. Veit, Villach, and Clagenfurt. S. Veit the
Metropolitan city, is a city of good note, having a very fair large market
place, wherein stands a goodly conduite of running water, which we saw in
building in the year 1558. The diameter or breadth of the cesterne we took to
be about seven foot over. This cesterne made of one whole stone of white
marble, and there amongst other monuments of antiquity dug out of the
ground, was a thing worth the seeing. As they go out of the city toward
Clagen-furt, there is a very wide champion that offers it self, as yet
bestrewed with many ruins of ancient buildings, they commonly call it
Solfeldt: Paracelsus in that his Chronicle of this country (if so be it be his)
names it, I cannot tell upon what ground, Liburnia. I do rather judge Soluense
oppidum, the town Solue, which Pliny makes mention of in Carina, to have long
since stood here. This is that place, where the princes are wont to be crowned
abroad in the open air, a strange and unusual kind of ceremony curiously
described by Pius the second, in his Europa. Villach, a town, whose houses in
their forefront gorgeously painted and set out with histories and variety of
colors yield a beautiful and goodly show to the beholders. It is seated upon
the river Dra, in a plain, enclosed with very high steep rocks, with a great
stone bridge over the river. Clagen-furt, a strong city anciently called, as
Lazius witnesses, Claudia. Some there are that write, that the citizens of
this city are so hardly bent against thieves, that upon the least occasion of
suspicion of theft a man shall there without examination be hanged, and then
the third day after that he is hanged, they sit upon the trial; if so be
that they find him to have been unjustly executed, they bury him very
honorably: if justly, they let him hang still. But Rithmayer says, that this
is but a mere fable. Moreover Frisach, a very ancient town S. Lionhart,
Wolfsperg, etc. are towns also of this country. In former times the Iapydes
were thought to have dwelt here abouts. The sovereignty and secular
jurisdiction of this country does belong unto the Dukes of Austrich: but as
concerning Ecclesiastical jurisdiction it partly belongs to the Bishop of
Salczburg, and partly to the Patriarch of Aquileia, as Paracelsus affirms in
his forecited Chronicle. But in the same place he has a most ridiculous
etymology of the name of this province, which he faineth to be fetched from
the Latins, namely, that it should be named Carinthia, as who would say,
Caritas intima, Entire love and affection. As if the first inhabitants who
seated themselves here should have been desirous to have their country named
by a name fetched from a foreign nation and strange language, not understood of
them. The Reader not satisfied with this here set down by us, let him have
recourse unto Sebastian Munster, Sabellicus, Pio II. etc. I understand also
that one John Saluian, has surueied this country, whose description as yet, I
have not seen.

Goritiae palatinatus, The county palatine of Gorcz, belonging to the Duke of
Austrich, is so named of Goercz, the chief city of this country, called of the
Italians (for it stands in Italy beyond the Alps) Goricia, of Ptolemey
Iulium Carnicum, as Leander thinks. Amasaeus, as the same Leander says,
gathers by diverse antiquities here found and remaining, that Noteia sometime
was seated here about. It is a town situate at the mouth of the river Wipach,
(formerly called Fluuius frigidus,) I mean where Wipach falls into the river
Natiso.

HISTRIA, or ISTEREICH.
IT is almost a common thing generally (as Pliny says in his natural
history) that every man describes best and most curiously that country, in
which he was borne and brought up. And within a few lines after the same
author says thus; I will follow no one man altogether, but as I shall find
him in all points to speak most probably and consonant to the truth. And
therefore here in this place (the which I do almost every where in these
discourses upon my Maps) I have determined, amongst many others that have
described this province, to offer to the view of the Reader a great description
according to the capacity of the place, of Lewis Verger, that country man
borne. This man in the Cosmography of Munster, says that this Neckland or
Demi-ile, from the inner bay where Trieste now stands hard upon the shore,
unto the S. Veit, a town situate in Fanatico upon the river Fiume, contains
in length better then 200. miles. The whole country is not very level and
plain, yet the mountains are neither very high, steep nor barren, but
plentifully replenished with vines, olives, and other fruit trees, corn,
pastures and cattle: only in that part which bends toward the bay, Golfo di
Quernero, sometime called Flanatico or Fanatico, it has a very high mountain,
which they commonly call Monte mayor. This first presents it self to the eye
of the seamen which sail hitherward; in whose top there arises a very
goodly spring of fresh water. It yields many rare herbs and plants of
singular virtues, which do make Physicians, far dwellers from hence, to
resort hither in time of the year, and with great toil and danger to clamber
up the same. The rivers of Histria are three, Fornio, Naupertus and Arsia: the
first the country people call Risano: the second, Quieto: the last Arsa, which
falls into the bay Quernero or Fanatico, and is now the utmost bound of
Italy. The cities of Histria are Mugia, Iustinopolis, Isola, Pitano, (or Piran
as I think it is named in the map) Pumago, Hemonia, Parenzo, Osara, Rubino,
Pola, S. Veit, all of them marine cities. Pinguento, Montana, Portulae,
Grisignana, Bullae, S. Lorenzo, Doi castelli, S. Vincenzo, Val Adignano,
Pamerano, Albona, Fianonae, Petina, Galigagna, Coslaco, and Pisino, are vpland
cities. The most famous city of this whole country is Iustinopolis, which they
commonly call Capo d' Istria, the head of Histria, Pliny names it Aegida: it
stands upon a rock in the sea, far remote from the continent, unto which
it is joined by a long bridge. This city with many other is subject unto the
Venetians, the rest are under the government of the Duke of Austrich etc.
Beside the ancient Geographers read also Leander, Volaterran, and Dom. Niger,
Cassiodore in his 12. book Variar, has much of this province.

ZARA and SEBENICO.
ZARA, we think sometime to have been called Iadera, and others do affirm
that his territories anciently was called Liburnia. SEBENICO, is that which old
writers called Sicum. Both are marine cities situate upon the Hadriaticke sea,
under the jurisdiction of the Venetians. In that place where in this our map
thou see certain ruins of old decayed buildings, Dominicus Niger says,
sometime did stand the city Essesia, which now lies level with the ground,
and the place at this day is called Beribir, where Epigrammes in Latin and
Greek, with many other monuments of antiquity are yet to be seen. The author
of this map, whose name we know not, calls the same Bergine. Of this part
of Illyria read the same Dom. Niger his sixth book of Geography. M. S.
Cornelius Scepper sometime Ambassador of Ferdinand Emperor of Rome, unto
Soliman the great Turk, in his Iournall has these words; At Zara we saw the
church of S. Io. de Maluasia, so named, for that the sailours of a hoy laden
with Malmesy, being in foul weather in danger of shipwreck vowed, that if
they escaped safe to land they would build a church, whose mortar should be
tempered with malmesy, which was accordingly performed.

map of Carinthia, Slovenia and Austria CARINTHIAE DVCATVS, ET GORITIAE
PALATINATVS, WOLF. LAZIO auctore.


map of Istria, encompassing Slovenia, Croatia, and Italy Histriae tabula Petro
Coppo descr.


map of Zadar and Sibenik, Croatia ZARAE, ET SEBENICI DESCRIPTIO


HUNGARY.
HVngaria, (which it is certain was so named of the Hunni or Hungari, a people
come out of Scythia, which now inhabit it) contains almost both the
Pannonies, the countries of the Iaziges, and the Daci, now comprehending
Transsyluania, VValachria and Moldauia. On the South it begins at the river
Dra: on the North it is bounded by Sarmatia Europaea, now called Polonia; and
Getia, at this day named VValagria: on the West it has Austrich, sometime the
head of the Higher Pannonia: upon the East it is confined with Mysia, which at
this day they call Rhetia. Donaw (Danubius) of all the rivers of Europe by
far the greatest, runs through the midst of it, and so divides it into
two parts, the Heather and the Farther. The HEATHER HVNGARIA, is that which
formerly were the Pannonies, the Upper and Nether: this is severed from the
further Hungaria by the river Dra: from Austrich and Bayern, by the foot of
the mount Caecius; from Slauonia by Dra: from Bosna and Rascia, by Saw. The
head and chief cities of this part is Buda, (often they call it) the imperial
seat of their kings. Other towns of great account are, Alba Regalis,
(Stulweissenburg) famous for the coronation and tombs of their kings;
Strigonium, (Gran) the Metropolitan or Archbishops sea, Quinqueecclesiae
(Funskirchen, the Turks call it Petscheu) a bishopric; Sopronium, Taurunum
(the Germans call it Griechweissenburg, the Hungarians, Nandor alba; the
Italians Belgrado:) Sabaria, (Zombatel) or Szombath hely) the place where S.
Martine was borne: and Stridon, (Sdrigna,) the native soil of S. Hierome. It
has many goodly rivers; and two very famous lakes, (Balaton) and (Fertou). To
this part of Hungary, as soon as thou art over the river Dra, is annexed
Slauonia, sometime a part of the upper Pannonie, lying between the rivers Saw
and Dra; although indeed it does extend it self far beyond the Saw, as far
as the river Huna, (for so it is at this day called) where Croatia begins.
After it follows Dalmatia, coasting along by the Hadriaticke sea, partly
subject to the Turk, partly to the Venetian. The least part of it now is under
the king of Hungaria: the vpland country is possessed of the Bozners, and
Rascians, which anciently were called Moesi superiores. The chief city of
Slauonia is (Zagrabia) of Croatia, (Bigihon) is now, but in former ages Fumium
was the chief. The FARTHER HUNGARY, or Hungary beyond Donaw, is severed from
Morauia, Silesia, Polonia, and Ruscia by the montes Carpathij, (called now by
the Germans (Schneberg) which do begin a little above Posonium, (Presburgh)
and from thence by many long and tedious windings, pass between this country
until they end at the Euxine sea or Marmaiore, at that place where there is
the country which now they call Maromarusia. There now other mountains and
woods, from that place bending toward Seuerinum, a city situate upon Donaw, do
divide it from Transsyluania and VValachria transalpina. The river Tibiscus,
well stored with diverse sorts of fish, arising out of the mountains of
Maromarusia, runs through the midst part of Hungary. It has many goodly
towns, as Posonium, (Presburg) Tirnauia, (Dijru) etc. on the West: Colacia,
Bachia, Zegedinum, (Zeged,) etc. on the South: Varadinum, Dedrecinum, etc.
beyond the river Tibiscus, where also are the mines of gold and silver; At
Seuerinum, is yet to be seen a mention of the bridge, long since built by
Traiane the Emperor, and other towns and things worth the remembrance, which
in this place, the shortness of our intended discourse does force me to omit.

The Inhabitants do speak the Scythian language, a tongue much different from
any language spoken by any of their neighbors round about them. It gives
place to no country of the World, for valiant and stout men; store of cattle,
fertility of soil, and rich veins of mettalls: but for temperature of the
air, wholesome and pleasant situation, it may justly be preferred before any
whatsoever that I know. The earth is plentifully endowed by nature with all
manner of things necessary and commodious: Gold, Silver, Salt, Precious-stones,
Mineralls for colors are here dug up in great abundance. It yields great
store of corn, grain, fodder for cattle, apples and fruits of diverse sorts.
They have many rivers well stored with fresh fish. They have great plenty of
Coppar. In the most of their rivers there are often found certain shiuers of
the best and finest gold: yea even in their vines, (such is the nature of this
golden soil) they do extract great plenty of Gold.

This we have gathered out of the little treatise of Steeuen Broderith, and the
Decades of Hungary written by Antony Bonfinius: to whom the studious Reader for
further satisfaction may have recourse. Let him also read Herberstein his
Commentaries of Moscouy; Matthias a Michou of Sarmatia, Munster, and Cuspinian
in oratione Protreptica, and in his Austria: and especially the abridgement of
the histories of Hungary written by Peter Ranzane, who, amongst other strange
wonders which he reckons up of this country, affirms, if you will believe
him, that himself has seen very many golden branches and twigs of vines, some
as long as ones finger, others half a foot long. George VVernher has written
a little tract of the strange waters of Hungary.

map of Hungary HVNGARIAE DESCRIPTIO, WOLFGANGO LAZIO AVCT.
Cum Priuilegio.

Hungariae uoces quomodo legendae sunt.

C H. litterae in vocibus Hungaricis CZ. S, littera pro S C H. Z, littera pro S
simplici in vocibus Hungaricis. W, litteram in fine pro V Y.



An other Map of HUNGARY.
THis second description of Hungary more exact and true, as the famous learned
man John Sambuke, this countrieman borne, makes me believe, (for every man, as
Pliny in his Natural history most truly witnesses, describes the plot and
situation of the country best wherein he himself was bred and borne) we have
thought good in this place to adioine unto the former, and that beside our
purpose: when as our promise was of each country, to set out but one Map. But
because I think neither of them to be of it self absolute enough for the
worth of this so goodly a country, I have thought it behouefull to the Reader,
to set out both in this our Theater. He that shall compare them one with the
other, shall find often times great variety in the situation of places, and
turnings and windings of the streams and rivers: and yet there is no reason
why presently any man should condemn the authors of want of skill or
diligence in describing it: but let him judge of it, as Strabo most truly does
of History: for he does not by and by think that history to be rejected, when
they that have set it forth, do not altogether agree in the descriptions of
places: when as the truth of the whole history is many times by that
disagreement more plainly demonstrated. Let therefore the diligent Reader and
student of Geography, for whose good we do whatsoever we possibly can, use one
or both at his discretion, seeing that we are forced to do what we may, not
what we would.

map of Hungary VNGARIAE LOCA PRAECIPVA RECENS EMENDATA ATQVE EDITA, PER
IOANNEM SAMBVCVM PANNONIVM, IMP. MS. HISTORICVM. 1579.


TRANSSYLVANIA.
Steven Broderith, in his Treatise printed at Basil, together with the
Hungarian history of Antony Bonfinius, describes this country thus:
Transsiluania, says he, was sometime a part of Dacia. His chief city is Alba
Iulia, (Weissenburg) so called either of Julius Caesar, or rather of Hiula a
certain prince of the Hunnes. It has many other goodly towns, amongst the
which are Cibinum, (Hermanstadt) called of the Hungarians (Seben) situate upon
the river Cibin, Brassouia, (Chronstadt) Colosium, (Clausenburg) Bistricia,
(Bestereze) and many other built and inhabited by a people of high Germany,
which we call Saxons. In this country are the Siculi, a fierce and warlike
Nation: amongst which there is neither clown, nor gentleman, all men are in
degree equal, like as amongst the Switzers Transsiluania is very fertile of
all manner of things, especially of Gold, Silver, and other mettalls; as also of
Salt dug out of mountains. It breeds excellent Horses, and has great
plenty of Wine, although not so good as Hungary and Slauonia. The two Walachies
VValachia Transalpina, Walachie beyond the mountains, and Moldauia, do enclose
Transsiluania: that rests upon the river Donaw, this upon the Euxine sea, or
Mar maiore, as the Italians call it; both of them together with Transsiluania
do now possess that part of Europe, which anciently was called DACIA. Thus
that whole tract beyond Donaw, which does not only contain the higher Hungary,
but also Transsiluania together with both the Walachies, is enclosed round on
every side with Donaw, the Carpathian hills, ( Crapacke, as some think) the
Euxine sea, and again with the same Donaw. Thus far Broderith.

But I think it not amiss to set down here the description of it out of
Antony Bonfinius his I. decade of the first book of his history of Hungary.
Beyond the Carpathian mountains, says he, is the uttermost province of Dacia,
extended even unto the river Axiaces. This now vulgarly is known by the name
of TRANSSILVANIA, they call it Sibenburghen, the Hungarians Herdel. It is a
most fertile country of cattle, wine, and corn: also of Gold and Silver:
where certain rivers do drive down shiuers of Gold, and pieces sometime of a
pound and an half weight; being every way round beset with steep hills in
manner of a crownet. In the woods are kine or beeues with long manes like
horses; buffs and wild horses, both very swift and light in running: but the
horses have long manes hanging down to the very ground: those which are tame
and brought up for service, naturally have a very fine easy kind of amble.
This country is inhabited partly by Scythians, partly by the Saxones and Dakes:
these are more humane and civil, those more rude and churlish. In old time
before the breaking in of the Goths and Hunnes, all Dacia was possessed by the
Roman and Sarmatian colonies, etc. George of Reichtersdorff has described this
country in a peculiar Treatise. See also George Rithaymer, Peter Rantzan, Pius
the second in his description of Europe, John Auentine, and Martine Cromer in
his twelfth book of the history of Poland. This country vulgarly is called
Sibenburgh, and Zipserland, as Sebastian Munster has given out. More of the
knowledge and discovery of this province are to be sought for, in the first
chapter and second section of the twelfth book of Wolfangus Lazius his Roman
commonwealth, and in Laonicus his fifth book: Lastly, in the protrepticke
oration of John Cuspinian.

Synonymes or diverse names of one and the same place in Transsiluania,
according as they are named by the Hungarians, Germans and Latins, done by
John Sambucus.
Erdel, Sibenburgen Dacia ripensis, Pannodacia, Trans. vel Vltratrasiluania.
Nagbanya, Newsteetl Riunli domin. Rudbanya, Rodna. Bestercze, Nosn Bistritiae.
Bonczyda, Bonisprukh. Kolosuar, Glausnburg Claudiopolis. Offenbanya, Offnburg.
Aprukh, Ochlatn. Samos falu, Mikldorff. Buza, Busaten. Vorosmarth, Rosperg.
Demeterfalua, Metersdorff. Teuuisch, Durnen. Balasfalua, Blasndorff.
Gulafeyruar, Weyssnburg Alba Iulia, Sermisdacia. Zekluasarhel, Newmarkh.
Kizekmezeu, Ibisdorff. Felseupold, Oberspald. Absopold, Niderspald. Zazzebes,
Millcnbach Zabeus. Holduilagh, Schatn. Apafalu, Apfdorff. Moneta,
Donnersmkrhta. Braniczka, Bernfapff. Baijon, Bonisdorff. Ekemezeu, Prosdorff.
Zelindes, Stoltzeburg. Naghczur, Grooscheyrn. Rihonfalua, Reicherdorff
Requiescit. Brasso, Cronstatt Corona, vel Stephanopolis. Varhel, Zarmis.
Segesuar, Schesburg. Zazhalom, Hunderthuhl Centum colles, an hundred hills.
Zarkan, Schirkingen. Keuhalom, Keps. Kykelwar, Kiklpurg. Veczel, Venecia, Vlpia
Traiana. Kerestien mezeu, Aw Insula Christi Christ's island. Muschna, Meschen.
Kakasfalu, Hendorff. Recze, Ratzisd. Ioffij Val. Dobra. Vizakna, Saltzburg.
Barczasagh, Wurtzland Burcia. Vaskapur, Eysuthor Pilae Geticae, the ancients
called it. Veurostorn, Ratertuern. Zakadat, Zaka. Feketetho, Nigra palus,
Black more. Tolmacz, Talmisch. Aran, Auratus fl. Zamos, Samisch Samosus fl.
Keureuz, Die Kraysz Chrysius fl. Fire Keureus, schwartz weis Kreysz. Feketh
Keureus, schwartz weis Kreysz. Sebeskeureus, dic schnel krapsz fl. Maros,
Merisch, Marysus fl. Olt, Die Alth Aluata, Aluttus fl. Strell, Istrig Sargetia,
vel Strigetia fl. Ompay, Die Omp fl. Haczagh, vel Hatsaag, or rather, the vale
Sarmisia, where there was some time the city Sarmisgethusa. etc.
map of Transylvania, Romania TRANSYLVANIA
HANC VLTRA VEL TRANSILVANIAM, QVAE ET PA^NODACIA, ET DACIA RIPE^SIS, VVLGO
SIBEMBVRGE^ DICITVR, didit Viennae Ao. 1566. Nobiliss atque Doctiss. Ioe^s
Sa^butus Pannonius.

H. Litera in hac tabula nonnullis vocabulis adiuncta significat ea esse
Hungarica.

Cum Priuilegio.



The Kingdom of POLAND.
POlonia or Poland, so named of the champion plains of the soil, (which yet
in their language they vulgarly call Pole) is a vast and wide country, on the
West bordering upon Schlesia, on the other sides it rests upon Hungaria,
Lithuania and Prussia. It is divided into the Greater and the Lesser. The
Greater Poland, is that which lies toward the West, and contains the goodly
cities Guesna and Posnauia. The Lesser Poland lies toward the South, and has
the famous city Cracow, seated upon the head of the river Vistula, (the
Germans call it De Wixel, the Polanders Drwencza,) which runs through the
midst of the country: the other cities are not very great nor beautiful.
Their houses for the most part are all built of stone, and some are dawbed with
clay. The country is very moorish, full of fens and woods. The common drink
the people use is Beer: wine they seldom drink, neither do they know how to
dress and manure the vine. They are counted excellent Horsemen for service in
the wars. The soil is fertile, they have many herds of cattle, many dear,
game and pastime for the Noblemen. It has great plenty of Honey. Salt here is
dug out of the earth in great abundance. In the mountains which they in
their language call Tatri, they have mines of Brass and Brimstone. Cromer
writes, that the Polanders are of the Hungars called Lengel, of Leech the
captain or father of the Nation.

Under the kingdom of Polonia are comprehended Lithuania, Samogitia, Masouia,
Volhinia, Podolia and Russia, which is called South-Russia, and of some
Ruthenia: as also all Prussia, except that part which has a peculiar Duke by
whom it is governed. Lewenclay writes that in the year 1570. the king of
Poland took the Prince of Moldauia to his protection.

The greatest part of LITHVANIA, is moorish and full of Bogges, for the most
part woody, and therefore not easily entered, traveled or come unto; it is
better trading with the Lithuans in the winter then at other times: for that
the moors and lakes being covered either with thick ice or deep snow, the
Merchants may pass from place to place more easily. In Lithuania there are few
towns, and the villages are little inhabited. The chief wealth of the country
people are cattle and rich skins of diverse sorts of wild beasts, wherewith the
whole country is wonderfully stored. They have great plenty of wax and honey.
This province breeds the Bugle, a kind of beast which they call Suber, the
Germans Vr-ochs, such as was to be seen at Antwerp, in the year 1570. From
hence also comes that kind of beast which the Latins call Alces, the Dutch
Elandt. The people speak the Slauonian tongue, like as also the Polanders do.
Their chief city is Vilna, a Bishop sea, and is as big as Cracow: but the
houses in it do not stand close together or touch one another: but like as in
the country, gardens and orchyeards are between house and house. All that
Oke-timber which we call Wagenschott, of which almost all the buildings
carpenters work, and ioiners work, as well public as private, is made in
the Low Countries, as also the greatest part of their furniture and
household stuff, is feld in these parts, and from thence is through the East
sea, (the Latins call it Mare balticum, the Dutch Oostsee, the Russians
Wareczkouie morie) and Germane ocean, transported into these countries.

In SAMOGITIA, (which in their language signifies Low-land) the people are
tall and of a goodly stature, but rude and barbarous in their manners and
behavior, using a sparing and homely diet. The Russians call this province
Samotzkasemla. Here is no manner of fair buildings, but their houses are like
houels or poor cottages; made of wood and covered with straw or reed. From the
bottom upward by a little and little their buildings are made less and less,
like the keele of a ship, or great helmet. In the top it has one window,
letting in the light from above, underneath which is the hearth or chimney
where they dress their meat. In that house they hide themselves, their wives,
children, servants, maids, sheep, cattle, corn and household stuff
altogether. Sichardus in his history of Germany writes that the people of
Samogitia are descended from the Saxons: and therefore although they be subject
to the kingdom of Polonia, yet the Saxons challenging it to be a part of their
jurisdiction, they do affirm it to pertain to the precinct of Saxony.

MASOVIA, is a shire held of the king of Poland, in homage. The chief or
Metropolitan city of this province is Warsouia, where they make the excellent
mead, a kind of drink made of honey etc.

VOLHINIA, a country abounding with all manner of things, a very fertile soil,
full of towns and castles.

PODOLIA, is of such a fruitful soil, that the grass in three days will
cover a stick being cast into it. It is so rank and grows so fast, that a
plough, being left in it upon the head-lands or grassie places of the field, in
a very few days, will be so covered over that you shall hardly find it again.
Here also is great store of honey. The head city is Camyenetz.

RVSSIA, yields great plenty of Horses, Oxen, and Sheep of very fine wool.
Their drink is mead, which they make of honey. Wine also is brought hither from
Pannonia, Moldauia and Walachria. The chief city of this province is Leunpurg,
the Latins call it Leopolis, Lion-city,

MOLDAVIA is a part of Walachia, whose metropolitan city is Sossouia, commonly
called Sotschen. The inhabitants of this country are a fierce and cruel
people, but very good soldiers, and therefore they are at continual enmity
with the Transsiluanians. As the custom of the Thracians was in old time to
mark the Noblemens children with a hot iron: so they report that the Lords of
Moldauia to this day do use, to mark their children, as soon as they be borne,
with some kind of mark: least a question might arise whether they were the
right and lawful heirs or not: and that aliens and strangers might be
excluded from inheritance amongst them; as Reinerus Reineckius in his discourse
of noble families has written. Many other things of thse countries thou may
read of in Matthias of Michow in his discourse of the Sarmaties, Albert Crantz
in his description of Wandalia, Bonfinius in his history of Hungary, and
Laonicus Chalcondylas in his first and third books. But of all Martine Cromer
in his Chronicle of Poland has most excellently described these countries, and
Sigismund of Herberstain in his commentaries of Moschouia. See also Sebastian
Munster, Pius Secundus Pope of Rome, and David Chytraeus in his Chronicle of
Saxony. Johannes Duglossus, a most copious historian of the Polonians, is cited
by Ioach mus Cureus; but as yet not published, as he affirms. George of
Reichersdorff has most curiously described Moldauia. Laonicus Chalcondylas
also in his second book has diverse things worth the knowing of this country.

map of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova POLONIAE, LITVANIAEQ.
DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Wenceslao Godreccio; et correctore Andrea Pograbio
Pilsnensi.
Cum Priuilegio. Imp. Regiae etc. decennali.



SPRVSE.
GRomer in his description of Poland, describes this country on this manner:
Amongst many other nations of Sarmatia in Europe, the Borussi by Ptolemey are
placed very far North in that coast, where now, as I think, the Liuonians
and Moschouites do dwell, beyond the river Chernish, next neighbors to the
Ryphaeans. Those, with Erasmus stella I judge, to have passed further South and
West and possessed a great part of Sarmatia, which is upon the East adioined to
the Russians and Moschouites, and is enclosed on the South with woods and the
Hercynian forest, and all that coast along by Pautzkerwicke or Frish-haff, as
some think, ( Ptolemey calls it Sinus Venedicus, Pliny Clylipenus) the
Balticke, and East seas, even unto the rivers Vistula, (Wixel or Weissel) and
Ossa; and to be called Borussi or Prussi, by names not much different. In this
compass now do inhabit the Liuonians, Lithuans, Samagites, and the Pruissen
yet retaining the ancient appellation, nations distinct in respect that they
are subject to diverse states and governed by different laws and policies, but
using altogether the same language vulgarly, wholly differing from the
Slauonians, yet having diverse Latin words intermedled and mixed among, but for
the most part corrupt, and formed rather after the Italian and Spanish
termination, than after the Latin. Notwithstanding the Dutch and Germans of
late years, conquering that part which lies upon the sea, and is called
Spruisse and Liuonia, have planted their colonies there. Here hence it is that
the Dutch tongue is more familiar and usual to these people, than that ancient
and vulgar language, especially in the cities and towns. Which also is usual
amongst the Lithuans, who by reason of their neighborhood and intercourse with
the Russians, and colonies from thence enterteined, do much what speak the
Russian language. For in that Duglossus deriueth the name and original of this
nation from Prusias the king of Bithynia, it is altogether fabulous, and not
worth the confuting. Some do think that the Borussi, in the German tongue were
so called, for that they were near the Russi: but whether truly, or fasly I
list not here to dispute. When and how the Latin tongue did intermedle it
self with the vulgar language of the Borussians, Lithuanians, and Liuonians we
dare not constantly affirm. Erasmus Stella says, that Borussia, (Prussia, or
Spruse) was rather assaulted by the Romans, then conquered; and alleges
Pliny for his author: whereupon that follows that together with the Empire,
the Latin tongue could not there be spread and planted. But Duglossus he
tells us, that in those civil wars between Caesar and Pompey, a certain
band or company of Romans, forsaking Italy, their native country in those
troublesome times, seated themselves in these coasts, and to have built a city
there, and to have called it ROMOVE, after the name of Rome their mother: which
city for a long time was the Metropolitan of that country. If this opinion of
Duglossus be true, who may justly suspect, (always reserved, if there be any
cause of doubt of the truth of the history) that that band of Romans, lead by
some captain named Libo, to have come unto the sea coast near Frisch-haff,
toward the East, and does border upon the Russians, driven hither either by
tempestuous weather to have landed in this place, or being followed by the
conquerours, to have withdrawn themselves into these quarters for shelter
against the raging tyranny of Caesar's soldiers: and so the Libones, Liuones or
Liuonians to have received their name and appellation from the same Libo:
Lastly entending their bounds further and spreading themselves every way, some
to have been named Lithuanians, by a name derived from the same, but much
altered and corrupt, and others to have retained still the ancient appellation
of the Prussi. Notwithstanding also a great part of Pomerland, and
Culmischland, and the skirts of Michelaw, after that they came to be subject to
the same jurisdiction with Spruse, and were under the command of the Knights of
the Holy Cross, (Teutones Crucigeri) began to be called by one name, Spruse:
yet indeed, that is properly and truly called Spruse, which is comprehended
between the rivers Weissel, (Vistulo) Dribentz, Ossa, and Nemen, and the bay
Frisch-haff, (which we spoke of before) and from Lithuania and Massouia is
divided by thick woods full of Meeres and Bogges. Thus far out of Cromer. I
think it not amiss also to set down here the ancient division of this
country of Spruse into particular shires, as Casper Henneberger has written,
whose words are these.

VIDIVVTO, or, as he is called of some, VIDINITVS, king of Borussia, in the
year of Christ 573. when he was 116. years old, before he together with his
brother BRVTENOCRIBE, did cast himself, for a sacrifice to his Gods, into the
fire, thus divided his possessions unto his sons. He had, as they report 12.
sons. The I. was LITPHO, or as others call him LITALAN, to whom he gave
Lituania the Lower, and made him king and sovereign of the rest, but he, for
the murder of CRIBE, a Bishop of theirs so called, was rejected of his
brethren. Amongst the other eleven he divided the country of Spruse. Of these
the first called ZAMO, obtained that tract, which of him to this day is named
Zambia, (Samland) having upon the West and North the salt sea; upon the East
the lake Curisch-haff, (Curonensis lacus) and the river Deem: upon the South
the river Pregel: it is a received opinion amongst them that he dwelt in the
mount GALTAGARE. II. SVDO, got for his portion that part of the country where
now are Oletzo, Stradaun, Lick. part of the precincts or liberties of
Iohanisburg, Letzen, Angerburg and Insterburg: and has upon the East,
Lituania: on the South, Masouia and Galindia: on the North-West, Barthonia,
(Barthenerland) on the North, Schalauonia. This country they called, after his
name, Sudauia. Which name afterward, when this whole tract was spoiled and laid
wast by the Crucigeri (the knights of the Holy Cross,) it utterly lost: and
therefore whether this country was called Sudauia, or not, the latter writers
are wholly ignorant, and they do think it to have been in Sambia, where now
is the canton called Der Sudawische winkel oder der Bruster ort, but they are
deceived: For for their treachery they were of the Crucigeri translated
thither. III. NADROO, was seated between Sambia, Scalauonia, and Barthonia,
where there are many rivers, forests, and vast wildernesses, and is called
Nadraw, (NADRAVIA.) In this province are Tapiaw, Taplaucken, Salaw, Georgenburg
etc. strong and defensible castles. IIII. SCALAVONI, had those places given him
which are on either side of the river Memel, (the old writers called it Cronon)
and therefore his portion was named, Scalauonia, after his own name. V.
NATANGO, got that part which of him was called Natangen, and has upon his
North side the river Pregel, upon the East, Alla. VI. BARTHO, enjoyed
Barthonia, Barthenerland. It was divided into the Greater, the Lesser, and
Plick Barthen; but now those divisions are forgotten and out of use. VII.
GALINDO, that tract from Masouia, unto the river Alla, and the lake Spirding,
of him was named Galindia, and contains many huge deserts: a great part of it
does belong to the Bishop of Varmia, and is now accounted as part of Ermeland.
VIII. VARMONI, for his portion was assigned VARMIA, lying between the countries
Galindia, Natangia, and Pogesamia. But he not living long after his father,
this province soon again lost that name, and of his mother was named by a
Germane name Ermeland. IX. HOGGO, his Lordship was severed from Ermeland, by
the river Passerg: from Pomesamia, by the river Weseck and the lake Drausen:
but now of the Germans it is called Hockerland, but by the Latins, of POGIA,
his daughter, it is named Pogesania. X. POMESO, possessed Pomesania,
(denominated of him) bounded by the rivers Weissel, Weeseck, Ossa or Mockra.
XI. CHELMO, obtained for his portion Culmigeria, or Hulmigeria (they call it
Colmishland:) a province lying between the rivers Weissel, Mockra, or Osso and
Dreuentza, well replenished with castles and cities. Here is another shire
worth the remembrance which they call Sossaw: Item another called LOBOVIA,
(Lobaw) belonging to the Bishop of Culm. HVNTAVV, also a very little province,
but well inhabited. There is also an island about Margeburg (or Marienburg)
enclosed round with a bancke or wall by the Crucigeri, the knight of the Holy
Cross, against the inundations and breaking-in of the rivers Weissel and
Nogot, and it is called The Greater i will, Gros Werder. The Lesser i will, Das klein
Werder, is in Pomerell, about Dantzk. Lastly, MARIANA by Marienwerder, an Island
so called, which is not inhabited, but reserved for pasture and meddow yielding
yearly great profit.

This author promises a peculiar Treatise of Prussia, with a further
discourse of this his map. But of this thou may read more in Guaginus
Veronensis in his history of Sarmatia. David Chytraeus also in his Saxon
Chronicle has excellently well described the same.

Amber, (the Latins call it Succinum and Electrum, the Germans Bernstein,
Agstein, Ammeren) is found plentifully on the coast of this country, and no
where else in the world beside, to the great gain and enriching of this Nation.
Diverse have written of the nature and properties of this Simple. But none
better, in my judgment, than Andreas Aurifaber Vratislauiensis, in a several
tract, written both in Latin and Dutch.

map of Prussia, Germany and Poland PRVSSIAE VERA DESCRIPTIO. Per Gaspar.
Henneberg. Erlichens.


LIVONIA.
LIuonia, (as Lewenclay writes) extends it self along the sea coast above
4000. furlongs, and where it is narrowest it is 1300. furlongs broad. The
Prussians, Lithuanians, and Russians dwell round about it, the rest the
Liuonian Gulf does bound. Liuonia contains the CVRONES, ESTHENI, and LETTI,
nations different both in manners and language. In the cities and towns they
use the Saxon or German tongue. The country is full of wood, plain and
champion without hills or mountains, for the most part lying lay and
unhusbanded, notwithstanding that the soil is good and fertile. For if you
shall except wine and oil, and some few other such things which nature
yields to some countries that are situate in a more temperate climate, (for
these only are brought in hither unto them) other things more necessary for the
maintenance of man's life, are here found in such great plenty, that they do
liberally communicate them to strangers and forreiners. They have great plenty
of Fish and Dear. Munster affirms, that the Hares in this country do in
every season of the year change their color: for in the winter they are
white, and in the summer they are gray. From hence, wax, honey, ashes,
stone-pitch, (pix arida) liquid pitch, (the Dutch call it There, we, Tar) and
that kind of corn which the Latins call Secale, the Germans Rogghe, and we
Rye, is yearly brought unto us in great abundance.

It has certain cities very large and finely built; of them the chiefest is
RIGA, a colonie of the Germans of the Bishopric of Breme, commodiously
seated upon the river Duin. It is a goodly Mart town, and the Metropolitan of
the whole province. RIVALIA, (they vulgarly call it Revel, the Russians
Roliua,) built by Waldemare king of Denmark, famous for his goodly haven upon
a bay of the Balticke or East-sea. This for traffic is not less frequented
or populous then Riga. DORPATVM, (Derpt) near neighbor to the Russians, which
call it Iuriongorod. The river Beck runs by the walls of this city, very
commodious for traffic with the Russians. This river is carried in one
channel into the sea, which running violently with a great fall from steep
rocks, works the same effect to the people near adioining, as Lewenclay
says, that the cataracts or falls of the river Nilus did to the Egyptians,
which in continuance of time by little and little grow to be deaffish and
thick of hearing. Besides these cities there are certain lesser towns,
fortified with goodly strong castles; VENDA, Wenden, the more honorable for
that here the Grand-captaine or Master of the order, keeps his court. It is
situate in the midst of the country: Then VELINVM, Welum, Parnaw, upon the
sea, Wolmer, Veseburgum, (I think they call it Yseborg) Wittestein, Narua, and
others. Willichius and Cureus do think that the Efflui and Limouij did
sometime dwell in these quarters. Of the form of government and ordering of
their commonwealth, which is at the prescript of the knights of the order of
the Holy Cross, read John Aubane, Munster, Lewenclay, Gaguine in his Sarmatia,
and Herberstein; out of whom we have culled these particulars. But Crantzius
also in his sixth book of Wandalia, is to be read, with Oderbornes second
book of the life of Basilidis, and David Chytraus his Chronicle of Saxony, who
has written of the same with greater diligence than the rest.

POMERANIA, or POMERLAND.
PEtrus Artopoeus Pomeranus in Munsters Cosmography thus describes this
country, his native soil: POMOERANIA, says he, situate upon the Balticke sea,
of the first inhabitants, in their native language, that is, in the Wandall
tongue, is called PAMORZI. It is still possessed of the first in-borne
inhabitants, governed by their proper Princes, and was never subdued or made
subject to any foreign jurisdiction. It is in all places very fertile, well
watered with rivers, brooks, lakes, creekes, and in-lets from the sea; it has
many good havens, rich pastures, and good corn grounds: it has great plenty
of apples, cattle, dear, fishes, foul, corn, butter, cheese, honey, wax and
such like commodities; it has many rich mountains, populous cities, towns,
castles, and villages; there is no void place or wast ground in it, but those
which lakes or mountains do possess. Before Christianity was entertained
here, they spoke the Wandall language, and followed their fashions and manner of
life, until such time as they were subdued under the command of the Roman
Emperors, for then together with Religion they began to use the Saxon tongue,
which to this day they retain. Thus far Artopoeus. Pomerye, in the Wandalian
language, which is the same with the Slauonian tongue, signifies nothing else,
as Herberstein affirms, but near the sea or a marine coast. The bank or
sea-wall of this country is so strongly fortified by nature with such a strong
rampart, that here is no fear of the sea breaking in to ouerflow them. The
more famous cities upon this coast, besides, some other situate further within
the land, are, Stetin, Newgard, Stargard, etc. STETIN sometime was but a small
village inhabited by a few poor fishermen, but after that Christianity was
planted here about, Wineta utterly destroyed, and the mart was removed hither,
it begun presently so to flourish, that now it is become the Metropolitan of
the whole country. It is most pleasantly seated upon the bank of the river
Oder, from the which it arises by little and little higher upon the side of an
hill. It is enclosed with a strong wall and deep trench. GRYPSVVALD, is a town
in the Dukedom of Wolgast, which others do call the Dukedom of Barth: this
town being long together much afflicted with civil wars, was much hindered
and impaired: but in the year 1456. by erecting and placing of an University
there, it began again by little and little to lift up the head. IVLINVM, a
town sometime not inferior unto the goodly cities of Europe, whether you
respect the wealth of the citizens or stately buildings of the same. This was
sometime a famous mart town of the Wandalls. Such a multitude of merchants did
flock hither, from Russia, Saxony, Laussnitz, Meisen, and all parts of
Wandal-land, in such troops, that in all Europe, except Constantinople, there
was scarce such a mart to be found: but it was so shaken by the violent wars
of the Danes, that at last it was almost wholly brought to nothing; such is the
mutability of unconstant fortune always delighted in change. Now they call it
Wollin. STRALSVND, upon the sea shore. It has had sometime his proper prince,
viz. the Duke of Barth. It is a city very populous and greatly frequented by
Merchants. WINETA, this sometime was also a city of good reckoning,
peradventure it is now called Archon or Iulinum, (Wollin.) For the cities of
Wandal-land, according to the diversity of languages of sundry nations, had
their diverse names. That which the Wandalls called Stargard, the Saxons named
Aldenburg, and the Danes Bannesia as Crantzius affirms. But I think it good
to set down the description of this country, which the singular learned man, M.
Peter Edling sent me from Colberg, in this manner: Pomerland at this day has
forty cities, enclosed with walls and ditches; besides certain goodly castles
and monasteries. Amongst the which these are the chief: Stralsund, Stettin,
Grypswald, Stargard, Colberg and Anglame. Five hundred years since, before the
enterteinment of Christian religion, which was in the year 1124. and when they
left the Slauonian tongue, Pomerland was greater, and not much inferior to a
kingdom. For Bugslaus the first, brother of Wartislaus the first, son to
Swantibore, who died a Pagane, when as his nephews leaving their country for
the alteration of the language, adioined Pomerell to Spruise. POMERELL, which
the Polanders do at this day call Casub corner, (Cassubia) is no very small
province. It extended it self from the borders of Pomerland to the river Wixel
or Weissel, and contains these cities, Dantzk, Putzka, Dirsow, Stargard,
Nauburg, Smecha, Tauchel, Nakel, Hamerstein, Baldeburg, Frideland, Conitz,
Schoneg, Slochow etc. which cities have for the most part castles belonging to
them: beside which there are these castles; Moseuantz, Talkenborch, Subitz,
Lauterberg: and these Monasteries, Polpelin, Sukow, Tzernitz, Oliua, where the
Princes of Pomerell were wont to be buried, even to Mestewin the last of that
line, who died at Dantzk and was buried at Oliua in the year 1295. Read more
of Pomerland in the Saxon Chronicle of David Chytraeus. This map we have
taken out of Munsters Cosmography.

The Dukedom of OZWIECZIN and ZATOR.
THis Dukedom is a part of the kingdom of Poland where it touches Silesia.
Sometime it did not belong to this kingdom. The territory of OZVVIECZIN, (the
Germans in their language call it Auschwitz) fell unto the kings of Poland in
the time of Cazimir, the third, in the year 1454. ZATOR, about 400. years
after, in the reign of Sigismund the first, was reduced unto the crown of
Poland and was united to that body, in the year of Christ 1548. as Cromer in
his Chronicle of Poland testifies.

map of Northern Germany and Northern Poland POMERANIAE, WANDALICAE REGIONIS,
TYP.


map of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania LIVONIAE NOVA DESCRIPTIO, Joanne
Portantio auctore.


map of Southern Poland DVCATVS OSWIE CZENSIS, ET ZATORIENSIS, DESCRIPTIO.


ROMANIA, anciently called THRACIA.
THat country which now they call ROMANIA, the ancients called THRACIA. It was
a large and wide province, having on the East, Propontis, (Mar di Marmora) and
Pontus Euxinus, (the Italians call it Mar Maiore, the Gretians Maurothalassa,
the Turks, as Busbequius says, Caradenis, the black sea, as both nations
understand:) on the South, Mare Aegeum, (the Turks call this Acdenis, the
white sea, Archipelago) on the West, Macedony and Pannony: on the North, the
mount Haemus (Monte Argentaro) and both the Moesiaes. The air is neither very
kind, nor the soil very fertile: and, except it be in those places which do
butte upon the sea, it is barrein and cold. Ptolemey divides it into thirteen
shires, namely these; Danthletica, Bennica, Bessica, Caenica, Coeletica,
Corpialica, Drosica, Maedica, Samaica, Sapaica, Sardica, Sellitica, Vrbana and
Vsdesica. The latter writers have divided it into these six provinces, Europa,
Hoemimontum, Moesia, Secunda, (which is the same with Moesia Inferior, Rhodope,
Scythia, and Thracia, properly so called. Lastly, it was since called by one
name Romania, which it still retains. Yet about Constantinople, I understand
the Turks do call it, Galatia, where also at this day there is the city
Galata, which we call Pera, and the old Historiographers named Cornu Bizantium,
the horn of Constantinople. The famous MOVNTAINES of this country are Hoemus,
(Monte Argentaro, or Catena mundi, the chain of the world, the Italians call
it: the Turks, Balkan: the Slauonians, Cumouiza:) Rhodope, (Valizu, or
Czernaniwerti, they now call it) Orbelus, (Karopnitze) Pangaeus, (Malaca or
Castagna) and diverse others of lesser note. The RIVERS are Hebrus, (Marisa)
Nessus, (Nesto or Mestro, the Turks call it Charasou) Melas, (now Lameta, or
Larissa) and Strymon, as some think, although others do rather judge this to
be a river of Macedony. The famous CITIES are, Abdera, (now Asperosa, as Niger
thinks; or Polystylo, as Sophianus; or Astrizza, as Nardus affirms)
Apollonia, Phinopolis, Philippolis, Nicopolis upon the river Haemus, Nicopolis
upon the river Nessus, Hadrianopolis, (the Turks call it Endrem, as Busbechius
writes; or Edernay as Postellus teaches) Selyhria, Debeltus, Heraclea,
Lysimachia, (Hexamili) and Bysantium, famous in all ages, so named of Bysa who
first built it, afterward it was enlarged and fortified by the Emp.
Constantine, and of him was called Constantinopolis, but at this time corruptly
and more short Stamboli. This now as also long since it was, is the most famous
and honorable city of all this country, next after Hadrianople (Andernopoli,
it is commonly called) then Sophia, and others of less estimation. This
country also has adioined unto it a necke-land or demi-ile, which they call
the Foreland of Thrace. Here is Callipolis (Gallippoli) and Sesto famous for
the love of Leander. David Chytraeus in his Chronicle of Saxony has diverse
things worth the noting of the provinces of this chart.

The islands in the Archipelago (mare Aegaeum) near to Romania are SAMOTHRACIA,
commonly called Samandrachi: and THALASSIA of Ptolemey, which others call
Thassus, and to this day it reteineth some similitude of that name; for the
latter writers do name it Tasso. In Propontis or Mar di Marmora, is
PROECONNESVS, or Elaphonnesus, which some have named Neuris. Now the Turks and
Greeks do call it Marmora, whereof that sea took the name. In Bosphorus (the
Latins call it Stretto di Constantinopoli, the straites of Constantinople, the
Greeks Laimon, the Turks Bogazin,) are the Insulae CYANEAE, (which Strabo
calls Symplegades, now Pauonare or Iarcazes) often mentioned in the writings of
ancient Poets, who after their manner did feine them first to have floted upon
the water and to be moveable, and then by the sailing of the Argonautes to have
been settled and fixed. Beside the old Geographers Ptolemey, Strabo, Pliny, and
Pomponius Mela, which have written of this country; the latter writers also are
not to be neglected: especially the singular learned VVolfangus Lazius his
commentaries of Greece; and Bellonius his Observations. Petrus Gyllius has
most curiously and diligently described the city Constantinople, which city a
man may say was by the providence of God ordained to be the head of many
kingdoms, and to have been sometime called New Rome, and at this day Romania:
so that the famous poet Tibullus may seem to have spoken not without just
cause and by a kind of divine inspiration, when he said, ROMATVVM NOMEN TERRIS
FATALE REGENDIS, O Rome, thy name does give, thou should the world command.
And in the judgment of Romulus, the Gods would have it, VT ROMA SIT CAPVT
ORBIS TERRARVM, That Rome should be the head of all the World, as Liuy has
left record in the first book of his Decades.

map of Romania, Moldova, Bulgaria and Northwest Turkey ROMANIAE, (quae olim
Thracia dicta) VICINARVMque REGIONVM, VTI BVLGARIAE, WALACHIAE, SYRFIAE, ETC.
DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Iacobo Castaldo.
Cum priuilegio decennasi. M.D.LXXXIIII.



SCANDIA, OR THE NORTHREN Kingdoms.
THis Map contains almost all the Northen tract of the known world: but
especially the Neck-land or Peninsula, known unto the old writers by these
names, Scandia, Scandinauia, Baltia and Basilia, but to them never thoroughly
discried: which in regard of his greatness they have called Another World, and
the Shop of men, and as it were the scabberd from whence so many Nations have
been drawn. But of the diverse names of this country, read that which we have
written at the map of Island, as also in our Treasury of Geography, in the
word BASILIA. This Neckeland in this our age contains three kingdoms,
Norwey, Swedland and Gotland; with a part of the kingdom of Denmark, and many
other provinces, as Bothny, Finmarke, Finland Lappland, etc. whose several
descriptions we will here set down out of James Ziegler.

NORVEGIA, Norway, if you would interpret it, is as much to say, as the
Northren tract, or Northren way. This was sometime a most flourishing kingdom,
and comprehended Denmark, and Friesland with the circumiacent Islands, until
such time as the kingdom was governed by an hereditary succession of kings.
Afterward the line failing, in the time of vacancie, by the consent of the
Nobility it was decreed, that the kings should be chosen by election. At this
day it is under the jurisdiction of the kings of Denmark, who do not only take
the lawful reuenews justly due to the crown, but imposing intolerable
exactions, and by scraping and raking all commodities into their hands, they
convey all the wealth of this country into Denmark. Neither is this
aggreeuance alone, but with all the disadvantage and condition of the place
does much hurt the subjects: for all the havens, roads, and shipping are at the
command of the king of Denmark: so that neither they may without his leave use
the sea or transport their merchandise into foreign countries. This kingdom
either for the temperature of the air, goodness of the soil, or benefit of
the sea is not of mean estimation and account. This does transport into other
parts of Europe a fish which is a kind of codde, slitte and spread upon a post
and so dried and hardened with the frost and cold: and thereupon the Germans
call it Stockfish. The best time of the year to catch them is in January, when
as the weather is coldest to dry them: those which are taken when the weather
is more mild, they shrink or rotte away, and are not fit to be transported any
whither. All the sea coast of Norway is very calm and temperate: the sea
freeseth not: the snow continues not long.

SVECIA, Sweden or Swedland, is a kingdom rich of silver, copper, lead, iron,
corn and cattle. Wonderful plenty of fish is here taken both in rivers,
lakes, and creekes, as well as in the maine ocean. Here are many Dear and wild
beasts. Stockholme is the kings seat and chief mart town, a city fortified
both by nature, by art, and industry of the ingenious Architect. It stands
in a fenne, like Venice: and thereof it took the name, for that being situate
in the waters it is built upon piles, which they call Stocks.

GOTHIA, (Gotland) that is, the Good land, is subject to the king of Sweden. In
it is the port and mart town Calmar, a great city. Here is a goodly Castle
which for ingenious Architecture or Fortification, as also for large compass
and content is not much inferior to that of Millane in Italy. Near
Tinguallen are mines of excellent iron. Thus far Ziegler.

Of DENMARK and the BRITISH ISLES we will speak nothing in this place, seeing
that we entreated of them at their proper and several mappes. In this chart
there is described also ISLAND, an Island as famous as any other for strange
miracles and secret works of nature. Item GROENLAND, another Island known to
very few. Here also is FRIESLAND, a third island altogether unknown to ancient
writers; neither is it once named of the latter Geographers or Hydrographers;
only Nicolao Zeno, a Venetian, who, in the year of Christ 1380. tossed with
many continual bitter storms in this sea, at last rent and weather-beaten,
arrived in this I Will. This author affirms that this island is subject to the
king of Norway, and to be greater then Ireland, and that the chief town is of
the same name with the I Will it self; lastly, that the country people do for the
most part live by fishing. For in the haven of this town they catch such
abundance of all sorts of fish, that from thence they lade whole ships, and
transport them into other islands near adioining. The sea next to this island
upon the West, full of shelues and rocks, as he writes, is of the inhabitants
called Mare Icarium, Icarus sea: and an island in it, he says is named ICARIA.
Of GROENLAND he writes, that the winter here is 9. months long, and all that
time it never raineth, nor the snow which falls in the beginning of winter
ever dissolueth until the latter end of the same. But that is most wonderful
which he tells of the Monastery of the order of Friar Predicants, dedicated
to the honor of S. Thomas, in this Island: namely, that there is not far from
it a mountain, which like unto Aetna in Sicilia does at certain seasons burn
and cast out huge flakes of fire, and that there is in the same place a
fountain of hot or skalding waters, wherewith not only all the chambers of
this monastery are warmed in the manner of Stones, and hot-houses, but also all
kind of meat and bread is sodden and dressed, and with no other fire. All the
monastery is built of a kind of hollow light stone, which the flames of that
burning mountain do cast forth. For these burning stones, being by nature
somewhat fat and oily, are solid and firm, but being quenched with this water,
they become dry, full of holes and light; and the water wherewith they were
quenched is turned into a clammy kind of stuff like bitumen, wherewith these
stones are laid, in steed of mortar, when they are to use them in building:
and thus they make a sure work against the injury of all weathers, Their
orchyeards also and gardens watered with this water are always green and do
flourish almost all the year long, with all manner of flowers, kinds of corn
and fruits. This Priory stands upon the sea shore, and has a reasonable
capacious and large haven; into which the forenamed fountain emptying his
waters, does make it so warm that it never freeseth, in the hardest and
egerest froast that ever was known. Whereupon here is such abundance of fish,
which do flock hither from more cold places, that not only these Monks, but
also the neighbors round about are furnished from hence with provision of
victual. These things amongst many others Zenus has written of these Islands,
who, being made by Zichimnus, king of certain Islands here about, high
Admiral of his navy, discovered all these Northren coasts.

The i will FRIESLAND, now again in these our days was descried by the
Englishmen, and was by them called by a new name WEST ENGLAND. In old writers
there are but few records left of these Islands. Amongst the new writers Olaus
Magnus Gothus, Episcopus Vpsaliensis, Albertus Crantzius, Saxo Grammaticus,
Iacobus Zieglerus, Sigismundus ab Herberstein in his commentaries of Moscouia,
have described these countries: And Nicolas Wimman has set forth the
navigations of the Northren sea. See also a little discourse of Antony and
Nicolas Zenis, two brethren, of the islands situate under the North pole,
together with the shipwreck of Peter Quirinus, written by himself and
Christophero Fiorauante, as also by Nicholas Mighel, in the Italian tongue.
There is also a discourse of these Northren parts written by Sebastian Cabato,
who in the year 1557. first sailed into these quarters. But above all the
history of Saxony lately written and set out by David Chytraeus is not to be
forgotten.

map of the North Atlantic, including the Arctic, Western Russia, the Baltic,
Scandinavia, the British Isles, Greenland, Iceland, the supposed location of
Frisland, and Newfoundland SEPTENTRIONALIVM REGIONVM DESCRIP.


ISLAND.
I Do find in the Ecclesiastical history lately set forth and imprinted under
the name of M. Adams: That the people of this Island came unto Adelbert Bishop
of Breme, earnestly entreating him to appoint them some learned divines that
might be able to preach the Gospel and plant Christianity amongst them.
Neither do I think that there is any mention of this Nation in any other more
ancient writer than he. Although I must confess, that Sigebertus Gemblacensis
has left record, that Great King Arthur, about the year of Christ 470.
subdued this island and reduced the people to his obedience. This I take as a
fable, not for any true history. For I do certainly know that this was never
written by Sigebert, but shuffled in, as many things else, by some other. For a
very fair Manuscript copy of mine own, as also another in parchment of my
friend, have it not.) Now this Adelbert died about the year after Christ's
incarnation 1070. And that the name Thule, often spoken of almost by all old
writers as well Poets and Historians as Geographers, does not pertain to this
Island (against the opinion well near of all the learned men of our time) but
rather to Scone (Scandia Peninsula) a neck-land of Norway, not only the
authority of Procopius; a grave discreet writer; but also for that a note and
remnant of that name yet remains to this day in Scone, in that part which is
opposite to the Orkeney isles; namely in a place of Norway where the famous Mart
of the Belgae is seated. For amongst other shires of Norway there is one in
this place which they call Tilemercke, that is, the March or shire of Tule. The
islands also over against this shore which vulgarly are called Hetland and
Shetland, the seamen, as I understand out of England by the relation of my good
friend M. W. Camden, are commonly called Thylinsel, whereby I conceive that
this Island took the name from the next maine land opposite unto it. For what
else is Thilensel, but the island of Thile? This opinion of mine not only
Pomponius Mela does confirm, who writes that Thule was opposite to the sea
coast of the Belgae; (he directly says, I say Belgarum, not Britannorum
littori, the sea coast of Britain where indeed Island is situate, not Thule:)
but also Ptolemey the prince of all Geographers and writers in that argument,
who places Thule under the 29. degree of Longitude, and 63. of Latitude. Which
position and calculation of degrees does exactly and precisely fall upon
Tilemarke. And as for Island there is no man that has looked with half an eye
into Geographicall Mappes and Charts, but does know it to lie under the first
degree of Longitude, and the sixtieth degree of Latitude. And I persuade my
self even Arngrimus Jonas himself, an Islander borne, in that his Treatise of
Island, where he says that the latitude of this Island is about 44. degrees and
45. minutes was much deceived. It is therefore as clear as the noone day, as
he says, that Island is not the same that Thule was: and the same Procopius
says, that it is inhabited by thirteen Nations, and governed by so many Kings,
and to be ten times as great as Britain: so that not without good cause
Stephanus gives it the title of Great; when as it is certain that Island is
much less than Britain. The same Procopius affirms that the Scritifinni, a
kind of people so called, did inhabit Thule; these Diaconus names
Strictofinni: and speaks of them in Scandia; as does also Iornandes in his
history; notwithstanding he corruptly calls them (that I may note this by the
way) Crefennae. Thus, gentle Reader, thou see that which they name Scandia or
Scone, he calls Thule: and the same nation to this day dwells in the same
Scandia, called by the same name no whit corrupted. For they are called
vulgarly Scrickefinner, and do dwell in Scandia, and not in Island. In Thule
Procopius writes, that there be huge great woods: in Island all the world
knows there are none at all. And so Isacius upon Lycophron says truly, when
he affirms that Thule, is upon the East of Britain, not upon the North, as
is Island. Contrary to that which Strabo (a most worthy and diligent
Geographer, by the sound judgment of all the learned) says of it, but from
the relation, as there he adds of Pytheas, a shameful lying historiographer,
whose custom was, as Diodorus Siculus in his second book writes, to
counterfeit and coin fables so cunningly that ordinarily they passed for true
stories. This is that Thule, which Tacitus reports, when the Roman navy
sailed round about Britain was seen and viewed by them, but not regarded, and
therefore not entered as is probable. This could not be Island, which is much
farther off, and out of kenning. But this is enough in this place of Thule or
Scandia. We will address our selves to speak of Island, an island altogether
unknown, and not once named in any ancient writer.

ISLAND, or, the Frosen or Icie land, which is all one, was so named of the ice
which lies continually upon his North side: for there now begins the
Frosen-sea, as Crantzius writes. It was called SNELAND, of the Snow which all
the year long does here in some places continue: Item GARDARSHOLM, that is,
Garders i will, so called, as Arngrimus himself being an Islander borne writes,
of one Gardar a man so named who first found it or inhabited the same. This
island is an hundred Germane miles in length, as commonly most writers do hold;
but the foresaid Arngrimus Jonas says it is 144. miles long. For the most part
it is not inhabited, but is wast and mountainous, especially toward the North
part: by reason of the bitter blasts of the South winds, which will not suffer,
as Olaus teaches, so much as any low shrubbe or bush once to put forth his
head. It is subject to the king of Norway, and so has continued ever since the
year of Christ 1260. at what time first, the same Arngrime affirms, they did
their homage to that Crown. Whereupon the king of Denmark every year sends
thither a Lieutenant, by whom they are now governed, as in times past they were
by certain Bishops of their own; by whom they were, as we said before,
converted unto Christianity, in the time of Adelbert Bishop of Breme. In the
reign of Harald with the fair locks, ( Pulchricomus, Harfagro they vulgarly
called him as Jonas writes) who was the first Monarch of Norway, it was first
begun to be inhabited, as some would feign persuade: namely, when he had
overcome the pety kings and had banished them out of Norway, they being driven
to seek their dwelling in some other place, they forsook their own native
country, shipped themselves together with their wives, children, and whole
families, landed at the length in this island, and here seated themselves. This
seems to me to have happened about the year of Christ's incarnation 1000. but
the forenamed author Arngrimus Jonas says that it was in the year 874. who
also there sets down a Catalogue and names of all their Bishops. The first
Bishop, as Crantzius writes, was Isleff. That it was subject to the command of
the same Norweies about 200. years, I find in the abridgement of Zenies
Eclogs, where I find that Zichmi king of Friesland attempted war against this
island, but in vain, and was repelled by a garrison of soldiers placed there
by the king of Norway, to defend the same from the assault of enemies. It is
divided into four parts or provinces according to the four quarters of the
World: namely, into Westfiordung, Austlendingafiordung, Nordlingafiordung and
Sundlendingafiordung, as to say as the West quarter, East quarter, North
quarter and South quarter. It has but two Bishops seas, Schalholdt, and Hola;
with certain schools adioined unto them. In the diocese of Hola are the
Monasteries Pingora, Remested, Modur, and Munketuere. In the diocese of
Schalholdt are Videy, Pyrnebar, Kirkebar and Skirda. Yet by the letters of
Velleius, the author of this chart, which he wrote unto me, I do understand
that there are here nine monasteries: and besides them 329. churches. They
have no coin of their own, nor cities: for the mountains are to them in
steed of cities, and fountains for pleasure and delights, as Crantzius
testifies, who affirms that for the most part they dwell in caves, making
their lodgings and rooms by cutting and digging them out in the sides of
hills. The which also Olaus does testify, especially in the winter time. They
build their houses of fish bones, for want of wood. Contrariwise Jonas he
says, that here are many churches and houses built reasonably fair and
sumptuously of wood, stone and turffe. Wares they exchange with Merchants for
other wares. Foreign dainties and pleasures they are not acquainted withal.
They speak the Cimbrian language, or the ancient Germane tongue, into which we
saw this other day the holy Scriptures translated, and imprinted at Hola (a
place in the North part of this island) in a most goodly and fair letter, in
the year of our Lord 1584. I say, in the old Germane tongue: for I do observe
it to be the same with that, in which a little book that is imprinted under
the name of Otfrides Gospels, is written in. Jonas himself confesses that
they have no manner of cattle beside Horses, and Kine. Velleius witnesses that
they have no trees but Berch and Juniper. The soil is fat for pastorage and
the grass so rank, that all men that have written of this island do iontly and
with one consent affirm, that except they do sometime fetch their cattle from
the pasture and moderate their feeding, they will be in danger of being stopped
up with their own fat. Yet all in vain often times, as the same Arngrime
affirms. The soil is not good for corn or for eareable ground, and so it
bears not any manner of grain, therefore for the most part they live
altogether on fish. Which also being dried and beaten, and as it were ground to
meal they make into loaves and cakes, and do use it at their tables in stead
of bread. Their drink in former time was fair water, but now of corn,
brought unto them from foreign places, they have learned to brew a kind of
beer: so that after they began to trade with strangers resorting to them, they
began also to love better liquours and have left their drinking of water. For
as Georgius Bruno makes me believe, the Lubekers, Hamburgers and Bremers do
yearly resort to this island, which thither do carry Meal, Bread, Beer, Wine,
Aqua vitae, course English clothes and other such of low prices, both Woollen
and Linen, Iron, Steel, Tin, Copper, Silver, Money both Silver and Gold,
Knives, Shoes, Coifes and Kercheifes for women, and Wood whereof they build
their houses and make their boats. For these they exchange the Island cloth,
(they commonly call it Watman) huge lumps of Brimstone, and great store of
dried fish, Stockefish we call it. All this out of the West and South parts of
the same. Out of the East and North part of the island, where there is great
plenty of grass, they transport into other countries, Mutton and Beef, butter
and map of Iceland ISLANDIA.
ILLVSTRISS. AC POTENTISS. REGI FREDERICO II DANIAE, NORVEGIAE, SLAVORVM,
GOTHORVMQVE REGI, ETC. PRINCIPI SVO CLEMENTISSIMO, ANDREAS VELLEIVS DESCRIBEB.
ET DEDICABAT.

Priuilegio Imp. et Belgico decennali A. Ortel. exud. 1585.

sometime the fleeces of sheep, and skins and pelts of other beasts, foxes
and white falcons, horses, for the most part such as amble by nature without
the teaching and breaking of any horse courser. Their oxen and kine are all
here polled and without horns: their sheep are not so. Saxo Grammaticus and
Olaus Magnus do tell of many wonders and strange works of God in this island,
whereof some it will not be amiss to receipt in this place. But especially the
mount Hekla, which continually burns like unto Aetna in Sicilia, although
always those flames do not appear, but at certain times, as Arngrimus Jonas
writes, and affirms to be recorded in their histories, as namely in the
year 1104. 1157. 1222. 1300. 1340. 1362. 1389. and 1558. which was the last
time that the fire brake out of this hill. Of the like nature is another hill,
which they call Helgas^ll, that is, the Holy mount. Of the which mountain the
forenamed Bruno, a laborious student, and for that his worthy work which he
has set out of all the cities of the World, famous and known far and near
all the World over, has written in his private letters unto me, that in the
year 1580. ( Jonas says it fell out in the year 1581.) not in Hecla, but in
another mount, namely, in Helgesel, fire and stones were cast out with such
crackes, thundering and hideous noise, that fourscore miles off one would have
thought great ordenance and double canons had been discharged here. At this
hill there is an huge gulf, where spirits of men lately departed, do offer
themselves so plainly to be seen and discerned of those that sometime knew
them in their life time, that they are often taken for living men of such as
are not aware that they are dead: neither do they perceive that they were
deceived, until the Ghosts be gone. ( Jonas accounts this for a fable.)
There are also certain spirits or ghosts, which do show themselves apparently
to be seen in the businesses of mortal men, or of such as came to their end by
some violent mischance, as Olaus reports. They call these Drols, as Rithmayer
testifies. (Now Drol, is a giant of the mountains, if we may believe Arngrime
Jonas an Ilander by birth and bringing up.) Here is a spring which by reason
of a filthy smoking water which runs from it, kills any thing that
naturally the earth brings forth: and whatsoever is besmered with this smokie
fume, in continuance of time becomes as hard as a stone, yet still retaining
the shape that it had before. There is also a spring of pestilent waters, which
whosoever shall taste or drink of, will presently be as if he had drunk
poison. Here also are certain waters that are in property and taste somewhat
like drink that is made of malt. There are fires here, that will not burn
or consume flax, yet they will quite dry up and consume water. They have
bears, crows, and white hares. As also Eagles with white tails, as our
author Jonas the Islander whom we have often cited, does witness. These Pliny
(as he there alleges) calls Pygargos, I think we call them Wringtailes.
But those that are desirous to know all the strange wonders of this island let
them read Albert Crantz, Saxo Grammaticus, Johannes Magnus, and Olaus Magnus,
whom they may believe or not believe, according as they shall find cause. To
those they may adioine that which David Chytraeus in his Saxon history has
written of this island. Except I be deceived, the fable which Isacius upon
Lycophron recites, of a certain island of Brittany, whither he says the
souls of dead men are transported, does perteine to this island. For such a
like tale is commonly told of Island.

A declaration of the Marks and Letters of this Map.
A. Is a fish which they commonly call Nahual. If any man eat of this fish, he
dies presently. It has a tooth in the forepart of his head, standing out
seven cubits. This diverse have sold for the Unicorns horn. It is thought to
be a good antidote and sovereign medicine against poison. This Monster is
forty else in length. B. The Roider, a fish of an hundred and thirty else in
length, which has no teeth. The flesh of it is very good meat, wholesome and
toothsome. The fat of it is good against many diseases. C. The Burchualur,
has his head bigger than all the body beside. It has many very strong teeth,
whereof they make Chesmen or Tablemen. It is threescore cubits long. D. The
Hyena, the sea hog, a monstrous kind of fish, of which thou may read in
the 21. book of Olaus Magnus. E. Ziphius, (it may be he means Xiphius, the
sword fish) an horrible sea monster, swallowing the black seal at one bitte.
F. The English whale, thirty else long: it has no teeth, but the tongue of it
is seven else in length. G. Hroshualur, that is as much to say as the
Seahorse, with a mane hanging down from his neck like an horse. It often
does the fishermen great hurt and skare. H. The greatest kind of Whales, which
seldom shows it self; it is more like a little island, than a fish. It
cannot follow or chase the smaller fishes, by reason of the huge greatness and
weight of his body, yet he prays upon many, which he catches by a natural
wile and subtilty which he uses for to get his food. I. Skautuhvalur, this
fish altogether full of gristles or bones; is somewhat like a ray or skaite but
an infinite deal bigger: when it appears, it is like an island, and with his
sins ouerturneth ships and boats. K. Seenaut, sea cowes, of color gray:
they sometimes come out of the sea and do feed upon the land many in a company
together. They have a little bag hanging at their nose, by the help of which
they live in the water: that being broken, they live altogether upon the land,
and do accompany themselves with other kine. L. Steipereidur, a most gentle and
tame kind of whale; which for the defense of the fishermen fights against
other Whales. It is forbidden by Proclamation that no man may kill or hurt this
sort of Whale. It is in length an hundred cubits at the least. M. Staukul, the
Dutchmen call it Springual; he has been seen to stand a whole day together
upright upon his tail. It is so called of leaping or skipping. It is a very
dangerous enemy to seamen and fishers; and greedily seeks after man's flesh.
N. Rostunger, (which also is otherwise called a Rosmar,) is somewhat like a
sea-calfe: it goes in the bottom of the sea upon four feet, but very short
ones. His skin may scarcely be pierced with any weapon. He sleeps twelve
hours together hanging by his two long teeth upon some rock or cliffe. Each of
his teeth are at the least an elle long, but the length of his whole body is
foureteen else long. O. Sperma ceti, parmacitty, or a base kind of amber, they
commonly call it Hualambur. P. Blocks and Trunkes of tree by force of wind
and violent tempest blown up by the roots from off the cliffes of Norway,
tossed to and fro and passing through many storms at length are cast up, or do
rest against this shore. Q. Huge and maruailous great heaps of ice brought
hither with the tide from the frozen sea, making a great and terrible noise;
some pieces of which often times are forty cubits big; upon these in some
places white bears do sit closely, watching the silly fish which here about
do play and sport themselves.

But I think it not amiss, to set down the Verses of Erasmus Michaelis,
which he has of Island in his third book De re Nautica.

Vltima Parrhasias Islandia spectat in Arctos,
Sub Canrum porrecta gradus: non diuite tantum
Laeta solo, cum vel caecis occlusa cauernis
Sulphura flaua coquit mixtisque extrudit arenis:
Pabula vel laetis pecori gratissima pratis
Fundit, and oppletas inuestit gramine valles:
At vicina etiam solidos cum littora pisces
Nec numeris, nec mensura certisve ferendos
Nominibus stipat, ratibusque immittere certat.
Prouentu siquidem vario cum cxcesserit, vno
Hoc vincit tamen, and cumulato pisce redundat,
Aucta opibus fortesque animis complexa colonos.
Cuius and in Notios quae pars iacet obuia ventos
Aestuat aeternis per aperta foramina flammis,
Eructatque globos cinerum, trepidoque boatu
Hecla tonans inter sparsa pice sidera lambit.
In English thus:

Island a famous i will that is far remote and distant from the Maine,
North-west from hence does lie in frozen sea: The countries chiefest gain
Is Brimstone pale, which here in mountains high in plenty great is found;
Or here and there like sand on shore li'th scattered on the ground.
The goodly pastures passing fat, the lowly meddowes alwaie green,
Such store of Neat and Kine in vales do feed, as else where may be seen.
The Sea on all sides round about, so many sundry sorts of Fish
Does yield, that none their names do know, or greater store may wish:
Whereof they daily lade great ships from hence, and those away do send
To foreign countries every way: though many things this i will commend,
For fish yet does it far excel all kingdoms of the world throughout,
By this the Nation grow'th in wealth, the people lusty strong and stout.
The Northren parts which lie full cold and bleake within the frozen zone,
Do breath forth flashing flames of fire, with lumpes of ashes, earth and stone.
Whot burning coals with filthy stinking smoke mount Hecla casts out,
With hideous cracks and thundering noise, heard far and near about.
Certain words expounded for the help of the Reader, and better
understanding of the Map.
Wic, that is, a creek, inlet or bay. Iokul, a mountain or hill. Ey, an i will:
Eyer, islands. Nes, the Dutch call it Nas and Nues, that is, a nose, a
promontory or foreland shooting out into the sea. Lend, the Dutch pronounce it
Landt, the land or earth. Clauster, a Cloister, or Monastery. Aust, the East,
West, the place of the sun setting; Nord, the North. Suyd, the South. Fior,
signifies four.

RVSSIA, Or rather THE EMPIRE OF THE GRAND DVKE OF MOSCOVIA.
THis Map comprehends not all Russia; for here are wanting Polonia and
Lithuania, which generally are contained under the name of Russia: But the
whole Empire of the Grand Duke of Moscouia; which is bounded on the North by
the frozen Sea; on the East, upon the Tartars; on the South, upon the Turks
and Polanders; on the West; it abutteth upon Lithuania and Sweden: all whose
countries and provinces Sigismundus Baro of Herberstein has severally and
particularly described; unto whom we send the thirsty Reader for further
satisfaction. Of the Religion, habit, manners and kind of life of this Nation;
we have out of him very willingly for thine ease selected these few things. In
their Religion they do for the most part follow the rites and ceremonies of the
Greek Church. Their Priests are married. They have Images in their Churches.
When their children are baptized, three times dipped all over into the water;
and the water in the font is severally consecrated for every child. Although by
their constitutions and canons they have a kind of Auricular Confession, yet
the common people thinks it to belong only to Princes and Noblemen, and
little to pertain to them. Confession being ended, and penance enioined
according to the quality of the offense and fault, they sign them in the
forehead with the sign of the cross, and with a loud mournful voice they
cry, Jesus Christ, thou son of God, have mercy upon us. This is their common
form and manner of prayer: for few can say the Pater noster. They do
communicate in the sacrament of the supper both kinds, mingling the bread with
the wine, or the body with the blood. They administer the Lords supper to
children of seven years old: for then they say a man does sin. The better
sort of men, after the communion ended, do spend the day in drunkenness and
riot; and do rather reverence the same with brave apparel than inward
devotion: the baser sort of people and servants; for the most part, do labor
and work as at other times; saying, that to make holy day to be idle and to
leave their work, is for gentlemen and masters; not for poor folks and
servants. Purgatory they do not believe, yet they make prayers and do other
service and ceremonies for the dead. No man does besprinkle himself or suffer
any other to cast holy water upon him; except the Priest himself will do it.
In the Lent they fast seven whole weeks together. They marry; and do tolerate
bigamy or permit a man to have two wives, but they make a question whether it
be a lawful matrimony or not. They grant divorces and separations. They take
it not to be adultery, except one man take another man's wife. The state of
women in this country is most miserable: for they think, except she like a
snaile do carry her house over her head, and be continually mewed up in her
closet, or so watched, that by no means she may start out of doors, none
possibly can be honest. It is a wily and deceitful people, and is rather
delighted to live in servitude and slavery, than at large and in liberty. All
of them do acknowledge themselves to be the Princes servants. They are seldom
quiet: for either they must make wars upon the Lithuans, the Liuonians, or
Tartars: or if they be not employed in any service in foreign wars, they are
placed in garrisons about the rivers Don (Tanais, the ancients called it) and
Occan, to repress the robberies and invasions of the Tartars. They wear long
cleit gowns, without any pleits, with strait sleeves after the Hungarian
fashion: boots also, for the most part red and short, such as scarce come to
their knees, and shoes or clogges clouted and hobbed with iron nails. They tie
their girdles not about their wastes, but beneath their bellies as low as their
hippes. They do severe justice upon freebooters and such as rob by the high
way side. Pilfering and manslaughter is seldom punished by death. Their silver
coins or money, are not round, but somewhat long, of an ouall form or
fashioned like an egge-like figure. The country abounds with those rich and
precious skins or pelts, which from hence are transported and carried all
Europe over; it is almost every where full of huge woods. All these particulars
we have drawn out of the above named Sigismund. Many things more of this
country thou may read of in Matthew of Micou, Alexander Gaguine, his tract of
the Sarmatiaes, Albert Crantz his VVandalia, Paulus Iouius of the Embassage of
the Moschouites to Clement the eight. Albertus Campensis upon the same, and in
the Persian iourneies of Ambrosio Contareno. But I would wish thee also for
farther satisfaction herein to read over the first and second books of
Bonfinius his first Decade of the history of Hungary: as also the first book
of the life of Basilides written by Oderborne, together with the Chronicle of
Saxony done by David Chytraeus.

map of Western Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan RVSSIAE,
MOSCOVIAE ET TARTARIAE DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Antonio Ienkensono Anglo, edita
Londini Anno. 1562 and dedicata illustriss: D. Henrico Sydneo Walliae praesidi.
Zlata Baba, id est aurea vetula ab Obdorianis, and lougorianis religiose
colitur. Idolum hoc sacerdos consulit, quid ipsis facie^dum, quoue sit
migrandum, ipsumque (dictu mirum) certa consulentibus dat responsa, certique
euentus consequuntur.

Horum regionum incolae Solemn, vel rubrum pannum pertica suspensum adorant. In
castris vitam ducunt; ac oi^m anima^tium, serpentiu^, vermiu^que carne
vescuntur ac proprio idiomate vtuntur.

Haec saxa hoi^m iumentorum camelorum pecorumque, caeterarumque reru^ formas
referentia, Horda populi gregis pascentis, arme^taque fuit: Que stupenda quadam
metamorphosi, repent in saxa riguit, priori forma nulla in part diminuta.
Euenit hoc prodigium annis circiter 300. retro elapsis:

Cum priuilegio



TARTARIA, OR THE EMPIRE OF THE MIGHTY CHAM.
HE that will take upon him to describe TARTARIA; he must needs speak of a
great number of nations, far asunder and remote one from another. For all
that huge tract and portion of the Maine land is now called Tartaria, that is
between the East sea, (or as he calls it Mare Mangicum, the sea of Mangi or
of Sin, a country all the World over, and vulgarly known by the name of China)
and the South countries, Sin or China, that part of India which is beyond
Ganges, the country of the Saci, the river Iaxartes, (now they call it Chesel)
the Caspian sea, Mar delle Zabacche (Maeotis palus, it was called of the
ancient writers) and Westward up as high almost as the Moscouites. For all
these countries well near the Tartars did possess, and in these places they
were seated. So that it comprehends that country which the old
Historiographers called Sarmatia of Asia, both the Scythiaes and Seria, the
country where the Seres dwelt, which now I take to be named Cataio.

The name of this Nation was never heard of in Europe before the year after
Christ's incarnation 1212. They are divided (in stead of shires) into Hordaes,
that is, as the word amongst them does signify, into companies or couents. But
as they do inhabit large and wide countries far distant and remote one from
another, so in manners and kind of life they are as far different. They are
well limmed men, broad and fat faced, scowling countenanced and hollow eied,
shaven all but their beards, which they never cut low: they are strong and of
able bodies, and do eat horse flesh and other beasts howsoever they come to
their deaths: only hogs excepted, from which they wholly abstain; they can
more easily endure hunger and thirst than other men, a little sleep does serve
them: moreover when they ride, if they be very hungry and thirsty, they use to
prick the veins of their horses upon which they ride, and by drinking of
their blood to slack their hunger and thirst. And because they roue up and
down and have no certain place of abode, they guide their course and journey
by the stars, especially by the observation of the North pole star, which
they in their language call, as Sigismund Herberstein testifies, Seles nicol,
that is, the iron clubbe nail, or stern. They stay not long in one place,
taking it to be a sign of ill fortune to dwell long upon one plotte. They
observe no manner of justice or law. The people, especially the poorer sort, are
very ravenous and covetous; always gaping after other men's goods. They have no
manner of use either of gold or silver.

In this country thou see TANGVT, a province from whence all the Rheubarbe,
that is spent and used in all the world, is brought unto us and other places.
Here also is the country CATAIA, whose chief city is Cambalu, which, as
Nicolaus de Comitibus writes, is eighteen Italian miles about, or as M. Paulus
Venetus, thirty two. It is of a square form, in each of whose corners there are
castles built, four miles in compass, where continually the Emperors
garrisons are kept. But Quinzai, a city of the province Mangi, which is from
hence Eastward, upon the Eastern sea, is thought to be far bigger than this:
For this as the same M. Paulus Venetus affirms, who dwelt there about the
year after the birth of Christ 1260. is in compass an hundred miles. The same
is also avouched by Odericus of Friuli (de foro Iulio) who names it Cansay. It
is situate in a lake of fresh water. There are in it 1260. bridges, whereof
many are of such great height, that ships full laden may go under them and
never strike sail Here the Great Cham has a standing garrison of 12000.
trained soldiers continually resident. It is a wonderful stately and pleasant
city, whereupon it obtained that name, for Quinzai, they interpret, The city of
Heaven.

The Tartars call their Emperor Cham, which signifies the same that Princeps,
a Prince: hereupon Cambalu is interpreted, The seat or city of the Prince.
Sigismundus of Herberstein writes, that the Tartars do call themselves
Besermanni.

The Tartars, together with their manner and course of life, are most lively
described by Sigismund of Herberstein and Martine Broniouius: as also in the
Historical Glass, or Mirour of histories, written by Vincentius Beluacensis,
in the 30. 31. and 32. books of the same. See also the commentaries of
Hungary, written by Antonio Bonfinio: M. Paulus Venetus, who it is certain
lived long there amongst them; and the Iournall or Trauells of Iosapha Barbarus
a Venetian. Of their original, read Matthias of Michou, Haiton the Armenian,
Caelius secundus Curio his Saracen history, and the letters of Iacobo Nauarcho
a Jesuit. Of the Tartars there be many things worth the reading in the
trauells of two Friars, which about the year 1247. were sent into these
quarters, by Pope Gregory the fourth, in the thirtieth chapter of Nicephorus
his eigteenth book. Laonicus also has many things, in diverse places of his
works, of the Tartars under the name of the Scythians: the like has Gregoras
another Greek writer. Lastly, David Chytraeus in his Saxon chronicle has
written much of this nation. But no man has more fully and amply set out the
manners and life of the Tartars then William Rubricius, a Friar of the order of
S. Francis, a copy of whose trauells into these parts, in the year of Christ
1253. I have by me in written hand.

map of Eastern Russia TARTARIAE SIVE MAGNI CHAMI REGNI typus
Continet haec tabula oe^m Tartariam, cum reliqua Asiae Orientalioris vsque
Oceanu^ Eoum part, Magno Chamo obediente: Cuius imperium Obij fl: Kataia lacu:
Volga fl: Mari Caspio, Chesel flu: Vssonte monte, Thebet regione, Caromoram
fluuio. and Oceano terminatur.

Cum Priuilegio.



CHINA.
BErnardinus Scalantus has in the Spanish tongue set out a peculiar
description of this country in a several tract, out of whom we have gathered
these few lines. This huge kingdom of China, the inhabitants do call TAME, and
themselves TANGIS: but of the bordering nations it is named CHINA, and is that
Tein or Sin, which Auicenna so many hundred times mentions, and commends
for rare simples and plants of sovereign use in Physic: and is the same no
doubt with SINAE or Sinarum regio, a country for rich commodities much talked
of amongst all ancient Cosmographers. This country on the East bordereth upon
the East sea: (vulgarly called Mare Cin, the sea of China) on the South, upon
the province Cauchinchina: on the West, it is bounded by Bramas: on the North,
it has the Tartars, a warlike and stout people, from whom it is defended and
severed partly by an artificial wall, made by the hand and labor of man,
partly by a natural mountain which runs for many hundred miles together
between the countries. It is a country very fertile of all manner of things
necessary for the maintenance of man's life, caused not only by the goodness of
the soil, and temperature of the air, but especially by the husbandry and
industry of the people. For the men here are not given to idleness, but are
very laborious and painful. To be idle here it is counted a shameful thing.
It has wonderful store of Gold, Silver, and Rheubarbe. The sea which beats
upon this coast, and the rivers which run through the midst of this
country, do abound with all sorts of fish. Upon the mountains, vales and
meddowes infinite flocks of cattle do feed and are maintained. The woods,
forests and groves are possessed with Bores, Foxes, Hares, Conies, Zebellines,
Martens, and diverse other such kind of beasts, whose skins are much set by for
facings for gowns. Of all kinds of birds it yields maruallous plenty,
especially of water-foule, as is manifest by this, that in Canton, which is one
of the least cities of this province, there are spent every day upon their
Tables ten or twelve thousand Ducks and Geese. They sow the drier ground with
wheat and barley: the wet, plain or moorish grounds, with rise: which they cut
or reap four times in a year: this is their chiefest diet and living. The
higher and steep places and sides of hills are beset with Pine-trees: amongst
the which they sow panicke, and pulse or horsecorne. There is no place
therefore, no field, no plot of ground unfruitful. Every where are Orchards,
Gardens, Fruits, Roses, Flowers, of all sorts yielding a most fragrant and
pleasant smell and goodly show to the beholders. They plant flax in great
abundance every where, whereof they make diverse sorts of linen, whereof they
make their apparel: but especially Sugar canes, (which here grows in
marvelous great abundance) and the Mulbery trees for the feeding of their
silk worms which are maintained with the leaves of this tree. Tor Silk is
the chifest merchandise and commodity, whereof they raise yearly an infinite
gain and profit. There are in this kingdom 240. goodly cities, the names of
which do all generally end in the syllable fu, which in their language
signifies a city; as Cantonfu, Panquinfu. The towns whereof there is infinite
number, they likewise end in Cheu. Villages which are not to be numbered, by
reason of the continual husbandry and tillage, are very populous and
wonderfully inhabited. All their cities for the most part, are situate upon the
bank of some great and nauigable stream, fortified with broad and deep
ditches, and very high strong walls. These walls from the foundation upward,
are made of stone; toward the top and battlement, with brick, laid in steed
of lime and mortar, with lome or potters clay, the same stuff, I mean,
whereof the China dishes, so much esteemed of amongst us, are made. The height
of them and thickness is so great, that five or six men may walk a breast
upon the top of them. Upon the wall are placed here and there certain high
towers and bulwarks, out of which they may see all the fields over far and
near round about. On each side of the walls so much vacant ground ( pomoerium
the Latins call it) is least, that horsemen may pass them six and six in a
rank in battle array. These walls are so close and soundly wrought without any
rifts or chinks, that one would think them to have been but newly made, when
as their histories do testify them to have been built two thousand years
since. The entrance into the cities is by great gates most wonderfully and
stately built. Their streets are as smooth and precisely plain, as if they
were altogether made by line and level, and are so large and broad that ten
yea fifteen horsemen may ride a breast through them, which in many and sundry
places are parted and severed with stately triumphall arches, gracing the
cities beyond all measure. Certain Portugals do report that they saw in the
city Fucho a turrette, standing upon forty marble pillars, whose height were
forty hand breadth, and the thickenesse twelve after the measure which the
Architects use. This, (they affirm in their judgment) for greatness, for
exquisite workmanship, beauty and costlinesse, does far exceed all the
stately buildings of all Europe. The greatness of their cities we do gather by
this, that they say the city Canton, which we said was one of the least of
their cities, is twelve English miles in compass; beside 355. suburbs which
do belong to it, very great and populous. The people are broad and round faced,
thin haired, flat nosed, and small eied: although there be some amongst
them reasonable well favored and handsome men. The color of their faces is
somewhat like that of those which inhabit Europe, yet those which dwell about
Canton are of a brown complexion. They seldom or never travel further than
their own country, neither will they easily suffer a stranger to dwell amongst
them, especially in the vpland places, except they be publicly sworn to be
true unto the King and Country. The wealthy and better sort of men have all
their apparel made of silk of diverse and sundry colors. The base and meaner
sort do wear a kind of stuff made of white or black cotton, and sometime
linen colored or stained with party colors; for as yet in these parts they
know not how to make woollen cloth. The men there, as women do here, do wear
their hair long, which they wind up in a knot to the crown of their head,
where they bind and fasten it with a silver bodkin. The women comb their hair
very trimly, and do behang and set it out with gold spangles and diverse kind of
pearls and precious stones. They paint and besmeare their faces with
complexion, such as the Spanish women do commonly use. They never once look
out of doors, except they be carried in their littars upon men's shoulders, and
attended by all the family.

It is lawful for the men to marry many wives, of which they keep but one in
the house, the other they maintain at board abroad in other places. Those
which are convict of adultery, are put to death. Within the city there may be
no stews, the courtizanes do live altogether in the suburbs without the walls.
Weddings are always kept in the new moon or beginning of the month, and that
for the most part on the first day of March, which is their New-yeares-day, or
first day of the year. These feasts they set out, like as we also do, very
sumptuously and with as great preparation and provision as may be gotten and
divised. Their chambers are hanged and spread with hangings of silk and rich
tapestry, flowers are strewed and cast in every corner. This feast is held and
continued for many days together. At them they have music and all sorts of
instruments, with Interludes and stage plays. At these bankets they eat and
drink so soundly, that in this even the very Dutchmen and Flemings themselves
do not much exceed them. Their meat they do not touch with their hands, but
with a silver forke or hook they put it into their mouths. They sit at their
meat or tables in chaires or on stools, as here we do in Europe, not upon the
ground, as the rest of the Asians use. It is a very witty and ingenious people,
so that they have devised and framed certain wagons, which they can skilfully
guide in the fields and champion plains, driven and forced by sails and
winds, like as ships are upon the sea. These people have had the use and art
of Printing of books, long before it was known to us here in Europe, the
West part of the world. And there being in this country, by reason of the
largeness of the same, many and sundry people speaking distinct and different
languages, one understanding another no more than the Castilliand th the
Biscaines, or the Germane does the Frenchmen; yet by their manner of writing and
characters which they all in common do use, they do one know another mind
passing well. Therefore all the inhabitants of the provinces of this kingdom,
as also those of Cauchinchina, and in the Lequeio's (certain islands upon this
coast) do use one and the same alphabet (as they call it) or rather a kind of
draught of letters (not much unlike the Hieroglyphickes, of the Egyptians)
whereby they do most cunningly and readily express every thing and phrase or
manner of speech. For example; a city or town (the one he calls Leombi, the
other Fu) all do express this word by this mark (...). In like map of China
CHINAE, olim Sinarum regionis, noua descriptio. auctore Ludouico Georgio.
Cum priuilegio Imperatoris, Regis, and Brabantiae: ad decennium. 1584.

manner Heaven, which this nation calls Guant, by this character (...): a
King, whom they name Bontai, thus (...) and so forth. For they have in that
their alphabet above five thousand characters of things and words. Gaspar
Balbus, in his Iournall of India, writes, except he jest, that they have sixty
thousand sundry characters. In writing or printing they do not begin at the
left hand and so go on to the right, as we do: nor contrariwise, as the Jews
and Arabians use; but they begin at the top and so write down in a straight
line until they come to the bottom of the page. This kingdom has an
infinite number of all sorts of galleys, boats and barges, whereby they pass
over rivers and arms of the sea: so that when they will brag of their Kings
wealth and show his power and command, they use in a proverb to say, that he
can make a bridge of ships so long that it shall reach from China to Malacha:
which are more than 500. leagues asunder. For the country abutring upon the
sea, and being every way and in many places watered and crossed by diverse great
and nauigable rivers, there are almost as many people that dwell in boats upon
the water, as there do in houses upon the land. Some there are, which never go
out of their boats or barges, but continually staying in them, do by fishing
and fowling get their living all the year long: for, as we said before: the
abundance of fish and fowls here in this country is admirable. Although this
province be beyond all measure fertile of all manner of living creatures, yet
they do help this fertility by art and this strange invention: In the Spring
time they cover two or three thousand eggs with horse dung, (like as they use
in Alcairo of Egypt) by the heat of which, in a certain time, goslings and
chickins are hatched and brought sorth. The like they do in the winter, but
then they lay them not in dung, but putting them into a basket made of reeds,
and so setting them over a soft and moderat fire, which they keep continually
burning in the same temper, whereby, in a certain number of days, they bring
the same to pass as before. They have also this kind of fishing: in those
cities which stand upon the banks and sides of rivers (as almost all the
cities of this kingdom do) they keep a great number of Cormorants or sea-guls
(the Latins call them Mergi, the Spaniards Sea crows) in cages or coupes:
these, when they list to go a fishing, they put into their boats, and carrying
them to the deepest places of the river, and there binding their necks lightly
with cords (least that the fishes which they catch should go into their
bellies) they cast them by multitudes into the water, where they let them stay
so long, until they see their croppes to be filled with fishes, and then they
returning to their boats, they are let in and there they cast up at their
masters feet all the fish they have caught. This they do as often as the
fishermen please: and then being brought unto their coupes, their necks are
untied, and their ordinary meat is given to eat while they will. All this whole
country is subject to one King, (as to a Monarch) whom they call The Lord of
the World, and The Son of Heaven. Paquin, a city in the North parts of this
kingdom, toward the confines of Tartaria, is the seat of their King, where he
ordinarily keeps his Court. Out of this he never goes, except in time of
war. His predecessors did sometime keep their court in the city Manquin, for
a remembrance whereof a golden Table is there very religiously preserved. In
this the name of the King, which now reigns, is written: before it is hanged
a very rich curtain, which is never drawn but upon festival and holy days,
when as they do reverence it very superstitiously, as if it did indeed
represent the very Majesty of the King himself. They report that when he
makes war at any time against the Tartars, that he leads out into the
field at the least three hundred thousand footmen, and two hundred thousand
horsemen: yet this also they add, that it is no very warlike Nation. The King
has under him a governor, as it were a lieutenant, whom they call Tutan. This
lieutenant is the judge and determiner of all causes and controversies arising
between man and man through-out the whole kingdom. In the execution of justice
he uses great severity. Thieves and murderers are kept in perpetual
imprisonment, until they end their lives either by whipping, hunger or cold.
Although they be condemned to suffer the greatest punishment that their law
does inflict (which for the most part is whipping) yet the execution of the
sentence is so slow, that the greatest part of these condemned men do die in
prison and never come to execution. Hence it is that there every where in all
their cities such an infinite number of prisoners, so that in Canton, one of
their least cities is there are oftentimes more than fifteen thousand men in
prison at once. Robberies, (than which fault, in these countries, there is none
counted more odious) are punished by a cruel kind of whipping. The manner of
this whipping is thus: They set the party to be whipped, with his face
downe-ward, and his hands bound behind him: then he is beaten with a whippe,
made of a reed or cane, upon the calves of his legs, with such mighty blows,
that the blood for the most part follows at the first stroke; the second blow
does so torment the party to be punished that he cannot possibly stand upon his
feet any longer. Several hangmen do whip, one one leg, and another another;
and that so hard that many do die of the fifteenth or sixteenth lash: for all
their sinews are by this time burst asunder. The Portugals do affirm that
every year in this country there die above two thousand of this kind of death.
This whippe is five fingers broad, and an inch thick, which every foot they
dippe in water, to make it the more pliant, and to strike the greater blow.

Concerning the faith and religion of this nation, it is thus: They do believe
all earthly creatures and all things in the World, and the government and
disposition of them, to depend of Heaven and Heavenly powers. For they do
think that Heaven is the greatest of all Gods; and therefore the character of
it possesses the first place of their alphabet. They worship the Sun, the
Moon and the Stars, yea the very Devil himself, (which they paint in the
same form, as we do here in Europe) that he may do them no hurt, as they
say. They have stately and sumptuous Churches, as well in the country, as in
their cities. They have also two sorts of Priests: the one sort go in white,
with their heads shaven, and live by begging, as our Friars do: the other goes
in black, wearing their hair long, and dwell by themselves, as our Priests
use to do here in Europe. Neither of them may marry, yet they live very
wantonly and licentiously. Thus far out of Scalantus. It will not be amiss
to these to add some things out of others. John Barry in his Asian Decades
gives out, that this king has under him fifteen very great and large
countries; which they call Governments. And moreover he adds, that this King
alone does far surpass all the rest of the Princes of Asia round about him:
and that his yearly renenews do exceed all the riches and wealth of all
Europe. For handy-craft trades and occupations they do excel all men living,
their works are so finely and cunningly made, that one would judge them to have
been framed by nature, and not by art and industry of man. At the city Nimpo,
which others call Liampo, he says it has been observed that some of the
Portugals in the space of three months, have bought and shipped away 166000.
pounds of silk. Odoardus Barbosa writes, that the people are very kind and
humane, and go apparelled much like the Dutchmen, whom also they do much
resemble in pronunciation and manner of speech. Those clear and transparent
vessels, or dishes as white as the drift snow, which amongst us are of such
great estimation, are here made in this manner: They mingle certain
cochleshels eg-shels and other things together, which they knead and make into
a paste. This paste they hide in the earth, where they let it li for the space
of fourscore, or an hundred years, before they stir it or look to it
again, leaving it, as a great inheritance or precious jewel, unto their
heirs. That paste they use which their grandfathers or great grandfathers have
laid up for them. And they do observe duly by an ancient custom, that he
which takes away the old paste, do put new presently in his place. Antony
Pigafetta, calls this King the most mighty Prince of the whole world. He
says that his palace, or house where he keeps his Court, is enclosed with 7.
walls; and that he has always 10000. soldiers for his guard continually there
attendant upon him: and that 70. crowned Kings do homage unto him and are
subject to his government and command. The same author affirms that Musk is
from hence transported into diverse parts of the world. Andrew Corsalis he
likewise says that the greatest store of Rheubarbe and Pearl that is brought
hither to us in Europe, does come from hence.

In the Jesuits Epistles lately set forth in print, many things well worth the
observation are here and there set down of this country. That of Ptolemey
these people were called SINAE, the situation does plainly prove, neither does
the name yet retained much differ from that. For the Spaniards and Portugals do
write it Ch na, yet they pronounce it Sina. Of the situation and nature of this
country, the behauiours and manners of the people, you may read in a work of
John Gonsalis set forth of this argument. Of the same also read the letters of
the Jesuits before mentioned, and Ferd^nando Lopez: but especially the sixth
book of Maffeius de rebus Indicis. Lastly, the nienth chapter of the ninth
book of the first part of the choice Library of Posseuinus.

The I Will IAPAN, OR IAPONIA.
John Peter Maffey, in the twelfth book of his history of India does thus
write of this island: They are especially three greater islands, with many other
smaller round about them, disioined one from another by very narrow straits or
arms of the sea, that are called by the name of IAPAN or Iaponia. The first
and the greatest is divided into three and fifty signiories or kingdoms: the
head and chief city of this is Meaco, whereof this whole island takes his
name. The second is named Ximen, and contains nine kingdoms: the more famous
cities of the kingdom of Bungo, are Vosuqui and Funay. The third island is
called Xicocum: it contains not above four kingdoms or signiories: it is
beautified with the goodly city Tonsa (Tosa he calls it) of the same name
with the kingdom: Thus the regiments or kingdoms of Iapan are in all
generally sixty and six; beside diverse other jurisdictions which cannot justly
be called kingdoms. The length of the whole maine land is, as they say, almost
two hundred leagues: the breadth is nothing so much: for in some places it is
not above ten leagues broad: at the most it is not above thirty leagues over.
Of the compass there is nothing certainly written that I know of. It runs
out from the South toward the North from the thirty degree of latitude almost
to the thirty and eight. Upon the East it is opposite to New-Spa^ne, remote
from it not above 150. leagues. Upon the North it has the Scythians or
Tartarians, and other such people exceeding rude and barbarous. On the West
lies China, (Sinarum regno) in some place nearer, in some place further off,
according to the diverse windings and bendings of the shore: for from the city
Liampo, which is the uttermost bound of China, toward the West, unto Gotum,
(Ogoto, I think) which is the first Island of all Iapan that offers it self
to the view of those which sail from thence hitherward, is not above
threescore leagues but from Amacan, a mart town in the West, where the
Portugals for the most part do altogether use to trade, unto the same Gotum,
the cut is 297. leagues over. On the South, near hand it has naught but the
vast and wide Ocean; further off, certain lands and countries not yet descried
or known, out of which, the report goes, that certain sailours came once by
chance unto Iapan, and never put off from thence any more to return back to
their native soil. The country for the most part is full of snow all the year
long, bleake and cold, and therefore not very fertile. In September they cut
down their rise, in some places they reap their wheat in May: (for this
generally is the usual food throughout the whole country) yet they make no
bread of it, as we use here in Europe, but a kind of pudding or pappe, which
they eat in stead of bread. The temperature of the air is very kind and
wholesome: their fresh waters are passing good: they have also some bathes or
springs of hot waters of sovereign virtues in Physic, as some do constantly
report. High and steep mountains they have many here and there, but two are
especially famous, the one of which, whose name I know not, does continually
burn and cast out flames of fire, as Aetna in Sicilia was wont to do, and as
Hecla in Island now usually does at certain times. In the top of this
mountain, the Devil, enclosed in a white clowd, shows himself to certain
men, after that for devotions sake they have long fasted and pined themselves.
The other, called Figenoiama, arises up certain leagues above the clouds.
The people do dig sundry sorts of metals out of the bowels of the earth,
whereby they entice foreign Nations to come from far unto their quarters.
Trees they have both for pleasure and for profit or fruit not much unlike ours
here in Europe: yet there is one tree, which does much resemble the
Palm Tree, whose nature is very strange: for, as they affirm, it is afraid of
any manner of moisture: and if so be by chance it happen to be wette, it
shrinketh together, and as if it had been infected with the plague, smitten or
blasted, it withers and dies immediately. The help and means to recover it
again, is to pluck it up by the roots and to dry it in the sun: then to
lay it in a dry ditch or empty pit, and to cover it all over, either with the
rust of iron beaten to powder, or else with sand: there, after it is planted
and set into the ground again, it grows and buddeth as before, and so it
flourishes and becomes as trim and beautiful as ever it was: the boughs
also that fall off, or are broken off, if they be fastened with a nail unto
the stock or body of the tree, they will grow and join to the same as well as
if they had been grafted into it. Here are every where great store of Cedar
trees, of such height and thickenesse, that hereof the carpenters make summers
for houses, pillars and columns for stately buildings, and the shipwrights
masts for the talest and greatest ships of burden that in those quarters they
usually make. Sheep, hogs, hens, ducks, geese, and such other filthy kinds
of living creatures they seldom or never keep at home about their houses: if
they please to eat flesh meat, they only eat venison, and such as they catch
abroad in the wild fields. The fields are bespread with many herds of cattle,
as kine and horses for service in the wars: in the forests, woods and bushie
grounds, woolues, conies, bores, stagges and other dear do wander up and
down: they have plenty of phesants, wild ducks, stock-doues, quails and wild
hens: fishes of diverse sorts, but especially of river trouts, (or silares as
some call them) as also of sea troutes which is not unlike that kind of fish
which Ausonius names Alosa, and Pliny Clupea or Clypea, in the fifteenth
chapter of his ninth book: this they set great store by and do account it for
a dainty dish. They know not what butter means; oil of olives they have
none; but they make a kind of artificial oil of the Whales which they catch
or are cast up upon this shore: the common sort of people do use most what
boughs or sticks of pine-trees, in some place straw and hawme, in steed of
candles. If any one be tall or properly made, he is not a little proud of it.
Many of them live long, and are strong and lusty even to the last, so that the
most of them are fit for the wars till they be threescore years old. They
wear their beards short: but in the rest of their hair they are very curious
and have diverse and sundry cuttes: they shave them not, but pluck them off
with pullesans or pinsers; the Boys do bare their heads from the forehead even
up to the crown: the baser sort of people and the clownes, the one half of
the same: the gentlemen and noblemen, almost all over, only leaving a few
hairs behind about the nape of the neck, which they hold for a great disgrace
if any man shall lay hand upon, or once offer to touch. Hunger, thirst, heat,
cold, labor and such like inconveniences, that do much trouble other men, they
can well away withal and most patiently endure. As soon as ever they be borne
and come into the world, although it be in the midde winter, they be straight
carried to a river to be washed: being weaned and taken from the breast, they
are exercised in hunting, and are kept apart in rough and craggy places far
from their mothers and nurces wings; for they think that there is nothing that
does more effeminate the minds of men, than too tender and delicate bringing
up. They bespread and cover the floores of their houses with fine and neat
mattes, rising and swelling as matrices or flockebeds. Upon these, laying a
stone or blocket under their heads, in steed of a pillow, they sleep and take
their rest: and upon the same, kneeling upon their knees and sitting upon their
legs, they dine and suppe. They are as neat and cleanly as those of China: at
their meat they do so cunningly put their meat into their mouths with two
little pricks or forkes, that they never drop or let ought fall beside, nor
need once to wipe their fingers. They put off their shoes when they go to meat,
least they should soil their carpets by treading upon them The poorer sort,
especially those that dwell upon the sea, do live by herbs, rise, and fish: the
wealthier sort do set out their banquets richly and with great variety of
dishes: at every mess each man's trencher map of Japan and Korea IAPONIAE
INSVLAE DESCRIPTIO. Ludoico Teisera auctore.
made of Cedar, or Pine-wood, of an handful thick, is changed without
table-clothes or napkins. The meats, when they are to be set upon the table,
are built, or laid upon another inform of a steeple or pyramid, bestrewed with
gold, and stuck and set out for a show with branches of the Cypress tree,
like as we use to do with Rose-mary. Many times whole fowls are brought to
Noblemens tables, with their bills and legs gilt all over. They intertaine their
friends and guests very kindly and bountifully. They have many orders and
laws of feasting and drinking, which are performed very curiously and with
strange and exquisite ceremonies. They have no manner of wine, nor vines
amongst them. A kind of artificial wine they make and press out of rise: yet
they are especially delighted, more than with any other kind of liquor, to
drink water almost scalding hot, putting it into the powder of an herb which
they call Chia, (it is a very wholesome herb of sovereign virtues) this kind
of drink they use often and are curious in the making of it; so that many
times Princes and Noblemen, will dress, prepare and mingle it with their own
hands, for an honor and grace unto their friends: and they have certain
places in their houses assigned to this purpose: in which there is a furnace or
fire kindled at all times ready, with a kettle of cast iron continually
hanging over the same: from hence they fetch drink to entertain their friends
at their first coming to their house, and for their farewell at their
departure: when their guests are to depart, they show them all their treasure
and household stuff which they do especially esteem; which for the most part
is nothing else but those vessels and instruments belonging to the making of
the drink which I spoke of before, namely the furnace or hearth, the pan or
kettle with the trefeet, the tunnell, the drinking cups or earthen pots, the
spoones, and the boxes wherein they keep the herb and the powder made of the
same. These things they set little less store by, than we do here in Europe
by rings beset with precious stones or bracelets of the best and most orient
pearls. Their houses for the most part are framed of timber, to avoid the
danger of earthquakes, which here are very frequent and often, although that
some have their houses very artificially and stately built from the foundation
upward of a very fair kind of stone. They have many goodly Churches, and
Monasteries both of men and women, very rich and sumptuous. The language of all
these islands is one and the same, but so diverse and manifold, and of such
different dialects, that it may not unjustly be said to be many. For they have
of one and the same thing diverse and sundry names, of which some are used in
scorn and bad sense, others in good sense and honorable usage: other phrases
and words are used by the Nobility, others by the common people: others are
spoken by the men, others by the women. Moreover, they speak otherwise than
they write: and in their writing there is a great variety, for they write their
private letters unto their friends one way, and books and such like another
way. They have diverse books, very fairly written, both in verse and in prose.
Again, their letters are such, as in one and the same character they do
express and signify sometime one word, sometime two or more. Lastly, the
Iaponian language is, of indifferent judges, preferred before the Latin,
either in respect of the elegancy and smoothness of pronunciation, or copy and
variety of the same: therefore it requires both great time and labor to
learn it. They are a very warlike people and much given to follow that kind of
life: the chief men of dignity, which have the command of the kingdom and
government of the same, they generally call Tonos; although amongst those there
are also certain degrees, as there are amongst our Nobility, Princes, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Barons. Another sort of men there are amongst them,
which have the charge and managing of matters of their Church: these are shaven
all over both head and beard: these may never marry, but do vow perpetual
chastity. There are diverse and sundry sects of these religious persons amongst
them: some there are which after the manner of the Knights of the Rhodes, do
jointly profess arms and religion together, but they are generally called by
one name, Bonzij. They have in many places diverse great schools, such as we
call Universities. The third state or sort of people amongst them, are the
citizens and other degrees of gentry: next unto these are the retalers,
hucksters, factours, and shopkeepers: with artificers and handiecraft-men, of
diverse occupations, very ingenious and skillful in their trades. They have many
kinds of armours and warlike weapons, made of sundry makings, and excellent
temper. They have also the use of Printing with letters and stamps, not much
unlike our manner invented and practiced here in Europe. The last sort and
state of people in these islands, are the husbandmen and laborers. Generally it
is a very subtle, witty and wise Nation, and of singular endowments and good
parts of nature, both for acute judgment, aptness of learning, and excellency
of memory. It is no shame or reproach to any to be accounted poor.
Slanderous and railing speeches, theeuing, robberies and that ungodly kind of
rash oaths and swearing, with all kind of dicing and gaming, they do utterly
abhor and detest. Any offenders against the Law, of what degree soever, are
punished by no less punishment, than banishment, confiscation of goods or
death. Those which are to be executed are for the most part beheaded suddenly
before they are aware. Notwithstanding it is the manner in some places to carry,
such as are taken for robberies, in a certain kind of carre round about the
city, in the face of all the people, and to hang them up without the walls of
the town. In the service of God, which is the chief point of justice and
virtue, they do miserably err and swerve from the right tract. Their guides
and great masters of religion to inform the rest, are those which I say they
name Bonzij. Amongst their saints which they worship, the chief are those
which they call Amida and Xaca: other idols they have of less estimation and
note amongst them, whom they pray unto for health, recovery in sickness,
children, money, and other things belonging to the body: these they call Camis.
All Iaponia, or the people of that name, were subject in time past unto one
Emperor, whom they called Vo or Dair, (this was his title of honor and
dignity) until such time as he grown effeminate and given to pleasures and
ease, became to be scorned and contemned by the Lieutenants and Nobility,
especially of the Cubi (for so they called the two chiefest Princes unto whom
the government of the country was committed, of which afterward the one did
kill the other) therefore the Lieutenants of the several shires, with the
military men, having for a time endured such a carpet Knight, by and by began
to loath his government, and at last wholly shaking off the yoke of subjection,
seized every man into his own hand the province over which he was set as
governor under the Emperor: so at an instant that united body and maine
Empire of so large command, was shattered as it were into many parts and
pieces: yet so as notwithstanding a kind of sovereign authority does even to
this day remain in the Dair, of distributing and giving the titles of honor
to the Nobility, which eftsoons are altered according to the diversity of the
degrees, and are designed by certain notes and badges. The chief and most
mighty of all the Princes of Iaponia is he that gat either by force or policy
Meacum, and the best kingdoms near to the same, which they generally by one
name do vulgarly call Tensa. Those places were lately possessed by Nubunanga,
that tyrant which I spoke of before: this King being slain by treason about
two years before, and his children murdered or banished, one Faxiba a chief
captain of the rebels, by force and violence stepped into his regal throne,
and took upon him to sway the scepter of that kingdom.

The honor and credit of the first entrance of this Island certain Portugals
do challenge and take unto themselves, but I do rather give credit to Antonio
Gaualno, who reports, in that book which he wrote of the descries of the
Newfound world, that Anton^o Mota, Francisco Zeimoro, and Antonio Pexoto, in
their journey as they sailed from the city Dodra in Sion, to pass for China,
they were carried by a contrary wind to the Islands of the Iaponians, about two
and forty years before that time. All this we have extracted out of the
forenamed Maffeius, who handles them more at large, with many other things of
these Islands of Iaponia. Of the same there are here and there many things in
the Jesuits Epistles.

INDIA.
THat there is not a more goodly and famous country in the world, nor larger,
comprehended under one and the same name than INDIA, almost all writers jointly
with one consent have affirmed. It was so named of the river Indus. The whole
compass of India by the judgment of Strabo and Pliny, is thus limited: upon
the West, it has the river Indus; on the North, the great mountain Taurus; on
the East, the Eastern sea, wherein those famous Islands, the Moluccaes, do lie;
on the South, it has the Indian sea. In the midst it is divided into two
large provinces by the goodly river Ganges. Of which that which is on the West
side of Ganges, is called India intra Gangem, India on this side Ganges: that
on the East, India extra Gangem, India beyond Ganges. That in holy Scripture it
is called EVILAT or Hauila: this latter some writers call SERIA, the country of
the Seres, as Dominicus Niger testifies. M. Paulus Venetus seems to divide
it into three provinces, the Greater, the Lesser, and the Middlemost; which he
says they name Abasia.

This whole country generally, not only for multitude of nations (of which, as
Herodotus writes, it is most populous and best stored of any country in the
world) and for towns and villages almost infinite, but for the great abundance
of all commodities (only brass and lead excepted, if one may give credit to
Pliny) is most rich and fortunate. It has very many rivers, and those very
great and fair. These running to and fro and in many places crossing and
watering the same, do cause it, as in a moist soil, where the sun is of
force, to bring forth all things most plentifully. It storeth all the world
with Spices, Pearls and Precious stones, as having greater plenty of these
commodities than all the countries of the whole world besides.

There are near unto this country many goodly islands, which here and there
lie scattering in the maine Ocean, so that it may justly be termed the World
of Islands. But especially IAPAN, which M. Paulus Venetus calls Zipangri,
situate in this sea, is worth the noting: which, because it is not many years
since that it was known to few or none, I think it not amiss to say
something of it in this place. It is a very large and wide island, and has
almost the same elevation of the Northren pole and position from the South with
Italy. The Ilanders and people here inhabiting, are much given to learning,
wisdom and religion: and are most earnest and diligent searchers out of the
truth in natural causes. They use to pray and say service often, which they do
in their Churches in the same manner as the Christians do. They have but one
King, unto whom they are subject and do nothing but according to his behests
and laws. Yet he also has one above him, whom they call Voo, to whom the
ordering of Ecclesiastical matters and government of the state of the Church
is soly committed. This peradventure we may not unfitly compare to the Pope, as
their King to the Emperor. To their Bishop they commit the salvation and care
of their souls. They worship only one God, protraitured with three heads, yet
they can show no reason of this act. They baptize their infants: by fasting, in
token of penance, they labor to bring down their bodies. They cross and
bless themselves with the sign of the cross, against the assault of Satan:
so that in religion, certain ceremonies, and manner of living they seem to
imitate the Christians: yet notwithstanding the order of the Jesuits labor by
all means possibly they can, not refusing any pains and travel, to reduce
them wholly to Christianity.

Here are also the MOLVCCAE, certain islands famous for the abundance of
spices which they yearly yield and send into all quarters of the world. In
these is bred the Manucodiatta, a little bird which we call the bird of
Paradise, a strange foul no where else ever seen. More near the coast of
India, is SVMATRA, or rather Samotra, for so the King himself of that country,
writes it, in his letters unto his Majesty: this Island was known to the
ancient Geographers and Historians by the name of TAPROBANA. There are also
diverse other Islands heereabout of great estimation and fame, as Iaua Mayor,
Iaua Minor, Borneo, Timor etc. as thou may see in the Map, but we cannot in
this place speak of every thing particularly and to the full. Thus far the
religion of Mahomet is professed, and from Barbary over against Spain, even
unto this place is the Arabicke language spoken or understood. The Moors from
Marrocco, Ambassadors to our late Queen some five years since, we saw and
heard them speak that tongue naturally, in which also their commission or
letters patents were written: From Achem in Samotra, and Bantam in Iaua Mayor
our Merchants, this other day brought letters unto his Highness, so fairly
and curiously written in that character and language, as no man will scarcely
believe but he that has seen them, especially from so barbarous and rude a
Nation.

Of the ancient writers Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, Quintus
Curtius and Arrianus in the life of Alexander, have described the Indies. So
has Apuleius also in the first book of his Floridorum. Dion Prusaeus in his
35. oration has written much of this country, but very fabulously. There is
also extant an Epistle of Alexander the Great, written to Aristotle, of the
situation of India. Of the latter writers Ludouicus Vartomannus, Maximilianus
Transsiluanus, Johannes Barrius in his Decades of Asia, and Cosmas Indopleutes,
whom Petrus Gyllius does cite, have done the same. But see the Jesuits
Epistles, where thou shall find many things making much for the discovery of
the i will Iapan. But if thou desire a full and absolute description of the same,
I would wish thee to have recourse unto the twelfth book of Maffeius his
Indian history. John Macer, a Ciuillian has also written books of the history
of India, in which he has much of the i will Iaua. Moreover Castagnedo a
Spaniard, has written in the Spanish tongue a discourse of the Indies. Of the
islands which lie scattering here and there in this ocean, read the twentieth
book of the second Tome of Gonsaluo Ouetani, written in like manner in the
Spanish tongue.

map of the Asia-Pacific region, including China, Japan, Philippines, New
Guinea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand,
Burma, Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Tibet, and Bhutan INDIAE
ORIENTALIS, INSVLARVMQVE ADIACIENTIVM TYPVS.
Cum Priuilegio.



The kingdom of PERSIA, OR The Empire of the SOPHIES.
THe Empire of the Persians as it has always in former ages been most famous,
so at this day still it is very renowned, known far and near, and
contains many large and goodly provinces: For all that whole tract of Asia
comprehended between the great river Tigris, the Persian gulf, the Indian
(which of old writers was called mare Rubrum, the Red sea) the rivers Indus and
Iaxartes (they now call it Chesel) and the Caspian sea, is now in these our
days possessed by the Sophies, the Kings of Persia. All which tract of ground
Pliny in the 27. chapter of his 6. book of the history of Nature, by the
judgment of Agrippa, assigns to the Medes, Parthians, and Persians. But
Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived in the time of Julian the Apostata Emperor of
Rome, does ascribe it wholly to Persia. For he in his four and twentieth book
reckons up these eighteen countries in this order, as parts of Persia;
Assyria, Susiana, Media, Persis, Parthia, Carmania the Greater, Hyrcania,
Margiana, the Bactriani, the Sacae, Scythia beyond the mount Emodus (a part of
the mount Taurus, the Jews call it Iethra, others, Moghali, others Beresith,
as Theuet reports) Scrica, Aria, the Paropamisadae, Drangiana, Arachosia and
Gedrosia. All these countries even at this day are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Kings of Persia, (for ought that I can learn either by the books of
late writers, or relation of sailours and travelers into those parts) yet the
names are much altered and changed, as you shall easily perceive by comparing
of the modern mappes and chartes, with the descriptions of ancient Geographers.

Of the original of the SOPHIES, these particulars following, Caelius Secundus
Curio, has translated in his Saracen history, out of the Decades of Asia,
written by John Barrius: In the year of Christ 1369. there was a certain pety
king amongst the Persians, named Sophi, who held the city Ardenelim in his
possession. This man bragged that he was descended lineally by his ancestors
from Musa Cazino, nephew of Alij Muhamed. He, the Chalife of Babylon being
dead, and the contrary faction maintained by the Turks, suppressed by the
Tartars, began more boldly and freely to broach his opinions of religion: and
because that Hocemus, the son Aly, from whom he draws his pedigree, had
twelve sons, minding to set some mark or badge upon his sect and disciples,
whereby they might be distinguished and known from others, he ordained that
they that would follow him, and be of his religion, should wear a tire under
the veil, which all the Turks do wind about their heads (they call it
Tulibant) should be of a purple color, and should hang out at the midst of
the Tulibant twelve hand breadth. After his death Guines his son succeeded in
his steed: who did purchase unto himself such an opinion of learning, religion
and holiness throughout all the Eastern countries of the World, that
Tamerlanes, that worthy and famous Emperor of the Parthians, (who overcame
Bayazet, the great Turk, and defeating all his forces, took him captive)
traveling through Persia, determined to visit him as a most holy and
religious Saint. To Guines, Tamerlanes freely gave thirty thousand captives,
which he brought thither with him: these Guines afterward trained up in his
religion; whose service Secaidar his son, especially used in his wars: For
he, after that Guines his father was dead, made war upon the Georgians, his
neighbors bordering upon his kingdom and countries, a kind of people of
Scythia, but Christians by profession, and by the help of these Mussulmanes,
grievously vexed them many kind of ways etc. Let this satisfy thee in this
place to be spoken of the original of the Sophies. These do make continual
war with the Turks about the Mahumetane religion: for because the Sophies do
follow one interpretour of the Alkora'n and Mohammedan religion, and the Turks
another, which interpretours and expositours do much dissent and vary one from
the other, so that the Sophians by the Turks are counted but as Heretics,
and contrariwise the Turks are esteemed for no less by the Sophians. It is by
nature a Gentleman-like and honorable Nation, very civil and courteous, loving
learning and liberal sciences, and withal do much esteem of Nobility and
Noblemen: in that are clean contrary and opposite to the Turks, which do not
acknowledge or regard any difference of blood or descent from famous ancestors
and great houses.

The situation of these countries, the manners, customs and behavior of the
people of the same, thou may read of in Aloysius Johannes Venetus, Iosaphat
Barbarus, Ambrosius Contarenus, Johannes Maria Angiolellus, and a certain
Merchants travels, whose name I know not, together with them imprinted. Look
into also the Jesuits Epistles, and the Persian Commentaries of Caterino Zeni,
a Senators son of Venice. Polybius in his fifth book does most excellently
well describe the middle Country. Moreover Petrus Bizarrus, my singular good
friend, has this other day set out the history of Persia. Lastly, and somewhat
latter than Bizarrus, Thomas Minadoius has done the like, but in the Italian
tongue.

map of the Persian Empire, incorporating Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan
PERSICI SIVE SOPHORVM REGNI TYPVS.
Cum priuilegio.



The Empire of the Great TVRKE.
OF the original and beginning of the Turkish Empire, the increasing and
grow'th of the same, until it came by little and little to that greatness
that now it is of, whereby it is fearful to all nations round about, we have
gathered these few lines out of the best Historiographers of our time. In the
year of Christ 1300. one OTTOMANNVS a Turk, the son of Zichi, a man of
mean parentage, began for his pregnant wit and great experience in feats of
arms and discipline of war, to grow famous and renowned amongst the Turks.
Of this man the stock of the Turkish Emperors first took their name and
beginning, and he was the first that ordained a king over the Turks. He
reigned seven and twenty years, in which space he conquered all Bithynia and
Cappadocia, and subdued many strong holds near unto Mar Maiore, or the great
sea; so now the Italians call that sea which the old writers call Mare Ponticum
and Sinus Euxinus, the Greeks now Maurothalassa, and the Turks Caradenis,
that is, the Black sea. After him succeeded his son ORCHANES, who won the
great and strong city Prusia or Prusa, (now called, as Bellonius writes
Bource, and was sometime named Zellia and Theopolitana) which he made the head
of his kingdom and place of residence for his Court. He was slain in an
unfortunate battle which he fought against the Tartars, in the 22. year of
his reign, and left AMVRATHES his son to rule the kingdom after him: who
first, (the Grecian Princes falling at variance and calling him in) sailed with
an huge army out of Asia into Europe: he in a short space subdued almost all
Greece, and Phocis a part of Bulgaria, but himself at last being overcome and
taken by Tamerlane, died and ended his days most dishonourably. The father
being taken, CALEPINVS his son stepped into the throne, and took possession
of the kingdom. But having in battle utterly overthrown Sigismund and his
forces, and begun to wast and spoil the borders and territories of the
Emperor of Constantinople, died in the flower of his age, when he had reigned
but six years. Here note by the way that, Adolphus Venerius does not reckon
this Calepine amongst the Turkish Emperors. For immediately after Baiazeth, he
places Mahomet. And that I may give every man his right, the singular learned
man, my good friend, Georgius Bruno Agrippinensis has taught me that the very
Turks themselves do not account him for an Emperor. After him MAHOMETES took
unto him the crown of the Empire, who made fierce wars upon the Walachians:
subdued a great part of Slauonia: first passed with an army over the Donaw:
conquered Macedonia: and pierced through the country even as low as the Ionian
sea. He translated his Court from Prusias in Bithynia, unto Adernopoli in
Greece, where he died in the fourteenth year of his reign. After him AMVRATH
the second succeeded in the kingdom. This man conquered Epirus, Aetolia,
Achaia, Boeotia, Attica and Thessalonica, (now Salonichi) a city belonging to
the state of Venice. After him MAHOMET the second took upon him the Diadem,
he overthrew Athens the most renowned University of the World. He won by
battery the great city of Constantinople, upon the nine and twentieth day of May
in the year after the birth of Christ 1452. He subdued the kingdom of
Trapezonda under his command. He took Corinth. He forced the islands Lemnos
(Stalamine they now call it) Euboea (Nigroponte) and Mitylene to yield to his
obedience. He got Capha, a city belonging to the Signiory of Genua; and at
Geiuisen a city of Bithynia died in the 32. year of his reign. BAIAZETH the
second, after his death possessed the crown. He made war upon the Venetians,
and wanne from them Naupactus (Lepanto, or, as the Turks call it, Einebachti)
Methona, (Modon or Mutune, a city in Peloponesus) Dyrrachium (Durazzo) and
spoiled all Dalmatia. He was poisoned by a Jew his Physician. After whom
SELYMVS his son succeeded in the Imperial throne. He wanne Alcairo, the
strongest city of Egypt, and killing the Souldan, subdued Alexandria and all
Egypt under his obedience. He took also Damascus in Syria. SOLYMANNVS the
only son of Zelimus, possessing his fathers room, wanne Belgrad, took Buda
the Princes seat, and spoiled Strigonium and almost all Hungary. He gatte the
Rhodes by composition, and utterly rased Quinqueecclesias in Hungary, (the
Turks call it Petscheu, the Dutch Funfkirchen). Having surprised the city, he
besieged Zygeth, where he ended his life. ZELIMVS the second his son,
continued the battery, wanne it and sacked it in the year of Christ 1566. And
thus under 11. Emperors, in 260. years, a great part of Africa, a greater of
Europe and the most of Asia was by Turkish tyranny, brought under their yoke.
But he that desires a more absolute knowledge of the histories of the Turks,
let him read Paulus Iouius, Christofer Richer, Cuspinian, Baptista Egnatius,
Gilbertus Nozorenus, Andreas Lacuna, Pius the second in the fourth chapter of
his Europa, and others that have written of the Turkish affairs; but no man
has set out these histories either with greater diligence or more amply than
M. Richard Knolles, our learned countryman my singular good friend. Laonicus
Chalcondylas has curiously described the pedigree of the Ottomans together
with the original of the Turks. John Leonclaw has very lately imprinted the
Annalles of the Souldan Otthomans, written by the Turks in their own language,
and interpreted by him into the Latin tongue. Of their ancient manner of life,
behavior and customs, thou may read in the eighteen chapter of Leo the
Emperor, of Warlike preparation: as also in Bartholomew Georgieuiz, who has
written a several treatise of that argument: but especially the Annalles of
the Turkish Souldans and the history of the Musulmans, both written by the
singular learned John Leonclaw, shall satisfy thee to the full.

map of the Ottoman Empire, incorporating Greece, Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Isreal, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman,
Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, and United Arab Emirates TVRCICI IMPERII DESCRIPTIO.
Concordia parue res crescunt, Discordia maximae dilabuntur.
Cum priuilegio.



The HOLY LAND.
THat which the ancients called Palestina and Phoenicia, all the Europeans
generally now call The HOLY LAND, under which name they comprehend that whole
country which God gave unto the Israelites by the name of the Land of Promise,
to them and their seed to possess and inhabit for ever, and which after the
death of Solomon, we read, was divided into two kingdoms, IVDAH, containing
two tribes Judah and Benjamin, whose chief or Metropolitan city was Jerusalem:
and SAMARIA or ISRAEL, which comprehended the other ten tribes, together with
the city Sebaste or Samaria. A latter description of the modern situation of
this country, very curious and exact, done by F. Brocard in a several treatise
(unto whom we send the Reader for further satisfaction) we offer in this Map:
for the former tables did present unto thy eye the ancient face and more
beautiful countenance of this land. To him they may adioine, that please, the
treatise of William Tyrius entitled, The Holy wars, and other authors that
have written their Peregrinations to Jerusalem, of which sort there is a great
number written and imprinted in diverse languages. For many Christians not only
out of sundry parts of Europe, but from all quarters of the world, have in
former times and now do daily travel unto Jerusalem, for devotion to visit
the holy sepulcher of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and are there
sometimes by the Franciscane Friars, dubbed Knights, who thereof are named
Knights of the Sepulcher: the order and ceremonies of making these Knights, we
have thought not altogether impertinent from our purpose, to describe in this
place, as it is set out by Iod. a Megge^, an ei-witnes of that, in the 12 chap.
of his treatise entitled, Peregrinatio Hierusolymetana. And thus he has down
the manner of it:

First of all therefore the Knight that is to be made, prepares himself unto
his devotions, that he may receive the favor of the degree of the holy order,
and making his confession (having heard Mass and received the Sacrament) he is
admitted into the room where the holy sepulcher is, and then they begin on
this manner: First, all being gathered together within the holy sepulcher, they
sing this Psalm, Come holy spirit etc. Then this, Send forth thy spirit etc.
The Answer. And renew etc. Lord hear etc. Let us pray, Thou Lord, which
know the hearts of the faithful etc. Then the Guardian demands of him, what
would thou have? He answeareth upon his knees, I do desire to be made a
knight of the order of the Holy sepulcher of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Question. Of what state and condition of life art thou of? Answer. A noble
man, borne of honorable parents. Question. Have thou sufficient living whereby
thou may live and maintain the estate and dignity of knighthood, without the
help of merchandise or use of any mechanical or handie-craft occupation?
Answer. I have, thanks be to God, sufficient living and maintenance by lands
and reuenews. Question. Art thou prepared to swear with heart and mouth, to
keep and observe, to the uttermost of thy power, those military sacraments and
orders which shall be hereafter inioined thee, namely these which follow? First,
a knight of the holy order of the sepulcher must every day, if opportunity be
offered, hear a mass or divine service. Secondly, when need requires, viz.
when there is any general war against the Pagans or Infidels, he must
adventure both body and goods in the quarrel of the Church; that is, he is
bound either to go in his own person, or to send thither of his charges, some
one sufficient man or other. Thirdly, he is bound by that oath to defend and
free, in as much as in him shall lie, the holy Church of God, and all the
members of the same, from their persecutors, and from the enemies of
Christianity. Fourthly, he must altogether shun unjust wars, filthy lucre
and hire, fencing, iusts, torneaments, combats and such like, but only for
exercise and making of himself more fit for the sacred war. Fifthly, he must
procure peace and concord between faithful Christian people, do his best to
grace and enlarge the bounds of his country, defend orphans and widows, he
must carefully take heed of cursed oaths, periuries, blasphemies, rapes,
usury, sacrilege, murder, drunkenness, suspected places, infamous persons,
and to shun and keep himself, (as from the deadly plague) from all those
vices of the flesh that mortal man by nature is so much subject unto: and that
he do so carry himself, that in the judgment of men he shall not be blame
worthy, but shall show himself worthy of that honor that he is called unto,
by frequenting the Church and procuring the honor and glory of God in what he
can. It is therefore demanded of him, whether he be ready with heart and voice
to protest, swear and perform all these things? Answer. IN. do protest and
promise before our Lord Jesus Christ and the blessed Virgin Mary his mother,
that I will, to the uttermost of my power, observe all these things. These
being done, the Sword is blessed or consecrated by the Guardian, according to
the blessing beneath prescribed, if it be not otherwise consecrated before: but
if it be blessed, then after that blessing or consecration, calling one of
those that are to be made Knights, and causing him to kneell down before the
holy sepulcher, the Guardian puts his hand upon his head and says: Thou N.
be thou a faithful, true, stout, good and brave soldier of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of his holy sepulcher, whom we pray to vouchsafe thee his heavenly
glory with his chosen Saints, Amen. Then the father Guardian gives him a pair
of gilded spurs, which he must put upon his heels, standing upon the ground.
Afterward he gives the naked sword to the Knight: saying, Take thou N. the
holy Sword, In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost,
Amen. (making withal 3 crosses upon the same) Use it for thine own defense,
and for the defense of the holy Church of God, to the offense and confusion of
the enemies of the cross of Christ and Christian faith, and to thy uttermost
power thou shall hurt no man wrongfully with it: which he vouchsafe to grant,
who with the Father and the holy Ghost reigns one God both now and for ever,
Amen. Then the Sword is put up into the scabberd, and the Guardian girdeth the
Sword about the Knight saying, Be thou N. most valiant, girded with thy Sword
upon thy thigh, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: and observe, that the
Saints have conquered kingdoms not by their swords, but by faith. The Knight
thus girded with the Sword arises, and resting upon his knees and leaning his
head upon the holy Sepulcher, he is dubbed by the Guardian, 3 times smiting the
Sword upon the shoulders of the Knight, and saying thrice these words, I ordain
and make thee N. a Knight of the holy Sepulcher, of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost, Amen. (making as
before 3. crosses.) Then he kisseth him, and puts upon his neck, according
to the old manner, a chain of Gold with a cross hanging upon it; Lastly, the
Knight kissing the Sepulcher, restores all these ornaments, goes aside, and
another is called, which is to be dubbed with the like ceremonies: In the mean
time the Knight first made must stay in the hall of the holy Sepulcher, until
such time as all the rest that are to be preferred to this dignity, have
obtained the same. When they are all made, then Te Deum is song by the Friars,
and from thence they go to the chapel of the Minorites, or else there they
stay still, as the Guardian shall please or appoint. Then these words following
are spoken in the singular number, if there be but one: if there be many, in
the plural. In the singular it is said, Thou more beautiful than the sons
of men, thou N. gird etc. with thy sword upon thy thigh, o thou most mighty. If
there be many it is spoken in the plural number. The Versicle. Lord hear etc.
Answer. And let my cry come unto thee. The Lord be with you. And with thy
spirit. Let us pray. Grant unto thy Church, most merciful God, that being
gathered together in the Holy Ghost, it may no manner of way be disturbed by
the assault of the enemy. Almighty and everlasting God, power the grace of thy
blessing upon this thy servant (or these thy servants) which at this instant
desires to be girded with the glorious sword, cause him, being defended by the
power of thy right hand, to be continually guarded with a garrison of heavenly
soldiers against all adversaries, whereby he may not be molested in this world
with any tempestuous storms of bitter wars, by Christ our Lord, etc. Lastly,
the Guardian and others, if they please, do embrace him. The blessing of the
sword. He that blesses it must hold the sword naked before him and say, Our
help is in the name of the Lord etc. Let us pray. Listen, we pray thee o Lord,
unto our prayers, and vouchsafe with the right hand of thy Majesty to bless
this sword, wherewith this thy servant desires to be armed, to the end that he
may be a defendour of the Church, of widows, orphans, and of all such as
serve God, against the fury of the Paganes and Infidels; and a terror and
dread to such as shall assault or go about to hurt him, assuring him of the
certain effect of just and lawful defense and offense, by Christ our Lord,
Amen. Let us pray. Blessed Lord, holy Father almighty, and eternal God, by the
invocation of thy blessed name, by the coming of thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord, and by the gift of the holy Ghost, bless this sword, that this thy
servant, which this same day, by thy bounteous favor, is to be girded unto
him, may overthrow and beat down all thy enemies both visible and invisible,
and he getting the upper hand may continually abide void of all danger, by
Christ our Lord, Amen. The blessed Lord, my rock, which teaches my hands to
fight, and my fingers to war: my largess and my castle, my high tower, and
my deliverer, my protector in whom I have put my trust, is he that subdueth my
people that is under me. Glory be to the Father and to the Son etc. Save thy
servant o Lord God, which puts his trust in thee. Be thou, o Lord, unto him
a tower of strength: from the face of his enemy. Lord hear our prayer. The
Lord be with you etc. Let us pray. O holy Lord, father almighty, who only do
govern and rightly disposest all things, who have by thy gracious providence
granted to man, in this world, the use of the sword to repress the malice and
audacious lewdness of the wicked, and to maintain right and equity; and
would that the order of knighthood should be instituted for the safeguard and
protection of thy people, who also causest it to be proclaimed by Saint John
Baptist, to the soulders which came unto him into the wilderness, that they
should smite no man, but be content with their own wages: we do humbly beseech
thy gracious goodness, that as thou gave to thy servant David power to
overcome Goliath, and made Judas Marcabeus to triumph over those fierce
nations which called not upon thy name: so also to this thy servant N. who
lately has submitted his neck to the yoke of knighthood, grant for thy
mercies sake power and strength to defend faith and justice, give unto him the
increase of faith, hope, and charity, and in him order all things aright that
pertain to thy fear and love of thy holy name, to true humility,
perseverance, obedience, and patience, that he may hurt no man wrongfully with
this sword or any other, and that he may with it defend all things that are
just and right: and like as he now is promoted from a low and mean degree, unto
this new and honorable estate of knighthood, so he putting off the old man
with all his affections, may put on the new man, that he may fear and
reverence thee aright, as he ought to do, may shun the company of the wicked
miscreant Infidels and may extend his charity unto his neighbor, be truly
obedient in all things to him to whom he is subject, and do his duty uprightly
in all things that he shall be employed in, by Christ our Lord, Amen. The form
of the oath which they must take before they may be admitted to take this holy
order of knighthood upon them, thou may see in the Oriental iournall written
by Leonard Rauwolph, in the Dutch tongue.

map of Israel TERRA SANCTA, A Petro Laicstain perlus trata, et ab eius ore et
schedis a Christiano Schrot in tabulam redacta.


NATOLIA, sometime called ASIA The Lesser.
PEtrus Bellonius in those learned observations which he made and set forth of
his travels, says that this part of Asia, (called of the ancients Asia minor,
Little Asia) is at this day named of the Turks NATOLIA, or Anatolia, of the
Greek word Anatale, which signifies the East, under which name they
comprehend all that part of Asia that is beyond Propontis (Mar di Marmora, it
is now vulgarly called) and Hellespontus, or, Stretto di Gall poli, the streits
of Gallipoli, as at this day they term it: that is to wit, all Phrygia,
Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Lycia, Magnesia,
Cappadocia and Comagena. The miserable estate and condition of which countries,
the manner of life and customs which the people there do now at this day use,
if any man be desirous to know, let him repair to the said author, who was
himself an eie-witnesse of the same, and he shall be I doubt not, satisfied to
the full. Let him also look over the description of the East countries,
(Orientalem Cosmographiam) done by Andrew Theuet, the Oriental observations of
Nicolas Nicolai, and Peter Gill his Bosphorus, or description of Constantinople
and the places near about that city. Laonicus Chalcocondylas writes that of
all the provinces of Asia Minor, Paphlagonia does yield a mine of Copper or
Brass, and that the King of this country, ( Ismael he calls him) does
yearly raise a custom or revenue of 10000. rose-nobles. ( Stater, the Greeks
call this kind of gold coin.) Yet it seems that he means not generally all
Asia, when as he adds this afterward, That this copper is thought to be the
best in goodness next that of Iberia: for Iberia is a province of Asia,
bordering upon the Caspian sea. But peradventure this may be true of that Asia,
which is called Asia Minor, of which Paphlagonia is a portion. Theodoricus
Adamaeus of Suallemberg, has described the Rhodes, an island which lies not
far from the coast of Asia Minor.

EGYPT.
Upon the West, this country is enclosed with the deserts of Barca, Lybia and
Numidia: upon the East, with the deserts which lie between Nilus and the
Red Sea: on the North it has the midland-sea: on the South it is confined with
the territories of the city Bugia: Thus it is bounded according to the
judgment of Johannes Leo Africanus, who does divide it into three provinces;
Assahid or Alsahid, which lies between Bugia and Alcairo: Errifia, from
Alcairo to Rossetto: and Bechria, between Pelusium and Tenessa: In Haithon the
Armenian we read that it was sometime divided into five shires; namely, Sayt,
Demesor, Alexandrina, Resnit, and Damiata. That which Haithon calls Sayt, and
Leo Assahid, Tyrius names Search; except the copy be corrupt and faulty. The
same author makes mention of another shire of Egypt, which the Egyptians do
call in their language Phium. Haithon does make the country of Egypt to be
fifteen days journey in length (a manuscript copy, which bears the title of
Antonius Curchinus, not of Haithonus Armenus, has, corruptly and falsely as I
think, five and twenty days journey, for fifteen days journey) and three
days journey over. To this computation Gulielmus Tyrius does seem to consent,
who says that between Phacusa and Alexandria cities of the lower Egypt, are
somewhat more than an hundred Italian miles. The upper Egypt is scarsely seven
or eight miles broad, in some places it is so straitely beset and enclosed with
mountains and hills that it is not above four or five miles over. Leo says;
that from the Mediterran sea unto Bugia, it is 450. miles long, the breadth of
it, especially in the upper part, is almost nothing to speak of. That Nilus,
the river which runs through the midst of it and waters all the country,
does empty it self into the Midland sea only by four mouths, against the
opinion of all ancient writers, Gulielmus Tyrius does teach us, who is a man
worthy to be believed in this case: for he was both an eie-witnesse, and a most
diligent searcher out of the truth of the same. I have a Map, which I think
was made by the pen in Egypt, which mentions so many, neither does it point out
more that are worth the speaking of. Haithon writes that in this whole country
there is beside Alexandria and Cairo, never a strong city or any that is
fortified with ditch, wall or rampart. Yet it is apparent out of the
description of this province done by John Leo Africanus, that there be diverse
other cities beside these, although they be not very strong. For in his eighth
book of the description of Afric, he reckons up thirty and two, beside
certain other villages, which he describes according to their name and
situation. Of Egypt thou may read in the description of the Holy Land, set
forth by Brocard, toward the latter end of the same; as also in Bellonius
Observations, Guillandine and Niger. Of Nilus read Goropius and Nugarola,
beside that which ancient writers have written of it, which thou shall see in
our Map of old Egypt.

The Haven of CARTHAGE.
IT is not our purpose to describe CARTHAGE that famous city (and next after
Rome the only glory of the world) which so long bearded the Romans and stood
out against all foreign subjection: but because we saw this his Bay to be set
out in Italy in this form, I thought it would be a thing, wel-pleasing the
learned student of Geography, to join the same also to this our work together
with this discourse of Paulus Iouius written of the same. Such is the form of
the Bay of Carthage, that the entrance into it is not to be descried by such as
sail thitherward from the maine sea: for that the cape Clupea, called of old
writers Mercuries Foreland or Fairness stretches out it self far into the
West, and again winding it self and bending inward makes another cape,
sometimes called Apolloes Foreland, now the sailours call it Zafranio. From
thence unto the straits of Goletto it is redoubled in manner of an half moon;
and at the left hand of the city Rada (Raba the chart has) famous for hot
bathes of sovereign virtue, it leaves the country. Over against which are to
be seen the ruins of old Carthage and the place where it stood. Thus far
Iouius. But the places near adioining are described more particularly in John
Leo Africanus.

map of Turkey and Cyprus NATOLIAE, QVAE OLIM ASIA MINOR, NOVA DESCRIPTIO.


map of Egypt AEGYPTI RE CENTIOR DE SCRIPTIO



map of Northern Tunisia CARTHAGINIS CELEBERRIMY SINVS TYPVS



ETHIOPIA or ALHABAS, The country of ABYSSINES, or The Empire of PRESTER JOHN.
THe same whom we in Europe call Presbyter John, or Priest John, the Moors
call ATICI ABASSI. themselus, that is, the Abyssines or Ethiopians, ACEGVE and
NEGVZ, that is, Emperor and King, for his proper name is arbitrarily given him
(as here we use in Europe) at the discretion of the parents. It seems also
that at his coronation he changes his name, (like as the Popes of Rome use at
this day to do) and together with his crown to take unto him another proper
appellation: for he which in our remembrance possessed the throne and made a
league of amity with the King of Portugal, was called before his coronation
Atani Tingal, but after he had taken upon him the Imperial diadem he was
named David. This Prester John, out of doubt, in this our age, is one of the
greatest Monarchs of the World, whose kingdom lying between the two
Tropickes, reaches from the Red Sea almost unto the Ethiopian ocean: and that
we may somewhat more precisely set down the bounds of this Empire, (for as
much as we can gather out of the surueihgs of the same, made and set forth by
some learned men of our time) it has upon the North Egypt, (which now is under
the command of the Turk) on the east it abutteth upon the Red sea and
Barbaricum sinum (Pliny calls it Troglodyticum sinum; others Asperum mare,
the rough sea; the seamen at this day vulgarly, Golfo de Melinde: on the South
it is strongly by nature fensed and enclosed by Montes Lunae, the mountains of
the Moon: on the West it is confined by the kingdom of Nubia and the river
Nilus. These bounds do seem to contain that province which old writers called
Ethiopia beneath Egypt, together with Troglodytis, and Cinnamomifera regio,
(the country where in those days Cinnamon grew most plentiful, with part of
the inner Libya. These countries now are divided into many smaller provinces,
and are called by diverse and sundry names, as thou may see in the Map.
These country people are at this day generally of all our modern
Historiographers called ABYSSINI, or, as themselves with the Arabians round
about them, pronounce the word Hhabas, and with All, the Arabicke article or
pronoune, prefixed, Alhabas, as Benjamin reports; and Abexim, as Garcias ab
Horto affirms: all which words indeed originally are the same, and do only
differ either in sound or manner of writing: for the Eastern Hheth, (a letter I
mean proper to those nations, and barbarous to us borne in Europe, the West
part of the World) is diuerslly expressed by diverse, (as they do well know
which know ought in the Hebrew, Arabicke, Syrian, and Ethiopicke languages)
sometimes by our single h, sometime by the double hh, otherwise by ch, others
do wholly omit it, as not finding any letter, in that language in which they
write, that is of that nature and power, whereby they may truly express the
same. Again the last letter of the same word which the Hebrews and Arabians
call Schin, is sometime expressed by sh, sometime by ss, or by the Spanish x,
(which they sound almost like our sh) and sometimes by s or z. For thus I find
the word written often in the holy Scriptures translated into Arabicke and
Habashi and Alhabassi, Psalm. 68.32. and 74.14. Item in Genesis 2.13. where Ardzi'
lhabas, the land of Ethiopia, is the same that Auicenna in the 283. chapter of
the second tract of his second book, calls B'ledi'lhhabashah, the country of
the Abyssines, or as our fathers named it, India Occidentalis, the West Indies;
the interpetour Gerardus Cremonensis has Terras alhabes, Bellunensis has
Terras Indiae minoris, the countries of the Abyssines, or of the lesser India.
Here also it is worth the observing that this word, out of all doubt, had his
original from the Hebrew Cush, whereby they did long since call this nation
and people, as it is apparent out of Genesis 10.5. and 2.13. by the judgment of
all Interpreters, Grammarians and Jewish Rabbines. For the Hebrew, or vaw,
which indeed, and in his own nature is the same with our w, is pronounced of
some nations in some cases like the Germane v, or v consonant, as they call it,
somewhat like the sound of b, altogether the same with that pronunciation of
the Hebrew Beth, when it follows a vowell, as the modern Grammarians and
Jewish Rabbines do now teach. According to which custom it is not unlikely but
that this word, which the Jews sounded Cush, some other nations might
pronounce and vowell thus, chauash, chabaas, habas, or Abyssi. And indeed, the
Asians generally, and they themselves, as Ortelius cites out of Josephus, do
call themselves Chusaeos, and, as he reports from the relation of the
reverend B. Arias Montanus Hispalensis, they are even to this day of the
Portugals still called Cussij of Cush, I make no question. The people are
black, or of a deep tawny or blackish color: and black, we say in our common
proverb, will take none other hue. Whereupon the Prophet Jeremy in the 23.
verse of the 13. chapter of his prophecy says thus: Can Cushi, (the Abyssine
or Blacka-moore) change his skin? or the leopard his spots? For the same
reason also the learned Divines do judge that David in the title or
superscription of the seventh Psalm, by Cush did mean Saul, for that his
deadly hate was such toward him, that by no good means that he might use, he
could make him change his mind, more than an Indian does his skin, as Kimchi
the great Rabbine does interpret this place. The people are by profession
Christians, as appears by the letters of the said David, written unto Pope
Clement the seventh. Of whose manner of life, customs and religion, we have
gathered these few lines, out of the travels of Francis Aluares, written and
imprinted in the Italian tongue.

In these countries there are very many Monasteries and Religious houses, both
of men and women: Into the Monasteries of the men, there is neither woman, nor
any living creature of the female sex, that may enter or once look within the
gates. Their Monks, which here do hold their Lent for fifty days together,
do fast for the most part only with bread and water. For in these countries
there is small store of fish, especially in the vpland places: for although the
rivers are well stored of fish, yet they give not their mind to fishing,
because they know not how to catch them; there is none skilled in that art. In
time of Lent, certain of these Monks do not eat any bread at all, only they
live upon roots and herbs: some of them for all that time do never go to bed,
nor sleep but as they sit in the water up to the chinne. In their Churches
they have bells as we have, but for the most part made of stone. Their Ministers
and Priests are married. They say Mass, and do go in procession with crosses
and censers like as they use in some Churches in Europe. The Friars do wear
their hair long, but their Priests do not so: neither of them wear any shoes,
nor any man, neither Churchman nor Layman, may once enter within the Church
doors, with shoes on his feet. They keep Sundaies and Holy Days, upon which
they do no manner of work. They are all circumcised, both men and women: but
they are also baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, yet not until the fortith day after their birth: they which live
not till this day, are buried unchristened: to all those that are baptized the
holy communion or Eucharist, as they call it, is at the same instant
administered, pouring a great deal of water into the childs mouth, that he may
so much the more easily get it down. The proper names which then are given
them, are all of some signification. They affirm that they were converted unto
Christian religion by Candaces, (a Queen of this country, spoken of in the 27.
verse of the 8. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles) whose proper name they
think was Judith. They have a book divided into 8. parts, (this they call
Manda and Abetilis) which they do verily believe was written by all the
Apostles being jointly for that purpose gathered together at Jerusalem: all
the contents of this book they do most diligently and strictly observe. The
baser sort of people do without any controwlement or fear of punishment marry
2. or 3. wives, according to their ability and as they can tell how to
maintain them: but these are excommunicated, and forbidden by the Clergy to
enter into the Church. Their laws do tolerate diuorcements. The Noblemen do
esteem raw beef, served in with fresh or hot blood, in manner as we use our
boiled meats with pottage or stewed broth, for a great and dainty dish.

In all the kingdom of Prester John they have no manner of brazen or copper
money, but in steed of it they use pure gold vncoined of a certain weight. In
like manner salt, (yet not only in these provinces, but also general
throughout all Africa) is used in exchange and buying and selling in stead of
money. In some places small pieces of iron bright and burnished do serve that
turn. But pepper amongst these people is of such great price, that whatsoever
a man will buy, he may easily obtain it for that merchandice. These countries
have almost all sorts of beasts and fowls; as Elephants, Lions, Tygres,
Losses, ( Lynces the Latins call them) Badgers, Apes and Stagges, (contrary to
the opinion of the old writers, which have generally denied that Africa does
veeld this kind of beast) but in all that six year which Aluares this our
author, dwelt in these countries, he writes that he never saw any Bears,
Conies, Linnets, Magpies, or Cuccoes. Yet John Leo an African borne, in his 9.
book says, that in Barbary there is wonderful store of Conies.

The Locusts do more vex and hurt this country, than any place of the World
beside, so that this plague is almost proper and peculiar to them. Such
oftentimes is the number and abundance of them, that as they fly they do seem
to darken the air and shadow the earth: they fly together in such great
flocks and thick troops that they do utterly spoil and consume the fruits
sometime of one province sometime of another; wholly almost devouring all their
corn upon the ground, eating up the leaves and barks of the trees, leaving
their meddowes and pastures bare of grass, so that the people do oftentimes
leave their native soil where they were bred and borne, and are forced, for
want of victuals, to go seek some other place to dwell in.

There is in these quarters a city named Cassumo, sometime the seat (as their
histories do record) and place of the Queen of Saba, Maquedam, (that is, as I
think, Antistes, a Provost or President) they say she was called. By whom they
affirm that Solomon King of Isra l, had a son named Meilech, (that is, The
King.) In this city they are persuaded that the Queen Cand ces did afterward
dwell. But it is best that the Reader that is desirous of further satisfaction,
to have recourse to the same Francis Aluares, who has very curiously described
those thing which he did most diligently observe in that his Embassage into
these countries. Item John Bermundes, who set forth his Embassage unto the
Abyssines, in the Portugal language. Let him also read a little treatise of
Damianus a Goes, which he wrote out of Ethiopia, and Sabellicus his 10. Enneas
of his 8. book. Of the original of Prester John, and by what means he came
out of Asia (where he was known to writers about 200. years since) and seated
himself in Africa, read John Nauarchus in his Epistol. Asiatica, and Gerard
Mercator in his Universal Map.

map of East Africa, Sudan, Eritrea, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Congo,
Rwandi, Burundi, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique PRESBITERI
IOHANNIS, SIVE, ABISSINORVM IMPERII DESCRIPTIO.
Titulus and Insignia Presbiteri Iois.

DAVID SVPREMVS MEORVM REGNORVM, A DEO VNICE DILECTVS, COLVMNA FIDEI, ORTVS EX
STIRPE IVDA, FILIVS DAVID, FILIVS SALOMONIS, FILIVS COLVMNAE SIONIS, FILIVS EX
SEMINE JACOB, FILIVS MANVS MARIAE, FILIVS NAHV SECVNDV^ CARNEM, FILIVS
SANCTORVM PETRI ET PAVLI SECVNDVM GRATIAM; IMPERATOR SVPERIORIS ET MAIORIS
AETHIOPIAE, ET AMPLISSIMORVM REGNORVM IVRISDICTIONVM ET TERRARVM; REX GOAE,
CAFFATES, FATIGAR, ANGOTAE, BARV, BALIGVANZAE, ADEAE, VANGVAE, GOIAMAE VBI NILI
FONTES, AMARAE, BAGVAMEDRI, AMBEAE, VANGVCI, TIGREMAHON, SABAIM PATRIAE REGINAE
SABAE, BARNAGASSI; ET DOMINVS VSQVE IN NVBIAM QVAE IN AEGYPTVM EXTENDITVR.



BARBARY, and BILEDVLGERID.
THe later writers, which have divided Africa into four parts, do name this
Barbary for the chief: and they do thus bound it; On the East toward the
rising of the sun it has the deserts of Marmarica (at this day they call it
Barcha) even as far as that part of the mount Atlas, which now is vulgarly
called Meies, which part peradventure was described by Strabo under the name
Aspis. This mountain (which runs all along by the side of it from the East
unto the West, even to the maine sea which of it is called Mare Atlanticum, the
Atlanticke sea) does bound it upon the South. On the West it abutteth upon the
said Atlanticke sea. On the North coast the Mediterran sea does beat: therefore
all that whole tract of Africa which formerly contained both the Mauritanies,
Africa, properly so called, and Cyrene, is generally by one name called
BARBARIA; all which tract, as Suidas witnesses, was under the command of King
Masmissa.

This now is held for the best and most famous part of all Africa, and is
divided into four kingdoms, or, if you like that term better, four
provinces: namely, Marroccho, Fesse, Telesine, and Tunete. The people generally
of this whole country are of a brownish or tawny complexion. They which dwell
in cities, are very ingenious in Architecture and such like Mathematical
inventions: which a man may easily gather by their rare and artificial
workmanship showed in their buildings. They are (if we may believe John Leo
Africanus) most singular honest men: without any deceit or couen: not only
making a show of simplicity and true dealing outwardly and in word, but also
approouing the same by their actions to be so indeed and in heart. They are very
stout and strong men; but especially those which dwell in the hills and
mountains. There is no Nation under Heaven that is more zealous, so that they
had rather die, than to put up any wrong or disgrace offered by their wives.
They are very covetous of wealth and as ambitiously given to seek after honor
and preferment, and therefore they trade and traffic almost into all quarters
of the World. They which dwell in tents, that is, such as follow grasing and do
live by cattle, are very kind men, courageous, patient, curtuous, good
housekeepers, and as great lovers of uprightness, as any men in the whole
world elsewhere. But seeing the state of the world is such, that there is no
man altogether blessed, none but have their faults, these also are not without
their vices: for the citizens, which before we spoke of, are exceeding haughty
and proud, hasty and fumish, so that the least injury or indignity that may be
offered, they do, as the common saying is, engraue in marble, they will never
forget it. The country or vplandish people are so clownish and of such rude
behavior, and that so deeply imprinted in their minds, that they will hardly
be won to acquaint themselves with any stranger, he shall hardly ever win
their favor. They are so plain and simply minded, that they are easily drawn
to believe things told them, although almost incredible. Of natural Philosophy
they are so ignorant, that they hold all things done by the natural force and
operations of Nature, to be wholly supernatural. They are so hasty and
choleric that one shall hardly in the day time walk the streets but he shall
see two or three either quarrelling or together by the ears. They never speak
but hastily, aloud and as if they would eat one another. Thus far of the
quality and behavior of the people, now it remains that we should speak
somewhat of the nature of the soil and country.

That part of the country which is toward the Mediterran sea, is full of hills
and mountains. From these mountains even unto famous Atlas, it is plain and
champion, yet here and there rising with knols and hills. Here are very many
goodly springes, and therefore it is well watered with diverse pleasant brooks
and rivers. It yields great store of Dates and Pomegranates: it is not very
fertile for corn and grain: but of figs, and olives with such like fruits
it affoordeth yearly great plenty. Mount ATLAS, very cold and barren, on all
sides full of woods, and covered over with snow, breeds almost all the rivers
of Afric. Yet the cold here is never so great and sharp that one need to
desire to come to the fire to warm him. The later end of Autumn, all the
Winter and a great part of the Spring have many boisterous and bitter storms
of wind and hail: and oftentimes they are in these places much vexed and
affrighted with terrible thundrings and lightning: in some places they have
great and deep snowes, etc. But Johannes Leo Africanus has described these
countries and people very curiously and at large, who will satisfy thee at the
full; to whom it thou please thou may adioine what Ludouicus Marmolius,
and Fazellus in the first chapter of the sixth book of the latter decade of
his history of Sicily, have written of this province. Caelius Augustinus Curio
has set out the description of the kingdom of Marocho in a several treatise,
to him, he that pleases, may adioine Diego de Turribus, who in the Spanish
tongue has written a book of the Original and Succession of the Xariffes.

map of North Africa, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya BARBARIAE ET
BILEDVLGERID, NOVA DESCRIPTIO.
Cum Priuilegio.



The kingdoms of FESSE and MAROCCHO.
THat part of Africa, which of old was called MAVRITANIA TINGITANA, at this day
comprehends the kingdoms of Fesse and Maroccho, which here we present unto
thy view in this Map. Of the which MAROCCHO, takes the name of Maroccho
(they call it Marox, the Spaniards Marwechos) the chief and metropolitan
city of the same. The territories round about this city, and generally the
soil and fields of the whole kingdom, as John Leo Africanus writes, are most
pleasant and fertile, every where bespread with herds of cattle, flocks of
sheep and diverse sorts of dear and wild beasts: in all places are green and
goodly pastures, most plentifully yielding whatsoever is necessary for the
maintenance of man's life, whatsoever may recreate the senses by pleasant smells,
or please the eyes with delightsome shows. The whole kingdom is almost
nothing else but one large champion, not much unlike Lombardy, the Paradise of
Italy. The hills that are (which are but very few) are exceeding bleake, cold,
and barren, so that they will bear nothing but barley. Maroccho which we said
was the chief city of this kingdom, is accounted one of the greatest cities
of the whole world: for it is of such a wonderful bigness, that in the reign
of Haly the son of Joseph their king, it had more than an hundred thousand
families. It has about it 24. gates. The wall of a marvelous thickness, is
made of a kind of white stone and chalk unburned. There are here such
abundance of Churches, Colleges, stoues or hothouses and innes, as justly more
may not be desired. Amongst the Churches, there is none more artificially and
gorgeously built, than that which stands in the midst of the city built by
the foresaid Haly. There is another beside this first, raised by Abdu'-lmumen,
his successor, and enlarged by Mansor, his nephew: and lastly more richly set
out with many goodly columns, which he caused to be brought out of Spain. He
made a fountain or cestern underneath the Church, as large and wide as the
whole Church it self. The roof of the Church he covered all over with lead.
At every corner he made spoutes, by which the rain water falling upon the
roof might run into the cestern underneath. The steeple made of a very hard
kind of stone, like that of the Amphitheater of Vespasian at Rome, is higher
than that tower of Bononia in Italy. The greeses or staiers, by which they go
up to the top of it, are every one nine handful thick, but in the outside
of the wall are ten. This tower has seven rooms or lofts one above another.
Upon the top of it is set another turret or spire like a pyramid, sharp
toward the top. This has three lofts one above another, into which they go up
from one to another by stairs or ladders made of wood. On the top of this
spire upon a shaft of iron, in steed of a weather-cocke, does stand a most
goodly Moon of pure gold, with three golden globes so put upon the iron shaft,
that the greatest is lowest, the least highest of all. If any man from the
top of the steeple shall look down toward the ground, the tallest man that
is seems no bigger, than a child of a year old. From the top also of this
the cape or fore-land which they call Azaphy, being an hundred and thirty miles
off, may easily be descried. And although one should skarcely find a greater
Church if one should travel all the world over, yet the place is almost wholly
desert: for none do ever use to come hither but upon Fridaies. Under the
cloisters of this Church they report that there were wont to be an hundred
Stationers, and as many over against them on the other side of the Churchyard,
which daily here kept shop, where as now I do not think that all this whole
city can afford at this time one booke-seller. Hardly the one third part of
the town is inhabited. Here hence it is that within the walls there are many
vineyeards, large gardens of palme-trees and other fruits, with goodly corn
fields most fertile and well manured: for without the walls they cannot till the
ground by reason of the frequent inrodes of the theeuish Arabians. This one
thing is most certain, that this city is suddenly grown old before the time:
for it is not above five hundred and six years, since it was first built.
There is also in this city a very strong castle, which in respect of the large
bigness, the great thickenesse and compass of the walls, the high and many
towers, or lastly, the goodly and stately gates built of the richest Tiburtine
marble, may justly be accounted for a fair town. Within this castle is a most
beautiful Church with a very high steeple, upon whose top is a golden moon,
with three golden globes of different bignesses, all of them weighing 130.
crowns. There have been some kings of this country, who, moved with the love
and value of the gold, have attempted to take these globes down and to put
them into their purses, but always some strange event or misfortune or other
did hinder their purpose and cross their desires. So that it is now commonly
amongst the people held for a very ominous thing for any man but once to offer
to touch these globes with his hand. Let this be sufficient to have spoken of
this city in this place: he that desires a larger discourse both of the city
and castle, let him have recourse unto Leo Africanus, who in his 2. book will
satisfy him to the full. In this kingdom also is the city TARADANT, (the
Moors call it Taurent) a very great and goodly city built by the ancient
Africanes. It contains about 3000. houses or families. The people are more
civil and curtuous than in other places here about. Here are many artificers
of diverse and sundry occupations. The townsmen do yearly raise a great profit
by keeping of a guard to defend merchants, that from hence do travel up higher
into the country, from the assault of thieves and robbers, and to conduct and
lead them the neereest and best way: for it is a place of great resort of
strangers as well of Christians as others. There are also other cities, as the
map does show: amongst the which is MESSA, having a Church not far from the
sea, which they do most religiously reverence. For there are some here that
most fondly do believe and affirm that the Prophet Jonas, when he was sent of
God to preach unto the Ninevites, was at this place cast up of the fish, which
before had swallowed him. The sparres of this Church and the beams are made of
whale bones: for it is a common thing, for the sea to cast up here dead whales
of maruailous bigness. Upon the coast also of this country is found that kind
of Amber, which we call Amber-greese. Not far from this city is TEINT, a
town where all those rich skins are dressed, which are commonly called
Maroccho pelts. More of this kingdom thou may read of in Leo Africanus,
Marmolius, and in the Saracen history of Caelius Augustinus Curio, where he
has a several treatise of this province. Thus far of Maroccho: it remains
now that we should speak likewise of Fesse.

FESSE, like as Maroccho, is a kingdom so called of the chief city and
metropolitan of the same. This city is situate in the heart and midst of the
kingdom. It was built as they affirm about the year of our Lord 786. Neither
is it only the head city of this kingdom, but it is esteemed, The
Metropolitan of all Barbary, and is vulgarly called, as Marmolius testifies,
The Court of all the West part of the World. Some there are which do think it
to have been named Fesse of a mass of gold, that here was found when first
they began to lay the foundations of the same: for fes in Arabicke signifies
an heap or mass. The greatest part of the city stands upon hills, only the
midst of it is plain and level. The river upon which it is seated enters
it at two sundry places, (for the one is divided into two parts) and being
entered within the walls it spreads it self almost into infinite branches,
and is by and by, in channels, troughs, and pipes conueighed almost to every
private house, church, college, inn and hospital. Lastly, running through
their vault, fewers and sinkes, it carries with it all the ordure and soil of
the city out into the maine river, and by that means keeps it continually
near and clean. The greatest part of their houses, built of brick and
colored stones, are very beautiful and do make a goodly show to the beholder.
Moreover the open places, galleries and porches are made of a kind of
party-colored brick or pauement, much like unto those earthen dishes which
the Italians call Maiorica. The roof or seelings of their houses they ouerlay
with gold and other most orient colors very finely and gorgeously. The tops
of their houses on the out side are covered over with board a dare made plain,
so that in the summer time they may be ouerspread with couerlets and other
clothes: for here in hot weather they use to lie and sleep all night. Item,
for the most part every house has a turret severed into many rooms and lofts,
whither the women, being toiled and weary, may withdraw themselves, to
recreate and refresh their minds: for from hence they may almost see al-ouer
the city. Churches and Chapels they have in this city to the number almost of
700. whereof 50. are very large and goodly, most sumptuously built of free
map of Wast Africa, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, Gabon, Congo,
Angola CONGI REGNI CHRISTIANI, IN AFRICA, NOVA DESCRIPTIO. Auctore Philippo
Pigafetta.


map of Morocco FESSAE, ET MAROCCHI REGNA AFRICAE CELEBERR. describebat Abrah.
Ortelius. 1595.
stone or brick, every one having a fountain or conduict adioining to it,
made of a kind of marble or stone unknown of the Italians. Every Church has
one Priest belonging to it, whose charge is to say service there and to read
prayers. The greatest and chief church in this city called Carrauen, is of
that greatness that it is said to be almost a mile and a half about. It has
one and thirty gates of marvelous bigness and height. The steeple of this
Church, out of which the people with a very loud and thundering voice are
called to Church, (like as we do use by the towling of a bell) is very high.
Underneath this is a cellar or vault, where the oil, lights, lamps, mats and
such other things necessarily and ordinarily used in the Church, are kept and
laid up. In this Church there are every night in the year 900. lamps lighted
at once. Moreover, in this city there are more than an hundred Bathes: Item,
two hundred innes, every one having six skore chambers apeece at the least: for
diverse of them have many more. Every inn has a well or fountain of water
private to it self. In about four hundred places you shall find mill-houses,
every place having in it five or six mils: so that in all you may account here
certain thousands of mils. All occupations here are allotted their several
and proper places to dwell in, every one by it self, so that the best and more
worshipful trades are placed nearest the cathedral Church. All things which
are to be sold, have their several market places appointed out for them. There
is also a place assigned as proper to the Merchants, which one may justly call
a little city, enclosed round with a brick wall. It has about it twelve
gates, each of which has a great iron chain drawn before it, to keep horses
and carts out. And thus much of the West part of Fesse. For the other side
which is upon the East, although it have many goodly churches, buildings,
noblemens houses, and colleges, yet it has not so many tradesmen of sundry
occupations. Notwithstanding here are about five hundred and twenty weauers
shops, besides an hundred shops built for the whiting of thread. Here is a
goodly castle, equal in bigness to a pretty town, which in time past was
the Kings house where he used to keep his court. These particulars we have
here and there gathered out of the third book of John Leo his description of
Africa, where thou may read of very many other things of this city, both
pleasant and admirable. Item John Marmolius has written something of the same.
Moreover Diego Torresio, in that his book which he sometime wrote of the
Seriffs, (or Xariffs as the Spaniards usually write it) has done the like. Out
of whom I think it not amiss in this place to add this one thing worth the
remembrance. There is a stone says he, at one of the gates of this city, which
has upon it this inscription in Arabicke letters, (...) FIZ VLEDEELENES, id
est, populus gentium, or thus, Fes bleadi'lenes: Fesse is a world of men: like
as they commonly speak of Norway calling it Officinam hominum, the shop or
workehouse where men are made. Again he alleges this as a common proverb
vulgarly spoken of this city: Quien sale dc Fez, donde ira? y quien vende
trigo, que comprera? as much to say in English, He that is weary of Fesse,
whither will he go? and he that sells wheat, what will he buy? answerable to
that of the poet, spoken of Rome, Quid satis est, si Roma parum est? What will
content thee, if all Rome be not enough? This S. Hierome, in his second Epistle
unto Geruchia a virgin, does cite out of Ardens the Poet.

The kingdom of CONGI.
OF Congi this kingdom of Africa (which others corruptly call Manicongo; for
this word properly signifies the king of Congi, and cannot he spoken of the
country alone) my good friend Philippus Pigafetta, the author of this Map,
wrote a book in the Italian tongue, this other day imprinted at Rome. Which he
penned from the mouth and relation of Odoardo Lopez, a Portugal, who had
himself been a long time a dweller there, and so a man very skillful of the
state and situation of this country, and an ey witness of that which here is
set down, out of whom we have drawn these few particulars: This kingdom is
divided into these six provinces: Bamba, Sogno, Sundi, Pango, Batta and Pemba.
The first of which is inhabited and possessed by a warlike and very populous
nation: so that this one by it self is able, if need be, to make 40000.
fighting men. The chief city of this province, and seat of their Kings, is
Bansa, which now they call Citta de S. Saluador. All this whole province is
very rich of silver and other metals, especially about the island Loanda, where
also they catch abundance of those shell fish which breed the pearls: these
they do use in this kingdom for exchange in buying and selling in steed of
money: for here there is no manner of use of coin: neither do they much
esteem of gold or silver. Here is also great traffic for slaves, so that
the Portugals do yearly buy and carry from hence above 5000. Negroes. This
country does breed great store of Elephants, which they in their language call
Manzao. There is also found in these quarters a kind of wild beast, which they
call Zebra, of the bigness and fashion of a mule. But that it is not a mule,
it is apparent, in that this beast is not barren, as the mule is: for this does
breed and bring forth young, as other beasts do. The pelt or hide of it is
different from those of other living creatures of like sort: for it is straked
with strakes of three diverse colors, namely, black, white and yeallow or lion
tawny as they call it. It is so wonderful swift of foot and so wild that by
no means it may be tamed or be made serviceable for any use of man: whereupon
they commonly use this for a proverb, As swift as the Zebra. There are also,
as in other places, Lions, Tigers, Woolues, Hearts, Hares, Conies, Apes,
Chamaeleons with diverse and sundry kinds of Serpents: beside hogs, sheep,
goats, hens and parrattes. Crocodiles, which they term Cariman, are here
very plentiful. But horses, oxen and other beasts fit for such kind of
services and uses for mankind, they have none at all. Here does grow great
store of Palme-trees. Of the leaves of this tree they make and weaue almost all
kind of silk garments and apparel. For the use of the silke-wormes, which in
other places is well known, is here altogether unknown. The manner of their
posts, or manner of travel from one place to another (for as we have showed
before, they have no horses) I think it well worth the while to set down in
this place, out of the 15. book of Maphey his Indian histories, who affirms
that they have no other but wooden horses; which story he thus laith down.
Upon a rafter or beam, says he, about nine inches thick, and eight foot
long, they spread a piece of a buffe hide of the breadth and compass of a
saddle; upon this the traveler sits stradling: two men bear the bayard
upon their shoulders, and if the journey be long, then other two do shift and
ease them of their burden. The forenamed author Pigafetta, describes another
kind of carrying of passengers from place to place, yet it is not very much
different from this. Upon the North part of this kingdom do abutte the
Anzicanes, a mankind nation, a people I mean that eats man's flesh: so that
here man's flesh is openly sold in their shambles and flesh markets, as beef
and mutton and other meat is amongst us. That also which they report of Loanda,
an island upon the coast of this country, I think it worth the noting in this
place; namely, that they say it lies so exceeding flat and low, that it is
scarcely seen above the water, and that it is a made ground compounded of the
mudde and sand, which the river against which it lies, casts out into the
sea. Lastly, that if any man shall dig but two or three handfuls deep within
the ground, he shall find fresh water, very wholesome and good to drink: and
that which is most wonderful, this same water when the sea ebbeth will he
salt, but at full sea only it is fresh. How this nation was by the means of
King John, King of Portugal, in the year of Grace 1491. converted unto Christ
anity, and with what success they have continued and gone forward, and yet
still constantly do persist in the same, any man that list, may read of in the
forenamed authors; Pigafetta in his second book: Maphey, in his first book
of the history of India: and John Barros in the third chapter of the third
book of his first decade of Asia. Before the entrance of the Portugals into
this country, the people had no proper names; but were called by common names,
such as also stones, trees, herbs, birds, and other creatures amongst them
were called by.

monumental frontispiece: top, a reclining male figure, semi-naked, with a
trident, leaning on a jar from which water flows, and another reclining male
figure, semi-naked, holding a rudder, resting on a cloud with two puffing child
heads representing wind; between them a snake with an orb entwined in books;
left, a standing male figure in classical dress holding a globe over his head
showing the western hemisphere; right, a standing female figure, half-naked,
holding a globe over her head showing the eastern hemisphere; bottom, two
cherubs OPIA PAPA TO THEO. PARERGON, SIVE VETERIS GEOGRAPIAE ALIQVOT TABVLAE.
LECTOR S. Ad nostram Orbis terrarum descriptionem habe sequentes tabulas: quas
in gratiam priscae tam sacrae quam profanae historiae studiosorum a me
delineatas, seorsum publicare decreueram: nihil enim ad nostrum in hoc Theatro
(quo hodiernum tantum locorum situm exhibere proposueram) institutum facere
videbantur: victus tamen amicorum precibus, eas in huius nostri Operis calcem,
tamquam Parergon, reieci, Vale, and nostros conatus boni consule.

HISTORIAE OCVLVS GEOGRAPHIA.

THE GEOGRAPHY OF HOLY WRITERS.
THat which we have promised, behold now, ye students of Divinity and Holy
writ, at length we offer to your view, namely, a Map of Sacred Geography, or
of such places as are named by holy writers in the books of the Old and New
Testaments, whether so exactly as the matter requires and thou do look
for, I know not: but that it is done with my best ability and skill (to which
in any matter, and therefore in this especially, I dare not much rely.) I know
and can truly protest. Yet notwithstanding, that I have not bereaved the
learned of their due commendation in doing the like; I do acknowledge and do
willinly confess, we have done what we could, seeing that we might not
perform what we would. Therefore what here we offer it is rather our will,
than our wish. Two things, most kind Reader, we desire thee to observe and
mark, before thou judge and censure this our labor. First, that in the
Geographicall names of places, we have followed the translation of Septuagints:
because that is but one and uniform. The Latin translations as they are many,
so also they are different, and in naming of places they vary much and dissent
one from another: so that that word which one does interpret properly, another
otherwise does translate it according to the sense and meaning. Which is, that
I may use Varroes phrase, to make a noune appellatiue of a proper name: and
contrariwise of proper names to make appellatiues. Examples of which thou may
see in the annotations of Emauel Sa, as also in our Geographicall Treasure.
Therefore where we stick as doubtful, which of these different readings and
writings of proper names we may take, we run unto the 72. interpretours as
unto a sure ground. It any man be desirous to know how otherwise the Latin
interpretors do call these proper names, let him have recourse to our
Treasury, and he shall without any great difficulty easily satisfy his
desire. For in this he shall find all the Synonymes of places digested
according to the order of the Alphabet. The other thing, gentle Reader, which I
would have thee to observe, and necessarily ought to be done, least prejudice
do go before sound judgment; is this, the seats of all places of Palestina are
not set down in this our Mapp, but a few of those that are more famous,
according to the capacity of the table: (for thou see how strait and narrow
it is:) what here is wanting may be supplied out of the Tables following; two
of Tileman Stella; the third entitled the Peregrination of S. Paul, and the
fourth entitled the Peregrination of the Patriarch Abraham. For if all these
should have been portraitured and joined together in one and the same Map, it
would grow too much too great: yea it would be so great and huge that it would
exceed this, which here we give; an hundred times; and so by reason of the
greatness, it would not only be troublesome in use, but also unpleasant to the
eye. In the heart and midst of the plotte; where thou see Syria, as it has
been sufficiently replenished and filled with places, so in places round about
upon the coasts on all sides, it is most empty and barren: so that it would
appear like a small island in the vast ocean, and would soon have grown into
a great, burdensome and chargeable bigness to no purpose or profit at all.

We have upon the side in a void place set the Map of the whole World,
whereby the diligent student of Divinity by conferring might easily see, what
and how great a portion of the same, the holy history does mention and
comprehend: and at once; jointly with the same labor to find out the situation
and position of two famous places mentioned in the holy Scriptures: namely of
the situation of the country Ophyr and the earthly Paradise. Of the which
although many men do write many and diverse things, and the opinions of the
learned be different, yet we have also set down our judgment, willingly
giving leave to the learned Reader, in his discretion, to take which him
pleases: and he may read, if he think good, that which in our Geographicall
Treasury, we have written more at large of Ophyr. Of Paradise also there is
the like controversy and question amongst the Divines. The most men do place
it in the East, others in Syria; Postellus, under the pole Arcticke. Some there
are which do guess it to have been under the Equinoctial line. Goropius, our
countrieman, is persuaded by many arguments that it was in Indoscythia, a
province of India in the East, abutting upon the river Indus. Some of the old
writers did imagine it to reach as high as the sphere of the moon: others do
place it in other places. Caesarius the brother of Nazianzene in his Dialogues,
in what place he supposes it to be, I cannot devise: for he makes Donaw one
of those four rivers; namely, that which sacred antiquity called Phison: this
Saint Hierome and Eusebius do understand to have been Nilus in Egypt, others
Ganges in East India: S. Augustine against the Manicheies has this opinion:
Beatam vitam, Paradisi nomine significatam existimo: By Paradise I do think
the blessed life to be understood. Others more later, which purposedly have
written of the situation of Paradise, are Moses Bar Cepha, in the Syriacke
tongue, and translated by the learned Masius; Pererius upon Genesis; John
Hopkinson, an Englishman, in a peculiar treatise, where also thou may see a
Geographicall Map of the same. Others also have done the like, as Beroaldus
in his Chronicle; Vadianus in the description of the three quarters of the
World; and Ludouicus Nugarola in his book entitled Timotheus or Nilus etc.
Phison one of the rivers of Paradise, which some do expound to be Ganges, which
runs too far toward the East; this Map by reason of his narrowness,
cannot by any means contain: the situation of which thou may see in another
Map of ours in this our by-worke, entitled Aeui veteris Geographiae tabula,
A Geographicall chart of the old World.

map of the ancient world GEOGRAPHIA SACRA.
Ex Canatibus geographicus Abrahami Ortelii. Cum privilagio Imp. Regis, et
Cancellariae Brabantiae, ad decennium. MDXCVIII.

Ophiram regionem quia haec tabula compraehendere non poterat, hanc aream
universalem hic seorsim delineavimus, in qua illam ex dissentientium scriptorum
iudicio notaevimus. Nostram vero de eadem sententiam si quis intelligere aveat,
Thesaurum nostrum Georgraphicum adeat, censuramque suam (per me enim licebit)
addat.

REVERENDO ET ILLVSTRI DNO GVILIELMO GRIMBERGIO, ANTVERPIENSI PRAESVLI
DIGNISSIMO, Abrah. Ortelius obsequij deuotionisque ergo dedicab. consecrabatque.



map of the world Haec notula locum Ophirae designat.

DOMINI EST TERRA ET PLENITVDO ORBIS TERRARVM ET VNIVERSI QVI HABITANT IN EO.
Psalm. 24.

PALAESTINA, OR The HOLY LAND.
CANAAN, The most ancient name of this country was Canaan, which it took of
Chanaan the son of Cham, whose posterity divided it amongst themselves and
first inhabited it. Their names were these, Sidon, Heth, Iebusy, Emory,
Gergesy, Heavy, Arky, Siny, Aruady, Semary, and Hamathy, Genesis 10.15.16.17.18.
Every one of these gave his own name to that part of the country of Canaan,
which he enioied for his portion and possessed, and of them mention afterward
is made Genesis 13.14.15.23.24.25.27.34.36.38.49.50. Exodus 3.13.23.34. Number.
13.22.32. Deuteronomy. 1.2.3.4.7.20. Iosu. 2.3.5.7.9.10.11.12.13.15.16.17.19.24. Judge.
1.3.10.11.18. 1. King. 7.1. Chron. 1. Iud. 5. Psalm. 105.106.134.135. Esa. 21.
Ezech. 16.27. This country was called by the name of the Land of Canaan, until
the Israelites, having partly slain and partly subdued all the posterity of
Canaan, possessed the same: from which time it began to be called the Land of
Israel, which name was by the Angel given to the Patriarch Jacob, for that he
had wrestled with God; and from thence the country grew to be called by that
name, Genesis 32.28. For the word Israel in the Hebrew tongue signifies, to
prevail with God, or a mighty man prevailing against the mighty God. Here
hence were the sons and offspring of Jacob named Israelites, and the country
wherein they dwelt the Land of Israel; as is apparent out of the book of Iud.
and the 1. book of the Kings. Although the whole land of Chanaan were indeed
generally called Israel, yet nevertheless the portion or jurisdiction of every
Tribe, which severally Joshua assigned to every one of the twelve Patriarchs,
received a proper appellation of the chief of that family, as is apparent by
diverse places of Holy Scripture.

The names of the Tribes were these, Ruben, Simeon, Judah, Zebulon, Isaschar,
Dan, Gad, Aser, Nephtali, Benjamin, Manasse, Ephraim: and so the name of every
one of the sons of Jacob, remained in his posterity and place of abode in the
same, so that the whole land of Chanaan was divided into twelve parts, as the
holy Scripture does testify.

Then under Roboam, when as Israel and that kingdom was rent into two parts,
the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, being united, retained the name of Judah: and
that for these reasons: First, for that of the two it was the mightiest:
Secondly, by reason that out of it the Messiah was to come, it was the more
famous, and the name of the whole was taken from the most honorable. But the
other ten Tribes, which were commanded by the Kings of Samaria, still
retained the ancient name, and were called Israel.

Again, the later part, after the captivity of Babylon, was divided into two
provinces, Samaria and Galilee. Samaria the Metropolitan or chief city (of
which the country took the name) was the seat of the Kings of Israel. But
Galilee was possessed and inhabited by forreners and strangers, 3. King. 9. and
4. King. 17. and therefore grew to be much envied and despised of the rest of
the Jews: so that they did use to speak all villainy and reproachful speeches
of the people of this province. The North part of this in scorn was called
Galiley of the Gentiles, and in respect of the situation, the Higher Galiley:
the other part of it, toward the South, was called the Lower Galiley. Therefore
afterward even unto the time of Christ and his Apostles, and so forth, the
land of Chanaan or Israel was divided into three parts, and called by three
distinct names. The Higher country toward Sidon and Tire, they called Galiley;
the Middle, Samaria; the Lower, toward the South and Arabia Petraea, was
properly called Iudaea, Iewrie, as is manifest out of the second chapter of
Saint Matthew, and the fourth of Saint John. This later did contain only two
Tribes, Judah and Benjamin. Although also all the land of Canaan, even as high
as the mountains of Thracon near Antioch, and the country of Ammon, was
called Iudaea, as is evident by the ninteenth chapter of Saint Matthew, and the
tenth of Saint Mark: and therefore also Pliny mentions Iudaea citerior,
Iewry on this side Jordan. Strabo in his sixteenth book, and Lucane in his
second book do also call the same Iudaea: which name, as we said before, had
the original from the Tribe of Judah. Ptolemey and others call it Palaestina,
of the Palaestini, which according to the propriety of the Hebrew pronunciation
in the Holy Scriptures are named Philistiim, (Phelistines) this Nation indeed
both for their great command and wars made with their neighbors for certain
years together, were very famous. Herodotus in Polymnia and Dion in his seven
and twentieth book, calls that part of Syria which is next to Egypt, Syriam
Palaestinam, Palaestina of Syria. Ptolemey calls it Palaestinam Iudaeam,
Palaestina of Iewrie, or Palaestinam Syriae, Palaestina of Syria: Because that
Palaestina is a part of Syria, as Pomponius Mela thinks, who calls it
Syriam Iudaeae, Syria of Iudaea. Many places of this Palaestina are expressed
in that his Map: and therefore here they are omitted.

OF EGYPT. The country situate between Syene, or the Catarractae Nili, the
fall or mouths of Nilus; through the midst of which this river runs, and
by his yearly inundation and ouerflowing, waters all the grounds of the
same, in old time was called CHAM, of Cham the son of Noe, to whose lot this
country fell when the world was divided presently after the confusion at Babel;
Psalm. 78. v. 51. and 105. v. 23. and 106. v. 22. Afterward it was called
Misraim, of Misraim the son of Cham, Genesis 5. and 10. Josephus in the twelfth
chapter of his first book calls it Mersin, which name doubtless is made of
Misraim, either by contraction or short kind of speaking, depraved by custom,
or fault of the writer. Herodotus in Euterpe affirms, that Egypt was
sometime named Thebes. Of some it was called Aeria, or Aetia, as some copies
write it. Marmolius Theuer, and Pinetus affirm that the Turks, and country
people in and about Egypt, do now call this country Chibth, Elchibet or
Elchebitz. And indeed the Arabs that turned Genesis, the first book of Moses
into Arabicke, in the 45. and 46. chapters, for Egypt has Elchibth, from
whence no doubt, the Greeks and Latins fetched their Aegyptus: like as of
Phrat, the Hebrew name is made Euphrates.

Egypt had three special provinces or shires; the Higher, which was called
Thebaica, the Middle and the Lower. Thebaica and the Middleshire of Egypt
which the mountains of Aethiopia, and the utter section or parting of the
river Nilus at Sebemytus do define, are called the Higher Egypt; through the
midst of which the river Nilus does jointly run in one maine channel: and
is both upon the East and West enclosed with high and steep mountains. The
other Province, from thence even unto the Egyptian sea, is called the Lower
Egypt. This alse they call Delta: for that this country or part of Egypt, which
is contained between the parting of the river at Sebemytus, Canopus and
Pelusium, or the two mouths of the same river where it falls into the
Mediterran sea, near these towns, is in fashion three cornered, or triangular
representing the form of the Greek Capital letter D.

These countries by the discreet advise of Alexander the Great, were divided
into NOOOS, that is, Shires: for by Nomos, Nom and Nomarchia, the Greeks do
understand a shire and ward, over the which is set Nomarches, a Lieutenant or
Lord-warden. Thebes comprehended ten shires, and the middle province sixteen
shires: so that in all, the Higher Egypt contained six and twenty shires. But
in the Lower Egypt or Delta there were only ten.

Egypt is very often mentioned in the holy Scripture: and the places where it
is spoken of, are very famous and memorable: Gehon, that is, as some do
expound, Nilus, Genesis 2.13. Bethshemeth, the Suns house, Heliopolis the
Greeks call it, Genesis 41. and 46. Esa. 19. This also is called On, Ezech. 30.
Gessen or Gosen a country or province of Egypt, Genesis 45.47.50. Exodus 9. Phitom,
Exodus 1. a city of store situate upon Nilus. This the Israelites were forced to
build. Ramesse or Raemses, Genesis 47. Exodus 1.12. which also was built by the
Israelites in their bondage, when they were slaves and served the Egyptians.
Sucoth, Exodus 12.13. Etham, Exodus 12. Piachiroth, Magdalum, Beelsephon, The red
sea, Exodus 14. Migdal or Migdalum, Ierem. 44.46. Taphnis, Ierem. 2.43.44.46.
Exodus 30. Phatures, Paturos, Pathros, Ierem. 44. Ezech. 19.30. Tanis, Number. 13.
Esa. 19. Ezech. 30. Psalm. 77. This Josephus calls Protanis. Alexandria,
Ierem. 46. Ezech. 20. Pelusium and Bubastus, Ezech. 30. Memphis, called of the
Hebrews Noph and sometimes Moph, and Migdol, Esa. 19. Ierem. 2.44.46. Ezech.
30. Ose. 9. This was the seat of the Kings of Egypt, where they ordinarily kept
their court, and was the Metropolitan city of all that whole kingdom.

map of ancient Palestine PALAESTINAE SIVE TOTIVS TERRAE PROMISSIONIS NOVA
DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE TILEMANNO STELLA SIGENENSI.
Dominus Deus tuus introducet te in terram bonam, terram rivorum aquarumque et
foncium, in cuius campis and montibus erumpunt fluviorum abyssi. Terram
frumenti, ordei, ac vinearum, in qua ficus and malogranata and oliveta
nascuntur terram olei ac mellis. Vbi absque ulla penuria comedes panem tuum,
and rerum omnium abundantia perfrueris.



OF ARABIA. This country the Hebrews call Arab, that is, a misture, hotchpotch
or dwelling of diverse and sundry Nations together in one and the same country,
as is probably to be gathered out of the six and twentieth chapter of the second
book of Chronicles. But there being three Arabiaes, Deserta, Felix and
Petraea: we are especially in respect of the neerenesse and neighborhood of it
to Iudaea, to speak of the later in this place. ARABIA PETRAEA, took the name
of Petra, the Metropolitan city of this province and place of residence of
their Kings. This also was called NABAIOTH, by the Hebrews of Nabaioth the
son of Ismael, Esa. 60. Ezech. 27. whereupon the name and appellation of
Nabataea arose amongst the old Historiographers. It sometime did belong to the
Edomites and Amalechites, and was a part of their lands and country. Whereupon
the Israelites by the commandment of God were constrained to pass by this
country. Saint Hierome says that Petra the city, is of the Hebrews called
Iacteel, and of the Syrians Recem. This country by reason of the passage of the
children of Israel through it, and the great works and wonders of God done in
it, is very famous and often mentioned in the holy Scriptures. The places of it
often spoken of in the book of God, are these: The Red sea, Exodus 13.14.15.23.
Number. 11.14.21.33. Deuteronomy. 1.2.11. Iosu. 2.24. Psalm. 77.105.113. Act. 7.1. Cor.
10. Sur and Mara, Exodus 15. Elim, Exodus 15.16. There were twelve wels and
seventy palm trees, of which Strabo does speak, in the sixteenth book of his
Geography. The wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. Arabia Petraea in many places was
a vast and horrible desert, as is apparent out of the first and eight chapters
of Deuteronomy, of which there are also diverse other testimonies every where to
be observed. Sinay, Exodus 16. Raphidim, Exodus 17.19. Horeb, Exodus 3.17. Observe
in this place, that Horeb was part of those mountains which the Greeks call
Melanas, that is, the Black hills; which are of such a wonderful height, that
upon the top of them the sun may be descried at the fourth watch of the
night, that is, about three of four of the clock in the morning, an hour or
two before her appearance to those which dwell in the plain. But Sinay was the
East part or ridge of mount Horeb. This is proved by these places of Scripture,
Exodus 33. Deuteronomy. 4.5.9.10.29. Psalm. 105. Actor. 7. In Deuteronomy. 33. Sinay is called
the hill Pharan: and in Exodus 18. the Holy mount. Moreover there is mention
made of the hill and wilderness of Sinay almost in every chapter throughout
the whole books of Exodus, and Leuiticus, and in the two and thirtith chapter
of Deuteronomy it is again spoken of. The country round about it, is called
the Wilderness of Sinay, Number. 9.10.26. Amalec, Exodus 17. Number. 14.24. Deuteronomy. 25.
Madian, Exodus 18. Number. 10. Act. 7. The Graves of lust, and Haseroth, Number.
11.12. Deuteronomy. 1. Pharan, Number. 12.20. Deuteronomy. 1.33. The Desert of Zin, Number.
13.20.26. Deuteronomy. 32. The Desert of Cades and Cadesbarne, Number. 13.20.26.32.34.
Deuteronomy. 1 9. Iosu. 10.15. Horma, Number. 14.21. Hor, Number. 20. Deuteronomy. 32. The Waters
of strife, Number. 20.26. Oboth, Ieabarim, Zared, the Brook, Mathana, Nahaliel,
Bamoth, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2. Also of Zared and Seir, mention is made in Number. 24.
Deuteronomy. 1.2.33. Iosu. 24. Tophel and Laban, Deuteronomy. 1. Elath, Deuteronomy. 2. Asiongaber,
Deuteronomy. 2.3. Kings 22.2. Paral. 8. Beroth, Mosera, Gadgad, Iatebatha, Deuteronomy. 10.
In the three and thirtith chapter of Numbers the four and twenty mansions or
places of abode where the children of Israel, in that their tedious
peregrination between Egypt and the Holy Land, pitched their tents, are
recited by name. Which mansions, and encamping places of theirs, were greatly
famoused with many miracles and wonderful works of God, which he wrought
there in the sight of that perverse and froward generation. These places were
not remote one from another by equal distances, as is very probable by these
places of the Old Testament, Exodus 14.15.19. Number. 10.14.33. Neither did the
people of Israel, being led through this wilderness up and down, ever cross
the first way which they had gone before: but by winding and turning this way
and that way, they came thrice to the Red Sea: as may easily be demonstrated
out of the three and thirtieth of Numbers, the second of Deuteronomy, and the
eleventh of Judges. These do necessarily appertain to the understanding of the
tract of that their journey and orderly placing of those forsaid mansions and
resting places.

Of SYRIA and PHOENICIA. Although in old time the name of SYRIA, and the bounds
thereof were more large: yet that is properly called Syria which is enclosed
within the mount Amanus, (Monte Negro, Postellus calls it) a part of the
river Euphrates, Iudaea, and the Phoenician sea. PHOENICIA a part of Syria,
famous by many reasons and accidents, amongst his more notable cities had Tire
and Sidon: But the chief or Metropolitan city of COELESYRIA, (Hollow Syria or
Holland in Syria we may call it) lying Eastward from Iudaea, was Damascus, often
mentioned both in holy and profane writers. Of which places we have spoken of
in Palaestina.

Thus far Stella the author of this Map has discoursed upon the same. Of
the old Palaestina read Saint Hierome, and that which the learned B. Arias
Montanus has written of it in his Chaleb. Iacobus Zieglerus, Wolfangus
Wissenburgius and Michael Aitzinger, have described the same in several and
peculiar treatises. Josephus in the six and seven books of the wars of the
Jews, Adam Reisner in seven books, and Christianus Adrichomius have described
Jerusalem, the chief city of Palaestina.

IEWRY and ISRAEL. An exposition, with an history or discourse upon certain
places of this Map.
ADER or Eder, a tower. The Jews do call a flock or herd, Eder; although
others do think that the word rather signifies a defect or want: and I know
not whether it do in those places signify a floor or plot of ground, I mean
that which the Latins do call Aream. In this place some write that the
nativity or birth of our Savior Christ was by the Angels told unto the
Shepherds. Beersabe, the well of the oath, or, the well of confirmation made by
an oath: so called for that Abimelech King of Gerar, made a covenant near this
place, first with Abraham, Genesis 21. then with Isaac, Genesis 26. Again Jacob
going into Egypt, when he came unto this well, he was encouraged and commanded
by a voice from heaven that he should boldly go down into Egypt and not
fear. God promising him that out of his seed should come the Captain or
Leader of the Gentiles, and the Redeemer of Israel, Genesis 46. It is also called
the Fountain of fullness or saturity: for Agar the handmaid of Abraham, when
she was with her son Ismael cast out by Sara her mistress, she wandered up
and down in this place, ready to die presently with her son for want of
drink: but the Angel showed her this well, whereby she with the child drunk
their fill and were satisfied, Genesis 21. Neither is that Beersabee, Genesis 22.3.
King. 13. diverse from this. BETHANIA, the house of obedience, or the house of
affliction, or the house of the grace of God: where our Savior Christ
manifested his infinite power by a sufficient testimony, raising Lazarus, who
had lien three days by the walls, from death to life again. This place is
spoken of in Matthew. 21. Marc. 11.14. John. 11.12.

BETHABARA, the house of Passing over, or the Ferry-house: For there the waters
of Jordan were divided into two channels, and therefore there they yielded a
safe passage to Joshua and all the children of Israel through the midst of
this river, Iosu. 3.4. Here John baptized Christ and many others, Matthew. 3.
Moreover Saint John speaks of this place in the first and ten chapters of
his Gospel.

BETHEL, Genesis 12. Thither Abraham removed his household, after his departure
from Sichem. For there is no doubt but that they are two diverse places. First,
it was called Luza, that is, an Almond tree, or place where Almond trees did
plentifully grow. There Jacob saw the Lord standing upon a ladder, as it is
related in the 28. chapter of Genesis. Therefore upon that accident the place
was called by a new name, Bethel, that is, the house of God. In the same
Jeroboam erected the Golden calfe, that he might seem in that to imitate the
example of the Patriarchs and holy men before him, who worshipped God in that
place. Hereupon the Prophets changed the goodname Bethel, and called it
Bethauen, that is, the house of wickedness or villainy. BETHSAIDA, the house of
fruits, or the house of corn, provision or hunting. Here Philip, Andrew and
Peter, the Apostles of Christ were borne, John 1. The Evangelists also Matthew
and Mark have made mention of this place, Matthew. 2. Marc. 6. CANA the Greater,
the country of Syrophoenissa, whose daughter Christ cured being possessed with
a Devil, Matthew. 15. Marc. 8. of this see more beneath in Sarepta. CANA the
Lesser, a town of Galiley, in which Christ with his presence and miracle of
turning water into wine, honorably graced matrimony. Cana signifies a reed or
cane. CANANAEA, it is the name of a country, so called of Chanaan the son of
Cham. Chanaan signifies a Merchant, and indeed the posterity of Chanaan
dwelling upon the sea coast did trade as Merchants. For Sidon the son of
Canaan built the city Sidon. And in the tenth chapter of Genesis, the land of
Canaan is so described, as it is certain that it contained all that whole
tract of ground which afterward the Israelites did possess, from Jordan even
unto the sea, and so along as far as Egypt. There as yet was no distinction
between the Philistiim and Canaan. For Canaan also was ancienter than
Philistiim, which was not borne of Canaan, but of Misraim. Yet afterward when
the power and jurisdiction of the Nation of the Philistines grew to some height
and greatness, they caused the country, especially all along the sea coast,
beneath Tire Southward, to be called after their name PALESTINA. And in the 13.
chapter of the book of Joshua there are reckoned up 5. cities of the
Philistines, Azotus, Accaron, Ascalon, Geth and Gaza. When therefore the
Canaanites for that they possessed the places near Jordan, were almost utterly
destroyed, their name by a little and little began to perish and to fade away.
And although also the Philistines, which greatly enlarged their bounds and
territories in that country, which afterward was given to the tribes of Judah,
Benjamin, Simeon, Manasses, and Isaschar, were driven from thence, and were for
the most part consumed: yet they retained, as I said, certain strong cities
upon the sea coast beneath Tire, and so somewhile they greatly flourish and
were lords over others: within a while after they grew weaker and were
commanded of others. In the time of Abraham the seat and court of Abimelech was
at Gerar, who in the 26. chapter of Genesis is named King of the Philistines. The
city Gerara was situate in that country which afterward the tribe of Judah did
possess, not far from Hebron: and was indeed placed between Hebron and Gaza.
It is therefore to be conceived that the name of Cananaea, Canaan is somewhat
more ancient, and comprehending more Nations, than the name of the Philistines,
which never possessed all that tract and compass of ground which afterward the
Israelites enjoyed. But notwithstanding because the Philistines had certain
great cities upon the sea coast, the name of Palaestina was, by reason of their
traffic, more famous and better known to the Greek writers, than Canaan or
Cananaea. Herodotus in Polymnia says, that the Phoenicians and Syrians
possessing Palaestina sent 300. sail of ships to Xerxes, and afterward he
adds that the whole country, even from the skirtes of Egypt unto Phoenicia,
was called Palestina. And therefore also afterward the Greeks, as Ptolemey,
under the name of Palaestina have comprehended Iudaea, Samaria and Galiley,
when as notwithstanding the Philistines did not possess all that large space
and compass of ground. But often times names are given to countries of some
principal province of the same, that does in power and command surpass the
rest. The Grammatical interpretation and reason of the Etymology of the word
Philistim, is thought to be, for that this nation inhabiting along the sea
coast, where earthquakes are very frequent, and so whole towns and cities are
covered with sand, besprinkled and soiled with dust and dirt. For the word in
the Hebrew tongue signifies Sprinklers, or besprinklings, as when any thing is
besprinkled and foiled with dust: or it signifies otherwise Batteries and
shakings, as when a building is violently shaken and moved by an external
force, whereby it is in danger and ready to fall. Like as Ascalon and Azotus
having their names given them of Esh, fire. CAPERNAVM, that is, a pleasant and
delightful village. Here Christ first began to publish his Gospel, Matthew. 4.
Luc. 4. and 7. For he was a citizen of that corporation, betaking himself to
that place, when as he fled for fear of Herod, when he put John Baptist to
death. Therefore of Christ and his Disciples they demanded there a didrachma
for poll money, as of the rest of the citizens and dwellers in this city. Of
this city mention is made Matthew. 8.11.17. Marc. 1.2.5.9. Luc. 4.7. Io. 2.6.
DALMANVTHA, that is, the poor men's habitation. Christ with his Disciples came
also into this country. Matthew. 16. Marc. 8.

DAMASCVS. It is distant from Jerusalem 42. Germane miles. Breitenbach writes
that Damascus is 6. days journey from Jerusalem. The map shows the situation
of it to be in the mount Antilibanas. It is a very ancient city, which also at
this day is very populous and much frequented by merchants. Diverse etymologies
and reasons of the imposition of this name, diverse men do curiously seek; I do
hold this for the likeliest, The sack of blood: because the old opinion is,
that in this place Abel was slain by his brother Cain. Surely it is very
probable and generally agreed upon, that our first parents Adam and Eve did
first dwell not far from this place. DECAPOLIS, the name of a province in the
uttermost skirtes of Phoenicia and Galiley, which comprehended ten cities:
these, although those authors, which write of them, do not wholly agree which
they should be, it is certain by the judgment of all men, were neighbor
cities. And it is that country which is contained between Damascus and Sidon:
and between the Lake Genesareth and Caesarea Philippi.

EMMAVS, afterward it was called Nicopolis. And in my judgment the Greek name
is but an interpretation and sense of the Hebrew name, which signifies the
mother of strength and fortitude or victory. Others have given out that the
interpretation of it is, the Mother of counsel. EPHRATA, which also is
otherwise called Bethachem or Bethlehem, as our books vulgarly have. Ephrata,
signifies abundance, fertility; a fertile soil plentifully bringing forth
all manner of fruits. For in the whole earth there was no place more fruitful
than Ephrata, that is, than Bethlachem, where Jesus Christ, the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, and Redeemer of all mankind, was borne: whom the Proph t Micheas, in
his fifth chapter, did foretell should be borne in this place. And therefore was
it called Bethlachem, that is, The house of Bread. In the same place was also
seated Bethhacaris, (Beth-haccarem, I think he means) that is, the house of
vineyeards. Bethlachem was the native soil of David, where he was anointed
king of Israel, 1. King. 16.17. GALGAL, this word signifies a wheel, or a
wheeling and turning about, the trundling of any thing that is round. It may be
that this name was given to that place and rose upon this occasion, for that
Joshua the captain and general of the Israelites, out of the camp here and
standing garrisons, did use to draw new supplies and armies, wherewith he
conquered and overcame the enemies, and by chacing up and down and continually
vexing the nations round about, at length utterly consumed them. Here the
royal army and camp was continually resident, until such time as the whole
land was divided into 12. tribes, and so was quietly and freely possessed and
inhabited of the Israelites. These were the first camps that the children of
Israel had in Iudaea, the land of promise, and here the Manna ceased. For now
they began to eat and live upon the fruits of the land. Here also the
Passover was celebrated, and all those almost were here circumcised which had
passed over Jordan. For they which had been circumcised in Egypt, they were
dead long since in the wilderness, Ios. 4.5. The same Galgala is mentioned in
the 1. king 11.15 2. king. 19 4 king. 4. GALILEA, that is, a limit or bound; it
was a country situat in the borders of Judea.

GAZA, AZOTVS, ASCAION, GETH, ACCARON. The exposition of which names it thus:
Gaza or Aza signifies strength or might. Azotus or Asdod a robbing or
spoiling, or else, the fire of the beloved: or rather in my judgment, a
fortification, bulwark, blockhouse or muniment: for so the Arabicke, a near
dialect of the Hebrew tongue, does most properly signify. For the theme or
Arabicke root Schadada, signifies to strengthen, fortify, bind together or
enclose with a defense, Psalm. 147.12. Genesis 12.10. Auscen. lib. 2. tractatu 2.
cap. 596. Luc. 12 35. from hence is derived Teshdid, a note or mark used by
the Grammarians, answering unto Dagesh forte of the Hebrew: so named of his
power and force; for it does double the letter over which it is put: therefore
the form of it is like unto the Greek omega, or our double 00. Again Shadid
signifies strong, hard, stubborn: Matt. 25.24. Psalm. 60.5. as also in
Mahomets Alkoran, in the 32. Azoara. Shaddah, strength, might, 2. Pet. 2.11.
Firmamentum, the Firmament, any thing that is solid and firm. Psalm. 73.4.
Ascalon, the keeper of fire or fire of ignominy. Geth, that is, a wine press.
Accaron, a barrenness, weakness, feebleness, a plucking up by the roots, a
body or stumpe of a tree. These were the chief cities of the Nation of the
P^^listines, which was so mighty a people, that all the whole country of Iudaea
or Israel, even from Egypt unto Phoenicia, was after their name called
PALAESTINA. This their power and greatness continued from the first entrance
of the Israelites into the Holy land, even unto the days of king Hezechia, 4.
Reg. 18. For all the while between these times they maintained almost
continual and cruel wars with the Israelites. GEHENNA, the vale of Hinnon;
compounded of Ge which signifies a valley, and Hinnon, the proper name of a man
to whom that piece of ground did belong. It was a dale in the tribe of
Benjamin, where those deuilish sacrifices were made, in which they burnt and
sacrificed children to their idols. For this cruel fact it came to pass that
the name afterward figuratively was used for Hell and place of the damned: and
indeed the etymology also does somewhat favor this sense, for Hinnon, is a
spoiler, destroier, conspiratour or traitor, Ios. 15.18 Mat. 18.

map of ancient Judea and Israel TYPVS CHOROGRAPHICVS, CELEBRIVM LOCORVM IN
REGNO IVDAE ET ISRAHEL. art factus a Tilemanno Stella Sigenensi.
Priuilegio Imperiali, et Belgico, ad decennium.

Abrahammus Orcelius in hanc formam minorem redigebat. Anno M.D.LXXXVI.



GENEZARETH, a lake in Galiley, of most pure water, well stored with diverse
sorts of fish. It was so called of the pleasantness of the country round about
it: For Genesar signifi^th, the Princes orchycard. Moreover, both the cities
near adioining, and the lake are called Cinnereth of the form and figure: For
Cinnereth is the same in Hebrew that Cinnor, that is, an Harp, a kind of
musical instrument which the Latins call Cithara, and which doubtless was
made of the foresaid Hebrew Cinnor. This place, diversely written, you have
mentioned in diverse places of Holy Scripture, 1. Machab. 11. Matt. 14. Marc. 6.
In the 6. chapter of the Gospel of S. John at the first verse it is called the
Sea of Galiley, for that it was situate in the Lower Galiley; or the Sea of
Tiberias, of the city Tiberias, so named by flattering Herod the tetrarch, in
honor of Tiberius Caesar Emperor of Rome, as Josephus in the 18. chapter of
his 4. book of the wars of the Jews, and Egesippus in the 3. chapter of his
2. book do witness, when as formerly it was named, as before is signified,
Cinnereth, which, together with the lake upon which it stands, is not^ably
described by the same Egesippus in the 26. chapter of his 3. book of the
destruction of Jerusalem.

GERAR, signifies a Peregrination Because that Abraham, going from Hebron,
soiourned in Gerar, where Sara his wife was violently taken from him by
Abimelech, the king of that place: whose striving lust God did so pun^sh that
he was forced to restore Abraham his wife again before ever he had come near
unto her, as is showed in the 20 chapter of Genesis. Here Isaac was borne,
Genesis 21. to whom in this place Christ was promised, after that Agar forced by
hunger, had fled from the well, unto Abimelech king of Gerar. Genesis 26.

HAI, in Genes. 13. signifies an heap. It stood over against Bethel. Saint
Hierome laboring to express the Hebrew letter Ain, writes it Hagai, and
says that in his time (...) parua (...) a small heap of rubbish.

HEBRON. When Abraham returned out of Egypt, after his long Peregrination,
seeking a new resting place, leaves Bethel, and trauelleth unto Hebron.
Hebron, often mentioned in diverse places of Holy Scripture had many more ancient
names. Of which one was Cariath-arbe, that is, Tetrapolis, Four cities. For
antiquity divided the principal and Metropolitan cities into four parts:
(wards we would call them) The first was the court of the Prince, where also
the Counsel, the Nobility and Princes did keep: The second, was for the
soldiers and military men: The third, was reserved for the husbandmen: In the
Fourth, the artificers and tradesmen dwelt. There also was the vale of Mamre,
so called of an Ammonite who possessed it, Genesis 14. and made a league with
Abraham. Here three guests who went to destroy Sodom and Gomorrhe, were
interteined of Abraham. There Abraham buried Sara his wife, Genesis 23. And
therefore some think it was called Ciriath-arbe, that is tetrapolis, the city
of 4 great men; for that here were buried 4. Patriarchs, Adam, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, Genesis 25.35.49. IABOC, the river Iaboc, that is, of emptiness, or
scattering or wrestling. The things done here, and the histories recorded are
agreeable to the etymology and reason of the name: for here Jacob wrestled
with the Angel, and therefore he was after that named Israel, that is, a
Prince of God, or prevailing with God. But the place where he wrestled, Jacob
called Penuel, that is, seeing God, or the face of God.

JERICHO. Some do expound it, his moon, others his mon'ths, or his smell. We
do approve the later exposition of smelling, rather than either of the two
former: and that for the pleasant and fragrant smell which partly issued from
the gardens and orchyeards of the rare and sovereign Balsam, a plant only
growing in this place: and partly from the Palmetrees, which here do grow in
greater abundance, than any where else in the world beside. And therefore in
the 34. of Deuteronomy. it is called the City of Palm trees. JERUSALEM, that is, The
vision of peace. It enclosed two mountains, upon the which it stood: the name
of the one was Sion, upon the which stood the castle or palace of David. Now
Sion signifies a watch tower, a beacon. The name of the other was Moria, upon
which the temple of Solomon was built. For the very name also does show, that
the fathers in old time did sacrifice in that place. And Abraham lead his son
Isaac, to sacrifice him to the Lord, to this mountain. As concerning the
etymology of mor-iah, we are contented with that deriuation of Abraham, who
names it, God shall see. Therefore let this be received that mor-iah
signifies, the beholding or the demonstration of God. Yet other etymologies
and deriuations, are not altogether from the purpose and to be rejected, as
these, the illumination of God, or the fear of God. IORDANIS. A famous river
running through the midst of the country, arising out of the foot of the
mount Libanus. It has two fountains or heads, like unto our river of Thames;
one called by the name of Ior, which name in the Hebrew tongue signifies a
brook: the other by the name of Dan. These meeting and running together in one
channel, they are called by one name Jordan, compound of the names of the
several heads.

MACHANAIM, that is, two camps, Genesis 23. These are the camps of God, as Jacob
himself names this place. For as he returned out of Mesopotamia by Gilead,
the Angels of God met him. Whereupon he called this place Mahanaim, the tents
or camp of God, that is, the presence and guard or garrison of the Lord.

NAIM, a city so called of the pleasant situation of it, as seems by the
etymology of the word: for Nahim, signifies pleasant, delightsome. Our
Savior Christ going from Capernaum, enters into Naim, and in the very gate
and entrance of the city, he raises the only son of a widow from death to
life, and so turns the heaviness and mourning of the mother into joy and
gladness.

SALEM, was the dwelling place of Melchisedecke. Josephus says, that it was
that town which afterward was named Jerusalem. Neither will I oppose my self
against this opinion received by so many great and learned men. But there was
another Salem, which afterward was called Sichem, as is left recorded in the
33. chapter of Genesis as we have touched before. Thou see therefore how
Abraham, Loath, Melchisedecke (who was the same with Sem the son of Noe) dwelt
not far one from another. SAMARIA, the keeper of God. (Observe here that our
Author mistook the name of a man for the name of a place: For Samariah, 1.
Chronic. 12.5. was one of David's friends, that went with him when he fled from
the presence of Saul: or, else one of the sons of Harim, of the number of
those that had married strange wives, as is manifest out of 1. Esdr 10.32. when
as the city was named in the Hebrew tongue, not Samaria but Shomrom) This city
was the seat of the Kings of Israel, the Metropolitan of the ten tribes,
where their princes usually kept their court. It was battered and laid level
with the ground by Hyrcanus the high Priest of the Jews. This afterward being
reedified again by Herod the son of Antipater, was called, for the honor of
Augustus Caesar, by a Greek name Sebaste, that is, AUGUSTA. Here Philip
(whose consorts and fellow helpers were Peter and John) first preached the
Gospel Actor. 8.5. Samaria is spoken of, 3. king. 18.19. and 4. king.
6.7.10.17. SAREPTA, a melting house, a refining or clensing house: For the
Sidonians which first invented the manner of making of glass, here first
erected and built their furnaces or glass houses. In the time of that great
famine which raged and was spread all over Iudaea, Elias by the providence and
commandment of God was sent unto a widow of Sarepta, whom he together with
her son preserved from famine and death, 3. King. 18. Moreover in the 15.
chapter of S. Matthew. there is mention made of the Chanaanite woman that
besought Christ to heal her daughter. SICHEM, or Sechem, Genesis 12. Thither
Abraham went presently after he came from Charram in Mesopotamia. Sichem stood
in that part of the country which afterward was allotted to the tribe of
Ephraim, near the famous mount Garizim, and not far from whence, not many
years after, the city Samaria was built. The word Shecem signifies a
shoulder, and the city peradventure was so named of the situation near the
mount Garizim, But the name also of the son of Hemor was Shecem, of whom some
think this place was so called. This town is often spoken of in the holy
Scriptures. In the last chapter of Joshua it is expressly written, that the bones
of Joseph were buried in this place, as it is also in the 7. chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles again recorded. The same is that Sichem which is
mentioned in the 11. and 21. chapters of the book of Iud. and in the 12. of
the 3. book of King. Jeroboam built Sichem in mount Ephraim. This same is it
which in the 4. chapter of the Gospel by S. John is named Sychar, the last
syllable being varied whether of purpose or chance, God knows, I cannot tell.
In the time of S. Hierome it was Neapolis, Naples. This is it which in the 33.
of Genesis was called both Sichem and Salem. Now there was another Salem in this
country, as we have showed before. SICLAG. In this place David dwelt a year
and 4. months: whereupon it came to pass that ever after the kings of Judah
held this town as their own inheritance, 1. Reg. 27. This city in the absence
of David, was sacked and fired, 1. Reg. 30. SODOMA, GOMORRHA, ADAMA, SEBOIM and
SEGOR were the 5. cities situate in the vale of Siddim, that is, the champion
vale or the vale of Salt Pits, Genesis 14.10. which by reason of the great
fertility and pleasant situation of it, was compared to the Paradise or garden
of God, or like Egypt the garden of the world, Genesis 13.10. In it were many
slime pits, ( bitumen the Latins call it) Genesis 14.10. In that same place now
is Mare salsum, the salt sea, otherwise called Mare mortuum, the dead sea, or
Lacus asphaltites, the lake of slime, a kind of liquid matter like pitch, that
issues out of the earth, and therefore is called Pissaphaltus: this they use
in those countries in the laying of stone or brick, in steed of lime or
mortar. Sodom as seems took the name of the champion plain wherein it
stood. Gomorrha, of an handful or gauell of corn. In the Arabicke tongue the
theme does signify to abide, live, or stay in a place, Psalm. 25.13. Hebr.
7.23. To prolong life, to cause to live long, Mahomet in the 45. Azzoara, his
Alkoran, and the interpretours of the Psalms and New Testament, do often use
the word thus. And from hence Gomor, or Homor, (for so they sometime express
the oriental letter ain) signifies vitae prolixitatem, the continuance and
length of days of a man's life. Azzoara 31.32. and 36. Item Psalm. 31.11 and
90.9. Lastly, Magburah, is the same that Thebel is in Hebrew, or Oecoumene in
Greek, that is, so much of the earth as is habitable, Psa. 33.81. Psa. 107.7.
and in Auicen. very often as also in the Geography of Nazaradin, where it is
opposed to Chala, that is desert, forestie, wast, inhabitable. And so I think
the more probable deriuation is to be fetched from the Arabicke, rather than
from that of the Hebrew. For such is the situation of this place, whether you
respect the wholesomnesse and kindness of the air, or fertility of the soil,
that before the fall it was so well inhabited, as no place better in all this
land. Adama or Admah, red earth, the best kind of soil for carcable land.
Zeboim a pleasant and beautiful country. Zeor or Sohar, a little province.

THABOR, a mountain in the tribe of Nephtalim near to Chedes. Thabor
signifies purity, cleanness, or (by the changing of Thau, into Teth, a letter
of like force and instrument of pronunciation) a navel, bullion, bosse or
pommell. For it arises up in the midst of the plain, like the navel upon
the belly. For it is 30. furlongs high, and the diameter of the flat of the
top is almost 20. furlongs over. TYRVS, was a colony drawn forth of Sidon.
The Hebrew name is Zor, which sign^fieth a rebel, or traitor. For it is
probable that a part of the citizens of Sidon falling to mutiny, departed out
of the city and to have sought where they might dwell in some other place to
their better liking. This great Alexander took after he had besiedged it 7
months, putting 7000. citizens to the sword and hanged up other 2000.

ZIDON, so named o^ Zidon the son of Chanaan, as it is left recorded in the
10. chap. of Genesis The word signifies an hunting, or taking of any pray. This
city being take by Ocho K. of Persia, by the treachery of the soldiers, was
burnt by the straglers and baser sort that followed the camp, in which fire
perished about 40000. men.

In the 5. chapter of S. Marks Gospel, and the 8. of S. Lukes, there is
mention made of the country of the Gadarenes, in that history where Christ
casts the devils out of the mad man, and the devils rushing into the heard of
swine do carry them headlong into the lake. This country S. Matthew calls the
country of the Gergesenes, which S. Hierome translateth Gerasers. It is
therefore to be understood that the town Gerasa, famoused also by Stephanus
stood not upon the South bank of Jordan, where the most fertile and pleasant
plain of Galiley is seated, but toward the desert and wast land, beyond the
river, upon the North bank. So that the diverse names of one and the same
town, are Gerasa, Gadara and Gergasa. Neither is the clear lake of
Genesareth, of which we have spoken before, to be thought to be one and the
same with the like of the Gadarens, but another situate near the town Gadara
far distant and remote from thence of which Strabo thus speaks, The water
also of the lake of Gadara is troubled and muddy, of which if any beasts do
drink, they will cast their hair, their hoofes and their horns.

THE PEREGRINATION of SAINT PAVL.
THere is no man of mean learning but does know, that the knowledge of
Geography and skill of Mappes and Chartes, is necessary for the understanding
of the historical books of holy Scripture: and if they will not confess it,
yet the thing it self does sufficiently approve it to be so. And thereupon
certain learned men in these our days have freely bestowed their labor in
this business for the furtherance of the studious Divine. Amongst the which
the great Mathematician, Orontius Fineus of Dolphine in France, was to my
remembrance, the first, in that his charte which he made for the understanding
of the Old and New Testaments: Tabula ad vtriusque Testamenti intelligentiam
concinnata; for such is the title of that his Map: After him followed Peter
Appian, in his Peregrination of Saint Paul. The same was done by Mark Jordan
of Holstein. Lastly, Christianus Schrot, in that his Map which he entitled,
The Peregrination of the Children of God: and B. Arias Montanus, of Civil in
Spain, in his Apparatus Biblicus, a learned work adioined to the King of
Spains Bible. This is that, which I in this Map attempt to do, according as
the narrowness of room will permit. For as this Map of mine may not compare
with theirs for multitude of places, which I do freely confess, so, that this
of ours shall as well as theirs make for the understanding of both the
Testaments, I dare boldly promise. For as all these (only excepting Montanus)
have stuffed their Mappes with the profane names of places taken out of
Ptolemey, which do nothing at all pertain to this sacred purpose: So I on the
contrary do labor in this my Map, not to omit any one place that is spoken
of in the New Testament.

This description of the Peregrination of Saint Paul, we have here willingly
put down in this place, framed out of the Map of Europe done by Gerard
Mercator.
IN the year after Christ's incarnation 34. he came from Jerusalem to Damascus,
from thence he went into Arabia, and so again he returns to Damascus, and
then to Jerusalem three years after his conversion, where he remains
fifteen days with Peter, Galat. 1.17.18. From whence, flying from the
persecuting Jews, he came unto Caesarea in Phoenicia, from thence to Tharsus
in Cilicia, Act. 9.30. from which place he was drawn by Barnabas to Antioch in
Syria, where he abode one whole year, where it seems Peter was reprehended
by Paul, Galat. 2.11. and so were sent jointly to Jerusalem with a subsidy or
succor, to supply the want of the distressed brethren in Iudaea, against the
famine that Agabus prophesied should come upon the inhabiters of the whole
world, Actor. 11.28.29.30. They come unto all the Churches throughout all
Judea, and having fulfilled their duty which was inioined them, they return to
Jerusalem, and in the mean time Peter being taken and imprisoned by Herod, is
delivered by the Angel, Actor. 12.5.6.7.8.9. They return to Antioch in Syria,
from whence being sent by the Holy Ghost, taking with them John Mark, v. 25.
they came down to Seleucia, and from thence by sea they sailed to Salamine in
Cyprus, and thence by land to Paphus, Act. 13.4.5.6. from whence again they
ship themselves for Perga in Pamphylia, (where John Mark left them and went to
Jerusalem) v. 13. thence to Antioch in Pisidia, v. 14. from thence to Iconium,
a city of Lycaonia, v. 51. from whence they fly to Lystra, then to Derbe the
Higher, towns of Lycaonia, Act. 14.6. then back again to Lystra, Iconium,
Antioch of Pisidia, v. 21. thus having passed through Pisidia, they came to
Perga in Pamphylia, v. 24. thence to Attalia a city of Pamphylia, v. 25. from
whence they went by sea to Antioch in Syria, v. 26. and so, (sent by the
Church, by reason of a dissension amongst the brethren) they passing through
Phoenice and Samaria they went to Jerusalem, Act. 15.3. where in the 48. year
after the incarnation of Christ, a Council was held by the Apostles, about
Circumcision and the Ceremonial law of Moses, Act. 15.5.6.22.28. Thence they
return back to Antioch in Syria, where having delivered their letters
containing the determination and decree of Council, v. 30. here Paul and
Barnabas fall at odds, they part company; Barnabas taking Mark for his
consort and companion, sailed unto Cyprus, v. 39. Paul choosing Silas,
departed: and passing through Syria and Cilicia, v. 40.41. they came to Derbe,
where Paul enterteineth Timotheus into his company, Act. 16.1. from whence they
traveling through the higher cities of Lycaonia, v. 4. through Phrygia and
Galatia, at length they come to Mysia, v. 7. where they were forbidden by the
Spirit to make any long stay, v. 7. therefore from hence they pass directly to
Troas, otherwise called Alexandria, v. 8. thence with a straight course they
went to Samothrace, an island in the Aegean sea, (now they call it Archipelago)
and so the next day to Neapolis, v. 11. then to Philippi, the chief city in
the confines of Macedony, v. 12. then passing through Amphipolis and Appollonia
they came to Thessalonica, Act. 17.1. from thence by night they were conueighed
to Berrhoea, v. 10. Here Paul leaving Silas and Timotheus, v. 14. went by sea
to Athens, v. 15. from thence in the ninth year of Claudius the Emperor, 51.
years after the birth of Christ, he came to Corinthus, Act. 18.1.2. where he
abode a year and six months, v. 11. from hence accompanied with Priscilla and
Aquila, two fugitives, escaped from Rome, he saileth to Cenchrea, v. 18. then
to Ephesus, where he leaving Priscilla and Aquila, v. 19. he sets sail for
Jerusalem, by reason that the feast of Pentecost was at hand, v. 21. therefore
coming to Cesarea he goes up to Jerusalem, and then back again to Antioch
in Syria, v. 22. where he abode for a certain season, and from thence
departing went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia, v. 23. until he
came to Ephesus, 19.1. where he stayed at least 2. years and 3. months, 19. 8.
10. from thence in the 12. year of the reign of the Emperor Claudius, and in
the 54. after the birth of Christ, he passed through Macedonia, Act. 20.1. then
through Greece otherwise named Hellas, v. 2. where he abode three months, and
then returning back through Macedonia, v. 3. he came to Philippi, and from
thence shipping himself for Syria, in the thirteen year of the reign of
Claudius, about the feast of Easter or unleavened bread, came in five days to
Troas, (otherwise called Alexandria) where he abode seven days, v. 6. from
thence a foot to Assos or Assum, v. 13. thence by sea to Mitylene a town of
Lesbos, an island in the Archipelago, v. 14. the next day they came over against
Chios, an island in the same sea now called Scio, and so the next day he arrived
at Samos, then staying a while at Trogyllium, an haven in the maine continent,
he went the next day to Miletum, v. 15. where he takes his leave of the Elders
of Ephesus which he had caused to be called unto him, v. 17. from thence he
went in a strait course to Coos (an island in the Archipelago now called
Stancon, as Bellonius affirms, or Lango, as Bordonius, Volatteranus, and
Sophianus have written) thence the map of the ancient Mediterranean
PEREGRINATIONIS DIVI PAVLI TYPVS COROGRAPHICVS. In quo et noui testamenti, in
primis autem apostolorum historiae, a sancto Luca descriptae, omnia fere loca
geographica, oculis inspicienda, exhibentur.
Abrah. Ortelius describebat 1579

QVONIAM IGITVR SCIMVS ET PERSVASVM HABEMVS, QVOD QVAMDIV IN CORPORE HABITAMVS,
PEREGRINAMVR A DOMINO; PER FIDEM ENIM AMBVLAMVS, ET NON PER VISVM; PROPTEREA
CONFIDIMVS ET PEROPTAMVS PEREGRINARI A CORPORE, ET ESSE APVD DOMINVM NOSTRVM.
SATAGIMVS AVTEM SIVE PEREGRINI SVMVS, SIVE INCOLAE, VT ILLI PLACEAMVS. 2. Corinthians. 5. day following to the Rhodes, and thence to Patara, Act. 21.1. and
there finding aship bound for Phoenice, he goes aboard sets forward, v. 2.
and leaving Cyprus on the left hand within kenning, passes by it, and arriueth
at Tyrus, v. 3. where he abides seven days, v. 4. and then takes his journey
again by sea to Ptolemais, where he staieth one day, v. 7. and then departs
and goes to Cesarea, where he abode many days in the house of Philip the
Evangelist, v. 8. here Agabus prophecieth of Paul's captivity, v. 11. at length
he came to Jerusalem, v. 17. where he was apprehended of the Jews, in the
fourteenth year of the reign of the Emperor Claudius, 56. years after the
incarnation of Christ, v. 30. and had by them at that time been slain, v. 31.
had not the Captain of the garrison there by the help of his soldiers and men
of war rescued him and freed him from the hands of that tumultuous multitude,
v. 32. yet by reason that about him the vproare grew, v. 31. and for that the
captain supposed him to be Theudas, the Egyptian, who not long before that had
made an insurrection, and had led a company of ruffians, cutthroats, and
disordered fellows, to the number of 4000. men, out into the wilderness, v.
38. and chapter 5.36. he caused him to be bound with two chains, Act. 21.33.
and should have been whipped, Act. 22.24. had he not been a Roman, v. 29.
wherefore he was loosed from his bonds, and by the chief captain was brought
before the high Priests and the whole Council of the Jews, to hear what they
could charge him withal, and what he could answer for himself, v. 30. but the
adversaries falling at variance and dissentions amongst themselves, Act. 23.7.
he was by the Scribes and Pharisees, the greater part, freed and wholly
acquitted, v. 9. yet the multitude still raged nevertheless against Paul, so
that the Captain was forced to withdraw him into the Castle, to secure him
from their fury, v. 10. and for further security, he is sent away in the
night, by Claudius Lysias the Tribune guarded with 200. footmen, 70. horsemen,
and 200. archers, v. 23. unto Antipatris, (a town in the tribe of Manasses,
called in Macchab. 1.31. Capharsalama, or, as the Greek copy has,
Capharsarama: it is now called Assure, as some learned men think; and was the
first town that the Christians wanne in their voyage to the Holy Land, as
Volaterran writes) v. 31. where the footmen leaving him returned to the
castle, he was the next day carried on to Cesarea Palaestinae, where Felix the
governor lay, v. 32.33. where five days after, he was by him brought forth
before Ananias the high Priest, the elders of the Jews, and other his
adversaries, there to answer to the feigned and malicious objections of their
prating lawyer Tertullus, Act. 24.1. but because beside their slanderous
cauills, and bare affirmations, there were neither depositions nor witnesses
present, v. 20.21. he was for that time dismissed and committed as prisoner
unto the keeping of a Centurion, v. 24. In the mean time, Felix having now
been president full out two years, and being to resign up his place to
Porcius Festus, (to curry favor with the Jews) left Paul in prison, v. 28. He
within three days of his entrance goes up to Jerusalem, Act. 25.1. where they
a fresh again renew their suite against Paul, withal desiring Festus to send
for him up to Jerusalem, v. 3. which Festus would not grant, v. 4. but wills
them to bring his accusers and witness down ta Cesarea, where they should be
heard without partiality, v. 5. Therefore Festus having tarried at Jerusalem
ten days returns to Cesarea, and the next day calls forth Paul before
the Jews, v. 6. who maliciously accused him of many things which they could by
no means prove against him, v. 7. yet Festus desirous to please the Jews,
demands of Paul whether he would be willing to be tried before him of those
things at Jerusalem, v. 9. Therefore Paul appealeth to Caesar, v. 11. which was
allowed by Festus and the council, v. 12. But before he could be dispatched to
Rome, king Agrippa and Bernice came to Cesarea to salute Festus, v. 13. who
being desirous to hear Paul, v. 22. he was brought forth into the common hall
before them, v. 23. where he makes an apology for himself, Chap. 26. Now
when it was concluded that Paul should go into Italy, he was committed to
Julius a centurion of Augustus band, Chap. 27.1. and being shipped in a ship of
Adramyttium, a city of Mysia or Aeolia in Natolia, and setting forth sailed
along by the coast of Asia, and came the next day to Sidon, v. 2. and then
hoissing sail came close by the shore of Cyprus, v. 4. from thence he crossed
the sea by Cilicia and Pamphylia, and so came to Myra, a city of Lycia in
Natolia, (now it is called Strumita, as Stunica writes: the vulgar edition in
stead of Myra has Lystra, which is not a city of Lycia, but of Lycaonia,
distant from the sea of Cilicia more than 40. leagues) v. 5. Here the
Centurion shipped Paul and his company into a ship of Alexandria, bound for
Italy, v. 6. and after many days they came over against Guidus, a marine or
port town of Caria in Asia minor: from thence they passed hard by Salmone, an
haven of Crete, now called Candy, situate in the promontory Sammonium, (the
seamen at this day call it Cabo Salamo) v. 7. and so with much ado casting
about at last they came to a certain place named The fair Haven, (Pulcher
portus, or as the vulgar has Boni-portus, Lyra calls it Bona Villa) near to
which was the city Lasea, (the vulgar has Thalassa) v. 8. But because this
place was not convenient to winter in, they put out from hence, laboring to
reach to Phoenice, a port town in the same island, (of which Ptolemey also
makes mention in the last chapter of his third book of his Geography) v. 12.
But a gust or stormy wind, which the sailours call Euroclydon, (the vulgar has
Euroaquilo) arising caught the ship, v. 14.15. and carried it upon a little
island, called Clauda, thus Ptolemey in the 17. chapter of the 3. book of his
Geography writes it (the vulgar and the Syrian interpretour of the New
Testament, names it Cauda) v. 16. fearing that they should have fallen upon
the Quicke-sands ( Syrtes, the Syrian retains the Greek word: the Grecians
otherwise call these dangerous places Brachea, the Latins Breuia, shelues or
flattes) v. 17. But at the last after fourteen nights of continual storm and
danger they were driven into the Adriaticke sea, v. 27. where falling upon the
coast of the island Melita, now called Malta, Act. 28.1. from thence, after he
had lien there three months, he passed in a ship of Alexandria, v. 11. and
arrived at Syracuse in Sicilia, where he staid three days, v. 12. From whence
fetching a compass they came to Rhegium, a town in Calabria, a province of
Italy, it is now vulgarly called Rhezo, where they staid but one day, and then
set forward again and the second day came to Puteoli, a town in Campiana, now
called Pozolo, v. 13. where they staid seven days, and so from thence by
Appius Market, (Forum Appij) and the three Innes or Tauernes, (Tres Tabernas)
they went by land to Rome, v. 15. in the second year of the reign of the
Emperor Nero, where he was suffered to dwell by himself, committed only to a
soldier as his keeper, who had the charge over him, v. 16. who after he had
remained thus two whole years restrained, at length being released, for a long
time preaches the Gospel in Rome and other places of Italy, v. 31.32. Some
there are that think that after his enlargement he went also into Spain and
France, and planted the Gospel amongst those Nations. Lastly, he was again
apprehended by Nero and at Rome put to death by him in the last year of his
reign, which was the 70. year after the birth of Christ.

The PEREGRINATION of ABRAHAM the Patriarch.
ABraham the first Patriarch (whom Jesus the son of Syrach, chapter 44. v.
19. calls a Great man, and Admirable for glory and honor) the son of
Their, was borne as Josephus writes, in the 292. year after the universal
flood, in V R, a city of the Chaldees, otherwise called Camarine, as Eusebius
witnesses; it may be it is the same that Ptolemey calls Vrchoa. He goes
forth of his country and native soil, at the commandment of God, when he was,
(as Suidas teaches) but foureteen years old, into CHARRAN, which S. Stephen
in that oration which he made to the Jews, Act. 7.2:3.4: as also Achior, in
the story of Judith, chapter 5. v. 7. in his speech to Holofernes, and likewise
the 72. interpretours, do expound to be Mesopotamia; Josephus takes it for a
city. That this place was Carrae famous for the great overthrow here given to
the Roman forces, led by Crassus against the Parthians, although there be some
which are of that opinion, yet I dare not wholly yield unto them, only I leave
it to the learned to determine. Having staid a while in this country of
Mesopotamia, (his father being dead there, as the same Suidas reports) from
thence he goes with Sarai his wife, Lot his brothers son, and all his family
and the souls or living creatures that he had gotten in Charran, toward the
land of Chanaan, Genesis 12.5. (And if you will believe Nicolaus Damascenus in
Josephus, he dwelt sometime near Damasco, where in his days, he says, there
was to be seen a street which they vulgarly called Abraham's house.) When he
came from thence into SICHEM, at the plain of MOREH, (a place which diverse
interpreters diversely interpret, some the Oak Moreh, others the Oke-groue of
Moreh; Zozomene writes that in his time it was called Terebinthus, the
Terebinth or Turpentine tree.) Genesis 12.6. God appeared unto him, and promised
to give to him and to his seed that land for an inheritance for ever: therefore
in this place he built an altar to the Lord which here appeared unto him, v.
7. From thence removing unto a mountain Eastward from Bethel, he pitched his
tent having Bethel on the Westside, and Haai on the East: and there also he
built an altar unto the Lord, and calls upon the name of the Lord, v. 8.
thence he remooueth and goes on toward the South, v. 9. But a great famine
arising in that land, and every day growing still more grievous than other, he
goes down into EGYPT, to soiourne there, v. 10. And coming thither with his
wife, a very fair and beautiful woman, v. 11. whom he called by the name of
his sister, v. 13. Pharao the king of Egypt, fell in love with her, and took
her into his house, v. 15. and for her sake entreated Abram extraordinarily
well, and bestowed great gifts upon him, v. 16. who also was there, as Josephus
affirms, for his eloquence, wisdom and great experience in all things, had
in great estimation amongst the Egyptians. But when the Lord punished Pharao
and all his family with many great and grievous plagues, for Sara Abrams wives
sake, v. 17. he debated the matter with him, and examined him what his reason
was, to give out speech that she was his sister, and that he had not told him
that she was his wife, v. 18. and so he restored her to her husband again, v.
19. and gave commandment that he, his wife and all that he had should be
conueighed out of the land, v. 20. Therefore Abram goes up back again to
Bethel, chapter 13.3. into that place, where formerly he had built an altar and
there he called upon the name of the Lord, v. 4. After this return Abram and
Loath (who had always accompanied him) grew exceeding wealthy and rich in
sheep, cattle, tents, and family, v. 5. that the land could not contain them
both, neither might they dwell together, v. 6. Besides that their heard-men
sheep-heards and servants could not agree, v. 7. Therefore they consent to
divide the land between them, v. 9. Loath he chose the plain of Iordane, a
champion country well watered every where with that goodly river, diverse
smaller brooks, lakes, wels and poolles: a tract of ground for pleasantness
and fertility like unto Paradise and Egypt. In this place then stood Sodom,
Gomorrha and those other cities, which as yet the Lord had not destroyed, v.
10. In these cities Loath dwelt even up as high as Sodom: but Abram he abode
still in the land of Chanaan, v. 12. Thus they being parted, the Lord appeared
unto Abram, and showed him all the country round about, Northward, and
Southward; Eastward and Westward as far as he could see, v. 14. all which he
promised to give to him and to his seed for ever, v. 15. From thence he removed
and came to dwell in the plain of Mambre. (The Septuagint interpretours have
translated it, The oak of Mambre, quercum Mambre, Josephus has the Oak Ogyn)
Euagrius writes that in his time the place was called Terebinthus, the
Turpentine tree: of the Turpentine tree, as I suppose, that stood six furlongs
off, as we read in Josephus: and which Eusebius Pamphilus says stood still in
that place even in his time. This place was not far from HEBRON, or as some
write it Chebron, v. 18. Here Abram hearing of the news of Lots captivity
with his whole family, and goods and substance whatsoever, taken by the kings
of the Nations when they sacked and spoiled Sodom, (for Lot dwelled at Sodom)
chapter 14.11.12. he armed 308. slaves or bond-seruants, bred and borne in his
own house, and with all possible speed makes out after the enemy; v. 14.
following them even as high as DAN, and CHOBA, (Saint Hierome calls it Hoba,
and Josephus Soba) v. 15. rescueth his nephew, recouereth all his goods and
booty that they had taken, and brings them back again with the women and
all the people, v. 16. Being come home from the slaughter of Chodorlaomer, and
the rest of the kings which were with him, at the VALLEY OF SAVE, (the Kings
dale, as Saint Hierome does call it, or the Kings field, as Josephus names it)
the King of Sodom meets him, v. 17. together with Melchisedech King and
Priest of Salem or Jerusalem, who bringing forth bread and wine, entertained
him most kindly, v. 18. blessing him and wishing all good fortunes unto him, v.
19. to whom Abram gave tith of all that he had, v. 20. These things being thus
performed, God appears unto him again, chapter 15.1. and promises him an
heir of his own seed, v. 4. from whom should come an offspring or issue as
great in number as the stars of Heaven, v. 5. or the sand of the sea, Hebr.
11.12. And this he, not considering now that his body was withered and dead,
(as being almost an hundred years old) neither the deadness of Saraes womb,
but being not weak in faith, nor doubting any whit of the promises of God,
knowing certainly that he which had promised was able to perform what he had
promised, against all hope, believed in hope, and therefore it was imputed unto
him for righteousness, Romans 4.18.19. and for a confirmation and further
testimony of the truth of the same, he divided a calfe, a goat, a ram, a
turtle and a dove, in the midst, only the birds he divided not, and that by
the express commandment of God, v. 9.10. The birds that lighted on the
carkeises Abram drove away, v. 11. Here God foretells him that his seed
should be in bondage to the Egyptians 400. years, v. 13. and then to return
into this country again, v. 16. And after the sun was down there arose a great
darkness, and behold a smoking furnace and burning fire brand, passed between
those pieces, v. 17. and the Lord made a covenant with Abram, and gave to his
seed and posterity all that whole country that lies between Nilus, (the river
of Egypt) and Euphrates, that great river, which seuereth Palaestina from the
kingdom of the Chaldees or Persians, v. 18. Sarai his wife, having hitherto
been barren, and having an Egyptian maid named Hagar, moves Abram to company
with her, chap. 16.1.2. Abram consenting unto his wife, goes in unto Hagar, v.
3. who conceiving bare him a son, whom by the commandment of the Angel, she
called Ismael, v. 4.11. After this Abram being 99. years old, the Lord
appeared to him, chap. 17.1. makes a covenant with him, with promise greatly
to multiply him and his seed, and to make him a father of many Nations, v. 2.4.
Therefore he changes his name from Abram, that is, High-father, (Altiparens)
unto Abraham, that is, Many-father (Multiparens) v. 5. and his wives name from
Sarai, (that is, My princess) unto Sarah, (The princess) v. 15. and promises
to give him a son by her, whom he was by the counsel of the Lord to call by
the name of Izahak, and with him makes the covenant of circumcision, v. 16.19.
Abraham therefore took Ismael and all the males of his whole family and cut
off the fore skin of their flesh that self same day, as the Lord had
commanded him, v. 23. And Abraham was 99. years old, and Ismael was 13. years
old, when they were circumcised, v. 24.25. Again the Lord appeared unto him in
the plain of MAMBRF, as he sat in the tent door about the heat of the day,
chap. 18.1. and lifting up his eyes he saw 3 men (in the 2. v. of the 12 chap.
of the Ep. to the Hebr. they are called Angels) which he entertained into his
house, chap. 18.1.2.3. and after they had dined and refreshed themselves, goes
along with them toward Sodom, v. 16. In the way as they went, the Lord
fore-sheweth unto him the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, v. 17.20.21.
Wherefore Abraham earnestly entreats the Lord to be merciful unto them, and
to pardon the multitude for a few righteous men's sakes amongst them: but in
vain, for that that great and infinite number which dwelt in these 5. cities
and the territories round about them, could not afford 10. that truly feared
God, v. 32. And being returned home again, v. 33. early in the morning,
looking toward Sodom and Gomorrha, he saw the smoke of the land ascending up
as it had been the smoke of a furnace, chap. 19.28. For the Lord had caused it
to rain down from heaven upon those cities, fire and brimstone, v. 24.
Afterward Abraham went from thence Southward and dwelled between Cades and Sur,
in the land of GERAR, chap. 20.1. Now Abimelek king of that country, sent for
Sarah, (whom Abraham, as before chap. 12. 13. called by the name of his sister)
v. 2. but being warned by God in a dream that she was his wife, v. 3. before
such time as he had come near her, v. 4. he restored her to Abraham her
husband untouched, richly endowed and with great treasure, v. 14.15.16. In this
country Sarah traveled, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, chap. 21.2.
(according as the Lord before had promised she should, chap. 17.19.) and
Abraham called his name Izaac, v. 3. and circumcised him when he was 8. days
old, v. 4. Now when he was to be weaned, Abraham made a great feast, v. 8. At
which feast Ismael, whom Abraham had begotten of Hagar the bondwoman, mocked
Isaac the son of the free woman, v. 9. wherefore by the counsel of Sara his
wife both Hagar and her bastard son are turned out of doors, v. 14. After
this Abraham and Abimelech contended about a well of water, which Abimelechs
servants had by force taken from the servants of Abraham, v. 25. yet the truth
being sifted out they agree, and do make a covenant and league of perpetual
amity, v. 27. at a place, which of this event was afterward, called
B'ER-SHEBAA, that is, the well of the league or oath, v. 31. Here Abraham
planted a GROVE, where he called upon the name of the Lord, the mighty God
everlasting, v. 33. and he dwelt as a stranger and soiourner, in these
quarters, namely, in the land of the Philistines, a long season, v. 34. These
things being thus performed God tempted Abraham, chap. 22.1. commanding him to
take Izaac his only son, (who was now, as Josephus writes, 25. years old)
by whom he had promised to give him an innumerable issue, and to offer him up
for a sacrifice, upon one of the mountains in the land of MORIAH, v. 2. (this
mountain was since called Zion, upon which David afterward appointed a temple
to be built, 2. Chr. 3.1.) Here therefore, he nothing distrusting of the
goodness and power of God, but persuading himself certainly that God could
without Izaac raise him a posterity out of the dead, he builds an altar, and
having laid on wood, binds his son, v. 9. takes the knife purposing to
slay him, as he was commanded, v. 10. but behold an Angel sent from God with a
countermand, charged him not to lay hand upon Izaac, v. 11.12. He therefore
looking about him and spying a ram behind him, entangled by the horns in a
bush, he catches him and offers him in steed of his son, v. 13. Wherefore
Abraham called the name of that place IEHOVAH-YIREH, v. 14. After this Sarah
his wife, being 120. years old, chap. 23. 1. dies in KIRIATH-ARBAA, a place
that was otherwise called HEBRON, v. 2. but Abraham buried her in the cave of
the field MACHPELAH, oueragainst Mambre, (the same is Hebron in the land of
Canaan) which he had bought of Ephron the Hittite, v. 19. Then he married a 2.
wife, named Keturah, cap. 25.1. who bare him many children, v. 2. Lastly,
Abraham being eight score and fifteen years old, died v. 7. and Izaac and
Ismael h^s sons buried him by Sarah in the cave of Machpelah, v. 9.10.

map of ancient Canaan, surrounded by 22 images from the life of Abraham, with
an inset map of the route from Ur to Salem ABRAHAMI PATRIARCHAE PEREGRINATIO,
ET VITA. Abrahamo Ortelio Antverpiano auctore.
ABRAHAM EGREDERE DE TERRA TVA, ET DE COGNATIONE TVA, ET VENI IN TERRAM QVAM
MONSTRAVERO TIBI. ET DABO TIBI, ET SEMINI TVO POST TE, TERRAM PEREGRINATIONIS
TVAE, OMNEM TERRAM CHANAAN, IN POSSESSIONEM AETERNAM. Dn^o Ioanni Moflinio,
Montis S. Winoxij abbati reverendo, viro humanitate and candore eximio,
multiplicique rerum cognitione nobili; Ab. Ortelius in perpetuoe amicitioe
pignus DD.



Of the DEAD SEA.
OF the Dead sea, or the lake Asphaltites, because we have described it in
another form than heretofore it has been usually set forth in, I have
thought it not amisle in this place to say something, for the further
satisfying of the Reader: For I here do give it this form which I conceive
and persuade my self it had in the time of Abraham, before such time, I mean,
as it was burnt with fire and brimstone from heaven, by the curse and
punishment of God, caused by the wickedness of the inhabitants of the same.
For we have made it to be a valley lying between the mountains, watered all
along from one end to the other, by the river Jordan, in which then stood these
five citities, Sodom, Gomorrhe, Admah, Zeboim and Segor. Which place why and
how afterward it was converted into a lake, the holy Scriptures do at large and
copiously describe. Josephus, in the 5. chapter of his 5. book of the wars
of the Jews, thus discourses of it: It is, says he, a salt and barren lake,
in which by reason of the great lightness, even the heauiest things that are,
being cast into it, do swim upon the top of the water: to sink or go down
to the bottom a man shall hardly do, although he would. Lastly, Vespasian the
Emperor, who came thither of purpose to see it, commanded certain fellows
that could not swim, to have their hands bound behind them and to be cast
into the midst and deepest place of it; and it came to pass that all of them
did flote upon the top of the water, as if they had been forced upward by the
air or spirits arising from the bottom. Moreover the diversity of the colors
of this lake, which changes and turns the top of the water thrice in a
day, and by diverse positions and falling of the sun beams upon it, gives a
lusture round about, is most wonderful. In many places it speweth forth
black lumpes of bitumen, which do swim aloft upon the top of the lake in
form and bigness of black oxen without heads. But when those that farm the
lake do come, finding a lump so clotted together, they draw it to their
ships: and because it is tough, being full, they cannot break them off: but
as it were binding to the boat it hangs to the knoll, until it be dissolved
by the menstrues of women, or with urine, this Pliny in the fifteenth chapter
of the seventh book of his Natural history, attributes to a thread stained
with a woman's menstrues.] It is good not only for the stopping of the ioints of
ships, but is also mingled with many medicines usual in the cure of diseased
bodies. The length of this lake is 580. furlongs, extending it self even up to
Zoara in Arabia. The breadth of it is 150. furlongs over. [Diodorus Siculus
makes it but 500. furlongs in length, and three score in breadth.] The land of
Sodom, sometime a most blessed and happy province for all kind of wealth and
commodities, but now all burnt up, being indeed, as ancient records make
mention, for the wickedness of the inhabitants consumed by fire from heaven,
was not far from this place. Lastly, as yet some remnants of that wrathful
fire, both in the foundations and plots of those five cities, and the ashes
growing up together with the fruits of the earth (which to see to are like
unto good wholesome fruits, but being touched they presently vanish into
smoke and ashes) are to this day to be seen. Thus far out of Josephus.
Tacitus in the fifth book of his histories reports almost the same of it
Verbatim, but that he affirms, that the heaps and lumps of bitumen after that
they are drawn to the shore, and are dried partly by the heat of the sun and
partly by the vapors of the earth, are cleft and hewed out with axes. Moreover
he adds, that this lake, in show like the sea, but much more corrupt and
stinking both in taste and smell, is pestilent and unwholesome unto the
neighbors round about: again, that it is never moved or driven to and fro
with the wind, nor suffers any fish, or water fowls to live in it, as in
other waters: yea it entertaineth no manner of living creatures, as Pausanias
and Hegesippus, in the fourth chapter of his eighteenth book, do write; so
that, as Pliny witnesses, bulls and camels do swim and flote aloft upon the
top of the water of this lake. The same things Strabo writes, but under the
name of the lake Sirbon, very falsely: for it is another lake in this country
different from this. Diodorus testifies that the water of it is bitter and
stinking: Item, that it bears up all things that have breath, except those
things that are massy and solid, as gold, silver, and such like, although even
those also do here sink more slowly than in other lakes. See more of this in
the same author in his 2. and 19. books. That all vegetable things that live
not, do sink to the bottom: and that it will bear up no such thing except it
be besmered over with bitumen, (alumen, some copies have) Trogus Pompeius, does
testify in the 36. book of his history. That a lamp or candle light, will
swim aloft; but being out, will sink, Isidorus has set down, as a truth, by
the relation of others. Aristotle in the second book of his Meteorologicks
does write, that the water of this lake does white cloths, if one shall but
shake them well, being only wette in the same. Of the fruits like unto those
which are wholesome and good to be eaten, yet indeed do vanish into ashes,
beside the forenamed authors, Solinus, Josephus, S. Augustine and Tertullian,
do witness. Notwithstanding they do all affirm it of apples, not generally of
all fruits. Hegesippus to these adds clusters of grapes, in shape and
fashion not in substance. Tacitus writes that this falls out not only to all
natural things arising out of the earth of their own accord, but also to
artificial things made by hand and ingenious invention of man. This then is
the nature and resemblance of this place now, which was sometime as Moses
testifies, Genesis 13.10. to see to, as glorious as the garden or Paradise of God.

To these we think it not amiss to adioine the opinion of Nubiensis the
Arabian, as he has set it down in the fifth Section of the third Climate of
his Geographicall garden, imprinted in the Arabicke language, at Rome in the
year of our Lord 1592. The place, says he, where Lot with his family dwelt,
the stinking sea and Zegor, even up as high as Basan and Tiberias was called
the Vale, for that it was a plain or bottom between two hills so low that all
the other waters of this part of Soria do fall into it and are gathered
thither. And a little beneath in the same place he adds. All the brooks and
springs do meet and stay in the lake of Zegor, otherwise called the lake of
Sodom and Gomorrha, two cities where Lot and his family dwelt, which God did
cause to sink, and converted their place into a stinking lake, otherwise named
The Dead lake, for that there is in it nothing that has breath or life,
neither fish, nor worm, or any such thing as usually is wont to live or keep
in standing or running waters: the water of this lake is hot and of a filthy
stinking savor: yet upon it are little boats in which they pass from place
to place in these quarters, and carry their provision. The length of this lake
is 60. miles, the breadth not above 12. miles. Moreover Aben Isaac, who in like
manner wrote in the Arabicke tongue, a treatise of Geography (certain fragments
of which I have by me, for which I am beholding, as also for many other favors
to Master Edward Wright, that learned Mathematician, and singular lover of all
manner literature) thus speaks of this place: The sea Alzengie, says he, is a
very bad and dangerous sea: for there is no living creature can live in it by
reason of the vnwholesomnesse and thickness of his waters: which happens by
reason that the sun, when it comes over this sea, draws up unto it, by
the force of his heat, the thinner and more subtle parts of the water which is
in it, and so does leave the thick and more gross parts behind, which by that
means also become very hot and salt: so that no man may sail upon this sea,
nor any beast or living creature live near it. Item, the sea Sauk, as
Aristotle speaks of it, which also is in these parts, and does reach up as
high as India and the parched Zone ( so I think the word Mantakah, that is, a
girdle or belt, which here he uses, does signify) that there is not in it
any living creature at all, of any sort whatsoever: and therefore this sea is
called The Dead sea, because that whenever any worm or such like falls
into it, it moves no longer, but swimmeth upon the top of the water; and
when it is dead it putrifieth and then sinketh and falls to the bottom: yet
when there falls into it any stinking and corrupt thing it sinketh immediately
and swimmeth not upon the water at all. Thus far out of Aben Isaac. This sea
is of Ptolemey called ASPHALTITES, the lake Ashaltites, of others Asphaltes, of
the bitumen which it does yield in great plenty; of the Jews, MARE
PALAESTINORVM, ORIENTALE, SOLITVDINIS, sieve DESERTI, the Sea of Palaestina, the
East Sea, the Sea of the desert or wilderness, of the situation and position
of it unto the land of Iewry: Item, MARE SALIS, the Salt-sea, of the hot and
fitish saltness of the same, above other salt-waters, which the Arabian
justifies to be true: Pausanias that ancient and famous historian of the
Greeks: and Iustine the abridger of the large volume of Trogus Pompeius, call
it MARE MORTVVM, the Dead sea, of the effect: (there is says Iustine, a lake
in that country, which by reason of his greatness and vnmoueablenesse of his
waters, is called the Dead sea, for it is neither moved with the wind; the
heavy and lumpish bitumen, which swimmeth upon the top of the water all the
lake over, resisting the violence of the greatest blasts: neither is it
saileable, for that all things that are void of life do sink to the bottom:
neither does it sustain any thing that is not besmered with bitumen) to these
both my Arabians do subscribe: of Galen, the Prince of Physicians, it is called
LACVS SODOMAEVS, the Lake of Sodom: for him Nubiensis does stand, who never
names it Bahri, a sea; but Bahira, a lake or standing poole: yet contrariwise
Isaac terms it Bahri, not Bahira, and by this name it is generally known to
all the Europeans. Solinus calls it TRISTEM SINVM, the Sad-bay, like as the
gulf of Milinde is of some named ASPERVM MARE, the rough or boisterous sea,
like as Isaac my author, calls this same lake, Tzahhib, the churlish and
dangerous sea. Josephus in the tenth chapter of his first book of the
Antiquities of the Jews, says, that this place where now is the Dead-sea, was
before named the Vale of bitumen pits. Strabo, otherwise a most excellent
Geographer and curious searcher out of the truth in these discourses, falsely
confounds this lake, as I touched before, with the Sirbon lake. Why the
Arabian should call it Zengie and Sawke, I know not. This we have here added
partly out of the Geographicall treasury of Ortelius, for the ease and benefit
of the Reader, least the diversity of names might make him mistake the thing.
Having thus finished the Mappes of HOLY write, It now remains that we do in
like manner begin and go on forward with those of PROFANE histories.

A draught and shadow of the ancient GEOGRAPHY.
THou have, gentle and curtuous Reader, in this Map a draught (a plot or
pattern I might call it) of the whole world, but according to the description
and ruder Geography of the more ancient authors and of those of middle age.
For this our globe of the earth was not then further known, (a wonderful
strange thing) until in the days of our fathers, in the year 1492.
Christofer Columbus a Genoway, by the commandment of the king of Castile,
first discovered that part of the West, which unto this day had lien hid and
unknown. After that, the South part hitherto not heard of, togther with the
East part of Asia, much spoken of, but never before this time entered, was
descried by the Portugals. That part which lies toward the North, we have seen
in this our age to have been first found out by the English merchants and
nauigatours; a particular view and proof of which, thou may see at large, in
that worthy work of the English Nauigations, composed with great industry,
diligence and charge, by my singular good friend Master Richard Hacluyt. By him
England still shall live, and the name of brave Englishmen shall never die. The
other countries which as yet do lie obscured within the frozen Zones and under
both the Poles, are left for succeding ages to find out. Peradventure, ancient
writers that lived many hundred years since, have named some country or some
one place or other, out of this our continent; but they have not written ought
of the situation of the same, as being indeed altogether unknown unto them. In
this continent and circuit, curtuous Reader, (that thou be not carried away
with a vain and false persuasion of the knowledge of things done in the whole
world) or if you please so to call it, within the compass of that part of the
world described by the old Cosmographers, all ancient HISTORIOGRAPHY, both
SACRED and PROFANE, is comprehended: in these all famous acts of mortal men,
which from the beginning of the world even unto the days of our fathers, have
been registered by learned men, have been done and performed. For every story,
before the forenamed Columbus, written in Latin, Greek or any other language,
exceeded not the limits of the Roman Empire, or the conquests of Alexander the
Great, (if you shall only except the travels of Marcus Paulus Venetus by land,
into China: and the navigations of Katherino Zeni, by the ocean sea, into the
North parts, of which we have spoken in the discourse to the Map of Mare del
zur) which I make no doubt all learned historians and others will easily grant
me. Whereupon we may see how maimed and imperfect the history of the world is,
when as it is very apparent that this part of the earth then known, is scarce
the one quarter of the whole globe of the world that is now discovered to us.
And (which is especially to be considered, rather than to be commended) we may
truly say that now, which Cicero in his third oration against Verres wrote then
most falsely: when he said of that age; There is now no place within the vast
ocean, none so far remote and distant from us, none so obscure or hidden,
whither, in these our days, the covetous and bad minds of our men, does not
cause them go.

Certain records and testimonies of ancient writers concerning Geographicall
Mappes.
Anaximander, scholar to Thales Milesius, did set forth as Strabo witnesses,
the FIRST GEOGRAPHICALL CHART. Now Anaximander, who lived in the time of
Seruius Tullus, the VI. king of Rome, was borne in the first year of the 35.
olympiade, which was the first year of the reign of Ancus Martius, the 4.
king of the Romans, 639. years before the birth of Christ. The same Strabo
makes mention of a map of the HABITABLE WORLD, done by Eratosthenes.
Socrates, when he saw Alcibiades to stand so much upon his wealth and great
possessions, brought him to a map of the WHOLE WORLD, and bid him there to
find out the province of Athens: which when he had found, he again willed him
to point to his lands: and when he answered that they were not in any place
there described: he says, Art thou then proud of the possession of that, which
is no part of the World? Aelianus in the 28. chap. of his 3. book De varia
historia. Hamo Carthaginensis sets out a map of his navigations into the
ATLANTICKE SEA, wherein he made a discovery of the COASTS OF LIBYA, which he
caused to be hanged up in the temple of Saturn. Aristagoras Milesius had a
Table of Brass in which was cut the WHOLE COMPASS OF EARTHLY GLOBE, the
WHOLE SEA, with all the RIVERS emptying themselves into the same. Herod. in
his V. book. Augustus and Agrippa set out a map of the WHOLE WORLD to the
public view of all men, as Pliny in the second chapter of his third book
has left recorded. Amongst the Egyptians there were continually kept certain
Chartes containing all the TRACTS, BOVNDS and COASTS both of sea and land, as
Apollonius in the fourth book of his Argonautickes does witness. Saint
Hierome affirms, that a MAP of PALAESTINA, made by Eusebius Caesariensis,
was lost long before his time. That Charles the Great, Emperor of Rome, had a
Silver Table, wherein the WHOLE WORLD was portraitured, those authors who
lived in his time and have written of his life and histories, do constantly
affirm. Theophrastus Eresius bequeathed and gave by his last Will and
Testament, certain mappes in which were described the SITVATION of the WORLD,
on condition that they should be put and reserved in the lower part of the
gallery, which he built and adioined to his school, as Diogenes Laertius
writes in his life. I have described a Charte of the WORLD, in 12. sheets of
parchment. Thus Dominicanus, the author of the Annals of the city Celmar in
Germany, who wrote about the year of Christ 1265. speaks of himself in that
his work. There are certain GEOGRAPHICALL CHARTS, mentioned and cited by
Stephanus Byzantinus, in the word Aino. The Emperor Domitian, put Metius
Pomposianus to death, because he carried about the country certain mappes of the
WORLD, portraitured in sheets of Velame, as Suetonius records. Varro in the
second chapter of his first book of Husbandry, has these words: There I
light upon by chance, Caius Fundanius wy wives father, and Caius Agrius a
Knight of Rome, a disciple and follower of Socrates, with Publius Agrasius the
Customer, whom I found looking upon a Map of ITALY, drawn and described upon
a wall. Here also Vitruuius what he speaks in the eighth book of his
Architecture: that these things are, and may be so, the HEADS OF RIVERS do
sufficiently prove, which we do see are described in the Chartes and Mappes of
the World. Florus, who seems to have lived in the time of Traian the
Emperor, has these words: I will do that that Cosmographers are wont to do,
who use to set out the SITVATION of the WORLD in a small chart or table.
Julian the Emperor in an Epistle to Alypius thus writes: I was even then
newly recovered of my sickness when thou sentest the GEOGRAPHY: and yet the
map which thou sentest was never the less welcome: For there are in it not
only better and more true descriptions, but also certain excellent Iambicke
verses wherewith thou have much graced it. But that the Ancients were wont to
describe the WORLD and globe of the earth in Mappes, it is manifest out of
Plutarcke in the life of Theseus: as also out of the fourth book of Propertius
the Poet, where he brings in Arethusa thus speaking to Lycorta. Cogimure
TABVLA PICTOS ediscere MVNDOS. We forced are to understand: By charts, the
state of Sea and Land.
map of the ancient world, with four corner medallions featuring Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America AEVI VETERIS, TYPVS GEOGRAPHICVS.
Abrah. ortelius Regiae Mts. Geographus describ. cum Privilegijs decennalib.
Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabantiae. Antverpiae Ambivaritorum. 1590.

EN SPECTATOR, PILAE TOTIVS TERRAE ICHNOGRAPHIAM. AT VERERIBVS, VSQVE AD ANNVM
SALVTIS NONAGESIMVM SECVNDVM SVPRA MILLES. QVADRINGENT. COGNITAE, TANTVM
GEOGRAPHIAM.

The ROMAN WORLD, OR The ROMAN EMPIRE.
AMmianus Marcellinus thus writes in his foureteenth book: At such time as
triumphant Rome (which shall flourish as long as men do live upon the earth)
began first to grow into credit and honor in the world, that it might still
rise by degrees and lofty steps into a firm league of eternal peace, virtue
and fortune (which often times jar) did fully consent and agree. For if
either of them had opposed themselves, it surely had never come to that
absolute height and greatness. The people of this city from the first infancy
even unto the last of childhood, which was limited almost within the compass
of three hundred years, abode the bitter assaults and wars of their
neighbors round about them: then having grown to a striplings age and past
the rod, after many outrageous furies of Mars, it passed the Alps and narrow
sea. Being come to man's estate and best years, from all quarters of the wide
world, it brought away the laurel the sign of conquest and triumph: but now
being old and beginning to dote, and sometime only bearing the name of
conqueror rather than winning ought indeed, it has betaken it self to a more
quiet kind of life. Therefore this city, reverend for so many glorious
conquests of stout and fierce nations, and for so many good and wholesome laws
which it has enacted, has now at last, like a kind and thrifty father, both
wise and wealthy, committed her patrimony and possessions to the Emperors, as
unto her natural sons, to be ruled and governed. And lately, although the
tribes and wards be idle, the hundreds and wapentakes still and quiet, and
there be no dissensions in the Senate house, but that the more secure and
calmer times, such as Numa Pompilius lived in, were come again: yet in all
parts of the world wheresoever, it is regarded as a Mistress and Queen, in all
places the reverend gray hairs of the grave Senators, every where the very
name of the Roman Nation is greatly esteemed and honorable. Thus far
Ammianus. Moreover this you shall find in Sulpiciaes Satyricke poem; Two
things there are which raised great Rome to that height, valor in war and
wisdom in peace. As this Roman Empire, in the judgment of all men, was
esteemed very great and large, so also indeed it was; especially if you shall
compare it with those which have been in former ages, as that of the Assyrians,
Persians and Grecians: Item, with those which since their fall have sprung up
in their places, as namely, that of the Othomans, amongst the Turks: the
Sophies, amongst the Persians: of the great Cham, over the Tartars in Asia: and
of Prester John, as we call him, over the Aethiopians or Abyssines in Africa.
But if you shall compare it with that Monarchy which Charles the fifth,
Emperor of Rome, within the memory of our fathers, established in diverse
parts of the world, and Philip his son in our age has enlarged, and shall by
looking into an universal map of the Earthly globe, confer and measure the
greatness of this with those others, by the eye you shall plainly and truly
discern, that this for largeness may not only be preferred far before all
those other forenamed, but also even before that of the Romans. The kingdom
of the Portugals, after that by diverse nauigations they had subdued under their
obedience the marine tracts and sea coasts of East India, together with the
islands there about, if it did reach and were extended up as far within the
land, as it commands about the shore, it might doubtless be accounted none
of the least Empires. Seeing now therefore that this also at this day is under
the obedience of the said K. Philip, who does not see that this Empire is the
greatest that ever was in the world?

Of the Empire of Rome, as it stood in his days, Tertullian in his book De
Pallio, speaks thus honorably: Reuera Orbis cultissimum huius Imperij rus
est; that is, In very deed the whole world is nothing else but a farm well
stocked and stored, belonging to this Empire. Lastly, Ovid, in his second book
De Fastis, thus writes of it: Gentibus est aliis tellus data limite certo,
Romanae spacium est vrbis and Orbis idem. All other nations, in the Earth their
certain bounds may name; The compass of the World and Rome, they only are the
same.

map of the Roman Empire with an inset family tree or pedigree of the seven
kings of Rome ROMANI IMPERII IMAGO.
Originis, Incrementi, et Culminis Imperij Romani, breuis enumeratio.

Primo sub Regibus septem, Romulo, Seruio, etc. per annos ducentos and tres
supra quadraginta, non amplius quam vsque Portum, atque Hostiam, intra decimum
octanum miliariu^ Romanum processit Imperium Sub Consulib. vero, inter quos
interdum Dictatores, et Decemuiri, ac Tribuni militares fuerunt, per annos
quadringentos and septem supra quadraginta vsque tra^s Padum Italia est capta:
Africa Hispaniaeque subactae: Gallia, et Britannia tributarie sunt factae:
Illyrici, Histri, Liburni, Dalmatae, sunt domiti. ad Achaiam transitum est:
Macedones expugnati: cum Dardanis, Moesis et Thracibus est bellarum. ad
Danubium est peruentum: ac in Asia (pulso Antiocho) primum pedem posuerunt
Romani Mithridate victo, regnum Ponti est captum, cum Armenia minori quam idem
tenuerat. in Mesopotamiam progressum est; and cum Partbis foedus initum; contra
Carduenos, and Saracenoe ac Arabas pugnatum: Judaea omnis victa: Cilicia et
Syria, in potestatem redacta: ac tandem in Aegyptum peruentum. Sub
Imperatoribus autem, a Diuo Augusto nempe ad Theodosij superioris, et Honorij
ac Arcadij eius filiorum tempora, per annos quadringentos and quadraginta
Cantabri, Astures, totaque Hispania sub iugum missa est Alps maritimae,
Cocciaeque et Rhetiae Noricum, Pannoniae et Moesiae, Imperio accesserunt. Omnis
ora Danubij in Prouincias est redacta Pontus omnis, et Armenia mayor;
Mesopotamia, Assyria, Arabia and Aegyptus, in Imperij Romani iuna concesserunt.
Atque hoc modo his Principibus viris, and populi Romani virtute, ac immortali
eoru^ gloria, hoc Augustissimu^ Imperium ad summu^ fastigium perductum fuit;
Cuius limits fuere ad Occidente^ Oceanus, a Septentrione Rhenus et Danubius,
ab Orient Tigris, a Meridie Atlas mons, quae omnia in hac tabula ob oculos
(historiae candidatis) ponuntur.

Ex Liuio, Dionysio, and Plutarcho, hanc genealogiam septem Regum desumpsimus,
atque huic tabulae in historiae Romanae studiosorum gratiam adiecimus. In qua
maxima linea est Regum: mediocres sunt coniugum: mintinae vero filiorum
filiarumque. Circuli duplicibus circumferentijs descripti, masculos denotant;
simplicibus autem, foeminas.

Diuina men's ciuitatem populi Romani egregia temperataque regione collocauit,
uti Orbis terrarum imperio potiretur. Vitruuius lib. 8.

Cum Gratia et Priuilegio.

EVROPE.
IN the division of the world, diverse have placed Africa in the third part:
some few have made no more but Asia and Europe only; and Africa they make a
part of Europe, says Salustius. This is that which S. Paulinus in Antonius,
out o the opinion of the same Salust, thus writes of: Europam Asiamque duo vel
maxima terrae Membra, quibus Lybiam dubie Sallustius addit, Europae admixtam:
postit quum tertia dici: Europe and Asia vast, the Earthly globe between them
share. Yet whether Afric should a part of this our Europe be; or make a third
part by it self, Salust does doubt I see. But Philostratus also in Isocrates
does divide the world into Asia and Europe: yea Isocrates himself, in his
Panegyricos. Moreover in Varroes book De lingua Latina these words are read;
As all the world is divided into Heaven and Earth: so Heaven is severed into
his quarters: and the Earth into Asia and Europe. Again the same author in
his book of Husbandry writes thus: First, when as the world, by
Eratosthenes, was very fuly and naturally divided into two parts, the one
toward the South, [ Asia doubtless he meaneth] the other in the North [ Europe
we call it.] S. Augustine in his 16. book De Ciuitate Dei: Lucane in his 9.
book: and Orosius in the first book of his history, have the like words to
the same sense. Notwithstanding custom since has prevailed with all
Historiographers and Cosmographers which have written either in Latin or
Greek, jointly to divide the globe of the earth into these three parts: Asia,
Afric and Europe: the last of which we have taken upon us to describe in this
place, not only in form of a map or chart, like a Geographer: but in this
present discourse, like an historian. Concerning the form of it therefore, it
is manifold, as Strabo writes. It is a Peninsula or demy-ile, and not an
island; although Silenus, as Elianus writes, did sometime to Midas so relate of
it. For it is on all sides, as you may see in the map, bounded and beaten
with the salt sea, but only upon the East, where it is by a small neck joined
to the greater Asia. Yet by what limits they are there distinguished, the
ancient and the later writers do not altogether agree. For those which are more
ancient as Aristotle, Plato, Herodotus, and others which do follow their
opinion, do divide Europe from Asia, by the river Phasis, (a river of Colchis
falling into the Euxine sea, Mar maiore, or Maurothalassa, as the Greeks call
it) near Trapezonda: some mappes do now call that river Fasso, others
Phazzeth: the Scythians, (as Theuet reports, Debbassethca) or which is all
one, by that Isthmos or neckland which is between the foresaid Mar maiore or
Pontus Euxinus, and the Caspian sea ( Mar de Cachu, the ancient called it Mare
Hyrcanum, the Hyrcane sea) which formerly all old writers thought to be but a
bay or gulf of the Scythian or Northren ocean, as Strabo, Pliny, Mela,
Dionysius, Plutarch (in the life of Alexander and in his discourse of the face
in the sphere of the Moon) and Iornandes a more late writer, have left
recorded. Yet all of them were deceived. Only Herodotus truly (as this our
latter age does approve and find to be so) does affirm this to be a sea of it
self, and to have neither inlet nor outlet, or to be intermedled with any
other sea. Dionysius, Arrianus, Diodorus, Polybius, Iornandes and Ptolemey have
divided it from Asia by the river Tanais (Don or Tana, as now the Italians name
it) who thinks that both the rise of this river, and the land Northward from
whence it comes, are both unknown and uncertain. All doubt where to place
and lay their bounds: as indeed who never perfectly knew those places toward
the East and North, not being then discovered, but only described by them, from
the fabulous reports of others: as for example, the Riphaean and Hyperboraean
mountains, which are feined inventions of the Greeks, as Strabo writes:
together with Aluani montes, here described by Ptolemey, where now not only
these mountains, but also no other at this day, are to be seen: but in their
places diverse huge and vast woods, great fennes and bogges, or large champion
plains. Orpheus also long since described in this part of the continent I
mean, between Maeotis palus, the fenne Maeotis, (now called Mar delle
Zabacche, and Mar della Tana) and the sea Cronium, an huge wood. Likewise,
Dionysius Afer here abouts places an Infinite wood, as he terms it, from
whence he says Tanais or Don does spring, which after many windings and
turnings at last falls into the forenamed fenne Maeotis. Isidorus here has
the Riphaean woods, in which he says Tanais does first take the beginning.
That Donaw (Danubius) does divide Asia from Europe, Seneca in the sixth book
Natural. does manifestly affirm; of which his opinion, what we do think, we
will, God willing, set down in the discourse to the Map of Dacia. Hitherto
we see the forenamed authors to doubt and disagree between themselves of the
limittes of these two parts of the world: If therefore they shall find me a
meet vmpier and arbitratour in this matter, I would, not unfitly, and as I hope
to the liking of all parties, decide the controversy thus: I would make the
bounds, to be Tanais, or the river Don; the straights or narrow piece of the
maine land that is between this river and the river Rha, (Athel) which emptieth
it self into the Caspian sea: the East branch of the same Athel: then from his
head unto the river Oby, and so even unto his mouth or fall into the Northren
sea: For by this mouth, I do easily persuade my self, that antiquity did
verily believe that the Caspian sea did unlade it self into the maine Ocean.
For that the name of this river Oby is ancient, it is very likely, for that
montes Obij, certain mountains called Obij are placed heereabout in this
tract, by Athenaeus, which he says formerly were called of the ancients montes
Riphaei, the Riphaean hills: but then in his days montes Alps, the Alps.
Again Iornandes in this continent, not far from hence, describes Ouim, or
Obim, a Scythian nation or family. And that these foresaid mountains, are in
this place (not where Ptolemey and Pomponius Mela have placed them) very many
men, of great credit and learning in these our days, sufficient witnesses do
stoutly avouch. Amongst which Baro Herberstein, in his history of Moscouy, is
one: Paul Oderborne, in his treatise written of the life of Basilides, is
another: lastly, Antony Wied, in his map of Moscouy may be the third. Now
they name it vulgarly by diverse and sundry names, but commonly they call it
Cingulum mundi, The girdle of the world, as the said Herberstein does affirm.
In a Map of these countries set out by Master Ienkinson, an Englishman, who
traveled through these parts, it is called Zona Orbis, The girdle of the
Earth. Moreover I have in some sort for this division, Iornandes and Aethicus,
upon my side, where they say that the Riphaean mountains do part Asia and
Europe. Again these self same hills, yea, and in this tract, are the montes
Hyperborei; not where Ptolemey places them. And they are the same with montes
Riphaei, Obij and Alps. Thus far of the division of Asia from Europe.

Pliny calls this part of the world, The Nurce of all Nations; Mardonius, as
Herodotus does tell of him, avouches it to Xerxes, To be by far the
beautifullest of all places of the World, to be a most goodly and gallant
country, yielding all manner of fruits and fruitful trees, and those in their
kinds the best; and to be such that it were pity that any king in the World
should have ought to do in but he. Varro in his books De re Rustica, of
Husbandry writes, That it is a more temperate and healthful soil than Asia.
Statius in his Achilleidos, more than once or twice calls it, The Mighty
province of the World. Maxima terra viris and foecundissima doctis Vrbibus,
Europe for multitude of warlike men and scholars deeply learned, does far
excel --: thus Mamilius writes of it. Aristotle, the prince of Philosophers,
makes the inhabiters of this part of the world, to be, A very stout and
courageous people. The same author affirms, that, All kind of beasts and
cattle here, are in their kind, greater and stronger than in Asia and
Afric. But of the nature of this country, the manners and customs of the
people, let us hear what Strabo that excellent Geographer says in his second
book; This part is most fertile of valiant and prudent men. It is all
generally habitable, excepting only a very small portion toward the North, and
abutting upon the Hamaxici, which dwell upon Tanais, (Don) Maeotis palus (Mar
delle Zabacche) and Borysthenes (Nieper or Dnester) which place, by reason of
the extreme cold, is not habitable. Yet certain bleake and mountainous places
inhabited, although in respect of the nature of the soil they are tilled and
manured with greater difficulty, yet having gotten good skillful and
industrious husbands, those also are tamed and much bettered, which heretofore
were badly used, and kept only by thieves and out-lawes. And indeed the Greeks
when they dwelt upon the rocks and mountains, dwelt well and conveniently, by
reason of their wise carriage in civil matters, arts, sciences and knowledge of
those things, which necessarily are required to the maintenance of man's life.
In like manner the Romans, having brought many savage and fierce Nations under
their servile yoke, seated, I mean, in places not very convenient to dwell in,
in respect of the nature of the country, either for that it was rough and
craggy, or wanted havens, or was too bleake and cold, or for other causes,
taught them to use merchandise before unknown, and have brought them from a
savage and brutish life, to live ciuilly and more humanely. But those parts
which are situate in an equal and temperat climate, there nature administreth
all things necessary for the maintenance of man and beast. Now when as those
Nations which do inhabit and dwell in fertile and rich countries, are
maintainers of peace and quietness; and those which are seated in barren and
unfruitful countries, are most hardy and stout: it comes to pass that both
are helpful one to another; while these do use their weapons for their
countries defense, those again do help and maintain them by the profits that
they raise out of the earth, by their arts and mysteries, as also by their
learning, wisdom and policy: even as in like manner also the damage is
mutual and either side feels a sensible hurt, when the one part does not
help the other: yet the estate of the soldier and warlike man is somewhat
better, if they be not one come with multitude. And the nature of Europe
serves very fitly for this purpose: for it is all diversely distinguished by
lofty mountains and lowly plains; so that every where the husbandmen and
soldiers; the politicians and the martial warriers do dwell together: yet so
as the greatest number are peaceable men: which kind of life they enjoy
especially by the means and labor of their captains, first of the Greeks,
then of the Macedonians; and lastly of the Romans. Therefore both in peace and
war it is sufficient of it self to maintain and defend it self: for it
has great plenty both of stout soldiers, painful husbandmen, and politic
statesmen. In this also it does excel, that it brings forth passing good
fruits, such I mean, as are necessary for the maintenance of man's life: with
all sorts of metal, for what use soever. Spices or sweet smelling things and
precious stones, are brought hither from foreign countries, WHICH THINGS
WHOSOEVER HAVE NOT, THEY LIVE NEVER A WHIT WORSE THAN THOSE DO THAT HAVE
THEM. Moreover this is especially worth the noting, that having wonderful
store of cattle, sheep and oxen; it breeds very few dangerous wild beasts.
Thus far the learned Strabo. Many other things thou may read of this
Europe, together with the nature and condition of the people of the same, in
that treatise which Hippocrates, the prince of Physicians, wrote of the care
and waters. This Europe also, and not any other place of the world beside, does
yield Succinum or Electrum, (Amber we call it, the Germans, Gleslum) yet it is
not found in Eridianas, a river falling into some Northren sea, as Herodotus
does fabulously report: or in Padus, a river of Italy (Po) as the poets
iestingly affirm: nor in the Electrides, certain fained islands in the
Hadriaticke sea, as some men of better credit, and more diligent searchers out
of the truth, as Pliny map of ancient Europe EVROPAM, SIVE CELTICAM VETEREM,
sic describere conabar Abrah. Ortelius.
CLARISS. D. NICOLAO ROCCOXIO I.V.L. PATRICIO ANTVERP. EIVSDEMQ. VRBIS
SENATORI, HANC ANTIQVAE EVROPAE, NOVAM TABVLAM, ABRAH. ORTELIVS DEVOTISSIME
DEDICAB.

CVM PRIVILEGIO DECEN NALI, IMP. REGIS ET BRABANTIAE CANCELLARIAE. 1595.

says, have seriously thought: nor in Spain, as Aeschylus believed: nor in
certain rocks at the further end of the gulf of Venice, (mare Hadriaticum)
as some more sober men have given out: nor in Liguria, as Sudinus, Metrodorus,
and Theophrastus would have men think: nor in Ethiopia, near Jupiter Ammons
temple, or in Scythia, as Philemon imagined: nor in Britain, as Socatus: nor
in the Glessariae, islands in the Germane occan, as Pliny has taught: nor in
Bannonia or Baltia, (a certain island) as Timaeus ha h broached: nor in a
certain river, as Dion Prusaeus has taught: but near unto the neckland or
peninsula Haestarum in the bay Pautzkerwicke and Frisch-hast, (Sinus
Clilipenus) in the Balticke or East sea, not far from Dantzk in Pomerell or
Sprese: where hitherto it has been taken (a thing wholly hidden from the
ancients) to the great gain and enriching of the Nations near inhabiting: and
not many other place of the world beside. In the same Europe are there many
goodly and stately cities, amongst the which the most famous, in all ages, are
Rome and Constantinople, (which afterward was called New-Rome) and now are
London, Venice and Paris. The rivers of greater note are Rhein, Isther or
Donaw, and the Thames: the woods more notable are Ardene in Gallia, 500. miles
of length, reaching from the river of Rhein unto Tourney in France; and
Hercynia in Germany, 40. days journey long, as Pomponius writes, and 9. days
journey broad, as Caesar in his Commentaries reports: a greater wood than
which, or more vast, there is no history makes mention of. Thus much of
Europe. But whereof it took the name and was so called, or who first gave it
that name, I think says Herodotius, there is no man under heaven does
certainly know or can upon any probalibity guess, except one should think it
so called of Europa Tyria. But wherefore it should so of her be named, I am
wholly ignorant, and I persuade my self and do verily believe, that no man in
the world does truly know. For that she, as we read in the fabulous stories of
the poets, was violently taken out of Phoenicia, a country of Asia, and carried
from thence into Cyprus, or as others write, into the island Creta (Candy) all
men do know well enough: where, as Eusebius his Chronicle does witness, being
taken of Asterius king of Creta to wife, she bare him Minoes, Rhadamanthus and
Sarpedon: from whence she went not into Europe, but into Asia, as Herodotus
has left recorded. But what is that to Europe this part of the world? One
might easilier believe it to have been so named of Europus, who, as Trogus
Pompeius witnesses, sometime in these parts possessed a large kingdom: which
also I do see to be avouched by Eustathius upon Lycophron, who makes this
Europus to be the son of one Himerus. Pausanias says that one Europa was
king of Sicyonia, a province of Peleponnesus in Greece: to him Eusebius in his
Chronicle does ascribe, who makes him equal to the Patriarch Abraham, and to
have lived above 3550. years since, about 1950. years before the birth of
Christ. There be some, as Festus writes, that think it so named of the
beautifulness and excellency of the country. These we are sure are fabulous or
uncertain: may we not therefore, as they have formed of Phrat, Euphrates, and
of Koft, Aegyptus (as we have showed before) think that of Riphath (the son
of Gomer, Iapheths son, to whom this part of the world was presently after
the confusion at Babel, assigned) they have likewise formed Europa? And surely
the name Riphath, does very manifestly show it self in Riphaeis montibus, the
Riphean hills: item in Riphaeo fluuio, now called the river Oby, in Ripe, a city
of Peloponnesus, in Rhiphataeis, the people of Paphlagonia, as Josephus
writes. Ptolemey in the second book of his Quadripartite, in my opinion much
more truly, writes that it was sometime called by a common name, CELTICA,
namely of a principal Nation that first did inhabit it. For there is almost
no province in all this part, in which in time past the CELTAE did not inhabit.
For in Spain toward the West, and beyond Hercules pillars are the Celtae as
Herodotus affirms. Item, about the river Baetis, as Strabo avouches, the
Ciltica Praesamarci, are in the province of Lucensis, and others otherwise
named Nerij, as Pliny says: Dion and Xiphilinus do show that the Cantabri and
Astares are the same with the Celtae: Pliny names the city Celtica, in the
province Hispalensis. Antonius has the Celti: item Celticum promontorium, is
the same that Cantabrum promontorium, which now is called Cabo de finis terre.
What Geographer or Historian is he amongst the ancients that has not made
mention of the Celtebri? In France were the Celtae and Celtogalatae: and from
thence are those in Britain. For that this island was first peopled from hence,
lying so near over against it, it is a common opinion and very probable. That
the Gauls Germans were vulgarly called Celtae, all Historiographers do jointly
agree: and indeed Dion does affirm, that the Celtae did dwell upon either side
of the river Rhein: the Celtae dwelt in Gallia Cisalpina (Lombardy) or Italy,
as Appianus writes. And again upon the Ionian sea, (that is, the Hadriaticke)
which also Strabo does auerre. Silius Italicus places them about the river
Eridianus (Po). In Epirus sometime dwelled the Celtae, as Antonius Liberalis
has given out: Stephanus places the same about the mount Haemus: Arrianus,
near the mouth of the river Donaw: as also Strabo in Moesia. The same author
writes, that the Celtae are intermedled with the Illyrij and Thraces. Who also
places them upon the river Borysthenes. Moreover Aristotle in his book De
mundo, ioineth the Celtae with the Scythians. Here hence the same Strabo and
Plutarch do make their Celtoscythae. In Plutarch, in the life of Camillus, I
read that the Galatae (which he makes to have come of the stock of the
Celtae) passing the Northren sea came unto the Riphaean mountains. Again out
of the forenamed Strabo I learn that the Nations dwelling Northward were in
his time called Caltae. The which also their ancient language, which is called
the Celticke or Germane tongue, does at this day sufficiently demonstrate:
which is the same (only differing a little in dialect) with that which is used
in the islands near adioining to these places, as in Island, Groenland,
Friesland and others in this ocean. Plutarke in Marius writes, that Celtica
does begin at the outmost sea (that is, the Atlanticke sea) and so stretches
it self out far into the North and from thence unto the fenne Maeoris, (Mare
delle Zabacche.) Pomponius Mela calls the Cassiterides (which in another
place we have proved to belong to great Britain, or to be of the number of
those which are named Brittanicae) Celticke Islands. What is this else, I pray
you, than plainly to affirm that THE CELTAE DO POSSESS ALL EVROPE? Which
indeed is that which Ephorus in Strabo did see so many years since: when as he
dividing all the world into 4. quarters, says that, That part which is toward
the East, is inhabited of the Indians: that which is in the South, of the
Aethiopians: the North parts, of the Scythians: and the West, of the Celtae.
The scholiast of Appollonius names the Hadriaticke sea, Mare Celticum, the
Celticke sea. And Lycophron describes Celtos, a certain poole, about the
mouth of the river Ister. Item he places Leuce an island of Mar maiore (Pontus
Euxinus) over against the mouth of the river Donaw. May we not therefore
properly, as they call those that inhabit Asia, Asians: and those which dwell
in Africa, Africanes: call these which dwell in Celtica, Celtickes? He that out
of all ancient stories, penned either in Latin or Greek does not know that
the Celtae are the Germans, let him have recourse to the 22. chapter of
Hadrianus Iunius his Batauia, and I doubt not but, having thoroughly waied those
many sound arguments, and sufficient testimonies of ancient grave writers,
shall rest satisfied and swear to our opinion. If not, let him listen to the
Dutchmen, and he shall hear them call one another in their familiar
communication, Kelt. The French also or Gauls I call a German nation. And I can
prove by good arguments, if it were a matter pertaining to this our purpose,
that the Germane or Dutch tongue is the ancient language of the Celtae, and to
be the same which hitherto they have used in all places and now is spoken,
except in some places where the power of the Romans so prevailed, that they
banished this, and seated theirs in the room. It is likely therefore that the
etymology and reason of the deriuation of the word Europe, which was unknown
unto the old writers, is to be sought and fetched from no other language else,
but from that which was most usual in this part of the world. For that the
inhabitants of any country should take the name of their native soil from
strangers, it is so absurd and hard to be believed, that there cannot any thing
more foolish or contrary to truth be invented or devised. Wherefore I think it
good, concerning this matter, here to lay down the judgment of Goropius
Becanus, our countryman, who thinks it to be so named, not of a woman, (which
it is probable, either never was, or never came here) but a latitudine
videndi, of the largeness of his prospect (as he speaks) namely, because (I
do cite his own words out of the 9. book of his Origines) it does not only
look toward Asia, on the East and South: Africa, on the South and West: but
also the New-found-world beyond the Hyperborei, on the West and North. Neither
shall any man persuade me, that Europe had the name from Greece or the Greek
language, seeing that it was first inhabited of the Cimbers ( Cimmerij,
descended from Gomer, the elder brother) before it was possessed of the Greeks
( Jones, come from Iawan a younger brother, and but the 4. son of Yapheth) we
make a dipthong by setting the 5. vowel of the Latins before the 2. which
neither the Latins nor Greeks do admit. Therefore if so be at any time they
would change the words in which this did light, for We, they put Eu; turning it
backward. Therefore our men do term it Verop, not Europ, whereby they
understand a worthy company of men: for Were (a mono-syllable pronounced like a
dipthong) signifies losty, great, excellent and that which is best in every
kind of thing: which notwithstanding some do write ur, without a dipthong, yet
with a long vowell. Therefore, as of Terues, they formed Tereus, so of Werop,
the Latins and Greeks have made Europe: so named of the excellency of the
Nation, which does far surpass all other men of the World. For Hop, as I
have showed before, signifies a company or multitude of men. More of this word
thou may see in his 8. book Thus far out of his works which are forth in
print: that which follows, is taken out of a book of his which he also has
set forth, yet not imprinted, but such as he used privately, and has many
additions in sundry places in the margin written with his own hand, which he
had prepared against the second edition. But I waighing, says he, and
comparing this name with that which I have read in holy Scripture, another
reason far more excellent, and better comes into my mind. We see that to
Yaphet was promised enlargement or a far spreading of his posterity, or as
some other interpret the word, joy and gladness: which then he truly had
enioied, when as Christ had redeemed us by his death and precious blood (which
blessing does agree to this part of the world, rather than to any other under
heaven beside: and therefore all other countries general do call Europe: THE
KINGDOM OF THE CHRISTIANS: and the Europeans, are called of the Turks and
Arabians, GIAVVR, that is, Christians.) E, therefore does signify a lawful
contract and marriage: VR, excellent: and HOP, hope: whereupon it comes to
pass, that Europe signifies The excellent hope of a lawful marriage. which is
proper to this portion of the world which Noah gave to Iapheth his son to
inhabit. For although that the posterity of Sem was by Abraham, for many ages
wedded to God, yet at length he put her away and divorced her from him. But the
wedlock whereby God, by Christ is wedded to Europe his Church, shall never be
dissolved: so that Europe may most properly be said to be Iaphets portion. But
of this word we will speak more in our Francica. Thus far Goropius. Which I
have very willingly communicated to the curtuous Reader, leaving it to the
censure of the learned to be judged. Yet I know that these things have been
very bitterly skoffed at already by a certain learned man, but one wholly
ignorant of this tongue, and therefore of less judgment in this argument.
There are some which do think that this Europe was in the holy Scripture
called IAPETIA. Thus far of Europe, to which before I do altogether leave, I
will ad out of Herodotus in his Polymnia, the words of Mardonius to Darius
spoken of this country. That it is a country most goodly and beautiful,
bearing all manner of excellent fruitful trees, and those in their kind the
best: and to be such that it were pity that any man but a king only should
possess.

The BRITISH ISLES, Now, THE EMPIRE OF Great Britain.
PLiny says that in the Atlanticke ocean, there be many islands named
BRITANNICAE INSVLAE, The British islands; but the two greater ALBION and
HIBERNIA, (Ireland) are properly so called. Of these, ALBION, in regard that it
is both the greatest, and as it were commander of the rest, is most properly
called BRITANNIA. And I might easily be drawn to believe, that all these
islands were recorded in the ancient monuments of the Greeks, before they were
once named or known to the Romans; and to have generally been called
CASSITERIDES, as who say, The Stannaries, and that properly CASSITERA, which
the Romans call Britannia. And although I am not ignorant, that Cassitera is
held of Dionysius and Stephanus to be Indica Insula, an Indian an island, or, an
island belonging or near adioining to India, yet I am not a whitte moved from
that my opinion. For I do verily think that this was delivered by them rather
of ignorance, than of sound knowledge grounded upon the skill of Geography: and
we know that this is also a common error in these our days, to call all
countries and islands unknown or far remote and distant from us, Indian isles;
by which name, not without a manifest ignorance of the truth, they call all
that whole continent of the New world, together with the circumiacent islands
first discovered and found out in the days of our grandfathers; and such also
as daily are descried, they call by that name. On my side is Pomponius Mela, a
man out of all doubt, of good judgment and credit, who calls them CELTICAS,
Celtickeiles; as if they were near neighbors to the Celtae. I do know that
these Cassiterides, are of others otherwise described; as of Diodorus Siculus a
little above Lusitania (Portugal) of Pliny, oueragainst Celtiberia, (Valentia)
near Artabrum promontorium (cabo de finis terrae) by Strabo and Ptolemey:
where now there are no islands at all; (and therefore not these) nor ever were
any: whereupon it is apparent that these islands were rather known to the
ancients by name, than true situation. Now all men do jointly commend these
islands for the great abundance of Tin and Lead, which they yearly did yield:
Strabo also makes these islands rich in Hides or Leather. Do not then these
three, whose plentiful store, has made ENGLAND at this day so famous all the
world over, manifestly prove that they all pointed and aimed at Britain? For
what country or province is there in the whole globe of the Earth, that is so
rich in Pelts and Leather: or has such plenty of fine wool, as ENGLAND has?
The same Strabo affirms, that in the Cassiterides they dig not very deep
for metals. Pliny says that they are found in the very sourd of the earth.
That these do speak both of the same thing, who does not see? By these I
gather, That the Phoenicians in times past, and Spaniards, did for traffic
sail through the straights of Gibraltar, unto this island; and for Tin, Lead
and Pelts bring in for exchange Brazen vessels and Salt: like as afterward the
Romans, when Caesar had subdued it, used to do the next way over land by
France. Therefore it was then first known to the Romans, by the name of
Britannia, which before that, certain ages passed, was very famous amongst the
Phoenicians by the name of Cassitera. Appianus a reverend author, who lived
about the time of Hadrian the Emperor, writes that the Spaniards did forbear
to travel upon the West and North ocean, but when they were forced into
Britain, by the violence of the tide. That here he names Britain,
Cassitera, I make no question: but that name was then worn out of use, and
this, as I think it very likely, was grown in request and better known. Let
the learned see, and at their better leisure consider, whether that Sextus
Rufus Auienus does not describe these islands under the name of OESTRYMNIDVM?
Surely I am of that opinion he does. For he says that these Oestrymniades, are
very rich of lead and tin: and that the country people do make ships of
Leather, in which they sail upon the maine sea. What is this else then that
which Pliny reports, That the Britanes do go to sea in ships made of
wickers and covered over with raw hides? and does not Caesar in his first book
de Bello civilly, affirm that the Britans did use to make the keele and ribs
of their ships of some light wood, the other part being radled with osiers or
rods was covered with leather? This island the Romans, as Dion and Xiphiline
do testify, divided into the HIGHER, containing all that part which is toward
the South: and the LOVVER, toward the North. In the Almagest of Ptolemey, this
is called MINOR, The Lesser: and that MAYOR, The Greater: and that about the
time of Seuerus Emperor of Rome. But in the reign of Valentinian the
Emperor, I find in Sextus Rufus, that it was distinguished by these names,
BRITANNIA PRIMA, The First, BRITANNIA SECVNDA, The Second, BRITANNIA MAXIMA,
The Greater, CAESARIENSIS and FLAVIA. The book of Remembrances (Notiar) and
Ammianus do add VALENTIA; which others, as Orosius, Claudian and Hegesippus
call SCOTIA, Scotland. Xiphilinus in Seuerus refers the people generally to
these two nations, MAEATAI and CALEDONII: for the names of the rest may, as he
says, welnigh be reduced to these two. (Yet this must needs be false except
he mean it particularly of Valentia, the later part.) He that desires to know
the several Nations of this island as then it was inhabited, let him have
recourse to Ptolemeys Geography, and this our Map, into which we have packed
those things which we have gathered here and there dispersed in Caesar's
Commentaries, Tacitus, Pausanias and Ammianus; and he shall be satisfied to the
full. But wilt not thou be deceived? take the learned M. Camden for thy guide:
and then I will warrant thy safe conduct. Thus far of the names of these
islands: now let us speak in like manner of the isles themselves, and first of
the greatest of them which we said was called Britannia.

Aristotle unto Alexander the Great writes, That this i will for greatness does
exceed the rest. Tacitus testifies, That it is the greatest of all islands that
the Romans ever had notice of. It is so great, as Appian writes, that it
might seem to be ANOTHER CONTINENT. And Hegesippus calls it ANOTHER WORLD.
Caesar, Diodorus, Strabo and Mela do make it to be Three cornered: and so it
may as well as Sicilia be called TRINACRIA. Tacitus out of Liuy and Fabius
Rusticus do liken it to a Swingling stock, or the warlike weapon Bipennis, a
twall, or battle-axe. Iornandes says, It is fashioned like a Conus, that is,
to a Geometrical body, which like a taper, is broad at the bottom and sharp
at the top. Nubiensis the Arabian, who wrote about five or six hundred years
since, likeneth it to the head and neck of Alnaama, an ostrich. This Island was
first descried and made known to the Roman Empire in the time of Julius
Caesar the tyrant, who first of all men (I understand it of the Romans) entered
it with a thousand sail of ships, as Athenaeus in his sixth book has left
recorded. For before that, as Dion in his 39. book testifies, whether there
were such an island or not, it was uncertain. The later writers made a doubt
whether it were a part of the maine land, or an i will apart by it self: and of
this argument they have written much on both sides, who indeed knew nothing for
certain of it (themselves having never seen it, or learned by the inhabitants
what it was) but only by guess had written of it coniecturally, as every one
had more leisure or learning. In process of time, first when Agricola was
vice-praetor (which I understand by Tacitus, was under Vespasian) then again,
in our days, says Dion, under Seuerus, it was manifestly found to be but an
island, and not of the Continent. Before the coming of these men, the island had
never borne the yoke of any foreign Prince, as Diodorus Siculus teaches. It was
governed by many princes: the common people for the most part bore the sway and
had a kind of sovereignty, as we learn out of Caesar, Strabo, Xiphiline, and
Tacitus: who also moreover does add, that by their princes they are drawn to
many factions and taking of contrary parts: and that they never have any common
counsel for the state of the whole commonwealth: so that while they fight
severally, they are severally conquered. The temperature of the air, says
Caesar, is more mild than in France, the frosts and cold are not so eger.
Tacitus affirms, That here is never any bitter cold weather. Strabo writes,
that the air is rather subject to clouds than snow. Herodian teaches, that
the air is thick and foggie: and he thinks the reason, to be the heat and
vapors which do ascend up out of the fennes and marshes. In Britain, (says
Minutius Felix, the divine) the heat of the Sun is not great, but it is
comforted and hartened by a warm and hot stream of the sea, which inuironeth
it on every side. The same forenamed Strabo says, that the most part of the
island is plain and champion, beset with woods and groves: to have also some
earthy hills, but very craggie, and dry without water, as Xiphiline writes:
moreover some plains, desert and full of fennes and bogges. This last Herodian
avouches to be true, who says that by reason of the frequent ouerflowing of
the sea, it is fenny and moorish in diverse places. Notwithstanding the
Panegyricus makes it a very fertile and fruitful soil for Corn; yet it is
better for grass than corn, and is more kind to beast than man, as Mela
affirms: and therefore here is infinite store of cattle, as Caesar has
left recorded. Yet it bears Wheat and Rye, as Strabo testifies, and that by
the means of their great store of marle: for this, Pliny says, does assure
the Britans of greater fertility: which in the time of the Emperor Julian, was
so luxurious and superabundant, that as Marcelline in his eighteenth book
justifies, they have sent over corn and provision into France and Germany.
The same history Zozimus does approve. It yields all manner of commodities
other things as France does, (excepting the beech and fur tree) yea Hares,
Hens and Geese, as the forenamed Caesar does testify. Xiphiline out of Dion
does highly coommend it for wonderful store of all sorts of Fish: Solinus as
much for the great variety and plenty of Metals. All the world did ever admire
it for the infinite abundance of Tin and Lead. Especially up higher within
the country, as Caesar would have it. Whose opinion Diodorus Siculus in a manner
does gainesay: who affirms that metals are plentifully found in Cornwall,
near the promontory which Ptolemey called, Antiuestaeum and Bolerium: the same
Diodorus, Belerium: Nubiensis Tarfi'lgarbey mina'lgiezira; The outmost bound of
the island toward the West: or as our seamen call it, The lands end, and The
cape of Cornwall. Beside these metals, the same author says, that it
yields also Iron, but not in any great quantity, and that in like manner
toward the sea coast. Item, Pliny does testify, that it affoordeth Lead in
great abundance even in the upper sourd of the earth. It has also some veins
of Gold and Silver, if we will believe Tacitus and Strabo, two authors of good
credit. Item, the prophecies of Sibylla do avouch it to be rich in Gold:
peradventure, says Ortelius, in respect of that plenty that is brought in
thither: for Cicero unto Trebatius writes, that the i will of it self does not
yield one dram of Gold or silver: and that nothing is to be carried from
thence, nor any manner of booty to be expected, more than that which may arise
of slaves. But Cicero here spoke like a lawyer, not like a Philosopher, and
lover of the truth. For our histories do approve that there have been mines, of
both those metals informer ages, found both in England, Wales and Scotland:
and the like no doubt we now might find, if we would seek for them with the
like diligence. Pliny and Mela do write that here are many and great rivers
which do afford both pearl and precious stones. These pearls are the best in
value and estimation, next to those of India, in the judgment of Aelianus: the
hope and gain of these. Pliny says, first moved Caesar to assault this island.
Heliodorus does highly commend the Amethyst of England. I read in Solinus that
here are hot baths ( fontes calidi, Bathe, I understand) very curiously carved
and trimmed for the use of man: these map of the ancient British Isles
BRITANNICARVM INSVLARVM TYPVS.
Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. Cum privileg. decen. 1595.

NATALIBVS INGENIO ET DOCTRINA ILLVSTRI REVERENDOQVE DOMINO D. GEORGIO AB
AUSTRIA, PRAEPOSITO HARLEBECENSI, AC SERENISS. PRINCIPI CARDINALI ARCHIDVCI A
CVBICVLIS, Abrah. Ortelius R. M. Geog. L. M. dedicab.

fountain, he says, are consecrated to Minerua, she is president of them.
Heliodorus ascribes also the Amethyst, a precious stone, to this country.
Here also is the Agath (gagares) the best in his kind, as Solinus and the old
interpreter of Dionysius do jointly testify. Pliny, many years since, it
seems had heard of our English Outers: which one commended who thus wrote of
them; -- Rutupinoque edita fundo, Ostrea callebat primo deprehendere morsu. The
Poet Gratius does highly commend the English Dogs, which are transported from
hence, as Strabo writes, for the excellent quality which naturally they have
for their sure hunting: which also Nemesianus was not ignorant of, when he thus
wrote of them, -- Diuisa Britannia mittit Veloces, nostrique Orbis venatibus
aptos. Britain that Other World, has always borne the name, For swiftest
hounds, and best for hunters game. Symmachus writes unto Flauianus his
brother, that in time past the Romans did greatly admire the English dogs:
and Strabo affirms that the Gauls did use their help in the wars. There is
a kind of these which are less than the common sort, which I find described in
Oppianus his book of hunting: Agassaeus, he calls it, a beagle, or
gase-hound: See M. Camdens Britannia. Whether in former times it has had wine
or not (for Tacitus flatly denies that it will bear vines or olive trees) I
dare not affirm: yet I understand by Vopiscus, that Aurelianus the Emperor
did suffer the Britans to plant vines, and to make wine. Item, the Panegyricus,
an oration made to Constantine the Great, does atttribute to this i will so great
a fertility of corn and all sorts of grain, that it has sufficient both
bread corn and drink corn to maintain it self. Pliny writes that Sotacus
verily believed that Amber (Electrum) here dropped out of certain trees,
which they therefore called Electrides, amber trees, a feigned story invented
by the old writers: as also this perhaps which Clemens in the sixth book of
his Stromaton, writes from the relation of Heruetus: they which write
histories, do report that in Britannia (Britannice, the Greek copy has) there
is a certain cave underneath an hill, in whose roppe is a chincke or rift:
when the wind drives into the cave, and beats against the sides of is, there
is heard a sound, as it were of cymbals making a melodious harmony. Like as
that of Solinus also is, who writes, that there is an altar (ara) in a
by-place, or odd corner in Caledonia, a part of Scotland, which by the
inscription written in Greek letters, does manifestly show that Ulysses had
landed there to perform some vow that he had made. And whether ever this i will
were joined to the maine continent or not, as Seruius is persuaded I dare not
affirm. Now it remains that we in like manner do speak something of the
people of the same.

Caesar and Diodorus Siculus do give out that it is wonderful populous: But
from whence the people and first inhabitants came, whether they were homeborne
(indigenae) or come from other countries, it is not known as Tacitus has
written. The inner parts, higher within the land, are inhabited of those which
they say, were borne and bred there: the sea coasts are possessed of those
which came thither from Belgium (the Low countries) all of them almost are
called by the names of those cities and provinces from whence they came, and
where they were bred, as Caesar reports. This his opinion Ptolemey does
confirm, who in this i will also does name and describe the Belgae and
Attrebates. Tacitus avouches that in that the Caledonij, (a people in
Scotland) are red haired and big limmed, it is a manifest argument that they
are come of the stock of the Germans. Their well colored complections,
curled heads, and country opposite to the coast of Spain, do prove that the
ancient Iberi, in former times had crossed the sea and seated themselves here.
That the Galli or Gauls did enter upon those coasts near to their country, it
is very probable by their ceremonies, superstitious opinions, and similitude of
languages. Zozimus in his first book writes that the Emperor Probus, sent
into this island all the Burgundians and Vandals that he could suppress and
take alive, that here they might dwell and seat themselves. The Saxons and
other nations which entered this land, I do of purpose omit: because these were
of later times and but the other day: we only determined to touch those things
that were of greater antiquity. Generally the inhabitants of this i will, in those
days, were all uncivil and rude: and as they were more farther remote from
the maine continent, so they had less knowledge of foreign wealth and were
less desirous of the same. That the Britans were more valiant and hardy than
the Gauls, we learn out of Tacitus: that they were more taller of stature than
they, Strabo does affirm: That they used strangers discurteously, Horace
reports: Claudianus the poet names this i will saeua Britannia, tyrannous
Britain. And the same author in his Panegyricus, for the Consulship of
Honorius, calls the people saeuos Britannos, cruel Britans. Quid in his
second book of Love, names them virides Britannos, the green Britans: in the
fifteenth book of his Metamorphosis, Aequoreos Britannos, the Britans of the
sea. They wear their hair long, all their body in what part soever being
shaven, beside their head and upper lip. The same author says that for
nature and quality they are for the most part all alike, yet some are more
plain and simply minded, others more rude and barbarous: so that although they
have great store of milk, yet they know not how to make cheese: others are
wholly ignorant of sowing, planting, grafting and of such other points of
husbandry. In their carriage and conversation they are, as Diodorus Siculus
speaks of them, plain, simple and upright, far remote from the wily
subtillies and crafty devices of our men which live more near the Court. They
fare basely and feed upon gross meats, and are wholly estranged from wealth
and gorgeous life and maintetenance: and as Mela says of them, they are only
rich in cattle, and great lands and compass of ground. For they do not hold
it lawful to eat either hare, hen or goose: notwithstanding they keep them,
as Caesar writes, for game and pastime. Yet they have a kind of geese here,
which they call chenerotes, (bernacles) which they esteem for great dainties,
so that in England they have not a daintier dish, as Pliny testifies. They
feed upon milk and flesh meat, as the same author says. They lay their corn
up in their barnes in the ear of sheaffe vnthrashed: from whence they fetch
and thrash as much as shall serve them from day to day. Of their temperate and
sparing diet, together with their patience in adversity and affliction, Dion in
the life of Nero will teach thee. That they did make their drink, which they
called Curmi, (or as now they pronounce it Courow, ale) of barley, Dioscorides,
that famous physician, or industrious and painful student and searcher out of
the true nature of medicinal simples, so many hundred years, has left
recorded. Zonaras writes that they did use to make a kind of meat, of which if
any man should take but the quantity of a bean, he should neither be an
hungered or a thirst for a great time. Believe him that list. Of the same
Britains, Herodian thus writes: they wear no kind of garment: only about
their necks they claspe a piece of iron, thinking that to be as great a
jewel and sign of wealth, as other barbarous nations do by gold. Caesar says
that they be clad in skins and leather. They used to have ten or twelve wives
common amongst a certain company of them: especially brothers with brothers
and fathers with their sons were thus copartners: but if any of them were
gotten with child, whosoever got it, it was accounted to be his who first
married her when she was a maid. Thus Caesar in his time wrote of them. That
many of them had but one wife only, Eusebius in his seventh book de Praepar.
euangel. has given us to understand: which also Clemens Alexandrinus in his 9
book Recognitionum, does auerre. Plutarch says that they do ordinarily live
till they be an hundred and twenty years old. They use brazen money or iron
rings made of a certain weight and poise, in steed of gold or silver coins.
Pliny says that they used to wear rings upon their middle finger. In Caesar I
read, that their houses did stand thick and close together: but as Strabo
writes, they were for the most part made of reeds, or timber. They dwell in
woods like as we do in cities. For they call that a town, when they have with
a bank or ditch enclosed or fortified a combersome wood, whither they may
flock and resort, to avoid the invasion and assault of their enemies: as
Caesar in his commentaries does give us to understand: and there, as Strabo
says they make cabbines or cottages for themselves, and stables for cattle,
such as may serve them for that present necessity. Herodian calls them a very
warlike and bloody nation. They fight not only on horseback and foot, but
also with coches and wagons, armed after the manner of the Gauls; Couinos they
call them, whose axeltrees or linces were armed with hooks made somewhat like
to the Welsh bills now adays used, as Pomponius Mela affirms; they use
likewise in their wars a great multitude of waines, as Caesar, Strabo and
Diodorus do tell us. They fight with huge great swords, as Tacitus signifies:
these swords, Herodian says, hang close down by their bare skin: only
sheathed in a straight piece of leather. Pomponius Mela writes that they used
to adorn the pommels of their swords with the teeth of certain sea fish. They
know not what a brigandine, jack or head-peece mean: these pieces of armor
they never use, accounting them to be but a trouble and hinderance to them when
they are to pass over any bogges or fennes. For they use to swim, run
through or to wade up to the twist over those fennes and marshes, and many
times being bare-legged they spare neither thick nor thin: yet afterward we
learn out of Dion by the oration of Bunduica, their queen, that they were wont
to arm themselves, for defense with helmets, habergions and greaus: when they
gave the onset upon their enemies the same author teaches us, they used to
make a great noise and to sing terrible and threatening songs. They make war
many times upon small occasions and for wantonness: and very often they
invade and annoy one another of set purpose; especially for a desire of
further command and covetousness of enlarging their possessions. Tacitus
moreover affirms, that they also go in the field under the leading and
conduct of women: for a manifest proof of which he brings in (in the
foureteenth book of his Annals) Boudicea with her daughters. Dion affirms
the same: but he calls her Bunduica: item Tacitus. in the life of Julius
Agricola, writes her name Voadica. Corpora inficiunt vltro; they purposedly
stain and paint their bodies: (there is a very learned man who thinks that
for vltro, here should be read nitro: with saltpeter) but wherefore or to what
end they did it, that is uncertain: Mela and Iornandes do think they did it
for ornament and to set out themselves: or that they might seem more terrible
unto their enemies in time of sight, as Caesar says: who ouermore adds that
they thus paint their bodies with wood ( Luteum, he calls it) which will make
a blew or skie-colour. Others here for Luteum, do read Glastum: on whose side
Pliny seems to speak, but that he affirms this only of the women: where he
writes that the Britans wives and women did use to besmere all their body over
with glastum, (woad, an herb like plantaine) and to go stark naked to some
certain solemnities, when they were to perform some rites and ceremonies: in
this imitating the Blackamoores. (But why I should not retain the ancient
reading, which in Caesar was glasto: for that which now they would have luteo;
I see no reason: seeing that out of a fr gment of a description of Britain,
done by my good friend M. Humfrey Lhoyd, I understand, that amongst the West
Britans in the ancient British tongue, which they still speak even to this
very day, by the word glass, they understand the blew or skie-colour, as also by
the same they signify the herb Isatis, th t is, woad) which is very like the
plantaine.) And that the men also did not only stain their bodies with some
kind of color, but also to mark them with diverse kinds of pictures, and
counterfeits of sundry sorts of living creatures, and to go naked, least they
should hide this their painting, I read in Herodian. Listen, thou shall hear
Solinus speak the same words: The country is partly possessed by a barbarous
and wild people, which even from their childhood, have by certain cutters, men
skillful that way, diverse images and pictures of living creatures, drawn and
raised upon their skin, and so imprinted in their flesh, that as they grow
unto man's estate these pictures together with the painters stains, do wax
bigger and bigger: neither does the wild people endure any thing more patiently
and willingly, than that their limbs by means of those deep cuts and slashes,
may so deeply drink in these colors, that they may stick long by them.
Amongst the Goddesses, as I learn by Dion, they worshipped Andates; (for so
they call Victoriam, victory) who had a temple and sacred wood, where they used
to do sacrifice, and perform their religious service and worship to her.
Beside her they had another which was called Adraste: whether this were the
same with Adrastia (which some did take to be Nemesis, the Goddess of revenge)
which the ancient Grecians and Romans did worship, I leave to others to
determine. Caesar says, that in former times the Druides, a kind of
superstitious priests, dwelt also amongst this people: who affirms, that
their discipline and religion was first here invented, and from hence carried
beyond sea into France. That they continued until the time of Vespasian the
Emperor of Rome, in Mona or Anglesey, it is apparent out of the 14 book of
Cornelius Tacitus his Annals. From them, doubtless, this nation had their
knowledge of the state and immortality of the soul after this life: for this
was the opinion of those Druides, as Caesar and others have written of them.
But of the Druides, we will, God willing, speak more in our Old France, or
Gallia as it stood in Caesar's time. That the Britans did so greatly esteem and
wonderfully extol the art Magic, and perform it with such strange
ceremonies, that it is to be thought that the Persians had it from hence, I
have Pliny for my patron, who mightily persuades me. The forenamed Bunduica,
also does seem to justify the same: who, as soon as she had ended her
oration unto her army, cast an hare out of her lap, by that means to guess
what the issue of that journey would be: which after that she was observed to
go on forward, all the company jointly gave a ioifull shout and acclamation.
To sacrifice and offer the blood of their captives upon their altars, and to
seek to know the will and pleasure of their Gods by the entrails of men, as
the Romans did by the bowels of beasts, these people held it for a very lawful
thing. Thus far Tacitus: and thus much of Albion: now it remains that we in
like manner say somewhat of Ireland.

HIBERNIA, Or IRELAND.
Upon the West of Britain, in the vast ocean (the Latins call it Oceanus
Virginius, that is, as the Welsh call it Norweridh, or Farigi, as the Irish
pronounce the word) lies that goodly island which all ancient writers generally
have called by one and the same name, although every one has not written it
alike, (an ordinary and usual thing in proper names translated into strange
countries) For Ptolemy (and vulgarly all Geographers which follow him) calls
it HIBERNIA: Orpheus the most ancient Poet of the Greeks, Aristotle the Prince
of Philosophers and Claudian, IERNA; Iuuenall and Mela, IVVERNA: Diodorus
Siculus, IRIS: Eustathius in his Commentaries upon Dionysius Afer, WERNIA
((...)) and BERNIA: the Welch-men or ancient Britans, YVERDON: the Irish
themselves (from whence all the rest were fetched) ERIN: whereof also the
Saxons, by adding the word Land, signifying a country or province (as their
manner is) have framed IRELAND; by which name it is not only known to the
English, but generally, at this day, it is so called of all Nations whatsoever.
Thus far the learned Clarencieux: who also thinks it so to have been named
by them, of their Irish word Hiere; which signifies the West, or Western coast
or country. Like as the Celtae, (whose language he proves to be the same with
this) for the same reason and of the same word, named Spain, Iberia: which
afterward the Greeks in their language interpreted Hesperia. In Festus
Auienus, who wrote a book entitled Orae maritimae, the sea coast; it is named
INSVLA SACRA, The Holy Island; who moreover adds that it is inhabited of the
Hierni, that is, of the Irish-men. Isacius in his Commentaries upon Lycophron,
calls it WEST BRITAIN: Plutarch in his book which he wrote Of the face in
the sphere of the Moon, calls it OGVGIA: but why, we know not: yet read him,
if you think it worth the while: you shall hear many an old wives tale. The
latter writers, as S. Isidore, and the reverend Beda, our countriman, call it
SCOTIA, of the Scotts which seated themselves in the West part of this i will,
about the year of our Lord 310. from whence within a very few years after,
being called in by the Picts, they came into Brittane: and indeed Paulus
Orosius, Beda and Egeinhardus, authors of good credit, wrote that it was
inhabited of the Scots. It is in length from South to North 400. miles; in
breadth scarce 200. The soil and temperature of the air, as Tacitus
affirms, is not much unlike that of England. It breeds no snake or serpent,
nor any venomous creature: foul and birds here are not very plentiful, and
as for bees, no man ever saw one in the whole country: yea if so be that any
man shall strew dust, gravel or small stones brought from hence, amongst the
hiues, the swarms will presently forsake their combs, as Solinus writes.
(Yet we know by experience that this is all false: for such is the infinite
number of bees in this country, that they are not only to be found here in
hiues and bee-gardens, but also abroad in the fields in hollow trees and holes
of the ground.) The temperature of the air (says Pomponius Mela) is very
unkind and unfit for the ripening of corn and grain: but the soil is so good
for grass, not only great and rank, but also sweet and wholesome, that their
herds and cattle do fill themselves in so short a time, that if they be not
driven out of the pasture, they will feed while they burst. Solinus affirms
the same, but in fewer words. Furthermore he calls it an inhumane and
uncivil country, by reason of the rude and harsh manners of the inhabitants.
And Pomponius Mela terms the people a disordered and unmannerly nation, less
acquainted with any sort of virtue then any other people whatsoever: yet they
may in some respect be said to be lovers of virtue: in regard that they are
very religious and devout. Strabo says, that they are more rusticall and
uncivil then the Britans: Solinus calls it a merciless and warlike nation:
Strabo writes, that they are great eaters: Diodorus Siculus says, they did
use to eat man's flesh: and Solinus he adds, that those which are conquerers
in war, use first to drink the blood of those which are slain, and then
with the same to besmere their face. Yea they do account it, as Strabo writes,
for a commendable thing to eat the bodies of their parents when they be dead:
and to lie men and women with one another openly, not regarding who stand and
look on: and that not only with other women, but also even with their mothers,
and own sisters: accounting this for an indifferent thing, neither good nor
bad, as Julius Solinus Polyhistor writes. Moreover he affirms, that if a
great bellied woman shall be brought to bed of a son, she causes the first
meat which he eats to be laid upon his fathers sword, and so upon the point
of the sword she gently puts it into the infants mouth: and with certain
heathenish vows and prayers, she wishes that he may never die but in the
wars or upon his enemies sword. They which would be more finer and gallant
than others, do set out the handles and pommels of their swords with the teeth
of certain seafish: for they are as white as any iuory: and the chief: delight
of the men is in the bravery of their weapons. Eusebius in his Chronicle says,
that in this Island Galba caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor: but it is a
fault of the writer, who for Hiberia, wrote Hibernia: for that this was done in
Spain. Thus far of these two greater Islands, which were properly called
Britannicae: now let us go on with those which are lesser, and do lie about the
coast of these.

Of the ORKNEY ISLES, WEST ISLES, MAN, etc.
THe ORKNEY ISLES (Orcades) lying upon the North of Scotland are, as Ptolemey
and Pomponius Mela do account them, in number 30. although Pliny and Martianus
makes them to be two: Iornandes 33. S. Isidore very falsely 83. and Solinus as
far short, reckons but 3 only: (peradventure for tres, three: we should
read triginta, thirty) M. Camden thinks them to have been so named of their
situation over against Cath-nesse, that is, the promontory, foreland or cape of
the Cathini, (not Careni, as the vulgar copies of Ptolemey have) a nation that
possessed this part of Britain, in the time of the Romans: for thus he found
it written and interpreted in an ancient manuscript, Argath; against Cath; (the
copy has supra Getas, above the Goths, falsely: for they had not, till many
years after this, seated themselves in any part of this i will: but peradventure
by the Getae, he understood Cath, or the Cathini of Ptolemey) Of these, as many
men report, diverse are desert and unmanured, others are habitable and fertile.
In Solinus time they were not inhabited, no man dwelt in them: for they had no
wood, nor grass, but were all ouergrowen with rushes, segges and such like:
the rest, he says, are nothing but bare rocks and heaps of sand: yet now they
are reasonably populous, and do yearly yield great store of Barley, mary they
are wholly void of wood, and altogether unprofitable for Wheat. They lie all
close together not far one from another, as Pliny and Solinus jointly
affirm. The same Solinus, as some learned men think, names POMONA for one of
the Orkeny isles, and calls it Pomona diutina, Long-daied Pomona; by reason of
the great length of the day in this climat. In regard that it is far greater
than any of the rest, it is now vulgarly called MAIN-LAND. This is the
principal and chief of them all, and has in it, in the town Kirkwale, a
Bishops sea; and two castles for defense of the same. It yields yearly some
quantity of Tin and Lead. Amongst these also Ptolemey names OCETIS and
DVMNA, that we take to be now called Hethy, this Hey. (But that island which
Pliny names Dumna, seems to be that which at this day they call Fair i will,
having but one town and that called Dumo) Eutropis and Orosius have delivered,
that Augustus the Emperor first annexed these islands unto the Empire: yet
Tacitus says, that they were first descried and subdued by Julius Agricola.

Beyond the Orkney isles, above Britain, five days sail Northward (whereabout
the old expositour of Horace places the Fortunate Isles) does lie, as Solinus
writes, the island THVLE, so famous and much spoken of in all ancient writers:
but where it should now be, or what, the world has long doubted. Some take it
to be Island, but that cannot be, for many weighty reasons, as diverse learned
men have proved. Synesius doubleth whether there were any such place or not:
and our Gyraldus plainly says, that if ever it were, yet now it is no where in
the world to be found. Some do think it to be Shetland, (or as some call it
Hetland) a greatter Island beset with many other smaller, subject to the crown
of Scotland: and this their opinion they confirm by many arguments. First
Gaspar Peucerus, an author of good credit, affirms that the Seamen do
commonly call this island, Thylensell: Secondarily, they are situate midway
between Norway and Scotland, where Saxo Grammaticus places Thule: Thirdly,
these islands are directly opposite to Bergen (Bergae, not Belgae, as it is
falsely and corruptly written: and indeed heereabout Pliny his Bergos, was
seated) and here Mela says Thule did stand: Again, Solinus writes that from
Cath-nesse to Thule, it is but two days sail: (observe the proportion of
distances: from the Orkney to the West isles he makes it 7. days sail: from
Orkney to Thule, 5: and from Cath-nesse thither, but 2.) Lastly, which were
sufficient of it self alone, Ptolemey places Thule under the 63. degree of
latitude, which is precisely the elevation of the North pole at Shetland. Thus
far of Thule or Shetland, which was not indeed ordinarily, of the ancients,
accounted amongst the British, yet we now know it to be one of that number, and
subject to the crown of Britain. The WESTERN ISLES, (called of Ptolemey,
Solinus, Stephanus and Pliny, Ebudae, Aebudae or Hebudes: of the latter
writers, Hebrides: of Ethicus, Beteoricae) are, as Solinus writes, 7 days
sail from the Orchades. Pliny says there be in number 30. yet vulgarly they
are esteemed to be 44. and a Scottish gentleman, who traveled them al over, as
he affirms, reckons up by their several names, as far as I remember, above
200. Solinus, Stephanus and Ptolemey do name but these 5. neither do they
mention any more. RICINA or Ricnea, as Pliny writes it, Antonius names
Raduna, now they call it Racline: EPIDIVM, now Ila, a large island, and a
fertile champion soil: MALEOS, now Mula, as also in Plinies time, as it
seems: EAST EBVDA, now Sky, lying close to the coast of Scotland: WEST
EBVDA, (Jews) the greatest of them al, but full of stones, craggie steep
mountains, and little inhabited. Moreover in Iona, which Beda names Hy, lying
between Ila and the maine land, was a monastery erected by S Columba, where
diverse of the kings of Scotland have been buried: beside the bishops sea, in
the village Sodore, in whose diocesses all the rest were, and therefore were of
it called Insulae Sodorenses. All the other, beside Hirth, are of small
account, as being nothing but rocks, stones, and craggie knols, in which you
shall scarce all the year long find a green turffe. The people, in manners,
behavior, apparel and language, do much resemble the Irish: as those in the
Orkney do the Goths and Norweyans. More of these see in Solinus and M. Camdens
Britannia, to whom we are beholding for this.

The I WILL of MAN, (which Pliny calls Monabia; Orosius and Bid, Menauia;
Gildas, Eubonia; the Welsh, Menaw; they themselves, Maning; Caesar, Mona: and
Ptolemey, Monoeda; that is, as who say, Mon-eitha, Mon the father; for a
distinction from Anglesey, which is also called Mon) is midway between England
and Ireland, as Caesar in his fifth book of the wars of France, and Gyraldus
Cambrensis report: yet the people are more like in language and manners unto the
Irish men. It is in length from South to North, about 30. miles, in breadth in
some places it is 15. and in other places, where it is narrowest, not above 7
or 8 miles over. In Bedaes time it had but 300. families or households, now it
contains 17. parishes very populous and well inhabited. It bears great
plenty of Hemp and Flax. The soil is reasonably fertile, either for Corn or
Grass: and therefore it yearly yields both great plenty of Barley, Wheat and
Rye, but especially of Oats, whereof they for the most part, make their bread,
and maintains great store of cattle, and many flocks of sheep, but that
as well the one as the other are less than they be in England. They burn
Seacole, instead of wood, of which they have none or very little. Upon the
South coast lies a small i will, which they call The calfe of Man, where there is
such wonderful plenty of sea fowls, which they call Puffins, and of those
geese, which we call Bernacles, Clakes or Soland geese, as none which have not
seen them, will easily believe. Thus far of Mona, described by Caesar; the
other Mona, which Tacitus and Dion do speak of, now follows.

That which we now call ANGLESEY that is, The English i will, Tacitus and Dion, as
I said, called Mona: the Welchmen, Mon, Tir-mon, and Inis Dowyl, that is, The
dark i will; the Saxons, Monege: a very goodly and fruitful island, the ancient
seat of the Druides, was brought in subjection under the Roman Empire, by
Paullinus Suetonius and Julius Agricola, about 46. years after the birth of
Christ. It is very near the coast of Britain, as Dion says: yea so near
that from the main, by swimming over the flattes and shallow places, Julius
Agricola, as Tacitus witnesses, conveyed in thither both horsemen and footmen,
to suppress certain rebels that held it against the Romans. But of this island
there is in this our Theater, a whole discourse written by Humfrey Lloyd, a
learned gentleman, and painful student in the British stories. Upon the coast
of Wales also lies BERDSEY, that is, The birds I Will, called of the Britans
Enhly: of Ptolemey, Edry; of Pliny, Andros or Adros: a plain and champion
country toward the West, but in the East very hilly and mountainous. Then
GRESHOLME, and STOCHOLME excellent pastorage, passing pleasant by reason of the
sweet smell of the wild Time which here grows every where in great
abundance. Next to these is SCALMEY, as fertile as any, called of Pliny,
Silimnus: of Ptolemey, Limi: and in the catalogue of Martyrs, Lemeneia Insula.
In the mouth of Seuern, lie the Holmes, or as the Welchmen call them, the
Echni, FLATHOLME and STEEPHOLME (Reoric, in Welsh) Item, BARREY, SILEY, CALDEY
and LONDEY, small Islands, but very fertile. Thirty or forty miles off West from
the Cape of Cornwall, which the seamen commonly call, The lands end, lie the
SORLINGS or the SYLLY; called by Sulpitius Seuerus, Sillinae; of Antonine,
Sigdeles: of Solinus, Silurae, or Silurum Insulae: the Grecians, of their
situation, named them Hesperides, the West isles: and of their rich commodity
of Tin (Cassiteros) which they yield, Cassiterides, the Stanneries: but why
Festus Auianus should name them Ostrimnides, I know not. They are in all 145.
beside craggie rocks which are innumerable. There are 10. of them, which also
Eustathius does testify: S. Mary, Annoth, Agnes, Sampson, Silly, Brefer,
Rusco, (or Triscraw) S. Hellen, S. Martine and Arthur, with Minanwitham, and
Minuisisand, greater and more famous then the rest for their rich veins of
Tin: from whence, as Pliny says, Medacritus first brought Lead or Tin into
Greece. Many of them are good corn ground: all of them infinite store of
Conies, Cranes, Swannes, Herons, and other Sea-fowle. These are those islands as
Solinus writes which a tempestuous frith, of two or three hours sail over,
does part from the outmost end of Cornwall (Danmoniorum ora) whose inhabitants
do still observe the ancient customs: they keep no faires or markets: they
care not for money: they give and receive such as one another have need of:
they rather regard more to get necessary things for exchange, than those of
high price and great value: they are very devout in their religious services to
their Gods: and both women and men in like manner do hold themselves to be very
skillful in foretelling of things to come.

Upon the coast of France, over against Normandy, are GERSEY (Caesarea,
Antoninus calls it) a fertile soil, good corn ground, and reasonable
pastorage: it has 12. parishes, well inhabited and very populous: Item,
GARNSEY, SERKE, ALDERNEY, ARM, the QVASQVETS and others, which although the
ancients did never reckon amongst the number of the British isles, yet we know
that they are now subject to the crown of England, and ever have been since
the year of our Lord 1108. at what time they were by Henry the first, annexed
to this kingdom. They are all in the diocese and jurisdiction of the Bishop
of Winchester.

Close to the shore of England is the i will of WIGHT, (Ptolemey calls it
Wictesis; Pliny and Suetonius, Vectis; the Panegyricus and Eutropius, Vecta;
Diodorus, Icta, all derived from the British word Guith, which signifies a
division, or separation; for that it was once joined, as then they vulgarly
held, unto the maine land: like as Sicilia was to Italy.) It is 20. miles long,
and 12. miles broad. Vespasian first brought it under the obedience of the
Romans, in the reign of the emperor Claudius, as Suetonius writes in the
fourth chapter of his Vespasianus: yet Eutropius affirms it to be done by
Maximianus the emperor. It is by the sea, which enters up high within the
land, divided into two provinces: Fresh Water i will and Binbridge i will. In Bedaes
time it contained but 1200. families, now it has 36. parishes, villages and
castles, which do belong all to Hantshire, and are of the diocese Winchester.
The soil is very fertile either for corn or cattle. Beside many flocks of
sheep of passing fine wool, it is wonderfully stored with Conies, Hares,
Patridges and Phesants. In the time of William the first, William Fitz-osbern
was entitled Lord of Wight, and after that Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick,
was by King Henry the sixth, crowned King of Wight. See more of it in Diodorus
Siculus and Beda.

The i will TENET, lying hard to the coast of Kent, of eight miles length, and
four miles breadth, is a chalkie soil, and passing good corn ground. Solinus
calls it Thanatos, or as some copies have, Athanatos, and thus he writes of
it: The i will Thanatos (Tenit) washed by the French ocean: and disioined from
England, the main continent, by a narrow frith, is a very rich corn ground and
fat soil: neither is it only good and kind to it self, but also to other
places: for as in it no snake or venomous serpents do breed or live, so the
earth and dust, carried from thence, to what place of the world soever, does
naturally kill such vermin: Thus far Solinus then: but that which he spoke of
it concerning Serpents, we now in our days know by experience to be false.
Near to this is that shallow sandy place, so dangerous to seamen, commonly
called GOODVVINS SANDS, an island sometime the possession of Earl Goodwin,
which as our histories report, did sink in the year of our Lord 1097. This
should seem to be Toliapis, of Ptolemey, but that he places it near to Essex
or the Trinobantes, when as this lies a great deal more near the Cantij.

Within the Thames mouth are yet other two islands, one upon Kent side, which
now we call SHEPEY, that is, the i will of sheep, but how it was called of the
ancients we certainly know not: The other upon Essex side, which Ptolemey in
his time called CAVNA, CONVENNOS or COVNOS (such is the variety of copies) is
still called Conway. It lies so flat and low that it is sometime all
overflowed, excepting some little knols and hills whither the cattle do
ordinarily fly in such like danger. It feeds yearly four thousand sheep at
the least, whose flesh is of a most sweet and pleasant taste surpassing those
of other places. Thus having passed so many troublesome and dangerous seas, and
now being come within kenning of mine own native country, I think it not
amiss to put into harbrough here for awhile, to rest our wearied limbs, and
purge us from those brackish humors which in this tedious journey we drunk
in. Thus far then of the islands described and named in this Map. Yet there
are certain others mentioned in some authors of good note. And Plutarch in
the life of Demetrius, gives out, that there are many islands near to Britain,
waste and desert: whereof some, he says, are dedicated to the gods and famous
worthies. Amongst these there is one, in which he says, they report, Saturn
lulled a sleep by Briareus, is kept as prisoner in chains: he is bound, I
say, with sleep in sted of a chain: and has many Angels and demy-gods for
servants to wait and attend upon him. Whether this be that which that Auienus
calls Pelagia, and affirms to be consecrated to Saturn, I dare neither
constantly affirm, nor peremptorily deny. Moreover, of these same thou may
read something worth the while as not altogether unpleasant, though doubtless
merely fabulous, in the same Plutarch in his book entitled De defectu
Oraculorum, of the ceasing of oracles: as also in Isacius Tzetzes, upon
Lycophron. Artimedorus in Straboes Geography says, that there is an island
near Britain, where they offer sacrifice to Ceres and Proserpina, in the
self same manner and with like ceremonies, as they do in Samothrace.
Apollonius, in his History of strange and wonderful things, affirms out of
Cytinus Chius, that there is a certain British i will (not Britain it self, as
M. Camden understands him) 400. furlongs in compass, where fruits do grow
without stones or kernels: for you shall neither find a stone in the olive, nor
kirnell in the grape: which also happens not only to these 2 fruits, but
also to all other of those kinds. But this is more like a feigned tale, then a
true story. Moreover Dionysius Afer names the NESIADES, the seat and
habitation of the Ammitae, amongst the number of the British isles: but I would
rather judge these to be islands upon the coast of France, than British isles,
and that by the authority of Strabo. If any man do desire to know these better,
let him repair to the learned Claurencieux Camden, my singular good friend,
who has in that his Britannia, (a worthy work composed by him, with infinte
pains and travel) so learnedly and diligently described and set down their
ancient form, customs, manners, places and cities, together with those of
later times, and of these our days, that they rather seem to be expressed to
the eye in their true colors, by the pencill of a skillful painter, then by
the pen of a painful student. But some man may say, this is written in the
Latin tongue, a language that I understand not. Be patient a while. Thou shall
hear him speak shortly good English. Of mine own knowledge he is already put
to school, for that purpose into the country to the learned Philemon Holland.
If thou know him not: that learned Doctor of Physic, who lately taught the
great Philosopher Pliny of Como; and the renowned Historian, great Liuy of
Padua; two Italians that never could sound a word of ours before, to speak
English so plainly and well, as never none better. No stranger, nay no man,
ever spoke more properly, none more eloquently. When he begins (I know it
will not be long) we ruder clownes, will hold our peace. But we cannot forget
the worthy pains of the learned M. Verstegan, who has given us good cause to
remember him with thanks, for that his Restitution of decayed intelligence, in
antiquities concerning the renowned English Nation, lately imprinted and
dedicated to his most exellent Majesty.

SPAIN.
THis is that warlike Spain, famous I mean, for worthy men and brave soldiers,
as Florus speaks of it, the first country of the maine continent of Europe
upon the West, environed round about with the salt sea, but only on that part
where it bordereth upon France, from which it is severed by the Pyreney
mountains, as it were by a natural wall or rampart. Some there are which do
think that it was first called IBERIA; of the river Iberus, or, as others
would have it of a king of this country of that name. Auienus deemeth it to
have been so named of Ibera, (of which you may read in Liuy) a city of the
province Betica, situate upon the river Iberus, different from that other of
the same name in Hispania Tarraconensis. But I could more easily be drawn to
think that both this country and the river did take their name of Iberia, a
country in Asia, from whence this people first came and had their original,
where also there is a river called Iberus, as Pliny testifies. That it was
also called HESPERIA, of king Hesperus, beside the great Poet Virgil, Honorius
and the feigned Berosus, far latter writers, would feign make me believe. But
truth will easily enforce any wise man to believe, that it rather took that
name of Hesperus, which in Greek signifies the West, or the Evening stare:
for indeed Spain, of all the maineland of the whole world, as far as the
ancients knew, lies farthest into the West. And thereupon Horace names it
Hesperia vltima, The farther Hesperia, to make a distinction between this and
that other Hesperia, I mean Italy, which Virgil calls Hesperia magna, The
great Hesperia. For as the Greeks have called this country Hesperia, by reason
of the situation, being indeed from them Westward, so the Italians for the same
cause have entitled Spain, which lies between them and the West, by the
same name. But at last it was generally of all sorts of writers in both
languages famoused by the name of HISPANIA, and that of one Hispanus, except
Trogus Pompeius be deceived. Whether it has sometime been called PANNONIA, as
Stephanus, in his book of cities, has given out, I am not able to say. That
it was once known by the name of PANIA, it seems to be probable out of the
first chapter of the third book of Pliny his Natural history. Where he says
that Lusa gave the name and appellation to that part of Spain which was called
Lusitania: (now Portugal) and Pan, who was sometime governor of that country,
caused the whole to be denominated after his name. Of this opinion also is
Sosthenes, cited by Plutarch, in his third book of the history of Iberia;
where he writes that this country of Pan, was first named Pania, but afterward
of succedent ages it was corruptly called SPANIA. S. Hierome, upon the sixty
and fourth chapter of the Prophet Esaias calls it Spania, and that the
Chaldaeans did call it Spamia, (peradventure for Spania) Benedictus Arias
Montanus, a man worthy of eternal fame, in his Commentaries upon Obadiah, does
plainly testify. And some there are, which, in the 28. verse of the fifteenth
chapter of Saint Paul unto the Romans, for (...), do read (...), as you may
see by the edition of Henry Steeuen, and the Syrian copy which Raphalengius
used: although some impressions of Plantine, and that of Albert Widmanstade
have the contrary. For Hispania, as commonly it is read in the printed copies
of Trogus, in the manuscripts I do find Spania. And so the best and most
ancient copies of Quintus Curtius have, as the singular learned Bongarsius has
noted. Thus also the name of this country was always wont to be written above
seven hundred years since, as the worthy gentleman Ambrosius Moralis, a man of
great credit, and a most diligent searcher out of Spanish antiquities, in more
then one or two places in his Commentaries upon the Eulogium, does teach us. An
ancient Glossary upon the Poet Iunenall says, that Tagus est fluuius Spaniae,
that is, Tagus is a river of Spain. In an ancient Greek Lexicon set out by
Henry Steeuen, (...), is put for Hibera, and (...), for Hispania. Galen, the
prince of Physicians in the fourth chapter of his sixth book of Simples,
writes that there is an oil brought out of Iberia (Spain) called amongst the
Apothecaries Oleum Spanum, i. Hispanum, that is, Spanish oil. In a little
manuscript treatise of the Provinces belonging to the Roman Empire, I found
Spania, in that very place where Schonhouius, who first set this book out in
Print, has Hispania. The inhabitants of this country, which to this day do
name it Espan^a, or Spania, do confirm this writing. For Espan^a and Spania do
differ only in manner of writing, not in sound or pronunciation. For the
Spaniards usually do put E before any Latin words which do begin with S, and
so make the Spanish. Examples hereof thou may find in our Thesaurus, at the
word Iberia. Moreover it was sometime called CELTIBERIA, as Appian and others
do testify. Heerehence it is that the people of this country were anciently
called Celtiberi and Celtoscythae, and also Iglerae, as Strabo the worthy
Geographer has left recorded. Of the Jews it is called SEPHARAD, as the
forenamed Montanus, and William Postell do teach us. But of the name and
appellation let this suffice: it remains now that in like manner we speak
somewhat of the country it self. Dionysius Afer and Strabo do affirm that
this country is in form like unto an Ox hide: Trogus says that it is square:
Aethicus, an author of small credit, in my judgment, makes it
Three-cornered. In the decree of Constantine, which Joseph Scaliger has set
out with Ausonius, it is graced with the title of Speciosa, The beautiful.
Stephanus divides it into the GREATER, and the LESSER. And an ancient
inscription makes mention of Spain the LOVVER (Inferior.) Learned antiquity
did divide it into CITERIOREM and VLTERIOREM, or EXTERIOREM, The Hither and the
Further or Outter Spain. Since that certain years, it was distinguished into
three provinces, called by other different names. For that which they called
Citerior, was by them named TARRACONENSIS; that part of the Vlterior which
lies Westward, LVSITANIA; and the other which declineth toward the South,
BAETICA. Afterward in the time of the Roman Emperors it was divided into six
shires or provinces, whose names out of Sextus Rufus are these: TARRACONENSIS,
CARTHAGINENSIS, LVSITANIA, GALLICIA, BAETICA, and TRANSFRETANA, which otherwise
also they called TINGITANA. Yet the Map shows that this latter province is
no part of true Spain, but a portion of Africa, beyond the streights. Moreover
to these the book of Records adds INSVLAREM or Balearium, The Baleares,
Malorca and Menorca with other islands in the Mediterran sea, belonging to this
country. All Spain, thus generally defined, was by the Romans divided into
fourteen Jurisdictions (conuentus iuridici;) For in Lusitania Pliny teaches us
that there were three, to wit, EMERITENSIS, PACENSIS, and SCALABITANVS, and in
them were five and forty towns: In Tarraconensis or Hither Spain, there were
these seven, CARTHAGINENSIS, TARRACONENSIS, CAESAR AVGVSTANVS, CLVNIENSIS,
ASTVRVS, LVCENSIS, and BRACARVS: in which there were 294. towns. In Batica
were these four, GADITANVS, CORDVBENSIS, ASTIGITANVS and HISPALENSIS, and in
them 175. towns. So that the whole sum of all the towns in Spain is 514.
And although Strabo does seem to make the number somewhat greater, yet he
thinks that they do but cog, which say that in Spain there be more then a
thousand: and that they do account great villages for good towns: and withal
he affirms that the country is not capable of many cities, by reason of the
dryness or barrenness of the soil, and barbarous rudeness of the people,
except it be only along by the coast of the midland sea. For the Spaniards for
the most part are wild, and do dwell in villages. That Spain is all over
inhabited, one may perceive by Pomponius; who says, That it is wonderfully
replenished with men. And Cicero, in a certain oration of his, writes, That
the Romans overcame them not by multitudes, but by religion and policy. Pliny
out of Varro teaches us, That they which inhabited this country were the
IBERI, PHOENICIANS, PERSIANS, CELTAE and POENI. The same also is auerred by
Appianus Alexandrinus. And I to those may well join the ROMANS, who
questionless, after they had from hence driven out the Poeni or Carthaginians,
did seat themselves and plant their colonies here. But to speak a word or two
of the nature, manners and customs of the inhabitants of this country, and to
annex unto the former, what I find noted of that matter in the writings of the
best historians, for that I doubt not but it will be a matter both pleasant and
pleasing unto the Reader, I think it will not be amiss. Calpurnius Flaccus
does attribute unto them flauam proceritatem, tallness of body, but tawny
complexions. Julius Firmicus says, that by reason of the elimate and
constitution of the heavens there, The Spaniards are impudent proud braggards.
Yet this he in the same place adds, That this foul fault is well left of
many of them. Florus says, that the whole Nation generally is unruly and will
by no means be commanded or kept in any due obedience. Dionysius Afer calls
it Nationem magnanimem, A courageous people: Martial the Poet, Trucem, Grimme:
Oppianus, Superbam, Proud: Tibullus, Audacem, Bold: Vopiscus, Astutam, Wily:
Trogus and Liuy, Feram and bellicosam, Fierce and Warlike, and withal very
active and nimble of body: men of unquiet spirits, always desirous of news
and alterations in states and common wealths: of nature more like to wild
beasts, than civil men. Vegetius the warrior, says that, They are lustier men
of body and far stronger than the Romans. Virgil in his Georgickes calls
them Iberos impacatos, Turbulent Spaniards: for that, as Seruius interprets
the word, they are rank riders and great stealers of cattle: or for that, as
Iunius Philargyrus understands it, they hold robbing and burglary to be the
best kind of life. Their bodies are fit for all manner of labor and hardship,
of such stomachs that they will venture life and limme upon the least cause
that is, as Valerius Maximus and Trogus do testify: whereupon Silius Italicus
writes thus of them, Prodiga gens animi, and properare facillima mortem,
Namque vbi transcendit florentes viribus annos, Impatiens aeui, spernit nouisse
senectam, Et fati modus in dextra est, etc. A desperate nation Spaniards are,
They care not for their blood: As Soon as e're they come to grow'th, And years
of man's estate, To live unto a doting age, They scorn't as thing not good:
Therefore each man will be the means To hasten on his fate etc. They are so
devoted and addicted to their kings, as Seruius in his Commentaries upon the
fourth book of Virgils Georgickes, cites out of Salust, that They will desire
to live no longer then they do. To their enemies they are very cruel, but
toward strangers passing humane and kind. For travelers or forreners such as
come to them, they do most curtuously entertain: so that often times they do one
spite another and contend for that honor and credit, as Diodorus Siculus
reports. Ptolemey in his Quadripartite writes, That they are a very neat and
cleanly people. This also is avouched by Diodorus, yet he in this one thing
misliketh them for this one slouenly and filthy trick, to wit, for that they
do ordinarily use to wash their bodies all over, and their teeth with urine,
taking it to be an excellent Physic and preservative for the body: yea and
the same author writes that they do save and keep it in cesternes until it
be stale for that purpose. Yet Strabo the learned Geographer ascribes this to
the Cantabri and their nere neighbors only. Catullus the Poet attributes it
as proper unto the Celtiberi. Apuleius in his first Apology which he wrote in
his own defense, makes mention of the washing of their teeth. We read in
Diodorus Siculus, that at their meals they eat lustily upon sundry dishes,
that they make their drink of honey, map of ancient Spain, with an inset map of
the ancient Bay of Cadiz HISPANIAE VETERIS DESCRIPTIO. Ex conatibus
Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij.
Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Belgico, ad decennium.

1586.

SVMMO THEOLOGO DN^O D. BENEDICTO ARIAE MONTANO: VIRO LINGVARVM COGNITIONE,
RERVM PERITIA, ET VITAE INTEGRITATE MAGNO: ABRAH. ORTELIVS AMICITIAE ET
OBSERVANTIAE ERGO, DD.

HISPANIAE LOCA ALIQVOT INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS.

POPVLI, Aebisoci, Aequefilici, Allotrigae, Amenionses, Andologenses, Arenates,
Axabricenses, Babanouses, Banienses, Bursaonenses, Bursavolenses,
Caesarobricenses, Carausiae, Cibilitani, Cincenses, Colorni, Cortonenses,
Damenanitani, Eilota, Emanici, Equaesi, Fortunales, Gessorienses, Iadoni,
Idienses, Ilumberitani, Interanisenses, Ispalenses, Itani, Karenses, Leuni,
Melesses, Onenses, Oppidoni, Ori^^^, P^suri, Palatini, Pleutauri, Rucones,
Sacilernusi, Segienses, Solienses, Talori, Teari Iulienses, Tuisi, Velienses,
Vermenses, Via^ienu^^, Vilienses, Volciani.

VRBES, Abobrica, Accabicus, Adercon, Adrobicus, Agla, Alea, Aliconsis, Alpasa,
And^risippo, Apetua, Apilo^urium, Arialdunum, Asena, Astenas, Atetona,
Axatiara, Axenium, Baecor, Baecyla, Baetyca, Belippo, Besaro, Biendium,
Brachyla, Branae, Brutobria, Casaris Salutariensis, Caliabria, Calucula,
Carabis, Carbulo, Careo, Carruca, Castax, Castra gemina, Castra vinaria,
Cedrippo, Certima, Cimbis, Cinniana, Cisembrium, Colenda, Colobona, Coplanium,
Cotinas, Crabalia, Cusibi, Danium, Dia, Dumium, Eiscadia, Erisane, Fabreseense,
Gemella, Gru^nus, Helingas, Hellenes, Hippo, Hippo Carausiarum, Ibem, Ilipa
minor, Ilipula Laus, Illurco, Ilucia, Indica, Ipasturgi, Ituci, Iulia cognomine
Concordia, Iul. Constantia, Iul. Contributa, Iul. Fidentia, Iul. Restituta,
Lancia Transoudana, Lenium, Magala, Malia, Marcolica, Massia, Moron, Merucra,
Nobilia, Nuditanum, Olitingi, Olone, Onoba, Opsicella, Osintigi, Ossigi,
Ossigitania, Oxthraca, Sacvuna, Saepona, Saon, Segeda, Segestica, Serippo,
Sicane, Silpia, Sitia, Soricaria, Soritia, Tabeta, Tarscium, Transsucunus,
Tribola, Turba, Turobrica, Tutia, Velia, Ventisponte, Vergentum, Vergium,
Vescelia, Vesciveca, Vesperies, Victoria portuo, Vrbicua, Vxena.

MONTES, Sacer, Ydrus. FLVMINA, Chalybs, Silicense. FONTES, Tamarici. et
quaedam Antonini. item Avieni. Horum omnium situm quamvis ignorarem, abesse
tamen ab hac tabula iniquum putari. In omni enim vetere historia (veterem voco
ad Caroli Magni usque tempora) omnium huius regionis locorum vocabula exprimere
valui and ni fallor ^^pressi. Si quae autem doctori in en deesse videbuntur;
erunt fortasse horum querundam synonyma. de quibus omnibus in nostro Thesaure
geographico.

and do buy all the wine they drink. Yet peradventure this is meant and to be
understood only of those which dwell upon the coast of the Midland sea. For
Florus and Pliny do write that they used ordinarily a kind of drink made ex
frumento soluto, of a kind of bread corn ground or beaten small, (which drink
of theirs Pliny calls Caelia and Caeria) yea and of Barley too, as Dioscorides
in the 110. chapter of his second book writes. (...). that is, Moreover that
kind of drink which they call Curmy, made also of Barley, usually drunk in
some places in stead of wine, makes the head ache, breeds ill blood and
hurts the nerves and sinews. Such kind of drinks also are made of wheat in
the West part of Spain and in England. Thus far Dioscorides. This kind of
drink the Welchmen do even to this day call Cwrw, by the same name very little
or nothing altered, as we have showed before, and is that which the Saxons call
Ale. Strabo affirms that the Lusitani or Portugals did drink a kind of
drink which they called Zythum, (made also of Barley but much different from
Curmi, as the same Dioscorides at the same place teaches) for they have, says
he, small store of wine. And that little which they have, they spend by and by
in banqueting and making merry with their friends and kinsfolk. This their
drink made of steeped corn, as the forenamed Pliny in the 22. chapter of his
14. book writes, will endure to be kept long, and is the better for the age.
For this cause it was peradventure that Athenaeus in his Deipnosophiston,
accounts the Spaniards amongst those nations that will ordinarily be drunk.
The same also does Plato write of the Celtiberi. That they had but small store
of wine in Straboes time, it is very probable, because that Vopiscus has left
recorded, that Probus the Emperor was the first that ever gave license to the
Spaniards to set and plant vines, and to make wine. Trogus says that they be
hard and very niggardly. And although they be very wealthy, as Athenaeus
testifies, yet they will drink water, live sparingly, dine and suppe alone,
that they may go brave and hang the more upon their backs. Nay as Trogus
affirms, upon their greatest festival days they never used to make any
great preparation or extraordinary cheer. Dioscorides writes that they used
wild rocket seed in sted of mustard seed. Pliny writes, That in his time they
did account akorns and mast for a dainty dish: and Strabo says, that of the
flower of them they did usually make their household bread. And Pliny he
affirms that this kind of bread was lighter than any other sort of bread,
because they did leaven it. That they did use to lie upon the bare ground, the
same Pliny does testify. They did wear a short black garment, as Diodorus
Siculus writes. Isidorus in the 23. chapter of the 19. book of his Origines,
names a certain kind of garment, worn by the Spaniard, Striges. They had
rather have wars, than rest and peace. When they have no enemy abroad, they
seek for him at home, if one may believe Trogus the Historiographer. In war
not only the horsemen, but also the footmen, are far stronger, harder, and
able to endure any manner of labor and pains then any other nation
whatsoever. They give the onset and begin the battle with songs and
poetical rymes, as the same author with Silius Italicus does testify; Ritu
iam moris Iberi Carmina pulsata fundentem barbara cetra, Then like as Spaniards
use, In stead of drum they targets sounds, And warlike songs do tune. And
leaning or resting themselves upon two swords, having beaten and disordered the
enemies horsemen, they light off from their horses, and do adioine themselves
to their footmen: which very same thing Suidas speaks of the Celtiberi. These
swords, as it is apparent out of Liuy and Polybius, by reason of their
shortness were very nimble, and more fit for close fight: they had also sharp
points, so that in sight they did rather use foines and thrusts, then down
right blows. Notwithstanding Suidas in that commends the excellency of the
swords used by the Celtiberi, that their fight is hot and desperate and that
they will abide a mighty stroke with both the hands. Athenaeus also shows
that they in fight used the French weapon called Gesum, where he tells us
that the Romans used to fight with that kind of weapon, and learned to handle
it of the Spaniards. And they, as it is very probable out of Julius Pollux,
took it of the Africanes, for he calls it Gaesam Lybicam, and terms it an
iron spear or partisan. They wear head-pieces made of brass. Their legs
they wrappe up in a kind of boots made of hair, as Diodorus Siculus
testifies. Strabo, the great Cosmographer, writes, That in battle they use
to bear a light kind of armor, targets, darts, and slings. They did fight, as
Polybius says, being apparelled in linen garments guarded or laid about with a
purple welt, and in long side coats as white as the drift snow. And although
they did wear tragical robes or gowns, and were clad with many coats, and
those, when they went abroad, hanging down to their feet, yet, as Athenaeus
testifies, they were not by that means one whit the more vnwealdy in fight,
cowardlike, or less valiant and courageous. This was their armor and warlike
habit. But this one thing, which you shall find in the 7. book of Aristotle's
Politickes, I do think may not be omitted, to wit, that he there records
that so many columns or pillars were wont to be pitched up about the graves or
sepulchers of the dead, as they had killed enemies. Nor this of Silius Italicus
in his 13. book may be forgotten, Tellure, vt perhibent, is mos antiquus,
Ibera Exanima obscoenus consumit corpora vultur, vpland, they say, an ancient
custom it is, That carren crows and ravening kite should pray and quite
consume the flesh Of Spaniards brave departed hence. Yet Aelianus affirms
this peculiarly of the Barcaei, and that of those only which did die in the
field or were slain in the wars: but those which died in their beds, of any
natural sickness, were as he says burnt to ashes. Caesar writes that they
are all by nature given to swimming, and to practice to swim over deep and
broad rivers, and that it is a thing generally so common amongst them, that no
man will here go into the field or camp without his bladders or water bouget
serving to that purpose. In the fragments of Salust I read that it was their
manner, that when young men were first trained, and were to go to the wars,
their mothers did recite unto them all the valiant acts of their ancestors.
Trogus affirms, That many of them did more esteem of their armor, and great
horses which had served in the wars, then they did of their own lives. They
were wont also, as Strabo teaches us, to prepare for themselves Toxicum, that
is, a kind of confection that kills a man without any manner of grief or
pain. This they made of a certain herb like to smallage, (apium) that they
might have it always by them in a readiness, what cross luck or misfortune
soever should betide them. Florus says that they do for this purpose draw a
certain poison out of the yewgh-tree (taxus.) Pliny also speaks of this
custom of theirs, but he says that they make it of the berries of the
yewgh-tre. And thus much hitherto of the nation in general: now a word or two
of some of them particularly. The LVSITANI or Portugals were more valiant and
better soldiers than the rest, but they were very infamous for pilfering and
theeuery, they give not themselves to husbandry or tillage of the ground, they
are not able fellows for scowts and ambushes, very nimble, light and quick of
retraict. For their drink they did use Zythum, as we said before. Butter does
serve their turn in stead of oil. Their dishes and such like vessels were
made of wax. Their boats were made of leather, until the time of Brutus. Yet
afterward they had hoies and such like ships of burden, as it is manifest out
of Strabo, who doubts not to equal the number and greatness of them with
those of the Africanes. This also is justified by Sidonius, in his Panegyricke
oration made to Maiorianus. Amongst this people, as Pliny reports, was the
Carbassus, a kind of linen for sails of ships, first invented. Such was the
life of these Lusitaui. The CALAICI, ASTVRES, and CANTABRI, even up as high as
the VASCONES and the Pyrenaean mountains did live much like the Lusitani, as
Varro in his book of Husbandry, Dion Cassius, Josephus the Jew, and Strabo the
great Cosmographer do testify, in whom and in Diodorus Siculus thou may read
many other things of this people. Sextus Auienus calls the inhabitants a
churlish and rough people; Item, Gens ista dura, gens fera venatibus,
Lustrisque inhaerens, This nation's hard and stout, All woodmen wild and given
to hunt, and range the woods about. But of the CANTABRI, hear what Silius
Italicus, the worthy Poet in his 3. book reports: Cantaber ante omnes
hyemisque aestusque famisque Inuictus, palmam;que ex omni far labor. Mirus
amor populo, cum pigra incanuit aetas Imbelles iamdudum annos praeuertere saxo:
Nec vitam sine Mart pati, quippe omnis in armis Lucis caussa sita, and
damnatum viuere paci. In effect thus much in English; The Cantaber can endure
the chilling cold of winter, the heat of parching summer, hunger, labor or any
manner of toil, better than any other nation of all Spain. It is a strange
thing to see how this people is delighted; as soon as ever they begin to grow
in years and to be gray headed, and so no longer fit for labor or any manner
of service, they will make an end of themselves. No man here desires to live
out of the wars, for every one thinks that he is borne for no other
purpose, all generally condemning peace and the idle life. Strabo calls the
CELTIBEROS, togatos, peaceable men, and says that they were sometime held to
be the wildest and most barbarous and inhumane people of all Europe, but now it
is a populous and wealthy nation. The same Strabo deemeth the TVRDETANOS to
have been the learned people of Spain. For that they did use the Grammar,
and had certain monuments of antiquity, recorded and kept amongst them in
writing, and withal their laws and statutes were written and preserved in
verse, and certain poetical meeter. The same author terms the CARPETANOS,
VACCAEOS, LACETANOS, and CALLAICOS, nobiles gentes, noble and brave nations.
But of these last I cannot but again cite the words of the forenamed Silius,
where he thus speaks of them; -- Misit dives Gallecia pubem, Barbara nunc
patrijs vlulantem carmina linguis, Nunc pedis alterno percussa verbere terra Ad
numerum resonas gaudentem plaudere cetras. Haec requies, ludusque viris, ea
sacra voluptas. Caetera femineus peragit pudor: addere sulco Semina, and
impresso tellurem vertere aratro. Segne viris quicquid duro sine Mart gerendum
est. Callaici coniux obit irrequieta mariti. And because that he speaks here
also of the women, hearken what Trogus says of them: The women, says he, do
manage all businesses at home and within doors, they look unto the husbandry
and plowing of the ground: the men give themselves wholly to follow the wars,
to rob and steal. The same does Strabo report of them, who besides adds
that when they are delivered of child, the husbands at their request shall
keep their beds, and they will scrue thcm. And while they are at work often
times they wash their little ones, and making them ready, do lay them to sleep
upon the brinke of some brook or river. Once every year they lay all their
webs which they have spunne in open sight to be viewed of all men, and she
which in the judgment of most men has labored hardest, bears away the bell
and greatest commendation, as Stobaeus, in the chapter of Temperance, out of
one Nicolaus, has left recorded. Amongst the Cantabri the husband gives a
dowry to the wife, and the daughters are made heirs of their fathers lands and
goods, and by them the brethren are bestowed in marriage. The fashion of the
apparel and manner of attire of these women, is described by the same author,
as you may read in Artimedorus. The buildings and houses of this country were
made, as we may understand by Vitruuues, the famous Architect, of timber,
roads, straw, reeds and leaves. Walls they have which they call formaceos, or as
some read fornaceos, for that being enclosed round in manner of a form on both
sides with two boords, they were rather stuffed then workmanly built, as Pliny
in the 14. chapter of his 13. book does testify. Of the religion of the
ancient Spaniards I find little observed by any good authors: and that which
is noted of that argument you shall find in Strabo: to wit, That the LVSITANI,
did sacrifice a goat to Mars, and beside that, their prisoners taken in the
wars, and their great horses. Item, That they used to divine and foretell of
things to come by the entrails of their captives and prisoners. Item, That
after the manner of the Greeks they held certain solemn feasts which they call
Hecatombas, wherein an hundred beasts were sacrificed at once. Item, Certain
gamings, in manner of their Olympiackes. That they were not altogether
unskillful of that kind of divination, made by the observation of the entrails
of beasts sacrificed, called by the Romans Aruspicina, we may see by that
saying of Lampridius spoken of Alexander Seuerus, to wit, in that he says,
That he was more skillful in that art, than they. In Macrobius I find that the
ACCITANI, did worship and do divine honor unto Mars, which they in their
language call Necys. Some have reported, That the CALLAICI had no manner of
perceiuerance at all of any god. But the CELTIBERI, and their near neighbors
in the North parts, did worship a certain unknown god at night in the full
moon, dancing and making merry, before the gates with all their families and
households all nightlong. Yet it is apparent out of Pliny that in old time many
years ago the Saguntim, did reverence and divine worship unto Diana, brought
thither by those of Zacynthus (Zante) 200. years before the destruction of
Troy. Thus far of the nation. But that we may show a little more plainly the
nature and disposition of this people, I think it not amiss out of the best
Historians to set down some few other observations which we have noted
concerning this argument. At what time the VETTONES came first to be subject to
the command of the Romans, and did observe certain captains and lieutenants for
recreation sake to stray and wander up and down the fields, they supposing them
to be beside themselves, took them and led them home to their cottages or
dwelling places. For they thought that either they were to sit still in peace
at home, or else to fight it out. This was an argument of their simplicity. See
the 5. chapter of the 2. book of Aelians de varia historia. In the wars between
the Romans and the Cantabri, the mothers killed their own children, left they
should fall into the enemies hands. A child at the commandment of his father,
with a sword killed his father, mother and brethren being taken captives by the
enemy. And again, a woman in like manner killed her children and husband with
others taken with her. One being called into the company of swaggering
tosse-pot drunkards leapt into the fire and burnt himself. These were
arguments of their great love of liberty. Others of them, being taken in the
field and nailed to the pillory, they report, did sing triumphantly as if they
had gotten the victory. This was an argument of their contempt of death. Thus
much out of Strabo: those which follow are taken out of Trogus. In the Punicke
wars the patience of that servant is highly commended, who revenging his
masters death, in the midst of all his torments did laugh heartily, and with a
merry pleasant countenance did overcome the cruel executioners. This is a
notable example of true fortitude and valor. Often times diverse of them have
been tormented to death for that they would not bewray such things as were told
them in secret: so that they made greater account of fidelity and secrecy,
than of their lives. Many such examples as these, might, out of ancient
authors, be referred to this place. But of the nature of this nation let these
few things suffice. Now let us address our selves to speak something of the
country it self and nature of the soil. And first of the fertility of the
same. Trogus makes Spain to be far more fertile than Africa or France. Being
neither so much parched as that, with the heat of the Sun; nor toiled as
this, with continual raging winds: but indifferent between them both: so that
partly by reason of the temperature of the air, and partly by reason of the
moderate showers and rain which here do fall, it is most fertile of all manner
of corn and grain. For, as Philostratus has left recorded, here the
temperature of the air is such, as it is ordinarily in Autumn at Athens in
Greece. Whereupon that in Solinus Polyhistor is truly spoken of this country.
This climate or tract of ground, for goodness, may justly be compared to the
best country in the world, it is inferior to none whether you respect the
great plenty of corn here growing, and goodness of soil, or whether you
respect the number of choice vines and fruit trees, which here do naturally
come up of themselves, with the great commodity that arises of them. It
abounds with all things, that are either richly prised and greatly esteemed,
or found to be necessary for use. Gold and Silver if you will seek for them,
they are here to be found: it never failed the Smithes: it gives place to
none for Vines; it excels any other country for store of the best Oiles.
There is no place of it vacant ground, none barren and altogether unfruitful.
What place soever it be throughout this whole country that will not bear some
kind of corn or other good fruit, that is good meddow or pasture. Yea even
those places that seem to be dry and barren, do bear hemp or such stuff
serving to make cables for ships. This is also confirmed by Pomponius Mela, in
these words: It is, says he, so fertile and well stored with men, horses,
iron, lead, silver and gold, that if there be any place of it, which by reason
of want of water, be barren and not like it self, yet there it bears Hemp,
Flax, and a kind of shrubbe called Spartum, whereof they made cables for
ships. Yet Strabo does exempt from hence Tudetania, or Batica, who affirms
that this place has such wonderful plenty of both, I mean of Metal and of
Corn, that it is impossible to give it such due commendations as for the
worthiness of it it does deserve. Nay it is so fertile of all these
commodities, that as the same Trogus reports, it yields not sufficient for
the use of the inhabitants only, but besides that it serves all Italy and the
populous city of Rome. And thus much generally of the nature of the soil and
commodities of this country. But Strabo does somewhat more particularly handle
this argument. For he shows that all the provinces and shires of Spain are
not alike fertile and good: and those countries which have greatest plenty of
mines and metal are good for little else. A great part of it also is but
meanly inhabited, by reason of the mountains and woods, with spacious and wide
champion barren fields, where the soard or earth is very little or none at all.
Neither has it in all places water enough to serve it, as about Carpentania or
Celtiberia, and almost all the North part of it abuttant upon the sea: which
places are not very well inhabited by reason of the cragginesse of the
mountains and bleake coldness of the air. This part bears no manner of corn
at all. (Peradventure Iuuenal in his 3. Satyr meant this tract, when he says,
Horrida vitanda est Hispania, Rough Spain must carefully be shunned.) Yet the
skirts of it where it bordereth upon the Midland sea abounds with Olives,
Figs, Vines, and other such like plants and fruit trees, notwithstanding the
vpland countries are not altogether void and destitute of these commodities. So
that I may not without good cause here apply that saying of Silius Italicus,
an author so often by me cited and named: Nec Cereri terra indocilis, nec
inhospita Baccho, Nullaque Palladia sese magis arbore tollit. Ceres here has
taught her trade, God Bacchus here was lodged: For choicest oiles and sigges
as good, This country well may boast and brag. In Lusitania also, that part
especially which lies between the river Tagus and the Ariabri, is a very good
soil both for corn and grass. Moreover it yields great plenty of Gold and
Silver, and such like things. Athenaeus, in the 8. book of his Deipnosophiston
confirms the same. Item, All that part of the country that lies upon the
South, as Pliny testifies, is very good: to wit, all that which they call
Baetica is more populous, better manured, a richer soil, more fertile and
pleasant than any other country of all Spain. In this province the grass is
so wonderfully rank, that except the cattle be leazed and sometime brought
home out of the pasture and restrained from feeding, they will burst
themselves, as Trogus reports. But not only the land, but even the sea which
beats upon the coast of this Turdetania, is also as fertile: For it is
wonderfully stored with all kind of Oisters, Shelfishes, Tunies and Purples, (a
kind of shelfish whereof that color is made) which are very gainful unto
those that will labor to take them. And besides that, they do salt much of it
and preserve it in pickle. Thus far therefore of the upper soard of the
earth: Now let us speak a word or two of the admirable rich metals of this
country, which lie hid under the same. That Spain is all over bestrewed with
Gold, Silver, Iron, Lead, white and red, Pliny and Strabo do jointly testify.
Of the great plenty of gold and silver here found the Holy scripture in the 8.
chapter of the 1. book of the Machabees does affirm. This also is avouched by
Josephus in the 16. chapter of his 2. book of the Jews wars. But it yields
the greatest store in the driest and most barren mountains, upon which nothing
else will grow or thrive. Yet by reason of the gold, as Pliny witnesses, they
are forced and made fruitful. Such are those which do enclose Bastetania and
Oretania, in which Strabo says there are some veins of Gold ore. The same
author writes, That in mount Argent, not far from Castulon by Ilipa and
both the Sisapoes there is a vein of silver. Polybius says that this vein
runs along by the city Babyla. In the confines of Milessia, where the city
Oringis stands, Liuy writes that the inhabitants do find good store of
silver. Near unto the river Tagus also, in the mountains are mines of
metal. At Cotinas are found both copper and gold, as the same Strabo
testifies. The province of Gallecia (this Trogus affirms) is wondrous full
of copper and lead: it is also very rich of gold, so that often times even the
plough does turn up some clots of gold ore. Pliny does affirm that the same
Gallecia, Asturia, and Lusitania, are as fertile of all manner of metals. Stabo
has left recorded that amongst the sparks of gold ore here found some have
been tried to weigh more then half a pound weight. Diodorus Siculus out of
Phalereus reports the same, who says, that some of those which here do dig
in the mines do every three days find as much in weight as an Euboian talent,
which of Troy weight amounts to above 36. pound. Stephanus mentions the
city Ibilla, where he says there are mines both of silver and gold. But the
greatest siluer-mine is near new Carthage, distant from the city about 20.
furlongs, where 40000. men are employed and set on work; and every day
throughout the year, the people of Rome, as Strabo testifies, received from
hence 25000. drams of silver. The same author writes that there was a pit of
silver called Bebelus, which did find Hanniball daily 300. pound weight of
silver. That this pit was about the Pyreney mountains, one peradventure may
guess by that, which he withal affirms, that the Aquitani do fetch their
water from hence. The great abundance of silver which did run from the
Pyreney mountains, being by casualtie set on fire (which story you shall find
in Strabo and Diodorus Siculus) was such that the Phoenicians when they
transported it from hence, and yet still there being left more than their ships
could carry, in stead of lead they put it under the ancors, or, as Aristotle
thinks, about Tartessus they made their ancors of it. It is observed by
Strabo that the Turdetani did make their cribs ( praesepia, yet the learned
Causabone does rather think that the Greek word in this place should signify
Lacunaria, a summer or maine beam in an house) and hogsheads, of silver. Yea
and that certain rivers of this country do yield some sparks of gold, amongst
which Tagus in Lusitania was one, there is none of the old writers but did
constantly affirm for truth. Whereupon the Poets of former times have highly
commended Spain for this matter, to wit, Iuuenall and Statius: Item Silius
Italicus in this verse: Hic certant Pactole tibi Duriasque Tagusque, Rich
Pactolus now may yield, to Dwere and Tayo stout. The great abundance of metals
which this country did yield may easily be proved by the many triumphs of the
Romans, and marvelous store of gold and silver by them carried and
transported from hence; which you shall read of in Liuy, a plentiful witness
and of good credit, in many and sundry places of his Decades, whereof for
examples sake I think it not amiss to produce one or two: Marcus Heluius,
says he, brought from hence into the Exchequer at one time of unwrought silver
14732. pound weight. Of coined silver, bearing the stamp of a wagon drawn
with two horses, 17023. Of Huesca silver (Oscense argentum) 120438. Cneius
Cornelius Lentulus brought from hence of gold 1515. pound weight: of rough
silver 1000. of silver coin, 34550. denaij, valuing of our money wel-neere
1728. pound sterling. That which the same does report of Marcus Portius Cato,
Quintus Fuluius Flaccus, Quintus Minutius, Lucius Stertinius, Tiberius
Gracchus, Cayus Calpurnius, Lucius Quinctius Crispinus, Marcus Fuluius
Nobilior, Albinus, and others, let them read, who list to admire the wonderful
store of metals of this country. Whereupon Antonius Augustinus might well say,
That Spain in those times was unto the Romans the same, that now the West
Indies are to the Spaniards. But now, lest I be too tedious, I will address my
self to speak of other things which here are found in as great abundance, as
namely, horses, dogs, conies, pearls, and diverse other such things. That in
Spain there are great store of conies, Strabo, Pliny, and Aelianus do teach us.
The same is auerred by this verse of the worthy poet Catullus, Cuniculosae
Celtiberiae fili, My son, in conny-borrow'd Spain ybred. Item, the coin of
Hadrian Emperor of Rome does testify the same: upon which this little beast
is stamped as a cognizance of this country. The wool also of this country (I
mean the black fleece, is of better estimation than that of the Coraxici,
inhabitants of mount Taurus) the flax (whereof most excellent nets are made as
Gratius witnesses) Spartum, a kind of shrubbe like broom, whereof they made
their cables, coccum, or grain wherewith they die skarlet, pitch, honey, wax,
salt, dug out of the earth, (Sal fossile) Alume, Boras (Chrysocolla) glass,
vermilion, of no less estimation then Sinople (Sinopica terra) purple
(purpurissum) and other colors, Crystal, the Loadstone, the Glasse-stone,
(lapis specularis) vitrum obsidianum, the Ceraunij and Hyacinthi, certain
pearls and precious stones, are highly commended by Pliny, Strabo, Varro,
Diodorus, Florus, Trogus; Dioscorides writes that Spain does yield red oker,
Cadmia, Schistus, and Sorry. Pausanias in his Arcadica says, that in Spain,
Cinoper (Cinnabaris) is commonly found in the same mine with gold. Theophrastus
teaches us that the Corke-tree grows plentifully in the Pyreney mountains.
Gellius, from the relation of Varro, does wonderfully extol the mast of
Spain. Heliodorus mentions the Spanisp Amethyst. The Nar, of the Corritani,
a kind of fish called of the Latins perna, is by Strabo preferred before those
of the Cantabri. Gellius commends the Lampreies taken near Tartessus. of the
marvelous fat Swine of this country Varro in the 11. chapter of his 2. book
of Husbandry, tells a strange tale: to wit, that the skin did hang over their
mouths, a foot and three fingers. Oppianus and Julius Pollux do greatly
commend the Hounds of Spain. So does Nemesianus. Quorum proles de sanguine
manat Ibero: Those whelps the huntsman most commend'th, That Spanish race does
yield. The same Varro and Oppianus with Strabo the great Cosmographer do as
highly extol the wild horses of this country. Of these I think Olympius
Nemesianus did speak in these his verses: Quin etiam gens ampla iacet trans
ardua Calpes Culmina, cornipedum late foecunda proborum etc. Aut inconcusso
glomerat vestigia dorso, Aut molli pacata celer trahit esseda collo. A mighty
nation dwell'th beyond the stately tops of Calpe high, Which store of Horses
good does breed, esteemed throughout the world so wide. Some pace it well and
amble fine, they never hotch nor shake at all: Some draw in plough or cart as
well, and run up hill as swift as wind. Item, Silius Italicus, an author
often in this history cited by me, reports the same, in these verses of his,
Martius hic sompes campos hinnitibus implet, Hinc iuga cornipedes euecti
bellica captant; The warlike steed with mighty noice does fill the champion
fields. Martial also thus speaks of them, Hic breuis ad numerum rapidos qui
colligit vngues, Venit ab armiferis gentibus Astur equus. This little nag that
trot'th so fine, and tread'th the measures round, Did come from warlike
Astures, it was bred in Spanish ground. The forenamed Silius in another place
speaks thus of another kind: Hic parus sonipes, nec Marti notus. This little
apish tit, For warlike service is not fit. Of this kind peradventure Gratius
speaks thus: Non tamen Hispano Martem tentare minace ausim, I dare not for my
life to serve in field, upon the weake-limm'd Spanish tits. Perhaps this is
that kind of horse which Pliny calls Thieldones, and Asturcones, Nags,
Hobbies or Gennets, very small of bone and grow'th. Which in their travel have
not an ordinary pace, as other horses, but by gathering up their feet round do
amble gently, which Plautus terms tollutim incedere. Seneca in his Epistles
calls them Asturcones and mannos tollutares, Ambling nags or gennets. Of the
coach-horses ( equi curules, or, quadrigales) bred here, and for their
extraordinary swiftness much esteemed far and near. Quintus Aurelius
Symmachus makes a long discourse. He terms this country equini pecoris
diuitem, rich in multitude of good horses. Silius Italicus, the worthy poet
says, that these horses are so swift, that they will out strip the winds. Of
mares got with foale by the wind, (near the maine sea about Lisbone, or, as
Silius writes amongst the Vettenes) in mount Sintra, (Tagrus) as Varro says,
or Cabo S. Vincente (mons sacer) as Columella would have it) many men have
written many things, and more peradventure then is true. All generally do
attribute this to the nature and quality of the West wind in those parts. Varro
and Columella do affirm that the colts or foales bred by this means do not
live above 3. years: yet Silius says that they will live well till they be 7.
years old. Columella writes, that it is a thing well known to every man to
be true: Varro tells it for an incredible matter, yet very true; and withal
affirms that mares do there conceive by means of the wind, as here hens
do: whose eggs by him are called Hypenemia, or, Subuentanea, by Pliny Zephyria,
that is, wind-egs. Aristotle in the 5. and 6. books of his history of Living
creatures speaks of these eggs. And although Julius Solinus, and S. Augustine,
in his book de ciuitate Dei, do write, that the same comes to pass, to the
mares in Cappadocia; and Homer would make the world believe that the North wind
makes the mares of Erichthonius with foale, and that I am not ignorant that
Aelianus in the 25. chapter of his 7. book de Animalibus, does think that
even the winds do make mares more fruitful; yet I do rather think with Trogus
that this did arise of the marvelous fruitfulness of the mares and swiftness
of the horses, which is such that in that respect there is just cause to deem
them to have been begotten by the wind. Of these our Silius Italicus, himself
a Spaniard borne, writes thus: Et venerem occultam genitali concipitaura, By
secret means they do conceive, The wind does make them big. And peradventure
Virgil in these his verses aimed at this story. Omnes ore versae in Zephyrum
stant rupibus altis, Exceptantque leaves auras, and saepe sine villis Coniugijs
vento grauidae, (mirabile dictu.) Beside these there are also certain other
miracles and strange things to be seen and observed in Spain. In Cadima (
ager Carrinensis, or, Catinensis, as some copies have it) there are two
springs, whereof the one swalloweth up all things that are cast into it, the
other casts them out. In the same province there is another which makes all
the fishes that are in it to seem as if they were of a golden color: yet they
being out of the water do nothing at all differ from those of other waters. In
Cantabria the three Tamaricke fountains ( fontes Tamarici, Pliny names them)
8. foot distant one from another, are ordinarily every day 12. times dry, and
sometime 20. times, so clean that you can scarce discern whether ever they
had water in them or not. When as notwithstanding there is another large
fountain hard by them that runs continually; thus far out of Pliny.
Suetonius in Galba says that a thunderbolt fell into a lake of Cantabria, and
that there were 12. hatchets (secures) found there. In Spain there is a river
which at the first sight differs nothing from other waters: but if you listen
but a little while, you shall hear the water make a fine whistling noice. For
as soon as never so little wind shall but move the pooles or deeper places, the
water resoundeth melodiously like a musical instrument. The wind strikes in
manner of the quill, the water serves in stead of the cittron, as Achilles
Statius writes in his 1. book De Amoribus. In the confines of Gallecia there
is a mountain called Mons Sacer, (Pico Sagro, the Spaniards do yet to this day
call it) which it was not lawful to dig or strike with any iron tool: but if
at any time by fall of thunderbolt the ground were broken, which in these
countries is an ordinary thing, the gold which by that means shall be discovered,
is gathered by those which come next, as if it were a special gift and favor
of God, as Trogus in the 44. book of his History testifies. Strabo writes
that in Lusitania (now Portugal) there is a kind of Salt found which is of a
purple color. Sidonius in Oresius affirms, That there is another kind of
Salt dug out of the mountains of Tarracon, which is sweet and of a pleasant
taste. Amongst the Hispani Albini about Iberus, Gellius out of Varro describes
a great mountain all of clean salt: from which look how much soever you
shall take from it, so much within a while it will wax and grow again. Lucian
in his vows, makes mention of Spanish pickle, or saltfish. Pliny writes that
upon the sea coast of Cantabria there is a very steep high hill that is all
nothing else but clean iron. Those which fall sick at Caliz (Gades) as
Philostratus reports, cannot die, their souls cannot depart from them, so
long as the tide does drown or ouerflow the country. And thus much hitherto of
old Spain, terris omnibus terra foeliciore, cui excolendae atque adeo ditandae
impensius quam caeteris gentibus (as Latinus Pacatus says) supremus ille
fabricator indulsit, that is, This land for goodness of soil excels all
lands in the whole world beside: about the trimming and furnishing of which,
and so consequently for the enriching of the same, almighty God creator of all,
bestowed more time and care then ordinarily he did for other countries. The
description of which I purpose to finish and close up with that commendation,
wherewith Pliny concludes his Natural history: Ab Italia, exceptis Indiae
fabulosis, proxime quidem dixerim Hispaniam, quocumque ambitur mari, that is,
Next after Italy, excepting always those fablous reports of India, I give
Spain the commendations, upon those sides especially which do butte upon the
sea.

Without the limits of the maine land or continent of Spain, there is a part
of this country called INSVLARIS, or BALEARIVM, that is, The Spanish isles, or,
the Baleares. For this part of Spain consists altogether of islands. The
names of those which do lie in the Ocean or Maine sea, are these, GADES (now
Caliz) IVNONIS insula, GERYONIS monumentum, (S. Pedro, a little i will between
Caliz and the maine land) LONDOBRIS, over against Portugal, now known by the
name of Barlinguas; CORTICATA, AVNIOS, DEORVM insulae, peradventure those which
they now call Islas de Baiona; and the feigned CASSITERIDES, in this tract. For
these famous islands are indeed those which our seamen call The Sorlings,
belonging to the crown of England, as we have showed before. In the Midland
sea are these following: the two BALEARES, the Greater and the Lesser MALLORCA
and MENORCA: the two PITYVSAE, to wit, EBVSVS, (now Yuica, or as some term it
Ibissa) and OPHIVSA; SCOMBRARIA (Cabo di Palos) COLVBRARIA, (Moncolobrer)
CAPRARIA (Cabrera) TIQVADRA (Coneiera) PLVMBARIA, PLANESIA, and MAENARIA, all
of them, except only the Baleares and Gades, small islands and of none account.
Gades was much renowned and famous long since by means of the fables of
Hercules and Geryon feigned by Poets to have been acted here, as also for that
the long lived king Arganthonius, who was before his death 300. years old, did
sometime keep his court here. The Baleares were much talked of, by reason the
Ilanders were counted good slingers, best experienced and skillful in that
weapon called by the Romans, Funda. But especially it was much spoken of by
means of the great famine and dearth that there was caused by conies: of which
there was sometime in these Islands such wonderful store and abundance, that
old stories do testify, that the country people were forced to entreat of
Augustus Caesar a military aid and band of men to help to destroy them, keep
them from breeding and spreading any further. Pliny compares the winds of
these Islands with the best that are made of Italian grapes. I do verily believe
that Seruius upon the 7. book of Virgils Aeneids did mistake the matter, when
he writes that Geryon did rule as king of the Baleares, and the Pityusaes. For
all other writers do affirm, that he reigned and kept his court about Gades.
Except in defense of Seruius one should allege this saying of Trogus: In part
Hispaniae quae ex insulis constat, regnum penes Geryonem fuit: that is, In a
part of Spain which consists altogether of islands, Geryon swaied the
scepter, and ruled as sovereign king. But that he spoke this of Gades, and the
island, not far from it in the maine sea, the wonderful pastorage and
rankenesse which he ascribes to these is a sufficient argument and proof;
which by no means may be verified of the Baleares. Again, Solinus plainly
testifies for me that Bocchoris, and not Geryon, did reign in the Baleares.
But his own words may perhaps please thee better; therefore listen, thus he
speaks: Bocchoris regnum Baleares fuerunt, vsque ad euersionem Phrygum
cuniculis animalibus quondam copiosae. In capite Baeticae, vbi extremus est
NOTI ORBIS terminus, insula a septingentis passibus separatur, quam Tyrij a
Rubro profecti mari, ERYTHRAEAM, Poeni sua lingua GADIR, id est, sepem
nominarunt. In hac Geryonem habitasse plurimis monumentis probatur, tametsi
quidam putent Herculem boues ex alia insula abduxisse, quae Lusitaniam
contuetur. Thus rudely in English. The Baleares where Bocchoris, until the
overthrow of the Phrygians, reigned and held his court, were sometime
wonderfully full of Conies. In the entrance and head of Baetica which is the
outmost bound of the KNOWN WORLD, there is an island which is distant from the
maine land threescore and ten pases. This the Tyrians, come from the Redsea,
called ERYTHRAEA, or, The Red island: but the Poeni or Carthaginians in their
language named it GADIR, that is, The hedge. Here Geryon did sometime dwell,
as monuments and antiquities do strongly prove; although some do think that
Hercules did carry the Oxen from another island, which lies over against
Lusitania. Thus far Solinus. Observe here that (...) Gader, in the ancient
language of the Jews, and

Giadir, in the modern tongue of the farre-conquering Arabians, does signify
an hedge, enclosure, or fence. Beside these forenamed islands known to the
ancient and best writers Sextus Rufus Auienus recites others by these names:
OESTRYMNIDES, ARCHALE, POETANION, AGONIDA, CARTARE, STRONGILE and LVNAE. These
because no man else does seem to know or take notice of, peradventure may be
some of those which Pliny terms mari vadoso paruas, Small islands or shelues
in the shallow sea, and are in number well near twenty. What if to these I
should adioine CROMYVSA and MELVSSA, certain islands upon the coast of Spain,
as Stephanus cites out of Hecataeus his Cosmography?

Of TRANSFRETANA or TINGITANA Hispania, that other part, I mean, of Spain,
beyond the streights, called Tingitania, (because it did only in name and
usurpation, not indeed and of right belong to Spain: as also for that it is,
thus Pomponius Melawriteth of it, Regio ignobilis, and vix quidquam illustre
sortita, paruis opidis habitatur, parua flumina emittit, solo quam viris
melior, and segnitiae gentis obscura, Abase country, and has scarce any good
thing in it worth the speaking of. It has no famous cities but small ragged
towns and villages. The rivers which run through it are very small and not
nauigable: yet the soil is better than the men. For the slouththfulnesse and
cowardice of the people has made the country the more obscure:) I will speak
nothing of in this place.

GALLIA, (now FRANCE) as it was in the time of STRABO and the rest of the
ancient Geographers.
ALl that tract of the earth, which the Ocean, the midland sea, the Pyreney
mountains and the river Rheine do contain and compass, is called of old
wtiters GALLIA or GALACIA, and the inhabitants CELTI or CELTAE. Whereupon
Ptolemey properly named it CELTOGALACIA. We have demonstrated and showed at
large in the old map of Europe, that the name Celtes was more general in
times past: and that Gallia did reach beyond the Alps as far as the river
Rubicon; because indeed that part of Italy (as we know) was possessed and
inhabited by them. But we purpose here only to describe that which is
properly and truly called Gallia, whose bounds we have set down to be the
Ocean, the Rhine and the mountains. This the Romans divided into GALLIA
TRANSALPINA, that is, Gallia beyond the Alps and GALLIA CISALPINA, that is,
Gallia on this side the Alps. Mela and Plinic divided it into two parts, the
one lying Northward, the other Southward: this Pliny and his imitatour Solinus
by the two hills Gebenna and lura: Mela by the hill Gebenna and the river
Rhosne: after whch manner alio Entropius and Suetonius do distinguish it. They
call that part, which is toward the North GALLIA COMATA; because the
inhabitants did wear long hair: the other toward the South GALLIA BRACCATA,
of a short kind of coat, which the people of that country did commonly go in.
The whole is divided of Caesar into three parts: of the which one (says he) is
inhabited by the BELGAE, another by the AQVITANI, and the third by them, who in
their tongue are called CELTAE, and in ours GALLI. The river Garonde parts
the Celtes from the Aquitanes, and the rivers Seine and Marne do divide them
from the Belgae. But GALLIA NARBONENSIS is not mentioned in this division:
which part Pliny and Pomponius Mela do describe severally by it self, and
Caesar comprehends it under the name of PROVINCE. Notwithstanding Ptolemey in
his description, and Ammianus, who follows him, does attribute it unto
Gallia, and divide the whole into four parts, to wit, AQVITANIA, LVGDVNENSIS
(the very same with Celtica) BELGICA and NARBONENSIS. But all do not limite
this division with the same bounds. For Caesar places the Heluetians next to
the Gauls or Celtes, whom Pliny and the foresaid Ptolemey place in Belgica.
Caesar makes Belgica to reach from the Rhine to Marne, Pliny from the river
Scaldis to the Seine. Caesar places the river Garonde as the bound between
the Celtes and the Aquitanes, so likewise does Pomponius Mela; but Strabo
boundeth it with the river Loire, and that according to the prescript of
Augustus, with whom also Ptolemey does agree. The foresaid Strabo (following I
know not what authors) says that the Belgae inhabit between the Rhine and
the Ocean and amongst them numbreth the Veneti, the utmost people that dwell
toward the West sea. But I fear much, lest in that place in sted of Belgae he
should have said Celtae, seeing that according to all Geographers and
Historiographers the people Veneti are placed in Gallia Celtica or Lugdunensis.
Succeeding ages divided the whole country of Gallia into many parts, as we may
read in Sextus Rufus, Ammianus, a book entitled Liber Notitiar: and another
called Dignitatum Libellulus, which authors do reckon all the parts and
regions thereof to be seventeen; all which we offer to thy view in this our
map. But afterward in process of time, to wit, after the time of Charlemaine
it was divided only into two parts the one AVSTRASIA, that is, East France, the
other NEVSTRIA (as they corruptly write it) or Vestria or rather Westria, that
is, West France. And so much concerning the name of this country, the
limitation and the bounds, which Suetonius in the life of Julius affirms to
contain in compass 32. hundred miles. Now it remains that we write somewhat
in like manner of the nature, temperature and commodities of the same.

Claudian writes that it is a most blessed and a happy country in respect of
the situation of it. And Caesar in his third book of Civil wars reports it
to be most healthful. Seneca in his third of Natural Questions says it is
full of brooks and rivers. Solinus records it had in times past sacred and
vaporous fountains. Strabo describes it to be all well watered and moistened
with brooks and rivers, and that the places, along which they run, are for
the most part champion grounds (for Sidonius says, that here are large and
open) or else small rising hills. The same author records that it bears
great store of grain, millet, and maste, and that it breeds all manner of
cattle. [The forementioned Sidonius in Maioranus his Panegyricke writes that
it is plentifully stored with cattle.] There is in it nothing superfluous,
unless it be, where it is either marrish or fenny, or ouergrown with wood.
Trebellius in his Balista makes it to be fruitful of grain, which same thing
Cicero affirms to be true in his oration for Marcus Fonteius: where he
wrireth that great store of corn was wont to be carried out of this country
by the Romans, and we may read in Caesar's third book of his Commentaries and
in Dions 39. book how they did use to send their Ambassadors for provision of
corn unto the Veneti, a people of this country. But Pliny testifies that this
corn was the lightest and worst kind of all those sorrs of corn that were
usually brought to Rome. The same author in another place has left in writing
that the people of Aquitane did eat panicke. Solinus extolleth France for a
fortunate country in respect of the fatness of the soil, and many rich
commodities, in many places also replenished with vines and orchards and
blessed with store of all things necessary for the behoof of man. But let us
hear also what Pomponius Mela says of this country. It is a land very
fruitful, chiefly of grass and corn, and pleasant to behold and beautified
with many great and goodly forests. Any kind of corn, that cannot well away
with cold, the country yields not every where, neither is there here any
great store of hurtful and noisome beasts. Let us here also what Julian the
Emperor in his Misopogones, an eie-witnesse says of this country: The winter
there is most mild, by reason of the heat of the Ocean as it is thought, or
else it may be because there blows thence a certain soft gale of wind: and
the sea water seems to be warmer than the fresh water. Whether it be
therefore for this reason, or for any other unknown to me, I cannot tell, yet
of this I am sure that this is true. The Winter of that land is verry temperate
and mild to the inhabitants: moreover the best vines do grow there: and many
also by their art and industry have now made fig trees to grow there, which in
winter they are feign to cover over with wheat straw or stubble and such like
things, as it were with clothes, thereby to defend them from the violence and
injuries of the air. Thus far out of Julian. It is true indeed that the
cold, (because the country, according to Caesar in his first book of
Commentaries lies far North) is wont to stay and slack the ripeness of
corn. Wherefore we may fitly add to this place that, which Varro has set
down in his first book of husbandry: In Gallia Transalpina (says he) there
are some regions bordering upon the Rhine, where neither vine, nor olive, nor
apples would grow, unless they did dung their grounds with a kind of white
chaulke dug out of the earth, which Pliny calls marga, that is, marle. but
Claudian terms it Galliam niue feratem, France fertile of snow: and Lucian
speaks of French ice: and hence comes that proverb in Petronius Arbiter,
Colder than French snow. Insomuch that Diodorus confesses, that when the
rivers are frozen over, they are not only passable to few, but even to whole
armies, with their carts and wagons. He adds likewise, that in steed of
water it is replenished with snow. Heerehence it is, if I be not deceived, that
Aristotle reports amongst his wonders, that France breeds no asses. Seneca
in his third book of Natural questions affirms it to be windy. The
North-West wind (Circius) (says he) annoieth France: to it, notwithstanding
that be ready to overthrow their houses and buildings, they give thanks, as to
whom they attribute their healthfulnesse, which peradventure might seem false
and fabulous, if the same author did not in that very place add these words
following: Augustus (who was afterward made a god) erected and dedicated a
temple to this wind, at such time as he soiourned in France. Of this wind you
may read more in Aulus Gellius his 2. book 22. chapter, but I take it to be
that Northen wind, which infecteth those places called Campi lapidei Stondon,
(whereof we shall speak hereafter) where these things are known to be true
even to this day. Cicero in his oration De prouineijs consularibus, moved (as
it seems) with the sharpness of this air, cried out truly or falsely. What
can be found more sharp or rough, than those places? What more desolate than
their towns? What more barbarous than their nations? What more large than
their Ocean? Yet for all that, the nature of the air and soil never let or
hindered, but that they learned either of Rome from her cradle, (as Macrobius
witnesses in his 2. book upon Somnium Scipionis, or of the Massilians as
reports Trogus 43. to plant both vines and olives. Pliny notes that one
Elico, a Swisser or Heluetian (having been entertained at Rome for his skill
in smiths work and carpentrie) at his return again into his country, brought
over with him dry figs and raisons, oil and wine. From which time afterward
there was such plenty of vines, that Columella does as it were complain, that
the Italians did lay up their vintage here: and Plutarch records that they
did use to send to Rome from Vienna in France that wine, which of a kind of
taste that it had of pitch was called vinum Picatum, as soon as it began to be
in request there. Therefore I would gladly understand what Vopiscus and
Eusebius should mean, who deliver that the Emperor Probus was the first that
granted the Gauls to plant and set vines. Shall any man think that until his
time there were no vines in any part of France, saving only in Province? Yet
Pliny makes mention of the vine of Berrie, likewise of the vine of Auuergne. I
must needs confess my shallowness of understanding herein. Julian the
Emperor writes in his Misopogones, that in his time there was an excellent
vine at Paris, and Isidorus commends the vine of Berrie. Strabo plainly
shows that there were here metals both gold and silver and the best sort
thereof in the mountain Cemmenus, now called Mountaignes de' Auergne, or, de
Ceuennes, as Poldus affirms. That there were also excellent gold-mines among
the Tarbelli, and iron mines in Perigort and Berrie. Athenaeus writes that
gold was dug up in some part of Celtica. Ausonius calls Tarne, a river of
Aquitane, the golden flood. Diodorus in his fifth book reckons up in it
diverse golden rivers: from hence it comes, as we read in Procopius, that the
Gauls did coin gold found in their own native soil, which was not stamped
like other money, with the picture of the Roman Emperors, but only with a
stamp of their own. Cassiodorus in his seventh book, and 37. section of his
Variar. makes mention of their coin in these words: Gallis auctoribus sine
aliquo adhuc signo ad metalla translata est; Hence it arose, as seems that of
Manilius Gallia is termed rich; of Dion, flourishing in wealth: of Josephus,
the rich Galls: and in Sibyls oracles, the Galls wealthy in gold. And
howsoever Diodorus writes that they have no silver, yet Athenaeus reports
that a wood by a mischance being set on fire so inflamed the Pyreney mountains
that there issued and ran forth great streams of melted silver. Moreover
Strabo reports that there were silver mines among the Rutheni and Gabali,
certain nations and people of Aquitane: and Caesar speaks of certain mines
of brass in diverse places. It is observed by Pliny that the Amethyst, a kind
of jasper, is found in France; as also Coral, near Marsiles about the Islands
Stoechades. There is also found Amber, in a river of the Celtae, if we may
believe Dion Prusaeus. For as I think it to be true if he meant it of the
Celto-Germanes, so I deem it false, if he meant it of the Celto-Galles. There
grow here also, as Pliny affirms, the purple vaccinia or whortles, wherewith
they did use to die clothes for their servants and slaves. In another place he
attributes to this country those rich tinctures of scarlet, purple and tyrian,
which were in such high estimation at Rome. To the same does Vitruuius assign
another sort of scarlet die. It is true by the testimony of Galen that Nard
(which tne Apothecaries used for to make treacle withal) was wont to be
brought out of France. Pliny shows that the best sort of fur that were,
grew upon the mountains Iura and Vogesus: and elsewhere, that birch first came
out of France, which they did use to boil and out of it to draw a glutinous
and clammy slime, which served in steed of bitumen: Item, that the herb
hyacinth or crow-toe do grow and prosper there exceedingly: that they sow line
or flax, wherewith being spun and wouen (as Strabo writes) they make sails,
although Caesar avouches that the Veneti people of America or Britain did use
skins or leather in steed of sails. That there did grow the citron-tree may
be gathered out of Paterculus, who affirms that Julius Caesar made
preparation for his French triumph of the citron-tree. But as there are in this
country these and such like herbs and trees, for the profit and use of man: so
are there those that be venomous and pernicious to man's nature. Of which sort
is the yew tree, and thereof, according to the testimony of Caesar, very great
plenty, which Dioscorides does deliver to be in Narbone of so deadly a poison,
that whosoever do either sleep under it, or shall sit and rest themselves in
this shade, they be not only hurt, but often times they do catch their death by
it. Concerning which tree Pliny adds this much, that it has been found by
experience, that in France the wine bottles made thereof for wayfaring men and
travelers have killed and poisoined those that drunk out of them: And Caesar
witnesses, that one Cat uulcus king of the Eburones made away himself with
the juice of the yew tree, whereof (says he) there was great abundance in
France. Aristotle amongst his wonders makes mention of a kind of poison which
is found in this country, called of them xenicon, the Greek copy has (...).
But hereof, hereafter we shall have occasion to speak in another place. And
this much concerning things without life: now concerning living creatures by
your patience we will in as few words as we may, set down what we have read and
observed written by all ancient writers. Trebellius in the life of Claudius the
Emperor makes mention of a famous breed of mares in this country. The
infinite number of dogs of this nation be not only highly commended by the
Poets, Ovid, Oppian and Gratius; but even also by Pollux the Grammarian, and
Euphrada the orator. Pliny says that he saw with his own eyes in the grand
cirque of Pompey the great a hart-woolfe (Lupus ceruarius) brought out of
France. Their swine, according to the relation of Strabo, be notable for their
bigness, strength and swiftness, which are to him that is not used to them,
as dangerous as the fiercest wolves. For which cause it cannot be denied but
that Athenaeus wrote very truly that they had the best bacon, and that (the
aforesaid Strabo bearing witness) in such plenty, that from hence they did
therewith furnish not only Rome, but also most places of Italy. I observe out
of Varro his tract de lingua Latina, that is, of the Latin tongue, that there
be here very great hares: in which author also there is mention made of
French wool, which according to Strabo is very course. If any credit be to be
given to the forceited Pliny, there is found in the upper coasts of France
toward the North Ocean foul like to a swan called Onocrotalus: item, as he
says, there is found fresh Saln on: in the French Ocean a mighty sea fish
called Physeter, or a whirlepoole, raising himself up aloft out above the sea,
in manner of a great column or pillar, higher then the very sails of ships,
spouting out as it were a deluge of waters, ready to drown and sink even very
tall ships: likewise there are, as the same author says, mearmaids, elephants
and sea-rammes. In the river Sone, as Stobeus gathers out of Calisthenes,
there breeds a huge kind of fish, called of the inhabitants therabouts
Clupea, which while the moon increases, seems white of color: and the same
decreasing grows black and when his body grows to be of an extraordinary
bigness, he is killed of his own chines or bones. In the head of this fish is
found a small stone, not unlike to a grain of Salt, (Plutarch in his book de
Montibus, affirms it to be like a crumme or little quantity of Frankincense)
which is a special remedy against the quartane ague, if in the wane of the
moon it be but applied to the left side of the body. Glycas out of Anastasius
terms this fish Clopia, but Plutarch, in the place before quoted, names it,
Scolopidon. It is almost incredible what a marvelous multitude of frogs be
here: such was, I say, the abundance of them, that the inhabitants of a
certain city were driven out and forced to seek another place to dwell in.
Yet Pliny, of whom we have so often spoken, avouches it to be true, citing
Varro for his author; and Trogus in his 15. book confirms it, affirming the
like thing to have happened to the Abderites, a certain people of Thrace. But
let us come to other more wonderful things of this region: and first the
history of fishes dug out of the ground, is as strange as any, of which
Pomponius Mela uses these very words: In Gallia Narbonensis is the fountain
Salsula, which shedeth water not sweet but more brackish than the water of the
sea. Hard by is a field all green and covered over with short and slender
reeds, yet otherwise it swimmeth and floteth aloft upon a pole that bears it
up. That it is so, the middle part of it plainly proves, which being cut off
from the rest about it, swimmeth like an Island, and suffers it self to be
shoued and drawn to and fro. Moreover by those map of ancient Gaul GALLIAE
VETERIS Typus.
Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij.

AMPLISS. VIRIS DD. EDVARDO VANDER DILFT, ET CAROLO MALINEO, NOBILITATE RERVMQ.
PERITIA CLARISS. VRBISQ. ANTVERP. COSS. ABRAH. ORTELIVS L.M. DEDICABAT.

Nomendaturae et positionis locorum huius tabulae testimonia, pete ex Thesauro
nostro Geographico.

Cum Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Cancel. Brab. 1594.

places also that are cut and digd quite through, appears the sea sheaded
underneath it. Whereupon, whether it were through ignorance of the truth, or
that they were purposely disposed to make a leasing, it liked is well our
authors as also the Greeks, to leave in writing unto such as should come
after, fish was dug out of the whole ground in that country, which indeed
coming out of the deep sea thither, and there being, killed by such as bobbed
for them, was drawn dead out of the aforesaid holes. This much out of him. Now
whether Strabo and Athenaeus be to be numbered amongst those Greek writers,
whose credit Mela does extenuate herein, I know not. For Strabo in his 4. book
delivers, that about the river Ruscino (in the very same province that Mela
there describes) there is a lake not far from it, and a little farther off from
the sea a waterish fenny piece of ground, full of salt pots, wherein are
mullets, which are wont to be drawn and taken out of the earth. For as soon
as a man diggeth 3. or 4. foot deep into the ground, thrusting an eel-speare
into the mud, a man shall sometime chance to stick or kill the foresaid fish,
being of a reasonable growth and bigness. This kind of fish, like the eele, is
bred and lives in the mudde. Thus writes he. Athenaeus in his 8. book, out of
Polybius his 34. book of histories says thus: that from the Pyreney
mountains until you come to Narbon, the fields, all along through the wh ch
the rivers Iliberis and Ruscino do run, be plain and champion, in which
fields are found those fishes which they term fossiles, that is, dug out
of the ground. For the soil of that place is soft and green, much grass
growing thereon: underneath the grass, the earth being for two or three
cubits deep sandy, you shall find water that has soaked thither and issued
forth out of the rivers, in which fishes do wander through those streams for
their food, being exceedingly delighted with the roots of the grass. All that
coast is full of fishes under the ground, which as soon as the earth is cast
up, they take. And D^lechampius upon Athenaeus has observed that this manner of
fishing does as yet in that place continue even to this day. I have been
always of this mind, that that little history which Aristotle has left in
writing in his book of wonders may fitly be referred hither: how that in the
borders of the Marseilles nere the Ligusticke sea, there is a lake, which
bubbling and streaming forth casts out an infinite multitude of fishes,
exceeding all belief etc. Pliny in his 9. book, chapter 17. says, that if in
that season, when mullets use to engender, in the province of Narbone, a man
take a milter out of their pooles where they are kept, and draw a long string
or line through the mouth and guils and so tie it fast and then put him into
the sea, holding the other end of the line still in his hand, if he pull him
again unto him, he shall have a number of spawners or females follow him hard
at the tail to the banks side. Semblably, if he do the same with the female
in spawning time, he shall have as many milters follow after her. In the very
same province, after the same author, is there a famous well named Orge,
within the very head whereof grow certain herbs, so much desired and sought for
by kine and oxen, that to seek and get a mouthfull of them, they will thrust
in their whole heads over their ears, until they meet therewith. In another
place of Pliny I read this following: There is a city of Gallia named Tungri,
much renowned for a noble fountain, which runs at many pipes: a waft it
has resembling the rust of iron, howbeit this taste is not perceived but at
the farewell and when you have done drinking only. this water is purgative and
drives away tertian agues, expels the stone and cures the symptoms
attending thereupon: Set this water over the fire or near unto it, and you
shall see it thick and troubled; but at the last it will become red. Moreover
this province, as it is described of S. Augustine in his book De ciuitate Dei,
has a fountain about Gratianopolis, or Grenoble, very like the holy well in
Epyre, which, if you dip a burning torch therein, it presently quenches it,
and if you hold it a good way off without any fire on it, of it own nature
kindles it again. Artimedorus is author, that upon the sea coast of France
there is a lake, which is called Lacus duorum coruorum, that is, the lake of
the two crows, in which he says two crows were ordinarily to be seen, each
of them having their right wings white of color. Hither repair all those that
have any matter in controversy, and upon a table set on high, each party for
himself layth down a cake. When the crows fly thither, they devour one
cake, and the other they break all to crumbs: but he obtains the cause
against his adversary, whose cake is broken and cast down. But Strabo judges
this history to be but a mere fable. Aristotle also amongst his wonders
reckons the high way called in his time Heraclea via, which is reported to
have reached from Italy even to the Celto-Galles, or Celtiberi. On this way all
passengers whether Greeks or homeborne are carefully looked unto, or guarded
by the inhabitants, lest any harm by mischance befall them in their journey.
For they in whose borders the harm is done, are by law punished or bound to
make good the loss. Vitrunius writes, that in Marsiles tiles are made, which
being cast into the water do swim and not sink. I may now fitly amongst these
wonders describe that field which is called Campus lapideus, that is, Stondoun,
or Stone-field. Geographers do place it between Marsiles and the mouth of the
river Rhone: Pliny calls it the memorial of Hercules his battles: because
that Hercules in this place fighting against Albion and Bergion the sons of
Neptune, and having spent all his artillery, called upon his father Jupiter,
who powered down a shewre of stones for his defense and aid: and a man would
verily believe that it had rained stones indeed, there lie so many, here and
there, and those so far bespread every way. This fable also is confirmed by
Mela, Solinus, Higinus and Martianus: yet before them all I willingly prefer
the opinion of Strabo, who describes it: There is a plain distant from the
sea about an hundred stadia or furlongs, about so much over from one side to
the other, and it is in compass round. It is of the event called the stony
plain. For it is full of stones, as big as a man can gripe, underneath which
grows grass, yielding great store of pasture for cattle: but within the
midst thereof there is water, saltpits and salt. The whole region that
bordereth upon it upwards, lies open to winds: but upon this plain chiefly
lies and blows the violent and impetuous Northern wind, wherewith, men
say, stones are hoised up and whirled in the air and men blown down out of
wagons and with the force thereof stripped both of armor and apparel. The
same author also brings this probable reason of Possidonuis, who said that
it had sometimes been a lake, which when it was dried up by reason of the
continual tossing and drift of the water this way and that way, was thereby
parted into many stones, resembling somewhat those pebble stones on the banks
of rivers, or sea-shoare very like one another in greatness and smoothness
etc. Aristotle in his 2. book of Meteors and 8. chapter affirms it to have
been made so stony by an earthquake and names it the Phlegraean plain.
Diodorus describes the very same plain (although not by the same name)
together with the wind infecting it. The forest of Ardrine is here also (in
Belgica I mean) of which Tacitus, in his 5. book of Annals, writes thus:
They sought those forests, which were named Arduenna. Are there then many of
this name? Can it be proved to be so out of Pomponius Mela, because that in one
place he says that Gallia is pleasant to behold by reason of many goodly great
forests? I cannot think it to be true: considering that in all old histories
(for as much as I know) there is mention made only of one wood or forest of
this name. Notwithstanding I am persuaded that it was scattred both in length
and breadth and happily one part disioined from another, yet all under one and
the self same name. For Caesar avouches it to be of a huge bigness: and
indeed even the greatest forest in all Gallia, as that which extends it self
from the river Rhine through the middle of the country of the Treuires unto the
entrance of the borders of Rhemes, and then declined toward the place, where
the rivers Skeld and Maze meet together: so that it was more than 500. miles in
length. These 500. miles (allowing eight stadia for a mile) do amount unto
4000. stadia, which number Strabo does assign it, but out of authors (as he
supposes) not worthy to be believed, if that place of his be vncorrupt. For
the learned Causa bonus, the glory of France, and honor of that his country,
in his learned Commentaries upon the said writer, scarce thinks the place to
be without error. Neither does it seem to me likely to be true, that Caesar,
who was an ey-witnesse of this forest, was ignorant of the measure thereof.
That Diana was surnamed Arduenna of this forest, is proved out of an old
monument of marble, whereof we shall speak more at large hereafter. And thus
far concerning the region. Now it follows to treat of the people. Pausinias
makes it a populous region: and Liuy, fruitful of men. Polybius also in his
2. book of civil wars, witnesses the same. For he writes that Caesar
subdued 400. diverse people of this realm of France. Iornandes says that they
exceed the common stature of men. Their bodies according to Hirtius are to be
marvelled at for their mighty lims and greatness, and according to Ammianus
they were tall of stature. And that they are of exceeding tallness above other
nations, it is apparent out of Caesar, when he says, that in respect of their
own tallness and goodly personages, all the Gauls for the most part account
the Romans but very dwarfes. Moreover that they were tall of stature, tender
and soft fleshed, and very fair complexioned, Strabo plainly testifies. That
they were whitely colored and snowt-faire these words of Petronius unto Gyrton
do seem to approve, Increta facies, vt Gallia suos ciues putet: Their faces
were painted, that France might think them to have been French men borne.
Namely, that by that means they might counterfeit the natural beauty and
whitlinesse of the Gauls: and not, as my singular good friend, in that his most
learned and exact description of England writes, who thinks that the Gauls
were wont to clear their faces to make them look more beautified: which
cannot be proved out of any ancient author, if I do not forget my self. And
no marvel, seeing that nature it self has voluntarily bestowed upon them
this beauty and whiteness. From hence it is, that the Poet says that the
Gauls had Lactea colla, that is, white necks. That they did usually wear their
hair long (for which cause one part of Gallia was termed Comata) I have for my
authors Strabo and Clemens Alexandrinus: as also Agathias, who writes that it
was an ordinary custom amongst the kings of France never to be cut or polled
but to continue vnshauen from their cradle to their dying day, and to have
their locks hanging trimly upon their shoulders, with their hair before
curiously sheaded, and falling down upon either shoulder. This their hair
Liuy delivers to have been long and yellow. Diodorus says it was naturally
reddish, and yet they augment this color by art. For according to Leopardus
the interpreter in his emendations they washed their hair continually with a
lie made of chalk and turned it up from the forehead toward the crown and
noddle, to the end that they might be conspicuous and eminent, and that their
look might seem to be most like to Panes and Satyrs. They likewise made
their hair so thick, that it differed nothing from the manes of horses. Was
this the reason then that Claudian happily says Gallia crine ferox, that is,
The Frenchman grim of countenance by reason of his long hair? Pliny affirms
that soap was an invention devised by the French for to color the hair of
their head yellow: in so much that Claudian says, that the Frenchmen have
aureos vertices, that is, yellow heads: and Virgil says, they have aureas
caesaries, that is, golden locks. To this purpose also are those words, which
Tertullian uses in his book De cultu Foeminarum, that is, of the ornaments of
women, where he delivers that some of them did use to color their hair with
saffron. To the very like reason Ammianus calls the French Candidos and
rutilos, whitish and ruddy, borrowing their denomination from their skin and
hair. I read in Liuy that they all wear long beards. Diodorus set it them out
in their true colors, thus. Some says he, shave their beards, other some let
them grow, although not over long. The gentle men and noblemen shave their
cheeks, but they suffer their beards to grow on their chin so long, until
they cover their bodies. Whereby it comes to pass, that when they eat, they
are every foot full of crummes and meat: and when they drink, the drink will
run down as it were through a pipe or channel. They use all means that can
invent, that they grow not too fat and gorbellied: and if any young man exceed
the prescript and set measure of his girdle, he is (as Strabo records)
amerced for it. And so much concerning their outward form and favor. Now it
remains to speak somewhat of their nature and disposition, whereof because
no writer is more skillful for knowledge and more ancient for writing than
Caesar; take these his words, as they lie scattered here and there in sundry
places of his Commentaries: The counsels says he, of the Gauls be hasty and
sudden: in their consultations they be variable and for the most part desirous
of alteration. This is a common custom among them, to compel even wayfaring
men to stay whether they will or no, and to enquire what news any man either
has heard, or knows of any matter whatsoever. And the common people use to
come flocking about the merchants in cities and do urge them to tell out of
what countries they come, and what things they know of there. And being moved
with these light reports and hearesaies, they fall to counsel oftentimes even
of most weighty matters: whereof they must needs repent them by and by after,
seeing they are so fondly led by uncertain rumors, and seeing also that
diverse persons do tell them forged news to feed their fancies withal. Thus
far Caesar. Moreover of these people we may read the very same things almost
in Polybius, Orosius, Trebellius and Vopiscus. But this peculiar custom of
theirs, which they have in their councels and assemblies, is not to be omitted,
which is (as Strabo reports) thus: if says he, any man among them with
noise or other tumult troubles him that is speaking, the sergeant comes unto
him with a naked sword or knife in his hand, and commands him to hold his
peace, threatening him therewith: thus he does three times, and then if the
party holds not his peace, and be not quiet, he cutteth off so much of h s
cassocke, that all the rest shall be good for no use at all. Diodorus and Strabo
affirm them to be sharp witted, and not without some smattering knowledge of
learning: So likewise does Symmachus, who commends their studies in good
lettets. Polybius more maliciously bent against them is not ashamed to say that
they neither apply themselves to learning nor to any manner of trade. But now
hear what Hirtius reports of them: They be plain dealing men, and no way
deceitful, they use to fight their battles by prowess and not by treachery.
Likewise Strabo thus commends them: they be of an honest disposition, without
fraud or guile, and no whit malicious or spiteful. Is it not for this cause
think you, that of the same author in another place they are called
Simplices, simple? of Seruius, Pigrioris ingenij, of a dull wit? of Firmicus,
stolidos, foolish? of Julian, Stupidos and rusticitatem amantes, blockish and
affecting a certain kind of clownishnesse? But on the contrary side, hark
what Lucius Florus writes: Let no man only call the French fierce or stout; for
they are crafty fellows and can do what they entend, very politickely. Is this
falsely? Or is it true, and likely that they learned it afterward of the
Romans? Who (as Trogus records) had sent Seruilius into Africa and had given
him a privy charge, if by any means he could, to make away Hanniball through
the help of those, who most of all envied his greatness. But neither was this
true, being improued by Julian the Emperor, that was an eie-witnesse, and
daily conversant amongst them, and therefore the rather in this case to be
believed, who not only after the aforesaid Florus, but also after all ancient
writers whatsoever, gives this commendation of them: to wit, that they know
not how to Hatter: they live honestly and simply without deceit or
dissimulation with all men, according to the laws of justice and equity: they
only intertaine Venus, the goddess of marriage, for wedlock and issue; and
Bacchus, the author of mirth, that they may have a sufficient competency of
wine to drink. Aelian reports that of all men living they are the readiest
to undergo dangers: Florus says, that they be Immanissimos, most savage:
Cicero and Eumenus, Immanes and barbaros, cruel and barbarous: Lucane, Trogus
and Hegesippus, Feroces, fierce: Auienus and Seneca, Truces, stern or grin:
Cassiodorus, Crudeles, cruel: Lucan, Sanguineos, bloody: Lampridius says that
they have Duras and retrogradas mentis, hard and backsliding false hearts.
Vopiscus affirms that they be, Gentium omnium inquietissimos, of all nations
the vnquietest: Liuy and Polybius, Molles and effoeminatos, delicate and
effeminate and the same Polybius in another place, faithless and given much to
surfettings and drunkenness; which same thing also Diodorus Athenaeus and
Clemens Alexandrinus do confirm to be true. The afore-cited Liuy says, that
they are exceedingly prone to anger, which this nation is not able to bridle or
moderate, and withal they are very covetous. Mela writes that they be proud
and superstitious: Silius, Vaniloquos, vain bablers and Plutarch in his
Pyrrhus, that they are exceeding covetous of money. Such like praises has this
nation, but all of them proceeding from a deadly sore, and therefore let them
approve and justify the truth of these their assertions. Nevertheless there
be extant, amongst other, these two examples of their cruelty: the one of them
in T^ogus, who writes that in their war and fight against Antigonus, when by
divination by the inwards of beasts offered in sacrifice, their utter
destruction and overthrow was foretold; they not cast into any amazement or
fear, but rather rapt with fury and madness, killed their wives and
children, beginning the hopeful success of this war with a most unnatural
murder etc. The other example you may see in Lucius Florus, who delivers that
some of them taken prisoners in battle, did assay to bite and gnaw atwo the
chains they were bound withal, and that they did cut one another throats.
Unless a man would rather think that these were proofs and examples of their
love of liberty. For both Orosius and Leo the Emperor have left in writing
that this people is most desirous of liberty. Notwithstanding Pausanias in his
Phocicam, shows their great valor in that battle at Thermopilae. I cannot
but wonder in my mind at Marcus Victorinus, who calls these men dastards,
cowards and such as put more trust in their heels than in their hands, whom
Claudian calls courageous; and Salust, warl ke, puissant, mighty in arms and
feats of war before the Romans. Or does this Victorinus happily interpret
thus these words of Caesar? As their courage is forward and ready to enterprise
and begin war, so have they womanish and faint hearts to suffer and endure
calamities? or these of Liuy? In the first onset or assault the Gauls are more
stout than men, but at last they are more faint-harted than women: or these
words of the same author? Often use has proved this to be true; If you can
endure and sustain the first onset, which they make in hot blood and desperate
fury, their bodies faint with sweat and weariness, so that they are not able
to bear up their weapons etc. or this in like manner of Florus? It has been
found true by experience, that like as their first assault is more than men's,
so their last are less than women's.

They agree in this one property with the snow of their country: for as soon as
they are hot in battle, presently they sweat extremely. And if they stir
never so little they melt like snow in the Sun. Or, this of Dion? The Gauls
are carried with insatiable lust to perform all matters whatsoever they go
about, in so much that they know no mean either of boldness or of fear, but
one while they fall of a sudden from boldness into fearfulness; and by and
by from fear into desperate rashness. Or this judgment of Strabo which he
gives of them? It is a warlike and fierce nation, very forward in fight.
Therefore being provoked to battle they fight upon heaps thronging together
and do lie very open: and that very uncircumspectly. Whereby it comes to
pass that they are easily entrapped, it their enemy using but some stratageme,
at his best advantage, do train them out to join battle, being appointed
and armed with nothing beside strength and desperateness. Leo the Emperor in
his book De Bellico apparatu, determines of them far otherwise. The
Frenchmen (says he) are stout of courage, valiant in war. To be faint hearted
and to give ground never so little they account a great disgrace, and do
esteem it no better than running away etc. Now then if this nation be so
womanish and cowardous, so impatient of labor, so unconstant and unable to
hold out in battle, do but tell me (O thou Roman) why Cicero in his oration
Pro Prouincijs Consularibus, did write that this Gallia was so terrible unto
thee? Why did Salust affirm that all Italy did tremble and quake for fear of
this people; in so much, that the Romans did not use to contend with them for
glory and ambition, but only for safeguard of their lives and country? How
happens it, that in Trogus we find these words of the kings of the East?
There was so great a terror of the French name, and of their success in all
wars so prosperous; that these supposed themselves never able to keep either
their majesty out of danger, nor to recover it again, being decayed or lost,
without the help of the French valor and prowess. And why does Appian, in
his second book of Civil wars, say, that they did strinke such a terror to
the Romans, that in the law, wherein freedom from service in war was
granted to Priests and old men, the French wars were only excepted?
Sosipater, out of Varro his second book of Antiquities, gathers, that the
Gauls did most ingeniously affect two things, to wit, military knowledge, and
eloquence. From hence is that of Iuuenal: Gallia ve^ potius nutricula
cansidicorum. Whether France should France entitled be or Lawyers nurse I know
not certainly. Item in another place: Gallia causidicos docuit facunda
Britannos. The prating Frenchmen first did teach, The Englishman to plead at
bar. Was this true in Iuuenals time? or did he rather prophecy of times to
come? For this misery our nation never felt till the days of William the
First. Columella in his first book of Husbandry says, that Sine causidicis
satis felices olim fuere futuraeque sunt vrbes. Saint Ambrose, in his Epistle
unto Rusticus, highly extolleth the most flourishing studies of France; and the
copiousnesse of the French tongue; and Claudian in his fourth Panegyricke of
the consulship of Honorius, commends the learned inhabitants of France.
Concerning their warefare take these few things gathered out of ancient
writers: and first out of Caesar. This is the manner of the Gals (says he) when
they begin any wars they appoint a general muster, to which by a common law,
all the young striplings are compelled to come in their armor: and he that
comes last of all, is in the open sight of all the rest, with all kind of
most cruel torments, put to death. Out of Strabo: Their armor according to
their stature is a long sword hanging on the right side, along target, spears
suitable thereunto (which Diodorus reports to be headed with iron, a cubite
or somewhat more in length, and little less than two handfuls broad) and a
kind of iaueling called Meris, or rather, as some learned men do affirm,
Materis, and to be the same with that kind of weapon which Caesar calls
Matara. Some of them also use bows and slings. They have moreover another
weapon of wood in form of a dart, which they fling not with a thong fastened to
the middle, [as the Irishmen at this day vse] but merely with the bare hand,
and yet for all that they will throw it further than an archer can shoot.
Nonius out of Varro makes mention of a kind of weapons, proper to the
Frenchmen, called Gesa, in these words: Qui gladijs cincti sieve scuto cum binis
gesis. That is, which were armed with swords and bucklers with two Gesaes.
Concerning them also Virgil writes thus: -- Duo Quisque Alpina corruscant Gesa
manu. Two Geses weapons which the Frenchmen use to brandisn did each party
choose. Seruius in his Comments upon this place does interpret them, Hastas
viriles, manlike spears: and adds moreover that valiant soldiers were wont
to be called in the French tongue Gesi. But it ought indeed to be written with
ae the dipthong, Gaesa: (of which you may see what we have delivered in the old
map of Spain, or M. Clarencieux Camden his Britannia, where he has
learnedly handled this argument, and for this word, amongst the rest, shall
satisfy thee to thy fill.) From hence, it may be, it is that a kind of people
there were named Gaesati, because they did wear and use these Geses. Touching
which I have written more at large in my Thesaurus. The foresaid author
affirms that their horsemen be better than their footmen: and that these
horsemen did use to come to the field with many carts and great carriages. Liuy
also and Pomponius Mela do deliver that they skirmish in chariots and wagons.
The same likewise does Strabo affirm of them, but that he calls these
wagons, Esseda, which is all one. Out of these charriots (says Diodorus) they
first throw a dart at their enemy coming against them: then afterward
forsaking their chariots they fight on foot with their swords. I do understand
out of Vegetius that in skirmishes they did use to fight in troops and
several bands containing in number six thousand armed men apiece. Cateruas, he
calls them: Of which word, as also of Essedum, see M. Camdens Britannia. They
were naked all above the nauill, save only that they covered their bodies,
although very meanly god woot, with a long target, which was not broad enough
for the largeness of their bodies, as Liuy and Polybius do testify. Likewise
Gauls were Scutis protecti corpora longis: shielded their bodies with long
targets, as Virgil reports. These targets being about the height of a man in
length, were, as every man thought fit, adorned with certain forms and
pictures of living creatures, embossed and somewhat bearing out higher than the
surface of the target it self, as Diodorus writes: who adds in another
place that they defended or armed their heads with a brazen helmet higher then
ordinary, wherein were engraven either horns or portraitures of birds or
beasts. The same author witnesses that they used trumpets in their wars.
Their swords says Polybius, were heavy; and very long, as Liuie writes, and
without points, as Strabo tells us: made only for this purpose, that they
might wound the enemy with downright blows: whereupon Virgil, (as Seruius
notes) writes, Alte consurgit in ensem, that is, he lifts up his sword on
high to give the greater blow: with which if they did hit, they cut off the
heads of their foes at one stroke. Yet notwithstanding these swords were made
without art and of a soft kind of iron, as Polyaenus affirms in his eigth
book. Wherefore of these same weapons thus gathers Suidas out of Polybius.
They are so made that at the first onset they give one blow, and then presently
are so crooked and bended both in length and breadth, that unless you grant
them space immediately to retire and to strengthen them with their feet, the
next stroke can do no hurt. Diodorus terms them Spathae, and says that they
hang by a brazen chain on the right side. Nevertheless Julius Pollux
commends this French sword, calling it by the Greek name (machaera.)
Polybius, Strabo and Diodorus do teach that they wore about their necks gold
chains, (which gave occasion to Virgil to say -- Lactea colla Auro innectuntur
--. Their lilly white necks adorned with gold.) and about their arms and
hands, costly bracelets: and those amongst them that were in place and
authority, did wear garments died and guarded with gold, ( Atque aurea vestis,
golden garments the French did wear, says Virgil.) They did adorn, says
Pliny, and set out their swords, shields, and head-peeces with coral. Some of
them also says Diodore, gilded their iron breast-plates. When they go to
battle there is among them such singing, howling, showting, dancing, such
noise of targets, which they shake after their country fashion and the
fearful clattering of armor so great, that all places round about did seem
to ring therewith, as Polybius and Liuy do jointly testify. Strabo also and
Diodorus affirm, that they did fight against the enemy with dogs. Moreover
they carried with them to the wars (if we may believe Possidonius in Athenaeus)
parasites, whom they would have to sing songs in their honor and commendation:
and indeed the same thing is avouched by Diodorus. If they have got the upper
hand of their enemies in battle, they are wont to sacrifice their captives
unto their Gods, as Athenaeus, upon the testimony of Sosipater verily
thinks. When they return from battle, (here what Strabo reports of them)
they hang the heads of their enemies upon the manes of their horses and set
them up upon the town gates, to be viewed and seen of of all men. But the
heads of Noblemen, (hear Diodorus) embalmed with spices, they lay up in cases
with the greatest care that may be; showing them to strangers, and will not
part with them, either to their parents or to any other their friends, for any
money. Liuy writes, that they did offer up in triumph, the spoils of dead
bodies, and the head being cut off from the body, in their temple, which is
held in greatest reverence amongst them. Afterward, the head being cleansed, as
their manner is, they gild the skull, and that they esteem for an holy vessel,
wherein they drink at solemn feasts and sacrifices. And this is the cup of
the Priests and rulers of the temple. Whereupon Silius writes thus: At Celtae
vacui capitis circumdare Sueti Ossa (nefas) auro and mensis ea pocula servant.
But this vile custom do the Celtes observe The heads from carcass of their
foes to pull: Which set in gold most curiously they carue, And in steed of
cups do quaffe in dead men's scull. Of the ordering of their Horse battle
which they call Trimarcisia, read Pausanias in his Phocica. Likewise of their
Silodunes, as Athenaeus, or Soldures, (soldiers) as Caesar terms them, read
these aforenamed authors, and, if you please, ad unto them those things which
Leo the Emperor has written in his eighteenth book De Bellico apparatu, in
the eighty and eight section. Now it remains that we speak something also of
their common manner of living. Throughout all Gallia, (says Caesar) there be
but two sorts of men, that are made account of, and had in any great
estimation; the one are the Druides, the other are their Knights. These knights
(of the Druides we have spoken at large in our map of Gallia described by
Caesar) when need is and when any war chances, give themselves altogether to
feats of arms. And among them, as any man is of greatest birth and ability, so
has he about him more servants and retainers. The Druides are occupied about
holy things: they have the charge of public and private sacrifices; and do
interpret and discuss matters of religion etc. For the communalty is kept
under in manner like slaves: and the noble men may lawfully deal with them in
all points as with their slaves. They do not suffer their sons to come in their
presence openly, until such time as being men grown, they be able to supply
the rooms of soldiers: and they count it a shame, that the son as long as
he is a boy, should be seen abroad in his fathers company. Look how much
money the men do receive with their wives in name of their dowry, they make an
estimate of their own goods and lay so much in value thereunto: all the which
is occupied together in one stock, and the increase thereof is reserved, and
which of them soever ouerliueth other, the stock with the increase of the
former years falls to the suruiuer. The men have over their wives, like as
over their children, authority of life and death, etc. Thus much we have
collected out of the sixth book of Caesar's commentaries, where thou may
read of many other things to this purpose, well worth the observation.
Diodorus Siculus affirms that their women are very goodly personages, and for
bigness of bone and strength, little inferior to the men: they are very
fruitful and good nources, or, as Strabo reports very good breeders and
bringers up of children. They, as Plutarch in the eigth book of his Symposion,
writes, did usually bring, when they went to the bath to wash themselves,
together with their children and little ones, the skillet and pappe wherewith
they used to feed them. A notable example of their worth and valor, thou shall
find in his book of virtues, where he shows that it grew into a custom
amongst them, that both for matters at home in time of peace, and abroad in
time of war, they used the counsel and advise of their wives, and whatsoever
was done it was partly done by their appointment. Polyaenus also in his seventh
book reports the very same thing of them. Notwithstanding that their women
are most beautiful, yet, as Athenaeus and Diodorus do both affirm, they are
much given to buggery and to love boys beyond all measure. But whether this be
true or not I cannot tell. I would rather believe that it was not generally
affirmed of all the Gauls; but rather specially of those which did inhabit
that part of the country which was called Gallia Braccata, where the
Massilyans, a people descended from the Greeks, did dwell, whose wantonness,
and effeminate manners, those adagies or proverbs cited by Suidas, Massiliam
venis, and Massiliam nauiges do manifestly reprove for this fault. Hither also
I do refer that which I have read in the ninth book of Clemens his
Recognitions, spoken as I suppose upon this very same occasion: There was an
ancient law or custom among the Gauls, says he, which did ordain that to a
new married man boys should be given openly and in the sight of all the
company, which was accounted no manner of shame or dishonesty amongst them. And
I verily think that Strabo spoke of this their usage, in these his words: It
was held for no manner of unseemly thing amongst them, if they did commit
buggery with young men of one or two and twenty years old. Of the Celtae also
this saying of Stobaeus is not to be omitted: where he writes, that it was a
more heinous crime and offense amongst the^ more severely punished, if one did
kill a stranger, than if one should kill one of his own country men: for this
was but banishment, the other was death. But was not this think you a law only
against such murders as were committed in via Heraclea? Their apparel they
did ordinarily wear, as Strabo testifies, was a kind of cassocke somewhat
like the Spanish cloak ( Saga it is called of the Latins) of which Virgil in
these words makes mention, virgatis lucent sagulis: Trim they shine in
stripped rugs: They were wouen of a course kind of wool, and were called in
their language Laenae, (yet the judicious Casaubone in his learned commentaries
upon this place of Strabo, thinks that the place is corrupt, and that we
ought rather to read Chlenas, than Laenas) They did also wear breeches, (
braccae, they call them) set out and bumbasted, or loose, as Lucane says. In
steed of coats they used a slit sleeued garment which came down to their
twist and buttockes: and as Martial says Dimidiasque nates Gallica palla
tegit: A curtalled pall the Gauls did wear, that scarce would hide their
tail. This kind of garment is still in use here in the Low countries, made in
the very self same form and fashion and is called in our language a
Pallatrocke; for Rock with the Flemings, is as much as Vestis in Latin, a
weed, or vesture. Aristotle in the seventh book of his Politickes, in my
judgment, speaks of this kind of garment, when he says that the Gauls did
wear a kind of short gabbardine. The forenamed Martial does speak of a kind
of weed used amongst the Gauls which he calls Bardocucullus Santonicus, The
hooded cloak of Xantoigne. But Pliny beside these, makes mention of another
kind of vesture usual amongst them, in these his words: Wool of it self,
driven together and wrought in manner of a felt, does make a knid of cloth: and
if in the making of it, you do work it with vinegar, it will be so stiff and
solid that you shall not be able to pierce it with the stroke of a sword:
this I think was first invented by the Frenchmen. The same author reports
that these people did first make that cloth that is damasked with scutcheons or
loze^ge-work. In Isidorus, out of Plautus these words are cited, Linnae
cooperta est textrino Gallia. For the sense of which I refer to the author
himself, for the copies of Isidorus are here very corrupt. Diodorus Siculus
says that they did use to wear rings upon their fingers: yet Pliny reports
that they wore them only upon the middle finger. Caesar testifies that they
took pleasure in oxen, and such kind of laboring beasts. Now in like manner we
will speak somewhat of their diet and manner of living. They used in their
services earthen vessels, very thick and strong, and goodlily set out with
flowers. At supper they generally all of them sit, not upon stools, but on the
ground upon woolues skins or dogs skins spread upon the same. Strabo
says that at their meat they sit upon beds or pallades lying upon the ground.
They are served at their tables with little boys. Hard by them is the fire,
where the pots with boiled meats hang see thing, and spits full of roast meat
are continually going, as Diodorus reports. Their meats for the most part are
porke and bacon; yea and sometime they eat any other kind of flesh
whatsoever, and that often times is dressed with milk, as Strabo has left
recorded. But Athenaeus words, which he cites out of Posidonius, are worth
the noting: The Celtae make their drinkings upon tables of wood, with a little
hay strowed underneath; these tables be not very high from the ground. They
have bread, (which, as Pliny writes, they make light with leaven) but of it
they have no great quantity: their meat is a great deal of flesh sodde in
water, broiled upon the coals, or roast upon spits. This, when it is brought
to the board, they take up whole in both their hands, and like ravening lions
do tear it with their teeth: but if there be any of it so tough that they
cannot easily gnaw it, that they cut in smaller pieces with a little knife.
Their bankets they use to furnish with all kind of fish, both fresh-fish,
seafish, and shel-fish, whatsoever kind, I mean, that either the fresh
rivers, or brackish seas do afford. These they broile and dress with salt,
vinegar and cummin seed, which things also they use to put into their pots. If
many do meet at one table together, they sit round in manner of a circle. The
best man always sits in the midst: him I term the best man, that either
for martial prowess, nobility, or wealth does excel the rest. The
seruitoures, skinkers, or such as do wait at the board, do carry drink to
the table in pots like pitchers, either of potters metal, or else of clean
silver. Of the same metal are their dishes and platters, in which they serve
in their meat. Yet some of them have them of brass: other some in steed of
platters do use baskets, made of twigs or osiers. The wealthier sort do drink
wine brought from Italy, or from the country near about Marseilles, and that
for the most part is of the pure grape, yet sometime they allay it or brew it
with a little water: dercoma, they call it. They suppe it up by a little and
little out of the same cup, being every foot sipping and bibbing. A boy
carries about the pot in both his hands. But Pliny testifies that they made a
kind of drink, of steeped corn, so strong that it would make a man drunk.
Diodorus Siculus writes that they had a kind of drink, which they call
Zythum, (we now call it Ale, the Britans as Dioscorides testifies called it
Curmi, or Curw as now the Welchmen pronounce the word.) Item the same author
says that they made another kind of drink of the water wherein they had washed
or sod honey combs, (this now we call Mead:) yea and Ammianus Marcellinus says
that they did make and invent every day many new kinds of drink in despite of
wine, to counterfeit it so near as they could. I read also in Diodorus Siculus
that they did use to eat man's flesh. But whether is this to be understood of
their enemies flesh only, and of such as they overcome in battle? For that
they did thus at the field fought at Thermopylae, Pausanias does flatly
affirm. Or, whether do you think that he so spoke of them in regard that they
sacrificed men unto their gods? For this was done, as Pliny reports, in such
sort, that it was somewhat like as if they had gnawen them. Notwithstanding in
Sextus Rufus we read of the Scordisci Galli, that they used to drink man's
blood, out of the skuls of their enemies which they had conquered in the field.
Moreover Diodorus writes that they used to bid strangers and travelers to
their tables, and after supper or dinner then to ask what they are, wherefore
they come, whence they are, and whether they will. They used also when they had
filled their bellies, falling into talk upon any argument as occasion should
offer it self, to fall out, and so to rise and challenge one another into the
fields, no whit respecting their lives or limbs: and that in this manner, as
Posidonius in Athenaeus reports: They being armed, says he, challenge one
another to fight aloof, clashing only the points of their swords, never
coming near there by the length of their weapons, as if they were afraid to
hurt one another: yet notwithstanding sometime it falls out that one of them
is hurt; and then except the standers by do part them, and keep them a
sunder, they will not give over till it has cost one of them his life:
whereupon peradventure Horace said, Non pauentis funera Galliae, And desperate
France that fear'th no death. In old time also it was an ancient custom
amongst them, that when the quarters and ioints of mutton were set upon the
table, the strongest and tallest man of them would take the leg, which if so
be any other would challenge as due to him, and would offer to take it out of
his hand, it must cost one of them his life. Others do take up in the theater
gold, or silver, or a certain number of hogges-heads of wine: and as soon as
they have bound themselves with an oath that they will endure that, for which
they had received these gifts: then taking them, and distributing them unto
their most inward and dearest friends, they stretch themselves out straight
upon their backs, and lay them down upon their shields, one standing by that
is to stabbe them in their throat and cut off their neck with a sword. They
lie down to sleep on grass or rushes strowed upon the ground, as Polybius
testifies: or upon deares skins, as Diodorus records. In the thirteenth
book of Athenaeus, where you shall find these words, in my judgment, spoken
of Braccata Gallia, (They lie upon skins between two Ganimedes:) For I am
verily persuaded, and I think all wise men with me, that he meant the Grecians
of Marseilles, and not the true and ancient Gauls whose manner it was, as before
we have noted out of Julian the Emperor, that they used that act only for the
procreation of children. Their houses and habitations, says Caesar, for the
most part were in woods, or upon the banks of brooks and rivers, thereby to
shelter themselves from the violence of the Sun, and heat of Summer: and
those, Vitruuius writes, were made and covered over with oken shingles, or
else with straw. Strabo affirms that they are built in a manner round, of
planks and hardles, covered with a great roof, made taper-wise or sugar loaf
fashion: this roof, as Pliny writes, was of stubble. Their gates, if we may
believe Nicolaus in Stobaeus, did continually stand open. Iulianus the
Emperor, in his Misopogonus, relates a tale, whereby we gather that they had
the use of hot-houses or stoues, such as still to this day are used in some
places of this country. Villages they have, as Polybius notes, without any
walls or rampart for defense against the assault of the enemies: For Trogus
reports that they learned of them of Marseilles, to enclose their towns with
walls and ramparts. The manner of building and fashion of which walls thou may
understand out of the seventh book of Caesar's commentaries: where moreover
thou shall find this that follows: when any great or notable matter falls
out they give notice of it through the fields and countries by loud cries or
proclamations one unto another, and so still forwards, like unto our hue and
cries, until it stay at the outmost border of the kingdom. Ammianus in his
five and twentieth book says that they gave themselves much to swimming. In
hunting, as I gather out of Cornelius Celsus, they were wont to strike the
dear with a venomed arrow. Item Aulus Gellius out of Pliny cites these words
of the same argument: The Gauls when they went on hunting, were wont to dippe
their arrow heads in the juice of hellebore, verily believing that the flesh of
such dear as were stricken and killed with them, was far more tender than
otherwise it would be: but by reason of the venom of the hellebore, they say
they did use to cut off round about, a great deal of the flesh where the arrow
went in. Item Pliny also makes mention of the herb limeum, wherewith they
made a kind of ointment, which they call venenum ceruarium, Hart-poison, with
which in hunting they do besmeare their arrows. Aristotle in his Admiranda,
shows that amongst the Celtae there is a kind of poison found, called by them
Toxicum, (the Latin interpreter did read Xenicum, that is, strange) which
infecteth and kills so speedily, that the hunters of that country when they
have stricken a dear with an arrow dipped in the juice of this herb, they
run with all speed, and do presently cut out all that flesh near round about
where the arrow went in, lest the venom spreading it self further and
further, the whole dear should putrify and so be marred and good for nothing
etc. Pliny makes me believe that this confection or poison was made of the
yeugh-tree ( taxus, they call it) where he says that those poisons, which we
now call toxica, wherewith they did besmere their arrows, were sometimes
called taxica. Of the poison and venomous nature of the yeugh-tree, we have
entreated before. But there was a tree which grew amongst the Celtae much like
unto a fig tree, whose fruit that it bare, was fashioned like unto the
chapter of the Corinthiacke pillar. This fruit being cut does yield a juice,
wherein if any man shall dippe his arrows, whatsoever he shall strike
therewith, will presently die of that wound, as Strabo affirms from the
report of others. That the Gauls did not fear the danger of Earthquakes,
Aristotle and Plutarch do plainly testify. But whether it be true or false, I
dare not affirm. Another notable example (except one should think it to be a
feined and forged tale) of great boldness or rather of desperate rashness, I
find in Aelianus his varia historia, which is thus: They do account it, says
he, so foul and shameful a thing to fly or run away, that often times they
will make no have to get from under houses that they see are ready to fall upon
their heads, nay they will hardly out of those houses that are on fire, so that
many times they be burnt to ashes in the flame. Many of them also will stand
still until the waves and tide of the sea do run quite over them. Moreover
some of them will cast themselves into the sea in their armor, and with their
swords drawn, and shaking of their spears, daren the tide, as if they could
either fraie or wound the same. Let the credulous Jew believe this, if he will,
I believe never a word of it, although I know that Stobaeus, and before him
Nicolaus, did verily believe it all to be true. Here I do by experience find,
that saying of Pliny to be very true, that There is hardly any greater
disparagement to the truth, than when a false told is told by a grave author.
But may not one think, that I may requite one tale with another, that this was
that sight, which Lucian in his Apologia writes, that his friend Sabinus went
as far as the West ocean to see? Their funerals according to their manner and
state are very gorgeous and costly: all things that the dead men in their life
time did especially love and affect, yea even such living creatures as they
best esteemed, were cast into the fire and burnt: and not long since, within
the memory of our forefathers, even their servants and followers, whom they
loved extraordinarily well, when all ceremonies of the funeral were done, were
cast into the fire and burnt together with their Masters or Mistresses; thus
Caesar reports of them. To this Pomponius Mela adds, That with the dead
they burn and bury in the ground all things that they commonly used when they
were alive: their accoumpts and debts were deferred till doomes day. Some there
were of them which would willingly cast themselves into the fires and graves of
their friends, verily persuading themselves that they should still live
together with them: Item Diodorus Siculus reports, that some of them would
cast into the fire where their friends deceased were burnt to ashes, their
letters, verily believing that they would read them there: For that opinion of
Pythagoras, of the immortality of the soul, had taken footing and deep root
amongst them: being persuaded that afterward, the bodies being dead, in
process of time they should again return into other bodies. Listen also what
Valerius Maximus says of this matter: It was an ancient custom says he,
amongst the Gauls, as old records do verify, usually to lend money in this
world, to be paid again in the world to come. Which the forenamed author
terms Philosophiam foeneratoriam, A covetous or miserly kind of Philosophy,
practiced then by some usurers. But can you tell where now a man may borrow an
hundred pounds, upon good security, till that day? I doubt whether there be any
pale-faced cutthroat usurer, glorious smooth-tongued goldsmiths, crafty
mocke-lawyer Scriuener, or any rag-merchant broker, in this our city, that was
ever Pythagoras scholar. This Jewish sect are all, I think by their practice,
of the opinion of the Sadduces, who thought and taught that there was no
resurrection of the soul to be expected after this life. It is no wonder or
strange matter to think that the Gauls were of this opinion, if so be that be
true, that one Alexander in Clemens Alexandrinus does tell of, namely, that
Pythagoras did travel into France. Tertullian out of Nicander does write that
they used to he abroad all night upon the graves and tombs of valiant men: and
there to expect the answer of some of oracle. I care not an half penny for
that opinion of the great Orateur Tully, in that his oration which he made for
Marcus Fonteius, where he writes that The Gauls are hardly addicted to follow
any religion at all: For Liuy, although in other things he be partial and
deals hardly with this nation, yet he plainly affirms that they be not very
backward in religion: And Caesar, in his seventh book of the wars of
France, who thoroughly well knew this people, says, that they were much given
to religion, and service of some god or other. Item he says, That they did
especially worship god Mercury, of whom there were amongst them many images and
statues, they affirming him to be the author and inuentour of all arts and
sciences: him also they hold to be their guide and leader in all iourneies and
ways through which they are to travel: him they supposed to have a great
power and stroke in all manner of traffic and gainful trade for money: to him
they offered man's flesh in sacrifice, as Minutius Felix writes. Besides him
they did also worship Apollo, Mars, Jupiter and Minerua. Of these their gods
they held the very same opinion, that other nations of the world did: viz. That
Apollo being prayed unto, did drive away all diseases. Minerua first taught the
grounds of all arts and occupations: Jupiter, did rule and moderate the motion
of the heavens: Mars, was president and guardian of the wars: That the Celtae
did honor Jupiter, whose image or statue was a most goodly tall oak, Maximus
Tyrius does plainly testify. Of Mercury hear what Pliny in the seventh
chapter of his four and thirtieth does write: Zenodorus, says he, in our time
did in the city Clermont or Auvergne ( Aruerniae, the ancients called it) make
the greatest and most gorgeous statue that ever was made in the world: who
there for ten years together working upon the statue of Mercury, had for his
hire H S. CCCC. that is, as some men read it, four hundred thousand
sestertioes; which do amount in our money to 3333. pounds, six shill^ngs and
eight pence. Strabo does testify that Diana, the Ephesian Goddess, had a
temple at Marseils. Item, Polyaenus witnesses, that the French-greekes
(Gallo-graeci) did worship Diana: which Plutarch, in his book of the Fortitude
of women, does avouch to be true. But beside this Diana, they worship another
by them surnamed Arduenna, as is verified by an ancient inscription in marble,
of which we shall speak more anon. This goddess by all probability seems
to have been worshipped in the forest Arduenna. For although it be there
written DEANAE ARDVENNAE, yet I think there is no man meanly seen and
traveled in ancient inscriptions, that is ignorant that by it is meant Dianae
Arduennae: For the ancient Romans did often times use I, for E, and contrariwise
E, for I, as the learned can bear me witness. And in honor of her was this
forest Arduenna consecrated and made holy, or rather as I think here was
some temple erected and dedicated to her service, built either by the ancient
Gauls, so devout and religiously given, as before is showed, or, if you like
that better, by the Romans themselves, as in the greatest and most renowned
forest or wood within the compass of their whole Empire, a place most worthy
and best beseeming this goddess. And what marvel I pray you? being, I say, a
place most fit and convenient for this goddess Diana, to inhabit and make her
abode in? For she is called of all ancient heathen writers Venatrix, Nemoralis,
Nemorum and syluarum Dea, virgo and custos; The goddess of hunting, the
goddess of the woods, chases and forests; and the maiden keeper of the same:
Lactantius, Lucane and Minutius Felix do affirm that they had three gods which
they in their language called Esus, or Hesus, Teutates, and Taranus: But the
learned, for the most part, by them do understand Mars, Mercury and Jupiter:
See M. Camdens Britannia. In Ausonius there is mention made of a god of theirs
which they named Belenus: whom Herodian, by the judgment of the learned Julius
Scaliger, calls Belis: And whether this be the same with Tibilenus, whereof
Tertullian makes mention, Petrus Pithaeus in his Aduersaria does most
learnedly dispute; and does there interpret it to be the same that Apollo is
to the Greeks. Moreover Abellio was one of their gods, as the forenamed
Scaliger, at the same place, out of an ancient inscription, does teach us. The
same author also makes mention of Onuana, a goddess of theirs. Saint Austen,
in his books of the city of God, does affirm that they had certain unclean
spirits or devils, called by them Dusij, in the catalogue and number of their
gods. But whether they did worship the god Serapis, (the same peradventure with
Pluto) the aboue-mentioned P. Pithaeus, out of certain words, of the sixteenth
book of Ammianus Marcellinus his history, does in the third chapter of his
Aduersaria, at large and learnedly discourse: to whom I refer thee for
farther satisfaction. Out of Florus also we learn that they worshipped Vulcane
for a god: who writes that they did promise to give him the armor and weapons
of the Romans their enemies. Athenaeus says that they turned their faces
toward the right hand when they did their service to their gods. Of this
matter, Pliny in the second chapter of his eight and twentieth book, writes
thus: In worshipping of the gods we offer to kiss the right hand, and withal
we wind and sway about the whole body: which the Gauls did hold to be more
religious, if it were done toward the left hand. To these they did offer in
their sacrifices, men and other things, but especially unto Mars, as Caesar
testifies, who thus writes of them: To him, (namely to Mars) when they have
fought any battle, for the most part they do bequeath those things that they
have won in the field: those beasts and living creatures that they conquer
and take they kill and offer them for sacrifice: all other things whatsoever
they bring into one place: In diverse cities, in certain holy and consecrated
places, you may see great heaps of these things: and you shall hardly ever
find any man so backward in religion or so ungodly, that either will hide and
conceal such things as he has gotten in the field, or that will dare to take
away ought that has been once consecrated and laid up in those sacred and
religious places: and if so be that any man be either so profane, or hardly
that dares take ought away, he is to be punished, by their laws, with most
cruel tortures. Diodorus Siculus reports the very like of them, They do
keep, in the chapels and temples of their gods, says he, great store of
gold, which has from time to time been offered to them, lying scattering
here and therein every corner: and yet no one man for his life, (such is their
great superstition) dares be so bold as to touch one piece of it. But Caesar
goes on forward in the same discourse: They, says he, which are sick or much
diseased, and such as are in any great danger, or are to follow the wars, for
their sacrifices do either kill and offer other men, or else do vow having
obtained their purpose to sacrifice themselves: and in these their ceremonies
they do use the advice, direction and assistance of the Druides: And this they
do for this reason: namely, for that they do verily believe that for the life
of man preserved, the immortal gods can no way be satisfied and pleased but
with the life and blood of man: And therdfore for that purpose they have
certain sacrifices appointed to be publicly solemnized and done. Others have
certain images of an huge and mighty bigness: whose limbs and parts of the
body, being made of osiers wreathen and roddled one within another, they fill
full of live men; these images being set on fire, the men within them are
smoothered and at length with them burnt and utterly consumed to ashes. The
death and punishment of such as are apprehended for murder, or felony, or any
other odious crime, they think to be much more pleasing to the gods, than the
death and sacrifice of other men: but when there do want a sufficient number of
such wicked men to furnish this tragedy, then honest guiltless men must be
forced to play a part, and to undergo that punishment that they never
deserved. Thus far Caesar. The same almost, but much different in words,
Strabo does write of them: Some, says he, in their divine ceremonies they
shoot through with arrows, or else do hang them up by the necks till they be
dead: and then making an huge colossus or stacke of hay, and sticking upright a
long pole in the midst of it, they burn altogether, sheep and all kind of
beasts and cattle, yea and reasonable creatures, men and women. Item Diodorus
Siculus writes of this matter thus: Condemned men, which they keep for the
space of five years together continually bound to a stake, at length together
with other goods and cattels they sacrifice and burn in an huge bonne-fire.
Minutius Felix also does testify, that to their god Mercury they did use to
sacrifice men. Tertullian in Apologetico, says, that Mayor aetas, Mercurio
prosecatur, The ancienter sort are hewed in pieces and sacrificed to Mercury.
So, that, it had been much better for the Gauls, as Plutarch in his book of
Superstition, writes, that they had never had any manner of knowledge of the
gods at all, then to have believed that they might no otherwise be pleased and
satisfied, then with the lives and blood of mortal men: and to think that
this is the best and only solemn sacrifice and oblation that ever was used by
any. Solinus also plainly affirms that this kind of sacrifice and detestable
custom, was no manner of worship and service pleasing to the gods, but rather a
great injury and wrong done to religion, much offending them. This custom of
killing of men, was not used only when they offered sacrifices to their gods,
but even in their diuinations and sorceries. For they took those men that were
appointed for the sacrifice or ceremonies, and striking them upon the back, by
the panting of their bodies, they did guess and divine of the event of that
action intended, as Strabo does witness of them. When they do deliberate or
consult of any great matter, they do observe, says Diodorus, a wonderful and
strange kind of custom and ceremonious superstition. For going about to kill
and sacrifice a man they strike him upon the midriffe with a sword. But without
the advice and presence of one of their Druides, they may not offer any manner
of sacrifice at all. And although that these butcherings and massacres of men
were forbidden by Tiberius Caesar, as Pliny testifies, yet Eusebius in his
fourth book de Praepar. Euang. does greatly lament that they were still
practiced in his time, who lived, as all men know, in the days of Constantine
the Great. It is recorded by Pliny, that these people did use, in their
sorceries, coniurations and answering to demands in manner of prophesying, the
herb verueine. And thus much of the three Galliaes in general. Of which thou
may read many other things in Caesar, Liuy, Ammianus, Strabo, Diodorus,
Polybius and Athenaeus. Something also might have been said of every part
particularly, if so be that the smalnesse of this sheet, had been capable of
so large a discourse: as also much might have been said of Gallia Narbonensis,
the fourth part, which was a province of the Romans, much differing from the
other three in nature of soil, temperature of the air, and quality of the
inhabitants and people; which was, as Pomponius Mela writes, better manured,
inhabited, and more fertile, and therefore was also a far more pleasant and
goodly country than any of the rest. But of this we have spoken in another
place, apart by it sesfe. Behold the inscription, which we spoke of before, and
promised to acquaint thee withal. DIS. MANIBVS. Q. CAESIVS. Q. F. CLAVD.
ATTILIANVS. SACERDOS. DEANAE. ARDVINNAE. FECIT. SIBI. ET. SVIS. HAERED. IN FR.
P. XII. IN AGR. P. XV. IIII. ID. OCTOBER. IMP. CAES. FLAVIO. DOMITIANO. VIII. ET.
C. VALERIO. MESSALINO. COS. This marble stone was found with this inscription
in the highway called Decia Salaria, by a place called the Seven Bathes,
(Septem Balneae) and from thence conueighed to Marcilianum, as Julius
Iacobonius, in his Adioinder to the commentaries of Baptist Fontey written of
the ancient family and stock of the Gaesij, cites out of P. Ligorius. DIANA
ARDOINNA also is mentioned in a certain old inscription, in that worthy work
of Smetius, which he has written and entitled De Inscriptionibus antiquis, in
the eighth number of the two and twentieth leaf. Of other inscriptions,
coins, statues, and such like monuments of the Gauls, or such as any way may
illustrate the history of this country, if thou be desirous of further
instruction, we do counsel thee to have recourse unto the said Smetius,
Fuluius Vrsinus, and others that have of purpose written of that argument.

JULIUS CAESAR'S GALLIA: That is, FRANCE, as it stood in Julius Caesar's time.
SO I entitle this Map: For it is merely Caesar's, that is, portraitured and
drawn only by that which he has laid down in his Commentaries: we have not
added one word or any one place out of any other author: neither have we, to
our knowledge, omitted any place there mentioned by him: Thus much I thought
good to advertise thee of, gentle Reader, lest in vain thou should in this
Map seek for those things which other ancient writers have written of Gallia.
Of the nature of the country and people there inhabiting, I will not in like
manner, which otherwise I use to do, add to these any one word out of any other
writer: because every one that lists may do this out of Caesar alone, which
is an author very common, and to be found ordinarily in every scholars study.
For why should I do this out of others, when as the Map is only framed out of
him? But in sted of this I think it not amiss here to compose this discourse
following of the Druides, selected out of all ancient historians.

Caesar in his sixth book of the wars of France has left recorded, that in
France there were two sorts of men which were in estimation and credit above
the common sort: One of these, says he, were the DRVIDES, the other were the
KNIGHTS, (Equites.) Strabo names these three, the Bardi, Vates (Prophets) and
Druides: like as Lucane does in these verses, Laudibus in longum VATES
dimittitis aeuum: Plurima securi fudistis carmina BARDI: Et vos Barbaricos
ritus moremque sinistrum Sacrorum DRVIDAE etc. You Vates grave, of worthy men
long tales do tell: For rymes and verse you careless Bardi eke do bear the
bell. Of barbarous rites in things divine you holy Druides write etc. Ammianus
Marcellinus affirms the same, but that those which Lucane calls Vates, he
names Eubages. Diodorus Siculus makes mention of the Bardi and Druides only;
but the latter sort he calls Saronides, by another and diverse name, yet of
the same sense and signification. Pliny seems often times to term them
generally by one name Magi. Lucianus in Hercules Ogmios calls them
Philosophers. So much of the name: now somewhat of the persons themselves. The
KNIGHTS, (equites) says Caesar, when need requires, and any occasion of war
falls out, do all go to warfare: and every one of them, as he is of greater
birth or revenues, so he has a greater retinue and number of servants
attendant upon him. Other honor and dignity than this they know none. The
BARDI are Poets, as Athenaeus and Strabo jointly testify, and did usually sing
songs and hymns made in the commendations of famous and worthy men. They are
musical Poets, which do sing to the harp or other instruments of music,
songs to the praise and commendations of some, and to the dispraise and
disgrace of others. Festus Pompeius also affirms that these men did usually
sing ballads made in commendations of the valiant acts of worthy men; and
withal he says that Bardus, in the Gauls language, signifies a Singer.
Marcellinus of these Poets speaks on this manner: The Bardi did use to sing to
the harp, in very sweet and pleasant tunes, songs composed in heroical verse,
of the valiant acts of martial men. In Strabo I observe that these are called
Vates, (Prophets) and did use to offer sacrifice, and to study natural
philosophy. Ammianus (who terms them Eubages) writes thus of them: These men
searched deeply into the secrets of Nature, and labored to lay them open and
plain. The learned Petrus Pithoeus thinks that all these words, Bardi,
Vates, Eubages, Semnothei, and Saronides, are but synonymes of the Druides. And
for that I see whatsoever of diverse writers are attributed to all these
severally, do agree to that one of the Druides only, (as is very apparent by
that which follows) I am easily drawn to be of his opinion.

The DRVIDES therefore or Druidae, (for in good authors I find it thus
diversely written) were, as Diodorus says, Philosophers and Divines. Caesar
says that their discipline and manner of learning was first found out and
invented in England, which also Tacitus in the 14 book of his Annals shows
and avouches to be true, and withal affirms that from thence it was
translated into France, and that they that desired to be more skillful in the
same, for the most part went thither to school to be better instructed. But
let us describe them out of Caesar's own words, for no man has done it more
plainly, no man knew them better: They are present at divine service, they
provide the sacrifices both public and private, they expound the articles of
their religion and do show the use of their ceremonies: To these great troops
of youth, of all sorts, do flock from all quarters, to be instructed in any
matter of learning: these men are greatly esteemed and honored of all men; for
they do end and determine almost all manner of controversies, both private and
public: whatsoever is committed amiss against right and reason, whether it be
of any murder that is done, or of any quarrel arising about any title of
inheritance, succession or bounds of land between neighbor and neighbor,
they do decide the controversy; they do set and appoint all rewards and boones
for such as have deserved well of the state, and likewise punishments for such
as are malefactors, and have in ought offended the law. If there be any man
whatsoever, whether it be one private man, or a whole multitude and society,
that will not stand to their arbitrament, they presently suspended him from
their sacrifices: this punishment amongst them is esteemed the greatest that
may be inflicted upon any man. They use not to follow the wars, neither do
they pay customs and subsidies as other men do. They are freed and privileged
from the wars, and from any imposition and task whatsoever. Whereupon (moved
thereto by so many great inducements, liberties and immunities) many of their
own heads do go to them to school, others are sent thither by their parents
and kinsfolk: there they are said to learn and con by heart an infinite
number of verses; so that some of them do stay at school twenty years at
least, before they can attain to the height of that knowledge. Neither do they
hold it lawful to commit those things to writing, when as almost in all other
matters, both in private and public businesses they do use the Grecke letters.
This they seem to me, to have done for two causes: First for that they would
not have that kind of learning to be made common and to come into the hands of
the vulgar sort: Secondarily, because they would not have those which learn,
to trust too much to their books, and so by that means not to regard their
memories so much as they ought to do: for indeed for the most part it falls
out, that those which rely too much upon the help of their book, do learn
more loosely and negligently, and withal do dull and greatly weaken their
memories. This is the first thing that they would beat into their scholars
heads, namely, That the souls of men are immortal; that they do not die
together with the body, but that after death they do pass from one to another:
and this they think to be a great inducement (by neglecting the fear of
death) to move their minds to follow virtue and true magnanimity. Moreover they
dispute of, and teach to the young fry, their scholars, many things of the
stars and their motion; of the compass and greatness of the world and
earthly globe; of the nature of all things under the cope of heaven; and of the
might and power of the immortal gods. Thus far Caesar. But for thy farther
instruction, we will to these adioine that which other men have written of the
same. Pomponius Mela thus speaks of them: These men do profess themselves to
know the compass of the world and greatness of the earthly globe; the motions
of the heavens and radiant stars both fixed and planetary: yea to know what
the gods themselves do know and do. They teach the nobility, and better sort of
men of their nation, many things for twenty years together, secretly in caves
or thick woods and forests. One thing, of all other that they have taught them
in secret, is blazed abroad amongst the common people; namely, to make them the
more fit for the wars; That the souls of men are immortal, and that there
is another life after this amongst the ghosts. In Marcellinus I read this of
them: The Druidae, men of more lofty spirits and deep conceits, much addicted
to brother like meetings, are given to the study and speculation of hidden and
high matters: and contemning the world, do peremptorily affirm that the souls
of men are immortal. Diogenes Laertius writes that they used to utter their
opinions of the mysteries of their art very obscurely in few words and short
sentences: videlicet: That God is to be worshipped: That we ought to do
nothing that is evil: and, That we must exercise our selves in feats of arms
and true fortitude. But let us hear what Strabo, in the fourth book of his
Geography, reports of them: The Druidae, says he, beside their earnest study
of natural philosophy, do dispute many things of the Ethics or moral
virtues. ^^^^^en had a reverend opinion of them for their severe justice:
insomuch that both private and public execution of justice was committed to
them alone: yea and sometime two armies being in the field ready to join
battle, they have by their mediation made peace between them: but especially
the cases of murder are committed to their censure. And being found true by
experience, that they have always the greatest crops and store of fruits, they
do verily believe, that these men can obtain at Gods hand plenty and fertility
at their pleasure. These, and also the other, have determined, that the soul
of man, and the heavens or world, are both immortal: yet so as that the time
shall come, that sometime the fire and sometime the water shall have the
victory and upper hand. Out of Diodorus Siculus take this observation of them:
They do moreover use soothsayers, which, says he, amongst them, foretelling
things to come by divination and sacrifices, are of great estimation and
account, all the vulgar sort and common people being at their obedience and
command. When they consult of any great matters, they do observe a very
wonderful and strange course: for they, for that purpose killing a man, do
strike him with a sword upon the midriffe; and by his fall tearing and
scattering of the parts of his body, and running of the blood, by a certain
old experiment and observation, do know what will fall out hereafter. It is an
ancient custom duly kept amongst them, that no sacrifice may be done without
the presence of a Philosopher: for they do think that sacrifice ought only to
be done by such as well knew the nature of heavenly things: as if these were
indeed the true and best interpreters of the heavenly language used of the gods
themselves: and by their intercession and mediation they deem all good things
to be sought and demanded at Gods hand. By their adui^e and counsel, they do
all things that are done, either in war or time of peace. Of this their slaying
of a man, the forenamed Strabo in the seventh book of his Geography makes
m^ntion where he calls them Vates. Poets are amongst them of such account,
that when the field is pitched and their swords drawn, having ca^ their d^rt^
and the armies are ready to ^ome to handy blows, not only their friends, but
even also their enemies and the aduers part, at their entreaty and meditation
do leave off fighting, and will not off^r to strike one stroke more. Thus even
amongst the most barbarous people that are, rage gives place to wisdom, map
of ancient Gaul GALLIA VETVS, Ad Iulij Caesaris commentaria. ex Conatibus
geographicis Abrah. Ortelij. 1590.
REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, DOMINO D. LAEVINO TORRENTIO, EPISCOPO
ANTVERPIENSI, APVD AMBIVARITOS, EIVS VIRTVTIS CVLTOR ABRAH. ORTELIVS REG.
MAY. GEOGRAPHVS DEVOTISSIME DEDICAB.

Cum Imp. Reg. et cancellariae Brabantiae privilegio decennali.

Galli apud Caesarem nominati and descripti.
IN BELGICA, Atrebas Commius. Eburones Ambiorix Cattivulcus. Bellovaci Corbeus
Vertiscus. Nervij Boduognatus Vertico. Treviri Induciomarus Cingetorix.
Suessiones Divitiacus Galba. Remi Antebrogius Iccius.
IN CELTICA, Aedui Cavarillus Cotus Convictolitanus Dumnorix Divitiacus
Eporedix Liscus Litavicus Surus Vedeliacus Virdumarus. Helvetij Orgetorix
Verodoctus Numenius Divicus. Sequani Casticus Catamantales. Senones Cavarinus
Moritasgus Acco Drapes. Andes Dumnacus. Lemovix Sedulius. Carnutes Tasgetius
Cotuatus Conetodunus Guturvatus. Vnellus Viridovix. Cadureus Luterius. Averni
Vercingetorix Geliallus Gobanitio Vergasilaunus Critognatus Epasnactus.
Aulercus Camulogenus. Nitiobriges Ollovico Theutomatus. Helvij Caburus C. Val.
Donataurus.
IN AQVITANIA, Piso Adcantuanus.
Gallorum aliquot populorum elogia, sive descriptiones apud Caesarem.
GALLI, sive CELTAE, in his Aedui fratres consanguineique Romanorum dicti, ob
veterem ac perpetuam erga P. R. fidem his in omni Gallia summa auctoritas.
Helvetij reliquos Gallos virtute superant. Senones civitas inprimis magnae
inter Gallos auctoritatis. Sequani per se minus valebant. Veneti his long
amplissima auctoritas omnis orae maritimae. scientia et usu rerum nauticarum
ceteros antecedunt. Boij egregia virtute cogniti. Ambarri necessarij et
consanguinei Acduorum.
BELGAE, his maxima virtus et omnium Gallorum fortissimi, Horum Nervij maxim
feri, and magnae virtulis: pedestribus vasebant copijs. Treviri quorum virtutis
opinio singularis. cultu et feritate non multum a Germanis differebant. Remi
officiosi Romany in Gallicis bellis. et secundum dignitatis locum, apud hos
obtinebant. Eburones civitas ignobilis et humilis. Bellovaci plurimum inter
sios valent virtute et auctoritate, hominumque numero. item magna apud hos
virtutis opinio. Aduatici ex Cimbris Teutonisque procreati sunt. Condrusi
Trevirorum clientes. Vbij ceteris humaniores. horum civitas florens et ampla.
AQVITANI hominum multitudo his. optima gens ad bellum gerendum. Sontiates hi
equitatu plurimum valent.



and Mars does reverence the Muses. Thus far Diodorus Siculus Now let us in
like manner listen to Dion Prusaeus, who thus reports of them: The Celtae have
their Druides, a sort of men amongst them much given to divination and the
study of Philosophy, without whose advice and counsel it is not lawful for
their kings to do ought, yea or once to go about to consult what is best to
be done: so that if a man should indeed speak that which is truth, they rule
as kings, and bear all the sway: when as their kings are but the servants,
ministers, or executioners of their will and pleasure, although otherwise they
sit in golden thrones, dwell in great and stately houses, and daily fare most
daintily, and eat and drink of the best that may be bought for money. Here
also it is not amiss to allege that of the Poet Lucane: Et vos barbaricos
ritus moremque sinistrum Sacrorum Druidae positis repetistis ab armis. Solis
noste Deos, and coeli numina vobis, Aut solis nescire datum. nemora alta
remotis Incolitis lucis, vobis autoribus vmbrae Non tacitas Erebi seeds,
Ditisque profundi Pallida regna petunt, etc. Over all these Druides, as Caesar
testifies, there is one that is placed as chief, and has a command and
authority over the rest: after his death, if any man amongst them excels the
rest for his worth and virtue, he is by and by chosen to succeed in his place:
but if there be many that are of equal value and dignity, then he is elected
by the greater number of voices of the Druides assembled together for that
purpose. Sometime the controversy is such as they fall to blows about, and
that souereignty is tried by dint of sword. They, once a year, upon a certain
time, in the confines of Chartraine or Chartres (Carnutes) (near the river
Leire, if one may give any credit to the comedy called Querulus, which goes
under the name of Plautus,) which is accounted to be the middle province of all
France, do meet and keep court as it were in a place consecrated to that
purpose: hither do come all such as have any controversies from all quarters
round about: every man referring his cause to their hearing, and being content
to stand to their arbrurement and censure. (In Chartraine to this day, a
certain memorial and note of the name Druides does seem to remain, in a
place called Dreux.) Gabriel Simeon in his Caesar newly revived, ( Caesar
renouatus, a work of his so entitled) writes that he has seen, in a forest
of this tract, a mention of an old plot of the palace of the Druides. And thus
much of these Druides, whose art magic and custom of killing of men, Pliny
writes did continue even unto his time, and withal adds that it was
abrogated, and they forbidden to use it any more, by proclamation from Tiberius
Caesar. Suetonius in Claudius aff rmeth that it was first inhabited by
Augustus, yet not generally, but to the citizens: and was at length utterly
taken away by the said Claudius: which also Seneca in his treatise entitled
Claudij ludus, does avouch to be true. Yet notwithstanding the name of the
Druides was not then clean extinct, as Tacitus, in the fourth book of his
H^storie, plainly shows: where he writes, that by the burning of the
Capitol, which happened in the reign of Vespatian, the Druides in vain made
men believe was signified that the possession and command of the whole world
should now come unto the nations inhabiting beyond the Alps. Aelius Lampridius
writes, that Alexander Seuerus the Emperor going to war against the Galli,
a woman Druide cried out in the Gauls language with a loud voice, Thou go
into the field, but look not to get the victory, trust not thy soldiers, they
will fail thee. Neither was she deceived, for in those wars he was slain.
Flauius Vopiscus reports, that Aurelianus asked counsel of the women Druides
of France about his Empire, whether it should remain unto his posterity, or
not. The same author testifies, that when Diocletianus was yet but a private
soldier, it was at Tongeren foretold him by a Druide woman, that he should
one day be Emperor of the whole world. Neither is there after him any mention
of them in any history, to my remembrance, except one should strain that of
Eusebius in his fourth book De Proepar. (for he lived in the time of
Constantine the Great and Constance his son) where he writes that the Celtae
even to his time, did sacrifice men upon their altars. Pliny notes this of the
Druides, that there is nothing which they do esteem more holy than misselto,
(which they call dryos hyphear) and so likewise they account of the tree upon
which it grows, especially if it be an oak: They chose, says he, groves of
these trees apart by themselves, neither do they any divine service or
sacrifice without a branch of this tree: so that they may very well be thought
to be called Druidae, of the Greek word (...), an oak, as one would say,
Oke-priests. And indeed whatsoever grows upon these trees, they do verily
believe it to be sent down from heaven; and that it is a manifest sign that
God has chosen this tree, and sanctified it to himself. They call it in their
language All-heale. The sacrifices and bankets being duly prepared and set
ready under this tree, they bring two white bulls, whose horns were never
bound before. The Priest putting on a white garment, gets up into the tree
ordained for that service, and with a golden hook pruneth and loppeth off all
the boughs. These are caught in a white vesture, like a soldiers cassocke,
before they come to the ground. Next after this they kill the bulls prepared for
the sacrifice, and withal make their prayers to God that he would bless that
his gift to the good of every one that he there did vouchsafe to give it. They
are persuaded that what beast soever, though otherwise barren, shall drink of
a potion made of it, shall presently become fruitful: and that it is a most
sovereign antidote against all manner of poison whatsoever. The same author in
the 3. chap. of his 29. book, tells a strange tale of a serpents egg, which
he affirms he saw experimented and proved before his face: I my self, says
he, have seen one of these eggs, which was about the bigness of a pretty
round apple, covered with a gristly or cartilaginous shell, indented with many
concauities like unto the hollow places wherein the legs of the fish called a
polypus do rest: This is the arms or cognizance of the Druides. It is
wonderfully commended of them to be a great and secret experiment against all
manner of contentions and brawles, procuring him that bears it the upper hand,
as also the favor and easy access to princes and great states, etc. Item, he
records that the Druides did first manifest unto the world that the herb
Sauin had an especial virtue against all dangers and pernicious accidents
which ordinarily betide mortal men. Moreover, they gather, with the left hand
fasting, never looking behind them, an herb which they call Samolus, and
affirm it, as he testifies, to be a sovereign remedy against all diseases of
hogs or swine. The same author speaks thus of another herb called Selago:
like unto this herb sauine is that which they call selago: it must not be cut
up with any knife or instrument of iron, but must be gathered with the right
hand wrapped in the skirt of his coat, which must be rent off with the left
hand, as if he came to steal it: he that does this feat must be clad in a
white garment, barefooted, but so as his feet be very clean washed and cleared
from all filth: he must first offer sacrifice with bread and wine, before he
gather it: lastly, it must be carried home in a new napkin. This herb thus
gathered the Druidae of the Gauls do hold to be a great preservative and
defensatory against all dangerous accidents and occurrences that usually happen
to mortal men: moreover they affirm that the fume thereof is good against all
diseases of the eyes. Such is the wonderful superstition of many nations in
the world, and that for the most part in frivolous and foolish things, as the
same Pliny witnesses at the 44. chapter of his 26. book. He that is desirous
to know more about the etymology of the name of the Druides, let him repair
to Goropius his Gallica, where he fetches this name from a Dutch word, and
proves that it signifies a teacher of truth, or a wiseman continually busied
in the diligent search of the same. Pomponius Mela also makes them to be
Magistros sapientiae, teachers and informers of others in Philosophy and all
manner of humane wisdom. I could be content to say that the word should
signify a Divine or student in the knowledge of God and heavenly things, (as
Diodorus Siculus calls them) for that I do see that Druthin, in the old
German tongue, does signify God: and that in Otfrides gospels, a book
imprinted and to be had in diverse men's studies, especially such as are lovers
of antiquities: and besides that I know that the Islanders, a people which
speak the German tongue, although in a dialect far different in many
things from that which now is commonly spoken in High-Germany, (which also is
incident to the Danes, and inhabitants of Norwey and Swedland, with other
countries nere neighbors and bordeing upon the Dutch) do yet to this day call
God, by the name of Druthin. Diogenes Laertius also seems to favor this
opinion, who, out of the authority of Aristotle, writes that they were termed
Semnothei, that is, religious and holy men, such as wholly gave themselves to
the worship and service of God. In that laborious and learned work of my
singular good friend M. William Camden, which he wrote of the antiquities of
England, and entitled by the name of Britannia, I read that one Albricus has
written that the Saxons did call a magus. Drij, (by a word that signifies in
that language as much as a Divine or Philosopher) and indeed Pliny calls
these Druides, Magi, that is, wise men, as the word is often used and expounded
by the interpreters of the second chapter of S. Matthewes gospel. For that
they were not so denominated of the oak, he himself does in a manner confess;
when he adds in the same place, that they seem to be derived from a Greek
word signifying an oak or misselto. (Now there is no man that knows not, that
to seem to be so, and to be so indeed, are two diverse things.) Again, how can
they have their denomination of the Greek word (...), when as Caesar, a very
sufficient witness, testifies plainly, that their art and discipline was
first invented in England; where never any colony of the Greeks, for ought I
know, was seated: for that voyage of Ulysses, (and so of his coming into this
island) is counted for a fable, and no true story, of all men of sound judgment
and discretion in this kind of learning. Neither will I ever with Eratosthenes
be made to believe the same, until some man or other shall show me him that
sewed together his bag full of winds. And that the Germane tongue was spoken
here, there is no man can deny, but he that thinks that the authority of
Caesar and Tacitus is of no great validity. For Caesar has flatly in the same
place left recorded, that out of Belgium (The Low Countries, where he also
affirms that the Germani Cisrhenani dwelt) certain colonies passed over sea
into this i will, and seated themselves here. He avouches that Caledonia (a great
part of this i will) was inhabited of a people which came thither from Germany.
And because there is nothing more sacred, in the judgment of these Druidae,
than the Oak and Misselto, as we have showed out of Pliny; and for that that
Jupiter was here of them represented in the form of a mighty high oak, as
Maximus Tyrius teaches us; I do suppose that Diodorus called them by another
name, or else of the same signification, although improperly, Saronides, (except
even in this place also we are to read Druidae: which we have at large handled
in the second edition of our Thesaurus) I know that Annius, out of his forged
Berosus, does write that these Druides were called by those diverse and sundry
names, of Druius, Barrus, Sarron, certain kings of the ancient Gauls. But as
for these men, let them defend their credit themselves: I know it is shrewdly
cracked. Some there are that do think that this byword, Au Gui l' an neuf:
With misselto comes in the new year: which to this day every year, upon the
last of December, is commonly used openly to be sung in France, came from them.
peradventure of this of Ovid, Ad viscum Druidae, Druidae cantare solebant.
which are at large handled by Goropius in his Gallica, Vinetus upon Asonius,
and Vigenereus upon Caesar's Commentaries. Conradus Celtes, Irenicus, Althamer,
and Auentine, do witness with me that these Druides, being driven hence by
Tiberius and Claudius Emperors of Rome, went beyond the Rhein, and seated
themselves in High Germany; and here hence amongst them even to this day
remains that same kind of night-bug, commonly called the Philosophical
shoe, or as they term it druttenfuss. And it is in form (as the learned
Ioachimus Camerarius the younger has signified unto me by his letters) five
cornered, like unto the emblem and hieroglyphicke of Hygeia, or, good health.
This they engraue upon their cradles, supposing that by that means the young
infants are safely guarded from the fairies, hobgoblins, and night-walking
spirits. Conradus Celtes describes certain ancient stone images at the foot
of the Pine-bearing mountain ( Vichtelberg they commonly call it, in the midst
and center of all Germany) which as he says he saw in a certain Abbey there.
These he thinks to resemble very liuelily the true counterfeit of these
Druides. They were in number six, says he, set in the wall at the church door,
seven foot high a piece, barefooted, and bareheaded, each of them had on a
Spanish cloak with a hood, and a scrip: a long beard down as low as his
girdle, and about his nostrils parted and shod this way and that way: each of
them in his hand had a book and a walking staff: they were of countenance sad
and grim: their heads leaned somewhat toward one shoulder, having their eyes
steadfastly fixed upon the ground. That description of James Scepper, which he
makes of them, in his Corography of Germany, in my judgment is fond and
foolish: for he adorneth their necks, wrests, and fingers, with gold chains,
bracelets, and rings: moreover to these he addceh a pair of buskins, such as
the ancient Philosophers were said to wear, with party-colored garments. From
whence he had this description I know not: for Pliny does plainly affirm that
they wore white garments; as we have showed before: and Strabo in his seventh
book, (where he calls them by the name of Va es, Prophets) describes them
in white vestures, with fine linen frocks put over them, fastened together
with a button, girt with a brazen girdle, and bare footed.

The LOW COUNTRIES.
THe word Belgium, which Caesar, in his Commentaries of the wars of France,
uses more than once or twice: has long and much troubled the Readers. For
some of them do think that Caesar by it meant a city, which some, (of whose
number are Guicciardine and Marlianus) do interpret it to be Beauois in France;
others Bauays in Henault; of this later sort are B. Vig^nereus, and our own
Chronicles. The learned Goropius thinks that the Bellouaci, a people of this
province were understood by it. Some there are which think that Caesar used
Belgium, for Belgica: as Liuy does Samnium, for the country of the Samnites;
of this opinion was Glareanus. John Rhellicane says that it contained a part
of Gallia Belgica, but which part it should be, he does not name. H. Leodius
would have it to be that part which is about Henault, where the said Bauays now
stands. But omitting these opinions, let us hear what Caesar himself
speaks of this his Belgium. He in his 5. book, where he speaks of the
distributing of the Legions in Belgia, has these words: Of the which one he
committed to Quintus Fabius the Legate, to be led against the Morini: another
to Quintus Cicero, against the Neruij: the third to Titus Roscius, against the
Essui: the fourth he commanded to winter, with Titus Labienus, in Rhemes, in
the confines of Triers: three he placed in Belgium: over these he set as
commanders Marcus Crassus the Treasurer, and Lucius Munatius Plancus, and Caius
Trebonius the Legates: one legion, which he had taken up hard beyond the Po,
with five cohorts, he sent against the Eburones. And a little above in the same
book, where he speaks of Britannia, you shall find these words: The sea
coast (of Britain he means) is inhabited of those which by reason of pillage
and war, went from Belgium thither: all which for the most part are called by
the names of those cities where they were bred and borne. Here first it
appears very plainly that Caesar under the name of Belgium comprehends not
only one city, but many: then, that he understands not by it all Gallia
Belgica: seeing that he names the Morini, Neruij, Essui, Rheni, and Eburones,
all which nations, he himself and other good writers, do ascribe to Gallia
Belgicae. Therefore it is more clear than the noone day that Belgium is a part
of Belgica: but what part it should be that is not so clear. That it is not
about Bauacum (Bauais) in Henault, as Leodius would have it, it is manifest in
that, that this is situate amongst the Neruij, which Caesar himself does
exclude out of Belgium. Neither can I be persuaded that it was near the
Bellouaci, but rather that it was that part of Belgica, which is more near the
sea, and lies up higher toward the North: namely, where about the three great
rivers the Rhein; Maese and Scheldt do meet and fall into the maine ocean:
these do afford an easy passage and fall into the sea and from thence a short
cut into Britain. Moreover it is more likely that they should pass the sea,
which were acquainted and used to it, and were seated upon this shore and
banks of these rivers, then those which dwelt up higher into the country, to
whom the sea was more fearful and terrible. They therefore that went from
Belgium, into Britain, did only change coast for coast.

Of the original and reason of the word Belgium and Belgica, the opinions of
sundry writers are diverse. Some there are which derive it of Belgen or Welgen,
a word of our own, which signifies a stranger. Another man of great learning
and judgment fetches it from Belgen or Balgen, signifying to be angry, to
fight. Our Chronicles do think it so named of Belgis, the chief city of this
province. Neither do they agree in the placing and seating of it: for one of
them places it at Bauais, a town in Henault: the other at Veltsick a village
about Oudenard. They which think it so named of the city Belgis (which
notwithstanding is no where else read of in any good author, either Geographer
or Historian) they have Isidore, in the 4. chapter of the 13. book of his
Origines, for their patron, where he thus speaks: Belgis is a city of
Gallia, whereof Gallica the province took the name. The same has Hesychius,
the Grecian before him, in his Lexicon: (...). that is, Belgy was so named of
the city Belges: as also Honorius in his counterfeit of the world. Iustine in
his 24. book cites out of Trogus Pompeius one Belgius (Pausanias names him
Bolgius) a captain of the Gauls, from whom it is like they took their name,
if you will believe Berosus that chaungling. For he writes Beligicos (sieve
Belgicos) appellari a Beligio (aut Belgio) Celtarum rege: The Beligici or
Belgici, were so named of Beligius ( or Belgius) a king of the Celtes. Of the
city Belgis we have written in our Geographicall Treasury. Well, let us leave
these to the censure of the learned, and so proceed to certain testimonies of
ancient writers, which we think will be both pleasant and profitable to the
student of Chorography.

Caesar, in his 1. book of the wars of France, thus speaks: All GALLIA is
divided into 3. parts: of the which the Belgae do inhabit one: the Aquitani
another: the third, those which in their language are called Celtae, but in the
Latin Galli: Again, within a few lines after: Of all these the Belgae are
most stout and hardy: because that being further off from the quaint behavior
and manners of the province: and for that they have no traffic with merchants,
or such as do bring in those things which effeminate men's minds: again
because they are next neighbors to the Germans, which dwell beyond the Rhein:
with whom they make war continually. Item, in the same page he thus
describes the situation of their country: The Belgae do dwell in the skirts of
Gallia: they do belong to that part which is within the river Rhein: they are
upon the North and East sides of it. The same author in his 2. book has
these words: Caesar found that many of the Belgae came from the Germans, which
long since passed over the Rhein and seated themselves there by reason of the
great fertility of the place: and that they had driven out the Gauls, which
formerly had dwelled there: and that these were the only men, which in the
days of our fathers, all Gallia being sore troubled, kept the Teutones and
Cimbres from entering within the lists of their territories: whereupon it came
to pass, that the memorial and record of these their famous acts have made
them to take much upon them, and to be highly conceited of their great stomachs
and skill in martial affairs. Suet. in Tib. 9. In the German war he sent over
40000. voluntaries into Gallia. Again in the 8. book of Caes. Com. The Belgae,
whose valor was great. Strabo in the 4. book of his Geography says: The
Belgae wear cassockes or cloakes, their hair long, and side breeches about
their loins. In steed of coats or ierkins they use a kind of sleeued garmert
slit, hanging down to their twist, or as low as their buttockes. Their wool is
very course and rough, yet is it cut off close to the skin: of that they
weaue their course thick cassocks, which they call laenas, rugges or mantles.
Their weapons accordingly, are long swords hanging down along by their right
side, a long target, lances answerable, and a iauelin ( meris or materis, as
some read) a kind of short pike with a barbed head: some use bows and slinges:
others have a staff like a dart, which they do not cast with a loop or thong,
(as our Irish do) but with the hand only; yea and that further than one can
well shoot an arrow: this they especially use in hunting and fowling. They do
all for the most part, even to this day, use to lie upon the ground; they dine
and suppe sitting in their beds. Their meat generally is made of milk and all
kind of flesh, especially porke, both fresh and powdered. Their hogs do lie
abroad in the fields night and day: these for bigness, strength and swiftness
of foot do surpass those of other countries; and if a man be not used to them
they are as dangerous to meet withal as with a ravening woolfe. They build
their houses with boords, planks and hardles, covered over with a very great
roof. They have so many and great herds of cattle and hogs, that they do not
only serve Rome with those fornamed cassocks or rugs, powdered beef and bacon,
but also many other places of Italy. The most of their cities and commonwealths
are governed by the Nobility and gentry: informer times the common people used
yearly to choose one Prince, and one General captain for the wars. They are
for the most part subject to the behests of the Romans. They have a kind of
custom in their councels proper and peculiar to themselves: for if any man do
interrupt or trouble another by loud speaking, or by making any tumult, the
sergeant comes to him with a naked knife in his hand and threatens him if he
hold not his peace: this he does the second and third time: if then he will not
be quiet, he cutteth off so much of his cassocke, that the rest may be good for
nothing. This is a common thing to them with many other barbarous nations, that
the services or offices of men and women are ordered clean contrary to the
customs and manners which here we use. Item, in another place. The Gauls the
nearer they are to the North and to the Sea. so much the more hardy and valiant
they are. They do especially commend the Belgae, who are divided into 15.
nations (in Caesar! find 31. mentioned) so that the Belgae alone sustained the
assault of the Germans, Cimbers and Teutones. What an infinite number of men
they were able to make, may h^ere hence be gathered, that long since there were
mustered of the Belgae, only of able men fit for the war, 300000. (this number
Caesar in the beginning of the 2. book of the wars of France, increases by
27000. more) Item, some there are which divide the Gauls into 3 nations:
namely, the Aquitani, Belgae and Celtae. Item, The Belgae do possess the
places near the Sea, even as low as the mouth of the Rhein: Dio. Sic. in his
6. book. A nation for the most part situat in those places toward the North:
it is a cold country, so that in winter time in steed of water, it is all
covered over with deep snow. The ice also in this country, is so great and
thick, that their rivers are frozen so hard that they may go over them; and
that not only some few in a company together, but even whole armies with
horses, carts and carriage. Plutarch in the life of Caesar. But after that news
came that the Belgae, the most mighty and warlike nation of the Gauls, which
possessed the third part of all Gallia, had gathered together many thousands of
armed men, purposing to make head, he goes against them with all possible
speed, etc. Appianus in his history of France. Caesar speeding himself against
the Belgae, at the foord and passage over a certain river, slew so many of
them, that the heaps of dead bodies served for a bridge. Ammian. in the 15
book of his history. Of all the Gauls the ancients did account the Belgae to
be most valiant and stout, for that they were remote from those that lived more
courtlike and tenderly, neither were they corrupted and made effeminate with
foreign delicates and foolish toies, but had long been exercised in wars and
quarrels against those Germans which dwelt beyond the Rhein: Dion in his 55
book. The Bataui are excellent horsemen. Again in his 39 book. The Morini and
Menapij dwell not in towns and cities, but in cottages and mountains enclosed
about with very thick woods. He means Arduenna (Arden) that huge forest
which then was more vast than now it is) Florus in his 3. book. The next was a
far more cruel battle, for then they fought for their liberty. Pliny in the
22. c. of his 26. book. In the province of Belgica they cut a kind of white
stone with a saw (as they do wood yea and more easily) to make slaits and tiles
for couerings for their houses, not only flat and plain, but also hollow and
crooked to serve both for roofe-tiles, and gutter-tiles: yea and when they
list, for those kind of couerings which they call pauonacea, like the peacocks
tail: these also are such as may be cut or sawed. Again in the 36. c. of his
16 book. The Belgae do stamp the tuft or beard of this kind of reed, and laying
it between the meeting of the ioints and plankes of their ships do calke them
as sure as with pitch and rozen. Item in the 22 c. of his 10. book, he writes
that from the country of the Morini geese did come on th^^^ feet as far as
Rome. In 1. c. of his 12. book he says that The plane tree was come now as
far as the Morini, into a tributary soil: that these nations might pay custom
even for the shade. In the 25 c. of the 15. book. In Belgia and upon the banks
of the Rhein, the Portugal cherries are most esteemed In the 14. c. of the same
book, where he speaks of diverse kind of apples: which for that they have no
kernels, are called of the Belgae, spadonia poma, spayd apples. In the 5 c. of
his 19 book: Gelduba is the castle called that is built upon the Rhein, where
grow the best skirwyrts or white parsneps. In the 8 c. of his 17 book. Of all
foreign nations that I know the Vbij, whose soil is very fertile, when they
plow their ground, do dig up any sort of earth so that it be at least 3 foot
deep: and spreading over it a sandy kind of earth a foot thick, do battle and
harten their lands as others do with dongue or marle. Marcus Varro in the 9 c.
of his 1. book of Husbandry. In Gallia beyond the Alps, up higher into the
country about the Rhein, I came to certain countries, where neither vines, nor
olives nor apples did grow, where they compassed their grounds with a kind of
white chalk dug out of the earth. Virgil in the 1. book of his Georgickes.
Belgica vel molli melius feret esse da collo. Lucan in his 1. book. Et docilis
rector rostrati Belga couini. Martial. in his Xenia. Cantarena mihi si^t, vel
massa licebit, De Menapis lauti de petasone vorent.

map of ancient Belgium BELGII VETERIS TYPVS. Ex Conatibus Geographicis
Abrahami Ortelij.
HAC LITTERARVM FORMA, VETVSTIORA PINXIMVS. Quae paulo erant recentiora, his
notauimus. Nulla autem antiquitate illustria, hoc charactere. Accentissima
vero, Sis vernarulis ab alys distinximus.

Prisca vetustatis Belgoe monumenta recludit
Ortelius, priscas dum legit historias.
Collige prima soli natalis semina Belga,
Et de quo veteri sis novus ipse vide.
Fauolius caneb. S.P.Q.A. PATRIAM ANTIQVITATI A SE RESTITVTAM DEDICABAT LVB.
MER. ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS CIVIS.

1594.

Cum privilegio Imperiali et Belgico ad decennium.



GERMANY.
I Think there is no man, studious of ancient history, that is ignorant, that
this country was called of the most ancient writers, especially the Graecians,
CELTICA, and the people thereof CELTI or CELTICA. From whence the word Kelt does
remain amongst them; whereby they yet do usually call one another in their
familiar speech and communication. Some there are which think them to be
called by Josephus ASCHANARI, whenas notwithstanding he says that these are
interpreted of the Graecians to be the Rhegini: better perhaps and more truly,
Rheini, as it were the borderers upon the Rhene, who also of Stephanus are
called (...). Tacitus reports that the word GERMANIA had not been long used,
and to be but lately heard of. The same author adds, that this name was
invented by themselves. Wherefore I do more easily assent to them, which derive
the original of this word from the etymon of the country it self, than from
the Latins. For it is much more likely that a nation should impose a name upon
it self derived from that language which it understood, than from a foreign and
strange tongue whereof it was altogether ignorant. I think therefore they err
which think this name to be made a germine, that is, of buds or young sprouts;
by reason of the great fertility and plenty of all things here growing. Of
this opinion are Festus and Isidorus. Those also which derive the name from the
Latin word germanus signifying a brother, as Strabo does, as who would say,
brethren to the Gauls or French men, from whom, as he says, they little
differ, in my conceit are as far wide from the truth. Our country man, as
Rhenanus and others do think it to be compounded of gar and man, to wit,
garman, that is, all man or manlike. Our Goropius of ger and man (coming
nearer to the writing or letter) of ge^en, which signifies to gather, as
scraping together a booty or pray. And the same man in another place deriueth
it of ger, which, says he, amongst our ancesters signifies war: which I see
also pleases Iustus Lipsius best. I know that gerre (or rather guerre) in the
latter French tongue signifies war; but whether it signifies so in our
ancient Germane tongue, I know not. I do easily believe that this nation first
wrote and named it self werman, of were, with e long, a mere Germane word,
which signifies any weapon whereby we smite or offend our enemy. From hence
weren signifies to defend himself against the enemy: and we call every man
fit to bear arms, weerman or weerbaerman, (that is, a warlikeman.) Insomuch
that they all called themselves wermanos, or, wermannos, that is, warlike men.
And Caesar and Tacitus, besides others, are most sufficient witnesses, that this
name does altogether agree with the nature and disposition of this nation. As
also Dionysius Afer, who surnameth these Martialists or warlike men (...). But
the cause is plain why these do call and write themselves Germans; because
they, wanting the digamma or W, in stead of it have substituted the G. which
also we see elsewhere done of them in the like case: as, for Wilhelmus, they
write Gulielmus; for Waltherus, Galtherus; for Walfridus, Galfridus, etc. So
also it is likely that for Walli, they wrote and pronounced Galli. For even we
Germans, on this side Rhene, retaining the ancient language, do yet name
these Galli by no other name than Walen. The Galli also themselves romanizing
(the liberty and ancient tongue being lost) do unto this very day imitate
this change of letters. These few words out of many are for an example: for
they usually both write and pronounce, vin for wijn, Guesp for Wesp, Gand for
Wandt, Guedde for Weedt, by which they mean Wine, a Wasp, a Glove, and Woad.
So also I find in a manuscript Guandali for Wandali. If any man shall object
that Strabo, Dionysius Afer, Ptolemaeus, and some other Graecians, who knew the
digamma Aeolicum, that is, the W, have notwithstanding written it with a single
V, I answer, that this nation was known to these men in times past only under
the name of Celtae, and that this word Germane was first used of Caesar or the
other Latins in their writings: from whom the Grecians, imitating this
writing, have translated this word into their language. But if any man desires
to read more of the etymology and reason of the word Germany, let him peruse
H. Iunius his Batauia in the one and twentieth chapter. There are some
historians that do verily believe that all the Germans were in latter times
called Alemanes, Vopiscus so persuading them in the life of Proculus. Yet it is
manifest out of Aelius Spartianus (who reports that Antoninus Caracalla the
Roman Emperor, both nations by him being subdued, took him the surname of
them both, and was entitled both by the name of GERMANICVS and ALEMANNICVS)
that these were two diverse nations. Moreover, this same thing is to be seen in
the marble inscriptions of the Emperors, Valens, Valentinian, and Gratian: as
also in the titles of Justinian the Emperor. Again, Ammianus in his 26 book
writes, that the Almanes brake through the borders of Germany, whereby it is
as clear as the noone day that they were diverse. But that was the name of one
family or people, this of the whole stock or nation. Notwithstanding, although
this Alemannie of Stephanus, Ammianus, and other writers of that age was
accounted only a part of Germany, namely of that which lies about the river
Aleman (commonly called Altmul) yet all men of other countries, ignorant of the
Germane tongue, do use the word Alemanie for all Germany, and by Alemanes, do
mean all the Germans. But the inhabitants at this day name themselves
Teutschen, Tuisiones: whether of god Tuisius, son of the earth, of whom
Tacitus makes mention, or of Tuisco, Noe his son, of whom Pseudoberosus
speaks; I leave to the judgment of the learned reader, for to me it is
uncertain. And thus much of the name. Ovid writing to Liuia, does grace it
with a very heroical surname and honorable titles, when he calls it ORBEM
GERMANVM, ORBEM NOVVM, and ORBEM IGNOTVM: The Germane world, The new world, and
The unknown world. Ptolemey surnameth it THE GREAT. Pliny in the third book
of his Epistles unto his friend Macer, calls it LATISSIMAM, A most wide and
spacious country. Learn the form of it out of Dionysius and Priscian his
interpreter, or as some call him, Rhemnius, in his periegesis in this verse:
Haec tergo similis taurino dicirur esse: In form, they say, it is somewhat like
unto a large buffe hide. (but falsely: for this is truly spoken of Spain, as
Arid. Papius, before me, has well observed.) The situation and limits of this
country are diverse and sundry ways described, according to the diversity and
alteration of times. Plutarch in Marius, does extend it from the Exterior or
Outmost sea, and the Northern parts, to the rising of the Sun near the fenne
Moeotis [Mar delle Zabbache] where it touches the Ponticke Scythia. Pomponius
Mela also, and Pseudoberosus, do confine it with Sarmatia Europoea. And Martian
stretches it fron Hister [Donawe] to the Ocean, even up as high as the deserts
of Sarmatia: (But the word Armeniae is falsely read for Sarmatiae, that I may
with Pintian, by the way correct this fault in this author.) Dionysius Apher
also places the Germans at the fenne Moeotis. Yea and P. Diacono in his first
chapter, under the name of Germany, comprehends also all Scandie or Scone in
Denmark, where he describes that den or cave near the Scricsinners, in
which seven men slept. And this I think to be that Exterior Germany which
Eusebius in his sixth book De Praepar. Euang. describes toward the North.
Isidore therefore rightly places the Riphaean mountains at the head of
Germany. Others have made the sea, the Alps, Vistula (the river Wixell) and
the Rheine, to be the limits of the same. But Tacitus takes from it whatsoever
is between Donawe and the Alps. For he confineth it within these limits:
namely, the Rhene, Donawe, the Dacia's ( Transsyluania and Walachia) and the
Sarmatia's, (Russia) with whom also Ptolemey the prince of Geographers
consents. But Strabo and Pomponius do notwithstanding extend it even to the
very Alps, and so by these mountains do divide it from Italy, as it were by a
certain natural rampart or bulwark. And this is yet at this day the true and
natural Germany: which on the North side is circumscribed with the sea, on
the South with the Alps, on the West with the Rhene, and on the East with
Vistula (Wixell) or Odera. Moreover, Suetonius, Tacitus, and Dion do divide
this true Germany into the UPPER and LOWER: they call that the UPPER GERMANY
which is nearer the fountains or head of the Rhene; that the LOWER which
reaches from thence to the Ocean. But beyond the Rhene also, namely in Belgia,
Ptolemey has other two Germanies, to wit, a SVPERIOR and INFERIOR. To whom
agrees Marcellinus, who names this the SECOND, that the FIRST. But I do not
judge these to pertain to the true Germany: but that it was so improperly
called of the Germans, who, as Dion witnesses, afterward possessed it, and
fixed their seats there. And first of the Tungri, who as Tacitus writes, first
of all other passed over the Rhene. Item we read in Caesar of certain Belgae,
sprung from the Germans. Hence it is that he witnesses that the Neruij,
Aduatici, Atrebates, Ambiani, Morini, Menapij, Caletes, Verocasses, Veromandui,
Catuaci, Condrusi, Eburones, Caeresi, Paemani, Segni, were generally GERMANI
TRANSRHENANI, the Germans beyond Rhene. Tacitus says that the Vangiones,
Triboci, and Nemetes were called Germans. Suetonius records that Tiberius
the Emperor placed forty thousand Germans in France near the bank of the
Rhene. Eutropius writes that there were of them four hundred thousand. Item
by the testimony of Pliny we are made to believe that the Germane nation did
dwell even as high as the river Scaldis (the Sceldt.) And that at this day the
Germans are seated beyond Scaldis, up as high as the straits of the Ocean, the
language which they use, does manifestly prove. So that Dion in his 53 book
has truly related, that they have spread themselves as far as the British
ocean, up to the city Bononia or Boloigne: which Zosimus calls a city of
Lower Germany.

But let us omit these things, and return to the description of the true and
ancient Germany, which we have set forth in this table. Seneca reports, that
there is a continual Winter, unpleasant air, and barren soil. Pomponius
writes that it is troubled with many rivers, rough and uneven by reason of
many mountains, and for the most part not to be traveled or passed through, by
reason of the great woods and fennes. Frontinus affirms the same, where he
writes, that the Germans were wont to assault the Romans out of these places,
as out of obscure couerts, and thither safely to retire themselves again.
Tacitus says that it is every where be spread and covered with hideous woods,
and loathsome and stinking fennes, the land or country is unpleasant, the
air is sharp, it is hard to be plowed, and ill favored to behold. It is
moister toward the Galliae (France;) windier toward Noricum (Bayern) and the
Pannoniae. (Austria and Hungary.) The cause I add, because here the Alps are
opposite, which entertaining the boisterous Northern wind, do by their
extraordinary height beat it back again, and so redoubleth the violence of
the blast. (The copy here is sound and good, although a great scholar does
think it faulty.) There, because the ocean is nearer, Ovid and Horatius call
it hideous cruel and savage. Manilius says, that it is sit only for wild
beasts: which indeed is wholly occupied by the Hercynian forest, being not
inferior to any for greatness and fame (as Pliny reports.) For this
Hercynianwood, (which Eratosthenes, Apollonius and Ptolemaeus, being Grecians,
name orcynium) of all others by far the greatest, is threescore days journey
in length, as Mela says. Which, seeing that no man has more diligently
described this wood than Caesar, we will here set down his words, which are
these: The breadth of this Hercynian wood is nine long days journey over. It
begins from the borders of the Heluetians and Nemeti, and Rauraci, and so
running along directly by the river Donawe, it comes up close by the confines
of the Dacia's. From hence it windeth Northward, or toward the left hand,
leaving the course of the river, and by reason of the huge greatness of the
same, touches the bounds of many nations. Neither is there any man of all this
Germany, which can say that he has either heard of, or gone to the end of
that wood, when he had been in it threescore days together: there is not any
man that ever map of ancient Germany GERMANIAE VETERIS, typus. Ex conatibus
geographicis Abrahami Ortelij.
DVBIAE POSITIONIS QVAEDAM.

Achiri Alcetienses Ames Ampsani Aravisci Attuarij nisi sint Ansuarij Aviones
Ballonoti Butones nisi sint Gutones Calydona Caracates Carini Cathilci Caulci
Chaubi Cinesia Cubij, nisi sint Vbij Foeti Fosi Guarni Harmi Iaravaci Landi
Luij, nisi sint Ligij Marsigni, nisi sint Maruigni Mugillones Nusipi, nisi sint
Vsipetes Poenina castra Quadriburgum Reudigni Ribisca Scinthi Sibini Solcinium
Suardones, nisi sint Pharodeni Subatij Toenij Vadomarius Varini Venaxamodurum
Zumi


Locorum vocabula circa Caroli Magni tempora primum nata inter vetusta non
numero: ea itaque nec in ipsa tabula neque hic seorsum nominare visum fuit.

Cum Privilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Belgico, ad decenn. 1587.

DN. IACOBO MONAVIO SILESIO PATRICIO VRATISLAVIENSI, VIRO ET ERVDITIONE ET
HVMANITATE ORNATISSIMO, ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS HOC MVTVAE AMICITIAE MONVMENTVM
LIBENS DONABAT DEDICABATQVE.

has heard in what place it begins, etc. Pliny has these words of the
same wood: The hugeness of the oaks of the Hercynian wood, never lopt or cut
since the world was made, does almost for their immortality exceed all other
miracles. That I may omit other things which would not be believed; it is
manifest, that the little hills are elevated by the mutuallil encounter or
crossing of the roots one within another: but where the earth is hollow and not
fast, there they rise with arches even up to the boughs, and striving as it
were among themselves, are crooked like broad gates, that whole troops of
horsemen may go underneath them. Suidas out of Julian describes the roughness
hereof: If any man, says he, shall consider the impassable Tempe of Thessalie,
or the narrow straights of Thermopylae, or the great and steep hie mountain
Taurus, it is nothing to this; they are not so difficult and hard to do, as to
pass through this Hercynian wood. And thus much of this grove or forest,
inaccessible, as Florus writes of it. Nay, but Pliny adds that the other
part of Germany is also full of woods. Item Tacitus in the fourth of his
Annals, says that abroad they have forests of huge beasts, and at home herds
or droues of smaller cattle. We read in the same author, that the ground of
Germany is sandy covered over with a very thin lain of turfes, yet their
pastures are very commendable. Tacitus makes it to be reasonably well stored
with cattle, but impatient of fruitful trees. Herodian reports, that the
Germans have few buildings of stone or brick; and that they rather delight to
abide in arbours and bowers made in thick woods, by coupling and fastening the
boughs together. They have no habitations or houses but such as weariness
makes for a day. Seneca in the book of Gods providence reports that they
defend themselves from storm and tempest by the couerture of reeds or leaves.
Tacitus says that they make caves under the earth, and cover them over with
dung, and use them for places of refuge, to which they may in danger retire
themselves. From whose opinion a place in Strabo does not far seem to
differ: where he says they dwell in cottages made for one day, that so they
may with more ease change their soil, and putting their household-stuffe into
carts, may depart whither they best like. For Eusebius m^keth them ignorant
both of Geometry and of Architectrie. So that the same Tacitus does most truly
deny that the Germans do usually inhabit or d^ell in cities; or can abide by
any means to join house to house close together, but to have them disioyned
or severed, as shall fall out by reason of some brook, field, or wood. I also
will add this, that they have anciently had few cities: for in all ancient
histories of each tongue, I see scarce one or two named before Ptolemies time.
Neither since him is there any mention of them in any other writer. Capitolinus
writes of Maximinus the Emperor, that he burned three or four hundred
villages: but there is no mention of cities. Strabo (as diligent a writer as
any in that kind) remembers only Bouiasmus, the palace or court of
Maroboduus. Tacitus, to whom Germany was best known, makes mention of
Matium, Arenacum, Batauodurum, and one or two castles near the mouth of the
Rheine, which any man would sooner judge to be ascribed to France than to
Germany. In other writers, there is not one word of any cities. And thus much
in general of the situation of the soil, the form and nature of this
country. Now some things peculiar to it, are to be considered: and first I
will speak of the river Rheine, that which I have read in a certain epistle
of Julian the Emperor to Maximus the Philosopher; his words are these: Rheine
does violently carry away bastard-infants as a revenger of the unchaste bed:
but those that are borne in wedlock of chaste parents, it bears aloft upon
the top of the water, and restores them again to the trembling hands of the
mother: and by the preservation of the infant does pay as it were the true and
incorrupted testimony of chaste and laudable wedlock. Nazianzene, Nonnus in
his Dionysiacks, and an ancient Greek Epigram do also aver this to be true.
There are other also which do give another, and in mine opinon, a truer cause
of this dipping of children in the Rheine, which we will by and by relate.
There is a fountain among the Mattiaci, which, being drawn, does boil three
days together: and about the brinke the waters make pumeise stones, as Pliny
witnesses. The same author describes in Frisland, a fountain of sweet
water, whereof if one shall drink, within two years after his teeth will all
fall out of his head: and that the herb called Britannica, there found, is a
present remedy against that danger. As in Nilus so in Donawe or Ister (as
Suidas reports) there are great falls of water, like a mountain, growing
under the water, according to the whole breadth of the river, against which the
stream falling does with great and terrible noise swell back again; and
first making a rumbling amongst the rocks, at length mounting over them
causes, the stearme by the violent fall being forced to turn round,
whirlpooles, troublous motions, and dangerous gulfs. Strabo also makes mention
of the same. Germany has the best Amber (which as Tacitus writes, they call
Gloss) which they gather between the shallow foords and the sea shores);
Brass ore, or the brassie stone, which they call Cadmia, crystal, the
callais, a precious stone, which they prefer before that of Arabia, the onyx,
and a white kind of those stones commonly called Ceraunia, which if you hold
in the open air does diminish the glittering of the stars; witness Pliny
and Soline. Here also is found the Adamant, if Scepsius, in this same author,
does speak the truth; and the Topaze (except there be some fault in the copy,
in the fourth and eight chapters of the seven and thirtieth book: for some
books read in this place, Carmania for Germania.) Tacitus dares not deny but
that Germany has veins both of silver and gold: and he reports that
Curtius Rufus dambd up a cave in the field of Matium, to search for veins of
silver. Pliny reports that mines of brass were found but the other day in
Germany. I find in the same Tacitus that the Gothini did daily work in iron
mines. Lycophron describes the hog fish with four feet in Donawe. And about
the head or fountains hereof Pliny speaks of a kind of black fishes, which
being eaten are present death. The same author mentions the Esox, a fish
proper to the river Rheine: (some read Exossem; again, for Rheine they read
Donawe: for I know the fish Exossis, that is, a fish that has no manner of
bones, no not the back bone, which lives in Donawe, as Iornandes testifies
with me, not in the Rheine: of whose clammy flesh, not unlike to the savor of
young porke, we sometimes tasted at Vienna in Austria, but much against our
stomach. They call it Hausen, namely of the greatness, showing it self in
the water like little houses. Cassiodor in his twelfth book attributes the
Carpe to Donawe. The river Maemus (Aelianus calls it Danubius) affoordeth the
fish called Silurus: the best goose feathers, especially those next the body:
the radish roots, as great as little children: the herb Corruda a kind of
sperage, as Pliny testifies; who confesses also that he s^^ ^here an honey
comb eight foot long. The same author with Solinus and Caesar does ascribe
these beasts as proper to this place, the alcen, the buffe, the vrus, and the
machlis. Cassiodor in the third book of his Variar. chap. 50, says that the
Alemanes oxen are more precious than those of other places, by reason of their
great bodies. Caesar also in the sixth book of the French wars mentions a
kind of ox, of which he thus says: There is an ox in shape and proportion
like to an heart; from the midst of whose forehead there grows between the
ears, one horn higher than the rest, and straiter than any of those horns
which we know: from the top thereof they spread abroad like the boughs of the
palm tree. There are birds in Hercynia whose feathers do shine in the night
like fire, as Pliny reports, or whose quilles, as Solinus says, do glister
and shine in the dark, yea although the night be never so dark and ouercast:
insomuch that the men of that place do often times so appoint their nightly out
goings, that they may use them as lights for the directing and finding of their
way: and having cast them before in the dark ways, do see which way to go, by
the mark of the glittering feathers. Of these very same speaks Priscian, or
whosoever else was the interpreter of Dionysius his Periegesis, Et pascit
volucres mirum fulgentibus alis, Quies ducibus noctu cernuntur flexa viarum.
Here lives the golden feathered foul, A wonder it is to tell, Whose quilles
being strewn in darkest ways, Do guide men passing well. Pliny has left
written, that there is seen in Germany, especially in Winter the turdus or
felfare. Plutarch in his lesser parallels writes that there are two altars in
Germany, which yearly upon a certain day do sound like trumpets in memory of
the daughter of C. Marius sacrificed long since in that place. Now let us
speak something of the Nation. Columella says it is a land of most tall men:
Pliny and Solinus who imitated or followed him, say that it is a rich country
for men, full of very many big and boisterous people. Sidonius calls the
Alemans cruel and fierce: Cassiodor, a proud and innumerable nation. Pausanias
in his Arcadia reports the same. Caesar, Arrianus, Appianus, Herodotus,
Polyaenus, Vegetius, and Columella do all jointly affirm, that they are all
tall of stature and very big limm'd men. Dionysius calls them, White
Germans: Calpurnius Flaccus, Ruddy: Tacitus, Blew eyed: Iuuenal, Yellow
hair'd: others, Red hair'd. Martial and Seneca describe them with their hair
wreathed and bound up in a knot. Tertullian in his book De Virginibus
velandis, does highly commend their goodly locks. Appian says that they are
very crabbed in manners, and cruelly minded. Caesar calls them barbarous and
cruel: Josephus in the second book of the Jewish war, chap. 16, stout and
hardy: Dionysius Afer, very warlike and martial: Hegesippus, boisterous and
invincible: Arrian and Dionysius, souldierlike: his old interpreter, stern
and surly: Arrianus, proud and arrogant. There is no man more courageous than a
Germane, none more eager or hot to give an onset or assault, none more desirous
of wars; as Seneca, in his book of Anger, writes. Herodian calls it a
nation very covetous of money: Ovid, faithless and treacherous: Caesar, false
traitors and deep dissemblers: Paterculus, most crafty in their greatest
cruelty and borne to lie. (But who can expect better commendations and report
of an enemy provoked to the full, beat back and forced to fly with great
loss and slaughter more than once or twice?) Tacitus, who lived among them, in
the third book of his histories, speaks more uprightly, when he says, That
the soldiers are most fierce and desperate: and that the nation delights
much in war, is nothing wily or crafty, but such as easily lays open the
secrets of their hearts, disclosing their minds one to another, and such as no
man may better trust upon their credit. The same author says, that Julian the
Emperor in his Misopogonos, who writes that he has learned by experience,
that it is a nation which can not flatter, but such as loves to live freely
and plainly with all men. Ptolemaeus in the second book of his Quadripartite
teaches that they are by nature and constitution of body temperate, and mild
in condition, by reason of the quality of the region wherein they dwell. Thus
much of their nature and qualities: now a word or two of their rites and
manners. As Soon as their children are borne, they carry them to the river,
(laid upon a shield, says the Greek epigram) as they come warm from their
mothers womb, as Galen and Aristotle in the eight book of his Politics, do
t^^^^e: and there dipping them as the Smith does his hot yrons into the cold
water, do make trial both of the hardness of their nature, and by this means
withal they do much strengthen the body. This is that which Claudian says,
Nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus. The river Rhene tries those that are newborn. And this I think to be the more likely cause: forasmuch as the Poet
attributes the same to his Italians: for he says, Natos ad flumina primum
Deferimus, saeuoque gelu duramus and vndis. The babes newborn to rivers cold,
In frost and snow we bring, To harden them against all storms, Into the midst
we sl^ng. Which is the same that Sidonius writes of the Thracians in these
words: Excipit hic natos glacies, and matris ab aluo, Artus infantum molles nix
Cambrica durat. Also Val. Flac. 6. of the Scythians, vbi tam saeno durauimus
amne, Progeniem, natosque rudes, etc. Suidas, in the word Lycurgus, teaches,
that this was proper to the Lacedaemonians: as also Seneca in Suasorijs, who
moreover says that the river Eurota does harden tender youth, to make them
able to abide the better the miseries of warfare. (This custom does yet
continue amongst the Iaponians, as Mapheius witnesses.) Caesar says they give
themselves to hardness from their childhood. If he were borne in Germany
(says Seneca) he would forthwith being but a child, know how to handle a
little iauelin. Young men, who make it but a pastime, do cast themselves naked,
says Tacitus, among swords and dangerous spears. The young men do long
abstain from venerie; and Caesar reports that they esteem it a most filthy
thing to know a woman before they are twenty years of age. Their marriages
are severe, they are content with one wife apiece; except a very few, which are
oftener married for nobility than for lust. The husband offers for a dowry to
the wife, oxen and an horse ready bridled and sadled, with a buckler, iauelin,
and sword. She is admonished by these signs of matrimony, that she comes as
a companion or consort of all labors and perils; both in peace and war, that
she is to suffer and attempt one and the same thing with her husband.
Adulteries were very few, and those thus presently punished: The husband (says
Tacitus) thrusts his wife out of doors stark naked before her friends and
kindred, with her hair quite cut off; and thus he whippeth her clean through
the town: whereupon it is manifest that Sextus Empyrus lies loudly, or at
least Gent. Heruetus his interpreter, where he writes, that it is no shame nor
dishonesty amongst the Germans, but an ordinary thing, to commit incest and
buggery. They give not their minds to husbandry, but all their life is
hunting, that is their chief delight; yet Pliny writes, that they usually
sow oats, and ordinarily use to eat no other pulse. Tacitus wtnesseth, that in
Winter they sit all day long by the fir^^ side. Caesar teaches us, that the
greater part of their food consists of milk, flesh and cheese; and Appian
says, that in poverty and distress they are content with green herbs and
sallets. Mela adds, that they feed also upon raw flesh. At dinner, as
witnesses Athenaeus, they bring flesh roasted in little pieces or gobbets; and
upon it they drink milk and wine. Their dishes are simple and plain, as
venison new killed, wildings, and cast cream. Their drink, says Tacitus, is
a liquor made of barley or wheat. Neither is there any nation more riotous in
their Innes and daily meetings. It is accounted a shameful thing and a great
discourtesie to drive any man out of doors, or forbid any man to come to their
house: neither is it a disgrace for a man to sit tippling and drinking whole
days and nights together. Yet this is now no wonder, seeing, as Pliny says,
drunkenness reigns in every corner of the world. I marvel that Athenaeus
does not name the Germans in that his catalogue of tospots and drunken nations,
or are these sober men in respect of those? The richer sort use no loose
garments, but so strait and close to their bodies, that one may tell their ribs
and muscles, if they do but stir: the rest do wear the skins of wild
beasts, which the exterior ocean or the unknown sea begets. The very same
is witnessed by Salust, who says that they cover their bodies with garments of
skins: as also by Caesar: but he with Tacitus adds, that a great part of
their bodies are clean naked. This is manifest out of these words of Isidore,
Rhenones are certain vestures or couerings for the shoulders and breast down
as low as the nauill, made like a rugge of course wool and hairs, that they
will keep out a good shower of rain. Varro perhaps speaks of these kind of
garments where he says, that Rheno is a French garment: and Seruius upon that
of Virgil 3. Georg. Et pecudum fuluis velantur corpora setis, Rhenonibus, Their
upper parts are clad in rugge, or Rhenones made of courser wool; justifies
the same. For as Salust says in his histories, garments made of skins or
pelts are called Rhenones. It seems in Persius to be a kind of beast, in
this verse, Essedaque ingentes locat Caesonia Rhenos. Interpreters upon this
place do understand by it the Germans, because, as they say, they do inhabit
near Rhene. But if it may be lawful for this nation to take denomination from
a river, it should be lawful for them to be called rather Danubij, which
runs through their country, than of the Rheine, which belongs as well to
the French men as to the Germans. And that it is the name of a living creature,
the silver money of C. Rhenius does in a manner persuade, in which a chariot
with two wheels is drawn of two beasts like goats. Olaus describes the
Reynen certain beasts so called, which of Herbersteinius are named Rhen. Thus
much by me concerning these beasts called Rhenones, let other men judge
otherwise if they please.

Plutarch in 6. Conuiual. writes that they wear apparel only against frost
and cold of Winter. Pomponius writes, that the men do cover themselves with
barks of trees. And the same man with Tacitus writes, that they all use a
cassocke for a covering, fastened together with a button or thorn, and that in
their childhood they go naked, even in the greatest cold and dead of Winter.
Neither is there any other habit for women than for men, but that the women often
times do cover themselves with linen garments. Pliny has noted that they also
sow flax, and that the women make cloth of it; neither do they know any finer
garment than that: and that they mingle it with purple. Every mother gives
suck to her own child, neither are they committed to bondmaids and nurses.
We learn out of Eusebius sixth book de Praeparat. and out of S. Clements
ninth book de Recog. that they give not themselves to childish things, or any
thing which they thought to be unprofitable, as namely, to stage plays,
painting, or music. Yet they have given themselves to making of verses, but
such as are rude and simple, as witnesses the forenamed Julian in the same
Misopogonos. And this is one kind of memorial or Chronicle with them, as
Tacitus witnesses. Otherwise they spend their whole life in warlike and
military exercises. We read in Caesar, that robbery is not accounted as any
infamy. And Seneca says, they take care for nothing more than for armor and
weapons. In these they are bred and borne, in these they are nourished. If
their country have long peace, they do voluntarily go and offer their service
to those nations which do wage war upon any other, as Tacitus witnesses.
They procure their mothers, children and wives to bring unto them being in
fight, encouragements and meat and drink, neither do they fear to suck and
dress their wounds. They begin the skirmish with singing, sound or clashing of
their weapons, and dancings. They animate and encourage one another with
shouting and loud hallowings. In battle they use long spears and pikes, the
weapons of the Alemans or Teutones, as Lucan in his sixth book affirms. To
leave his armor behind him in the field was accounted the greatest disgrace
that might be, insomuch that many after their return home from the war, have
ended that infamy with an halter. Hence perhaps is that of Eusebius and S.
Clement, which report, that many of the Germans do hang themselves. Dion and
Herodotus say that they usually swim over rivers: for the lightness of their
armor and the tallness of their bodies does lift them up, and bear them above
the water, as Tacitus witnesses. Pliny teaches that the pirates do sail in
several hollow trees, whereof some one does bear thirty men apiece. The same
man says that there is yet a custom with them, that the conquered give an
herb to the conquerours. Appianus Alexandrinus says they contemn death, by
reason that they are persuaded that they shall return to life again. Perhaps
for that cause peradventure it is, that Tacitus speaks thus of them: They
desire no great funerals: that only is observed, that the bodies of famous and
better sort of men may be burnt with some certain kind of wood. They heap
upon the fire neither garments nor any sweet savors. Every man's armor, and
some man's horse also was cast into the fire. The sepulcher is raised with
turfs, etc. They have also a certain kind of punishment only used here, as
Tacitus says, who writes, that they hang traitors and runnagates upon trees,
but idle and lusty fellows (Lipsius reads, big-limmed and lazy lubbers)
they throw into puddles and fennes, casting an hardle or grate over them.
(Caesar in his sixth book de bello Gall. makes me embrace that reading of
Lipsius, where, if I be not deceived, he makes them slothful, whom they
account in the number of runnawayes, cowards and traitors: neither do I see
how these differ; to accuse a man for idleness, and to make him infamous for
slothful dullness.) This is that diversity of punishment, according to the
diversity of offenses. They use not any sacrifices: and they count them only in
the number of gods (if we may believe Caesar) whom they see, as the Sun, the
Moon, and Vulcan. But afterward, as it is manifest out of Tacitus, who lived
under Verna the Emperor, they got themselves other gods also, as Mercury,
Hercules, (whom, if we may credit Lucian, they did call Ogmion) Mars, Isis, and
the mother of the gods; beside one named Alcis. The same Tacitus adds, that
they accounted also Velleda and Aurinia amongst the number of their gods.
Suidas mentions this, but that he reads Beleda for Velleda. Theodosius out
of Dion writes, that the virgin Ganna gave out oracles. He also here makes
mention of the temple of Tanfannae. He says that the Sueui (which is the
greatest nation of all Germany) did worship the mother Earth, which (as Lipsius
reads) they call Aertha, which yet is called Aerde. But they have no images.
Tertullian in his Apolog. writes (if the reading be vncorrupt) that Belenus is
the god of the Norici. Plutarch, and out of him Clemens Alexandrinus, teaches
that they have certain holy women (Tacitus calls them Agathias and
Polyaenus, Fortune Tellers, Prophetesses) who did tell of things to come by the
roaring, wirlings, and circumuolutions of rivers. It is very like that Caesar
meant these same people, which he reports said to Ariouistus, that it was not
lawful for the Germans to overcome, if they fought before the new moon.
Hither are those things to be referred which Strabo speaks of the
Prophetesses of the Cimbrians (people of Germany) in his seventh book. Aelian
in the second book of his Var. hist. chap. 31. has noted that they foretell
things to come, even by birds, entrals of beasts, signs, and forespeakings.
Tacitus is witness, that they made experimental diuinings, even by the neying
of their horses. It is manifest out of Suetonius his Domitian, that they had
also Diuiners, which foretell by looking into the entrals of beasts. We read
in Tacitus, that at an appointed time they publicly sacrificed those men, and
that in their consecrated groves, and by calling on the names of their gods:
which I also gather out of Claudian his first book of the praise of Stilicon,
who calls these woods, cruel by reason of their ancient religion. Tacitus
also attributes unto these a certain kind of casting of lots. Josephus in
his eighth book of Antiq. chap. 8. does tell a pretty tale worth the reading,
of a captive soldier, concerning their skill in divination by birds. And thus
of many things we have selected these few particulars of Old Germany, which
has now a new face, far other fashions, rites and manners than at that time
it had. Caesar will afford more to the greedy Reader, but especially Tacitus
in his peculiar book written of the Germans. Moreover, some things thou may
find in a Panegyricke speech made to Aurelius Maximianus the Emperor. The
Epitome of Liuie in the 104. book, witnesses that he wrote of the situation
and manners of Germany. Caecilius reports, that Plinius Secundus his uncle
wrote twenty books of the wars of Germany. Agathias witnesses that Asinius
Quadratus did most curiously describe the estate of Germany. But we hitherto
want all these books of Pliny and Liuy. Notwithstanding there are some men of
no reputation, which brag that they have those books extant by them, and do
suffer them to lie hid and fight with worms to the great injury and damage
to learnings commonwealth. Of this vanquished, and yet invincible Germany,
these men took their names or surnames, to wit, Nero, Claudius, Drusus, (of
whom Ovid thus speaks, Et mortem and nomen Druso Germania fecit: Great Drusus
was of Germane named, and there he li'th entombed.) Germanicus Caesar this man's
son, Tiberius Caesar, C. Caesar, Nero, Vitellius, and Domitian; as Suetonius,
Dion, Tacitus, and their coins do witness. Item, Nerua, Hadrian, Antoninus
Pius, Traian, M. Aurelius Antoninus, Commodus, Carocalla, Maximinus, Maximus
his son, Gallienus, and Claudius; as their ancient coins do plainly teach.
Aurelian also, Maximilian, Valentinian, Valens and Gratian, as ancient stones
and inscriptions do testify. Lastly, Valerius Maximinus and Eusebius in his
ninth book de Histor. Eccles. do avouch the same. Insomuch that the most
learned Iustus Lipsius has rightly observed and noted upon the first book of
Tacitus Annals, that almost all the Emperors since Tiberius have taken their
surnames from this most warlike nation. I have a piece of brass money in which
is the picture of M. Aurel. Antoninus, with this inscription: M. ANTONIUS AVG.
TR. P. XXV. on the back side is a fur tree, near which stands Victory,
with a shield in which is written VIC GER. and about the verge or skirt, IMP.
VI. COSS. III. It is no marvel that Germany should be signified, by the fur
tree, for it is very common and familiar to this region: and Pliny describes
the best of them all to be in the Alps; in that part or side as I conjecture
which looks toward Germany. For we have observed that few or none do grow,
scarce in any tract of the Alps, on that side toward Italy. And this is that
Germany, with which the Roman nation waged war from the year six hundred and
forty after the building of Rome, Caecilius Metallus and Papirius Carbo being
Consuls, even unto the year one thousand one hundred and sixty four: at what
time it was taken of the Goths, a people of Germany, in the reign of Honorius
the Emperor. So long was this Germany winning, that I may so speak with
Tacitus, who does freely confess, that it was rather triumphantly conquered,
than basely vanquished. That the disposition of the country might the better
be understood, I think it not amiss to add these few histories to the
former. Of the SIMPLICITY of these people, out of Suetonius de Claudio. He
being moved with the simplicity and affiance of the Germans suffered their
ambassadors to sit in chief rooms of the Theater, for that being brought
into the places where the comminaltie and common sort used to sit, they marking
the Parthians and Armenians to sit amongst the Senators, they boldly on their
own accord stepped to those higher places, affirming that their valor and
eondition was nothing inferior to theirs. Here also Tacitus in his 13. Annal.
speaking of the Frisian Germans, and being gone to Rome, while they wait and
attend Nero's leisure, who was busied about other matters, among those things
which are usually showed to Barbarians, they come to Pompies theater, to see
the great multitude of the people there assembled. There sitting idle (for they
were delighted with plays like fools) inquiring about the sitting in the
lists, differences of states, demanding which is the gentleman, which is the
Senator, they observed some in strange apparel in the seats of the Senators:
and asking who they should be, they understood, that that honor was given to
the ambassadors of those nations which did excel in virtue and friendship
with the Romans, they cried out aloud, NO MORTAL MEN MAY BE PREFERRED BEFORE
THE GERMANS FOR VALOVR AND FIDELITY: they step aside, leave their seats, and
place themselves among the Senators: which was well taken of all the
beholders: being held for a token of their ancient spirit and courageous
stomach. Nero made them free of the city of Rome. Of their SECVRITIE, ex
Arria. 1. Alexand. Alexander asked the Celtae (or Germans) what thing all the
world most feared? thinking that the greatness of his power and name had
pierced as far as the Celtae, yea and far beyond them, that they would have
answered, that they feared him above all men in the world beside. But the
Celtae answered him far otherwise than he expected: to wit, that they feared
lest heaven should fall upon them, because they lived far from Alexander, and
dwelt in places hard to come to, and that they saw him make expedition another
way. Alexander calling them friends and entertaining them into the number of
his friends and confederates, sent them home again, adding this one thing,
That the Celtae are proud and arrogant fellows. Of their CONFIDENCE IN THEIR
OWN STRENGTH, ex Caesar. Comment. lib. 4. The Germans said that they did
neither first begin war with the Romans, neither do they refuse to answer
them, if they be provoked, and to meet them where they will assign; because
this is a custom of the Germans continued from their ancestors, to answer him
whosoever shall proclaim war against them, and never to offer conditions of
peace unto their enemies. Yet to say this, that they came unwillingly thither,
being that they were cast out of house and home: if the Romans desired their
friendship and amity, they might be able to stand them instead and do them good
service: or else let them give them lands, or at leastwise suffer them to hold
those which they have gotten with their swords. They yield themselves inferior
to none, but to the Sueui only, to whom they think the immortal gods are not
equal: otherwise in earth, there is no nation whom they can not overcome. Of
their MAGNANIMITY ex L. Flor. lib. 3. What was the pride of Ariouistus king of
the Germans? When the ambassadors said, Come to Caesar: he answered, But who
is Caesar? And if he will, let him come, says he, himself, what needs he
care how our Germany does? Do I meddle with Romans? But these things of
Ariouistus are more largely handled by Caesar himself, in his 1. Comm. de Bell.
Gall.

PANNONIA, AND ILLYRIS.
IN Dion, an author of good credit, and who sometime, it is certain, was
President of this country, I read that the PANNONES were so named for that they
used to were sleeued coats made ex pannis, that is of patches or pieces of
woollen cloth, cut and slashed after their manner and fashion, not usual in
other countries. That they were so named of the Apennine mountains, Isidore
affirms he has read in some one author or other: but sure I think he
dreamed when he wrote this, so unlike it is from the truth. Ptolemey
restrains PANNONIA, their country, within the rivers Donaw^ and Saw, and the
mountains Cetius and Albanus, making, as seems, these to be the true and
natural bounds of the same. The same in effect does Strabo, who extended the
Pannonij Westward up as far as the city Segestica, (Segesd, the place, where it
sometime stood, is yet called, as Bonfinius writes) Northward up as high as
the river Ister or Donawe: Southward and Eastward as low as Dalmatia and the
Sardiaei, a kind of people dwelling between Moesia, Dardania and Dalmatia.
Florus writes that these Pannones are entrenched and walled, as it were,
within two great forests or wildernesses and these three rivers, Dra, Saw, and
Donaw. Dion says, that they dwell and possess all that tract of ground that
is between Noricum, (Bauaria, or Bayern) and Moesia Europaea, (Seruia and
Bosna.) Appaianus makes them to abut Westward upon the Iapodes or Iapydes, a
people of Illyria now called Craner, and Eastward upon Dardania (Bossen.) But
in this he is deceived, that he calls these people Paeones: a common error
among the Grecian historians, which Dion in his nine and fortieth book did
first discover: For of the Romans, and of themselves, they are called Pannonij.
The Paeones are a nation diverse from these, lying between mount Rhodope and
the marine coasts of Macedonia. Ptolemey, Strabo, Dion, Aurelius Victor, and
ancient inscriptions do divide Pannony into the HIGHER and LOVVER: Liber
Notitiarum, The book of Remembrances, into the FIRST and SECOND. Optatus Afer
makes three Pannonies: but untruly, seeing that those above named, approved
authors, do describe but two: and the coin of the Emperor Decius, this
countriman borne, does mention no more. Solinus writes, that this country is
very plain and champion, and as rich and fertile a soil as any other
thereabout. Appian says, that it is full of woods, and that it has no cities
nor towns, only the lands and fields are divided unto certain farms and
families. In Hygenus I read that a price and custom was imposed upon these
lands according to the fertility and goodness of every aker: for there were
fields of the first and second price; woods yielding yearly great plenty of
maste; woods of the meanest sort of feed and pastorage. etc. But Iornandes
certain ages after reports otherwise of this his native country; and
affirms it to be beautified with many goodly cities. The people do live and
fare as hardly as any people under heaven, having neither good ground nor good
air, nor having of their own growing either oil or wine, but very little and
bad, neither do they regard to plant and set these commodities, the greatest
part of the year being there very cold and bitter, nothing else almost but a
continual unkind Winter. Dion writes, that they have some Barley and Millet
[ Strabo says, Spelt (Zea) and Millet] of which they make their bread and
drink: and withal affirms that he writes not this by hearsay or relation
from others, but of his own experience and knowledge as he learned and saw at
such time as he was Lieutenant there. Yet he says they are a most stout and
hardy people, but having nothing worthy the name of honesty and ciuility,
being generally very hasty and bloody minded, killing and slaying without any
respect or fear of God or man, and that upon every cross word and light
occasion. Solinus avouches the same to be true, saying, that this country is
very strong and well furnished with courageous and stout men. Tibullus in his
fourth book, says that they are a wily and crafty people. Statius and
Paterculus called them, Feroces, fierce and cruel. But the same author does
again as much commend them, not only for their great love of military
discipline: but for their skill and knowledge of the Latin tongue, and for
that diverse of them are learned and studious of the liberal sciences. Ausonius
names them Armiferos, a warlike people. Eusebius in his tenth book de
Praeparat. Euangelica, gives out that these people, especially those that
dwelt about Noricum, (Bauaria, or Bayern) did first find out the use of copper
or brass. Herodian says, that they are big bodied, very tall, ready to
fight, and to kill and slay upon every occasion: but of so dull a conceit and
simple, that they do not easily perceive whether one deal or speak ought
craftily and subtly, or mean well and plainly. The Panegyricke of Mamertinus
names this Pannony the Empress of all nations for valor, and, like as Italy,
renowned for ancient honor. Pliny says that this country yields great
plenty of mast or akornes. The same author also, in his history of Nature
has left recorded, as if it were a matter of some moment, that here the herb
saliunca, a kind of lauender, does naturally grow of it own accord. Oppian
commends the Pannonian dogs, which Nemesianus in this verse affirms to be
good hunters: Nec tibi Pannonicae stirpis temnatur origo: The hounds here bred
are not the woorst that ere I see. The Pannonian cappes made of beasts skins
or furs, such as soldiers use to wear, Vegetius in his book of war does
highly commend. This country afterward Probus the Emperor permitted to have
vines, and by the help of the soldiers himself did plant them in mount Almus
(Arpatarro) near Sermium (Sirmisch) the place where he was borne, as also upon
mount Aureus (Meczek) in Moesia superior (Seruia) as Sextus Aurelius Victor, in
his life, does testify. In Paeonia, a province here, abbuttant upon mount
Rhodope toward Macedony in Greece, the soil is rich and fertile of gold, that
many men have found lumps of golde-ore of more then a pound weight. And in the
confines of this country Aristotle in his Admiranda does write, that oftentimes
the earth or upper soard being by continual showers washed away, that kind of
gold which they call apyrum, (quicke-golde, if I may so call it, such as have
not touched the fire) is found without digging or any other labor. But here
again I do also observe an error very frequent amongst the Greek writers,
mistaking Paeonia for Pannonia: For Pannonia or Hungary even to this day is so
rich of gold, that it is wonderful and scarce to be believed of such as have
not seen it, as Bonfinius, Broderith, and Ranzan do jointly affirm, who do
all write that they have seen very many golden twigges of vines, some as long
as ones finger, others of half a foot long: but of the richness of Paeonia
for mines of gold, I have never heard nor read in any author to my
remembrance. Diogenes Laertius, in the life of Pyrrhus Eliensis has noted,
that the Paeones do use to cast the bodies of dead men into pondes or deep
pooles. Maximus Tyrius in his eight and thirtieth oration writes, that the
Paeones did worship the Sun, and that the sign or idol of the same, which
they adored; was a little dish, put upon the end of along pole and set upright.
But whether this be meant of them, or of the Pannones (for that this author is
a Grecian) I know not, I leave it to the consideration of the learned. The like
is that place of Aelianus in the twelfth chapter of his seventh book de
Animalibus, where he writes a discourse of the laborious painfulnesse of the
women of this country, well worth the reading and observation. Tzetzes also,
in the three hundred and eighteenth chapter of his tenth Chiliade, names the
Paeones for the Pannones, where he has something perteining to this our
purpose. Antigonus in his book de Mirabilibus, writes that in Illyria and
Pannonia is that kind of beast which they call Monychos: Aelianus terms it
Monops: Others, Bonasus. Diaconus in the eighth chapter of his second book of
the history of Lombardie writes that Pannonia breeds great plenty of Buffes
or Bugles, (Bisontes) and that he heard of an honest old man, that fifteen men
have been known to lie together upon one buffe hide, noting thereby the huge
greatness of this beast. And thus much of both those Pannonia's: now it
remains that in like manner we say something of Illyris.

This country is called of Ptolemey ILLYRIS: of Stephanus ILLYRIA, ILLYRIAE and
ILLYRIVM: of Historians and Geographers ILLYRICVM. Valerius Maximus writes,
that one Alexander wrote a whole book of the description of this country. It
was so called, if we may give credit to Appianus Alexandrinus, of Illyrius the
son of Polyphemus: or Cadmon, as Apollodorus and Stephanus do think. The
bounds of this province are by diverse diversely assigned. For Ptolemey confineth
it with the Hadriaticke sea, Istria, the two Pannonies, and mount Scardus,
(Marinai, they now call it.) Pliny ends it at the city Lissus (Alesio.)
Pomponius makes it to begin at Tergestum, (Trieste, a city of Friuli,) and to
end at the river Aea, which is near Apollonia, (Sissopoli, a town of Macedony
in Greece.) Martianus extends it yet further, namely even up as high as the
Ceraunian mountains, as in like manner Strabo does. Suetonius in the life of
Tiberius writes thus of the bounds of this country; ILLYRICVM, which lies
between Italy, and the kingdom of Noricum; (Bayern) Thrace, and Macedony, the
river Donawe and the gulf of Venice. And Appian he makes it yet more large,
stretching it out in length from the head of the river Ister, (Donawe even unto
the Ponticke sea, (Mar Maiore.) Sextus Rufus who lived in the time of
Valentinian the Roman Emperor comprehends under the name of Illyricum these
seventeen provinces: Those two of the Norici, the two Pannonies, Valetia,
Sauia, Dalmatia, Moesia, the two Dacia's, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, the two
Epiri, Praeualis and Creta. Thus much of the name and limits of this country
out of diverse authors.

map of ancient Pannonia and Illyria PANNONIAE, ET ILLYRICI VETERIS TABVLA. Ex
conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij Antverpiani.
Vis consili expers mole ruit sua.

Dn^o Ludovico Hallero ab Hallerstein, Stemmate, eruditione, and animi candore,
vere nobili, Ab. Ortelius hoc amicitiae mnemosynon dedicabat.

Loca incertae positionis.

In ILLYRIA populi, Agravonitae, Araxiae, Cinambri, Decum, Deremistae, Denari,
Dudini, Glinditiones, Grabaei, Hemasini, Hymani, Lacinienses, Mentores,
Melcomani, Oxei, Palarei, Plerei, Sassaei, Scirtari, Selepitani, Separi,
Stulpini, Syopij, Tralles. Vrbes, Alcomenae, Arduba, Astraea, Bolcha, Bargulum,
Bolurus, Cornutum, Dimalum, Eugenium, Hyscana, Iovium, Megara, Melibussa,
Nerata, Ninia, Nutria, Oedantum, Olympe, Orgomenae, Pelion, Pherae, Seretium,
Sesarethus, Setovia, Sinotium, Sir, Surium, Tribulium. Regio Ias. Fluvius
Salancon. Mons Monoechus. Locus Serita. In PANNONIA populi, Arivates, Belgites,
Corneatae, Dasnones, Decentij, Desitiates. Vrbes, Albanum, Arsaciana, Burgena,
Quadriburgum. Hae urbes quoque circa Iapygiam, Istriamque, Archimea, Torgium.
et populi Eleutij, Moentini. Quaedam etiam ex Anton Itinerar. hic omisimus.



We in this Map have expressed only Ptolemey's Illyricum, which he divides
into two parts, namely into LIBVRNIA and DALMATIA, Liuy in his six and
fortieth book, according to the people and inhabitants of the same, divides
it into three parts: of the nature of which province Strabo writes in this
manner: All the sea coast of Illyricum is well furnished with fit and commodious
havens: both the maine land, I mean, and the islands near adjoining to the
same. The soil is very fertile of all manner of fruits and rich commodities,
especially of olives and strong wines. The country that is situate about this,
is wholly mountainous, cold, and covered with snow; so that vines are here
very rare, either in the high grounds or plains and valleys. Whereupon
Propertius not altogether unfitly called it Gelida Illyria, Bleak and frozen
Illyria: Appian names the people Incolas bellicosisimos, a most warlike and
courageous people. Liuy says that they are a very hardy nation both by sea and
land: Florus and Strabo makes them cruel and bloody men, and much given to
rob and steal. Julian the Emperor in his discourse de Caesaribus, testifies
plainly that they are one of the stoutest and valiantest nations of all Europe.
Vegetius records that there were always resident in Illyria two legions
called Martiobarbuli: these Diocletian and Maximinian Emperors of Rome named
afterward Iouiani, and Herculei: and they were preferred before all other
legions whatsoever. Illyricis sudant equitatibus alae; as Claudian reports in
the commendations of Serena. Lampridius makes them well seen and renowned for
their skill in soothsaying, and divining of events to come, when he writes,
that Alexander Seuerus excelled this nation in that skill. Isogonus in Pliny
writes that there be a kind of men amongst these which do bewitch with their
eyes, and do kill such as they do behold and look upon any long while
together: especially such of them as have fiery eyes, like those which are
moved with anger, and these kind of people have two sights in each eye. Aelianus
says that they are great wine bibbers, and, as Athenaeus reports, very much
given to drunkenness. Of the maidens and wives of this country see Varro in
the sixteenth chapter of his second book. Claudian in his second panegyricke
to Stilico signifies that they were permitted about the reign of the latter
Emperors, to have vines, where he thus writes: Exectis inculta dabant quas
secula syluis, Restituit terras, and opacum vitibus Istrum Conserit. Which was
done, as seems, about the time of the Emperor Probus. In Ammianus
Marcellinus I find mention made of Sabaia, the drink of the poorer sort of
people, which they made of barley or wheat turned into a liquour or kind of
woort. Clemens Alexandrinus in his first book of his Stromaton, has recorded
that these people first found out that weapon which the Romans called Pelta, a
kind of shield or target. The kine here every year do bring two or three
calves a piece, and some four; yea some five or more at once: and do give so
much milk at a meal, that every day one cow yields more then a large
gallon. Again, the hens do not lay only once a day, but some two or three
eggs a piece every day, as Aristotle in his Admiranda plainly affirms.
Aelianus writes that he had heard by report from others, that their goats
here are whole footed, not cloven as in other places. Pliny records that
here grows the best Gentian, a kind of bitterwoort, or herb, whose root
is of great virtue and request in physical uses. The same author commends
the cockles of Illyria for their extraordinary greatness. Athenaeus
testifies that here in the high country far from the sea, grows the best
and goodliest Lychnis, or Rose campaine. Ovid in his second book de Art
Amandi, does much commend the Illyrian pitch. Theophrastus, Cornelius Celsus,
Ovid, and Dionysius Vticensis, do mention the Illyrian flower-de-luce, an
herb, beside his beauty, of sovereign use in Physic: the best of which,
and that which is of greatest estimation, as Pliny writes, grows in the
wilds and woods about the rivers Drilo (Drino, or Lodrino) and Narona, now
called Narcuta. In Illyria, if one may believe Festus, in the word Hippius,
every ninth year they were wont to throw four horses into the sea, as a
sacrifice to Neptune, great commander of the same. Dionysius Vticensis and
Caelius Apitius do speak of oleum Liburnicum, a kind of oil made here. The
same author tells us of a cold spring or well in Illyria, over which if a man
shall spread any clothes they will burn, and at length be clean consumed. And
thus much generally of Illyria: now it remains that we speak a word or two
of Liburnia and Dalmatia, the several parts of the same: whose beginning and
ending, as Florus thinks, is at the river Titius, (Cercha, or Polischa:) or
at the city Scardona (Scardo) situate upon the bank of that river, as
Ptolemey, Dioscorides, Galen and Pliny do think. Liburnia is renowned for
those kind of ships which here were first made and used, and therefore were
named Naues Liburnicae: they seem to have been like unto our pinnaces or
foists, light and swift of sail, and therefore were good for pirates and
sea-robbers: and Vegetius in his book of war writes that they were held to
be the best kind of ships for service and fight upon the sea, and therefore
in war to be preferred before any other kind of shipping whatsoever: this
also Appian does confirm, who says that for lightness and swiftness they
did far surpass any other. And Zosimus writes that they were as quick of
sail as those galleys that were forced and rowed with fifty oars: but in this
he is deceived, that he thinks them to have been so named of a certain city
in Italy. Apitius tells us, as we said before, of a Liburnian oil, used, as
seems, about some services in the kitchen. Of the iron mines in Dalmatia, see
Cassiodore in his third book Variarum, dedicated to Symeon. These verses of
Statius in his Siluae, do show that it has also some veins of gold: Quando
te dulci Latio remittent Dalmatae montes, Vbi Dite viso Pallidus fossor redit,
erutoque Concolor auro. So does the poet Martial in the threescore and
eighteenth Epigram of his tenth book unto Macer, in these words: Ibis
littoreas Macer Salonas: Felix auriferae colone terrae: yet Strabo plainly
testifies that they used no manner of money or coins either of silver or gold.
Moreover, he affirms that every eighth year they make a new division of
their lands. There are in Dalmatia, as Cicero to Vatinius writes, twenty
ancient towns, which also have gotten unto them more than threescore other
towns. The rape root and persnep do grow of their own accord about Dalmatia,
without setting, sowing or manuring, as Athenaeus in his ninth book
Deipnosophiston, out of the authority of Posidonius, affirms. For so
Delachampius translateth the Greeks word (...), not used of any other writer to
my knowledge. Aristotle in his often cited Admiranda, gives us to understand
that the Taulantij, a people of Dalmatia, did use of honey to make a kind of
wine: for taking the hony-combes and pouring water upon them, they press and
wring out the liquor, which they presently seethe in a great kettle and
caldron, until the one half of it be consumed, then they put it into earthen
vessels and so let it stand for a certain time: lastly, they tun it up into
barrels or treene vessels, and so they keep it for a long time, until it get
the true and perfect taste of a strong kind of wine. The same author in the
same place writes, that amongst the Ardiaei, a people of Dalmatia, in the
confines near to the Autariatae, there is a great mountain, and near to that
as great a valley, out of which water runs in great abundance; yet not at
all times, but in the spring time only: which in the day time they power into a
vessel, and keep it close within the house, at night they set it abroad in
the open air uncovered: which being done for six days together, at last it
congealeth, and becomes as fine salt as may possibly be seen. Pliny in the
skirts of Dalmatia places a cave which he calls Senta, with a wide deep
mouth, into which if one shall cast any thing though never so light, and in a
day never so calm, presently there rises a storm like to a whirlewind.
Hither peradventure belongs that fable of the two rocks of which Dionysius
Afer speaks. In the same country there is a hole called Diana's cave, in
which, if one may believe Phlegon Trallianus, there are many dead bodies, the
ribs of which are more then sixteen eles long a piece. Give him the
whetstone. Thus far of this country and the people of the same, collected
out of the most ancient authors that are extant and have come to our hands.
Latter writers have named this Illyria, SLAVONIA, and the people or inhabitants
of the same, SLAVONES, Slauonians: by which name, being reclaimed from the
barbarous inciuility of other nations, and by holy baptism incorporated into
the body of Christ's Church, in the time of Basilius Emperor of Constantinople,
and his son Leo, who succeeded him in that Empire, they are described in the
eighteenth chapter of that his book de Bellico apparatu, where he thus sets
out their nature and manner of life: It is a populous nation, able to endure
all manner of miseries; heat, cold, rain, nakedness, want of meat, drink and
other such like necessary things, they can easily abide. They were wont to be
humane and courteous to strangers: which hospitality they do very diligenly
mainetaine and keep even to this day: for they always used to show themselves
gentle and kind to travelers and strangers, to entertain them friendly and
courteously, and to go with them and conduct them from place to place, to
defend and keep them safe and sound from all hurt and danger. So that if a
traveler were wronged by the negligence of his host, they presently made war
upon him, as against a public enemy. For they held it for a great argument of
fidelity, if the wrong done to a stranger were righted or any kind of way
revenged. Moreover, this also does show them to be human, in that they do not
bind their captives to a perpetual servitude, but rather they detained and
kept them with them as captives, and prescribed them a certain set time of
their servitude, after which being expired, paying a certain fine or piece of
money, they might if they pleased return home to their own country again:
or, if they thought good, stay still amongst them as frinds and freemen. Their
women are said to be very modest above those of other countries: for many of
them do take the death of their husbands so heavily, that they will die with
them, and one way or other make an end of their lives with them: for they
cannot abide to live as widows alone after their husbands death, and to marry
the second time that is counted a foul shame. Their ordinary fare is millet:
they are very temperate and sparing in their diet. Other toiles of husbandry
they cannot away withal: for they love to live more freely and gentlemanlike:
by no means they will be drawn with great labor and travel to prepare great
and sumptuous banquets and dainties, and then when they have done, to eat and
drink them up. In war they arm themselves with two iauelings or darts a
piece. Some of them also do carry great shields which they call Thyrei: for they
do use wooden bows and shafts, whose heads they dip in a very strong poison:
for whosoever he be that is wounded, except he presently drink treacle or some
other wholesome and sovereign antidote, or shall by and by cut off all the place
which is wounded, that it run no further, the whole body will surely rot and
perish. They do delight to fly to steep and craggie places, not easily to be
assaulted or come unto, and there to abide and dwell. Thus far Leo the
Emperor. Of HISTRIA, which also is contained in this Map, thou have a large
and fine description in the twelft book of Cassiodore his Variarum, directed
to the lieutenants and governors of this country: where in respect of the
great fertility and store of fruits that it yields, he names it Rauennae
Campaniam, Campany of Rauenna, and the storehouse of the Imperial city.

ITALY.
THey which use to compare the situation of countries to other things do liken
Italy to an oken leaf, as Pliny, Solinus and Rutilius have done: or to an iuy
leaf, as Eustathius. The later writers do more truly liken it to a man's leg.
One in our time has described all Europe in the form of a maiden, in whose
right arm Italy is portraitured: and not unfitly, in my opinion, if one do
exactly consider the nature of the country and famous acts done in the same:
for even as the strength of the body does for the most part show his force and
ability in this member; so this province in times past declared to the world by
this his arm, of what power all Europe the whole body is likely to be.

That Italy has had diverse inhabitants, partly Barbarians and partly Grecians,
it is manifest out of the ancient records both of Latins and Greeks. For at
the first it was inhabited by the Aborigines, Siculi, Pelasgi, Arcades, Epei,
Troiani, Morgetes, Ausones and Oenotri. And therefore it was called by diverse
and sundry names: as, AVSONIA, OENOTRIA, of the people and nations possessing
it: IANICVLA, of Ianus: SATVRNIA, of Saturn: and lastly, ITALIA (which it
still retains) of Italus their King, or as Varro witnesses of bulls or oxen:
for the ancient Gretians did in those days call bulls, (...): and because that
this country did breed and maintain many goodly bulls, it was of them called
Italia: or, (as others affirm, which more regard poetical fables) for that
Hercules from Sicilia hither followed a worthy bull, which was named Italus. Of
the Greeks also it was named HESPERIA, of Hesperus, the son of Atlas: or,
which pleases others better, of Hesperus the evening star: whereof also in
old time Spain was called Hesperia. For, for the same reason that Italy was
sometime of the Grecians called Hesperia, was Spain of the Latins called
Hesperia. Yet for distinction sake, Virgil, in the first and seven books of
his Aeneiads, calls Italy, Hesperiam Magnam, Great Hesperia. But it was also
by others named by other names. For I see that of Macrobius, Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, Marcus Cato, Isaac Tzetzes etc. it was called APENINA,
ARGESSA, CAMESENA, TVRSENIA, SALEVMBRONA and, TAVRINA. Stephanus writes that
it was called CHONIA and BRETTIA. A part also of it was called by writers of
good note MAGNA GRAECIA, Great Greece, of the Grecians that sometime dwelt in
it. They report, as Aelianus writes, that there have dwelt here so many and
sundry nations (more than in any other country of the world) by reason
especially, that all times and seasons of the year are very mild and
temperate: again, for that the goodness of the soil is excellent, well
watered, and very fertile of all manner of fruits, and yields great store of
pastorage: Item, because it is crossed with many rivers, and has the sea very
commodious lying round about it, and the sea coast on all sides open, and cut
into sundry baies, inlets, creekes and havens, serving very fitly for the
entertainment and harborough of goodly tall ships. Lastly, the extraordinary
kindness and humanity of the people inhabiting it, has been a great means to
draw others to seat themselves here. The Italians were ever, as Julius
Firmicus witnesses, very famous for their princely courtesy and gentlemanlike
behavior.

Aethicus calls this country Heavenly Italy, and The Queen of the World;
Rutilius, Rerum dominam, The mistress of all Nations: Dion Prusaeus, The most
blessed and happy country of all Europe: Halicarnassaeus in his first book,
says, that for many reasons, It is the best country of the whole World. Strabo
says, That none may sufficiently express in words the due commendations of
this country, according to the worth of the same. But I think it not amiss to
set out the praises of this country by this one commendation of Pliny,
wherewith he concludes that his famous work which he wrote of the history of
Nature. In the whole World, says he, the cope of heaven, Italy is the most
beautiful country, and of all things it does possess the sovereignty: it is
another nurce and mother of the World, for men, women, captains, soldiers,
servants, famous arts and occupations, worthy wits and inventions, commodious
situation, wholesomenesse and temperature of the air, easy access of all
nations, many safe havens, kind blasts of winds, sufficient good water,
pleasant and healthful woods, goodly hills and mountains, great store of dear
and wild beasts, and those harmless, fertility of soil, and multitude of
people. Whatsoever is necessarily required for the maintenance of man and beast
is here to be found, and no where better. Corn, Wine, Olives, Wool, Linen,
Woollen and Bullockes. Neither did I ever see better horses, or more esteemed
at the runnings or horse-races, than those bred in our own country. For
metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper and Iron, (so long as they pleased to search
for them) it was inferior unto none, all which it still retains in her
womb. Now it yields all manner of liquors of sundry force and virtue,
together with all sorts of grain and pleasant toothsome fruits. Thus far
Pliny. You may add to these, if you please, that which the same author
writes in the fifth chapter of his third book: Item, that of Polybius in his
second book: of Varro in the second chapter of his first book of Husbandry:
of Strabo near the end of his sixth book; and lastly of Virgil in diverse
place. Si factum certa mundum ratione fatemur, Consiliumque Dei machina tanta
fuit: If that we shall confess that heaven by heavenly skill was raised, And
in the same the massy globe by due proportion pais'd: as Rutilius in his
second book speaks of Italy.

Octauianus Augustus, Emperor of Rome, as Pliny testifies, divided this
country into eleven shires: Constantine the Great, as Rubeus, in his second
book of the history of Rauenna, says, into seuenteen. Or, into eighteen, as I
read in the one and twentieth chapter of the second book of Diaconus his
history of Lombardy. Aelianus writes that it was beautified in his time, with
1197. cities. This is that same country, which, when word was brought of the
rising of the Gauls, at what time as L. Aemilius Paulus and Caius Attilius
Regulus, were Consuls, of it self, without any foreign aid, yea and without the
help of those which dwelt beyond the Po, mustered 80000. horsemen, and 700000.
footmen. Polybius says, that in the time of Hanniball, the trained-men of this
country were 700000. fotmen, and 70000. horsemen.

Pliny makes these Islands to belong to Italy: Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica,
Oglasa, (Monte di Christo, or Ianuti) Planar a, Vrgon, (Gorgona) Capraria
Aegilium, (Gilio) Dianium, Moenaria, (Melora) Columbaria, Venaria, (Chia, or
Elba) Planasia, (Planosa) Astura, (Stora) Palmaria, (Palmarola) Sinonia,
Pontiae, Pandataria, (Palmaia) Prochyta, (Prosida) Aenaria, (Ischia) Megaris,
(Ouo) Caprea (Capri, or Campanella) Leucothea, (Licoso) Cuniculariae,
(Sanguenares, or two islands, one called Bizze, the other Speragia) Herculis
insula (Asinaria) Enosis, (S. Pierro) Ficaria, (Serpentaria) Belerides, (Tauro,
and Vacca) Callodes, Hera lutra, Leucatia, Pontia, (Ponzo) Iscia, Ithacesia,
(Praca, Braces, and Turrecula) and Vlyssis spelunca. To these I add the
Aeoliae (Merleiae) Parthenope, (Palmosa or Betente) Diomedeae, (de Trimite)
Calypson, and D oscoron, together with the Electrides, which I find recited and
named in Pomponius Mela and Antoninus.

map of ancient Italy ITALIAE VETERIS SPECIMEN.
EX NVMMO AEREO IMP. CAES. VESPASIANI AVG.

EX NVMMO AEREO IMP. CAES. ANTONINI PII AVG.

Cum Privilegio Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabantiae decennali, evulgabat
Abrahamus Ortelius.



ITALY of the GAVLS.
THis part of Italy in times past was called Gallia. For the old writers did
extend the borders of Gallia from the ocean sea eastward even to the river
Rubicon (Runcone or Rugoso) Therefore the Alps running through the midst of
it divides it into two parts: this they call TRANSALPINA, and Gallia vlterior,
Gallia beyond the Alps, or the further Gallia: this which we have here set
out in this map, CISALPINA, Subalpina and Citerior, Gallia on this side the
Alps, under the Alps, or the hither Gallia. Ausonius names it Gallia the
Old; so does Solinus, where he writes that the Vmbri are an ancient issue and
branch sprung from the old Gauls. Liuy in his 45. book names it Gallia,
without any addition. And for that all this part, in process of time was
comprehended under the name of Italy: therefore of Appian in his Annibalica, it
is called by a fit name, to distinguish it from that other part, ITALIA
GALLICA. The book of records of the Provinces names it, ITALIA MEDITERRANEA
Midland Italy. In this part was also contained that province, which was called
GALLIA TOGATA. Moreover this was named ARIMINIVM, as you may read in the 28.
book of Liuies Decades, except the place be corrupt. Silius Italicus, in his
9. book, calls the people of this place, Celtes, dwelling upon the river
Eridanus or Po. In this circuit of ground (which Tacitus names the most
flourishing side of Italy) are the Eighth, Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh shires of
Italy, according to the division of Augustus. This self same tract is of the
river Padus (Po) which waters it, and divides it in the midst, divided
into two parts, namely, GALLIA TRANSPADANA and CISPADANA, Gallia beyond the Po,
and Gallia on this side the Po. This later, Cispadana alone, in Ptolemey does
contain that which otherwise was called Togata. Under this division were the
Ligures comprehended: who, as we have observed in ancient writers, long since
dwelt up as high as the river Po. If there be any credit to be given to the
Origines, a book which commonly goes under the name of Cato, this same
province was also called AEMILIA, FELSINA, AVRELIA and BIANORA. Polybius says,
that the form of this whole tract of Gallia, is triangular or three cornered:
whose top or vertex, as the Geometricians call it, is made by the meeting of
the Alps and Apenninus, that mountain that runs through the midst of
Italy from one end to the other. The base or ground line, is the Hadriaticke
sea (Golfo di Venetia). Moreover he adds that in it are the greatest champion
plains and most fertile fields of all Europe. It is every where full of woods,
good pastorage for the feeding of cattle, and well watered with many pleasant
brooks and rivers, and has had in it twelve great and goodly cities, so built
and seated that they had all things necessary either for the enriching of
themselves conveniently, or maintenance and provision for to live gallantly, as
Plutarch does witness in the life of Camillus. The same also Pliny does
affirm, who in like manner says that it is three cornered: and as in Delta, a
province of Egypt, the river Nilus: so here Po, does empty it self and
falls into the ocean sea. Which river Po, as Strabo says, does water this
plain, makes it fertile, and also distinguishes it by many most fruitful
hills, into diverse and sundry parts. This is that river which antiquity called
Eridanus, famous for the poetical or fabulous story of Phaeton. Virgil calls
it, The king of Rivers. Claudian gives it the title of Oloriferus, the
swanne-bearing stream. Pliny names it Auriferum, the golden stream, and
moreover says, that for clearenesse it is not inferior to any river
whatsoever. It issues out of the bosom of Vesulus, (Veso) the highest hill of
all the Alps: where first arising out of many small fountains, it draws to
head, then hiding it self or running underneath the ground for many furlongs
together, at last rises again not far from Forum-Vibij or Vibi Forum. From
thence (many huge lakes emptying tnemselues into it) accompanied with thirty
other rivers, it vnladeth it self by many mouths into the Hadriaticke bay or
Gulf of Venice: into which it falls so swiftly and with such violence, that
forcing back the billows and tide, it keeps his own channel in the sea,
and, as Pomponius speaks, makes the waters fresh and potable amid the
brackish surges of the same. Pliny writes, that in the Ligurian language it
was named Bodincus, that is, (as Scepsius there does interpret it) Bottomless.
In these quarters, amongst others, the Gauls did sometimes dwell, who first of
all mortal men made war upon the Romans, took the city of Rome, sacked and
burnt it, the Capitol only being preserved untouched. This is that part of
Italy, which, as Pliny writes to his familiar friend Iunius Mauricus,
retains even to this day much of that ancient frugality and good husbandry
of our ancestors. In the fifth book of Straboes Geographie, and in the second
book of Polybius history you have an excellent and large description of this
country. Of Venice, a shire of this province, read Cassiodore in the four and
twentieth section of his twelfth book. Bonauentura Castilloneus and Gaudentius
Merula, borne here, in this our age have much graced and painted out this part
in their learned writings, and several tracts written of the same. They which
are delighted with tales and fables, let them repair to Aristotle, who, in his
book entitled Admiranda, has certain things of the Electrides, (a few small
islands supposed by the ancients to be in this Gulf, but falsely as we have
showed before) and of Dawes or Choughs which do stock up the seed new sown.
Of these also Theopompus speaks in the sixteenth chapter of the seventeenth
book of Aelian de Animalibus.

Of LIGVRIA, here some thing might well be said, if so be that this map did
contain it all: but because a piece of it only is here expressed (for in time
past as good authors do record, it extended his borders beyond Marseilles and
the river Eridanus, or Po) therefore of it we will surcease to speak much in
this place. Only I will set down an ancient inscription cut in a plate of
brass, found in this province long since, for that it contains many names of
places of the precinct of Genua, mentioned in this map and no where else read
in any author whatsoever. And for that the antiquity of it (although I suspect
that also) is the greatest matter to be admired, I will only set it down in
the same manner as it was delivered by Ortelius. Thus it is expressed word for
word by Stunica:

Q. M. Minutie is Q. F. Rufeis de controuersieis inter Genuateis and Veiturios
in re praesente cognouerunt; and coram inter eos controuersias composeiuerunt:
and qua lege agrum possiderent, and qua fine is fierent, dixserunt eos fineis
facere, terminosque statui iouserunt: vbei ea facta essent, Romam coram venire
iouserunt. Romae coram sententiam ex Senati consulto dixerunt, eidib. December.
L. Caecilio. Q. F. Q. Muutio. Q.F. Cos. Qua ager priuatus Casteli Veituriorum
est, quem agrum eos vendere haredemque sequi licet: is ager vectigal nei siet.
Langatium fineis agri priuati ah tiuo infimo qui oritur ab fontei in Manuicelo
ad flouium Edem, ibi terminus stat. Inde flouio suso vorsum in flouium Lemurim.
Inde flouio Lemurisusum vsque map of ancient Northern Italy ITALIA GALLICA,
SIVE GALLIA CISALPINA. Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij.
Cum priuilegio decennali, Imp. Belgicae, et Brabantiae.

Venerando Dn^o D. Francisco Superantio Veneto, pietate ac sanguine nobili,
auctor lubens merito donabat, dedicabatque.

INCERTI SITVS LOCA.

Acara, Ampelus, Aprona, Auginus, Barderate, Barra, Caelina, Carcantia, Carrea
quod Potentia, Cottia, Diacuista, Epiterpium, Forum Clodij, Iramine, Ordia,
Palsicium, Pellaon, Quadratae, Rigomagum, Templum, Vcetia.

Electrides insulas ante Padum, a priscis descriptas, fabulosas facit Strabo.

INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS POPVLI.

Casmonates Celelates Cerdiceates Euburiates Flamonienses, qui Vannienses, et
Culici Foretani Friniates Garuli Hercates Ilvates Lapicini Magelli Otesini
Padinates Quarquerni Treienses Varvani Veliates, cognomine Vecteri Veneni
Vergunni Vibelli.


ad riuem Comberane. Inde riuo Comberanea susam vsque ad conualem Caeptimam,
ibi termini duo stant circum viam Postumiam. Ex eis terminis recta regione in
riuo Veindupale. Ex riuo Vendupale in flouium Neuiascam. Inde dorsum flouio
Neuiasca in flouium Procoberam. Inde flouio Procobora deorsum vsque ad riuom
Vinelascam infumum: ibei terminus stat. Inde sursum riuo recto Vinelasca: ibei
terminus stat propter viam Postumiam. Inde alter trans viam Postumiam terminus
stat. Ex eo termino quei stat trans viam Postumiam recta regione in fontem in
Manicelum. inde deorsum riuo quei oritur ab fontein Manicelo ad term number quiei
stat ad stouium Edem agri poplici quod Langenses posident: hisce finis videntur
esse: vbi confluont Edus and Procohera ibei terminus stat. Inde Ede flouio
sursuorsum in montem Lemurino infumo: ibei terminus stat. Inde sursum vorsum
iugo recto monte Lemurino: ibei terminus stat. Inde susum iugo recto Lemurino:
ibei terminus stat in monte Procauo. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Lemurinum
summum, ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in castelum quei vocitatust
Alianus, ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Louentionem, ibi
terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Apeninum quei vocatur Boplo,
ibi terminus stat. Inde Apeninum iugo recto in montem Tuledonem: ibi terminus
stat Inde deorsum iugo recto in flouiom Veraglascam, in montem Berigienam
infumo: ibi terminus stat. Inde sursum iugo recto in montem Prenicum:
ibiterminus stat. Inde dorsum iugo recto in flouium Tutelascam: ibi terminus
stat. Inde sursum iugo recto Blustiemelo in montem Claxelum: ibi terminus stat.
Inde deorsum in fontem Lebriemelum: ibi terminus stat. Inde recto riuo Eniseca
in flouium Procoberam: ibi terminus stat. Inde deorsum in flouiom Porcoberam
vbei conflouont floui Edus and Probobera, ibei terminus stat. Quem agrum
poplicum iudicamus esse: eum agrum Castelanos Langenses Viturios posidere
fruique videtur oportere: pro eo agro vectigal Langenses Veituris in poplicum
Genuam dent in annos singulos VIC. N. CCCC. Sei langenses eam pequniam non
dabunt neque satisfacient arbitratuu Genuatium, quod per Genuenses mora non
fiat quo setius eam pequniam acipiant: tum quod in eo agro natum erit frumenti
partem vicenumam, vini partem sextam Langenses in poplicum Genuam dare debento
in annos singulos. Quei intra eos fineis agrum posedet, Genuas aut Viturius
quei eorum posedeit. K. Sextil. L. Caicilio. Q. Muutio. Cos. eos ita posidere
colereque liceat, eus quei posidebunt vectigal Langensibus proportione dent:
ita vti ceteri Langenses quei eorum in eo agro agrum posidebunt fruenturque.
Praeterea in eo agro ni quis posideto, nisi de maiore part Langensium
Veituriorum sententia: dum ne alium intromittat nisi Genuatem aut Veiturium
colendi caussa. Quei eorum de maiore part Langensium Veiturium sententia ita
non parebit: is eum agrum nei habeto niue fruimino. Quei ager compascuos erit:
in eo agro quo minus pecuascere Genuates Veituriosque liceat, ita vti in cetero
agro Genuati compascuone quis prohibeto: niue quis vim facito: neiue prohibeto
quo minus ex eo agro ligna materiam que sumant vtanturque. Vectigal anni primi
K. Ianuaris secundis Veturis Langenses in poplicum Genuam dare debento. Quod
ante K. Ianuaris primas Langenses fructi sunt eruntque vectigal inuitei dare
nei debento. Prata quae fuerunt proxuma foenisicei. L. Caicilio. Q. Munitio
Cos. in agro poplico quem Vituries Langenses posident: and quem Odiates and
quem Dectunines and quem Cauaturineis, and quem Montouines posident: ea prata
inuitis Langensibus, and Odiatibus, and Dectuninebus, and Cauaturines, and
Mentonines, quem quisque eorum agrum posidebit inuiteis eis ni quis sicet: niue
pascat: niue fruatur. Sei Langenses aut Odiates aut Dectunines aut Cauaturines
aut Mentonines malent in eo agro alia prata inmitere, defendere, sicare, id vti
facere liceat, dum ne ampliorem modum pratorum habeant quam proxuma aestate
habuerunt fructique sunt Vituries. Quei controuersias Genuensium ob iniourias
iudicati aut damnati sunt, sei quis in vinculeis ob eas res est: eos omneis
soluei mittei leiberique Genuanses videtur oportere ante Eidus Sextilis primas.
Si quoi de ear iniquom vid ebitur esse, ad nos adeant primo quoque die, and ab
omnibus controuersieis and hono. publ. leg. Moco. Meticanio Meticoni. F.
Plancus; Peliani Pelioni. F.

Thus far out of Stunica; for although I know that others have described this
inscription, yet because I judged his copy best, presuming upon his diligence
and credit (for he protests that he has written it out without any
alteration, adding or detracting any one letter) I have followed him, rather
than others: therefore he admonishes the Reader not to be moved with the
diverse writing of one and the same word, as iouserunt and iuserunt; dixserunt
and dixerunt, susum and sursum; and others such like. Neither let him think
that these are faults ouerslipped by the negligence of the writers, but to be
so diversely written in the copy. Augustinus Iustinianus (that I may add this
also) for in Manicelo, reads Immanicelum: for Vendupale, Vindupale; for
Louentio, Iouentio: and for Berigiena, Berigema. Some other diversities also
there are to be observed in certain other words, as you may find by Fuluius
and Lipsius in Smetius: Stunica thus understands those abbreuiations; VIC. N.
CCCC. victoriatos nummos quadringentos, (four hundred pieces of silver money
called Victoriatus; whereof one was about the value of our groat.) HONO. PVEL.
MOCO. Oneribus publicis liberi, lege Moconia.

This plate was found in the year of Christ 1506. by a laboring man, as he
was digging in the ground, in the liberties of Genua, at the bottom of the
mount Apenninus, in the vale Proceuera, which they commonly call Sicca, in a
village called Izosecco: from whence it was carried to S. Laurence Church in
Genua, where it is this day to be seen. It seems to have been written about
one hundred year after the beginning of the Punicke war.

TVSCIA, OR ETRVRIA.
THe length of this country is bounded by two rivers; with Tiber on the East:
and Macra (Magra) on the West: on the South it has the Tuscane sea ( Mare
Tuscum, or Tyrrhenum; now mar Tosco) For although, as Liuy and Polybius do
testify, before the Roman Empire it was more large, and extended his bounds
beyond the Appenine mountains, even as far as Atria (Atri) whereof the
Atreaticke sea, ( Hadriaticus sinus, the bay of Hadria, Golfo di Venetia) took
the name: yet afterward being expelled and driven from thence by the Gauls, it
was contained within these bounds. Of those eleven provinces into which all
Italy was by Augustus divided, as Pliny testifies, this was the seventh. The
Origines, a book which commonly goes under Catoes name, do divide this
country into the Maritima, (that part which coasteth along the sea, and is of
Vopiscus in the story of Aurelianus said to be fertile and full of woods) the
Transciminia, beyond the mount Ciminus (Monte viterbo) and the Lartheniana, so
named of the city Larthenium. Iornandes and Ammianus in his 26. book does make
mention of Annonaria Etruria, about the town Pistorium (Pistoia.) Moreover,
Lib. de Limitib. speaks of Etruria Vrbicaria. Was not this about the city of
Rome? Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his sixth book writes that it was divided
into 12. Dukedomes: Liuy in his first book calls them people ( populos
hundreds, tribes) at which it seems Virgill did aim, where he thus writes,
Gens illi triplex populi subgente quaterni. Three Nations great Etruria do
possess, four tribes each nation it contained. Out of the which choosing one
king in common, each people sent their several sergeants, to attend upon him.
Seruius names them Lucumones, at the second book of Virgils Georgickes, and
would have the word to signify kings: yet Festus says that they are men so
called of their madness, for that they make all places where they come
unlucky and unfortunate. In the forenamed Origines, they are called twelve
colonies; and are thus recited in order, Ianiculum, Arinianum upon Tiber,
Phesulae, and another Arinianum upon Arnus, Phregenae, Volce Volaterra, Cariara
otherwise named Luna upon the shore, Ogygianum, Aretium, Rosellae, and
Volsinium within the land. Volaterranus reckons them up by these names and in
this order: Luna, Pisae, Populonia, Volaterra, Agyllina, Fesulae, Russellana,
Aretium, Perusia, Clusium, Faleria and Vulsinia. An ancient monument of stone,
yet remaining at Vulsinium (Bolsena) as Onyphrius affirms, makes mention of
fifteen Hundreds of Etruria.

The country has been called by diverse names. For out of Pliny we learn that
it was first named VMBRIA: who withal affirms that the Vmbri were thrown
out of it by the Pelasgi, and thereupon it was called PELASGIA. These the Lydi
did expel as the same Pliny with Trogus does witness, of whose king Tyrrhenus
it was entitled TYRRHENIA, as Paterculus, Halicarnassaeus, Strabo and Liuy
have left recorded. Soon after that, of the ceremony of sacrificing, it was
called in the Greek tongue TVSCIA. It was also named, as the same
Halicarnassaeus writes RASENA, of a certain Duke or General of that nation:
In Myrsilus, if I be not deceived, it is corruptly written Rasenua. Moreover it
was called COMARA and SALEVMBRONE, if we will believe the feined Berosus,
Annius, and such like fabulous writers. The Phocenses, as Herodotus in Clio
writes, sometime possessed it. The fragment of Antonius near the lake Arnus
makes mention of the Phocenses, and the lake Phocensis. Halicarnassaeus also
in his first book says that the Siculi did inhabit it before the entrance of
the Pelasgi.

The nature of the soil is very fertile of all manner of things, yea of vines
especially, as Halicarnassaeus has given out. The large champion plains,
divided into several by-hils and mountains, are well manured and very
fruitful, as Diodorus witnesses. It is very woody, good pastorage and well
watered with many pleasant streams, as Plutarch justifies. Martianus says
that for fertility of soil it was ever renowned and of great estimation: which
fertility is no small means to draw the people to give themselves overmuch to
pleasure and ease: for they are, as the same Halicarnassaeus writes, very fine
in their apparel and dainty in their diet both at home and abroad: who indeed
beside things necessary, do carry about with them, even when they go to
war, diverse fine things most curiously wrought only for pleasure and
delight. Eustathius calls it a robbing, cruel and uncivil nation. Eusebius
in his 2. book de praeparati. Euang. says that they were much given to
Necromancie. Arnobius in his 7. book contra Gentes, makes it the mother and
nurce of superstition. They were always counted very religious, and so were
the first that found out sacrifices, diuinations, and soothsayings, from whom
also the Romans received these vain and superstitious arts: as also the Sella
curulis (coach of estate) paludamenta, trabea, (the rich robe) toga pretexta,
toga picta, fasces, secures, (hatchets) litui, apparitores, curcules, annuli,
annuli, (rings) music, and the ludiones (whifflers.) Lastly, all their
ornaments of triumph and robes of the Consuls, or rather, (that I may use the
words of Florus) all the bravery and badges wherewith the honorable estate of
the Empire was graced and set out. Cassiodore in the 15. section of his 7. book
does attribute to them the invention of the casting and working of statues of
brass. Here hence it arose that the Romans first committed their children to
the Etrusci, to be taught and brought up, as afterward they used to do to the
Grecians, as you may read in Liuy, Strabo and Diodorus Siculus. That the flute
(tibia) was the invention of the Tyrrheni, by which they did not only fight,
but also whip their servants, yea and to sees, Julius Pollux does cite out of
Aristotle. Of them Plutarch in the 8. book of his Conuiual. writes, that by
an ancient statute they used to disperse their couerleds and blanckets when
they rose out of their beds in the morning. Item, taking of their pots off the
fire, they left no print thereof in the ashes, but did always rake them
abroad. They never would suffer any swallows to come within their house. They
might not go over a broom. They would keep none in their house that had
crooked nails upon his fingers. Yet Thimon, in the 12. book of Athenaeus, his
deipnosophiston, calls them voluptuous and licentious livers, and none of the
best report for their conversation: hereof you may see many examples if you
take any delight in such stories. The like you may read in his 4 book. But I
cannot omit this one thing which Heraclides in his Politics does recite:
namely, that if any man be so far in debt that he is not able to pay, the
boys do follow him holding up unto him, in mockery, an empty purse. The
Etrusci were long since accounted very wealthy. They were very strong both by
sea and by land: and in war equal in strength to the Romans. Liuy (to whom
Diodorus does subscribe) says it is the richest province of Italy both for
men, munition and money. Plutarch in the life of Camillus, says, that this
country did reach from the Alps Northward as high as the Hadriaticke sea, and
Southward as low as the midland sea. That there were 300. cities of the Vmbri,
battered and taken by the Tusci, we find recorded, says Pliny. Such was the
wealth and command of Etruria, that it did not only filll the land with an
honorable report and fame of their name, but also even the sea all along from
one end of Italy to the other. Liuy and Pliny do affirm that Mantua and Atri
were colonies of the Tusci; Pomponius and Paterculus do say the like of Capua:
as also of Nola, although that Solinus does ascribe this to the Tyrians (where
I think the copy is corrupt, and for Tyrijs, I suppose it should be written
Tyrrhenis) Trogus and Silius Ital cus do affirm it to have been built and
first peopled by the Chaldicenses. Yea Plutarch in his treatise of famous
women, and again in his Gretian questions, says, that these Etrusci, in old
time did possess Lemnos, (Stalamine) and Imbrus (Lembro) certain islands in
the Archipelago or Aegean sea.

Tuscus vicus, a street in Rome: Tusculum and Tusculanum, in Latium (Campagna
di Roma) took their names from hence; Again mare Tuscum, called otherwise
mare Inferum, Notium, Tyrrhenum, and Liburnum, (the Nether sea, or South sea,
in respect of the Hadriaticke sea which is called mare Superum, the upper sea,
and is upon the North from this country) as we find in Pliny and Cicero. About
Puteoli (Pozzole) as Dion records, there is a creek of the sea called
Tyrrhenus sinus, the bay of Tuscane. But there are also other Tusci, diverse
from these in Sarmatia, as Ptolemey notes: as also other Tyrrheni, in the
islands belonging to Attica, if you will believe Marsylus Lesbius.

map of ancient Etruria TVSCIAE ANTIQVAE TYPVS. Ex conatibus geographicis Ab.
Ortelij.
LOCA TVSCIAE QVORVM SITVM IGNORO.

Ad harnaba Amitinenses Anio Caprium Cora Corytus Cortenebra Cortnessa
Crustuminum Etruria, idem forte cum Tyrrhenia Nacria, quae et Nucria Neueia
Olena Perrhaesium, nisi sit Perusia Sabum Sora Tagina Troilium, nisi sit
Troitum Turrena Augustalis Tyrrhenia, an idem cum Etruria? Vera Vesentini
Vexij, nisi sint Veij.


Consule nostrum Thesaurum geographicum.

Cum privilegio Imperiali et Belgico ad decennium. 1584.



LATIVM.
LATIVM, which the excellent Poet Virgil syrnameth The Great, The Fair, and
The Western, by the description of Augustus, who, as Pliny testifies, divided
Italy in eleven shires, the chief and principal of the rest, was twofold, to
wit, Latium The New, and Latium The Old. LATIVM VETVS, Old Latium, began at
the river Tiber, and extended it self even up as high as the Circaeian
mountains (or to Fundi, as Seruius says.) LATIVM NOVVM, New Latium, from
hence stretched it self unto the river Liris, as Pliny and Strabo do jointly
testify: yea and farther, as they both affirm: For even as low as Sinuessa,
(which was otherwise also called Sinope) being in that part which is named
Adiectum Latium, the same Pliny calls Latium beyond the Liris, which is
indeed a part of Campania. Which peradventure was the reason that moved Seruius
to extend this Latium as far that way as the river Vulturnus. So that the
bounds of this Latium are the Tyrrhen sea, the mount Apenninus, the rivers
Tiber, Anio, and Liris. The neighbor Nations inhabiting round about it are the
Tusci, Sabini, Marsi, Samnites, Praegutiani, and the Campani. It was so named
of the Verb Lateo, signifying To lurk or Lie hid; for that Saturnus here did
hide himself, as Seruius writes: and in truth before him Herodianus,
Eutropius, Cyprianus, and Minutius Felix do plainly affirm the same; yea and
that Poet, which in all men's opinions is counted the best, in these his verses.
Primus ab aetherio venit Saturnus Olympo, Arma Iouis fugiens, and regnis exul
ademptis. Is genus in^oc^^, ac d^spersum montibus altis, Composuit, legesque
dedit, Latiumque vocari Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris. Thus
Englished by M. T. Phaer: First from Olympus mount (right near the skies) good
Saturn old, When he from Jove did fly, and from his kingdom outlawed stood,
He first that wayward skittish kind dispersed in hills and wood, Did bring to
thrift, and gave them laws, and all the land this way Did Latium call, for
safely here long time he lurking lay. The same, another Poet, as famous as he,
both for his eloquence and long exile, relating the words of god Ianus, thus
reports: Multa quidem didici, sed cur naualis in aere Actera signata est,
altera forma biceps? Noscere me duplici me possis in imagine, dixit: Nivetus
ipsa dies extenuasset opus. Caussa ratis superest: Tuscum venit rate in amuem,
Ante pererrato falcifer orb deus. Hac ego Saturnum memini tellure receptum,
Caelitibus regnis a Jove pulsus erat. Inde diu genti mansit Saturnia nomen:
Dicta quoque est Latium terra latente Deo. At bona posteritas puppim formauit
in aere, Hespitis aduentum testificata Dei. Prudentius also, the Christian
Poet, in his book which he wrote against Symmachus, thus writes of Saturnus:
Number melius Saturnus auos rexisse Latinos Creditur? edictis qui talibus
informauit Agrestes animos and barbara corda virorum? Sum D^us, aduenio
fugiens, praebete latebras. Occultate senem, nati feritate tyranni Deiectum
solio: placet hic fugitiuus and exul, Vt lateam, genti atque loco Latium dabo
nomen. Is It thought that Saturn did the Latins better rule, Who taught them
first when as they were as wild as horse or mule? A god I am indeed, show
where I may me hide; For I have lost my regal crown, by Jove's untimely pride;
And still I fear his power, I dare him not abide. If that you will grant me
leave with you to hide my head, Latium this country shall be called long after I
am dead. So that Solinus Polyhistor did not without just cause make this
demand: Who is he that knows not, that of Saturnus this country was named
both Latium and Saturnia? But if any man shall suppose these reports to be
fabulous and mere Poetical fictions, let him hear the learned Varro speak,
an author far more ancient than all those aforenamed, who affirms it to
have been so named, quod lateat inter Alpium and Apennini praecipitia, for that
it is hid, enclosed or contained between the steep and craggie cliffes of the
Alps and Apenninus. But what shire, I pray you, in all Old Italy is there,
quae non aeque latet? that is not thus environed? If I poor goose might dare
to keake amongst these well tuned swannes, I should rather think it to have
gotten this name, not a latendo, of lurking, but a latitudine, of the breadth of
it: For there is no other country of the right and ancient Italy, that
between the sea and those mountains does spread it self more broad and wide
every way than this does: and that the Geographicall charts and mappes of this
province do sufficiently approve. But let antiquity be still believed, I
poor fool will not impeach their credit, lest at last it turn to mine own
discredit. There are some, as Hieronymus Columna, writing upon the fragments of
the famous Poet Ennius, reports, which think that this name Saturnus is a
mere Syrian word, and in that language to signify the same that latens (that
is, one that plays least in sight) does in Latin: And hereupon those
ancients, as it were, interpreting the word, have called that shire and
country where the Latins dwelt, LATIVM Truth it is, and all learned in these
oriental tongues can bear me witness, that the Hebrew thema (...) Sathar,
signifies to lurk, or hide ones self from the presence or sight of others:
which signification it constantly reteineth both in the Syrian or Chaldey, and
Arabicke dialects. From hence also may analogically be formed (...) Sithron,
(from which by adding us, the Latin termination, is made Saturnus) like as of
(...) Pathar, to interpret, is made (...) Pithron, an interpretation, and of
(...) Rahama, to be merciful or pitiful, is made (...) Rahman, in the
Arabian, or (...) Rahmana in the Syrian tongue, a pitiful hearted man: and of
(...) Thirgem, to interpret out of one language into another, is framed also
(...) Thurgmana, an interpretour; used likewise by the Chaldey Paraphrast at
the seventh Psalm: as also by the Arabian interpretour of the New Testament,
at the 28. verse of the 14. chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians: and vulgarly amongst the Mores, Turks, and other Oriental
nations, they call an interpretour, or him who usually attends strangers or
travelers inexpert of that language a (...) Turgman, or, as they commonly
pronounce it, a Trugman. Observe moreover, that even the word Latium it self,
supposed to be a pure Latin deriuatiue, together with his theme Lateo, does
savor of the Hebrew root (...) Lat, of the same signification: from whence is
derived (...) Lot, the proper name of Harans son, who with Terah his
grandfather, and Abram his fathers brother, came from Vr of the Chaldees, and
dwelt in the land of Canaan, Genesis 11.27.31. From the same root also, as some
learned men think, was derived (...) Lotan, the proper name of one of the
sons of Seir the Horite, Genesis 36.20. which comes more near to the Italian
Latinus. But of this peradventure we have stood too long. That the inhabitants
or people of this country were called Latini, Strabo with all the ancient
writers of the Roman histories does plainly teach us, denominated of Latinus a
king of this province, according to that of Virgil -- genus vnde Latinum, From
whom the Latins took their name. Pliny also makes mention of the
Latinienses, a nation of this province; but extinct something before his time,
as he there adds. These were called Prisci, as Halicarnasseus and Festus do
testify. Of the nature of this country Strabo in the fifth book of his
Geography writes thus: All Latium, says he, generally is a very good soil
and fertile of all manner of things, except only some certain places near the
sea coast, which are morish and very unhealthful; as namely the fields about
Ardea, and whatsoever is between Lauinium and Antium, even as far as
Pometia, with some places about Setia; and others near Tarracina and Circeium;
beside all those fields that are stony and mountainous; although even these
grounds are not altogether idle and unfruitful: all of them having either some
good pastures and large woods, or do yield great abundance of fenny and
mountainous commodities. Caecubum, a place in this fenne, does yield a kind of
vine which grows up in height like a tree, whose wine is counted to be the
best of all Italy. Hear also what Theophrastus writes of this province in the
fifth book of his history of Plants, at the ninth chapter of the same book:
Latinus ager, the country of Latium, says he, has great plenty of water. The
champion plains have great store of laurel and myrtle trees: item they yield
a wonderful kind of beech ( scissima, he calls it, or oxea, as others term
it) of that marvelous length, that one tree may serve for a whole keele for
such kind of ships as they commonly use in Etruria. The hilly and mountainous
places do bear the pine and fur trees. Pliny does highly commend the wines
of Latium, (Latiniensia vina.) The same author affirms that their chief
meat was far, that is, a kind of bearded or read wheat; and withal,
testifies that it is certain that the Romans for a long time together lived
with pulls, by which they understand all manner of corn beside wheat and barley,
not with bread. How populous this country was, how many cities and people it
contained, the same author does teach us, where he writes that in Old Latium
only three and fifty nations are utterly decayed and extinct without any
mention at all remaining of their names. Item, that Pomptina palus, the fen
Pontina (now called Aufente palude) a part also of this country, had in former
times in it three and twenty cities. Of all the cities of Latium, in old time
Alba longa was the chief and metropolitan: but afterward Rome, which grew to
that greatness and power that it was not only the head of this province, but
also even of the whole world beside. Whose other name, because it is held an
unlawful thing to speak that which is concealed and enrowled in ceremonious
mysteries, I will not utter, lest with Valerius Soranus, I be worthily punished
for the same. Yet the syrnames, epithets, and commendable titles where with it
was graced and set out by the best writers of all nations, if I shall here
reckon up, I hope there is no man, that is an indifferent Judge, that will
blame me. It is called and entitled a city AEQVAEVA POLO, As ancient as the
heavens, of Claudian: AETERNA, Immortal, of Ammianus, Tibullus, Ausonius, and
marble inscriptions: ALTA, Stately, by Virgil: ALTRIX IMPERII, The Nurse of the
empire, by Corippus: ALTRIX ORBIS, The Nurse of the world, of Rutilius:
ANTIQVA, The ancient, by Prudentius and Corippus: ARX OMNIVM GENTIVM, The
fortress or bulwark of all nations, by Nazarius: ARX TERRARVM, The bulwark
of all lands, by Symmachus: AUGUSTA, The imperial, by Corippus: AVREA, The
golden, by Ausonius and Prudentius: BEATA NOBILIBVS POPVLIS, Most happy for
honorable people, of Cassiodorus: BELLATRIX, The warlike, by Ovid, Claudian,
and Sidonius: CAPVT GENTIVM, The head of all nations, by Martianus: CAPVT
IMMENSI ORBIS, The head of the huge globe of the whole world, by Ovid: CAPVT
MVNDI, The head of the world, by Cassiodorus and Sidonius: CAPVT ORBIS, The
head of the earthly globe, by Pliny, Ovid, Trogus, Gratius, Fortunatus,
Aethicus, and Prudentius: CAPVT RERVM, The head of all things, by Liuy, Ovid,
Ausonius and Tacitus: CAELESTIS, The heavenly, by Athenaeus: CELEBERRIMA, The
most famous, by Statius: CELSA, The lofty, by Prudentius: CLARISSIMA, The most
bright, by Stephanus: DARDANIA, Of Dardanus, by Ovid and Silius Italicus: DEA,
The goddess, in coins: DEA GENTIVM, The goddess of all nations, and DEA
TERRARVM, The goddess of all lands, by Martial: DESIDERABILIS, That all men
wish to see, by Eustathius and Dionysius Afer: DEVM LOCVS, The seat and place
of gods, by Ovid: DICNITATVM CVRIA, The court of dignities and honor, by
Sidonius: DITISSIMA, The most rich, by Prudentius: DOMINA, The mistress, by
Ovid, Arnobius, Horace, and Nemesianus: DOMINA GENTIVM, The lady mistress of
all nations, by Eumenius: DOMINA RERVM, The mistress of all things, by
Appianus, Eunapius, and Ausonius: DOMINA TERRARVM, The lady mistress of all
lands, by Ammianus: DOMINA TERRAE MARISQVE, The lady mistress of sea and land,
by Halicarnasseus: DOMINA TOTIVS MVNDI, The lady mistress of all the whole
world, of Aethicus: DOMINA VNIVERSORVM, The lady of all things, by
Halicarnasseus: DOMINANS, The swey-bearing city, by Silius Italicus: DOMVS
AVREA, The golden palace, by Ausonius: DOMVS DIVVM, The palace of the gods, by
Ausonius: DOMVS MAGNA REGVM, The goodly palace of kings, by Eustathius and
Dionysius Afer: DOMVS QVIRINI, Quirinus palace, by Ausonius: ELOQVENTIAE
FOECVNDA MATTER, A fruitful mother of eloquence, by Castiodore: EXCELSA, The
lofty, by Lucane: FELIX, The blessed, by Propertius, Cassiodor, and a certain
ancient marble inscription: FEROX, The fierce, by Horace: FVTVRA, by Rutilius:
GENETRIX HOMINVM ET DEORVM, The mother of men and gods, by Rutilius: GENITRIX
REGVM, The mother of kines, by Priscian: GYMNASIVM LITERARVM, A school of good
learning and liberal sciences, by Sidonius: IMMENSA, The exceeding great city,
by Statius: IMPERII LAR, by Ammianus: IMPERII LATIALE CAPVT, by Statius:
IMPERII DEVMQVE LOCVS, The native country of emperors and of gods, by Ovid:
INCLYTA, The renowned, by Virgil, Ennius, and Ausonius: INVICTA, The
invincible, in some old coins: LAETA, The fortunate, by Ovid: LATII PARENS,
The mother of Latium, by Ausonius: LEGVM DOMICILIVM, The mansion place of all
good laws and justice, by Sidonius: LEGVM PATRIA, The native soil where all
good laws are bred and borne, by Justinian in his Code: LIBERTATIS PARENS, The
mother of liberty, map of ancient Latium, with an inset of Mount Circea LATIVM
Ex Conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij Antverp.
MONS CIRCAEVS, AD VIVVM DELINEATVS, AB ANGELO BREVENTANO.
VIRO NOBILI, ET HISTORICO ILLVSTRI, MARCO VELSERO, PATRICIO AVGVSTANO,
ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS DEDICABAT, L.M.

Cum privilegio decennali, Imp. Reg. et Brabantiae. 1595.

by Corippus: LVX ORBIS TERRARVM, The light of the whole earth, by Tully:
MAGNA, The great, by Virgil, Horace, Calpurnius Siculus, Nonn. Marcelunus. On d
and Claudian: MARTIA, The martial, by Ovid and Ausonius: MARTIGENA, Begotten
by Mars the god of battle, by Silius Italicus: MARTIS VRBS, The city of Mars,
by the Poet Martial: MATTER CIVITATVM, The mother of cities, the Metropolitan
city, by Ennodius: MATTER DVCVM, The mother of famous generals, by Claudian:
MATTER DIGNITATVM, The mother of honor and dignity, by Cassiodor: MATTER
ELOQVENTIAE, The mother of eloquence, by the same author: MATTER MVNDI, The
mother of the world, by Rutilius: MATTER OMNIVM VRBIVM, The mother of all
cities, the metropolitan city, by Dionysius Afer and Eustathius: MATTER REGVM,
The mother of kings, by Claudian: MAXIMA RERVM, The greatest of all things to
be seen under heaven, by Virgil the Poet: MVNDI MIRACVLVM, The miracle of the
world, by Cassiodore: MVNDI TOTIVS TEMPLVM, The temple of the whole world, by
Ammianus Marcellinus: NVMINIS INSTAR, Like an heaven goddess, by Lucane:
OFFICINA ORBIS, The shop of the whole world, by Seneca: ORBIS CAPVT, The head
of the world, by Ovid: ORNATA SENATORIBVS, Beautified with grave senators, by
Cassiodore. PATRIA COMMVNIS, The common country, by Modestine: PATRIA GENTIVM,
The country and native soil of all nations, by Pliny: PATRIA LIBERTATIS, The
country of liberty, by Sidonius: POTENS, The mighty, by Horace, Ausonius,
Paulinus and Ovid: PRAEPOTENS, The puissant, by Nazuius: PRIMA TERRARVM, The
principal of all lands, by Paulinus: PRIMA INTER VRBES, The chief city of the
world, by Ausonius: PRINCEPS VRBIVM, The principal city, by Horace:
PVLCHERRIMA, The most beautiful, by Virgil: PVLCHERRIMA RERVM, The most goodly
and beautifullest thing in the world, by the same Poet: PVLCHRA, The
beautiful, by Athenaeus and Ovid: QVIRINI VRBS, Quirinus city, by Ovid:
REGIA, The palace, by Horace: REGINA, The Queen, by Athenaeus and Ammianus
Marcellinus: REGINA PVLCHERRIMA MVNDI, The most beautiful Queen or Princess
of the world, by Rutilius: REGINA RERVM, The Queen of all things, by Eunapius:
REGINA TERRARVM, The Queen of all lands, by Ammianus and Nazarius: REGINA
VRBIVM, The Queen of all cities, by Athenaeus: ROMVLEA, Romulus his city, by
Ovid: SACERDOTII FONS, The fountain and author of Priesthood, in the Code of
Justinian: SACRA, The holy city, by Ausonius, Mamertinus, Aethicus and in some
ancient marble: SACRATISSIMA VRBS, The most sacred and holy city, in Justinians
Code: SATVRNIA, Saturnes city, by Ovid: SEEDS TOTO MIRABILIS ORB, A seat which
all men in the world do much admire, by Cassiodore: SEPTEMGEMINA, by Statius:
SVPERBA, The proud and stately, by Ausonius: TEMPLVM BELLICOSI MARTIS, The
temple of warlike Mars, by Plutarch: TEMPLVM LATISSIMVM OMNIVM VIRTVTVM, The
most large and spacious temple of all heavenly virtues, by Cassiodore: TEMPLVM
MVNDI, The common temple of the world, by Ammianus Marcellinus: TROIVGENA, An
impe of Troy, by Liuy: TVRBIDA, The foul and filthy city, by Iuuenall and
Persius: VALLATA, The well defenced city, by Silius Italicus: VENERABILIS, The
reverend and honorable city, by Ammianus: VERTEX MVNDI, The top or center of
the world, by Sidonius: VICTRIX, The conqueresse, by Ovid: VICTVRA CVM SAE
CVLIS, A city that shall stand as long as the world endures, by Ammian:
VIRTVTVM LAR, The seat where virtue dwells, by Ammianus: VRANOPOLIS, The
heavenly city, by Athenaeus.

These and diverse other praises and commendations thou may observe in sundry
good authors of this city, Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum, To which
nothing is equal, or that may be compared unto it, as Martial speaks of it:
Et, Qua nihil in terris complectitur altius ether, A statelier thing than
which in all the world The glorious sun has never seen, as Claudian
writes: And, as Martianus testifies, It was the head of all Nations for
munition, and holy men, so long as it stood in the prime, equalling even the
glory of heaven it self: whose walls (as Olympiodorus in his Collections
has, according to the survey and measure of Ammon the Geometer, at what time
the Goths first ouerran and sacked the same) were found to be one and twenty
miles about. Flauius Vopiscus writes, that Aurelianus the Emperor did so much
enlarge this city, that the walls of it were well near fifty miles in
compass. Of Arpinum, Cicero the famous orators native soil, (for that it is
contained in this Map) I can not but write what Volateranus has noted of it,
namely, that in their ensigns or banners they do bear these three letters, M.
T. C. being the first letters of the name and syrname of that famous orator,
Marcus Tullius Cicero, as is supposed. Of the Circaeian mount, for that it is
severally described in this Table, I think it not amiss to make a peculiar
description of the same apart by it self.

CIRCAEIVS MONS, Now MONTE CIRCELLO.
PLiny and Pomponius Mela call this mountain CIRCEIVM MONTEM: Strabo and
Ptolemey CIRCAEVM. but an ancient inscription in this same place calls it
CIRCAEVM, denominated as ancient writers affirm of Circes, the famous
sorceresse, who sometime dwelt here, as they verily believed. Whereupon Mela
and Solinus, as also Ovid himself, names it Circes domum, Circes house. Item
Appollonius in like manner calls it Circes habitacle, and Ae AE AE portum,
(with three diphthongs, as Seruius observes in Virgil) the Aeaean haven. It
was so called, as the same Grammarian writes, of a contemptuous word used by
those which passed by that way, which they uttered in contempt of those her
witchcrafts and sorceries, whereby she turned men into swine, practiced in this
place. This was long since an island, and environed round with the ocean sea,
but now by continuance of time it is joined to the continent, as Solinus
testifies. The like does Pliny affirm of it; It was, says he, sometime
enclosed round with the maine sea, as Homer seems to think, but now it
stands upon the firm land. But was not Homer deceived? surely so Procopius,
in the first book of his Gothica, seems to think. Of the mountain
Circeius, says he, where they report Ulysses had conference with the
enchantresse Circe, as I think, they speak many things that are not true:
except that peradventure one might say that this mountain was therefore an
island, for that it shoots out an huge way into the vast ocean etc. And
although that Homer here has Theophrastus, in his history of Plants, and
Seruius in his Commentaries upon Virgils Aeneides, upon his side, as Patrons of
fabulous antiquity, yet that I should rather lean unto Procopius, the opinion
of the learned M. Isaac Casaubon, who in those his laborious Commentaries upon
the Geography of Strabo has observed, that often times amongst the best
Geographers, Islands and Promontories are confounded, and one put for another:
so that that which one author terms a promontory, another calls by the
name of an i will or a neckland. Therefore I do willingly prefer the description
of Strabo of this place, before those descriptions of any other authors
whatsoever, as more true and probable. From Antium, says he, two hundred four
score and ten furlongs, is situate mount Circello [Circaeum] an hill environed
partly with the sea and partly with moorish fennes and bogges. Those things
also which the Poets do tell of the witchcraft of the sorceresse Circe, and
that fabulous transmutation and changing of men into diverse and sundry forms
or shapes, with Seruius I do rather attribute to the force of nature, than to
magic or witchcraft. namely, of the horror of those which pass by that way,
whereby men do seem to be changed into beasts. and with Pliny I may say, How
infinite are those fables that are told of Medea of Colchis, and others, but
especially of our Italian Circe, who for her excellent skill in the art
magic was canonized for a goddess? And be it far from me, and from every
Christian man, that we should believe those things which it were wicked and
profane to think or imagine. For I have read in the Ancyrane council, that
they are worse than Pagans and infidels, who do believe that any creature may
by any man be turned and transformed into any other shape or similitude, than
by the Creator himself, who first gave them that form and fashion. Therefore
let all other men say what they will, and persuade what they can, they shall
never make me believe these fables. It seems that the fable arose of the
nature and quality of the place. for those places which lie out into the sea,
as this promontory does, are wont to be in more danger of storm and winds
than any other places whatsoever. Which blasts, accompanied with the waves,
ebbes and tides of the sourging sea, falling upon the rocks, cliffes and hollow
places, do cause such sundry sounds and noices, that such as do sail by this
way, not without a great horror and trembling, do seem as if they heard at
one instant men mourn, lions roar, wolves howl, dogs bark, hogs grunt, and
bears to make a noice. Hither do those words of Lucan in his sixth book
belong; Omnia subducit Circaeae vela procellae. That this promontory is full of
trees, especially of oaks, myrtles, and bay-trees, Theophrastus writes from
the relation of others. Strabo says that it abounds with diverse sorts of
roots: peradventure, as there he adds, they affirm this of it, that they may
the better apply it in all respects unto the fable of Circe. And do you not
think that this saying of Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, in his
Admiranda, did arise from hence? They report, says he, that in the mount
Circello there grows a deadly poison, of such great force, that so soon as
ever it is taken, all the hair of the body immediately falls off, and it so
weakeneth all the parts and members of the same, that they wex so litly and
dwined, that outwardly they bear the show of dead carkeises, such as it would
grieve any man to behold. Strabo writes that in this mountain was an altar
dedicated to Minerua. and withal there is to this day to be seen a certain
goblet or bowl of Ulysses. but this latter he affirms to be from the opinion
and report of the vulgar sort only. But passing over these fables, let us
return again unto the historical narration of such things as in truth are
either here found or have happened in this place. Horace has left recorded,
that the sea upon this coast yields great store of good oisters, which
thereof are called Ostrea Circaeia. Suetonius reports that Marcus Lepidus was
by Augustus Caesar for ever confined and banished into this place. Plutarch
writes that Julius Caesar had a purpose, hard beneath the city, by a deep
channel to convey the river Tiber another way, and to turn the course thereof
toward this Circaeium promontorium, and so to have caused it to fall into the
sea, at the city Anxur: by which means those which for trade and traffic
were by ship to travel up to Rome, he meant to make their passage more easy
and safe; but being prevented by death, performed not what he had purposed.
Here also was the city CIRCAEIVM or Circaeia, or as Strabo terms it Circes
town. That it was made a colony of the Romans by Tarquinius, Liuy,
Halicarnasseus, Cicero and Plutarch, do jointly testify. Strabo says that it
has a good and convenient haven. I would think that the mention or plot of
this ancient city Circaeia does still remain in this mountain in that place
where in this description thou see certain ruins and foundations of the
walls, as it were of a city rased long since and laid level almost with the
ground: which place at this day is called by the name of Citta vecchia, that is
as much to say, as, The old city. Certain remnants of this name does yet
remain to be seen engraven in the top of this same mountain, as Angelus
Breuentanus, a man of good credit, the author of this description, and a most
diligent searcher out of the Roman antiquities, does from his own knowledge
plainly testify, yet much defaced, as he also affirms, and worn out with
continuance of time, to wit, in this form; depiction of an inscription
PROMVNTORIVM VENERIS CIRCAEIENSIVM XXI


The forenamed Breuentanus thinks that by this inscription is showed the
distance of this place from the city of Rome. And it is to be seen at this day
in that place of this mountain, where thou see this mark of a star *
imprinted.

MAGNA GRAECIA, OR GREAT GREECE.
THat a great part of the true and ancient Italy (if not all of it) together
with all Sicily was sometime called by the name of GREAT GREECE, I think there
is no man meanly seen in Geographie that makes any doubt: for the Grecians did
in former times possess, as Trogus writes, not only a part, but welnigh all
Italy. Listen what Pliny, in the fifth chapter of his third book, says, Of it
the Grecians, a Nation very prodigal in commending themselves, have given
their verdict, in that they have named a great part of it Great Greece. Hither
also pertain those words of Festus. Italy was called Great Greece, because
the Siculi, sometime passed it, or for that many and the greatest cities of it,
were built by the Grecians. Seruius in his Commentaries upon the first of
Virgils Aeneids, writes thus: Italy was termed Megale Hellas, Great Greece,
for that all the cities from Taranto, (Tarentum) even unto Cumae, were first
founded by the Grecians. And therefore it was not altogether unfitly of Plautus
in his Menechmis, called Graecia exotica, outlandish Greece. Seneca, in his
Consolation, thus speaks of it: All that side of Italy, which coasteth along
with the Nether sea (Mar Tosco) was called Great Greece. That Campania (Terra
di lauoro) was possessed by the Grecians, Pliny does plainly affirm. Maximus
Tyrius in his six and twentieth Oration describes Auernus lacus, the lake of
Tipergola, in Campania, to be within the compass of Great Greece. And that
these authors speak truth, Trogus particularly shows in the twentieth book
of his history, in these words: The Tusci which dwell along by the coast of
the Nether sea, came from Lydia: Item, the Venetians (Veneti) which now we see
to be seated near the vpper-sea, (Golfo di Venetia, the Hadriaticke sea) Troy,
when it was taken and sacked, sent thither under the conduct of Antenor:
moreover, the city Adria (Atri) which first gave name to the Adriaticke sea,
near neighbor unto the Illirian sea, is a city built by the Greeks:
Diomedes, after the overthrow of Troy, built the city Arpi, (Sarpi, or Monte S.
Angelo a city in Apulia) being himself and his company carried thither by
violence of storm and tempest. And Pisae in Liguria, (Pisa in Riuiera di
Genoa) was first begun by the Grecians: as also in Tuscane the Tarquinij,
(Tarquene) came from the Thessalians and Spinambrians: and the Perusini
(Perugia) from the Achaians: what shall I say of the city Caere (Ceruetere?)
what of the Latini? which do seem to have had their beginning from Aeneas: now
the Falisci, Nolani, Abelani, are they not generally held for to be no other
but colonies derived from the Chalcidenses of Asia the Less? what shall I
speak of the whole shire of Campania? of the Brutij and Sabini? of the
Samnites and Tarentini? have we not heard often that they came from Lacedaemonia,
and were commonly called Spurij? They report that Philoctetes built the city of
the Thurini, (Terra noua) where to this day his tomb is to be seen: as also
the arrows of Hercules, which were the bane of Troy. The Metapontini, (Torre
di mare) also do still reserve, in the temple of Minerua, the tools wherewith
Epeus (from whom they are descended) made the Troiane horse, whereby the city
was betrayed. Whereupon all that part of Italy, was called GREAT GREECE. Thus
far Iustine out of Trogus Pompeius. Whereby we gather, that the pleasant poet
Ovid in the fourth book of his Fastorum, did speak but the truth, when he
said: Itala nam tellus Graecia Mayor erat: For Grecia Great, that land was
called, which now Italia hight: and so forth, as follows in the same place.
The same almost that you have heard out of Trogus. Of this same Great Greece I
cannot but add that which I have observed contrary to the opinion which some
very learned men in our time, have written of it: namely, that even as Sicilia,
as Strabo in his sixth book testifies, was comprehended under the name of
Great Greece; so contrariwise also this Great Greece, was now and then
understood by the name of Sicilia: for proof hereof consider these
authorities: Saint Hierome says, that Rhegium Iulium Brutiorum, (Reggio in
Calabria the Lower) is a city of Sicilia: Aelianus and Suidas affirm the same
of Tarentum in Calabria: the sixth Counsel of Constantino ple, held in the
time of Constantine the Great, does the like of Baiae in Campania: Stephanus
describes Sinuessa, a town of Campania; Caulonia, (Castro veto) of the Locri,
Lagaria, of the Thurini; and Mataurus, of the Brutij; by the name of places of
Sicilia: the like does Eustathius, by Crathis (Gratti) a river in Calabria: the
Scholiast of Theocritus, by Neaethus, a river of the Crotoniatae, a people of
Vmbria. Item, Liuy an Italian borne, a man of singular judgment, and more
ancient than those, has Siculas vrbes in Campania, cities of Sicilia in
Campania. Yea Pliny has left recorded, that Togata Gallia, the furthest
province of Italy toward the West, before such time as the Gauls came thither,
was possessed of the Siculi. Thucydides writes, that the Siculi being expelled
by the Opici, a people of Campania, seized upon this island. And if we will not
give credit unto Seruius, yet against Halicarnassaeus a writer of good credit,
we cannot except, who has written the very self same thing: namely, that the
Siculi, a people borne and bred in Italy, and did first of all nations
whatsoever inhabit and possess the Roman soil. Lastly, that this province,
called Great Greece, was inhabited of the Siculi, Strabo in the fith book of
his Geography does testify out of Antiochus. Thus far of that ancient Great
Greece, or, if you please so to call it, of Sicilia: all which we have not
described in this Map, but only the outter part of it; in which, beside
Calabria, Apulia, the Brutij and Locri: there is Great Greece, properly so
called by Ptolemey, Liuy, Polybius, Athenaeus and Valerius Maximus: and that,
as Strabo in his sixth book, and Cicero in his 2 book of his Orator, think
because Pythagoras the Grecian Philosopher dwelt sometime in these quarters;
or, as Synesius in his oration de Dono writes, for that it always maintained
and brought forth schollerlike and military men. Yet I rather rely upon the
judgment of Atheneus, who writes that it was so called of the infinite number
of Grecians which usually dwelt in this province. And that Festus and Trogus
are of this opinion, I have partly showed before. These forenamed countries of
Halicarnassaeus, are comprehended under the name of EAST ITALY. Pliny calls
them, The front of Italy: which, as Mela says, is divided into two horns,
called in the fragments of Salust, two promontories, nesses, capes, or
forelands, namely, Brutium, (Capo di Sparto vento, or, Capo de Larme) and
Salentinum (now of some called Capo de S. Maria: of others, S. Maria de fin
terre: and Capo de Leuca; item Stalat.) In the second book of Straboes
Epitome, they are termed coryphae, tops: and are named Leucopetra, and
Iapygium: (for these are synonymes with Bruttium and Salentinum.) But Paulus
Diaconus calls them Horns: this The left horn, that, The right. For
Salentinum, we read Lacinium, in Pliny: but whether it be a fault of the
writers, or an error of the author, let the learned judge, I determine
nothing. The same Pliny compares this tract to the form of the Amazonian
shield, that is, to the half moon, as Seruius expounds it, at that verse of
the first book of Virgils Aeneides, Ducit, Amazonidum lunatis agmina peltis.
There is in these quarters, the wood Sila (La Sila) of which Salust, Virgil and
Vibius have made mention. Strabo writes that it is seven hundred furlongs in
length: full of goodly tall trees and well stored with good water. Cassiodorus
in the twelfth book of his Variarum, unto Anastasius, does highly commend the
cheese made here about. From hence comes Calabrian pitch (pix Bruttia) which
Dioscorides in the ninety and eight chapter of his first book De medica
materia, speaks of: and which Pliny, in the seventh map of ancient mainland
Greece, with an inset of the Trimiti Islands Itala nam tellus GRAECIA MAYOR
erat. Ovid. 4. Fast.
Hanc Italiae partem exteriorem sic describere conabar Abrahamus Ortelius. cum
Privilegio decennali. 1595.

CL. V. DNO D. IOACHIMO CAMERARIO, R.P. NVRENBERG. MEDICO CELEBERRIMO, VERO ET
VETERI SVO AMICO, ABRAHAMVS ORTELIVS DEDICAB.

euenth chapter of his four and twenty book of the history of nature
affirms, that it is especially commended for the trimming and stopping of
wine vessels: I would judge that this wood, in the book of Remembrances, is
called Carminianensis, sylua; and peradventure, Carmeiana, in the book De
Limitibus. The forenamed Cassiodorus in his eighth book and last epistle,
describes in the territories of Consilinum (Stylo) a city of this tract,
Marcilianum suburbium, which he terms the native soil of Saint Cyprian; of
which (that by the way I may speak one word of this) there is nothing spoken
(which indeed is strange) in the lives of the Fathers, or Martyrologies of the
Saints, or in any other author to my remembrance. Nor, which is more strange,
in any of those writers, which, like as Gabriel Barry and Prosper Parisius,
have particularly named and wrote of the several Saints of this country. But
of the Nature, Situation, proper Qualities, and Antiquities of this province I
will not speak one word more; because the same is most exactly and learnedly
done by two learned men both borne here, who therefore knew it well, before I
began once to set pen to paper to draw this my Map: I mean Gabriel Barrius,
in his book entitled Calabria, where he so largely and curiously tricked out
Great Greece, Brutium and the tract possessed sometime by the Locri, that even
that Reader, which hardly will be satisfied with such like stories, may
doubtless here take his fill: and Antony Galatey, who has painted out his
Iapygia, (which is in truth the ancient Calabria) that his Reader shall not
only depart skillful and cunning in the knowledge of this country, bur also
much bettered in his understanding and instructed with rules of good learning
and Philosophy: in him also there is a description of the city Gallipoli: Of
Tarentum, a city of this province, Johannes Iuuenis harh set out a several
treatise. Of Diomedes isles, belonging to this country, we have gathered these
few lines which follow.

DIOMEDES ISLES, Now, ISOLE DE TRIMITE.
PLiny describes two islands by this name: so many also does Strabo mention:
whereof the one he says is inhabited, the other wast and desert. Ptolemey
reckons up five, all called DIOMEDES ISLANDS; and so many there are at this
day called by several and distinct names, if one shall account rocks and all.
Whether every one of these were known to the ancients by several names or
not, I know not. Festus, Stephanus and others, call properly one of these
Insula Diomedea, Diomedes i will, like as amongst the Britannicae insulae, the
British isles, one is properly named Britannia, Britain. One of them Tacitus
calls TRIMERVS: (or peradventure Trimetus; for otherwise I do not see from
whence that name of Trimite: whereby the greatest of them at this day is
called, and of it the rest, should come.) Pliny calls another of them
TEVTRIA: the other for ought I know, the ancients left unnamed: as for Electris
and Febra, which Seruius mentions at the eleventh book of Virgils Aeneids or
Sebria, and Aletrides, whereof Pomponius Sabinus, upon the same place,
speaks, I do very willingly confess, that I have not found them spoken of,
by any ancient writer. They are seated in the Adriaticke sea, not far from
the seacoast of Puglia, opposite to Monte de S. Angelo, Mons Garganus, or
Promontorium Garganum. Not within kenning or sight of Taranto (Tarentum) a city
of Apulia, as very falsely, at the same place, Seruius has set down. The name
was derived by the testimony of all writers both Latins and Greeks, from
Diomedes the king of Aetolia, (Artinia, Nicetas calls it) whom they report,
after the surprising of Troy, in his return homeward, not being enterteined of
his own nation, to be driven hither and to be interred here, and that his
temple, monument or tomb did remain in the greatest of them properly called
Diomedea (S. Maria di Trimite) and that the Plane tree was first brought hither
for to shadow Diomedes tomb, Pliny in the first chapter of his twelfth book
of the history of Nature, has left recorded. Into Trimerus, as Tacitus
writes, Augustus banished sent his niece Iulia, convict of adultery: where he
furthermore adds, that she endured that punishment of exile the space of
twenty years. In Platina, in the life of Hadrian the first, I read, that
Paullus Diaconus was once condemned thither, by Charles the Great. Of Diomedes
birds (which Iuba calls Catarractae: Aristotle, Charadrij: of others, Erodij,
a kind of Cormorant or ravenous sea foul) proper to these islands (for they are
only to be seen in this one place of all the world, if we may believe old
writers) read Ovid in the thirteenth book of his Metamorphosis, where he thus
speaks of them: Si volucrum quae sit dubiarum forma requiris, Vt non
cignorum, sic albis proxima cignis. The doubtful forms of birds most strange,
if that you seek to know: They be no swannes, yet white they be, as white as
any snow. Suidas makes them to be like to storkes. Aristotle in his Wonders,
calls them vaste and huge birds with very long, and big bills. Pliny with
Solinus do write that they be like the Fulica, a kind of coote: of color
white, having teeth and eyes of a fiery spark. Some there are which do think
them to be Heronshawes. Robert Constantine testifies that the country people
of these islands do now call them Artenae: and that they make a noise like the
crying of young children. Item, that the fat or grease of them is a sovereign
remedy against diseases arising of cold causes. Blondus writes that he
understood by some of the inhabitants of these isles, that these fowls, still
retaining the name of the Diomedean birds, are of the bigness of a goose. But
to be very harmless creatures, yet neither doing them, nor the Church any
manner of pleasure. They which desire to know more of these birds, as also of
the Metamorphosis and transmutation of Diomedes consorts into these fowls, or
of their nature and quality, as of their kindness toward Grecians (
honest-men, Strabo calls them) and their curstness to strangers, (
wicked-men, as Strabo has) and of the purifying of the temple, and of other
poetical fables devised of them, let them have recourse to the authors above
named: to which they may ad that list, that which Aelianus has written in the
first c. of his 1. book S. Aug. in the 16 c. of his 18 book De ciuitate Dei;
Antigonius, Antony Liberalis, Lycophron, and his Scholiast Isacius. At this day
these islands are under the command of the kingdom of Naples: and are al
generally called by one name Tremitanae, islands de Trimite: and every one by a
several and proper name by it self, as thou may read in our Geographical
treasury. They are now all desert and void of inhabitants, only that except in
which sometime was the temple of Diomedes: where now is the Monastery vulgarly
called Santa Maria de Trimiti: possessed by regular canons, which Eugenius the
fourth, Pope of Rome, enlarged and endowed with great reuenews, as Blondus
records. These, as Zacharte Lilly reports, go to Church so diligently,
hear divine service so devoutly, and relieve those which by storm and tempest
are driven thither so charitably, that they are not only very famous and
reverently esteemed of those that dwell round about them, but also of all
seamen which travel by that way. Leander Albertus says that these islands do
breed most excellent horses.

SICILIA, OR TRINACRIA.
THat this was sometime a peninsula, or demy-ile, adioined to Italy, as a part
of Brutium in Calabria near to Rhegium (Rhezzo) and afterward was by violence
of tempest severed from the same (and of that accident the city Rhegium took
the name) it is a general opinion of all antiquity. But when, or at what
certain time, this division happened, there is not any memorial, for ought I
know, remaining in any ancient writer. Strabo, Pliny and Dionysius do write
that it was caused by an earthquake: Silius and Cassiodorus, do think it to
have been done by the rage and violence of the tide and surges of the sea. They
which lend their listening ears to fables, do attribute the cause of it to
Neptune (as Eustathius witnesses) who, with his three-tined mace, in favor of
Iocastus, the son of Aeolus, divided it from the maine land, and so made it
an island, which before was but a demy-ile; that by that means he might the
more safely inhabit and possess the same. Diodorus Siculus, moved by the
authority of Hesiodus, ascribes to Orion: who, that he might be compared to
Hercules, cutting through the rocks and mountains, first opened the Sicilian
streights, as he did of Gibraltar. Therefore Trinacria quondam Italae pars vna
fuit; sed pontus and aestus Mutauere situm, rupit confinia Nereus Victor: and
abscissos interluit aequore montes, etc. They which esteem the islands of the
midland sea, according to their quantity and content, do make this the
greatest, as Eustathius and Strabo, who affirm this not only to excel the
rest for bigness, but also for goodness of soil. As concerning the form of
this island, Pomponius Mela says it is like that Capital letter of the
Greeks, which they call Delta. That the whole island was consecrated to Ceres
and Libera, that is, Proserpina, all old writers do generally with one consent
affirm: to Ceres it was dedicated, because it first taught the rules of
setting and sowing of corn: to Proserpina, not so much for that she was from
hence violently taken by Pluto, as for that (which Plutarch and Diodorus do
report for truth) Pluto, as soon as she uncovering her self first showed
herself to be seen of him, gave it her for a boon; which kind of gifts and
favors the Greeks call anacalypteria.

Of the fertility and riches of this country, there is a famous testimony,
written by the learned Orator Cicero, in his second oration against Verres,
where he says that Marcus Cato did call it, The garner and storehouse of the
Roman common wealth, and the nurce of the vulgar sort. The same Cicero does
add in that place, that it was not only the storehouse of the people of Rome,
but also it was accounted for a well furnished treasury: for without any cost
or charge of ours says he, it has usually clothed, maintained and furnished
our greatest armies with leather, apparel and corn. Strabo in his 6. book
reports almost the same thing of it. Whatsoever Sicilia does yield, says
Solinus, whether by the kindness and temperature of the air, or by the
industry and labor of man, it is accounted next unto those things that are of
best estimation: were it not that such things as the earth first puts forth
are ouergrowen with Centorui saffron (Crocus Ceturipinus). Aristotle in his
Admiranda, writes, that about Pelorus (Cabo de la torre del Faro) saffron
grows in such abundance, that any man that lists may load and carry it away
by whole cart loads. But Dioscorides does affirm, that that which grows
about Centuripinum (a town now called Centorui) is much weaker and of less
force, than that which grows in other places. Diodorus Siculus says, that in
the fields near Leontium, (Lintini) and in diverse other places of this island,
wheat does grow of it self, without any labor or looking to of the
husbandman. That this island was made a province first before any other foreign
nation, amongst other Cicero and Diodorus have left recorded. Martianus shows
that there were in it 6. colonies, and 60. cities. Pintianus, at the 8. c. of
Plinies 3. book, reads 73. free colonies and cities. Silius in his 14.
book, and Ovid in diverse places reckons up the names of many of them: but
this our map speaks of many more.

That it was in the beginning possessed and inhabited by Giants, Laestrigones,
Anthropophagi, and Cyclopes barbarous and uncivil nations, all histories and
fables do jointly with one consent auerre. Yet Thucydides says that these
savage people dwelt only in one place of the island. Afterward the Sicani, a
nation of Spain, so called of the river Sicanus, (or as Solinus and Berosus,
have given out, of their king Sicanus) driven out of their country by the
Ligures, possessed it. That these Sicani were not bred in the i will (although
some do so think) Thucydides and Diodorus do constantly avouch. Of these it
was named SICANIA. The Elymi and some of the Phocenses, seated themselves
here: after them succeeded the Phryges driven from Troy, as Pausanias
thinks: and the Morgetes expelled out of Italy by the Oenotri, as Strabo
writes. In Plutarch his Conuiual. Quaest. and Julius Pollux his 2. book de
Manibus, I read that the Doors sometime did inhabit it. Lastly, it was all
conquered by the Siculi, a people of Italy overthrown and cast out of their
possessions by the Opici, and of them it was called SICILIA; when as before it
was known by the name of TRINACIA, as Dionysius writes: or TRINACRIS, as
Ovid: or TRINACRIA and TRIQVETRA, as Pliny reports, of the triangular form.
Whereupon the Romans in their money were wont to counterfeit or express this
province by 3. legs joined together about the upper end of the thigh, (not much
unlike those arms of the E. of Darby, as I think,) Lycophron for the same
reason gives it the title or epithet of TRICERVIX, 3. necked: and Pindarus in
like manner calls it TRICVSPIS, 3. pointed. Homer the prince of poets names
it CYCLOPVM TERRA, the land of the Cyclopes, being peradventure in his time not
known by any proper name. Julius Firmicus, says that the Siculi, the people
of this island, are acute and nimble witted: Quint. in his 6. book of his Orat.
says that they are lascivious and full of words.

Besides many famous acts done by these people both at home and abroad, as well
in peace as in war there be many other things which have made this island very
renowned: the birth of Ceres, the rauishing of Proserpina, the Giant Enceladus,
the wonderful mathematician Archimedes, the famous geometrician Euclide, the
painful historian Diodorus, Empedocles the deep philosopher, the ingenious
architecture of Daedalus, the tomb of Sibylla Cumana, Syracusae the famous
tetrapolis, or as Strabo says, a pentapolis (one city made of 4. or 5. cities:
like as London, in respect of Westminster, and Southwarke, may be said to be a
tripolis) the fountain Arethusa, the lake Palicus, the mount AEtna, Scylla and
Charibdis, and the notorious harlot Lais. Beside many miracles and wonderful
works of nature, which thou may read of in Solinus, Trogus in his fourth
book, Antigonus de Mirab. l. and Achilles Statius in his 2. book of Love:
Item statues costly images, for art and curious workmanship of great
estimation; which are described by Cicero in his orations against Verres.
Athenaeus commended highly the cheese, doves and diverse sorts of garments of
Sicilia. Antigonus writes that the Cactos (a kind of thorn) does grow in this
i will, and not in any other place of the world beside: as Theophrastus affirms:
upon which if a stagge shall tread and prick his foot, his bones will yield
no sound, and therefore they will be naught to make pipes of. Here also, as
Pliny says, is found the Smaragde, a kind of precious stone, of great
estimation in those days: in the sea, the same author affirms, that Coral
is gotten by such as do seek for it. Julius Pollux does write, that this island
had at first no hares, but such as were brought in by Anaxilas Rhegnius The
Sicilian sea, which beats upon this i will on the East side, was also called
Ausonium mare, and was the deepest of all the Mediterran sea, as Strabo
testifies. There is another island in this sea near to Peloponnesus, called
Sicilia, as Stephanus reports. The i will Naxus (Nicsia, it is now called in the
AEgean or Archipelago, Pliny says, was sometime named Sicilia minor, Sicilia,
the less. Pausanias also speaks of Sicilia a little hill not far from
Athens in Greece. Moreover there is a place in the Palace of Rome, of that
name, as Capitolinus has left recorded in the life of Perlinax the Emperor.
But these are by-matters nor so directly to our purpose.

Diverse adagies, proverbs, or by-words have sprung from hence: as Siculissare,
spoken of one that is sullen or tetchie: Siculum mare, the Sicilian sea,
meaning that which is dangerous: Siculus miles, A Sicilian soldier, that is, a
mercenary or stipendary: Siculae gerrae, and Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare
charybdim, He falls upon the rocks that labors to shun the quick
sands; spoken of him that coveting to escape one danger falls into a worse.
But of these and such like thou may read Erasmus his Chiliades.

map of ancient Sicily with inset of the Gulf of Syracuse SICILIAE VETERIS
TYPVS. Ex Conatibus geographicis Ab. Ortelij.
Territorij Syracusani loca, incertae positionis: Acrillae, Echetla, MagellaX

Veteris Siciliae loca, incertae aut prorsus incognitae positionis

VRBES.
Acharenses Acra Adryie Amathe Ancyrg Arbelo Artacia Aterium Atina Bucinija
Calauria Caulonia Chimera Comitianum Crastue Cronidas qui philippi Cijdonia
Didyme Eggyna Elerii Emporium Ergetium Eryce Exagyios Halentina Hippana, que et
Ipana Homotyles Iaetia, an Ietas? Ichana Indara Lichindus Megarsus Miscera
Morgyna Nacona Noae, an forte Nooeni Nonymna Ochyra Omphace Piacus Pirina
Plinte Propalae Prostropaea Sinoessa Stilpe Talaria.
ARCES,
Cype Eizelos Elauia Eucarpia Motylae.
VICI,
Paradisus
MONTES,
Atulirius Torgium
FLVVII,
Achates Danyrias Elysius Hypas Pachisus Rhyacus Triopala
REGIONES,
Aphannae Craserium Epiora Pelagonia Rhybdus
STAGNA,
Gonusa Gelonium
POPVLI,
Loestienses Etini Chalcides Herbulenses Icilienses Letini Timaei
LOCA,
Ambicas Apollinis ref. Achillaeum Cabala Chalie refug. Cymba Cronium Draxum
Hipponium Italicum Mela Mergana Mesopotanium plaga Micite Gorgium Nomae Phaedae
Rhyacus Saturni fan. Senis Scritaea.




DACIA, and MOESIA.
THe inhabitants of DACIA, the Greeks called DACI: the Latins GETAE; as
Pliny, Dion, Stephanus and others do testify: (This also Cottiso, sometime the
King of that nation, does confirm: whom Suetonius names, The king of the
Getes; Horace calls him, Dacum: a Dake) Item, Iornandes says, that the
Romans indifferently called them DACI, or GOTHI. I do observe that Herodotus
and the writers about that age have generally comprehended them under the name
of the SCYTHAE, Scythians: to whom also the foresaid Iornandes does wholly
assent and agree, Item, the abouenamed Stephanus names them DAOS and Strabo
DAVOS, Daces, or Dawes, who notwithstanding makes this distinction between
them: that the Getae were those which were seated farther Eastward; the Daci,
those which dwelt more into the West: Notwithstanding they speak one and the
same language: namely, the Duche tongue, used also by the Thracians, as may be
demonstrated out of Pliny and Iornandes. Moreover Arrianus writes, that the
Getae were also called APATHONIZONTES: but it is to be amended: and out of
Herodotus first book, to be written ATHANATIZONTES, as who say, Immortal: for
they do verily believe, that they shall never die: but after their departure out
of this life, go presently unto one Zamolxis, a Saint or Idol which they
especially worship and adore. But of this their Saint and ceremony you may
read more in the said author. Suidas shows that in his time these people
were known by the name of the PATZINACITAE. That those Dakes did inhabit on
either side of the river Donaw (Danubius) even up as high as mount Haemus, I do
find recorded by Dion: whom I do perceive, under that name, to contain also
the Moesi. And indeed we shall hereafter prove that the same Dakes were often
translated afterward into these Moesiaes. Therefore Saint Paullinus, for that
reason, makes this same DACIA twofold, in his treatise Of the return of
Nicetas, in this verse; Et Getae currunt, and vterque Dacus: The Getes in
troops do throng, both Dakes they do the like. In the Digests of the civil
law mention is made of two Daciaes. But of the Moesiaes we will speak
hereafter, this place we have assigned to the true DACIA, properly so called,
whose bounds Ptolemey, the Prince of all Geographers, makes to be the rivers
Donaw (Danubius) Teissa (Tibiscus or Pathissus, as Pliny names it) Pruth
(Hierasus) and the mount Carpates. Iornandes, this country man borne, says,
that the next neighbors to this Dacia, upon the East, are the Roxolani; upon
the West, the Tamazites: (Zyges I would rather read, moved so to think by
likeliehood and probability of the thing it self: as also by the diverse
reading of another copy, which has Taziges, a word no where else found) upon
the North, it has the Sarmatae and the Bastarnae: and on the South, the river
Donaw (Danubius.) This Dacia, as the same author says, oueragainst Moesia,
beyond the Donaw, is enclosed round with mountains, and has only two passages
in and out; one by Bontas (Rotteothurn) and Tabae (Bross.) Xiphiline, I think,
calls this later Taphae. Ammianus Marcellinus to this adds Succorum
angustias, the streights of Turkzuest, by the town Succi. Aurelius Victor,
Eutropius, Marcellinus, Comes, the book of Remembrances, and the Miscellan
story, do divide this country into two provinces, MEDITERRANEA and RIPENSIS:
There are some (of which Lazius is one) that to those do add a third called
ALPESTRIS, upon what ground and proof, I know not. VANNIANVM REGNVM, of which
Tacitus and Pliny do speak, was, as seems here abouts. This is properly
that province of Dacia, which Eutropius says did contain in circuit a
thousand miles. The chief city of this part was Zarmisogethusa, which
afterward was called COLONIA VLPIA TRAIANA AVG. DACIC. ZARMIS. as we find in
certain inscriptions in Marble, and was so named of Vlpius Traianus the
Emperor. For he first by conquering ouercomming their king Decebalus, made it
a province. Of which war, made by Traiane against the Dakes, (for the
histories of it, written by himself, cited by Priscian the Grammarian, are
lost) you may read in Dion in the life of this Emperor. Behold also and view
the column set up by the Senate of Rome, in Traianes market place, which yet
to this day remains whole and sound. This column, Hieronymus Mutianus the
famous painter, shaddowed out with his own hand and imprinted at Rome, in 130.
tables. The same has F. Alphonsus Ciacconus so lively expressed and declared
with such a learned and laborious Commentary, that in it a man would think
that he had rather seen this battle fought, than to have read or heard ought
of the same, from the relation of others. Florus writes, that this country
does lie amid the mountains. Item, he calls it, a copsy country, full of
woods and forests. For he affirms that Curio came up as high as Dacia, but
durst go no further, for fear of the dreadful dark woods. Strabo in the
seventh book of his Geographie, and Virgil in the third of his Georgickes, do
speak of the deserts and wildernesses of the Getes. The same author calls
it, Gentem indomitam, an vnruelie nation. Statius says, that they are hirsuti,
hairie, intonsi, unshorn, pelliti, furred or clad in skins, inhumane, sturdy,
stern, braccati, wearing long side breeches and mantles, like to our Irishmen.
I read in Pliny that they used to paint their faces [like unto our Britans.]
That there is not a more stern nation in the World, Ovid the Poet, who did not
only see the country, but also dwelt amongst them and saw their manners, very
truly wrote of them. Vegetius, who wrote of the Art of war, says that it is
a very warlike people: Having indeed, as the Prince of Poets testifies, god
Mars for their Lieutenant and Governor. Of Claudian, it is named, Bellipotens,
a mighty nation for warlike men. Philargyrius, out of Aufidius Modestus
writes, that when they go to war, they will not set forward, before they
drinking down a certain measure of the waters of the river Ister (Donaw) in
the manner of hallowed wine, do swear that they would never return home again
into their own country, until they had slain their enemies. Whereupon Virgil
called this river Istrum Coniuratum, coniured Donaw. Trogus writes, that this
nation, with their king Orotes, (another copy has Olores: in Dion I read,
Roles) did fight against the Bastarnae, with very ill success: in revenge of
which cowardice, they were by their king enioined, when they go to bed, to lie
at the beds feet: or to do those services to their wives, which they were wont
to do for them. They were in times past so strong, as Strabo writes, that they
were able to make an army of 200000. men. Of them also peradventure this speech
of Silius Italicus is to be understood: At gente in Scythica suffixa cadauera
truncis, Lenta dies sepelit putri liquentia tabo. Josephus in his second book
against Appian writes there are a certain kind of Dakes commonly called
Plisti, whose manner of life he compares to the course of life of the Essenes.
These I do verily believe are the same with those which Strabo calls Plistae
and were of the stock of the Abij. And thus much of Dacia, now the Moesi do
follow, who, as Dion Prusaeus notes out of Homer, were sometime named Mysi.

By the name of MOESIA was all that country vulgarly called, which the river
Saw (Sauus) falling into Donaw, above Dalmatia, Macedonia and Thracia, does
divide from Pannonia. In the which Moesia, beside diverse other nations, there
do inhabit those which anciently were named the Triballi, and those which now
are called Dardani. These are the words of Dion Nicaeus. It is by Ptolemey
enclosed and bounded with the same limits. Pliny also does extend the coasts of
it from the meeting of the river Saw with Donaw, even unto Pontus (Mar maiore)
Eastward: and Iornandes makes it to reach as far as Histria, Westward. We
have said before, that MOESIA was sometime called DACIA: for proof whereof I
could allege Flauius Vopiscus: who writes that Aurelianus the Emperor, borne
here, did bring certain people out of Dacia, and placed them in MOESIA and to
have named it DACIA AVRELIANA, after his own name, which is now that province
that divides map of ancient Dacia and Moesia DACIARVM, MOESIARVMQVE, VETVS
DESCRIPTIO.
Vrbes Moesiae II. incognitae positionis: Accissum, Ansanum, Anthia,
Aphrodisias, Bidine, Borcobe, Cabessus, S. Cyrilli, Eumenia, Genucla, Gerania,
Ibeda, Latra, Libistus, Mediolanum, Megara, Parthenopolis, Securisca,
Talamonium, Thamyris, Theodoropolis, Troczen, Vsiditana, and Zigere. Moesiae I.
Daphne, Laedenata, Pincum, Regina, and Zmirna. Daciae, Aixis, Bereobis, Burgus,
Siosta, Sostiaca, et Zerna. Flumina Daciae, Atarnus, Athres, Atlas, Auras
Lyginus, Maris, et Noes. Mons, Coegenus.

Cum Privilegijs decennalib. Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabanticae.

Ex conatibus Abrahami Ortelij. 1595.
NOBILISS. DNO IOANNI GEORGIO A WERDENSTEIN ECCLESIAR. AVGVSTANAE ET
EYCHSTETENSIS CANONICO, SERENISSIMI DVCIS BAVARIAE CONSILIARIO, SVPREMOQ.
BIBLIOTHECARIO, ABRAH. ORTELIVS AMORIS MNEMOSYNON HOC DD.

Proefuit his Graecine locis modo Flaccus, et illo
Ripa ferox Istri sub duce tuta fuit.
Hic tenuit Mysas gentes in pace fideli:
Hic arcu fisos terruit ense Getas.
Ovid. 4. de Ponto, Eleg. 9. the two Moesiaes one from another. The same does
Suidas in the word DACIA, report. The province Dacia, says Lutropius (speaking
of the same Aurelianus) he placed in Moesia where it now abides on the South
side of Donaw, when as before it was seated upon the North side of the same.
And Sextus Rufus shows, that by the same Emperor, there were two Daciaes
made of the countries of Moesia and Dardania: whereupon in the Code of the
civil law these words are read, Mediterranca Mysia, seu Dardania: vpland
Moesia, or Dardania: confounding the one with the other. Underneath the name of
Dacia, beside those countries abouenamed, was contained also PRAEVALITANA, and
that part of Macedonia commonly called SALVTARIS, as the book of Remembrances
(liber Notitiarum) does manifestly affirm. Of the people here, brought from
other places, Strabo likewise writes, that in his time (who we know lived in
the time of Augustus and Tiberius) by AElius Catus (or rather, as the learned
and industrious Causabon out of Dion would have us read, Licinius Crassus:)
were conueighed of the Getes which dwelt eyond the Donaw (Ister) into Thracia,
more than 50000. men, and were afterward called MYSI, Mysians. An inscription
of an ancient stone, mentioned in Smetius says, that AElius Plautius
propraetor of Moesia, did transport into this country, of the people and
nations beyond the Donaw, more than 10000. men, together with their wives,
children, nobles, princes and kings. This MYSIA, or, as for the most part the
Latins write it MOESIA, Ptolemey divides into the UPPER and NETHER (Superior
and Inferior) this in the Code of Justinian is called SECVNDA, that PRIMA, (the
Second, and First.) The neither is named of Iornandes MINOR SCYTHIA, the Lesser
Scythia: of Zosimus, SCYTHIA THRACENSIS, Scythia of Thrace: of Plutarch in
Marius, SCYTHICA PONTICA, Scythia of Pontus: and the inhabitants of the same
Celtoscythae: of Polyaenus, PONTICA MARITIMA, Pontus upon the sea: of Ovid and
others, PONTVS, simply without any addition: Some there are which do call it
FLACCIA, of one Flaccus, a Roman, whom it is certain out of Ovid, was
sometime heereabouts lieutenant for the state of the Empire. Neither does this
seem to be altogether false or improbable; for the name Waiachia or Valachia,
whereby it is known at this day does import so much. By Ovid also in sundry
places it was described under these names, Sarmaticu^ solum, Geticu^ littus,
Cymmeriu^ littus, and Barbaria: the Sarmatian soil, the Gottish or Cymmerian
shore, and Barbaria. These countries are very fertile of all manner of fruits
and commodities, so that, as Solinus witnesses, the Romans commonly called it
Cereris horreum, Ceres barn. The poet, as Procopius in his 4. book AEdifici.
notes, calls these people Enchemachous, such as fight aloof and far off.
Mysos in palustra feroces: and Quum Geticis ingens premeretur Mysia plaustris:
when Mesia great was much oppressed with Gottish waines: thus Claudian, the
poet writes of them. Dant illis animos arcus, plenaque pharetrae: They much
presume upon their bow, and cunning great in archery: as Ovid in his first
book de Ponto, writes of them. Aelianus shows that they were able by their
own strength and power to keep out the Scythians from entering their country,
and every way to defend the same from that furious and violent enemy. Strabo
says, that they were exceedingly given to rob and steal. Vix hac inuenies
totum, mihi creed, per orbem, Quae minus angusta pace fruatur humus: Scarce
may thou find in all the world, so small a plot of ground: Where bloody wars
their hideous noise, more oftentimes do sound; as the forenamed poet writes of
this country: as also this that follows in another place: In quibus est nemo
qui non coryton and arcum, Telaque vipereo lurida fell gerat. Amongst these
men there is none, but has his sturdie bow, With poisoned arrows sharp and
swift, to fight against his foe. How fair and stout they were, thou may see
by this of Florus. One of the Captains, says he, stepped out before the army,
and entreating their silence, demands, who are you? It was jointly with one
voice answered of all, We are Romans, lords of all nations of the world. To
which answer they replied again, So you are indeed, if you can conquer us.
Posidonius in Strabo affirms, that they forbear the eating of flesh for
religion and conscience sake: and do feed only upon butter and cheese. Of the
fabulous story of a kind of horses here, if thou desire to know, see Elianus:
as also Solinus of the strange herb growing in that part of the country called
Pontica. In Moesia also is the province called DARDANIA, which we said was
called MYSIA MEDITERRANEA, Vpland Moesia, for that it is far remote and
distant from the river Donaw. Of the inhabitants and people of this country,
the same author thus speaks: In all their life, as I hear by report from
others, these people do only bath or wash themselves three times; once, as
soon as they are borne: another time when they marry: and again at their
death. Of the Triballi, a people of this country take this of Pliny as he
alleges it out of Isigonus. They do bewitch and kill with their eyes such as
they do steadfastly look upon, any long time together; especially if they be
angry: which mischief of theirs, striplings are most subject unto, and
soonest hurt by. But that is most notable and worth the observation, that in
each eye they have two sights apeece. He that desires to read more of this
country, especially of the Lower Moesia, let him repair to Ouids 3. book de
Ponto, at the 1. 4. and 10. Elegies. Of their barbarous manners, rites,
customs and ceremonies, thou shall find much in the 7. Elegy of his 5. book
de Tristibus: of the river Donaw or Ister (which Elianus in the 23. chapter of
his 14. book de Animalibus calls, The king of Rivers. Of Apollonius, in the
fourth book of his Argonautickes, it is named Cornu oceani, the horn of the
sea) for that it runs through the midst of those countries which here we
have described, it is not amiss, in my judgment to say something of that
also. That Ister or Donaw, of all the rivers of the Roman Empire, for
greatness is next unto Nilus, we do read in the fragments of Salust. Gyraldus
in his Syntagmata Deorum, affirms, that the kings of Babylon were wont to
reserve certain of the water of Donaw or Ister, in there treasuries amongst
their precious jewels. Caesarius, Nazianzenus brother, in his dialogues says,
that this is one of the rivers of Paradise: and to be that which the holy
Scripture calls Phison: which I will easily grant him to be true, when he
shall persuade me, that by Paradise is meant the whole world or massy globe of
this lower element of the earth: which I do verily believe he thought to be
true. Seneca, in the sixth book of his natural Philosophy, says, that this
Donaw does part Europe and Asia. Notwithstanding all writers generally both
Latins and Greeks, as well ancient as those of later times do attribute this
to the river Done (Tanais.) And what is he, I pray you, that ever dreamed that
Germany which is beyond this river should be a country of Asia? Shall we
correct the copy? Or shall we retain that reading in Horace, upon the credit
and peril of Acron his expositour? where he says, that Tanais is also called
Danubius. I leave it to the censure of the learned. (This we know for a
certainty as well Tanais as Danubius, is of the inhabitants near about, called
Done: and surely I think that both the Greek Tanais, as the Latin Danubius,
were made of the barbarous Done or Taken; which in that language peradventure
for ought I know, may signify a river or stream: so Nilas, as Pomponius Mela
seems to affirm took his name of Nuchul, which generally signifies a
river, as all men meanly skild in Hebrew or Arabicke can testify with him.)
Isidore also in the ninth chapter of the seventeenth book of his Origines,
seems to be of this opinion, where he writes that Rhabarbarum, rhew barbe,
grows in solo barbarico, in a barbarous country, beyond the Donaw: For we
know at this day, that it grows near the river Rha, which is beyond the
Donaw Eastward. In Pliny we read that every one of his mouths, whereby it
emptieth it self into the sea, are so wide and great, that it is affirmed to
overcome the sea for forty miles in length together, and that so far the
waters may be perceived to be sweet amid the brackish surges of the salt sea.
Polybius in his fourth book to these adioineth, that by the violent and swift
fall of the waters of this river into Pontus (Mar maiore) there are certain
knols, hills, or shelfs, which the seamen call Stethe, that is, breast bones,
made of the gathering together of such things as the river brings down with
it, and are more than a day sail off from land, upon which often times the
seamen falling by negligence, are in great danger of shipwreck. Strabo also
makes mention of the same. They which desire to know more of this river, his
name, nature, quality, fountain, mouths, and streams which do run into it,
let him read the commentaries of William Stuckius written upon Arrianus
Periplus of the Euxine sea: for there he has most plentifully and learnedly
descr bed all these things. Of the Thracians, Moesians, Getes, Dakes and other
countries, nations and people of this map, read the seventh book of Straboes
Geography, and the Epitome of the same.

PONTVS EVXINVS, now called MAR MAIORE.
THe sea which here we purpose to describe (famoused of ancient writers by
means of the Argonantes and fabulous story of the golden fleece) was called,
as we find recorded, by diverse and sundry names: first it was called PONTVS by
the figure Synecdoche; then PONTVS AXENVS, that is, inhospitale, the
harbourlesse sea, but afterward it was named PONTVS EVXINVS, hospitale mare,
the good harborough, as Pliny, Ovid and others do witness. Strabo, Tacitus,
Plutarch, Ptolemey and Iornandes do call it PONTICVM mare, the Ponticke sea,
without any addition at all. Lucretius names it PONTI mare, the sea of Pontus,
of the country Pontus abuttant upon it. For the same reason it is, of Valerius
Flaccus, Ovid and Martianus, named SARMATICVM and SCYTHICVM mare, the Sarmatian
and Scythian sea; of Claudian AMAZONIVM: of Herodotus and Orosius, CIMMERIVM:
of Festus Auienus, TAVRICVM: of the Sarmatians, Scythians, Amazones, Cimmerians
and Tauri, certain Nations dwelling upon the coast of this sea. Of the
province Colchis, neighbor unto it upon the East, Strabo names it COLCHICVM
mare, of the mountain Caucasus, which here begins: Apollonius intituleth
it CAVCASEVM: of the river Phasis, which vnloadeth it self into this sea, (or
town of that name situate upon that river) Aristides calls it PHASIANVM
mare. Procopius says that it was sometime named Tanais, unfitly and falsely, as
I think. Almost all ancient writers have likened this sea (or more truly, this
bay or gulf) unto a Scythian bow when it is bent: so that the string does
represent the South part of it: namely from the streights of Constantinople,
unto the further end of it Eastward, toward the river Phasis: for excepting
only the promontory Carambis, (Cabo Pisello) all the rest of this shore has
such small capes and creekes, that it is not much unlike to a right line. The
other side or North part does resemble an horn that has two crooked ends, the
upper end more round: the lower more straight: which proportion this our map
does very precisely express. This sea also has two promontories; one in the
South, then called Promontorium Carambis, now Cabo Pisello: the other in the
North, Ptolemey names it Criou metopon, Arietis frons, the rams head: Paulus
Diaconus calls it Acroma, and now it is known by the name Famar. These two
capes are opposite one against the other, and are distant one from another
about 2500. furlongs, as Ammianus and Eustathius do testify: which although
they do make 312. Italian miles, yet they are distant only 170. miles, as Pliny
says: or as Strabo reports, so much as a ship will sail in three days:
notwithstanding to those, which do sail either from the East to West, or from
West to East, they seem to be so near one to the other, that one would think
that there were the end of the sea, and that Pontus Euxinus were two seas: but
when you shall come in the midst between these two capes, then the other part
appears, as it were a second or another sea. The compass of it round about
by the shore Strabo makes to be 25000. furlongs: Polybius but 22000. and yet
from this Ammianus takes 2000. and that by the authority of Eratosthenes,
Hecataeus and Ptolemey, as there he affirms. Herodotus an eie-witnesse of the
same, writes that he measured the length of it and found it to be 11100.
furlongs: and likewise he found the breadth of it (where it was furthest over)
to be 320. furlongs. This measure Strabo and Pliny in the twelfth chapter of
his fourth book, do more distinctly, partly out of their own and partly out
of other men's opinions, set down. Strabo writes that about 40. rivers do
unload themselves into it. Yet this our map does show many more. Antiquity
does hold that this sea, of all our seas, was by far the greatest; (here
hence I suppose that the Italians have given it that name of Mar maiore, the
Great sea) and that here (as there at Caliz, without the straits of Gibraltar)
was the end of the World: and that it was innauigable, both for the huge
greatness of it, as also by reason of the barbarous nations which daily did
annoy the shore, and use all manner of cruelty and inhumanity toward strangers
and aliens. From hence arose those epithites and adjuncts given by the ancient
poets to this sea of Pontus; vast and rough, Virgil and Catullus call it: Ovid,
infinite and terrible: Lucane, a devouring and dangerous sea; Silius, raging:
Statius, an uncertain and swelling sea: Valerius Flaccus, perilous: Manilius,
horrible, spiteful and furious: Seneca, mad and churlish: Festus Auienus,
raucisonum, making a hoarse ill favored noise. Thus far of the Names, Form
and bigness of this sea: of the Situation and Nature of the same, although
Herodotus, Pomponius, Strabo, Pliny, Ovid and Macrobius (that I may say nothing
of others) have spoken much, yet in mine opinion, no man has done it more
exactly and diligently than Ammianus in his 22. book; whom he that lists,
may adioine to this our discourse: and if he be not satisfied with these, he
may to them add a whole book, written by Arrianus of this sea: together with
the large commentaries, of Struckius, upon the same. As for us we will content
our selves in this place with a few peculiar observations of this sea, gleaned
here and there out of the ancient monuments of learned writers of former ages.
It is sweet, or at leastwise more sweet than other seas: moreover, the waters
of it are more light than others; and do never ebb and flow, but always keep
one and the same stint of running one way, as Lucrece, Macrobius, Pliny and
Ovid do witness. Which I take to be the cause that sometime it has all been
frozen over. For this I remember I have read, in Ovid, Marcell. Commit. and
others, sometime to have happened. Aristotle in his Problemes writes, That it
is whiter than other seas: (yet the Greeks now call it Maurothalassa, and
likewise the Turks Caradenis, that is, as Lucian does interpret them both,
Mare nigrum, the Black sea. Contrariwise mare Aegeum, the Archipelago, or
Mediterran sea, the Turks call Acdeniz, and the vulgar Greeks Aspra thalassa,
both signifying as the learned Leunclaw expounds them, Mare album, the white
sea.) Aelianus in his Varia historia writes, That it breeds no tender or
soft shelfish, but very seldom and those very few. It feeds no Whales, only
certain small seals, and pretty little dolphins sometimes are here taken, as
Plutarch in his Morals has left recorded. There is no ravenous creature that
prays upon fish does live in it, beside seals and dolphines, as Pliny
writes. Strabo in the seventh book of his Geography says, That there are
about 40. rivers, which coming from diverse quarters do unload themselves into
it. Yet we, in this our Map, do point at a great many more beside. The
cities, upon the coast of this sea, more famous, are BYZANTIVM,
(Constantinople) of which we will say nothing in this place, because we have
before in the map of Thrace written of it at large, in respect of the
narrowness of the place which is assigned for such like purposes. Then TOMOS (
Tomisuar, as Calcagninus; or Kiouia, as Ciofanus thinks) famous by the
banishment and exile of the noble poet Ovid. BORYSTHENES, otherwise called
Olbia and Miletopolis, (Strapenor, a city in Sarmatia Europaea, situate at the
mouth of the river Boristhenes) of which Dion Prusaeus has spoken much (that I
may omit others) in his 16. oration. DIOSCVRIAS, which was also called
Sebastopolis, built, if you will give any credit to poetical fables, by the
waggoners of Castor and Pollux: it is yet to this day known by the name of
Sauatopoli or Sauastopoli. This city was in times past so famous, as Pliny
tells out of Timosthenes, that there ordinarily resorted unto it 300.
several nations, speaking so many different languages: so that the Romans for
the dispatch of all matters for their state, did maintain there 130.
interpretours. There are here many other cities, which were nothing so
renowned, as TRAPEZVS (now vulgarly called TREBIZONDA: of the Turks,
Tarabasson: but of the barbarous nations near adioining, as Theuet reports,
Waccamah: CERASVS ( Cherasoda, or as the barbarous people call it, Omidie)
PHARNACEA (Platena) AMISVS ( Amid or Hemid, or as Niger thinks Simiso) SINOPE
( Pordapas, yet the Turks to this day call it Sinabe) HERACLEA ( Aupop, and
Pendarachia) and oueragainst Constantinople, where we began, is CHALCEDON (
Chalcidona, or as the Turks term it, Caltitiu) a free city and of great
command in those days, but now as P. Gyllius says, it is a small street
without any mention of walls. Upon the West side of this sea, the Thracians did
dwell: upon the South the Asians: as the Bithynians, Galatians and
Cappadocians. The Colchi did possess the Eastern coast. All along generally
upon the North as well in Europe as Asia, inhabited the Sarmatians and
Scythians, distinguished into diverse and sundry nations: amongst these are the
Tauroscythians, (which took their name from thence) and their Cherronnesus, or
demy-ile, vulgarly known by the name of Taurica Cherronnesus, and Scythica
Cherronnesus. Appianus names it Pontica Cherronnesus, the demy-ile of Pontus:
which Pliny writes, was sometime environed round with the sea. For form and
quality it is compared and thought to be much like Peloponnesus. Strabo, from
the mouth or relation of others, has left written, that it was sometime
annexed to the maine land by an isthmos, or neckeland of 360. furlongs in
length. The country toward Metopon (Frons Arietis the rams head) is rough,
mountainous and much subject to Northren storms, cold and violent blasts.
Near to Theodosia, (Caffa or Cofe, as the Turks write it: a city situate upon
the sea, whose haven is so capacious and large, that it is able to entertain
an hundred tall ships at once) it is a good and fertile soil. Athenaeus
writes that bulbi, certain bolled roots, which do grow here of their own
accord, are so sweet and pleasant that they may be eaten raw. In it also is the
hill Berosus, where, as Pliny witnesses, are three wels, of which, whosoever
drinks, he dies without any grief and without any remedy. Plutarch in
Tanais, makes mention of an oil made in this mountain Berosus, which the
country people do press out of a certain plant which they call Halinda. With
this oil they anoint themselves, and then being once warm they feel not the
cold although it be never so bitter. The same author tells of the herb
Phryxa, which grows about Borea antrum, the cave Borea, which if the
stepchildren shall have about them, they shall suffer no wrong at their
stepmothers hand. This herb is colder than Snow: yet as soon as ever the
stepmothers shall go about to wrong their son in laws, it presently casts
out flames of fire: and by that means they shun all eminent dangers and
causes of fear. Thus far of Cherronnesus Taurica.

They which take any pleasure in fables or fictions of poets belonging to this
Pontus or spoken of the same, let them have recourse to Senecan Medra, or the
Iphigenia of Euripides, and others that have written of the voiages of the
Argonautes, or the story of Iasons Golden fleece. But before I leave this sea I
think it not amiss to put thee in mind what Josephus writes in the 11.
chapter of his 9. book of the Antiquity of the Jews. He there says that
Jonas the Prophet being devoured and swallowed up of the whale about Issicus
finus (Golfo de Atazzo, a bay of the mediterran sea, near to Issus, a city of
Silicia, which now they vulgarly call Atazzo) was after three days cast up
again, into this Euxine sea, alive unhurt or any way perished. One part of
this his relation I will believe, if you will believe the other. Robertus
Constantinus in his supplement of the Latin tongue says, that Lamia was a
fish. Of the fenne MAEOTIS, ( Mar delle Sabacche, it is commonly called now a
days: the Italians, of a town abuttant upon it, name it Mar della Tana, and
Mar bianco, the white sea: of the Scythians it is called Carpaluc: of the
Arabians Bohari'lazach, as Baptista Ramusius witnesses) beside other
Geographers, read Polyb. in his 4. book, and Arist. in the end of his 1.
book, and beginning of the 2. of his Meteor. The length of it is 6000. as
Themistius Euphrada writes. In this sea there are not many islands, yet these
are not all inhabited or manured; and the people which dwell in them do live
very poorly: for they use the flesh of great fishes, dried in the sun, and
then beaten and stamped to powder, in steed or meal for bread: for as
Pomponeus says, they yield no great store of provision for victuals.

map of the ancient Black Sea area or Pontus Euxinus PONTOS EYXEINOS. PONTVS
EVXINVS. Aequor Iasonio pulsatum remige primum.
Ex conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij.
Cum Priuilegio Imp. Reg. et Belgico, Ad decennium. 1590.



THRACE.
Under the name of THRACIA many and diverse countries with sundry people are
comprehended: for except the Indies it is the greatest country of the world as
Herodotus does testify: for Pliny does confine it by the river Ister, Pontus,
Propontis, the Aegean sea, and the river Strymon. Yea and Strabo in the first
book of his Geography, according to the opinion of Homer, extends it as
far that way as the river Peneus, which river Ptolemey attributes to
Macedonia. Marcellinus makes the Scordisci to be a people of this country.
Appianus to these conioineth the Illyrians. So also does Mela upon the West,
who moreover upon the South to it does assign the mount Athos. Many of the
ancient writers likewise do make the peninsula or demy-iland Pallene, a
portion belonging to this country. Yea if one may credit Eratosthenes, the hill
Olympus does part Macedonia from Thrace. And the Epitome of Strabo in his
seventh book makes yet a far other description of the bounds of this
region. (For in Strabo himself the description of Thracia is wholly missing.)
This Epitome, I say, seuereth Thrace from Macedony by the mouth of the river
Nessus. Yea and indeed in succedent ages the compass of this country was not
much less: for Ammianus, Procopius, Sextus Rufus, and the book of Records
(Notitiarum) do divide it into these six shires or provinces; Moesia, the
Second or Lower, Scythia, Europa, (peculiarly calling this part by the general
name of that quarter of the world wherein the whole did stand) Rhodopa,
Haemimontus, and Thracia, properly and specially so called. Here hence it is
that in Trebellius and Orosius; there is mention made of the THRACIA'S, in the
plural number. Yet this our Map is not so far extended toward the North.
For we have indeed followed the description of Ptolemey in butting and bounding
it; who seuereth it from other Northren countries by the mount Haemus. And this
true THRACIA we do think to have been so named of the enchanting Nymph
Thraca, as Eustathius out of Athenaeus teaches us; having been in former times
called PERCA: And had been also sometime, as many do verily think, known by
the names of ARIA, ODRYSA, CRESTONIA and SCYTONIA. Josephus a most grave
author affirms, that it was of the Jews called THYRAS. The abouenamed
Ptolemey in it names these fourteen shires, Dantheletica, Sardica,
Vsdicefica, Selletica, Moedica, Drosica, Coeletica, Sapaica, Corpialica,
Coenica, Bessica, Bennica, Samaica, and Vrbana. Pliny divides it into fifty
(or two and fifty, as I remember Dalechampius has) Regiments, (Strategiae)
shirewickes, I think, they call them in some places of England, Hundreds, or
Wapentakes I would call them. This Thracia, properly so called, Ammianus
likeneth unto the half Moon: or, to a Theater, whose higher part is enclosed
with high and steep mountains, which do divide this same country from Dacia;
The lower part opens toward the Aegean sea.

Of the nature and quality of this country, Virgil speaks on this manner:
Terra procul vastis colitur Mauortia campis: A martial country li'th far
off, vast champions it conteinth: Plutarch teaches us that it has in it many
huge fennes and bogges, and that it is divided or crossed this way and that way
by diverse deep and dangerous rivers. Pliny says that the soil of Thracia is
very fertile for all manner of corn, and commends the wheat of the same, for
weight and heaviness: Item, for goodness he affirms that this kind of
wheat possesses the third place. Athenaeus testifies that it bears some
vines, especially about Biblina, which otherwise is called Oesyma. Item, Pliny
highly commends Vinum Maroneum, the wine of Marogna, or Marolia, as Lewnclawe
calls it. Homer also affirms, that the Achiui were wont, by ship to
transport wines from Thace into Grecce. Xenophon writes, that in the mount
Pangeus, there is a gold-mine: and Strabo affirms the like to be about
Philippi. Here also is the Thracian stone, which is kindled by the water, and
quenched with oil, as Pliny witnesses. But because no man of all the ancient
writers, has better described this country than Pomponius Mela, let us here
him speak: It is, says he, a country that cannot much brag either of the
goodness of their soil, or wholesomenesse of their air: nay indeed, except
it be in some place near the sea coast, it is barren, cold, and very unkind
to all things generally that are set, sown, or laid into the same. It seldom
bears any apple trees or other fruit trees: yet vines do here and there grow
in diverse places: but the grapes never ripen kindly, or come to any perfection,
except in some places where the vine-dressers do, by the leaves, keep the cold
from them. It is a country much more kind to men: yet they are none of the
properest: for they are very clownish, unhandsome and rough hewed fellows: but
otherwise for number and hardiness (for they are many and those very uncivil)
this nation far surpasses others near adioining. This latter also is
auerred by Pausanias who affirms it to contain such wonderful multitudes of
men, that, if you shall except France (Gallia) it may for ought that I know, in
all likelihood, for multitude of men be preferred before any country in the
world. Item, Herodotus says, that next after the Indies, it is the greatest
country of the whole earth. Liuy calls it a desperate and most fierce
Nation: and Solinus he says, that they are a very stout and hardy people:
Sextus Rufus makes them the most cruel and furious people that ever he saw or
heard of: which Florus well expresses by this example, when he writes that
certain of them being taken by the Romans, and giued as the manner of
captiises is, did bite the fetters and manacles with their teeth, and so
themselves to have sufficiently punished their own barbarous cruelty: and that
there are of their parents even from their cradle trained up to this wild
inhumane kind of life, Sidonius does teach us in these words: Excipit hic
natos glacies, and matris ab aluo Artus infantum molles nix cimbrica durat.
Pectore vixaliter quisquam, sed ab vbere tractus. Plus potat per vulnus equum,
sic lacte relicto, Virtutem gens tota bibit. Creuere parumper, Mox pugnam
ludunt iaculis: hos suggerit illis. Nutrix plaga iocos: pueri venatibus apti,
Lustra feris vacuant. rapto ditata iuuentus, Iura colit gladij. consummatamque
senectam Non ferro finire pudet. Tali ordine vitae Ciues Martis agunt. So soon
as infant here is borne, The thing they say is sure, To frost and snow their
tender limbs They presently inure. Scarce one of many thousands here, Does
suck the Nurces teate: Warm blood of warlike horses here, For most part's
infants meat: This diet mak'th them bold and hard. And as they come to growth
They learn to toss the spear and pike: Here no man lives in slowth. These
are the sports that these men use: As soon as boys can ride The fallow dear
they learn to chase: etc. But to these let us add that commendation of them,
given by the Emperor Justinian in his Authentica: That is most certain, says
he, and for a truth confessed of all men, That if any one do but name the
country of Thracia, by and by together as soon as the word is out of his
mouth, there presently enters into the heart of the stander by, a conceit of
manhood and warlike valor fit for all manner of service in the field. For
these things naturally bred in the bone, and as it were proper qualities
peculiar to this country only. Valerius Maximus highly commends the valorous
wisdom (Animosam sapientiam) of the Thracians. Yet Thucydides says it was
such, as it was the next door to barbarous cruelty: wheresoever the Thracian
is secure and thinks he may safely insult, there he is most bloody and
tyrannous. When it thundereth and lightneth, they shoot their arrows up into
the air, threatening even God himself, for that indeed they think there is no
other God but that whom they adore. These gods, as Herodotus writes. Mars,
Bacchus, Diana and Mercury, they worship only and none other. Yet the same
author in another place names Plistorius, for a God proper unto this nation
only. Ammianus also writes that these people do worship the gooddesse
Bellona. To these their gods, as Eusebius affirms, they slew and sacrificed
men, before they set forward and attempted to daren battle. In which they
used, by the report of Liuy, two hand swords of an huge length. Their salades
or head pieces were of woolues skins, every man wearing his dart, and his
target with a short dagger or poinyard. Every man here thinks it a gallant
thing and very honorable to live by the wars, and by robbing and spoiling.
An idle fellow here is accounted for a right honest man: and it is a most base
and contemptible thing to be an husbandman. Clemens in the seventh book of his
Stromaton writes, that these people are of complexion and color lion tawney,
and wanne, or as it were of a sky color. Homer calls them Comatos Thraces,
Long-locked Thracians: Julius Pollux, In vertice crinitos, wearing a long-locke
upon the crown of the head. It was accounted for an honorable thing amongst
them to have their faces full of skarres: and indeed Herodotus says, that it
was no disgrace to any man. Yea and Plutarch adds that they used to imprinte
marks upon their wives faces: which Athenaeus in the twelfth book of his
Deipnosophiston justifies to be true. Heraclides and Sextus Empiricus do
jointly affirm, that every man usually had more wives than one. It is very
certain, that they were great drinkers of wine and sound drunkerds, and that
they brewed their wine with honey, we learn out of Pliny. Yet in Pomponius Mela
I read that diverse of them did never know what wine meant; but when they meant
to be merry, sitting round about the hearth, certain seeds were strawen upon
the coals, which cast up such a smoke or steame, that it made every man so
lightheaded and pleasant, as if he had been cup shot, or had taken a pot or
two too much of strongest beer or wine that might be drunk. Athenaeus also
writes that they had here a kind of drink which they called Brytum, made of
barley and other kinds of corn. Suidas writes, that what wine soever the
pot-companions, in their quaffings and carowsings could not drink out was
presently powered upon their heads. The same author reports, that they are
much delighted to eat garleeke, as being indeeed of it self very hot, and
their country wherein they dwell very bleake and cold. Julius Pollux writes,
that they used to exchange slaves for salt. Whereupon Sale empti, bought with
salt, was spoken prouerbially of bad servants and such as were taken up at
iade-faire. Item, he affirms, that this nation first invented a kind of
musical instrument called Canthorum. But of the manners and behavior of this
people, many other things may be observed in the reading of those authors
which before I have cited, especially in Herodotus, Athenaeus, Solinus,
Pomponius Mela, and Heraclides his Policies. These, although mere Barbarians
and unlearned, yet in this one thing, diverse of them judged not amiss, in
that they thought and verily believed the soul to be immortal: others did
think that it did die, yet so as that it was in better estate then when it
lived. Hereupon it is, that they morned when women were brought in bed, and
wept at the birth of their children. An ancient writer affirms, that there
was a kind of nation of the Thracians that could not reckon further then the
number of four, any greater number they could not remember. Now it remains
that we should, out of Antigonus, say something of the miracles, and strange
things found and observed in this country. In Chalcidis, a province here,
there is a place called Cantharoletron; for that any beast that goes in
thither, may come safe and sound out again: save only the beast called
Cantharus: these never come out from thence alive, but they presently fall a
turning map of ancient Thrace or Thracia THRACIAE VETERIS TYPVS. Ex conatibus
Geographicis Abrah Ortelij.
LOCA CIRCA BYZANTIVM, INCERTAE POSITIONIS.

Anaplus, Bathycolpus, Canopus, Casthenes, Chetumesum, Chlidium, Chrysa porta,
Colone, Coparia, Crompi, Daphne, Fretum angustum, Hermoeum, Rhesium, Senum
portus. Plura preterea sunt apud Dionysium Byzantium quem vide in Gyllij
Bosporo. ex quo quum hunc ipsum seorsum iconice delineare cogitabam, experior
sine eo comite hoc mihi tam difficile, quam illi commentarijs describere fuit,
sine suo Dionysio.

THRACIAE ALIQVOT INCOGNITI SITVS, LOCA; Barathrum, quod et Orygma, Berzetia,
Caria, Drongilum, Ergisce, Gammaides, Ganiada, Maura, Nice, Onocarsis,
Parthenium, Phalesina, Psycterius, Tentyra, Thrasum, Vlucitra: REGIONES,
Aezica, Cecropis, Chytropolis, Mocarsus, Petalia, Zerania: VRBES, Abrus nisi
sit Aprus, Acragas, Adrane, Aegae, Aegialus, Aegistum, Agessus, Alapta,
Alexandria, Ampelus, Amytron, Anastasiopolis, Arne, Bellurus, Benna, Bepara,
Beres, Beripara, Bertisum, Bibastus, Bistiros vel Pistiros, Bola odipara, Bona
mansio, Borcobe, Borijaros, Bre, Bylazora, Bymazus, Cabessus, Coenurgia,
Capturia, Carasyra, Castrozarba, Cissine, Cizya nisi sit Bizya, Cobrys,
Cobryle, Cucasbiri, Cursazura, Cusculis, Cycla, Cynoetha, Dalasarda, Daunion
murus nisi sit Daonium, Dengium, Denizus, Dorium, Drison, Drys, Elaeoe, Elce,
Galepsus, Garmaa, Heliopolis, Hyrcania, Isdicea, Isgipera, Libethrus, Ludice,
Lycozia, Mandepsa, Mastira, Myrtion, Mysia, Nipsa, Nysa, Odrysa, Omole, Ozarba,
Paroreia, Passa, Petra, Phorunna, Pinsum, Pissyrus, Plysenum, Prastillus,
Probatum, Sacisus, Scelenas, Scempsa, Scitaces, Scotusa, Sipte, Sir,
Sozopolis, Spartacus, Strambae, Sudalene, Tamombari, Tharsandala, Therne,
Thestorus, Thraces, Tylis, Zeirinia, Zositerpum; GENTES, Banisoe quae et
Basanisoe, Bantij, Botioei, Brinci, Bryces, Bybe, Carbilesi et Carbileti,
Cerronioe, Cinchropsoses, Cyrmianoe, Darsij, Datylepti, Desili, Diobesi,
Disorae, Droi, Drugeri, Eleti, Entribae, Erasinij, Gondrae quae et Cyndrae et
Rondaei, Hypselitae, Ligyrij, Maduateni, Mypsaei, Podargi, Priantoe, Pyrogeri,
Sabi, Satro centae, Scaeboae, Sindonaei, Trisplae; MONTES, Cissene, Dunax,
Edonus, Ganos, Gigemorus, Libethrius, Melamphyllon, Meritus, Mimas, Nerisum,
Pindus, Zilmissus; FLVVII, Aristibus, Cebrinus, Cius, Cyndon, Edon, Zorta;
VICI, Aliphera, Asae; SINVS Bennicus; NEMVS Abroleua; FONS Inna; CAMPVS, Areos
pagos. Plura erant his addenda, uti quoque in ipsa tabula referenda; ex Zonara,
Cedreno, Nicephoro, ceterisque Byzantinae historiae graecis scriptorib. at quia
hos inter veteres non numero, consulto omisi.

Cum Imp. et Belgico privilegio decennali. 1585.

round until they die. In this country is the river Cochryna, of whose water
if any sheep do drink, they bring forth none but black lambs. Between
Byzantium (Constantinople) and the Chersonesus, there is an hill which they
call The holy mount, near to which, the sea oftentimes carries upon the top of
his waters a kind of slimy substance called of the Latins, Bitumen. In Agria,
a shire of this country, the river Pontus, carries down in his channel
certain stones much like unto coals: which being kindled, and water cast upon
them, they burn the better: but being blown with bellows, they go quite out.
There is no manner of vermin or venomous creatures that can abide the smell of
this kind of siring. Amongst the Cinchropsoses there is a fountain, of whose
water, whosoever shall drink they die immediately. In Botiaea, there grows a
stone, which by the heat or reuerberation of the Sun beams kindles, and
casts forth sparks and flames of fire. Plutarch writes, that there is a
spring not far from the hill Pangaeus, of whose waters if one fill one and
the same vessel, and then weight it, he shall find it to be twice so heavy in
the winter, as it was in the summer. Plutarch (whom Tzetzes calls, The
younger: another names him Parthenicus) reports certain things of the herb
Cythara, the stones Pansilypus and Philadelphi, found in the rivers Ebrus and
Strymon: which, because they are more like to fables, than true stories, I do
in this place willingly omit. To reckon up here the several Nations,
Mountains, Rivers or Cities of this country, I think it nothing necessary:
because they are at one view better to be seen in the Map it self. Yet of
the city Byzantium (now Constantinople) for that it is sooft mentioned in
ancient histories, to say nothing at all, for that we do in some sort hold it
an injury, I think it not amiss to write these few lines following, of the
description of it. The first founder of BYZANTIVM, which was also in times past
called LYGOS, was, as Trogus and Eustathius do think, one Pausanias a Captain
of the Spartanes: and that, as Cassiodorus writes, at such time as Numa
Pompilius was king of the Romans. It was so called of Byzantes, the son of
Ceroessas, a captain of the Megareans: whom Eustathius affirms, to have
been the vprightest and most just man that ever the earth did bear. This city
is situate upon an high cliffe, at the narrowest place of Bosphorus, Thracius
(the frith or streights of Constantinople) in a very fertile soil, and upon a
fruitful and commodious sea (fertili solo and foecundo salo) as Tacitus
writes. In respect of which situation, being strongly fortified by nature, it
is thought to be almost invincible. Whereupon Trebellius Pollio calls it
claustrum Ponticum, The blocke-house of Pontus. Orosius terms it, Principem
gentium, the sovereign of all Nations; Sextus Rufus, Arcem secundam Romani
orbis, The second bulwark or fortress of the Roman Empire: Procopius, Arcem
Europae and Asiae obicem ponentem, The Castle of Europe, and bar against
Asia: Themistocles Euphrada, Magnificentiae officinam, The shop of all manner
of bravery and courtlike fashions: and Ovid he calls it, Vastam gemini maris
ianuam, The huge gate of the two seas, to wit, Propontis (Mar di marmora) and
Pontus Euxinus (Mar maiore.) For the rampart and walls of it (which Pausanias
and both the Dions so highly commend) were so strong that the Athenians used in
former times, as the same Eustathius writes, to carry all their goods and
treasure thither and there to bestow it, holding it to be a place impregnable
and not to be surprised by any enemy whatsoever. Of the great felicity of this
city you may read many things worth the observation in diverse ancient writers;
especially in Polybius, Herodian, Xiphiline, Dion Prusens, and Themistocles
Euphrada in his sixth oration: who deemeth the citizens thereof to be most
happy men, both for the goodly river which passes by it, temperature of the
air, fertility of the soil wherein it stands, capacious haven and creek of
the sea, gorgeous church and stately walls of the same. Heerupon grew that
daintiness, luxury, drunkenness and wantonness of these people: which vices
of theirs are noted by Athenaeus in the tenth book of his Deipnosophiston: and
Aelianus in the foureteenth chapter of the third book of his varia historia.
This city, fortune often frowning upon it, was sometimes possessed of the
Spartans or Lacedaemonians: after that it was under the command of the
Athenians. Then shaking off their yoke, it began by a little and a little to
challenge unto it self a kind of sovereignty and freedom from any foreign
jurisdiction: which it held for a while, until Vespasian the Roman Emperor,
subdued it, and reduced it unto the form of a province. While it thus stood
under the command of the Romans, it was, by Septimius Seuerus, who held on
Nigers side, assaulted, battered, raced to the ground, and of a goodly
flourishing city, made a poor and beggarly village, and withal was adjudged
to belong unto the Perinthij. But Antonius Caracalla, Seuerus his son,
restored them to their ancient liberties, and was called by the name of
ANTONIA, as Eustathius testifies. Yet for Antonia (that I may note this by the
way) an ancient brass coin, of the Emperor Seuerus which I have, does teach
us that it ought to be read Antoninia. For upon this piece of money was stamped
ANTONEINIA YANTION SEASTA, that is, Antoninia the Imperial city of the
Bizantini. But after this it was again wasted by Gallienus the Emperor, and
all the citizens and garrison soldiers thereof slain and put to the sword.
Yet for fear least the Scythians, Getes and other barbarous nations might
break in to the Roman territories on that side, it was again reedified,
repaired and fortified by the same Emperor. But Constantine, worthily in deed
and name surnamed the Great, did yet far more strongly fortify it: and
adorn it with the most goodly temple of Santa Sophia: and moreover gracing it
with many stately ornaments and curious works of Architecture which he caused
to be brought out of Asia, Africa, Europe, yea and from Rome it self, and
after his own name by proclamation caused it to be entitled and called by the
name of CONSTANTINOPOLIS, that is, Constantines city. Item, he took it from
the Perinthij, made it a free corporation and endowed it with many large and
ample privileges. After him, as Themistius Euphrada in his sixth oration
testifies, Theodosius the Great did beautify it with diverse gorgeous and
costly buildings. Moreover Justinian the Emperor, as Procopius an eie-witnesse
affirms, adorned it with many most fair and beautiful works of curious
Architecture. But especially he graced it by that glorious work of that
stately temple of Santa Sophia, which he repaired (being a little before burnt
down, and utterly defaced by fire) and of it bestowed such cost, that the
Emperor himself, as Glycas witnesses, boldly said that in this edifice he
had exceeded even glorious king Solomon, in that his building. Which work of
his, as P. Diaconus writes of it, did so much excel all other buildings, that
in the whole world beside there was not to be found another that might in any
respect be compared unto it. Whereupon Corippus thus speak th of this Church:
Iam Solomoniaci sileat descriptio templi, Cedant cunctorum miracula nota
locorum. That stately work of Solomon, great Iudahs glorious king, May now be
still and brag no more: The greatest woonders of the world, may well give
place to this, No eye has seen the like before. Consta. Manasses calls it
Orbis ornamentum, The glory of the world, which he verily believes the very
Seraphim themselves did reverence and adore. But if any one be desirous to know
the fashion and model of this building, let him have recourse to Procopius his
first book of Edifices. Of this church Paulus Lyrus Florus wrote a treatise in
heroike or hexameter verse, as Agathias in his fifth book testifies. So that
it might seem that there was nothing more that might be wished for the further
beautifying of this city. Sozomen doubted not boldly to affirm, That
Constantinople both for multitude of men, and store of wealth and money, by all
men's joint consent, did far excel even great Rome it self. Moreover
Nazianzen writes, That Constantinople for beauty and bravery, did as much
excel all other cities of the world beside, as the highest heavens in glory do
exceed the lowest elements. Whereupon of some it was graced with these proud
titles, VRBS AETERNAE, VRBS REGIA, NOVA and SECVNDA ROMA, The eternal City,
The Imperial City; New Rome, and Another Rome. In the praising and tax of the
chief cities of the Roman Empire, this city, in a Council there held, was
placed in the second degree: but in former times, as Egesippus testifies, it
possessed only the third place. Zosimus writes, that there is no other city
whatsoever, whether you respect the large compass and circuit of the walls, or
great felicity of it every way, that may justly be compared unto it. The
buildings of it are so close and near together and the houses and streets are
so pestered and thronged, that whether a man keep home or walk abroad he
shall be so crowded and thrust, that scarcely he might go without danger, by
reason of the huge throng of men and infinite of multitude of cattle always
passing to and fro in the same. He that desires to know all the glorious
ornaments and wonderful things worthy of observation to be seen in this
city, let him read George Cedren his history of the life of Theodosius the
Great. Where he does not only receite them all and reckon them up curiously,
but also he does most artificially describe them and paint them out in their
true colors. This city was taken, in the year of Christ 1453. by Mahomet the
first of that name, Emperor of the Turks, who at this day do yet possess
it. Many other things pertaining to the beauty and magnificence of this city
are to be seen in the book of Records of both the Empires, and in Procopius
his first book De Aedificijs. Of the original and famous buildings of this
city, read George Codinus: for no man has handled that argument better than
he. But of the later writers, Petrus Gyllius has most exactly and learnedly
described the same. Of the Thracians, this one thing in this place I cannot
omit; namely, That in former times they bore a great sway in foreign countries,
and were great Lords out of their own native soil. For they conquered and had
under them a great part of Asia, which is situate over against them, and caused
it after their name to be called THRACIA ASIATICA: yea and toward the South,
beyond the bounds of their own country, upon the Aegean sea (where Pausanias
described THRACIA CARIA) they had long since placed their colonies. This
province, Porphyrogenneta calls THRACESIVM. Xenophon doubted not to call this
kingdom the greatest of all other between the Ionian sea and Pontus Euxinus.
Moreover Strabo makes mention, of a certain nation, dwelling above Armenia,
which were called Thraces Seraperae. To this Thracia, is annexed a Chersonesus
or Neckland, which thereupon was surnamed THRACIA CHERSONESVS. Suidas calls
it CHERSONESVS HELEESPONTIACA, of the sea Hellespontus, near neighbor unto
it. It is also named PALLENE of Halicarnasseus and Stephanus, who moreover
adds, that it was inhabited of the Crusaei. Xenophon says, it was a most
rich soil, and fertile of all manner of things whatsoever: and withal
affirms that in it were eleven or twelve great and goodly towns. But we out
of all ancient Historians have much exceeded this number, as the Map does
sufficiently approve. This Neckland or Chersonesus belonged sometime to Marcus
Agrippa, after whose decease, as Dion reports, it fell unto Augustus Caesar.
He that desires out of ancient writers, a more ample description of Thracia,
let him read Wolfangus Lazius his Histories of Greece: Item, the fifth book of
Agathias a Grecian borne. A strange thing it is that William Brussius writes
of this Chersonesus, that by no manner of means or diligence vines can be made
to grow here in any great abundance.

GRAECIA, OR HELLAS.
THat country which the Latins call GRAECIA, Greece, of the Greeks themselves
generally was named HELLAS: yet the out-borders of it are not the same,
according to every man's description and limitation. That was truly and most
anciently called Greece, which Ptolemey, Pliny and Mela, name ACHAIA; in which
Athens, the first and most flourishing University of the World, and most
renowned city of these parts was seated. Here Jupiter himself, as Athenaeus
witnesses, kept his Court. It is a free city, as Pliny calls it, and needs
as he says, no further commendations, so famous and honorable it is, and ever
has been beyond all measure or conceit of man. Yet it is manifest, not only
out of the writers of the common sort of Historiographers, but also even out of
Strabo himself, the prince of Geographers, that many countries are
comprehended under the name of Graecia or Hellas, as namely, Macedonia, Epirus,
Peloponnesus, and those other provinces and shires, contained under these
names: so that all Greece, as it is generally taken, is on three sides bounded
with the Ionian, Aegean (Archipelago) and the Libyan seas: toward the maine
land it abutteth upon those mountains which do part Macedonia from Thracia,
(Romania) Mysia the upper, ( Seruia, Bosna and Bulgaria,) and Dalmatia, (now it
is called Sclauonia.) This is that Greece, which, as Manilius says, is Maxima
terra viris, and foecundissima doctis Vrbibus, etc. Renowned Greece, for
warlike men, and scholars deeply learned, does far excel -- etc. which, (as
Cicero writes in his oration pro Flacco) for honor, renown, learning, diverse
arts and sciences, civil policy in time of peace, and feats of arms and
martial chivalry abroad, has ever been famous: or, as Trogus Pompeius in his
8. book says, was for valor and estimation, Princess of the World. From
hence, as Pliny says, the bright lusture of all manner of literature and humane
learning, first call forth his beams, and enlightened the rest of the world on
all sides round about.

In this country humanity and letters together with the manner to write and
read, how to till the ground and sow corn, was first invented and practiced,
as Plinius Caecilius has left recorded in his epistle written to his friend
Maximus: And this is that country, says he, from whom we had our statutes:
that I mean, which received not laws, as those do which are at the command of
the conqueror, but willingly and courteously did communicate them, to such as
did demand them. MACEDONIA, possesses the greatest part of Greece. This long
since having conquered the greatest part of the World, passing through Asia the
Less, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria, Egypt, the mountains
Taurus and Caucasus, subdued Bactria, Media, Persia and the rest of those
Eastern countries, even as far as India; (in this following the steps of
Bacchus and Hercules) of which also it became the Empress, yea thou may say,
if thou will, of the whole world, answeareable to that of Manilius, -- and
Macedum tellus quae vicerat Orbem: -- and Macedonia stout which all the world
subdued. This is that Macedonia, 72. of whose cities, Paulus Aemilius, a Roman
Consul, sacked and sold in one day. Then next after this follows
PELOPONNESVS, a peninsula or demy-ile, (not much inferior for goodness of
soil, fertility and riches, to no country under heaven) is very like in form
to the leaf of the plane tree. In this stands binaris Corinthus, the city
Corinth, the fortress, bulwark and gate of all Greece, situate between two
seas in the isthmos, neckeland or narrow place between this province and
Achaia. Here also is Lacedaemon (Misithra or Zaconia, as some think, but it
was in old time called Sparta) reverend and honored of all men for the
politic government and commonwealth instituted by Lycurgus, for many
memorable acts done both at home and abroad. But that the name of Greece did
extend it self further than before specified, on each side of the sea, it
plainly appears out of the records of the best writers: for how great a
portion of Italy was in old time called Magna Graecia, Great Greece? A great
part also of the maine continent in Asia, beyond the sea over against
Macedonia, of certain colonies transported thither and seated there by the
Greeks, was named also by this name: whose inhabitants, Plutarch in his
Laconica apothegmata, for distinction sake, names Graecos Asianos, Asian
Greeks. For Lucian in his treatise of Love, (de Amoribus) writes, that the
insulae Chelidoniae, certain small islands, or rocks, as some call them, in the
midland sea (they are now called Isole corrente, as Castaldus judges, or
Caprose, as Pinetus thinks:) were the ancient bounds of Greece. Isocrates in
his oration entitled Panegyricos, writes that the Grecians did inhabit from
Cnidus, (a town in the province of Doris in Asia the Lesser) even unto Sinope
(a city of Paphlagonia in Asia, situate upon the Euxine sea, Chalcondylas
calls it Pordapas, the Turks, as Leunclaw reports, Sinabe.) In like manner
the Aegean sea (Archipelago) which beats upon the coast of Macedonia, and
also upon this forenamed Asia, is called of Thucydides, Plutarch, Arrian and
Polyenus, (Hellenice thalassa) of Pliny Graeciense mare, the Greek sea. Strabo
and Pausanias, amongst the rest, have described Greece, as then it stood, most
diligently and curiously. Of Graecia Asiatica, this part of Greece in Asia, the
Lesser, which thou see opposite to Macedonia, read Pausanias in his Achaia:
and Vitruuius in the fourth chapter of his first book of Architecture.

map of ancient Greece Ella. GRAECIA, SOPHIANI. Abrahamo Ortelio descriptore.
Cum Priuilegio



CYPRVS.
THat this island was sometimes a part of Syria and joined to the maine land,
Pliny in his Natural history does affirm: and that it shall again be
reunited to the same, Apollo has prophesied, as Strabo in his Geographie has
left recorded. Amongst those islands of the Midland sea more noted for their
greatness, this does possess the sixth place. In respect of the form, it is,
as Eustathius writes, compared to a sheeps skin: or, as Hyginus notes, to a
French target. It is longer one way than another, by the judgment of Strabo;
who moreover adds, that for excellency and goodness of soil, it is
inferior unto no island whatsoever. Pliny and Mela do testify, hat in former
times nine kings did reign in it at once. Herodotus says, that king Amasis
was of all mortal men the first that took it, and made it tributary unto his
crown. It was all over sometime so woody and ouergrowen with bushes and trees,
that the ground by no means might be ploughed and manured: a great part of
which although it was daily spent in the melting, and refining of copper and
silver, (for the island is very full of metals) as also for the building of
ships; yet notwithstanding for all this they never were able utterly to destroy
their huge woods and infinite luxuriousness of the same, until by
proclamation free liberty and license was given and granted to every man that
list, to fell and carry away what wood and timber they pleased: Item, that what
ground so ever any man had cleared by stocking up the bushes and trees, that he
should for ever after hold for his own by a free tenure. The wonderful
fertility of this soil Elianus does bewray, when as he writes, that stagges
and hindes do often times swim hither out of Syria to fill their bellies: so good
is the feed of this i will. The manifold variety and plenty of all sorts of
commodities here, those words of Ammian in his 14 book do sufficiently
demonstrate unto us: when he gives out, That it needs no manner of foreign
help of other countries, only of it self it is able to build a ship even
from the very keele to the top sail, to rigge it and send it forth to sea
furnished with all manner of necessaries whatsoever. The great riches of this
island, these words of Sextus Rufus do manifestly declare: CYPRVS famous for
great wealth, moved the beggarly Romans to attempt the same; so that indeed the
interest that we have in that island, we gat rather by violence, than any right
we had unto it. Florus writes, That the riches of this island when it was once
wholly subdued did fill the Exchequer of the city of Rome more full, than any
other conquest that ever they got wheresoever. Carystius lapis, (Caristium, I
think a kind of green marble) a stone of great estimation is found here, as
Antigonus writes: and as Pliny testifies, the Diamond, Smaragd, Opalus,
Crystal, Alume, and a kind of whetstone, which they call Naxium. The same
author affirms, that the Rosen of this island does far surpass that of any
other places of the whole world. He also highly commends the oiles and
unguents of the same for pleasure and delight, as also their wax and reeds as
much for medicines and necessary use in physic. Athenaeus extolleth their
passing fair doves. Fabulous antiquity did verily believe that the goddess
Venus here first came up out of the sea: for whose honor and memory
peradventure, the women of Cyprus (as the same author affirms) do offer
their bodies to be abused of every man that list. Why it was not lawful for
any Jew to come within the i will of Cyprus, read Dion in the history of Hadrian.
The diverse names of this island as we have noted out of sundry authors are
these: ACAMANTIS, AEROSA, AMATHVSA, ASPELIA, CERASTIS, CITIDA, COLINIA,
CRYPTVS, MACARIA, MEIONIS, and SPHECIA: of which see more particularly in our
Geographicall treasury. Of the Cyprians, or people of this island, thou may
read many things in Herodotus. There are also other three Cyprianiles, called
by this name, about this island, as Pliny teaches.

EVBOEA.
THis island is severed by so small a frith, (thus Solinus describes it) from
the maine land of Boeotia, that it is hard to say whether it be to be accounted
amongst the number of the islands or not: (Thus some have thought of the I Will of
Wight:) For on that side, which they call Euripus, it is joined to the
continent by a fair bridge, and by the means of a very short scaffold one may
pass from the firm lana thither on foot: and, as Procopius in his iiij.
Aedifi. testifies, by the laying over, or taking away of one rafter or planke,
one may go from one to another on foot or by boat as one please. Pliny writes
that it was sometime joined to Boeotia, but was afterward severed from it by an
earthquake: and indeed the whole island is much subject to earthquakes, but
especially that frith or Euripus which we mentioned a little above, as Strabo
tells us; who moreover adds that by that means a fair city, of the same
name with the i will, was utterly sunk and swallowed up of the sea. Of all the
islands of the Midland sea this in bigness is held to possess the fifth place.
In diverse authors it is called by diverse and sundry names: as MACRA, and
MACRIS, ABANTIAS, ASOPIS, OCHE, ELLOPIA, ARCHIBIVM, etc. Item, CHALCIS, of the
chief and metropolitan city of the same, situate upon the forenamed frith.
This, I say, was the greatest city and metropolitan of all the whole i will, and
was of that power and command, that it sent forth colonies into Macedony,
Italy, and Sicilia. In Lalantus, that goodly champion, there are, as Strabo
writes, certain hot baths, which Pliny calls Thermas Ellopias, The baths of
Hellopia. They are very sovereign against diverse diseases. Here are, as Strabo
reports, the rivers Cireus and Nileus, of which the one causes such sheep
as drink of it to be white, the other black. Pliny does also highly commend a
kind of green marble here which they call Carystium, for that it is dug
out of a rock nere the town Carystus, in the East corner of this i will, where
also the marble temple of Apollo is described by Strabo. Copper was first found
in this island: here do grow the woorst fur trees, as Pliny affirms; item,
here blows olympias, a wind proper to this country: again, that the fishes
taken in the sea here abouts are so salt, that you would judge them taken out
of pickle. Of the Euripus (where they say Aristotle abode and died) very
strange things are told by diverse writers; namely that it does ordinarily ebb
and flow seven times in a day, and as many times in the night, and that so
violently and high that no winds can prevail against it, nay and the tallest
ships that are, though under sail, it drives to and fro as it lists. Of all
men, Strabo in his tenth book has most curiously described this island. See
also what Procopius in his fourth book de Aedificijs Iustiniani, says of it.
Item, Wolfgangus Lazius, in that his History of Greece, has set out a very
large Commentary of the same. Libanius Sophista, in the life of Demosthenes,
writes, that it had sometime two and twenty cities. Yet we, in this our
Map, out of sundry writers, as well Latins as Greeks, have gathered together
and noted down the names of many more.

RHODVS.
THe brave and frank RHODVS, was also of the ancient called OPHIVSA, STADIA,
TEICHINE, AETHRAEA, CORYMBA, POEESSA, ATABYRIA, and TRINACRIA, yea and by
diverse other names also, as thou may see in our Geographicall treasury.
Pliny gives out that this i will did rise up out of the bottom of the sea,
having been before all drowned and covered over with water: and Ammianus he
writes, that it was sometime bedrenched and sowsed with a golden shower of
rain: for the fabulous writers do tell that here it rained gold, when Pallas
was borne. Therefore this soil, above all other was beloved of Jupiter, the
mighty king of gods and men, as the poet says. In Diodorus Siculus we read
that it was beloved of the Sun, and made an island, by the removing of the water
which before had covered it all over: for before this it lay hid in the bowels
of the sea, or else was so full of bogs and fennes that it was altogether
inhabitable. In memory of which kindness of lovely Phoebus, that huge Colossus
of the Sun, one of the seven wonders of the world, was vulgarly said to have
been erected. This, we read, was made by Chares Lindius, Lysippus his
scholar, and was at least seventy cubits high: Festus says, that it was one
hundred and five foot high. This image, says Pliny, within six and fifty
years after, was by an earthquake overthrown and laid along:
notwithstanding, as it lay it was a woonderment to the beholders. Few men were
able to fathom the thombe of it: and the fingers of it were greater than many
large statues. Those parts of it that were by any casualty broken did gape so
wide, that they were like unto the mouths of hideous caves: within it were huge
massy stones of great weight, wherewith he ballaced it when it was first set
up. It was finished in the space of twelve years: and the brass thereof
waighed three hundred talents. There are beside in sundry other places of this
city, an hundred less r colosses, yet wheresoever any of them were, they did
much grace the place. In another place the same author writes that, that
there were in it above three thousand statues. Strabo writes, that this
Colossus, in his time, was by an earthquake overthrown and lay along, and was
broken off at the knees: after which time the Rhodians were by the oracle of
Apollo, forbidden to set it up again. Of this Earthquake read Polybius in his
fifth book. The air is never so thick and cloudy, nor the heaven ever so
closely maskt, says Solinus Polyhistor, but the sun does shine in Rhodes.
Whereupon Manilius writes thus of it, Tuque vere domus Solis, cui tota
sacrataes. And thou who truly sacredart, and princely court of glorious Sun.
Pliny and Athenaeus do commend the Wines and Figs of Rhodes above those of
other countries. Phylostratus in his second book of Images affirms, that the
soil of this i will is very good and fertile of Grapes and Figs. Eusebius
writes that the inhabitants and people of this i will, always upon the sixth day
of May, used to sacrifice a man unto their gods. There are some which boldly
affirm, that these people were called Colossians, of that famous Colossus,
before mentioned. Amongst which are Eustathius, Zonaras and Glycas: as also
Suidas, but that he calls them not Colossenses, but Colassenses, sounding a,
the first vowell, not o the fourth, in the second syllable. Others, of whose
opinion I am, do rather think, that those are called Colossenses, which do
inhabit Colostae, (now Chone, as Porphyrogennetas shows) a city of Phrygia
in Asia the less, to whom S. Paul wrote his Epistle, not to these Rhodians, as
we have showed in our Treasury. Diodorus Siculus and Polybius do speak much of
Rhodes: but of all men Strabo does describe it best. Of this island see the
third chapter of the seventh book of Aulus Gellius. It had seven Arsenals or
docks wh^re ships were built and repaired, as I read in the fifth book of
Polyaenus in Heraclides. Their great store of shipping was a manifest argument
of their great strength and power. Of their empire and command which they had
in Asia, the maine continent see Liuies 37 and 38 books. Item, of their
jurisdiction over cert ine islands in the midland sea, look Ammians 22. book.
For they had under their command all Caria, part of Lycia, Carpathus, and the
Calymnae, certain islands in the Aegaean or Carpathian sea (Archipelago) as we
are given to understand out of the one and thirtieth oration of Dion Prusaeus.

LESBOS.
THis island of ancient writers was called by diverse and sundry names: as
namely, AEGIRA, AETEIOPE, HEMETTE, LASIA, PELASGIA, ISSA, MACARIA, MITYLENA and
MYTANIDA. There are some, as Strabo writes, which do think it to have been
sundred from Ida. The fabulous story of Arion, the excellent musician and
lyricall poet, has made this island more famous. Of this story thou may read
more at large in Aelianus: Item, Sappho, the poetresse, who, as Pausanias
witnesses, wrote much of Love, and the temple of Apollo, with the chapel of
Lepetymnus (situate in the mount Lepetymnus) as Antigonus writes, have
likewise made this island much talked of. In the fables we find recorded, that
about Antissa, Orphaeus head was buried: and that the nightingals do here sing
much better, than in other places, Antigonus, out of the authority of Myrsilus,
borne in this i will, does affirm for a certain truth. Diodorus Siculus writes,
that it was first inhabited of the Pelasgi: then of Macarius, the son of
Jupiter Cyrenaicus, together with the Jones: after that, of Lesbus, the son
of Lapithus. Pliny and Athenaeus do affirm it to be a very fertile soil and
good for vines; the wine Athenaeus does so highly commend, that he map of the
ancient islands of Cyprus, Chios, Rhodes, Icaria, Delos, Rineia or Rhenea,
Euboea, Samos, Kea, Lesbos, and Lemnos, Greece INSVLAR. ALIQVOT AEGAEI MARIS
ANTIQVA DESCRIP. Ex Conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij Antuerpiani.
LEMNOS. LESBOS. CIA, et CEOS. SAMVS. EVBOEA, Insula. RHENIA. DELVS. ICARIA.
RHODVS. CHIOS. CYPRVS, Insula laeta choris, blandorum et matter amorum.

Cypri insulae incognitae positionis LOCA Esmaeus Tyrrhia.
GENTES Asphax Otienses.
VRBES Acra Acragas Alexandria Alcathi villa Asine Capbalus Cerbia Cinyria
Cresium Cyrenia, nisi sit Ceronia Dionia Epidarum Erysthia Gerandrum Lacedaemon
Malum Togessus Tembrus Urania



Cum priuilegio decennali. 1584. Psieus flu., et Aous flu. Aoius mons.

says that it is indeed more like to Ambrosia than mere wine. Pomponius Mela
says it has five goodly towns: but Pliny speaks of eiht: yet we out of
Greek and Latin authors have found the names of many more, as thou may see
in the Map. This, amongst the isles of the midland sea, famous for their
larger compass and greatness, does possess the seventh and last place. In
Strabo thou shall find much of this island.

CHIOS.
AThenaeus writes that this island is full of thick woods and ouergrowne with
trees and bushes: Item, that the people and inhabitants of the same were of all
the Grecians the first that used to buy slaves to do their servile works and
drudgery. It had a city of the same name, which Thucydides calls the greatest
and richest of all the cities of Ionia. There is nothing in this i will more
renowned, than the wine which they call Chium vinum, the best of all Greek
wives, as Strabo, Aelianus, and other good authors affirm. The vines whereof
this wine is made do especially grow in the fields of Aruisius (Amista, it is
now called) about the mount Pelmaeus. whereupon this wine was since called
Vinum aruisium, and by addition of one letter Maruisium, of which later we do
commonly call it Malmesy. Athenaeus shows, that vinum nigrum, the red wine or
black wine, was first known in this i will. It is no less famous for the
Lentiske tree which yields Masticke, that sweet and wholesome gum. The
marble also of this i will is much commended by Pliny: who thinks, that the
quarries of Chios did first show unto the world that marble of diverse colors,
which they use in building of walls. Vitruuius describes a fountain in this
i will, of whose waters if any man shall drink unawares they presently become
stark fools, bererued of all understanding and reason. That there is here a
kind of earth called Chia terra, of sovereign use in Physic, the same
author does plainly affirm. Eusebius testifies that in former times the
inhabitants were wont usually to sacrifice a man, cut in pieces as small as
flesh to the pot, unto Omadius Bacchus. This island was also known by other
names, as CHIA, AETHALIA, MACRIS, and PITYVSA. Some thing of the history and
famous acts of these ilanders thou may read of in Herodotus: as likewise
again in Strabo. Of Drimacke, a slave or bond-seruant, a story very well
worth the reading done in this island, thou may see in the sixth book of
Athenaeus his Deipnosophiston.

LEMNOS.
LEMNOS is situate over against mount Athos, (Agion oros they now call it: the
Italians, Monte santo: the Turks, Manastir:) which, as Statius and Solinus
report, does cast his shadow into the Marketplace of Myrina, (now Lemno) a
wonderful thing to tell; seeing that Athos is from this island at the least 86
miles. This i will is consecrate and sacred to Vulcan: for old fables do tell,
that, being by Jupiter thrown headlong out of heaven, he light in this i will.
Tzetzes out of Hellanicus affirms, that fire was first found in this island,
as also that armor and warlike weapons were first devised and made here. Of
those four Labyrinths, famous all the world over, and reckoned up by Pliny,
the third was in this country. The surueyers and architects of this work were
Zmilus and Rholus, together with Theodorus, this countryman borne. It was
made of hewn and polished stones, arched in the top, and vpheld by 140
columns of more curious and wonderful work and greatness than the rest:
whose bosses in the shop did hang so equally poised, that while they were
wrought and turned, one boy alone did strike the laue. Cert ine pi ces and
remnants of it did remain even until Plinies time. This same author also
does for certain affirm, that rubrica Lemnia, or, terra Lemnia, a kind of
red earth here found, was of greatest estimation: of whose sovereign use in
physic see h m in his history of Nature, as also Galen, the Prince of
Physicians, in his book entitled De simplic. Medicam. In the first book of
Apollodorus his Bibliotheca, you may read a history of the women of this island.

SAMOS.
THat this SAMOS was called by diverse names; as PARTHENIA, ANTHEMVS,
MELAMPHILVS, CYPARISSIA, IMERASIA, and STEPHANE, we have found in reading of
diverse authors, as thou may see more at large in our Geographicall treasury.
It is an island fertile and rich of all manner of commodities, wine only except,
which here is none of the best, nor in any great quantity: whereupon they do
use to say in a common byword, That in this island their hens give milk.
Athenaeus writes, that here Figs, Grapes, Pears, Apples, and Roses do ripen
twice a year: yet we find recorded in Aelianus, and Heraclides in his
Politics, affirm that it was sometime a forest, full of woods, and wild
beasts. Pliny does speak of Lapis-Samius and Terra Samia, a certain stone and
kind of earth only found in this island, and does highly commend their
sovereign virtue and physical use. Item, he says that the Samian dishes were
of great request at princes tables. Moreover, he adds that here also was a
Labyrinth, built by Theodorus. But in Samos there is nothing more notable, or
makes it more famous than that Pythagoras was this countreyman borne, Eusebius
also in his Chronicles testifies, that that Sibylla which was surnamed
Hierophila, was borne here. Aelianus writes, that the Samians used to worship
a sheep: and with that stamp to coin their money. Athenaeus commends the
Peacocks bred here. This foul, antiquity did hold to be consecrated to Juno:
and that this island was greatly esteemed of Juno, these verses of Virgil do
plainly avouch: Quam Juno fertur terris magis omnibus vnam, Posthabita coluisse
Samo. Thus Englished by M. Thomas Phaer: Which town above all towns to raise
was Juno's great'st delight, Forsook her seat at Samos i will, etc. You shall
find much of Samus in the 12 book of Athenaeus his Deipnosophiston; in
Apuleius his second book Florid. in Plutarch, in the life of Pericles; and
Strabo in the 14 book of his Geography: out of whom it is not amiss to annex
this one history of Polycrates a tyrant of this country. This Polycrates, they
say, grew so rich and mighty, that beside his command upon land, he was lord
also of the sea: for proof of which, they report this history: that he
throwing of set purpose a ring of great value (both for the price of the stone,
and curious cutting of the same) into the midst of the sea, within a while
after a certain Fisherman took a great fish, which had swallowed it down,
and opening it, found the ring in her belly, so that by that means it came to
the kings hands again. This self same story does Herodotus in his Thalia
tell, but much more eloquently and with far finer terms, as his manner is.

DELOS, and RHENIA.
DELOS is situate amongst the Cyclades. Pliny writes, that this i will was far
and near known and talked of by reason of the Temple of Apollo and the great
market or fair ordinarily kept there. Pausanias calls it, The Mart of all
Greece; Festus, The greatest mart of all the world; Thucydides terms it, The
Exchequer of Greece; another names it, The native soil of the gods: for the
fabulous tales of Poets have made the world believe that Diana and Apollo were
borne here. Of which conceit and opinion of men, it rose, as Tully against
Verres writes, that this island was held to be consecrated unto them: and such
the authority of holiness and religion of it both is and always has been,
that the Persians making war upon Greece, in defiance both of God and man,
and landing at Delos with a thousand ships, they never once offered to profane
or once to touch any thing here. Immediately after the first deluge or flood in
the time of Ogygius, this island, as we find recorded by Solinus, before all
other lands and countries whatsoever, received the lusture of the sunbeams,
and thereupon it obtained that name of DELOS, that is, Apparent, or easily and
soon descried. It had also other names given to it of other accidents and
events that fall out in the same: as namely, PELASGIA, LAGIA, ORTYGIA,
CYNETHVM, CYNTHON, CHLAMIDIA, SCYTHIA, ANAPHE, ASTERIA, etc. (But Asteria was
the name of a city in this i will, which city was afterward, as Apollodorus and
Seruius do testify, called also Delos.) Pliny names it ARTEMITA and
CELADVSSA. Athenaeus notes three things here worthy of special observation; A
market wonderfully furnished with all manner of victual and dainty dishes; The
great multitudes of all manner of people dwelling in it; and The infinite number
of parasites, smell-feasts or trencher-chaplaines belonging to this god. Pliny
writes of the fountain or head of the river Inopus, that altogether in the
same manner, and at the same time it does ebb and flow with Nilus in Egypt, so
that the people do verily believe, that it comes by secret passages under
the sea from the Nilus unto them. The same author makes mention of certain
rocks of Delos (petrae Deli) where he says, the fishes by nature are so salt,
that one would deem them to have been laid in pickle, and may well be
accounted for salt-fish, and yet in the haven of the same they are fresh. In
old time the copper of Delos was held for the best, as we read in the same
author. In his time, he affirms, there was a palm tree still to be seen,
that had stood there ever since Apollo was borne. Pausanias (who lived in the
reign of Hadrian the Emperor) writes, that in his time this island was so
desert and dispeopled, that the guard of the Temple which the Athenians sent
thither being removed, if one should reckon only the Delians, was wholly waste
and void of inhabitants: It is wonderful to see how time does alter the state
of all things. In this island it was not lawful, as Strabo and others report,
to keep a dog, to bury a dead man, or to burn his corpse, as then the
custom was ( Thucydides says, that no man might either be borne, or die
here.) Therefore the corpses of dead men were from thence conveyed into the
next i will called RHENIA, which is a very small island, waste and wholly desert,
distant from hence not above four furlongs. Plutarch says that Nicias made a
bridge from one to the other. Thucydides in his 1 and 3 book writes, that it
was taken by Polycrates the tyrant of Samus, annexed by a great long chain to
Delos, and consecrated to Apollo Delius. Antigonus affirms, that neither cats
nor stags do breed or live here. Athenaeus describes a kind of table that is
made in this island, and thereupon it is called Rheniarges. It was by violence of
storm rent off from Sicilia, and utterly drowned, as Lucian in his Marine
dialogues, writes. To these add that which Seruius has left written at the
third Aeneid. of Virgil. Of Delos read the hymn which Callimachus has written
of this i will.

ICARIA.
THe tale, death and burial of Icarus, gave occasion of the name both to this
island, as also to the sea which beats upon it. For long since it was called
DOLICHE, ICHTHYOESSA, and MACRIS. Strabo says that it was desert, yet green
and full of goodly meadows and pastures. The same author makes it a colony of
the Milesij Notwithstanding Athenaeus commends vinum Pramnium, a kind of wine
so called of Pramnium, a mountain in the island, where the vines whereof it is
made did grow. This wine he moreover affirms to be otherwise called
Pharmatice. Of the fabulous story of Icarus, read Ovid, Pausanias, and
Arrianus.

CIA.
THat island which Ptolemey calls CIA, Strabo names CEVS. Ceus, says Pliny,
which some of our writers call Cea, the Greeks call HYDRVSSA: It was severed by
tempestuous from Euboea, and was sometimes 500 furlongs in length: but pr
sently after, four fifth parts of it, which lay Northward, being devoured and
swallowed up of the foresaid sea, it has now only remaining these two towns,
Iulis and Carthea: Coressus and Paccessa are lost and perished. Aeschines (...)
his epistles names Nereflas for a town of this island; but untruly and falsely,
as I think. From hence that brave garment so much esteemed of fine dames,
came, as Varro testifies. The first author and deviser of this loose gown,
was Pamphila, the daughter of Latous, who is by no means to be defrauded of
her due commendat ons for this her invent on, as being the first that taught
how to make that kind of thin sarsnet wherewith gentlewomen might cover their
bodies, yet so as notwithstanding their beauty and fair faces might easily be
discerned through. Aelianus in his varia historia, writes that it was a custom
here, that they which are decrepit and very old, do inuit one another, as it
were to a solemn banquet, where being crowned they drink hemlocke each to
other: for that they know in their consciences that they are wholly
unprofitable for any uses or services in their country, beginning now to dote
by reason of their great age.

CRETA, now CANDY.
ALthough there be many things which do make this island famous and much talked
of amongst Historians and Poets, as the coming of Europa: the lovers of
Pasiphae and Ariadne: the cruelty and calamity of the Minotaure; the labyrinth
and flight of Daedalus: the station and death of Talus: (who thrice in a day,
as Agatharcides reports, went round about it) yet there is nothing that made
it more renowned than the nativity, education and tomb of Jupiter. Yet it was
also much honored for the natiuities (if we may believe Diodorus Siculus) of
many other Gods: as namely of Pluto, Bacchus, Pallas and Dictynna, whom some
think to be Diana: so that one may not unfitly call this island, THE CRADLE OF
THE GODS. Moreover, they say, that in the confines of Gnosia, (Cinosa) near
the river Therene, the manage of Jupiter, with Juno was celebrated and kept.
The history of Minoes the Lawgiver: and Radamanthus, the severe Iusticier,
has made it more talked of, than any other i will in this ocean. That it is very
full of mountains and woods, and has also diverse fertile valleies and
champion plains, Strabo does sufficiently witness. Solinus makes it to be a
country well stored with wild goats. Item, he shows that the sheep,
especially about Gurtyna) are red and four horned. Pliny calls it, The
native soil of the Cypress tree: for which way soever any man shall go, or
wheresoever he shall offer to set his foot, especially about mount Ida
(Psiloriti) and those which they call, The white hills, except the soil be
planted with other trees, this tree sprowth up, and that not only in any
peculiar or made ground, but every where of it own accord naturally. Cornelius
Celsus speaks of Aristolochia Cretica. That there is here no Owl, or any
mischievous and harmefull creature, beside the Phalangium, a kind of perilous
Spider, Plutarch, Pl ny, Solinus, AElianus and Antigonius do jointly testify.
Ammianus Marcellinus, in his 30. book, does commend the dogs or hounds of
this island for excellent hunters. These Julius Pollux, in the fifth book of
his Deipnosophiston, divides into two kinds, Parippi, (light foot and his
kind) and Diaponi (Toyler, with her whelps) that is, The one sort excelled
for swiftness of foot, the other for painfulness and sure hunting.
Pausanias, Liuius, Aelian, Xenophon and Ctesias commend the inhabitants and
people of this i will for the best Archers. Plutarch says, they are a warlike
people and very lascivious: item, deceitful, ravenous and covetous: Athenaeus
he affirms that they be great wine-bibbers, and cunning dancers: S. Paul in
his Epistle to Titus, chap. 1. ver. 9. calls them, by the testimony of
Epimenides a poet of their nation, Always liers, evil beasts, and slow
bellies. Notwithstanding Plato in his Laws writes, that they more regard the
sense and true understanding of matters, than words and quaint terms. Diodorus
Siculus reports that the i will was first inhabited of the Eteocretae, a people
bred and borne there (indigenae) whose King he calls Creta: yet this king
Solinus names, the king of the Curetae, and from hence the island was called
CRETA. But if we may believe Dociades, whom Pliny cites, it took the name of
Creta, a nymph so called. It was also named CVRETIS, of the Cureti a chief
nation which did sometime inhabit it: this does Pliny and Solinus testify:
Item, they affirm that it was before that called AERIA, Item, MACAROS,
Blessed; and MACARONNESOS, The blessed i will; of the temperature of the air:
Stephanus calls it IDAEA and CTHONIA: Item, TELCHIONIA, of the Telchines the
inhabitants, as Gyraldus witnesses: Item, HECATOMPOLIS, of the hundred cities,
which in former times it had, as Pliny, Solinus and Strabo out of Homer
reports: who otherwise says (which Plato justifies) that it had only
fourscore and ten. Yet I, in this my map, out of the writers in both
languages, have gathered an hundred several names of cities, and more: many of
which, for that I knew not their situation and place, I have set apart by
themselves, as certain other places here mentioned by some authors. Amongst
the greater isles of the midland sea, this, as Eustathius testifies, possesses
the fourth place. In Strabo, Diodorus, Heraclides, in his Commonwealth, and
Athenaeus in his Deipnosophiston (beside other) you may read many things of
this island.

SARDINIA, Now SARDEGNA.
OF those seven islands of the Midlandsea, more famous and memorable than the
rest for their greatness, some there are, as Eustathius writes which make
this the third. They which describe countries by their forms and proportions,
do liken this to the print of a man's foot: whereupon it was sometime named
ICHNVSA and SANDALIOTIS: of the Greeks it was called, of Sardon, Hercules his
son, SARDON; of the Latins, SARDINIA. This, by the testimony of Pausanias
in his Phocica, may be compared to those isles which, either for greatness or
goodness of soil, are most highly commended. Polybius says, That for
greatness, multitude of men, and all manner of excellent fruits, it bears
the bell from other islands in this sea. AElianus calls it, The best nurce for
cattle: Strabo makes it, The best soil for corn, whereupon Florus terms
it, Annonae pignus, a pawn for all manner of provision. Prudentius writes,
That a navy, which should bring over into Italy the store of grain in
Sardinia, would burst all the barnes of Rome. Saluianus names this island,
Vitalem vrbis Romae venam, the vital artery, or vein wherein the life blood
of the city of Rome does consist. Sidonius in Panegyrico Maiorani, says that
it is very fertile of silver. It is an island very rich and fertile of silver,
as Pomponius writes: Item, he writes that the soil is much better than the
air: and as it is very fruitful, so is it for the most part pestilent and
unwholesome: the which Strabo also confirms, where he says, That in summer
time it is very dangerous for sickenesses, especially in those places where it
is most fertile. To these discommodities, the herb Sardonia, also may be
adioined, which, as Dioscorides, in the foureteenth chapter of his sixth book,
writes, that if it be eaten troubles the brain, takes away a man's memory,
makes him yawne, and so to die as if he laughed. There is also the Solifuga,
(as Pliny calls it, or Solipungia, as Festus) a little creature, much like to
the Spider, upon which, whosoever shall chance to sit, he lightly shall be
dangerously hurt. The Musmo, a beast like to a ram, which Pliny says is
proper to Corsica, Strabo attributes to this i will: to whom also AElianus in the
four and thirtith chapter of his sixteenth book De Animalibus, does seem to
give his voice. Suidas says that here are bred the best and finest purples.
Nonnius Marcellus, by the authority of Varro, in his book De genere
vestimentorum, commends the Sardinian tapestrie (except there be a fault in
the copy, and for Sardineae, it should be written Sardianis, of Sardis the
city of Asia: which I do rather think to be true and more probable: for of
the Sardian tapestrie we may read in Athenaeus and others.) Claudianus in the
later end of his treatise De bello Gildonico, does most finely describe
Calaris, (Calari, or Caglire) the chief city of the same. Strabo makes the
depth of the sea here to be M. else. Other things proper to this i will you may
see in Pausanias, Solinus, Eustathius, Claudian and others. This island of
Justinian in his Code, is reckoned amongst the isles of Africa.

CORSICA.
THis island the Grecians called CYRNVS, the Latins CORSICA, of Corsa, a
certain woman so named, as Eustathius thinks: or rather of the tops of the
craggie mountains, as Dionysius has written: For as Strabo says, it is rough
and very uneven: in many places not passable nor scarce habitable. There is no
island Dionysius says, more woodie. That it is full of tall trees, very fit for
ship timber, Theophrastus, in his fifth book of the History of Plants,
teaches that the Romans, out of those woods heretofore, at one time, cut
down such wonderful store of timber, that of it they made a flote that was
driven with 50. sails. Some do think that it was called of Ovid, Therapne.
The Scholiast of Callimachus says that in his time it was named TYROS. Believe
him that list. Pliny, out of Diodorus writes, That it is very full of Box, and
that the Honey here is bitter; Item, that it has abundance of Foxes, Conies
and wild foul: but as for Oxen, Goats, Woolues, Hares and Stags, it breeds
not any at all, as Polybius in his 12. book witnesses. Procopius, in his 3.
book of the wars of the Goths, says map of ancient Crete CRETA Iouis
magni, medio iacet insula ponto. Ex conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij.
Incertae positionis locorum nomina.
LOCA,
Adrasus, Athrona, Corium, Hippocoronium, Onychium, Pergamia, Tripolus.
POPVLI,
Ceretae, Dryitae, Lycij, Orij.
FLVVII,
Amnisus, Oaxes, Tethrynes, Triton,
MONTES,
Asterusia, Arbius. Carine, Lasion. Othrys, Styracium.
STAGNV^,
Coresium.
TEMPLV^,
Rocceae Dianae.
INSVLAE.
Asticla, Naumachos.

Vrbium Cretae nomina, quorum situs ignoratur.
Albae Arcadia, Archidium Asos, Aulon, Axus, Biennus, Boeae, Cantanus, Catrea,
Caunus, Chalcetoriu^, Clatos, Cytinos, Dulopolis, Drauca Elyrus, Etia, Glamia,
Grammium, Hierapolis, Holopyxos, Hydramia, Hattia, Lasio, Istros, Lycastos,
Marathusa, Methymna, Miletus, Mycenae, Myrina, Nauphra, Naxus, Oaxus, Olus,
Olyssa, Pergamum, Phalanna, Phalannea, Pharoe, Proefus, forte Prasum, Priesus,
Pyloros, Rhaucos, Rhizenia, Rhytium, Satra, quae Eleutherna, Sibyrtus, Strenos,
Syia, Syrinthos, Tegea, Therapnae.


map of ancient Corsica Loca incog^ita positionis.
Alalia Blesino. Carax. Enconiae. Prosidium. Vapanis.


map of the ancient islands of the Ionian Sea map of ancient Sardinia
Incognitae positionis vocabula Sardonica.
VRBES, vel LOCA.
Agraule Aradis Biora Carbia Caput Tyrsi Celiem Charmis Cochlearia Elephantaria
Fan. Carisy Ferraria For. Traiani Gemellae Ad Hercule^ Longones Lugudonec Media
Metalla Molaria Nafa Othoca Porticenses Sarrapos Sorabile Tharpos Turobolis Ad
Turres Viniolae Ad Puluinos
POPVLI.
Aconites Balari Pellidi Sossitani Diagebres, qui quondam Io: laenses, forte
ijdem cum Iliensibus.


that it breeds Horses, but so little, that they are not much bigger than
sheep: Item, Apes, if one may believe him, very like unto a man in shape and
proportion. Liuy, in his 40. book of his History, has given out, That there
has been here such marvelous plenty of Honey, that Marcus P narius a Praetor
carried out from thence 100000. pounds at once. In bigness, of all the isles of
the midland sea, it chalengeth the third part. That the ilanders are more
savage and inhumane than wild beasts, and to live by robbing and cutting of
throats, we do read in Strabo. That they are very long livers, Eustathius
shows, and before him Athenaeus affirmed the same. Martianus Capella, has
given us notice of 33. cities, which this island sometime had: and the map
will show, that I, out of Latin and Greek writers, have gathered the names of
many more. The student of Geography, if he please, may have a larger
description of this island, in the 5 book of Diodorus Siculus. Seneca also in
his Consolation to Albinus, and likewise again in his verses, describes the
same.

The ISLANDS of the IONIAN SEA.
THe Islands of the Ionian sea, of better note, are these, Corcyra, Cephalenia,
Zacynthus, Ithaca, Leucadia, and Echinades: of which severally take these few
lines: CORCYRA (now called Corfu) the native soil of Alcinous, as Dionysius
says, was called CERCYRA, as also long since by diverse other names; as
PHAEACIA, SCHERIA, DREPANVM, CERAVNIA, ARGOS, MACRIS, and as some think
CASSIOPE; as thou may see more particularly in our Geographicall Treasury.
This island grew to such great strength and power, as Eustathius writes, that
it subdued many other islands and cities, and brought them under their command:
Item, that it was so strong in shipping, that it alone, in the Persian war,
did set out and furnish threescore ships. Yet afterward it was brought to
that desolation, that of it became this proverb, Cercyra est libera, caca vbi
volueris; Corfu is empty now, you may untruss where you list. There is
another Corcyra, different from this, in the Hadriaticke sea, named otherwise
Melaena.

CEPHALENIA, otherwise called MELAENA, SAMOS and TAPHOS: as also DVLICHIVM, as
some men have written, by the testimony of Strabo. Eustathius and Tzetzes have
written that it was sometime inhabited of four sundry nations; namely, of the
Pronij, Samij, Palenses and the Cranij: to these Liuy adds the Nesiotae. In
this island, if one may trust Aelianus, the Goats drink not for the space of
six months together. Look in the discourse of Zacynthus following. In
Antigonus we read, that a certain river runs through the midst of it,
upon the one side of which there are great store of grasse-hoppers, and on the
other side not one.

ZACYNTHVS, (now Zante, and as Erythraeus says, sometime Jerusalem) HYRIA it
was in old time called, and CASSIOPA, the poet names it Nemorosa, woody. These
ilanders, Athenaeus says, are no good soldiers; the reason he yields to be,
for that they be very wealthy, and have such plenty of all things, that they
give themselves to naught else but to their ease and pleasure. The Phalangium,
a kind of spider, is here more dangerous and hurtful to mankind, than in any
place of the world beside, as AElianus says. So long as the Etesiae, (East
winds which rise ordinarily in the dog days) blow, the Goats stand yawning
and gaping with their noses up into the North: and are so satisfied therewith,
that they look after no water nor ever care for drink, as Antigonus has left
recorded. That in this island there is a cave commonly called Coeranium,
Plutarch, in his book of the comparisons of beasts, does affirm. It has a
fountain very full of fish: out of which great store of pitch is taken, if we
may give credit to Ctesias. Item, here F. Desiderius Lignamineus Patauinus
writes that he found this Epitaph of Cicero; M. TVLLI. CICERO. HAVE; God be
with thee good Cicero: which he says was in the year 1544. Adamus Tefellenius
Louaniensis in his Iournall (a manuscript copy of which M. Hadrian Marselar,
lent me to read over) writes, that he in this island in the year of Christ
1550. handled the bones of Cicero, and read upon his tomb this epitaph: Ille
oratorum princeps, and gloria linguae Romanae, iacet hac, cum coniuge Tullius,
vrna: Tullius ille, inquam, de se, qui scripserat olim, O fortunatam natam me
consule Romam. The learned Tully, who for fined tongue, in Rome had never
peer, With loving wife, in clay full low, lie both enterred here: That Tully
great, I mean, who of himself, sometime thus proudly said: Now Rome, thou
blessed art indeed, since I thy scepter swaied.

ITHACA, which was also in old time called NERITIA, of Neritus a mountain, if
I be not deceived, is now vulgarly of the Italians called Valle di Compare, and
as Porcaccius says, Teachi: of the Turks, as the learned Lewnclawe writes,
Phiachi. Moreover in the 10. book of Straboes Geography, I find that there is
here a city called Ithaca, which Plutarch in his Greek Questions names,
Alalcome, but Stephanus, Alcomenae. Athenaeus writes, that it has many
havens, but withal is very mountainous, rough and craggie: so that it will not
easily, without great and infinite labor and toil, yield any small or mean
profit, unto the husbandmen, as Plutarch tells us. In Porphyry, out of the
writings of Artimedorus, I read that this island, from Panormus, an haven of
Cephalina, lies Eastward, and contains in compass 85. furlongs. It is very
narrow, but high. In it is, as the same author, with Homer does witness, a
cave of the Nymphs. We read in Antigonius, that it breeds no Hares at all.
Except it had been the native soil, and country where Ulysses was borne, there
had no mention at all of it remained in any records of ancient writers.

LEVCAS or LEVCADIA (now S. Maura) although Pliny makes it but a peninsula or
demy-ile, yet Mela calls it flatly an island. That it was made an island and
was severed from the maine continent, yet afterward by force and violence of
winds joined to the same again, Strabo does teach us. In a very high foreland
or promontory of this i will, AElianus describes the temple of Apollo Aelius,
from whence yearly they were wont to tumble some one or other down into the
sea headlong, thereby to appease the wrath and fury of their Gods; as Strabo
has left recorded.

ECHINADES, ( Echidnae, Seneca in his Troas, and Euripides in Iphegenia in
Aulide, call them: but Stephanus, Echinae) so named of the great multitude of
the Echini, Vrchines or Hedge-hogges, which do greatly infect this island.
Apollodorus calls them, STROPHADES; now they are known by the name of the
Cozzulari: they are, as Ovid in the 8. book of his Metamorphosis writes, in
number 5. these were also part of the continent, as Pausanias in his Arcadia,
testifies; their form and fashion is often altered and changed by the ebbing
and flowing (if I may so speak) of the mudde of the river Achelous (Aspri or
Pachicolamo) at whose mouth they stand, as Strabo would feign persuade us.
Near these are the Taphiae and Acutae, otherwise called Thoae. Plutarch in his
treatise of the ceassing of oracles, tells a story (or fable, rather) worth
the reading, of the death of Pan, which tell out about these islands.

AFRICA PROPRIA, AFRICA properly so called.
AS that part of Asia which is enclosed with Mar Maiore, Archipelago, Midland
sea, and the river Euphrates, is of the Geographers properly called Asia: so
this part of Africa, above all other provinces of the same, has always
hitherto been known by the name of AFRICA PROPRIA. This also is worth the
observation, that in all ancient stories, when Asia or Africa are generally or
indefinitly named, these several provinces of those greater parts, are only to
be understood. The bounds of this province of Africa on the West are the river
Ampsaga, and the Mauritania's, the countries of the Moors, their next
neighbors: on the North, lies the Midland sea: Arae Philenorum, a village
between it and Cyrenaica, is the uttermost bound of it Eastward: the Inner
Libya and the deserts of the same do confine it upon the South. This country
was otherwise sometime called ZEVGIS and ZEVGITANA. It comprehends within
this compass these three shires, NVMIDIA (named of some MASSYLIA) BYZACIVM and
TRIPOLITANA. Diodorus Siculus divides this province into four nations, the
Poeni, Libophoenices, Libyi, and the Numidae. At such time as the Romans bore a
sway here, and Scipio Aemilianus commanded their legions in these parts, this
Africa was divided into two provinces: that near Carthage, they called OLD
AFRICA: that which contained Numidia, NEW AFRICA, as Pliny, Appian and Dion do
jointly testify. Numidia, and Byzacium, were under the command of the Consuls;
that wherein Carthage stood, belonged to the jurisdiction of the Proconsuls, as
Sextus Rufus reports. (And this division they made, as Pliny writes, by a
certain ditch drawn between them.) In the first book of Justinians Code,
and in the seven and twentieh title of the same, thou shall find another manner
of division of this country, and a far other manner of government of it by
Presidents and Lieutenants. Numidia, beside the great store of Marble there
found, called by the name of Numidian marble, and the marvelous plenty of
Dear and wild beasts which it yields, has nothing worth the remembrance,
as Pliny affirms. Liuy, Pliny, and Solinus do give it the praise for the best
horsemen for service in the wars, of any country whatsoever. They do as
highly commend the fat soil of Byzacium; which is such that it yields an
hundred for one: yea, it has been known, that one bushel of wheat being
sown, has yielded at harvest the increase of an hundred and fifty bushels
again. The Lieutenant of this place sent from thence unto Augustus Caesar,
Emperor of Rome, forty ears of corn sprung and grown up from one root, and
one grain, as was probable. Item there were sent likewise to Nero from thence
three hundred and forty stalks with ears of corn come up of one and the some
grain. To this also may be adjoined the goodness of the soil, which is such,
as Columella reports of it, that the husbandman, after he has laid his seed
in the ground, from seed-time to harvest, never looks to his fields, nor once
medleth with it more, for that searse any weed or other such thing, which
usually hinders the growth of corn, does here come up of it own accord,
except it be either set or sown by hand. Halicarnasseus also makes mention of
this great fertility of Africa. But Titus the Emperor of Rome, in one word,
does sufficiently declare the woonderfully fruitfulness and plenty of all
things here, in an Oration of his written unto the seditious and mutinous
Jews, where he names it, Altricem orbis terrarum, The nourse of all nations
of the world. Yea and Saluianus in his seventh book terms it, Animam
Reipublicae Romanae, The soul of the Roman Commonwealth, or politic body
there; where thou may read many other things worth the observation, of the
riches, command and power of this country. Herodian makes it a country very
fertile of men. Polybius on the other side does as much commend it for the
great abundance of cattle and all sorts of living creatures that it breeds.
So that for multitude of Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, it does far
surpass almost all the rest of the world beside. And that which is most
wonderful of all other, it is no strange thing here (as Columella, out of
Dionysius, Mago, and Marcus Varro, tells us) to see Mules to breed, and bring
forth young: so that the inhabitants do as often see the foales of Mules there,
as we do of Mares here. The same author in the first chapter of his fourth
book says that the people are very ingenious and witty. Hirtius calls it,
Gentem insidiosam, A treacherous nation: Maternus names it, Gentem subdolam, A
wily and crafty people: so that Vlgetius doubted not to say, That for wiles and
wealth the Romans were always inferior to the Africans. Iuuenal the Poet
terms it, Causidicorum nut^iculam, The nurse of prating petifoggers.
Athenaeus recounteth the Carthaginians amongst those nations which delight much
in quassing and carowsing, and use to be often drunk. Saluianus in his seventh
book De Prouidentia, says that they are generally so inhumane, such
drunkards, so deceitful, fraudulent, covetous, treacherous, disloyal, lewd,
lecherous, and unchaste, that he that is not such an one, he surely is no
Africane. Lastly, there is, as he there adds, no manner of wickedness or
villainy that they are not given unto. All histories do make mention of the
unfaithfulness and false-heartednesse of this nation: which indeed is such,
and they for the same so greatly noted and famous, that they grew for it into a
common byword among all such nations as had any conversation or ought to do
with them. And thus much of this Africa, a land, as the Poets term it, most
rich for triumphs; the fortress or castle, as Cicero calls it, of all
Provinces belonging to the Roman Empire. The Islands near adjoining and
belonging to this country, more famous and of better note, are, Melita, Menyx,
Cosura and Cercina; beside some other lesser ones, and of less account: of
which, as also the people, rivers, mountains, towns, and cities, see this our
Table. That Sardinia, that goodly island which lies over against Genua, did
sometime belong to this Africa, Justinian does testify in the seven and
twentieth Title of the first book of his Code. But of CARTHAGE, the chief and
metropolitan city of this province, although Salust says it is better far
to say nothing at all of it, than to speak little: yet notwithstanding I
think it not amiss to add somewhat of that also in this place. This city of
the Latins was called CARTHAGO, of the Greeks CHARCHEDON. Solinus Polyhistor
reports that it was first called CARTHADA, which word, says he, in the
Phoenician tongue, (of near affinity to the Hebrew and Arabicke) signifies
Ciuitatem nouam, The new city. And indeed, truth it is, that (...) in the
Arabicke dialect, and (...) Kariat hadatha, in the Syrian does signify, A new
city, or castle. Hereupon it is that Stephanus names it (...), NOVAM VRBEM,
The new city. He moreover calls it OENVSSA, CACABE, and CADMEIA, but upon
what ground and authority I know not. Cadmeia, peradventure, it was named of
the Hebrew (...), which in that language (as also in the rest of the oriental
tongues derived from hence) signifies, the East; or, first and chiefest: both
which may well agree to this city: for the first inhabitants, who built it, and
enclosed it with an huge wall and ditch, were Easterlings, Cadmonim, or such as
came thither from Kedem, the East. Again, in respect of the greatness, power,
goodly beauty and lusture of it, it might justly (and indeed so it did, as we
shall show in that which follows) deserve the name of Cadmia, that is, the
chief and principal metropolitan city: and it may be that for the same
reason it was also of them called Cacabe, Stellaris, the glistring star; of
(...) Caucabi, a star: answerable to Asteria, or Asteris, an island in the
Midlandsea: Asterius the name of a place in the i will Tenedos: Astron, or Astrum,
a river of Troas, issuing out of the mount Ida, as Pliny testifies: Item, a
great and goodly city of Argia in Peloponnesus: with diverse other places in
Greekland, of the like denomination; all derived from Aster, and Astrum, which
in the Greek tongue signify A star. There are many learned men, which do
think, that in the Holy Scripture this city is called and described by the
name of THARSIS. And thus much of the ancient names and appellations of this
city: for in succedent ages it has been called also by diverse others beside
these, as we shall show hereafter. Yea and ancient writers have graced it with
diverse honorable titles and epithites: calling it Celsam and Almam, The Stately
and Honorable city Carthage: Apuleius names it, Romani imperij aemulam,
terrarum orbis auidam; Prouinciae magistram venerabilem; Africae Musam
coelestem; Camaenam togatorum; The great enuier of the Roman state, and yet it
self desiring all the souereignty of the world; The honorable mistress of
the Province; The heavenly Muse of Africa; The delight and paradise of the
gentry of the land. Of Solinus it is entitled, Alterum post vrbem Romam
terrarum decus: Next after the goodly city of Rome the only glory of the world.
Of Ptolemey, Manilius and Pliny it is called Magna, The great city. Of Victor
Vticensis and Suidas, Maxima orbis terrarum, The greatest city of the whole
world. And that not without just cause: for Orosius testifies that it was
twenty miles about within the walls, almost round enclosed with the sea. The
abridgement of Liuy says that it was four and twenty miles about. Strabo
makes it in compass three hundred and threescore f^rlongs (stadia) which do
make five and forty Italian miles. How true this is I leave to the discretion
of the learned Reader to determine: This city was situate in a peninsula, or
demy-ile, joined to the continent of Africa, by a neckland ( Isthmos the Greeks
call it) of three miles breadth, or as Appian, the dilig^nt Chorographer of this
place reports, 25 furlongs over. Siluis Italicus thus writes of it, Haec
caput est, non vlla opibus certauerit auri, Non portu, celsoue situ, non
dotibus auri, Vberis, aut agili fabricanda ad tela vigore. The more famous
places in it are Megara, a part of the city so called. Byrsa, the castle, which
contained in circuit, as Scruius has noted, two and twenty furlongs; (in this
stood the temples of Juno, Aesculapius and Belus:) The Theater, Thermae
Gargilianae, and Thermae Maximianae, certain hot bathes: The Delphicum, or
temple of Apollo, the chapal dedicated to the goddess Memoria, the Horse-race
(Hippodromus) Basilica Celerinae, the church of Theoprepia, Lypsana a certain
place so called (...) Via coelestis, Heaven walk; except the copy in this
place be faulty and corrupt. In the midst of the city there was a grove, and
in it the temple of Juno, as the famous Poet Virgil has left recorded: Item,
the temple of Elisa, as Siluis Italicus testifies. What places afterward map
of the ancient coast of North Africa, with inset map of Carthage AFRICAE
PROPRIAE TABVLA, In qua, Punica regna uides; Tyrios, et Agenoris vrbem.
Illustri ac Amplissimo viro Domino Christophoro ab Assonleville: Equiti
aurato: Altevillae domino: Regis Catholici Consiliario primario. Abrahamus
Ortelius dedicabat, lubens merito.

EX CONATIBVS GEOGRAPHICIS ABRAHAMI ORTELII.
Cum priuilegio Imperiali, Regio, et Belgico, ad decennium. 1590.

Sinus Carthaginensis, ipsaeque vrbis, atque locorum aliquot vicinorum plenior
descriptio,

LOCA INCOGNITAE POSITIONIS, ex varijs antiquae notae auctorib.

Abba, Achris, Adis, Agar, Alele, Bada, Baste, Canthele, Caputbada, Cemma,
Cilla, Cillaba, Decimum, Ethine, Graesa, Hermio, Ismuc, Lectum, Locha, Males,
Mamma, Marthama, Massilia, Menephessa, Meschela, Miltina, Nargara, Ophe,
Oroscopa, Parthos, Phara, Phellina, Pithecussae, Salera, Sarsura, Sintae, Solis
campus, Syllectum, Tegea, Tergasa, Thabena, Tholuns, Thon, Tinges, Tisiaus,
Tisidium, Tocas, Tricamarum, Tuman, Vazua, Zama, Zella, Zincha, Zona. Ex
Augustino, Cypriano, et concilio Carthaginensi, Abarina, Abbir, Accura,
Acyrega, Agra, Amaccura, Anthypatiana, Asuaga, Avasafa, Audurus, Ausciaga,
Auspha, Autumnum, Ballita, Barus, Becena, Begetselita, Bobba, Buslacena,
Calama, Capra picta, Carpeta, Cartemita, Casae Medianae, Casae Nigrae,
Centuriones, Chullabi, Cibaliana, Colusita, Diaba, Dionysiana, Eugitana,
Fetulae, Foratianum, Formae, Furnae, Galbae castrum, Gazana, Gazanfala,
Getabinustum, Girpa, Gor, Gradus, Iacena, Iosiniana, Lemella, Limata, Liniacum,
Luperciana, Mactarum, Marcellianum, Mileuis, Midila, Mirita, Migirpa, Muzula,
Nice, Obba, Opte, Pambestum, Piste, Rucuna, Rusugoniotum, Subulae, Sullestiana,
Synica, Tabeae, Tambada, Tarassa, Telepte, Thagabe, Thibarum, Thucabarum,
Thygate, Tibina, Timida, Tisigita, Tubunae, Tyzica, Vcrensia, Victoria,
Vinianum, Vlula, Vnzibilis, Vzalis, Zataria, Ziquensis, Zurinia. Ex Plinio,
opidum Aboriense, Abuticense, Acharitanum, Auinense, Melzitanum, Salaphitanum,
Theudense, Tigense, Tiphicense, Tiricense, Tuburbis, Tuburnicense,
Tunidrumense, Vigense. Ex Libro Notitiar. limes Balensis, Balaritanus,
Bazensis, Bubensis, Columnatensis, Madensis, Mamucensis, Sarcitani,
Tintiberitani, Varensis. His recentiora, veteris geographiae tabulis non
inferimus.

Justinian the Emperor of Rome builded here and repaired, Procopius in his
sixth book of the buildings of this Emperor, relates at large. Of him also
if we may give credit to Balsamon, it was called IVSTINIANA. The builders of
this city, which laid the first foundations of it, were the Phoenicians Xorus
and Carchedon, or, as some other report, Elissa or Dido, King Agenors daughter,
fifty years before the overthrow of Troy: or three score and twelve years
before the building of the city of Rome, as Appianus affirms. Siluis Italicus
says that Teucer was the first that began the foundation of this city. It was
built, as Josephus in his disputation against Appion writes, in the hundred
and five and fifty year after the death of Solomon, the glorious king of
Israel. The valor and great strength of this city, as it was always eminent
and famous in foreign wars abroad, so has been often shaken and ouermastered
many and sundry times at home. At length having stood in flourishing estate, as
most authors affirm, seven hundred and seven and thirty years, it was by the
Romans, as an envious enemy of their state and empire, assaulted, battered,
taken, sacked, utterly spoiled, and at last consumed to dust and ashes. And
thus it continued for the space of one hundred and one years: when by the
commandment and prescript of the Senate it was again reedified, who, sending
thither certain people to inhabit and dwell there, made it a Roman colony:
and this was the first colony of the Romans that ever was transported forth of
Italy. It was of Cayus Gracchus called IVNONIA, as it is recorded by Appian,
Solinus, and Dion; who also adds that it was afterward by Augustus Caesar
again the second time made a Colony: because that when Lepidus had wasted a
great part of it, and left it destitute and without inhabitants, he in manner
seemed to have dissolved the right and privilege of the Colony. Therefore this
city began again to flourish, and under the Roman Emperors, to be renowned
under the name of The second Carthage. So that that city which lately was
renowned for seats of arms and martial prowes, was now, as Martianus writes,
as honorable for worldly felicity and all manner of earthly blessings. It
tasted also of the benevolence and bounteous magnificence of the Emperor
Hadrian, and thereupon it was of him called HADRIANOPOLIS, that is, Hadrians
city, as Spartianus has left recorded. Item, the Roman Emperor Antoninus
Pius did much grace it with many sumptuous and stately buildings as you may
read in Pausanias. Lampridius writes, that in respect of the favorable
kindness of the Emperor Commodus toward this city, it was in like manner of
him named ALEXANDRIA COMMODIANA TOGATA. But, (as the state of all things under
the cope of heaven is unconstant and variable) the same city under Gordianus
the Emperor, was, as Herodian testifies, by one Capellianus Lieutenant of
Mauritania taken the second time, and spoiled, about six hundred and four
score years after it first had submitted it self to the command and
jurisdiction of the Romans. In the reign of Honorius the Emperor it was by
treachery the third time taken, sacked, and utterly defaced, by Genserichus
king of the Wandals, in the four hundred and thirty year after the
incarnation of CHRIST our Savior. The like it suffered of certain mutinous
soldiers under one Solomon a lieutenant of the Maurusij, or Barbary, as
Procopius has recorded. From these it was won by Belisarius, in the year of
CHRIST five hundred thirty eight, in the time of Justinian the Roman Emperor,
who caused it to be repaired, and fortified with a strong wall and deep ditch;
who moreover beautified it with many goodly public buildings, of most curious
architecture, as Cloisters, Galleries, the Theodorian Bathes, the gorgeous
Church of our Lady, the chief Saint, and others which are reckoned up by the
same Procopius. After this it continued under the Romans until the time of
Heraclius the Emperor, when as it was conquered and surprised by the Persians,
about the year of CHRIST six hundred and sixteen. It was taken, sacked, and
spoiled by the Egyptians, three score and six years after that, as Procopius
and others do constantly witness. Neither was this the last misery of this
city: for it being spoiled, rased almost to the ground, laid waste, and left
dispeopled and void of inhabitants, by the Mahumetanes; so continued unto the
days of one Elmahdi a Bishop, who, as Johannes Leo Africanus reports, gave
it unto certain people of that country, which were in number so few, that
they did not replenish above the twentieth part of it. The same author, an eye
witness of that which he wrote, affirms that of all this greatness and
glory, beside certain ruins of the walls and a part of the Conduit, there
remains at thus day not any whit or mention at all. This now in these our
days is the fate and form of this most goodly city. This is that city, which,
as Herodian testifies, in time past for wealth, multitude of people, and
greatness of circuit, did only yield it self inferior to Rome; and with
Alexandria of Egypt long contended for the second place. Item, this is it which
long since was of that power that it commanded all the sea coast of Africa from
Arae Philenorum, all along as far as to the Straights of Gibraltar: over which
they passing by ship, conquered all Spain, even up as high as the Pyreny
mountains. So that Appian, a grave writer, does deem the Empire and command
of this city, of equal value to the power of the far-commanding Greeks, or
wealth and riches of the brave Persian: which were an easy matter for one to
justify out of Strabo and Pliny, two authors of good credit. For this man
affirms, that this city commanded in Africa alone three hundred cities; and
it self contained seventy thousand men, daily inhabitants within the walls of
the same. Item, Scipio having conquered this city, transported from thence unto
Rome four hundred and seventy thousand pound weight of silver. Of this city,
(which, as long as it stood out, and was master of it self, as Trogus
witnesses, was esteemed as a goddess; and in Africa, as Saluianus writes,
was accounted as another Rome) there remains now no more but the bare name
only. Of the nation of the Africans, from whence they came into this country,
and what they were, Procopius, in the eleventh book of his History of the
Wandals, has written somewhat worth the observation.

Of Heauen-walke, (Via coelestis) which we in a word touched before, I think
it not amiss here in this place to speak somewhat more at large. In Victor
Vticensis these words following are read in all copies that ever I saw: Nam and
hodie si qua supersunt, subinde desolantur, sicut in Carthagineo Theatro aedem
Memoriae and viam quam Caelestis vocitabant, funditus deleuerunt. For viam, I
make no question but the author did write etiam, that it might be referred to
aedem, (or templum, as Julius Capitolinus in Pertinax, does call it) that is, a
chapel, temple or church. Furthermore, of this Caelestis dea, Heavenly
goddess, as Capitolinus in Macrinus and Trebellius Pollio in Celsus tyrannus,
do call her a goddess peculiar to Africa, there are here and there diverse
things to be observed in diverse authors. Aelianus writes that the Egyptians
do call Venus, Urania, that is, Heavenly. Venus caelestis (which is all one)
is expressed in an ancient piece of coin which I have of Iulia Soemia's. S.
Augustine in his book De ciuitate Dei does speak of the Heavenly Virgin
(Virgo caelestis) meaning doubtless the Heavenly goddess: but by that
epithet, I suppose, he had a purpose to distinguish her from that other; I
mean that wanton, which Julius Firmicus calls Venerem virginem. Herodian
names her Urania; and adds moreover, that of the Phoenicians she is called
Astroarche. Alilat, Herodotus says she was named, and affirms that it is the
Moon. S. Hierome in his treatise against Symmachus writes that the Persians
call her Mithra. idque pro diuersitate nominis, non pro numinis varietate; all
these different names signifying, as S. Ambrose says, one and the same
goddess. Apuleius in the sixth book of his Golden Ass, witnesses that all
the nations of the East countries do generally call her Zigia. There is a
notable record of this goddess, this Caelestis Venus, in the eleventh book of
the same treatise of Apuleius: which he there calls both by the name of
Regina caeli, The Queen of heaven; and Syria dea, the Syrian goddess. Of
whose diverse and manifold form or shape, the great variety of distinct and
different names of the same, if any man be desirous to know more particularly,
let him have recourse to this foresaid author, as also to Lucians treatise
entitled De Dea Syria; to which if he shall adioyne certain coins of the
Emperors, Seuerus and Antoninus his son, he shall understand that in this
one idol, almost all the divinity of the ancient Gentiles is comprehended.
Philastrius, who wrote of the heresies of former times, says that this
goddess was of certain heretical Jews named Fortuna caeli, Heavenly
fortune. I might easily be drawn to believe, that this very goddess is that
idol which Jeremy in the four and fortieth chapter of his Prophecy, does
term The Queen of heaven. To whom the wicked Israelites did offer sacrifice,
and reverence as to the immortal God. For it was not hard for this nation, so
prone and inclined to idolatry, out of their next neighbor Hierapolis, in
Syria, (where Lucian testifies this goddess was most religiously worshipped)
to transport this idol into their country Palaestina, as the Phoenicians did
out of the same Syria convey her beyond the sea to Carthage: under the conduct
and leading, as is probable (and which Herodotus justifies to be true) of
Queen Dido, Agenors daughter. Many other things of this goddess, out of
diverse other authors, might here to these be adjoined: but we at this time
are content, with Plato to demonstrate that there were two Venuses: of which,
one, whom the Carthaginians did worship, was this which hitherto we have spoken
of: that same, I mean, which was called Dea Syria, or Venus Assyria, as Oppian
in his first book of Hunting calls her. This, I do understand out of the
sixth book of Apuleius, was the same that Juno was, where he terms her
Vecturam leonis, The burden or carriage of the lion: and whom they report, Did
love old Carthage more than all the world beside: for here her charet always
stood, her weapons here did lie; as the Poet writes of her: whereupon I make
no question, the city Carthage was for the same reason also called Iunonia: for
so I find it recorded by Plutarch and Solinus. By her Charet, I understand the
Lion, upon which she rode: by her weapons, the thunderbolt, with the other
ensigns of the gods and goddesses, which in those forenamed coins are
expressed. Saluianus in his book De Prouidentia, makes mention of an Heavenly
god (Deus caelestis) an idol also of the Africans. Vlpianus in like manner, in
the Tit. qui haeredes institui possunt, deo haeredis, speaks of Caelestis
deus Salinensis Carthaginensis. But this is nothing to this our goddess. And
peradventure, we, purposedly speaking of Geography, have said too much of this
goddess.

EGYPT.
Egypt is the gift and favor of Nilus: For antiquity did verily think that
all that whole tract, which now this country does possess, was sometime a
creek or bay of the Midland sea; and by the often ouerflowing and tides of the
same, was at length filled up, and so made firm land. Whereupon perchance it
was of Stephanus called POTAMITIS, that is, if I may so speak, Brook-land or
Creek-land. Item, the same Stephanus, with Dionysius, calls it by diverse
other names; as, AERIA, AETIA, OGYGIA, HEPHAESTIA, and MELAMBOLOS. Apollodorus
calls it The country of the MELAMPODES, for that it is far more fertile
than any other country whatsoever. Item the fornamed Stephanus and Eustathius
do call it AETHIOPIA, by reason of the Aethiopians which do inhabit and dwell
there. It was also sometime long since called THEBAE, as Herodotus and
Aristotle do testify. In Holy writ, of Misraim the second son of Ham, (Genesis
10.6.) who first after the confusion at Babel, seated himself here, it is
named MESRAIM, as Josephus writes: by which name it is still to this day
known to the Arabians, their next neighbors round about them. Item, as the
learned Arias Montanus thinks, it is in some places called CVS, or Chus, of
Chus, father of the Aethiopians, eldest son to the said Ham. Again, Plutarch
in Osiris writes, that in the sacred writings of the Egyptians it was named
CHEMIA, of Ham, or Cham, (for thus diversely foreign writers express the Hebrew
let er Hheth, nay sometimes they wholly omit it: as in Ammon, their chief god,
which they worshipped, derived, as I think, from that cursed root) son to
Noe, and father of the aboue-mentioned Chus, and Misraim. And indeed Isidorus
says that the inhabitants do, to this day, in their own language, call this
country Kam. Yet Pinetus and Marmolius do jointly affirm (and that truly, as
we have before in the other Map of Egypt demonstrated) that the Egyptians
themselves, as also the Turks, do commonly call it (...) Elquibet, Elchibetz,
and Chibth. Lastly, Honorius writes that it was sometime entitled EVXAEA, but
upon what authority or ground, I know not: let him therefore justify the
truth of that his assertion.

The bounds of this province are these: upon the East it is confined with the
Arabian gulf ( Bahri'lkolzom, the Red Sea) Iudaea, and Arabia Petraea: on the
West with the mountains of Libya, and Marmarica (Barca) another country of
Africa: in the South it is severed from Aethiopia, (which they term Aethiopia
beneath Egypt) by the Greater Cataract or fall of Nilus (Catadupa, Tully, in
Scipio's dream, calls it, A place where the river is so penned up between
two mountains, that there it runs not, but rather falls and powers down
amain with such an huge and terrible noise, that some report that the people,
nere inhabitants thereabout, naturally, by that means, are all deaf or very
thick of hearing.) The Mediterranean or Midland sea, or, if you like better of
that, the Egyptian sea (so named of this country) does beat upon the North
coast of it. It is divided into The Higher Egypt, Middle Egypt, and Lower
Egypt. THE HIGHER EGYPT was also otherwise called Thebais: (Auicenna in the 47.
chapter of the 2. tract of his 2. book, (and in diverse other places often)
with Nubiensis my Arabian, calls it (...) Alsahid, or Said, of the theme
Saada, as I think, which signifies to ascend or rise up in height.) MIDDLE
EGYPT, sometimes called Heptapolis, and Heptanomia, (of the number of the
Nomoi, or shires of this part) and of some, Arcadia. THE LOWER EGYPT, which
later authors have named Augustamnica, is divided, in the Nouella of
Justinian, into The first, and The second. The book of Remembrances (liber
Notitiarum) divides Egypt into six provinces: namely, Libya the upper, Libya
the Nether, Thebais, Egypt (properly so called) Archadia and Augustamnica.
That part of the Lower Egypt which is enclosed between the sea, the two
mouths or floud-gates of the river Nilus, Heracleoticum and Pelusiacum, and
from their parting a little beneath Memphis in the South, is of all ancient
Geographers, Historians and Poets, in respect of the form and proportion of
it, called DELTA: for it is, as you see, of form triangular like unto D, the
fourth capital letter of the Greek alphabet. And this also of Ptolemey (who
was borne here, and therefore knew the state of it best) divided into Great
Delta, Little Delta, and Middle Delta, or the Third Delta. This Delta, as Pliny
testifies, of all the chief parts of the world was sometime accounted the
Fourth, and reckened up amongst the islands, and was not esteemed as any portion
of the continent. Under Egypt also, the three OSITAE, beyond the Libyan
mountains, are vulgarly comprehended: yea and LIBYA it self to, if a man may
give credit to Ammianus.

This country is watered with no other river than NILVS, of all the rivers in
the world the most famous and renowned, and therefore called and known by the
greatest variety of names: for the ancients have given this river many titles:
Some have called it AEGYPTVS (from whence the whole country took the name);
others OCEANVS (the sea, in respect of the greatness of it); AETOS (an eagle,
for the swiftness of the stream); NIGIR, MELAS, (or Melo) SIRIS, TRITON,
CHRYSORRHOAS (Gilden-flood, of the goodness and beauty of his waters); and
others, DYRIS. Orus Apollo writes, that the Egyptians in their language called
it NOYVM, that is, as I think, (...) sweet, pleasant, delightful: for so the
impostor Mahomet uses this word in the xxxij. Azoara of his wicked Alcoran; as
also the Arabian paraphrast, 2. Pet. 2.13. And R. Saadias Hagaon, Gen 2.15.
calls Paradise, Phardusi'nnaym; which the forenamed beast, at the 66. Azoara,
names Ginnati'nnaym, The pleasant garden. Josephus calls it GEON, or Ginon,
for that, as R. Solomon Yarhi the great Rabbine thinks, it runs from his
fountain, or rather rusheth on with great violence and hideous noise: Arias
Montanus affirms, that in the Holy Scripture it is named PHISON, because, as
the forenamed Jew says, his waters do spread themselves, swell, and wax so
high, that they flow over the banks, and water the whole land: And SIHOR, that
is, black, or troubled, for that the waters of the same, issuing from a durty
fenne, with great violence often breaking over into the meadows and marsh
grounds, by which it coasteth along for many hundred miles together, are thick
and muddy. The Georgians call it MAHARA, that is, swift, or violent: item,
BAHARI'NNIL, the sea of Nilus. The Africanes, as Marmolius writes, commonly
call it NIL, that is, in my judgment (...) Nehil, or Neil, of the theme
Nahal, which in the Arabian dialect signifies to be liquid, thin, dissolved
and apt to run: from whence in the Hebrew tongue is derived Nahal, a stream,
or swift water course. And this opinion of mine Pomponius Mela the worthy
Geographer does seem to patronage, where he writes, that In horum finibus
fons est, quem Nili esse aliquibus credibile est, Nuchul ab incolis dicitur,
and videri potest non alio nomine appellari, sed a barbaro ore corruptius, etc.
In the confines of Ethiopia there is a spring, which some do verily think to
be the head of Nilus, Nuchyl the inhabitants and country people do call it;
and it may seem probable that they name it by no other name, only the
barbarous word is corrupted and otherwise pronounced of forreners, etc. The
Abassines, Ethiopians and other nations inhabiting near unto it, do call it by
diverse and sundry other names, as thou may see more at large in our
Geographicall treasury. It vnladeth it self, as most men think, and all
antiquity has constantly affirmed, into the Midland sea by seven mouths or
very great floudgates. Ptolemey in his time made mention of nine, but of them,
two were false gates ( pseudostomata, he terms them) then almost quite
stopped up. Pliny speaks of eleven, of which four were false gates, the
other seven were great and more renowned. Herodotus also mentions two false
gates, but in all he speaks not of more than seven: with him Eustathius word
for word agrees. And that which of these mouths or falls are of this man
held for a truth, in others are held for false and contrariwise. The like
difference there is about the names and proper appellations of these mouths,
even in the best approved authors. Pliny makes Heracleoticum to be a diverse
and distinct mouth from Canopicum: in which notwithstanding, it seems, he is
much deceived: yea and Diodorus Siculus does flatly deny it, affirming that
Canopicum is otherwise named Herculeum, or Heracleoticum. All this difference
about the names, number, and nature of these mouths, if I mistake not the
matter, arose in continuance of time, from the change and alteration of places.
For every man describes them according to the situation of the sea coast, as
it then was in that time wherein he lived, which by violence of tide and
inundatious, drifts of sand and shifting of the same back again, in process
of time have sometime one form, sometime another, as is very likely, and they
do very well know which dwell near to the sea; who do never wonder to see
rivers change their channels and leave their ancient course: to see their
mouths sometime to be quite debt up with sand, and to seek new issues and
channels, where never none were before: or to see them which in former times
were not nauigable, but full of flats and shelfs, afterward to become deep and
able to entertain ships of good burden. Galen says, that this river, for
goodness of water, has but few peers. Arethaeus the Cappadotian says that
the water is thick: Plutarch in the eighth book of his Conuiual. calls it
turbidam troubled, and muddy: Statius in his fourth book Amor. says that it
is sweet, and cool without any unpleasantness in taste: and therefore he
adds in the same place that the Egyptians do never fear any want or dearth
of wine. Diodorus Siculus says, that for sweetness it does surpass all other
rivers in the whole world beside: which opinion of his, Pescennius Niger, an
Emperor, did long since avouch to be true, when he thus answered his garrison
soldiers, demanding wine of him, Have ye Nilus, and yet do ye demand wine? A
description of this river thou may see in Claudian. Of his inundation and
ouerflowing every year, beside others, read Strabo, and the Panegyricke
oration pronounced before Traian Emperor of Rome. Item Achilles Statius and
Heliodorus. He that lists and has more vacant time, to these may add
Plutarch, in his treatise of mountains. Mountains of Egypt, beside those
which Ptolemey mentions; namely, Montes Libyci, Troicus, Alabastrinus,
Porphyritis, Smaragdus, Aiaces, Acabes, Niger, Basanites, and Pentadactylus,
are diverse, as Nitria, Pherme, Sinopius, Climax, Eos, Lacmon, Crophi, and
Mophi. They have many Fennes, yet these two only, Moeris and Maria, are of name.

Ancient writers have divided this country into many Nomous, (Pliny expounds
it Shires or Counties, each having a Shiriffe or Lieutenant over it) of which
Herodotus mentions but 18. Diodorus Siculus says that there were of them 36.
and Ptolemcy speaks of 46. and reckons them up all by their several names:
and so many or more Pliny tells us of. Strabo writes of 36. and thus
generally points them out: Thebais, says he, contained 10. Delta as many:
and Middle Egypt 16. But we out of all sorts of old writers have found above
60. decyphered by their several names and situation, and have brought them
within the compass of this Map. But with Pliny we find by experience, that
the names of them often times are changed, and one place put for another: of
which we have spoken more fully in our Geographicall treasury. Eusebius
writes that in this one country there were more cities, than in all the whole
world beside. Egypt, beside their brag of great antiquity, boasts, that in
the time of Amasis their king, it had 20000. cities: and now it has very many,
as Pliny says, although they be but small and of no great account. Of these,
there stood but 3000. unto Diodorus Siculus his time. We, although map of
ancient Egypt with inset map of Alexandria AEGYPTVS ANTIQVA.
Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis Aut Iouis, in solo tanta est
fiducia Nilo. Lucanus 8. INCERTAE POSITIONIS LOCA: Amythaonia, Apeliotes,
Athos, Cephro, Cessan, Colluthium, Cusi, Elysius, Eurychorian, Focis, Litrae,
Melite, Metole, Metopium, Nelupa, Pyrae, Taeniotis, Tevochis, Tityus, REGIONES;
Dulopolis, Pentapolis, NOMI; Anthites, Anytios, Aphthala, Bathrithites,
Crambetites, Croites, Omnites, Phanturites, Ptenethu, Sebrithites,
Thermopolites. VRBES; Abotis, Achoris, Anthiti, Anysis, Arcadia, Arieldela,
Arype, Asphinum, Atharrabis, Auaris, Bosirara, Bucaltum, Burgus Seueri, Byblos,
Calamona, Cassanoros, Chiris, Chortaso, Cos, Cotenopolis, Crambutis, Crialon,
Cross, Cyrtus, Flagoniton, Gavei, Gazulena, Helos, Isidis opidum, Juliopolis,
Iustiniana II. nova, Maximianopolis, Mucerinae, Muson, Mylon, Naithum,
Narmunthum, Nupheum, Oniabates, Paprinus, Paremphis, Pasteris, Ptemengyris,
Pempte, Philadelphia, Pinamus, Paebebis, Polis, Precteum, Praesentia,
Proxenupolis, Psinaphus, Psinaula, Psochemnis, Python, Sadalis, Sampsira,
Sargantis, Scenae, Sella, Senos, Sosteum, Spania, Syis, Terenuthis, Thamana,
Theodosiana, Ticelia, Tindum, Tisis, Titana, Tohum, Toicena, Trichis, Tyana,
Vantena, VICI; Anabis Daphnusium Diochites, Nibis, Phoenix, Psenerus, Psentris,
Psinectabis, Psittachemnis. MONS; Laemon, FLVVIVS; Phaedrus. INSVLAE; Hiera,
Nichocis.

Horum vocabulorum, et ceterorum que in ipsa tabula describuntur, testimonia et
auctoritates veterum, videre sunt in nostro Thesauro Geographico.

Ex conatibus geographicis Abrahami Ortelij. cum Priuilegio decennali. 1595.
we have most diligently sought the names of them out of all manner of writings
and monuments of antiquity, yet we could not find mention of many more than
300. as this Map does give thee to understand. Thus mighty Jove does sport
himself in earthly things.

The Map does show the situation of this country, and therefore I shall not
need to speak ought of that. What the great fertility and richness of soil
of this province was, that worthy commendation vulgarly spoken of it, wherein
it is said to be, The common barn of all the world, does sufficiently show.
For, although it never raineth here, yet it breeds great plenty of men and
beasts, with all manner of cattle whatsoever. But this indeed their river
Nilus, by his inundation every year, brings to pass: whereupon, as the poet
Lucan writes, this is Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis, Aut Iouis:
in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo: A land that of it self is rich enough, It
need'th no foreign aid, Jove's help it scorn'th: so much it stand'th, upon the
bounty of the Nile. Yea they were wont proudly to vaunt, as Pliny testifies,
that they carried in their hands the dearth or plenty of the Romans those mighty
conquerours. The riches and wealth of this country one may easily esteem, by
that of Diodorus, who writes that the Kings of Egypt used yearly to have, of
Alexandria only, a Subsidy of above twelve thousand talents; item, out of
Strabo, in whom I read that Auletes, father to Cleopatra, levied yearly in
Egypt a Subsidy of twelve thousand and five hundred talents (which does
amount, according to Budey his estimation, to seventy five hundred thousand
French crowns:) and that, as he there adds, under a very loose and bad kind
of government. Eusebius in his second book de Praepar. Euang. reports that
Osiris their king did erect and make, for Jupiter and Juno his parents, and for
other gods, temples and shrines of beaten gold and silver: a marvelous show of
their wonderful wealth and riches Of the golde-mines of this country
Agatharcides has written something. But so many endless and immortal works
yet extant, having hitherto even to this day abode all assaults and injury of
time, do sufficiently show what their great command and power in former times
has been; as namely, are those huge Pyramides, so many Obelisks of solid
marble of one whole stone of such wonderful height, Colosses, Sphinges,
Statues, and Labyrinths: so many gorgeous Temples, of which this one country
could show more than all other countries beside whatsoever, as Herodotus, who
himself was an eyewitness of the same, does plainly affirm. The infinite
number of people and inhabitants (which Philo, in his book of Circumcision,
ascribes unto it) gather out of Josephus and Egesippus, who writes, that
beside the citizens of Alexandria (which as Diodorus testifies, were three
hundred thousand free men) there were seventeen hundred and fifty thousand
enrolled and made free-denisons of Rome at once.

It is a very prudent and wise nation, as we may understand by diverse
histories; very ingenious in the finding out of any manner of arts and
sciences: very quick of conceit in the search of any invention whatsoever, as
Aulus Gellius has left recorded. They are fit and able to attain to the
understanding of all manner of divine knowledge, as Macrobius affirms; who
also calls Egypt, The mother of all arts. But Trebellius Pollio, in the life
of Aemilianus the Tyrant, says that it is a furious and outrageous nation,
easily moved to sedition, tumults and rebellion upon every light occasion. And
Quintus Curtius says that they are a light headed and giddy brained people,
more fit to set matters abroach, than to follow them wisely, when they are once
afoot. Hadrianus the Emperor, as Flauius Vopiscus in the life of Saturninus
reports, calls it, Gentem leuem, pendulam, and ad omnia famae monimenta
volitantem: A light and unconstant nation, hanging as it were by a twined
thread, and moved at the least blast and puff of news that might stir.
Seneca to Albina calls it Infidam, A faithless nation. Ventosam and
insolentem. A bragging, proud and insolent nation. Pliny, in his Panegyricke to
Traian the Emperor, terms them: Nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis: No
country in the world I am sure, More vilder knaves did ere endure, says the
Poet Martial. Philo in his book of Husbandry says that they have Innatam and
insignem iactantiam, that is, that, they it bred in the bone that an Egyptian
should be a famous bragger. Yet he says that they are withal wise and
ingenious. Apuleius terms them Eruditos, Learned Egyptians: and Themistius
Euphrada, Sapientissimos homines, Very wise and cunning fellows. Philostratus
says, that they be much given to Theology and study of heavenly things. Strabo
has left recorded, that they were no warlike people. Of famous knaves they
possessed the middle rank, according to that old proverb, Lydimali, secundi
Aegyptij, tertij Cares. The Lydians are the great knaves, The Egyptians mean
knaves be, The clownish hobs of Caria are The least knaves of the three: as
Eustathius upon Dionysius Afer reports. Of the customs and manner of life of
this nation, Porphyrius speaks much in his fourth book, entitled, Of
abstinence from flesh meats. The most famous cities, which we have read of in
the ancient writers of both languages, are these: First, ALEXANDRIA, which
Athenaeus names The beautiful and golden city: the Council of Chalcedon,
The great city: Marcelline, The head of all cities in the world: Eunapius,
Another world. Dion Prusaeus says, that it is the second city of all that are
under the cope of heaven. The chief temple here called Sebasteum (or
Augusteum, that is, Princely, or, Imperial) has no peer. This thou may see
described by Philo Iudaeus in his book De vita contemplatiua. The Serapium,
another stately building in this city, so adorned and beautified with diverse
goodly galleries, many gorgeous and lofty columns and pillars, set out with
most lively imagery, and diverse and sundry other rare works and devices, the
best that the most excellent Architects of the world might invent, that next
after the Capitol, of which reverend Rome does so much glory, the whole world
it self has never seen ought more rich and sumptuous, at Ammianus
Marcellinus writes of it. Strabo in the seventeenth book of his Geography,
does most bravely describe the whole city. The like does Statius Alexandrinus
in his fifth book of Love: and Diodorus Siculus in the 17 book of his
history. Item, Hirtius in his book De bello Alexandrino. THEBAE was the next
city of great note, famous for the multitude of gates that sometimes it had:
and thereupon it was otherwise called Hecatompylos, Hundred-gate; and
Diospolis, Gods-towne: item, Busyris: and Thebestis, as S. Hierome affirms.
MEMPHIS, an ancient town, renowned by reason that their kings ordinarily kept
their Court here, was accounted one of the greatest cities of this kingdom.
COPTOS, a great Mart-towne, well frequented with Arabian and Indian merchants.
Of this city the whole province took the name, as we have elsewhere showed
before. ABYDVS, the Court and Imperial seat of Memnon their king, famous for
the temple of Osiris. I omit SYENE with diverse others: for it were more than
needs here to reckon them up all; because they offer themselves at an
instant, to him that shall but cast his eye on the Map. Besides that,
Herodotus, Diodorus, Pliny, Josephus, Marcellinus, Philostratus, Eusebius, and
diverse other good authors, yet extant, and in many men's hands, have most
eloquently and diligently described them, and set them out in their true and
lively colors.

The situation of this country, the rivers, mountains, cities and strange
things there to be seen, we have already described, according as the capacity
of the place assigned, would permit. Now it remains that with like breuity
also we do, out of Diodorus, Herodotus, Strabo, Athenaeus, Aelianus, Plutarch,
Philo, Eusebius, Pliny, Heliodorus, Lucian, Ammian, Clemens, Athanasius,
Prudentius, and others, speak something of their religion. Eusebius in his
first book De Praepar. Euang. teaches me, that the Egyptians were the first
men, that ever honored the Sun, Moon and the rest of the Stars, for
immortal Gods. But not only the Holy scripture, but even profane authors also
do plentifully testify that they were ever from the beginning the vainest men
of the world, and in this their divine service, and choice of gods, of all
other most fond and foolish: for beside the gods of the Gentiles, as Jupiter,
Juno, Vulcane, Venus, Bacchus, and such others, which they had and worshipped
common with all the world, (yet by their several and different names, as Isis,
Osiris, etc.) they moreover, as Artemidorus and Cicero in the third book of
the Nature of gods do testify, consecrated all kind of beasts and living
creatures. Herodotus affirms, that they accounted all manner of beasts which
they had in Egypt, as sacred and holy; so that, as Dion reports, they far
surpassed all nations of the world in multitude and variety of gods. Neither
did they only reverence these as gods, but also Anubis, Orus, Typhon, Pan (whom
they called Mendon and painted him with a goats head) and the Satyrs. Item
another, which, as Plutarch in Osiris writes, they called Cneph. Moreover,
Minutius Felix says, that they worshipped a man, and in the city Anabis did
all manner of divine service unto him, as unto an immortal God, as Eusebius
avouches; who furthermore adds, that they had another peculiar god, which
they called Canopus, and expressed in the form of a pot. (This Bembus has
described in his Hieroglyphicall table.) Athanasius and Heliodorus do
testify, that they accounted the water, but especially Nilus, for a god. Of
four footed beasts, the Crocodile, the Ox, the Mneuis, the Lion, the Bear,
the Cat, the Hee-goat, the Monkey, the Ape, the Bull, the Ram, the Shee-goat,
the Hog, the Dog, the Ichneumon or Indian rat, the Woolfe, the Sheep, the
Weazell, and the Shrewmous, they put into the inuentory of their gods. Of
fishes, the Oxyrinchus, the Lepidotus, the Latus, the Phagrus, the Maeotis
(fishes proper to the river Nilus) and the Eccle: beside the Cantharus, as
Porphyrius in his book De sacrificijs testifies. Of birds, the Eagle, the
Ibis, and the Hawke: beside the Owsell or Blacke-bird, if we may believe
Hyginus: and the Vulture and Raven, as Aelianus affirms: with the Sparrow, as
Porphyrius in his Treatise De Abstinentia, makes us believe. Josephus in his
second book against Appion says that they worship the Ferrit. They had beside
these, the Dragon, (or serpent) the Aspis (which they named Thermathis) and the
Beetle. The counterfets of these for the most part they adored and worshipped
as gods; yet some delighted rather to honor the very beast themselves alive:
so that it was felony for a man to kill any of them, although it were by
chance. And if so be that one of them should fortune to die of any disease,
they used to bury it with mourning and great solemnity. Item certain vegetable
things without life, as Onions, Leekes, and Garleeke, they did adore with
divine honor, as S. Hierome, against Iouinian, testifies of the Pelusiotae.
Nay they did not content themselves with these natural things, but even
certain monsters, such as were never seen in the world, they did in like
manner consecrate for gods: as the Cynocephalus, with a dogs head, worshipped
of the Hermopolitani: and Cepus, honored of the Babylonians. To these you may
add out of Athanasius the Serpenticipites, idols with serpents heads: and
Asinicipites, with asses heads. Moreover, in the villages and vpland towns,
Lucian reports, (I know not whether in jest or earnest) that some held the
right shoulder for a god: but those that dwelt over against them, the left.
Some did sacrifice to the one half of the head: others to a Samian cup or
dish. Diodorus Siculus reports, (I blush to speak it) that they accounted
the privy parts for a god. Eusebius, in the second book De praeparat. Euangel.
seems to restrain it only to Osiris. Clemens in the fifth book of his
Recognitionum adds (blush foolish idolaters, for I will tell it, and let
another say surreuerence) that the Egyptians worshipped the Iakes and a Part
for their gods; which also is auerred and justified by Minutius Felix. This is
that which Lactantius reports of them, that they reverenced certain beastly
and shameful things. Philo Iudaeus says, that all things under the cope of
heaven are consecrated and enrowled amongst the number of their gods. And
Sextus the Philosopher says of them, that there was not any thing which they
did not hold for sacred. Thus much of their gods: more thou may see of this
matter in Clemens, but especially in Iuuenall the Poet. These do hold
themselves to be the first and most ancient Nation in the world, and to have
first had the knowledge of God, to have built temples, groves and conuents in
honor of them, as Lucian testifies. Afterward, when the light of the Gospel
began to shine forth, here great swarms of Monks and Heremites were bred, and
from hence were spread and scattered all Christendom over, as we find in the
Records of the Primitive Church: so that a man may justly term this country
The Seminary or Nursery of all religions. Of the Philosophy, and
Hieroglyphicall secrets of the Egyptians, read the sixth book of Clemens
Alexandrinus his Stromaton. Item, Orus Apollo and Pierius his Hieroglyphics.

The VOYAGE of ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
IF Archelaus the Chorographer, whom Diogenes Laertius affirms to have
described all that part of the earthly globe or maine continent conquered by
Alexander the Great, that famous king of Macedony: or Beton [ Baeton, Athenaeus
calls him] and Diogenetus, whom Pliny writes were the measurers of the
journey of the said Alexander: or if the Commentaries of Strabo, which he says
that he composed of the histories and famous acts of that great Conqueror,
were now extant, it would out of all doubt have been an easier matter for us
to have made this map which here we purpose to set forth to the view and
benefit of the serious student of Geography, of the VOYAGE OF ALEXANDER THE
GREAT: But being destitute of those helps, first we have laid the plot of it
out of Ptolemey, and some other later writers. Then we have set down in it all
those particular places which Quintus Curtius, Arrianus and Plutarch do make
mention of in the history of this expedition. For these three, of all those
which have at large written of his life, and are come to our hands, have of
purpose handled this his voyage and expedition. To these, as helps, we have
adioined what we find making for this our purpose, in Strabo, Diodorus,
Trogus, Orosius and Plutarch, in that his book which he has entitled, Of the
fortune and prosperous success of Alexander, for these men, although they have
not purposedly intended that argument, yet notwithstanding by the way they have
showed themselves, in the setting out of his memorable acts, very diligent and
faithful authors. Item Philostratus, Solinus and Pliny have in like manner
done us some service herein. And while I look over all manner of histories
written either in Greek or Latin, by any other authors whatsoever, beside
those above named, I could pick very little or nothing out of them, that might
serve us in this our argument to any sted at all. For although some things may
be observed in the reading of Liuy, Valerius Maximus Polybius, Athenaeus,
Polyaenus, Aelianus, Seneca, Stobaeus, Quintilian, Apuleius, Dion Pruiaeus,
Maximus Tyrius, Theon Sophista, Plutarch in his treatise of Mounteins, and the
Panegyricke made to Maxim. and Constant. yet those do rather seem in my
judgment, to concern his private life, natural inclination, manners, virtues,
and vices, then this his voyage and expedition. Francis Iuret, in his
annotations upon Symmachus, does confess that he has by him the life of
Alexander the Great, written first in the Greek tongue by one Aesope, and
since that translated into Latin by Julius Valerius. This author as yet we
have nor seen, and therefore of him we say nothing. We have therefore (in the
description of this Empire of the Macedonians, the greatest, as Liuy in his
five and fortieth book names it, of all the whole earth, begun by this our
Alexander) performed what we could, not what we would. To this we have caused
the plot and portraiture of Jupiter Ammons oracle, famous, as Pomponius Mela
writes, for the certainty of his predictions, to be adioined for an auctuarie
and ornament; and for that it is so often named and mentioned in all ancient
histories: as also for that this our Alexander in this his expedition, went
unto this place, to demand of the Oracle what the issue and event of this his
journey should be. Lastly Curtins and Trogus do jointly affirm that he
commanded that his body, after his death, should here be buried although it be
certain that this was not performed: for his corpse was interred at Alexandria
in Egypt. Of it therefore out of sundry authors we have collected that which
follows.

The ORACLE of Jupiter Ammon.
THe place where the temple of Jupiter Ammon stood has round about it vast and
huge wildernesses, great heaps of hungry sand, round enclosed on every side
with waste and barren grounds, places wholly unmanured and uninhabitable. Here
are diverse large fields, as Arrianus, Curtius and Diodorus Siculus do describe
them, clean covered over with sand, like as we often times see low-meddowes
ouerflowed by the breaking in of some great river. The midst of this place
(Silius Italicus calls it Lucus fatidicus, The fate-telling wood) which
contains but a little plot of ground (for where it is broadest, it is, as
Arrianus writes, but forty furlongs, or at most, as Diodorus would have it,
not above fifty furlongs over) is beset with diverse sorts of fruitful trees,
namely, as Arrianus testifies, with olives and dates: or, as Theophrastus
writes, with a kind of Cypress, or sweet smelling aromaticall tree, which he
calls Thuia (our herborists call it, The tree of life) and with the Paliurus,
a kind of very sharp thorn, very plentifully growing in Palestina, wherewith
some learned men do verily think that our Savior Christ was crowned by the
Roman soldiers, and thereupon is of some called Christ's thorn: Yea, as
Diodorus Siculus reports, here do grow all manner of goodly trees, but
especially all sorts of fruit trees, most plentifully. Pliny also does highly
commend the goodly palm trees of this place. It is watered with diverse
pleasant and wholesome wels, springs and brooks; and by that means it is
inhabited, by the Ammonij, a people which dwell in cottages here and there
scattering a good way distant one from another. In the midst of this place
there was a tower enclosed with three walls, whereof the first compassed about
or defended the ancient palace of their kings ( tyrannos, Curtius calls
them) within the second were kept their wives, children and concubines: here
also stood the temple or Oracle of that god. Within the third and inner wall
the guard and armed men did keep and give their attendance. Diodorus Siculus
reports that before the Oracle there was a fountain, in which, all things
whatsoever were to be offered to the god, were first washed and purified. And
thus far of the natural situation of this Oracle, and the manner of the
building and architecture of the same: now it remains that we should in like
manner speak something of the form and shape of this Libyan god, as Dionysius
Afer terms him; whom they painted not, as we usually do, casting of
thunderbolts, but with a pair of rams horns upon his head, as Arnobius, Ovid,
Macrobius and others have left recorded: and those very crooked and wreathen,
as Lucian and Ovid have written. Lucian says that they expressed him in the
form and shape of a ram: yet Herodotus seems to understand it only of his
head and face: In Martianus he is painted with a pair of rams horns and a
iagged or fringed coat: this also is that which Atheneus means when he
calls it (...), as Natalis and Dalechampius do both understand the word. Yet
Quintus Curtius does set him out after another manner, in this his description
of him; That which is worshipped for a god, has not the same shape and
similitude, which commonly artistes and workmen have attributed to gods: it
was like a bosse ( vmbilicus, he calls it) made of smaragds and orient
pearls. This idol, when an answer was demanded of it, was carried by the
Priests in a golden boat or ship, with diverse and sundry silver goblets and
pieces hanging round about on each side of the same. Immediately after it did
follow a great company of old women and young maidens, singing in that their
language a rude and homely song: whereby they do verily believe they do much
please their god, and do win him to give a good and certain answer to the
demand that then is made unto him. The like does Diodorus Siculus report of it,
who moreover adds, the Priests daily attendant here were in number
foureskore at the least. Why he was painted with rams horns amongst others,
Germanicus and Hyginus in Ariete, do plainly teach us: when they write that
this temple was first erected by Bacchus, in honor of the ram, ( (...)
Hamil, the Arabians, Dutch and Spaniards call him) wh ch was his guide and
conducted him, (being himself with his whole army in great distress, and
almost famished for want of drink) through these desert and sandy
wildernesses, unto this place well served with water and abounding with diverse
wholesome wels and springs. Yet I am not ignorant that Herodotus does bring
another reason of the same. This temple (in which, as Plutarch in his book
entitled, Of the ceasing of Oracles, writes, a lamp did burn continually)
was first erected, as Herodotus gives out, by Thebana Aegyptia, an Egyptian
woman, a Priest of Thebes. Diodorus Siculus teaches us that it was built by
Danaus an Egyptian. Pausanias he writes that it was so called of a certain
sheepeheard, which first built a temple here to Jupiter. Virgil in his fourth
book of his Aeneides, seems to ascribe the building of it to Hiarbas King of
the Getuli, and son of Jupiter. All other ancient authors for the most part
do derive the name from the Greek word (...), which signifies the sand; so
that Jupiter Ammon, should be nothing else but Sandy Jove: yet Plutarch
contrary to all men, in Osiris, writes that of the Egyptians it was called
(...) (or Thamos, as Plato in his dialogue entitled Phaedrus, affirms) which
word in that language he there moreover adds, does signify an hiding, or any
thing that is hid and secret, for proof whereof he brings in Manethon
Sebennites, an Egyptian borne, for a witness: affirming withal that this idol
is corruptly and falsely called Ammon. And indeed the learned do know that in
the Chaldey tongue, (a language of near affinity unto the Egyptian) (...)
Hama, does signify to hide, or to conceal from the sight of other men's eyes:
in the eight and twentieth chapter of Job: item, to escape, and betake himself
to some place of refuge, to take sanctuary: except the copies in those places
be corrupt and faulty. But this is certain that (...) Tham, or (...) Tamtam,
in the same language does signify, to shut up, to lock up or hide from the
sight of others; as men do their treasures, answering directly to the Hebrew
theme (...) Thaman. I cannot but wonder when I call to mind the inscription of
an Egyptian obeliske or statue erected in the city Thebes by king Ramesses,
where there is often mention made of Ammon, as thou may read in the seventeenth
book of Ammianus Marcellinus. This Oracle, although it was of all heathen
nations far and nere round about, had in great reverence, and held for most
certain and true: yet Strabo the famous Geographer, who lived in the days of
Tiberius Caesar, at such time as Christian religion began more clearly to
shine forth; and Plutarch, who lived in the time of Traiane the Emperor, do
jointly and plainly testify, that in their times it was very much neglected.
Prudentius, the Christian poet, who wrote about the reign of Theodosius,
justifies the same in this his verse: Nec responsa refert Libycis in syrtibus
Ammon: God Ammon on the Libyan sands, now answer'th no demands at all. In the
days of Justinian, it seems by Procopius in the sixth book Aedificior. that
it was altogether desert and unfrequented. Whether this be that same place
which is described by Clemens Alexandrinus in his Stromaton, and by Eusebius in
his book De praeparat. Euangel. under the name of Gerandryus, placed by them
in these sands, I would gladly learn of those that are more learned than my
self. About this Oracle which we have hitherto described, there is on the East
side, a forest or grove, Curtius calls it nemus, Solinus, lucus: but Diodorus
says it is a chapel: templum. within which there is Aqua Solis, or, as others
term it Fons Solis, the fountain of the Sun: whose water is, as Ovid
writes, at noone as cold as stone, at eeuen and morn as hot as heat of Sun.
This fountain is thus described by Pomponius Mela: This fountain, says he,
as soon as any man shall but touch it with his hand, it presently begins to
swell, and so to toss up the sand and to rise in great billows like unto the
maine sea in tempestuous weather. At midnight it boileth: by and by, it
begins by a little and little to cool, until at length about the break of
day it becomes key-cold: Then as the Sun arises, so it waxes by degrees
colder and colder, until at noone it becomes as cold almost as ice. After
noone it begins again to wax warm, and at night it becomes very hot;
and so as the night passes it grows still hotter and hotter, until at last
about midnight it become almost scalding hot. The very same does Curtius,
Diodorus, Herodotus, Pliny, and Lucretius write of this fountain. The same
Lucretius in his sixth book does yield the reason of this strange miracle.
Item, S. Augustine and Solinus do speak the like almost word for word of it.
But Solinus and also Isidorus do make mention of another spring not far from th
s place: whose water, as they say, does bind together the dust and clods, and
presently turns embers and ashes into firm ground and solid turffe: Or as
Lucane in his ninth book writes, Qui putria terrae alligat, and domitas vnda
connectit arenas: which rotteth and turns all things to fertile solid ground:
and scattering sands in massy lumps of stone it tieth. Again Antonius
Liberalis makes mention of another spring, which he says, at Sunset does
congeale and as the Sun comes toward it again does stand st ll. Item Pliny
tells of another spring in the country of the Troglodites, a people nere
inhabiting to this place, which about noone is sweet and cool, but at midnight
it boileth and grows to be very bitter. I will surcease to speak any one
word more of these things, after that I have added that which I have read in a
certain epistle of Synesius, unto his friend Euoptius, of the inhabitants and
people dwelling nere this temple of Ammon, namely that the women have here
such great paps, that they do not give their children suck as here they use,
but do cast their breasts over their shoulders and do give them suck behind
their backs. And lest any man should doubt of the truth heerof, hear see what
Iuuenall writes of the same in his Satyrs; In Meroe^ crasso maiorem infant
mamillam. In Meroe the teat often times is found much bigger than the sucking
child. Thus much therefore of the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, and the fountain of
the Sun. In the 30. chapter of the book of Job, in the original text (...)
Hamma is used of the Holy ghost for the Hebrew (...) Semes, the Sun, which in
the 19. Psalm does signify drought or a parching heat, such as is in those
countries nere the tropicks of the Sun: Item (...) Hamam, in the Arabicke
tongue signifies an hot bath, such as this fountain is, by the authority of
many authors described to be. Why then may we not say (as well for that this
Oracle or temple was built near unto this fountain, as also for the joy and
comfort, as is said before, that Bacchus and his consorts enioied by means of
the same) that this god and his temple took the name of Ammon, not of the
Sand, but of the Sun (Hamma) whereof the well or spring did bear the name;
or otherwise of Hammam, a bath? Surely the analogy is proper, and in regard of
the affinity of the languages, by ods the etymology more probable. For I cannot
easily be persuaded that the names of places here were fetched from Greece.
But of this argument we shall have occasion, God willing, offered to speak
more fitly and more co^^^ously. Pausanias in his Eliaca, amongst the goddesses
of Libya, reckons up Juno Ammonia, which was worshipped in her hair, but
this is beside our purpose. It remains only that we speak a word or two of
Memnon, which, Quintus Curtius reports, Alexande had also a great desire to
see. In map of the ancient Empire of Alexander the Great in east Asia, with
inset representation of the temple of Zeus-Ammon at Siwa ALEXANDRI MAGNI
MACEDONIS EXPEDITIO.
IOVIS AMMONIS ORACVLVM.
INGENIO, IVDICIO, ET ERVDITIONE PRAESTANTI, DOMINO HENRICO SCHOTIO, VRBI
ANTVERP. A CONSILIIS: AMORIS ET BENEVOLENTIAE ERGO, HANC TABVLAM DEDICAB.
ABRAH. ORTELIVS.

Cum Priuilegio Imp. et Ordinum Belgicor. ad decennium. 1595.

the 4. book of Quintus Curtius you shall find these words spoken of
Alexander. He had an earnest desire (and not without great reason although
there were also some reasons to the contrary) to see not only the high country
of Egypt, but even Ethiopia it self. The stately palace of king Memnon and
Thiton, famous for the great antiqury o^^, did force him to venture that way
almost beyond the tropicke of Cancer. Thus far Curtius. Strabo, Solinus and
Pliny, in the fifth book of his history of Nature, do describe this palace of
Memnon to have been in the city Abydus. Yet the same Pliny in his 36. book
writes that it was in Thebes which opinion Pausanias and Dionysius Afer do
confirm to be true. But here by Thebes I understand Thebais, or the country
of Thebae: for both Thebae and Abydus, were cities of this province. In this
palace was the image or statue of the said Memnon, as Pliny calls it: Strabo
says it was a Colossus: and Tacitus terms it S^xiam offigi^^a, a counterfeit
cut in stone. For, as Strabo testifies, it was made of one solid stone: of
color black, as Philostratus affirms: or red, as Tzetzes, I know not upon
what ground and authority, would make us believe. Pausanias and Philostratus
do write, that it was the image of a king sitting in his chair of estate.
Moreover the same Philostratus says that it did represent the form of a
beardlesse young man. Strabo records that in his time he saw the upper part of
this image broken off above the seat upon which it was placed. Which Pausanias
also does testify to be true, affirming that he himself had seen the same.
the other part, he says, is yet to be seen sitting. Philostratus writes that
it rests it self, or lying groueling upon the hands, and bears the shape
of a man that would willingly raise himself being down. This image, all the
forenamed authors do affirm, every day at sun rising (and, as Philostratus
reports, as long as the sun beams touched the same) did make a noise at the
mouth, much like to the sound of an harp; which is also avouched by Pausanias:
although we are not ignorant that Tacitus writes that it did speak and
counterfeit the voice of man. Pliny says that it did but crackle. It is
apparent that Lucian does but scoff and jest, (which is an ordinary thing in
him) when as he writes that he heard th s image speak, and that not after a
vulgar manner making a foolish and vain babbling, but to utter an oracle in
meter of 7 verses long. I do in like manner hold that of Tzetzes, in 64. section
of his 6. Chiliade (as also many other things in him in other places) to be but
a mere fable, when as he reports, that this image in the day time did
usually sing a pleasant song, but in the night a very mournful and lamentable
dittie. Peradventure he had this from Callistus, who writes that this image
when the Sun came toward it, did make a pleasant noise, but when it went from
it, it made a heavy and sorrowful sound. But of this noise or sound let us
hear Strabo, a grave author, a man of great credit and a diligent obseruer of
this strange wonder: I my self, says he, was present with Aelius Gallus,
together with a great multitude of his friends and soldiers that were with
him, about one of the clock in the day, and I heard a sound, but whether it
came from the basis, or from the colosies, or image it self, or from some of
those that stood about it, I was not able to discern, nor dare not for truth
affirm: seeing that by reason of the vncerainty of the cause, I had rather
suspect any thing, than to believe and teach that stones laid and joined
together in that manner should make a sound Eustathius upon Dionysius Aier does
observe that this was ordinarily done by a kind of instrument: but I dare not
give much credit unto him, who is often times himself too light of belief.
Pausanias writes that the Thebenes do flatly deny this to be the statue or
image of Memnon the Ethiopian, but to be indeed the counterfeit of Phanemophes,
a natural Egyptian borne. Item, that the heard say of some that it was the
image of Sesostris. Strabo writes that there be some which think Memnon to
have been called of the Egyptians Ismandes. Dion Prusaeus in his 31. oration
writes that it had no manner of inscription or letters written about it at all.
But it seems to have been the statue of Memnon, in regard that Heliodorus,
amongst the gods, worshipped by the Ethiopians, does also reckon Memnon for
one. Mention is in like manner made of this image in that verse of Iuuenall:
Diminio magicae resonant vbi M-mnone chordae; Where curtall'd Memnons harp, by
magic skill, with music sweet and warbling sound the ears does fill.
Dimidium, curtall'd, he calls it, as I think, because the upper part, as
we heard before, was broken off from the rest of the body, which Pausanius
says upon Cambyles: but Strabo rather thinks it to be done by an
earthquake. Upon the forenamed verse of Iuuenall, an ancient gloss writes
thus, (I deliver it for no truth; only take it as it is, corrupt and false) The
statue, says he, of Memnon, made of brass, holding an harp in his hands, at
certain hours made a pleasant sound. This king Caubis (Cambyles, I think he
means) caussed to be broken up, supposing that there had been within it some
engine or mechanical automaton, that had made this sound yet notwithstanding
the statue which had been made and consecrated by art magic, after it had
been opened, did still at certain times make a noice as before. But these are
mere fooleries: as also these following are, out of another ancient
interpreter of the same poet, as they are alleged by Ianus Do^^^ in his
commentaries upon Catullus; namely, that this statue or image did usually in
plain words salute both the Sun and the King: but after that Cambyses had
broken or cut off a piece of it, it saluted the Sun only, but not the King.
The Chronicle of Eusebius relates, from the opinion of the common people, th t
it spoke until the coming of our Savior Christ. And thus much of this statue
of Memnon, which Curtius says Alexander had a great desire to see: the reason
of whose strange miracle, Tacitus reports, Germanicus Caesar did much labor
to conceive: and which, Spartianus testifies, Septimius Seuerus the Emperor
did very diligently view, and behold with great admiration.

By that description of Jupiter Ammon in Curtius, it seems that he meant to
express unto us two forms of it: viz. one which was accounted to be his
image or counterfeit, the other was that which was worshipped for a god: that
had the shape of a ram, this the form of a bosse (vmbilicus) For I
understand by the word vmbilicus, any high thing that steeketh out (as the
nauil in a man) in manner of a pyramid, or conus round or square: Like as in
books almost finished, as Porphyrius testifies, they ordinarily used to do
either for ornament or some special purpose; yea and yet to this day still
they are put upon the outside in form of a round globe. For men of ancient
families were wont, as we do gather by many circumstances, often times in this
rude manner to point at their gods, rather then truly to express them in
their true form and proportion. In the temple of Delphos, as Strabo in the 6.
book of his Geography reports, there was a bosse preserved, curiously lapped
up in skarfes and ribbends, to demonstrate and show unto the world, that this
place was in Vmbilico, that is, in the midst or center of the whole earth:
and it was made, as Pausanias writes, of pure white marble. For the statue or
image of the goddess Venus, which was to be seen at Paphus in Cyprus, as
Tacitus reports, was a continual circle, broad at the bottom, with a thin
edge or brim, rising up narrower and narrower by degrees, in manner of a
pyrarnis. Maximus Tyrius in his 38. oration speaks the same of it, almost
word for word: but that he says it was like a white pyramid. The same author
in the same place writes, that the Arabians portraitured their god in form of
a square or cubicall stone: and as Suidas affirms, it had no manner of carved
work upon it at all. But this he speaks of the Arabians of Petiaea, and
withal adds that this their god is called Mars. Minutius Felix makes the
same god to be but a rough stone, vnhew'd or vnpolish't. Liuy also testifies
that the Pessinuntij, a people in Phrygia, did honor a stone for the mother of
the gods. Arnobius in his 6. book says that it was a flint stone, of no great
bigness, of color black or very dark and duskish, very craggy, rough and
uneven. Prudentius also in his 7. book says, that it was of color brown or
inclining to black. Herodianus reports almost the same of the form of the
statue of the Sun or Elagabalus, that Quintus Curtius does of his god Ammon:
These are his words as you may read in his 5. book: They have no image carved
and made by art of man, after the manner of the Greeks or Romans, to
express the similitude of that god: But there is a very great stone, round at
the bottom, and tapred upward almost in manner of that Geometrical body which
the Mathematicians do call Conus. The Sicyonij, citizens of Sicyona city in
Peloponnesus in Greece, as Pausanias writes, did make their Jupiter Milichius
in form of a pyramid or taper. The Semni, a sect of Philosophers in India, as
Clemens Alexandrinus reports, did adore and do religious service to a
pyramid. Hither peradventure that sign of the profane Sacrament mentioned by
Firmicus, is to be referred. Yea and the Romans themselves under this
forenamed figure doubtless did mean to express some god or other, as
appears by that scaffold or chair, described by the foresaid Herodian, made
in manner of a turret or lantern, in which their Emperors were crowned and
enstalled, and was indeed of them enrowled amongst the number of their gods or
saints as you please to term them. For this also was so built that it did rise
from the bottom upward less and less by degrees, until at length it came to
the highest and last room, which was the least and narrowest of all. Hither
also are to be referred those obeliskes or pyramides of the Egyptians, built in
form not much unlike those Vmbilici, before mentioned, dedicated also to the
Sun. Item those spires (metae) in the theaters dedicated to the Dioscuri or
Tyndarides. The fire (which signifies the goddess Vesta, (...) Esta, the
Chaldees call the fire) also was expressed in this form, whose temple was
built round, and tapered upward. All which do come very near to the form of a
bosse (Vmbilicus) or that Geometrical body called by them Conus. Out of these
I gather that the ancient reading in the old imprinted copies of Quintus
Curtius, which have Vmbilico similis, like a bosse, is much better and more
probable, than that late edition set out the other day by a learned man, which
reads, Vmbilico tenus arieti similis, to the nauill like a ram. But all
these will appear more plain and clear to the reader by the comparison of
certain moneys and coins, as may be seen in those authors which have of
purpose written of the ancient Roman coins. Moreover certain nations also
(although this be not altogether to our purpose, yet I take it not amiss to
add a word or two of it, by the way) were wont to attribute no great beauty
to their gods. For Arnobius writes that the Scythians for the sign or idol of
their god did use a skene or short sword. The Thespij, citizens of Thespia, a
city in Boetia in Greece, did adore and do divine honor to a bough of Progne:
The Romans for Quirinus (or Romulus, as some think) to a spear. The Samij
did reverence a well for Juno: and the Carij, a rough and vnhewed piece of
timber, for Diana. Pausanias witnesses that the Sicyonij honored Diana
Paetroa, under the form of a column or rude pillar rough and unpolished.
Maximus Tyrius reports that the Celtae did do reverence to a very high oak as
unto the sign or image of mighty Jove. The same author testifies that the
Paeones for the Sun, did divine honor to a little dish or platter put upon
the top of a long pole. Tertullian tells us that Pallas Attica, and Ceres
Farrea were put upon the end of an ill-fauor'd pole, rugged stake or rough
piece of wood. Faria, or Pharia, which Lipsius likes better, to whom also I
assent, for that in a certain coin which Antonius Augustinus sets out in
his Dialogues, together with the image and picture of this goddess, there is
this inscription ISIS PHARIA. seeing that also as Herodotus and Plutarch do
testify, that this same goddess is the same that Isis, which is worshipped of
the Egyptian, is: item that Isis is the same that Dea Pessinuntia is, and this
the same that Cybele. So that Pharia, as he would have it, should be the same
with Aegyptia, understanding thereby Isis of Egypt. Moreover Minutius Felix
makes mention of Pharia Isis. Pausanias in his Achaica writes that in times
past it was an ordinary thing generally practiced by all the Grecians to
worship rude and unpolished stones for their gods. Item, Herodotus in Clio does
writnesse that the Persians were not wont to make any images, to rear any
temples or to build any altars to their gods. We read also that it was the
custom of some nations never to make any image, portraitures or pictures of
their gods at all. For Tacitus writes that the Syrians never made any
similitude or temple to their god Carmel, only they built him an altar, and did
adore him with a religious worship. The same author says, That the Germans
did make no similitudes of their gods: nor did ever attribute unto them the
shape and feature of any mortal man: and moreover he adds, that they did see
them only in their devotions. Strabo says that the Persians did neither erect
images nor altars to their gods. Silius Italicus speaks thus of the chapel
of Hercules at Caliz: Sed nulla effigies, simulacraue nota Deorum, May ite
locum and sa^ro impleuere timore. Yea and the Romans themselves, as Varro
tells the tale, for more then an hundred and fifty years together, did
worship their gods without any images or idols at all. And indeed Pliny plainly
affirms, that it is the weakness of man's nature to seek for any
similitudes or counterfets of them. But because there is nothing more absolute
and perfect than God, it is very probable that the Gentiles did reverence him
under that form, wherewith in all their actions, when they come to perfection,
they are ordinarily beautified, as with a most rich and costly ornament. Why
they used to carry this god Ammon in a boat or pinnace, peradventure we may
understand by that of Cornelius Tacitus: where he teaches that the Sueui were
wont to make the image of Isis in manner of a small bark or pinnace: thereby
to show that their religion and manner of service of their gods used by them,
was brought from beyond the sea from foreign countries. Pausanias has left
recorded that the Cyreneans did at Delphos dedicate their God Ammon sitting in
a wagon [ Vehiculum, the interpreter calls.] Sic bona posteritas [Romana
scilicet] Puppim formauit in aere, Hospitis aduentum testificata Dei. So
Romans old for love did make This ship, of purest brass, To testify that
this their god A far borne stranger was: this Ovid in this first book of his
Fasti, speaks of the Roman god Ianus. So that what the Romans meant by this
their ship, [puppis] that they meant by their pinnace or wagon [nauigium, or
vehiculum.] Moreover, amongst the Germans also in an island of the maine sea,
as Tacitus testifies, there was a place which he calls Castum nemus, in
which there was a wagon consecrated and sanctified, covered over with a cloth,
and adored as a saint. But peradventure we have been too tedious in this
argument.

As we have out of old and ancient histories laid down two diverse and sundry
forms of this god Ammon; so out of the same it is very probable that he had
two diverse temples: For Diodorus in his seventeenth book in the description of
this temple, does say that it was built by Danaus the Egyptian. And the same
author again, in his first book says, that Ofiris also erected a temple for
Jupiter Ammon, in Thebes a city in Egypt: which was all of beaten gold, clean
contrary to that which we have described before, as appears out of these
verses of Lucane in his 9. book: Non illic libyeae posuerunt ditia gentes
Templa, nec Eois splendent donariagemmis. In Egypt it was, not in Libya, as is
manifest out of the second book of Herodotus. Where you shall find this
description of it; Jupiter being not willing that Hercules, who came to visit
him, should see him, yet at length by importunity being overcome, used this
device to deceive him; He took a ram, flead him and cut off his head: this
fell, with the head, wool and all, he put upon him, and thus shows himself
to Hercules. Whereupon the Egyptians have decreed to make the image of Jupiter
and to picture him with a rams head. For him every year, upon a certain
day, they kill a ram in like manner as before is showed, and the skin they
put over the image of the said etc. And because the temple of this god Ammon
was in the city Thebes, which thereupon is of good writers called Diospolis,
that is, Jove's town; I was of opinion that the Holy scripture did also in some
place or other speak of it. And indeed in the thirtieth chapter of Ezechiel
the septuagints for the Hebrew No, have D^^spolu. and again in the third
chapter of Naum, for No Amon, they have (...). It is very probable therefore
that Amon ((...), Hamon, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies a multitude) was
the proper name of this place.

THE VOYAGE OR Navigations of AENEAS, especially gathered out of the renowned
Poet VIRGILL: with some other matters perteining to that history, collected
out of others.
TRoy being surprised, sacked and burnt, Aeneas betook himself for a refuge
to the mount IDA, a hill in the province of Troas, in Asia Minor, a place very
well wooded and served with water: from thence, forsaking his native soil, he
went to ANTANDRVS a town in Mysia abutting upon the Aegean sea, [taking with
him, as Xenophon says, all his kindred both by fathers side and mothers side]
with a navy of twenty sail puts forth to sea, and at length landeth in
THRACE, [or as Dionysius Halicarnasseus writes, at PALLENE a promontory, and
city of the same name, in Macedony:] near unto which he built the city Aenos
(Oeno, or Inos, they still call it.) [Lycophron says, that he came to CISSVS,
(Cis) a hill of Almopia a shire of the kingdom of Macedony. Liuy writes, that
he stayed about OLYMPVS.] But our author reports, that from Thrace he came
to DELOS, (Sdiles) an island in the Aegean sea, of the number of those which the
ancient Geographers called Cyclades. [Here he married Lauinia the daughter of
Anius, a Priest belonging to the temple of Apollo, as you may see in a Treatise
written of the original of the Roman nation: but let them believe him that
list, for Halicarnasseus condemns him for a very lying and fabulous author.]
And from Delos he setting sail, saluted NAXOS, (Nicsia,) PAROS, (Pario)
DIONYSA, OLEARVS (Quiniminio) and other islands of the Aegean sea, and the third
day after arrived at CRETA (Candy) where he built the cities RHOETEVM and
PERGAMEA. From hence putting off to sea again [and, as Dionysius
Halicarnasseus writes, saluting CYTHERA, (Cerigo) an island in the Midland sea,
where he built a Temple dedicated to the honor and service of the goddess
Venus: then CYNETHIVM, a foreland or promontory of Peloponnesus, and there
laid the foundation, as Pausanias and Halicarnasseus have left recorded, of
the cities APHRODISIADES and OETIA] and the fourth day after landed at the
STROPHADES, (Striuali) two islands in the Ionian sea. From these he passed to
ZACYNTHVS (Zante) [where he dedicated, as Halicarnasseus writes, a chapel to
Venus:] then passing by DVLICHIVM, SAMOS, NERITVS, and ITHACA, came to LEVCATE.
Thence to ACTIVM near the Temple of Apollo, and so leaving CORCYRA, (Corfu,)
coasting along by CHAONIA a province of Epyrus in Greece, [and AMBRACIA, as the
same author affirmeth] he came at length to BVTHROTVM (Golfo de Butronto.)
From hence on foot over land, he went and visited DODONA, a city of Epyrus,
and the CERAVNIAN mountains, and upon the third day came to Anchises Haven,
ANCHISAE PORTVS, where his ships meeting him, he crossed over the Hadriaticke
sea into ITALY; [his consorts landed on this side the forland IAPYGIVM (Cabo de
S. Maria,) himself with some few others, as the same Halicarnasseus
witnesses, at the forland or promontorie ATHENAEVM (Rossia, or Cabo de
Campanella) so named of the Temple of Minerua, called of the Greeks Athene,
which stood in this place.] From thence he passed by sea to TARENTVM, (Taranto)
LACINIVM, (Cabo delle Colonne) CAVLON (Castro veto, or vetore) and SCYLACEVM
(Squilacci.) Afterward sailing by SCYLLA (Scyllo) and CHARYDIS, (Galofaco,) by
the CYCLOPES, (giants, or a certain kind of people near mount Ethna in
Sicilia, of an extraordinary stature and strength, feined by the Poets to have
but one eye and that in the midst of their foreheads,) the mouth of the
river PANTAGIAS, (Porcari) by the bay of MEGARA, a sea town sometime called
Hybla, by THAPSVS, a neckland or peninsula now known by the name of Manghisi,
by the forland PLEMMYRIVM, (Cabo Massa Vliuien) by ORTYGIA, by the river
ELORVS, (Abyso, or Atellari) by the forland or promontory PACHYNVS, (Cabo
Passaro) by the city CAMARINA, by the CAMPI GELOI, by the rivers GELA,
(Cherza, or Salsi,) by AGRAGAS, (Draco) by the city SELINVS, (Salemo, or Terra
de Pulici) then by the promontorie LILYBAEVM (Cabo Boei, or Cabo Coco) and so
at length to the forland DREPANVM, (Trapani) From hence leaving the strait
course, he fetches a compass about by those dangerous rocks which our author
calls SAXA or ARAE, directing his course toward CARTHAGE, in Africa, where
having stayed a while with Queen Dido, who enterteined him and his most kindly
and in the best manner, at length hoiseth sail, and returns back into
SICILIA again; here landing his men [at the river CRIMISVS, as Halicarnasseus
writeth] after diverse games, iusts or triumphs; he ordained that those days
yearly, for ever after should be solemnly kept as holy, in honor of Anchises
his father: and moreover also he built the city ACESTA or Egesta [and ELIMA
(Alymite, or Palymite) if we may believe Halicarnasseus.] Item he founded the
TEMPLE of Venus Idalia, upon the top of mount Eryx (monte S. Iuliano.) Yet
Pausanias in his Arcadia makes another manner of relation of Anchises and of
his burial. Here putting to sea again, he comes to the SIRENVM SCOPVLI,
certain dangerous rocks upon the coast of Italy, in the bay of Cumae; and
first casting anchor at PALINVRVS (Paliuro, or Cabo Palemudo) [at LEVCASIA,
(Licoso) as Halicarnasseus says: or, INARIME (Ischia) and PROCHYTA (Profida)
as Ovid affirmeth] and then again at CVMAE where putting to land he goes to
Sibylla's cave, ANTRVM SIBYLLAE, and to AVERNVS lake (Lago di Tripergola)
thence to the airie mount MISENVS, (Miseno) to CAIETA, King Lamus city, at
this day called Gaietta, and lastly to the river TIBRIS, where with seven of
his twenty ships remaining, he enters, landeth his men and goods, and so
ends his seven years long and dangerous voyage, which we have thus
described, as you see partly out of Virgill, Ovid, and Lycophron, famous poets:
and partly out of Liuy, Halicarnasseus, Pausanias, and Xenophon, as worthy
renowned historians.

But here I cannot omit that which I have read in Pausanias his Phocica,
namely, that certain of Aeneas his consorts, severed and driven from his
company and the rest of the navy by storm and tempest, did seat themselves in
the i will SARDINIA. Item, it is worth the observation that Halicarnasseus and
Liuy do jointly testify, That Aeneas did not stay at Tibris, but at LAVRENTVM,
(S. Laurentij,) and landed not with above six hundred men, as Solinus
reports: which indeed seems somewhat more probable and like to be true: for
that both by ancient histories and modern experience, we find that Tibris,
the river which runs by Rome, is not capable of a fleet or navy of any
bigness. Therefore it is to be thought that the Poet fained this of his own
head, or else spoke it in love and commendations of this river. Neither was it a
voyage of seven years, but of two at the most, as Halicarnasseus does plainly
affirm: Solinus out of Cassius Hemina avouches the same. There are some, as
Strabo in the thirteenth book of his Geography witnesses, which do think all
this voyage to be a fained tale and fiction of the Poets: and that Aeneas
stayed still in Troy, and succeeded in the kingdom after his father, as
likewise his childrens children did after him for many generations. Of this
opinion Homer does seem to be. Xenophon in his book of hunting, tells this
tale another way, where he writes, That Aeneas manfully defending his father,
and carefully preserving the gods of his father and mother, gat himself a
great reputation and credit amongst all sorts of men, for that his piety and
religion; insomuch that even the very enemies themselves, granted to him only,
above all other which they had taken captive in the surprising of Troy, that in
the sacking of the same no man should spoil or lay hand of ought that was his.
Moreover, that that his voyage unto Carthage is not mentioned by any approved
historian, but fained by the poet, Macrobius does plainly teach. Item, Appian,
a writer of good credit, does much discredit that story of his meeting and
communication with Queen Dido, who writes that CARTHAGE was built by the same
Dido five hundred years before the destruction of Troy. Again, the grave
historiographer Trogus, in his eighteenth book does make a relation of the
life and death of this Dido or Eliza far different from this. But the poet,
as it seems, had a purpose to disgrace this city and to strike a deep
impression of the fatal hatred which it always bare toward the Romans, like
as long before, Homer under the person of Helen had showed how much the Greeks
in heart did malice the Trojans. Whereupon not unfitly, I think, this Epigram
of Ausonius which he wrote upon the counterfeit or picture of Queen Dido may
here to those former be adioined: Illa ego sum Dido vultu, quam conspicis
hospes, Assimulata modis pulchraque mirificis. Talis eram, fed non, Maro quam
mihi finxit, erat men's: Vita nec incestis laeta cupidinibus. Namque nec Aeneas
vidit me Troius vnquam: Nec Libyam aduenit classibus Iliacis. Sed furias
fugiens, atque arma procacis Iarbae, Seruaui, fateor, morte pudicitiam, Pectore
transfixo: castos quod pertulit enses. Non furor, aut laeso crudus amore dolor,
Sic cecidisse iuuat, vixi sine vulnere famae. Vlta virum, positis moenibus,
oppetij. Inuida cur in me stimulasti Musa Maronem, Fingeret vt nostrae damna
pudicitiae? Vos magis historicis, lectores, credit deem, Quam qui furta Deum,
concubitusque canunt. Falsidici vates: temerant qui carmine verum: Humanisque
Deos assimilant vitijs. Which Priscian, or whosoever else he were, that was the
author of that ancient translation of Dionysius Afer, does to the same sense,
but in far fewer words, utter in those two verses: Atque pudicitiam non
perdit carmine falso, Quae regnans felix Dido per secula viuit. This fained
tale, first forged in faithless poets brain, It never may, I trow, the honest
fame distaine, Wherein thou Dido long did live amongst thine own, And still
of wiser sort thorowout the world is known.

map of the ancient Mediterranean AENEAE TROIANI NAVIGATIO Ad Virgilij sex
priores Aeneidos.
Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrahami Ortelij Antverp.

DOCTRINA ET HVMANITATE CELEBRI DNO BALTHASARO ROBIANO, R.P.ANT. THESAVRARIO,
VIRO ANIMI CORPORISQ. DOTIBVS ORNATISS. Ab. Ortelius veteris amicitiae memor
dedicabat.

Sum pius Aeneas, raptos qui ex host Penates Class veho mecum, fama super
aethera notus. Bis denis Phrygium conscendi nauibus aequor, Vix septem
conuulsae undis, Euroque supersunt: Europa atque Asia pulsus. Aeneid. i.

The PEREGRINATION of ULYSSES.
THe manifold wandering voiages of Ulysses ( Errores, Ausonius in diverse places
calls them) were from all antiquity so famous and renowned amongst all men,
that The Peregrination of Ulysses, grew into a byword, and to be spoken
prouerbially of any hard and difficult travel that any man did undergo, as
Apuleius, in the second book of his Golden Ass, does testify. Therefore for
the benefit of the Readers and Students of that history, and at the earnest
request of sundry learned men, my friends, I have thought good out of ancient
Historians, to describe the twenty voyages of this famous Captain, who, as
Tzetzes writes, with twelve ships, set forward from TROY, (or, as the
Greeks call it, Ilium,) a city of Troia or Troas, a province of Asia Minor,
continually wandering up and down until at last he came to ITHACA, an island in
the Ionian sea, where he was borne, now called, as Sophianus and others do
testify, Valle di Compare, or Teachi, as Porcacchius affirms; but of the
Turks Phiachi, as Leunclaw witnesses. Therefore after the ten years siege,
taking and sacking of Troy by the Greeks, Ulysses or Odysseus as they call
him, having a purpose to return home to his own country, shipped himself and
his company, put forth to sea, and arrived within a few days upon the coast
of the CICONES, a people of Thracia in Europe, whose chief city ISMARVS,
(Zimarus, Dictys Cretensis falsely calls it) he sacked and spoiled. This
city, as Suidas, Hesychius, and Tzetzes do testify, was called MARONEA, now
Marogna, as Sophianus and Niger both do peremptorily affirm, or, Marolia, as
Leunclaw writes. In Hyginus fables it is falsely written Marathonia. And that
it should be amended and written Maronea, it is very manifest, for that the
wine wherewithal Ulysses afterward made the great lubber Polyphemus drunk was
fetched from hence, as he there writes, and which Euripides in his Cyclops
does justify to be true. Moreover Vinum Maroneum, the wine of Maronea, has
been in old time much esteemed of and was as famous as any other sort
whatsoever. Therefore after the sack of this city, and as Suidas reports,
Hecuba, ending her days, near the sea, being there intombed in stone in a
place commonly called by the name of CYNOSSEMA, he was assaulted by the Cicones
a sturdy and rough kind of people inhabiting amongst the mountains of Thrace;
and so by that means was forced with great loss and slaughter of his men to
horse sail and put off to sea again. And directing his course toward MALEA,
(Cabo Malio, or S. Michaels wings) a promontory or foreland of Peloponnesus,
the weather growing very foul, he was sore troubled and his ships rent and
torn most grievously, as Homer testifies. But first it is very probable that
he put into DELOS (Sdiles) an island in the Archipelago, lying directly in his
way, and where they write, that before the altar of Apollo, Ulysses saw a tall
and slender Palm Tree grow: which, Cicero in his book of Laws affirms, was
still to be seen in his time: and it is likely was the very same, which Pliny
reports in his time had remained from the days of Apollo. Homer also and
Pausanias do speak of this palm tree. From Malea, he came to the i will CYTHERA
(Cerigo) in the Ionian sea not far from the coast of Peloponnesus, and from
thence he went to the LOTOPHAGI. The Lotophagi, a kind of people which live
especially by the fruit of the lote tree, are by Historiographers placed in
Africa, yea and that here and there in diverse and sundry places of the same.
But those Lotophagi unto whom the consorts of this our Ulysses came, I am of
opinion with Isaac Tzetzes, that they dwelt near Hyperia, a city of Sicilia,
or were next neighbors to Camarina, a city there still known by the name of
Camarana. Neither can I be persuaded that these Lotophagi are to be sought for
in Africa: seeing that it is apparent even out of Homer himself that the next
day they went from the Lotophagi unto the CYCLOPES, which out of Africa, so
far remote from Sicilia, they could by no means have done. Item I have
Ausonius in his Periocha, upon my side, who there testifies that these
Lotophagi did butte upon the i will of the Cyclopes. Now almost all authors which
have written of this argument do jointly affirm that some of his consorts,
much delighted with the sweetness and pleasant taste of the fruit of the Lote
tree, stayed here still and would by no means ever return back again. This
I thought good, gentle Reader, to admonish thee of, lest thou should in
vain in this our Map think to find any part of the continent of Africa.
Moreover in Pausanias I read, that Ulysses in this his journey did build the
ATHFNEVM, that is, the chapel of Minerua, in Arcadia. From Cythera, he went to
CACRA, a port town of Sicilia, which the forenamed Tzetzes testifies was of
him afterward named Vlyssis portus, Ulysses haven, and had been also sometime
called Engyon, now known by the name of Longina. From hence he went to the
I WILL of the Cyclopes, and so to the CAVE of Polyphemus; where he offered
sacrifice and performed all due religious ceremonies unto the gods, as
Athenaeus testifies. Now this Cave, as Vibius Sequester shows, was upon the
brinke of the river Acis, now called Freddo. Here making Polyphemus drunk
with the forenamed Maronean wine, and putting out his eyes, he went unto the
AEOLIAE, or, as the Gods call them, the Planetae, certain islands continually
casting forth sparkles and flames of fire. Here of Aeolus, king of these
islands, he had given him a bottle or bag made of an ox skin, wherein all the
winds, but Zephyrus the West wind (or, if we may give credit to Agatharchides,
none but the North and South winds only) were contained and enclosed. For the
West wind for those that sail with a strait course from Sicilia to Ithaca, is
the best that can blow. With this prosperous gale of wind, in nine days, as
Ovid reports, they coming within sight and kenning of the i will Ithaca, while
Ulysses was asleep, his consorts upon the tenth day, as the foresaid author
writes, opened the bag, which they had always hitherto been verily
persuaded was full of gold and silver. By this means contrary winds and
storms arising, they are forced back again, and redoubling their course,
(yet an ancient Lyricall Poet, says it was but the bottle that went back
again) to come the second time to the AEOLIAN ISLANDS: where being by Aelous,
as contemners of the Gods, and skorners of all religion, for bidden to land,
they came unto the LAESTRYGONES, a savage people, that used to eat men, (like
as they now write of the Canibals of America) who set upon them, as enemies,
near to the city Lamus, and the fountain Artacia. From hence with one ship
only (the other eleven, as Ovid and Ausonius do testify, being sunk by the
Laestrygones) he came unto the i will AE AE AE, otherwise called Circeia, (Hyginus
in his fables does falsely call Aena) the place of abode, where Circes, (called
after her death, as Lactantius writes, Marica) the daughter of Sol, or the
Sun, a woman famous for her Sorcery, passing skillful in all manner of Magic
and witchcraft: by whose conduct and direction he went to AVERNVM, (Cedrenus
names it Neciopa) a lake in Italy now called Lago di Tripergola; where amongst
the souls that are in Purgatory (apud Inferos) he has conference with his
mother Anticlia, and of her and by her means he understood many things
concerning his journey that now he was to take. This done coming back again
to Circeia, he found Elpenor one of his consorts whom he had left with Circes,
as also Tiresias the wisard or sooth-saier, with diverse other worthies and
brave men, dead and buried. From thence he returned to the SVPERI, and entered
there the Ocean. Lastly, he made a funeral and performed all ceremonies as he
had promised to do, for his friend Elpenor, and withal built him a stately
tomb. And thus much of that matter. Of this his navigations through the vast
Ocean, although many things by diverse authors are diversely reported: (as of
Vlyssea, and Vlyssipona, certain cities of Spain, etc. built by this our
Ulysses: Of an altar in Caledonia, mentioned by Solinus, a province of Great
Britain, having an inscription upon it written in Greek letters, there
consecrated and dedicated to some God whose gracious favor he had largely
tasted of in this his journey: Of Asciburgium, a city built by him, as Tacitus
writes, upon the brinke of the river Rheine, and of an altar there consecrated
to his service:) yet that they are altogether fained and mere fables, there be
many things that do strongly prove. And indeed Aulus Gellius, in the sixth
chapter of his foureteenth book, shows, that long since this voyage upon the
Ocean seas was doubted of and called in question: videlicet, they made a
question whether Ulysses wandered through the maine Ocean, as Aristarchus would
have it: or whether he never went out of the inner sea, (so Strabo and Pliny do
call the Mediterran or Midland sea) as Cratetes would persuade us. And truly
in Ausonius his Periocha there is not a word of this navigations through the
Ocean. Item, Ulysses himself relating unto his wife the sum of all his
peregrination, does not once name the Ocean. Neither does Dares Phrygius,
Hyginus in his fables, or Isacius upon Lycophron, mention any such thing: and
yet every one of these men do make a large discourse of that his wandering
voyage. Again those things which we find in Strabo of this matter, as he
himself plainly confesses, were taken out of Possidonius, Artemidorus, and
Asclepiades (every one of which authors it is certain lived many a day since
Homer) and not out of Homer himself. Item, the wise Seneca in the 88. chapter
of his seventh book, calls it Angustum iter and errorem longum, A short
journey, but long in regard of many turne-againes, before it was ended. But
because it was also before me, by the learned John Brodey, a man of good
judgment and quick conceit, accounted for a mere fable, I will here, out of
the third book of his Miscellanea, set down his opinion in his own words,
which in English are thus: They, says he, who think that Ulysses ever sailed
upon the Maine Ocean, do labor to prove that their opinion, out of this verse
of Homer, in the tenth book of his Odysses, (...), But when thou shall by ship
have passed the Ocean seas: Of which opinion although I do find the learned
Strabo to be, yet I see no reason, why I may not freely propose to the censure
of the learned what I do think of the same. When I do consider the fashion
and manner of building of map of the ancient Indian Ocean, Arabian Sea, and Bay
of Bengal, with inset maps of the Aegean Sea and Ionian Sea, West Africa, and
the Artic Circle ERYTHRAEI SIVE RVBRI MARIS PERIPLVS, olim ab Arriano
descriptus, nunc vero ab Abrah. Ortelio ex eodem delineatus.
VLYSSIS ERRORES, ex Conatib. Geographicis Ab. Ortelij.
ANNONIS PERIPLVS.
Cum Imp. Reg. et Cancellariae Brabantia priuilegio decennali. 1597.

Ulysses ships described by Homer, to be open, without deckes and hatches, I
do perceive them to have been much too weak and too low, to abide the
billows and storms of the maine sea: which for three months of the year
galleies and tall ships, well and strongly built of the best timber, and well
seasoned can hardly be able to sustain. That any man should think that
Astypyrgium, (or, Asciburgium, which we spoke of a little before) was built by
Ulysses, as some men have gathered out of Cornelius Tacitus, it were extreme
madness. For if one would pass the Spanish, French and English seas, and then
at length to return back again through the Germane Ocean, and in diverse
places, on Gods name, upon the sea coast to build and erect altars, he had need
have a navy of many tal ships strongly built and well appointed, he must not
think to do it with one little bark or rotten barge rowed to and fro with oars
and strength of men. But authors of good credit do make mention of Vlyssipo,
and of other famous monuments of him to be seen in Portugal. What then?
Whether that any thing of Ulysses his doing be there to be seen or ever were I
greatly doubt: and if there be, yet that it was made by this Ulysses, whose
life and famous acts Homer did describe, I flatly deny. And yet it is not
incredible to believe, that as we do suppose that there were many Herculesses,
so that there were in like manner more Vlyssesses then one: which in mine
opinion seems very probable and likely to be true. Thus far Brodey. To
those arguments of his I add, first, That Odyssopolis is; by Cedrenus and the
Historia Miscella, described, to be near Pontus in Asia. And who is so mad
to believe that this city was so named of this our Odyssus or as the Latins
call him Ulysses? And seeing that I do see that Homer himself does not make
mention of any one place unto the which he did put in or landed in all this his
travel upon the Ocean sea: I am easily persuaded that this notable Poet does,
not only in this verse, but even in diverse other places also by the Ocean,
poetically mean the sea. For example, near the end of the 10. book of his
Odysses and ni the beginning of the 11. as soon as ever he is returned from the
Inferi, presently Homer makes him to enter the Ocean. But you will say he
entered the Ocean, near wherabout the Cimmerij did dwell, as appears plainly
by that which he writes in the beginning of the 12. book of his Odysses: True.
But where I pray you, did these Cimmerij dwell? No where surely, but in Italy,
within a little of the i will Circeia, and being returned from thence, he burieth,
according to his promise, the body of Elpenor. The body I mean, after so many
months, or, which is more probable, so many years (for those nauigations in
old time were not the next way through the midst of the sea, but much further
about, as we have showed in our Thesaurus at the word OPHIR, along by the shore
within sight of land) corrupt, or, which is more likely turned to dust and
ashes, or quite consumed to nothing. If any man shall again object (with Ovid
in the first book of his Tristium, who says that illius pars maxima ficta
laborum est: The most part of Ulysses toil, was forged in Poets brain) and
say that this whole history, and not only this navigations upon the Maine Ocean,
was but a feined tale. I answer, that all the story, except this part of his
navigations by the vast Ocean only, is somewhat probable, and nothing in it
impossible but might have been done. In this voyage by the Ocean sea, I have
stated the longer, lest the Reader might suspect that either through negligence
or ignorance it were left out in this our Map. Now let us, if you please, go
on forward with our intended journey. Ulysses departing from the island Aeaea,
and taking his leave of his hostess Circes, by whom, having kept with her by
the space of an whole year, he begat his son Telegonus, he went his way safe
and sound. For Mercury had given him the herb Moly (so the Gods do call it) a
sure antidote and preservative against all manner of enchantments and
witchcraft. And sailing along by the SIRENVM INSVLAE, (the Mirmaides islands) he
built the temple of Minerua (Fanum Mineruae) in CAMPANIA in Italy, as Strabo
writes. In this tract also, videlicet, in LVCANIA, as the same author
records, he built the chapel of Draco (Sacellum Draconis) one of his
companions in that his voyage. From thence he sailed along by the shore, and at
length landed at TENESSA, a city of the Bruttij; (Isacius upon Lycophronfalsly
writes, that he landed in England, mistaking Britannos, for Bruttios, or
ignorantly confounding (...) with (...):) as Pausanias has left recorded:
Item, Suidas out of Pausanias affirms the same, but withal he adds that
here one of the sailers did ravish a virgin, and for that vild act was by the
townsmen stoned to death. Near to this town the chapel of Politas, (Fanum
Politae) one of Ulysses consorts, by Strabo is described to have stood. From
hence it is likely out of Pliny, that he came to the isles ITHACEIAE, or, as
otherwise they are called, Ulysses specula, that is, Ulysses beacon or
lantern. From hence setting forward, and warily avoiding the dangerous Scylla,
and Charybdes, (although not altogether without the loss of some of his
company) he came again into TRINACRIA, or the Island of the Sun, (Insula
Solis) twice, as Horace says, or as Ausonius writes, often losing his way,
and failing of his course: where while he himself was asleep, some of his
company killed certain sheep of Sol, the governor of that place, out of his
flock, which, as Appianus Alexandrinus in the fifth book of his Civil wars
writes, did feed near Artemisium, a town in Sicilia, which Barrius at this
day thinks to be called Agatha: for which their villainy and foul act
committed by them, they were all cast away and sunk. Ulysses himself alone,
getting up upon the mast of the ship, escaped and was carried into the i will
OGYGIA, where he dwelt seven years, as Homer writes, or six year, as Ovid
testifies: or ten years, as Seruius would make us believe, with the Nymph
Calypso, by whom he gate his son Auson. After all this, building a ship with
his own hands, he shippeth himself and sets sail all alone, for mere
natural love of his country (preferring it before immortality, which the
goddess had promised if so be he would stay with her) committing himself to
the sea, out alas he feels again the second time the weight of Neptunes
wrath, for that, as we have showed before, he had put out the eyes of his son
Polyphemus. For the eighteenth (or, as Ovid writes, the eightith) day after
his first setting out, when as he came so near Ithaca, that he might easily
descry the smoke of the chimneies (mark the cross luck) tempestuous winds and
raging storms do on every side arise, so that his ship was ouerturned, and
himself thrown into the sea, but, as God would have it, rising again
instantly he caught hold of the ship. The Nymph Leucothea, ( Nausicaa, others
call her) seeing him thus toiled and wandering in the midst of the sea, took
compassion upon him, and presently relieved him: she advises him to let go the
ship, to put off his apparel, and to commit himself naked to the sea only;
and withal she gives him her fillet or haire-lace wherewith her head was
bound up: which he tying about his middle, swom until he came unto the country
of the PHAEACES, (Cedrenus, falsely, has Phoenices) where he arrived near unto
the river Callirhoe. The foresaid Cedrenus writes that he was carried from
hence into Creta to Idomeneus; and by him conuieghed thence into Corcyra, unto
Alcinous. But let us proceed. With this fillet of Leucothea, he being tied unto
the ship and hanging at it, (except here Philostratus which is ordinary with
him, do tell a tale,) with his own strength, using his hand in steed of
oars, he swomme through the midst of the sea. Yet that the ship came thus
far and further, it seems out of Pliny to be not altogether improbable:
because he writes that about Phalacrum, a promontory or foreland of Phaeacia,
or Corcyra, this ship was turned into a rock: which rock Martianus says is
in fashion and proportion like a ship: although falsely he in that place
calls this foreland Phalarium for Phalacrum. But if any man shall say that he
does requite one tale with another, I will not greatly gainsay him. From
Phaeacia, by Alcinous king of that country, who had most honorably entertained
him, he was at length conueighed to Ithaca his native country, whose smoke he
had many times and often desired before this to see. Where killing the woers,
which were in number, if one may believe Athenaeus, an hundred and eight, or as
Dictys Cretensis says but thirty only, he embraces and kindly saluteth his
loving wife Penelope. And this is the end of all these wandering peregrinations,
in which, as Ovid says, Iactatus dubio per duo lustra mari: Ten years he
wandered up and down in seas unknown. Signifying that the rest of the years
were spent in travels and troubles endured upon the land. Of which the same
author also thus speaks, Ille breui spatio multis errauit in annis, Inter
Dulichias Iliacasque domos. In travel many years he spent, his journey was
not far, Between the island Zante and Troy, that famous town of war.
Isacius upon Lycophron testifies that Ulysses, by the counsel of Minerua,
went to TRAMPYA, a city of the Eurytanes, a people of Epyrus or Aetolia, there
to offer sacrifice unto the Gods: and withal this our author there adds,
that these people are the very same that Homer in the eleventh book of his
Odysses speaks of in these words, (...), that is, until he came amongst
those men, that never heard tell of Ocean sea. Again the same author moreover
affirms that in this city Ulysses was worshipped as a god, and that he had
an oracle there. Not far from hence amongst these people also Stephanus
places the city BVNIMA, first founded by Ulysses. That he was reverenced as a
god, I do find by a certain speech of Seneca that he uses of him unto
Serenus: and therefore it is no marvel that he should give forth answers and
oracles. And that I may omit nothing of his labors, Dares Phrygius amongst
diverse other of his dangerous attempts writes that he put in to harborough at
MONVCHA. Cassiodorus in the twelfth book of his Variar. writes that the town
SCYLLACIVM was also built by him. That he erected a chapel upon the top of
mount BOREVS in Peloponnesus, to Neptune and Minerua Sospita, I do find in
Pausanias his: Arcadica. Apollodorus, as Strabo cites, writes that Ulysses in
this his voyage came to the i will CANNVS, but which this should be I know not.
For of this name there are diverse, as thou shall find in our Thesaurus. And
peradventure it is not unlikely to be true, that Ulysses was tossed to and fro
to diverse and sundry places; which Eratosthenes, as Strabo alleges, says he
will then find out, when it shall be his chance to meet with the cobbler which
sewed the bottell wherein he carried the winds which Aeolus gave him. And thus
much generally of the wandering voyage of this Captain, which happened to him
as he passed inter Dulichias Iliacasque domos, Between the island Zante and
famous Troy, as Ovid reports. Sed perlege Odysseam omnia nosse volens, But
read over learned Homers works, He tells this tale at large: as Ausonius in
his Epitaphs counsels. Yet of this our Ulysses I cannot with silence pass
over that of Plutarch in his Morals; namely, for that he had killed those
Suitors, it was by Neoptolemus decreed against him that he must leave his
country and be seen no more in Ithaca, Dulichium and Zacynthus. So that in
this his banishment he went again into Italy. But where he left his life, it
is uncertain. Isacius upon Lycophron, an author often cited by us, affirms
out of Theopompus, that he died in GORTYNIA, a city of Tyrrhenia in Italy. Yet
Dictys Cretensis toward the latter end of his sixth book (whom also thou
may read if thou think good) says, that he died in ITHACA. All men for
the most part generally report, that he was slain unawares by his son
Telegonus (holding still in his hand a cup, as Athenaeus tells the tale)
with an iron dart, headed by his mother Circe, with a puffens quill (pastinaca
marina, they call it) but for another purpose, as Oppianus in the second book
of his Halieutica writes, namely to kill his enemy, not his father. Hyginus in
the 127. fable records that as soon as he was dead he was carried into the
i will Aeaeato Circe, and was there by her interred. Some there are, as Isacius
testifies, that do report that Circe by her sorceries restored him again to
his former life. More peradventure might have been said of this our Ulysses,
if Cratinus Comicus, whom Athenaeus reports to have written De Vlyssibus,
were now extant and to be gotten. Notwithstanding, after this larger discourse
of the wandering voyage of this famous Captain, I think it not amiss to
speak a word or two of Ulysses himself, because I verily persuade my self
that it cannot but be a matter that the Reader will very well like of. In a
certain silver coin or piece of money of Caius Mamilius Limetanus, who, as
the report goes, (thus testifies Liuy) was lineally descended from Ulysses,
and the goddess Circe, was stamped upon one side the head of Mercury, and
therefore it had, as is very probable, on the other side the signet or
counterfeit of Ulysses: which may be easily proved out of those particulars and
testimonies that do hereafter follow. Plutarch in the life of Cato the Elder,
does give out that Ulysses had a purpose to have gone back again to the cave
of Polyphemus, for no other cause but to demand his Cappe and Girdle, which
there he had left behind him and forgotten. Therefore, it is here hence apparent
that he did usually wear a Cap and a Girdle. Yet we read in Pliny that
Nicomachus the painter did first paint Ulysses with a cappe upon his head. And
to be painted wearing a Cappe was a cognizance and badge of nobility, as
Soranus in the life of Hippocrates does plainly affirm: item, Dion Prusaeus in
his foureteenth oration seems to intimate as much. Again, by an ancient
custom of the old Romans they were wont by putting on a Cappe upon a man's
head, to make those that were slaves, free. Whereupon they used this phrase of
speech Ad pileum vocare, To call a man to the Cappe, for Ad libertatem vocare,
To make one a freeman. That this Cappe af Ulysses was in fashion round, it is
manifest out of these words of Saint Hierome, Rotundum pileolum, quale in
Vlysseo conspicimus, A round Cappe, such a like one as we do see upon the
counterfeit of Ulysses. I may also add this one thing although somewhat far
fetched, That they were called Pileati, as Iornandes testifies, which amongst
the Goths were accounted of greater birth and nobility, or of deeper reach and
experience then the common sort of men were of, because they went with their
heads covered with a kind of bonnet or cappe. Moreover he carried in his hand
a staff, wherewith he staid himself where the ways were slippery, and
defended himself from such as in his travel did assault or molest him; as
Homer testifies of him in the fourteenth book of his Odysses. He had also a
dog, as the same author affirms, which after twenty years absence, at his
return home knew his master. Now the name of this dog, as we read in the
same author, was Argus. Which also Plutarch, in his book of the tranquillity
of the mind, does avouch to be true. And withal adds this moreover, that he
wept for his dog when he died. Pausanias in his Phocicis, describes this our
Ulysses with a corslet or coat-armor upon his back. Homer in the fifteenth
book of his Odysses says that he was bald or very thin haired. Which is to
be understood of his latter days when he grew in years. For Suidas out of the
aforesaid author shows, that his hair was black and curled. Beside that,
he says that he was somewhat hog-backed or stoup-shouldred. That he bare in
his shield or scutcheon a Dolphin, and why, thou may read in Plutarch in his
book of the Comparison of living creatures. But some man may ask me, why
Mercury, wearing a broad brimmed hatte, with his verge or mace in his hand, was
stamped upon the backeside of Ulysses coin? If it be lawful for me to guess
and interpose mine opinion, I answer, For the especial and singular love and
favor of this God above the rest, showed at sundry times toward this brave
Captain. For when in that his peregination all the Gods well near were set
and opposed against him, only Mercury was found to favor him and to stick
close unto him. For he only gave him an antidote or preservative against the
sorceries and enchantments of the mischievous witch Circe. And indeed we read
that this God of all others was wont especially to be honored in any manner of
magical services whatsoever, as we may see in the fourth book of Papirius his
Thebaidos. Item, of this God he obtained leave to depart, and that he might be
no longer detained by the nymph Calypso etc. And peradventure there may be also
another cause assigned; namely for that Ulysses, whom Homer and other authors
do highly commend for a most eloquent orator, and one that could speak most
wisely and to the purpose in any kind of matter, did take this god Mercury
(whom the Gentiles did make the president of orators and eloquence) for his
guardian and protector, thinking thereby to bind him so much the more nearly
unto him. Pausanias says that in Motya, a city of Sicilia there was the statue
or counterfeit of this our Ulysses, but by Nero the Emperor it was from thence
transported to Rome in Italy. And thus much of this brave Captain, Qui mores
hominum multorum vidit and vrbes, who, as the Poet writes of him, saw many
men's manners and knew many cities. Of whom also thus speaks Ovid, Si minus
errasset, notus minus esset Ulysses? If great Ulysses had not strai'd, he had
been more obscure. But of him I will speak no more: lest peradventure with
the Grammarians, I be hit in the teeth with that of Diogenes: who said that
while they did search diligently to know all the crosses and evils that befell
Ulysses, did forget their own. And moreover that worthy admonition of wise
Seneca, where he says, Quid proderit inquirere vbi Ulysses errauerit, quam ne
nos semper erremus? What shall it avail us to seek where and which way
Ulysses wandered, more then to restrain us that we do not in like manner always
wander as he did? And now it is high time to take pen from paper. As for
those coins which we have spoken of before, I wish thee to repair to Goltzius
and others which have at large and peculiarly handled that argument.

A description of the RED SEA, now vulgarly called, The INDIAN SEA.
MARE ERYTHRAEVM, or, as the Latins call it, MARE RVBRVM, The Red Sea, which
here we offer to thy view in this Map, for as much as we can gather out of
ancient writers, stretches it self from the West, as Liuy writes along by
the coast of Africa or Aethiopia, even unto India in East, yea and beyond that,
I know not how far, as Arrianus testifies: whereupon Ptolemey, Pliny and
Melado call it MARE INDICVM, The Indian Sea. But Herodotus calls it MARE
PERSICVM, The Persian Sea. Which Pliny does seem to justify to be true, where
he says, That the Persians do dwell along by the coast of the Red Sea, between
the coast of Africa, and the island Taprobana. Strabo that worthy Geographer, he
calls it MARE MAGNVM, The Great sea, who moreover does affirm it to be a
part of the Atlanticke sea, and that truly. A part of this sea, to wit, where
it touches the coast of that Aethiopia which lies beneath Egypt, Pliny, of
the country Azania (which at this day some do think to be called Xoa) names
it MARE AZANIVM. Where it ioineth with the Bay of Arabia, it is of Ptolemey
named HIPPADIS PELAGVS, now called of some Archiplago di Maldiuar. Item, of the
same Ptolemey it is otherwise called BARBARICVS SINVS, The Barbarian bay: I
mean in that place where it beats upon Aethiopia, and the island Menuthesia,
now of the seamen generally called, The island of Saint Laurence, but of that
country people Madagascar, and of Theuet Albagra. There are two Baies or
Gulfes, as the Italians and Spaniards term them, of this sea much talked of in
all ancient histories: to wit, SINVS PERSICVS, The Persian Bay, and SINVS
ARABICVS, The Arabian Bay, which some, not well read in old writers, do for the
most part call Mare Rubrum, The Red Sea. Very improperly, being indeed but a
part of that sea, properly called the Red sea, which we have hitherto spoken
of. But why it was of the Greeks named Erythraeum, and of the Latins Rubrum,
Red, it is a great question amongst the learned not yet decided. Some there are
which do deem it to have been called, The Red Sea, of the color of the
water: but this, of all late writers, travelers, seamen, and other
eie-witnesses of good credit, which have in this our age, and every day do
sail through this Sea, and have diligently viewed the same, is improued and
found to be altogether false. Moreover Qu. Curtius amongst the ancients does
plainly testify that it differs no whit in color from other seas. Some
there are as Pliny writes, which do think that, by reason of the
reuerberation of the Sun beams, it seems to cast up such a like color to
the sight of the beholders. Others do think that this is caused by reason of
the color of the sand or earth in the bottom of the same: others do affirm it
to be the very nature of the water. Some do write that it was so named of king
Erythrus, Perseus son, whose tomb, as Quintus Curtius writes, did in his
time remain in a certain island of this sea not far distant from the maine
land: (Strabo calls this island, Tyrina: Pliny and Pomponius Mela, Ogyris:
Arrianus, Oaracta:) or else of a certain Persian named Erythras, as the
forenamed Strabo gives out. Who, as Pliny with him testifies, in a small
bark or barge first sailed through this sea and discovered the same. Which
story also is at large handled by Agatarchides. Yet our author calls him
Hippalus, who first found out the course to sail through the midst of this
sea. Pliny by that name calls the wind by which they make their iourneis
through this sea. (So called as is very probable of the inuentour.) Which wind
the same author in the thirteenth chapter of his 6. book, makes the same
that Fauonius is unto the Latins. Mela and Agatarchides do call it a
tempestuous, stormy, rough and deep sea. Pliny, Philostratus, Elianus, and
Athenaeus do give it the title of Margaritiferum, the pearle-bearing sea. And
the same Pliny makes it Arboriferum, a tree-bearing sea. For he writes in the
five and twentieth chapter of his thirteenth book, that it is full of groves
and tall woods: the tops of whose high trees he affirms are seen much
above the waters, and therefore at high tide they use to fasten their ships
unto the tops, and at the ebb unto the roots of the same. Item, the same
author, in the two and twentieth chapter of the sixth book of his Natural
history, writes that about Colaicum, (which also is called Colchi) or as
Solinus affirms about Tapobrana, an island not far hence, the sea is of a
very greenish color, and so full of trees that their top boughs are barked
and brushed with the rudders or stern of those ships that sail this way.
Moreover that trees do grow in this sea Megasthenes, out of Antigonus de
Mirabilibus, does affirm, which Plutarch in his Natural questions, and again
in his book de facie Lunae, does avouch to be true: where he does particularly
nominate some of them, to wit, Oliue-trees, Bay-trees, and Plocamus, which
otherwise they call Isidis Capillus. This also Strabo in the sixth book of his
Geography justifies to be true: so does the forenamed Pliny, who teaches us
that it is a plant much like to coral without leaves. Agatarchides says that
it resembles much the black rush. Athenaeus out of Philonides the Physician
writes, that the vine was first brought from the Redde-sea and planted in
Greece. In the eigth chapter of the fourth book of Theophrastus his history of
plants, you may read of diverse other kinds of trees and herbs which do
naturally grow in this sea. Pomponius shows, that this sea has more and
greater monsters that do live and breed in it then any other sea in the world
beside. Quintus Curtius affirms that it is full of whales, (balaenae) of such
an huge bigness that they are in bulk equal to the greatest ships or
vessels that are. Solinus says that one of them will cover two akers of
ground. The same author does there describe unto us certain blew worms,
which have their forelegges not less then six foot long. These are of that
wonderful strength that often times they do with their claws lay hold upon
Elephants coming thitherto drink, and by maine force pull them into the sea.
Item, he tells of certain whirle-pooles, Physeteras, he calls them, of
that huge bigness, that they are to see to like unto great and massy
columns, these do many times raise themselves up as high as the crosse-mast,
from whence they spout out such abundance of water out of their gullets, that
often times by the violence of the storm the vessels of those which sail and
pass by that way are sunk and cast away. Strabo has left in writing, that
Amazenas, the admiral of the Indian fleet, did there see a whale of fifty foot
in length. Arrianus in his Indica describes certain balaenas, whales or
whirlepooles, of an huge and wonderful bigness, with three sorts of great and
terrible kind of Serpents, which as Solinus writes will cover more then two
akers of lands. It is recorded by Pliny that the Hydri, certain sea monsters
of twenty cubits in length, did much affright the navy of Alexander the Great.
Item, he tells of torteises of such a marvelous bigness, that the shell of
one of them will make a cover for a pretty house: and again, That they
usually do sail in these shells upon this sea, like as they use in other
countries in ships and boats. Yea, as Agatarchides affirms, these fishes
do serve those which dwell upon this sea coast, instead of houses, boats,
dishes and meat. About the island Taprobana, now called as generally all learned
do think, Samotra, there are certain fishes, which do live partly upon sea
and partly upon land, whereof some are like oxen, others like horses, and other
some are like other four footed beasts, as Strabo in his fifteenth and
sixteenth books has left recorded. And thus much of the name, situation and
nature of this Redde-sea, which Liuy in his 45. book terms, Finem terrarum,
The outmost bound of the world. He that desires to know more of this sea, let
him have recourse to Agatarchides and Arrianus in his Indica. Item, let him
consult with Baptista Ramusio, who translated this Periplus, or discovery, into
the Italian tongue, and has enlarged the same with a discourse, as he calls
it, of his own, of the same argument. And I would wish him not to omit
Stuckius, who also translated the same into the Italian tongue, and has
illustrated it with his most learned and laborious Commentaries. Lastly,
Athenaeus in the fourteenth book of his Deipnosophiston, makes me believe
that Pythagoras that great and famous Philosopher, did write a book of the Red sea.

HANNO'S PERIPLVS, OR, Discovery of the Atlanticke Seas and Coasts of Africa.
THis Periplus of Hanno king of Carthage, was first translated out of Greek
into Latin by Conradus Gesnerus, a man that has very well deserved of all
sorts of scholars and succedent ages, and has illustrated the same with his
most learned and painful Commentaries. But before him Baptista Ramusio turned
it into the Tuscane tongue, and has to it adioined a discourse, as he terms
it. Of the ancient writers Pomponius Mela in the second chapter of his third
book, and Pliny in the first chapter of the fifth book of his history of
Nature, who there calls him a captain of Carthage, not king of Cathage, have
made mention of this Periplus or Discovery. But he calls this discourse by
the name of Commentaries, not of a Periplus. The same Pliny in the one and
thirtieth chapter of his sixth book calls him an Emperor. Yet Solinus in
the last chapter of his work, out of Xenophon Lampsacenus, makes as if he
had been a king of the Poeni. Arrianus also toward the latter end of his
Indian stories mentions this Periplus. Moreover Pliny in the sixteenth
chapter of the eighteenth book of his Natural history, and Aelianus in the
fiftieth chapter of his fifth book De Animalibus, do make mention of one
Hanno, who was the first man that ever was heard of in the world that durst
handle, and take upon him to tame a Lion. But whether he be the same with this
our Hanno, I am not able to determine. For there have been many of that name:
of which, if any man be desirous to know more, let him repair to the
Commentaries of the forenamed Gesner, which he wrote upon this Periplus. These
words in Pliny and Martianus in very deed are meant of another Hanno, diverse
from this of whom we have hitherto spoken. Hanno, say they, at such time as
the Punicke Empire stood in flourishing estate, sailed round about by the coast
of Barbary, and so from thence Southward all along by the shore, until at
length after a long and tedious journey he came to the coasts of Arabia.
Moreover that student that is desirous to know more of this Periplus or
Discovery, may add to these collections of ours, such things as John Mariana
has written of it, in the latter end of his first book of his history of
Spain.

ORBIS ARCTOVS, OR, The Northren frozen Zone.
THe draught of this we have in this place here adioined both for an auctuary,
and for the better beautifying or proportioning of this Map. To wit, that
there might be something that might answer to the model of Hannoes Periplus.
This we entreat the diligent student of ancient Geography to take in good
part. Peradventure succedent ages shall hereafter manifest to the world
another different from this of ours and perhaps more true, by the diligent and
painful travels I hope of our English nation or their consorts the Hollanders.
For these both have spared no cost nor refused any danger to find out a passage
through the Northren seas from hence to China and India: (For hitherto there is
no other way discovered to sail thither but by the South, by Cabo de buona
speranza, which is a long and most tedious journey:) But of this read hose
worthy labors of M. Richard Hackluyt, who, to the great benefit and singular
delight of all men, has set out the English voyages, to the immortal praise
and commendation of this our Nation, and those brave Captains and Seamen which
have undertaken and performed the same.

ARGONAVTICA, That is, IASONS voyage for the GOLDEN FLEECE.
THere is none almost of the ancients which has not as it were by the way
touched the story of the ARGONAVTES, that is, of JASON, or of the GOLDEN
FLEECE: but amongst those which of set purpose have handled that matter as
Cleon, Herodotus, Pisander, Dionysius, Milesius, Varro Attacinus, and
Epimenides (who, as Laertius records, set out the same at large in 6500.
verses) there are only three remaining at this day, that have come to our
hands; namely, Valerius Flaccus, Orpheus and Apollonius Rhodius. In all which
three, the journey foorth-ward of those Argonautes (that is, of Jason and his
consorts which sailed with him in the ship named the Argo) is reasonably alike
described, but in the return of them homeward they differ very much one from
another in their relations: For Flaccus brings them back from Colchis, by
the North shore of the Euxine sea, (Mar maiore) and so unto the mouth of the
river Ister or Danubius (Done or Donaw) and there he leaves them; being
prevented by death, as he peradventure supposed. Apollonius brings him up
against the stream of the said river, and so out of it by the river Sabus
(Saw) as Pliny and Trogus do think, into the Hadriaticke and Ionian seas: not
far off from Tergeste (Trieste, in Friuli) but as Pliny says, they were
forced out of the way by the river Eridanus (Po) into Rhodanus (Rhosne) unto
the Stoechades (Isles de hyerres) certain islands in the Ligusticke sea (Mar di
Leone) ouer-against Narbone in France: out of which sailing through the Midland
and Aegean seas, they came safe home to the place from whence they first set
out. But Orpheus he tells the story with a far greater circumstance, and
makes them to fetch a larger compass about, namely, by the river Tan^^ (Don)
and that huge wood (as he calls it) or endless, as Dionysius Afer terms
it: and that not without just cause: for I deem it to be the greatest wood of
the whole world that yet to us is descried. (These latter ages called by one
proper name Orcynium, or Hercynia.) Then by the North sea, called of them
Cronium (named by Seneca in his tragedy, entitled Medea, Vrsae vetitum mare)
and by the Atlanticke sea unto Hercules pillars (the streights of Gibraltar)
compassing round all Europe, came at last home safe again to their own
houses. This voyage therefore we have in this our Map, framed out of those
three forenamed authors: which will easily and plainly appear to him that
shall examine the same with the stories set down by them. Beside those places
named by them, we have added certain other, out of other authors, never
touched by them, yet pertaining to this their purpose: as namely, Salmydessus
in Thracia, where Apollodorus says they landed or put into harborough. Item,
AEmonia, a town built by the Argonautes in that place where they laying the
Argo, their ship, upon ingines [their shoulders, as Pindarus and Trogus have
given out, and so Pliny says, the best authors affirme] carried it from the
shore 400. furlongs: or, which is all one, 50. miles, even unto the coasts of
the Thessalians (Italians, Zozomen reads: differing in word and manner of
writing, not in truth of story: for they were Thessalians by birth and
parentage, now seated in the land of Italy) as we find recorded in Zosimus and
others. There is the city Pola, a work begun and perfected by the Colchi, who,
being sent to pursue Medea, up to the river Done, (Ister) up as high as the
islands then called Absyrtides, where, being frustrate of their purpose, they
staid: and of the river Ister, up which they sailed: they called the country
through which it runs Istria. Phla, or if you please Phila, an island in the
lake Triton, in Africa, where Herodotus writes that Jason arrived, and the
North wind blowing stiff against him was driven to Malea, a promontory or
foreland of Peloponnesus, and there to have given his tripos, (or treuet) to
Triton. Polybius says, That Jason built a temple at Bosphorus Thracius
(Stretto di Constantinopoli, the streights of Constantinople: the Greeks call
it Laimon, the Turks, Bogazin) and that to the honor of Neptune, as Pindarus
reports: where he also consecrated twelve altars for those services and
sacrifices. This self same Temple Demosthenes names the Temple of the
Argonautes. In Pausanias and Varro, we read that the same Jason dedicated a
Temple to Juno, in the i will Samos, (Samo.) Item, to Juno Argiua in agro
Picentino, (Principato, or Costa de Ainalfe) as Pliny has left recorded. And
that he erected altars near the river Ister, (Done or Donaw) where it
divides it self into two streams, emptying his waters partly into Pontus
(Mar maiore) and partly into Adria, (the Gulf of Venice) Aristotle teaches in
his Admiranda. I suppose he meant this of the Caucasian rocks, (Caucasij
scopuli.) Fabulous antiquity verily believed that the river Ister had issue out
into the Hadriaticke sea. Peradventure moved by that which Pliny in the
fifteenth chapter of his fourth book, has most fabulously written, that
certain fish called Tunies, breed in the Euxine sea, (Pontus Euxinus Mar
maiore) do swim up the river Ister, and from thence do pass, by secret
passages under the ground into the Hadriaticke sea. And thus far of this
gadding and rouing voyage by sea, which from their first setting forward until
their return, as Apollodorus reports out of ancient records, was performed
in the space of four months. Which in my judgment seems not very probable:
I believe he dreamed when he wrote this story. For so many months would
scarce be sufficient for one to sail up the river Ister, against the stream,
from his mouth where it falls into Mar maiore, unto Tergeste, (Trieste) upon
the Gulf of Venice, much less could they be able in so short a space to go so
long and tedious a journey as this was described to be. More true and likely by
far are those words of Hypsipula to Jason, (for she entertained him into her
house at the i will Lemnos (now it is named Stalamine.) Tertia messis erat, cum tu
dare vela coactus, Implesti lachrymis talia verba meis: Abstrahor Hypsipule: si
dent modo fata recursum: Vir tuus hinc abeo, vir tibi semper ero. Quod tamen e
nobis grauida celatur in aluo, Viuat, and eiusdem simus vterque parens. Thus in
English by M. George Tuberuile: When third Autumn came on that thou of force
were feign, To hoise thy sails, these words thou spakest with gushing tears
amain; Mine own, I must depart: if fortune say Amen, From hence I pass thy
spouse and will thy spouse repasse again. The imp within thy womb God grant
that it may live; And we his parents both y fear a decent name may give. They
which desire a larger description of this navigations, (which Philostephanus
says was made in one long ship; or with a navy or sail of diverse ships,
as Pharax reports) let him repair to those three forenamed authors often
cited by us. To these he may adioine Diodorus Siculus in his fourth book:
Ouids seventh book of his Metamorphosis: Hyginus fables: Pindarus and
Callimachus: and if he please, the history of Dares the Phrygian. Appian in his
Mithridatica writes, That Cneius Pompeius after that he had pursued
Mithridates, even as far as Colchis, that he went aland here, map of the
ancient Mediterranean, with inset maps of Europe, the Black Sea and Thessaly
ARGONAVTICA.
ILLVSTRISSIMO PRINCIPI CAROLO COMITI ARENBERGIO, BARONI SEPTIMONTII, DOMINO
MIRVARTII, EQVITI AVREI VELLERIS, ETC. ABRAH. ORTELIVS DEDICAB. L. M.

Ex conatibus Geographicis Abrah. Ortelij Antverp.
Cum Imp. Reg. et Belgij privilegio decennali. 1598.

to view the peregrinations and travels of the Argonaures, and to see the mount
Caucasus, and the couch or bed of Prometheus. This is that which we here in
this map offer to the eye and consideration of the student desirous of this
knowledge, with a great deal less toil and travel, and peradventure with as
much contentation and pleasure. Cydias the painter, drew this story of the
Argonautes in a table so curiously that he sold it, as Pliny in the eleventh
chapter of his five and thirtieth book writes, to Hortensius the famous
Roman Orator, for 144. sesterces.

That the Argonautes, which were otherwise called Minyae, Dioscuri, and
Tyndaridae, were in number fifty, Lucian in his Saltationes and Philostratus in
his Icones do plainly testify: Item, Valerius Flaccus in his seventh book in
these words: Quinquaginta Asiam (pudet heu) penetrauit Jason Exulibus. Brave
Jason with his fifty mates, I blush to tell, Did first set foot in Asia great.
Orpheus reckons up two and fifty. Diodorus Siculus and Apollonius four and
fifty. We, out of diverse and sundry writers, have gathered together more than
fourscore. And these are their names, with their authors by whom they were
mentioned.

Acastus, by Apollodorus, Apollonius and Val. Flaccus. Actor, by Apollodorus.
Actorides, by Orpheus and Flaccus. Acterion, by Orpheus. Admetus, by Orpheus,
Apollonius, Valerius Flaccus and Apollodorus. Aethalides, by Orpheus,
Apollonius and Valerius Flaccus. Aglaus, by Orpheus. Almenus, by Apollodorus.
Amphiaraus, by Apollodorus. Amphidamas, by Flaccus and Apollonius. Amphion, by
Apollonius, Flac. and Orpheus. Ancaeus, by Apollodorus, Orpheus, Apollonius and
Val. Flaccus. Anchistaeus, by Orpheus. Areices, by Apollonius and Orpheus.
Argus, by Apollonius, Apollodorus and Valerius Flaccus. Armenius, by Trogus.
Ascalaphus, by Apollodorus. Asterius, by Orpheus, Apollonius, Apollodo us and
Flac. Atalanta, by Diodorus and Apollodorus. Augeas, by Apollonius, Orpheus,
Apollodorus, and Philostratus. Autes, by Valerius Flaccus. Autolicus, by
Apollodorus and Flaccus. Buphagus, by Orpheus. Butes, by Orpheus, Apollonius
and Apollodorus. Caeneus, by Orpheus. Calais, by Apollodorus, Apollonius,
Orpheus, Pindarus, Val. Flaccus and Oppianus. Canthus, by Orpheus, Apollonius,
and Val. Flaccus. Castor, by Apollodorus, Herodotus, Diodorus, Apollonius,
Orpheus, Flaccus and Pindarus. Cepheus, by Flaccus, Apollonius, Orpheus and
Appollodorus. Climenus, by Val. Flaccus. Clytius, by Apollonius. Coronus, by
Apollonius. Deiloontus, by C. Valerius Flaccus. Deucalion, by C. Val. Flaccus.
Echion, by Orpheus, Flaccus and Apollonius. Erginus, by Apollonius,
Apollodorus, Orpheus and Valerius Flaccus. Euphemus, by Flaccus, Apollodorus
and Pindarus. Euryalus, by Apollodorus. Eurybotes, by Apollonius and Flaccus.
Eurydamas, by Orpheus and Apollonius. Eurytus, by Orpheus, Apollonius, Flaccus
and Apollodorus. Glaucos, by Athenaeus. Hercules, by Apollodorus, Apollonius,
Diodorus, Orpheus, Pindarus and Flaccus. Hylas, by Orpheus, Apollonius and
Liberalis. Jason, by Diodorus, Orpheus, Apollonius and Val. Flac. Idas, by
Apollodorus and Apollonius. Idmon, by Orpheus, Apolloninius, Flaccus and
Marcell. Iphidamas, by Orpheus. Iphitus, by Valerius Flaccus and Apollonius.
Iphyclus, by Diodorus, Orpheus, Apollonius, Flaccus and Apollodorus. Iphys, by
Valerius Flaccus. Iritus, by Apollodorus. Laertes, by Apollodorus. Laocoon, by
Apollonius. Laodocus, by Orpheus, Apollonius and Valerius Flaccus. Leitus, by
Apollodorus. Lynceus, by Apollonius, Apollodorus, Orpheus and Flac. Meleager,
by Flaccus, Apollonius, Orpheus, Diodorus and Apollodorus. Menoetius, by
Orpheus, Apollonius and C. Val. Flaccus. Mopsus, by Pindarus, Orpheus and
Valerius Flaccus. Nauplius, by Orpheus, Flaccus and Apollonius. Nestor, by C.
Val. Flaccus. Olieus, by Apollonius, Orpheus and Flaccus. Orpheus, by
Apollodorus, and Diodorus. Palaemon, by Orpheus, Apollonius and Apollodorus.
Peleus, by Orpheus and Apollodorus. Peneleus, by Apollodorus. Periclymenus, by
Apollonius, Apollodorus, Pindarus, Orpheus and Flaccus. Phanus, by Apollodorus.
Phalerus, by Pausanias, Orpheus, Apollonius and Flaccus. Philoctetes, by C.
Valerius Flaccus. Phlias, by Apollonius, Orpheus and Flaccus. Phogus, by C.
Val. Flaccus. Poeas, by Apollodorus. Pollux, by Apollodorus, Diodorus, Pindarus
and Herodotus. Polyphemus, by Flaccus, Orpheus, Apollodorus and Apollonius.
Staphylus, by Apollodorus. Sthelenus, by Ammianus. Taenarius, by Orpheus.
Talaus, by Apollonius and Val. Flaccus. Telamon, by Diodorus, Orpheus,
Apollodorus and Flaccus. Theseus, by Pindarus, Apollodorus and Plutarch.
Tideus, by C. Val. Flaccus. Tiphys, by Orpheus, Apollodorus, Flaccus,
Philostratus, Ovid, Pausanias and Marcellinus. Zetes, by Apollodorus,
Apollonius, Orpheus, Pindarus, Flaccus and Oppianus.
All which, Philo Iudaeus says, were gentlemen, free men borne, and of good
parentage: allied to Kings, and of the blood royal, as Varro in his second
book of Husbandry writes: The dear darlings of the Gods, as Theocritus in
his seven and twentieth Idyllion, or Demy-gods, as Philostratus in his Icones
names them: Whereupon the poet Catullus thus saluted them: Heroes saluete Deum
genus: All hail brave woorthies borne of seed divine.

As for the Argo (which Flaccus calls fatidicam, the fortune teller: Lucian,
Claudian and others loquacem, the prattling ship: and was at last, as Manilius
reports, taken up into heaven) of whom it was so named, who made it, in what
place, of what wood, from whence it did first set sail, etc. Hieronymus
Columna, in his Commentaries upon the fragment of Ennius, imprinted at Rome,
has most diligently gathered and selected out of all ancient writers, and
followed to the full.

These Argonautica, Martial in his seventh book of Epigrammes, where he
speaks of the fragment or broken keele of this Argo, makes of it, except he
jest, a true story, not a feigned tale and fiction of the poets: Fragmentu^
quod vile putas and inutile lignu^
Haec fuit ignoti prima carina maris.
Qua^ nec Cyaneae quonda^ potuere ruinae
Fra^gere, nec Scythici tristior vnda freti.
Secula viceru^t, sed quamuis cesserit annis,
Sanctior est salua parua tabella rate.


TEMPE THESSALICA, OR The PARADISE of THESSALY.
BEing admonished in my sleep by the Goddess Fessonia, (which they were wont
to adore and pray unto, that by reason of any great labor or far travel
were faint and weary (fessi) that after this long and tedious peregrination
over the whole world, I should bethink my self of some place of rest, where
the painful students, faint and wearied in this long and wearisome journey,
might recreate themselves; I presently, as soon as I awaked, went about it:
and while I surueigh all the quarters of the huge globe of the Earth, behold
the noble TEMPE, famous for their sacred groves, by the leading of Pomponius
Mela, that renowned Geographer, do offer themselves to my view and
consideration: those therefore shaddowed out in their true and lively colors
with the best art of painters pencill: and rudely described by our more
unskillful pen we have annexed to the end of these our labors. They are
situate in AEMMONIA, as Ovid and Athenaeus do testify: or THESSALIA, which is
all one in the judgment of Solinus and Liuy. But in regard that the river
Peneus (Pezin, or Salampria) does part Thessaly from Macedony, they seem
rather to be situate in the confines of both these countries, than to be
contained wholly within the bound of one. Strabo Pliny, Herodotus, Liuy and
Theon, the petifogger, by the judgment of Theopompus, do place these Tempe, or
this large and pleasant plain (through the midst of which the goodly clear
river Peneus does run) between the two stately mountains Ossa, (Olira, or
Cossouo) and Olympus, now called Lacha. Solinus also is of the same opinion, as
appears by these his words: Peneus the river, which running between the
mountains Ossa and Olympus, with the goodly hills rising and falling gently by
degrees, and woody vales, does make the pleasant Tempe in Thessalia; Tempe,
quae syluae cingunt super impendentes, The Tempe which the ouer-hanging groves
do round enclose, as Catullus the poet in his Argonautickes, has left
recorded. It is, as Pliny says, about three lands breadths over, (sesqui
iugerum, AElianus calls it Plethrum.) The length (which they do define to be
from the mouth of the river Gannum, even unto the bay, now vulgarly called
Golfo di Salonichi, then Sinus Thermaeus) is as Liuy testifies five miles, or
as AElianus says, which is all one, forty furlongs. These mountains, Liuy
writes are so high, steep, and craggy on all sides, that a man may scarce
look down from off the top of them, without a dazzling of the eyes, and
giddiness of the brain. The noise also and depth of the river Peneus, which
runs through the midst of the valley, is very terrible. Pliny says that
the stately tops of these mountains, on every side do rise by little and
little up higher into the air, than a man may well discern. Within these hills
the goodly river Peneus does run; which for his crystal waters, rolling over
the smooth pebbles; the goodly meddowes and grass always fresh and green upon
the banks: the ouerhanging groves and trees continually resounding with the
melodious harmony of sweet singing birds, is so pleasant and delightsome as any
in the world beside. But because all these authors have spoken of it, as it
were by the way, and not of set purpose: I think it not amiss to set down in
this place, the description of it, done by AElianus as you may read in the
first chapter of his third book De varia historia, where it is most curiously
and absolutely set out in his true and lively colors. These therefore are his
words.

There is a place between Olympus and Ossa, the two loftiest mountains of all
Thessaly, disioined one from another, by the divine providence of eternal God,
by a fair plain or level running between them: the length of this plain or
valley is forty furlongs: It is from one side to the other in some places, two
or three lands breadths over, in some places it is somewhat broader. Through
the midst of this valley runs the river Peneus: into which also other
rivers falling and mingling their waters with his, do much increase the stream
of Peneus. This place is most pleasant and delightsome, by reason of his great
variety of all sorts of alluring and inticeing pleasures, never made by any
art or industry of man, but by nature it self, showing all her skill in the
beautifying of this valleie, at such time as it was first made. There is in
this place great store of iuie alwaie green and flourishing, alwaie budding and
putting forth his pleasant slowres, ever clinging and winding in manner like the
goodly vine, about the tallest trees, and clambring up by little and little
until it come even to the very top. In the same places grow the aie-green
yeugh-tree, which lifting up it self aloft upon the rocks, shaddoweth the
caves, holes and cliffes, which beneath lie lurking in the vale. All other
things whatsoever do flourish, blossom, and bear flowers are there to be
seen: this is a most gallant and glorious show for the eyes to behold. In the
plain, when the sun is at his height in summer, you shall have many goodly
shaddowie groves and diverse places of shelter, into which travelers, desirous
for to refresh their wearied limbs from the violence of the heat and their
noisome sweat, do betake themselves, as into the most pleasant and
delightsomest innes and harboroughs that are in the world. Moreover of
ouerflowing wels and pleasant springs of most cool and fresh waters running
here and there in sundry places of this valleie, there are very many and
diverse: which if we shall believe the report of our fathers, have been very
wholesome and sovereign to sundry sorts of diseased persons that have washed
themselves in the same. Again, diverse birds here and there dispersed in these
groves and woods, do make the guests great mirth at their banquets, with their
sweet singing and pleasant tunes: especially those which have the lowdest and
sweetest voices, do so please and hold the ears of the hears, that those
which pass by this way are so ravished and delighted with this their music,
that they instantly forget all their travels and business. On each bank of the
river such are the delights, pleasures and recreations for the wearied
travelers, as before we have mentioned. Yet the river Peneus, going on
leasurely, and smoothly like an oil, runs quietly through the midst of
the Tempe. About this river, by reason of the trees which grow upon the banks,
and their farre-spreading boughs, is a most goodly shade: so that such as row
in boats, up and down upon this stream, for almost a whole day together, may
sail in the pleasant shade free from the violence and schorching heat of the
sun. The people which dwell upon this river, do often times meet in companies,
sometimes in one place and sometimes in another. Having done divine service and
ceremonies in due form and manner, they banquet and make merry. Therefore
those which do these services and perform these ceremonies being very many, it
is no marvel though such as come hither to walk for recreation, those which
travel by this way or sail up or down this river upon what occasion soever,
do continually smell a most sweet and fragrant savor. In this manner this place
was consecrated with great honor and religious services. These things and many
other has Aelianus written of these Tempe.

depiction of the ancient paradise of Tempe in Thessaly TEMPE.
Delineatum et auditum auctore Ab. Ortelio cum privilegio decennali. 1590.
Est nemus Aemoniae praerupta quod undique claudit
Silva, vocant TEMPE, per quae Peneus ab imo
Effusus Pindo, spumosis volvitur undis.
Ovid. i. Metamorph.

Of these also Procopius (although he names them not by name) has written in
his fourth book De Aedif. Iustiniani Imperatoris. There is a brave description
of these places in Catullus his Argonauticks. But I think it good here to set
down out of diverse writers certain several things of these Tempe, as they
are here and there dispersed in their works. Maximus Tyrius, in his xxxix.
oration, has left recorded, that divine honor in old time was done to the
river Peneus, for his marvelous goodly beauty and farre-surpassing clear
waters. Pliny writes, that this river does admit into his channel the
stream of the brook Eurotas, but so as it swimmeth aloft like oil; and
having carried it so for a certain space, casts it off again, as refusing to
quaint and intermeddle his silver stream with his filthy stinking troubled
waters. The same author says, that here grows great plenty of Laurel,
Polypody, Dolichus (a kind of bean) Wilde-time, and Water-lilly: but this
has a black flower, if we may believe Apuleius. Pausanias in his Phocica,
writes that the temple of Apollo at Delphos was built of Laurel boughs which
grew in this place. Mela and the Poets do speak of Ossa, the mountain
memorable for the fabulous story of the Giants: who also do report, that the
Lapithae a people of Thessaly, did sometime dwell here. In the same mountain I
read in Polyaenus his fourth book, that Alexander King of Indica, (for so I
do rather yield to have it read, than India, as hitherto the interpretours have
set forth, seeing that Indica is a country hard by Pontus, as Stephanus
directly auerreth) by hewing down the craggie cliffes of this mountain, did
make certain small stairs, which sequent ages called Alexanders ladder. Nere
these Tempe there is a water described by Seneca and Pliny, which is so
ill-favored and filthy, that it will make any man affrayd to look into it; and
which, they say, will eat and consume both brass and iron. Vitruuius also in
the third chapter of his eighth book says, That in Tessaly there is a well or
spring of running water, whereof no cattle will drink, nor any manner of beast
will once come near; hard by this fountain is a tree which bears a purple
flower. Thus far Vitruuius. Of the mount Olympus (which Homer, in the second
book of his Odysses, calls The seat of the Gods) Solinus out of the sixth
book of Varro, De lingua Latina, cites, That it rises up so exceeding high
into the air, that the people near adjoining do call his lofty top, Heaven.
Lucane says that it is higher than the clouds. For it is ten furlongs high,
as Plutarch in Aemilius, by the authority of Xenagoras, who measured it, has
left recorded. No bird nor foul does fly higher than the top of this hill,
as Apuleius in his book entitled De Deo Socratis, does affirm. In the very
top of it there is an Altar built and consecrated to Jupiter, where if any of
the entrals of beasts sacrificed be left, they are neither blown about by the
blustering blasts of the roughest winds, nor dissolved by the dampish air or
washing stormy raines: but the next year after, that time twelue-moneth,
look how they were left, so they shall find them: and at all times and
seasons of the year, whatsoever is there once consecrated and offered to that
God, is preserved from all putrefaction and corruption of the air: Letters
also written and drawn in the ashes do so remain until the next solemnity
of the like rites and ceremonies the year following. Thus far Solinus
Polyhistor. Et nubibus intactum Macedo miratur Olympum: The Macedonian brave
admir'th Olympus top to see So high and stately, far above the highest clouds
to be: as Claudian the poet has spoken of it in his poem of the wars of the
Goths. Of this mountain, Varro, in his sixth book De lingua Latina, notes
that the Muses were named Olympiades. And thus far generally of these Tempe,
which from the beginning had not this form and goodly countenance as all
ancient writers do constantly with one consent affirm: but the river Peneus,
being enclosed with mountains, and entertaining many rivers into it, did all
ouerflow the valley, making it to stand full of water like a fenne or pond: and
afterward when the mountains Olympus and Ossa, which sometime did touch one
another, were disioyned and rent asunder (which happened by reason of an
earthquake, as Strabo, Seneca, and Athenaeus have written: others, as
Herodotus, Claudian, and Philostratus, do ascribe it to Neptune: others, as
Diodorus and Lucane, to Hercules) and so by that means Peneus found an issue
and way to unload it self into the maine ocean; whereby it came to pass that
the valley was emptied and clean dried up. By Stephanus in his book of
Cities, I find that this tract and plot of ground was first called LYTAE,
before it was disburdened of those waters. Eurypides in his tragedy entitled
Troades, calls it Semnan choran, the sacred and honorable country. Amongst
the poets there is every where much speech of this most goodly coast: to wit,
in Virgill, Ovid, Horace, Catullus, Claudian, Statius, Lucan, Flaccus and
Seneca, where you may observe these epithites attributed and spoken of it; some
calling it Tempe Thessala, Peneia, Heliconia, Phthiotica; others, Tempe
Frigida, Tenebrosa, Nemorosa, Opaca, Gratissima, Lucentia, Oloria, and
Teumessia. The paradise of Thessaly, Peneus, Helicon, Phthiotis: the cold,
shadowy, woody, cool, kind, swanny and Teumessiam paradise; although this
latter, with the singular learned man Hermolaus Barbarus, I do think not to
belong properly to this place, but rather unto another most delightful place
in Boeotia, where we learn out of Pausanias, Strabo, Stephanus and Hesychius,
that the mountain Teumessus is seated. For Lutatius the Grammarian I hold to
be deceived, who calls the place The city Trumessia. Neither is this
altogether an unaccustomed thing or unusual amongst writers, especially poets,
to use this word Tempe, and to speak it figuratively of other places, famous
for their many delightful pleasures; as you may see by Heloria Tempe, a place
in Sicilia; and another in Tiburtina villa Latij, a place in Villa Hadriani; if
you will give credit to Spartianus in the life of the Emperor Hadrian: again
there was a College in Athens known by this name. So Dionysius and Priscianus
do name Daphne, the suburbs of Antioch, Tempe. Plutarch in Flaminius describes
a place near the river Apsus (Spirnasse or Vreo in Macedonia) for
pleasantness much resembling the Tempe. Of these and such like places I cannot
but I must needs add these words of the Emperor Julian unto Libanius the
sophister, and so to end my speech of this most goodly valley: Then, says he,
Batnae, a city of Mesopotamia, did entertain me: a place such, as, only
Daphne, the suburbs of Antioch in Syria excepted, in all my life I never saw
the like: Daphne which now is compared to Batnae, when as before excepting the
temple and image, I would not doubt not only to compare it, but also far to
prefer it, before Ossa, Pelion, Olympus, and the Thessalian valleys etc. (he
means Tempe). These Batnae are situate (if any man be desirous to know) in
Osroena, a province of Mesopotamia, as Zozimus and Stephanus do think; or in
Anthemusia, as Ammianus affirms; in the way between Antioch of Syria, and
Carrae. Thus far of these Tempe. But because I see that Daphne, the suburbs
of Antioch in Syria, is of some writers contained under this name, and that it
is as pleasant a place as the Tempe, I will address my self to describe and
trick this out also; but in the next page following, not in this.

DAPHNE, OR The pleasant Suburbs of Antiochia in Syria.
DAPHNE of Antiochia in Syria, upon the river Oronies, that famous and pleasant
Suburbs, which Ammianus calls, Amoenum and ambitiosum, A delectable and
gorgeous place, is distant from the city about forty furlongs. It is in
compass foure-score furlongs (or, which is all one, ten miles) as Strabo
writes; who moreover says, that it is a pretty village, within a huge dark
grove, watered with diverse goodly brooks and running waters. But take this
larger description of it, out of Sozomen: It is a place, says he, round beset
and shadowed with many Cypress trees, [and those of infinite height, as
Philostratus reporteth] yet here and there it is bedecked with sundry other
sorts of goodly trees: by reason of the thickness of whose boughs and leaves,
which by no means suffers the Sunne-beames to come unto the ground, it is
all close covered over with a shadow as it were with a roof. Under the trees,
the earth, according to the seasons of the year, brings forth of all sorts,
most pleasant and sweet smelling flowers, one after another. Item, it is a
place, both for the great plenty and pleasantness of the waters [ Strabo
calls them, Running waters; Philostratus, Still or standing waters:] as also
in respect of the temperature of the air and kind seasons of the year;
lastly, in regard of the cool blastes and gales of winds which here do
ordinarily blow, (yielding also, as Calistus adds, a sweet and pleasant
whistling noise) most delectable, and for all manner of pleasure and recreation,
passing fit and commodious. Here is also a spring, which is supposed to fetch
his waters from Castalius, a spring by Parnassus in Greece: wherefore some men
have attributed to it the virtue and power of divination, and do verily
persuade themselves, that it was of equal force and nature with that at
Delphos. The vulgar sort and common people to these do add this fable; namely,
That the daughter of Ladon (Ovid has Peneus) a river in Arcadia, did fly
hither from her lover, and here was transformed into a tree. Yet Apollo not
thus quieted in mind, but crowning himself with the boughs of that tree
which he especially delighted in, and embracing the tree, and the place where
it stood, beloved of him above all places in the world beside, did honor and
grace it more than ever any other whatsoever. Gulielmus Tyrius, in the tenth
chapter of his fourth book, does make mention of a fountain or spring called
Daphnis; which, he says, by devices and pipes into diverse places is so
cunningly conveyed, that it affoordeth, at certain set times, great plenty of
water. The situation therefore and nature of the place, the argument and matter
of the fabulous story, which was altogether of love, and applied unto
wantonness, often times did imprint in the minds of corrupt and ill disposed
young men (taking this slight occasion) twice so great a desire of this wanton
life as by nature they had before. For they, repeating those matters, spoke of
in those fables, as it were in defense and excuse of their follies, were the
more inflamed and pricked forward to the same: so that, casting off all shame
and honesty, they are in these their lascivious acts carried with such heat and
violence, that by no means they are able to temper themselves, nor abide to
see here any modest man in company with them. The nature therefore of this
place being thus, it was held for a vile thing and great disgrace, for any
honest and civil man to be seen in it. For if any men, of those places near
adjoining, were by chance seen here without his wench, he was counted for a
very clown or sot, a man of no bringing up, or good manners, nor fit for any
gentle-mans company. Thus far Sozomen. It was a defencible place, enclosed
with a strong wall or rampart, as appears out of the seven and twentieth
book of Trogus Pompeius, who writes that Beronice betaking her self to this
place for a refuge, was besieged by Seleucus, but might by no means be taken.
Item, he makes mention of the Enginers of Daphne, (Ballistarij Daphnenses.)
Moreover, it was also, as Metaphrastes writes in the life of Artemius, graced
with many goodly buildings, houses and bathes. In it was a chapel of very
gorgeous and costly workmanship, wherein stood the brave statue or image of
Apollo Daphneus, or, of the Daphneian god, as Julian the Emperor terms it;
equalling, as Ammianus says, the greatness of the counterfeit of Jupiter
Olympius. Here also was a temple and sanctuary of Diana, as Strabo
testifies. Item, here Germanicus Caesar kept his Courts, as Tacitus has
recorded: and here afterward, says Suidas, Constantine the Great built a
palace, where he set up the statue of Helena his mother: ( Augustale, he
calls it; which is, that I may note this by the way, as Quintilian, in the
second chapter of his eighth book of his Institutions, does interpret it,
Tabernaculum Ducis, The pauilion of the general.) The same Constantine caused
this place to be named after his name, CONSTANTINIANA DAPHNE. Callistus and
Gregoras do report, that one Mamianus, in the time of Zeno the Emperor, did
build that place which was called ANTIFORVM. Here also was the church of Saint
Euphemia, where S. Thomas the Abbat was buried. Item, the church of S. Michael,
which, as Procopius in his second book of the Persian history writes, was
burnt by Cosroes. That this was a most pleasant place, beside those things
here alleged, other histories also do plainly show: for Eutropius has left
recorded, That Cneus Pompeius being delighted with the pleasantness of the
place, and great plenty of water, gave unto the Daphnenses a certain plot of
ground, that they might there farther enlarge the same. Julius Capitolinus
writes, That Verus, that voluptuous Emperor, did usually spend the Summer in
Daphne, the rest of the year at Antiochia. Lampridius says, That Alexander
Seuerus executed some of the Tribunes of his legions or companies, for that by
their negligence they had suffered diverse soldiers to keep riot and take
their pleasure too much in Daphne. In Volcatius I read of Auidius Cassius,
That he caused proclamation to be made, that every man should repair to his
Ancient, and to have caused bills to be set upon every wall, That if any man
were found in Daphne armed, (cinctus) he should return from thence disarmed
(discinctus.) (For Seruius at that place of Virgill, Discinctus Mulciber Afros,
does interpet the word, Discinctus, id est, militiae inhabilis.)
Notwithstanding, it was of the Gentiles had in no less reverence and
estimation for the certeinty of those Oracles, which, as Suidas reports, were
uttered and given forth in a cool and soft blast, breathed forth of the waters
there. For they say that Hadrian who afterward was Emperor, before such timeas
he was called to any public office, having in a fountain here dipped a
Cypress leaf, did together with the water suck in a certain faculty of
divining things to come. Iulianus in his Misopogonos writes, That he had so
many times and often gone unto this Oracle, that he could not possibly call to
mir de how often. In his time also, Sozomen, Theodoret, and Saint Chrysostom do
write, that this Oracle ceased to give any answer at all. For Gallus the
brother of this Julian, being elected Caesar by his father Constantius, because
he was by profession a Christian, determined to cleanse and purge this place of
that heathenish superstition, and that by this means: He commanded the coffin
of Saint Babyla, that constant Martyr, and of others, which in the persecution
of Numerianus suffered martyrdom with him, to be brought from Antiochia
thither: by whose presence only, which Gallus before had truly deemed, that
devil at an istant became wholly dumb. But the foresaid Iulianus purposing to
make war upon the Persians, and according as his manner was, coming with
great devotion to this his Daphne, and killing many oxen and other cattle for
sacrifices, demanded of the Oracle what the event of this his war would be;
answer was made him, by the idol, that by reason of the neerenesse of the dead
bodies depiction of the ancient paradise of Daphne at Antioch DAPHNE.
Ex utriusque lingua scriptoribus adumbriabat Ab. Ortelius. Cum priuilegio
decennali.

(meaning Babyla with the rest, although he named them not) he was never able
any more hereafter to answer ought of things to come. Iulianus taking this
hardly, commanded the Christians to carry away the coffin of Babyla from thence
into another place: which was straightway accordingly performed. Not long after
(the very next night, as one author affirms) by chance the chapel was set
on fire, which consumed the roof of the same, and burnt the image to ashes.
This was the end of this Apollo of Daphne, as also of his temple. Saint
Chrysostom writes, that in his time there stood one column or pillar of it
firm and sound, which neither any violent tempest of wind and weather, or
trembling earthquake had shaken or overthrown; so that he supposed that it
expected and looked to be amended and repaired again by some succedent
Emperors or others: And although Procopius affirms that this temple was
reedified by Justinian the Emperor, yet Cedrenus (who lived long since Saint
Chrysostom) says, that in his time there remained neither stick nor stone of
it. Which also my good friend M. Ioachimus Axonius Grauianus, a man for diverse
and sundry far travels undertaken and performed by him, and especially for
his skill in diverse strange languages very famous and honorable, an
eyewitness of this same place, does justify to be true: for he being by my
self demanded of the modern estate of this place, plainly answered, that
beside certain trees, there is not any thing of it at all to be seen. But of
the firing and burning down of this temple, the report of diverse writers is
diverse. Saint Chrysostom says that it was done by the devil. Many affirm it
to have been kindled by thunder and lightning from heaven. The infidels
commonly did father this act upon the Christians. Iulianus the Emperor in his
Misopogonos writes, that it was defaced by the negligence of the warders or
watchmen, and the desperate rashness of some wicked and base fellows. But the
Sextens, Church-keepers, and Priests, as Theodoret testifies, when they were
whipped for their negligence, said plainly, that the fire began not at the
ground or bottom, but at the top, and so consequently by all likelihood did
fall from heaven. And the clownes and countrey-people which dwelt not far
off, affirmed that they saw lightning fall from heaven upon that place. But of
this let us hear Ammianus Marcellinus, who in his two and twentieth book has
these words of it: Iulianus had the Christians in a jealousy for the fact,
moved thereunto, as he thought, by envy and malice. But the same was, although
but lightly reported and of small credit, that this chapel was fired upon this
occasion: Asclepiades the Philosopher coming to see Iulianus the Emperor,
staying in these suburbs, was wont whithersoeuer he went to carry about him a
little silver image of the heavenly goddess (Dea coelestis) which he set below
underneath the feet of this idol; and lighting torches and wax candles, as
the manner was, went his way: whereupon about midnight, when no man could be
there nor at hand to help, the sparkles flying up gat hold upon the old rotten
timber, and the fire being kindled and increasing greatly by reason of the
dryness of the fuel, streamed upward and caught hold upon whatsoever it
might reach, yea indeed were it never so high, and burnt it clean down to the
ground. Notwithstanding, we learn out of Nicephorus Callistus, That this same
place from that time was not altogether forsaken and contemned, but was wont
of a long time after to be frequented, and that games, plays and shows were
usually held and kept there.

Aethicus (or, more truly, Julius Orator) accounts this Daphne (yet falsely
and untruly he calls it Daphe, not Daphne) amongst the most goodly and
famous towns of the East sea. Metaphrastes also, in the life of S. Artemius,
makes it a city: Claudian, the Christian Poet, calls it Apollineum nemus,
Apollo's grove: Dionysius, Sacra Tempe, The holy Tempe: and his old
interpreter, Optima Tempe, The goodly Tempe: in ancient coins, we said before,
they were called Constantiniana Tempe, Constantines Tempe: in the iournall set
forth by Peter Pithoeus, Palatium Daphne, The Palace of Daphne. But why should
I not here insert these verses of Petronius Arbiter written of it? Nobilis
aestiuas platanus diffuderat vmbras, Et baccis redimita Daphne, tremulaeque
Cupressus, Et circumtonsae trepidanti vertice pinus. Has inter ludebat aquis
errantibus amnis Spumeus, and querulo vexabat rore capillos. Dignus amore
locus. In summer time the broad-leafd plane had cast his shade about, Brave
Daphne crowned was with bays, sweet Cypress proud and stout, And here and
there the taller pines with rounded tops looked out: Amid these ran a foaming
brook, with wandering stream so fast, That all their lower boughs beneath with
water were bedasht. This pleasant place who can but love?

And thus much of the name, situation, and nature of this place: now there do
yet remain some things somewhat pertinent to this matter, which I thought good
to adioyne to those former. Saint Hierome, Eusebius in his Chronicle, and
Sextus Rufus do write, that Pompey the Great, returning from Persia,
consecrated this grove, and thereto adjoined a goodly large forest. Ammianus
attributes the building of the temple to Antiochus Epiphanes: Sozomen, and
Callistus, to Seleucus: Theodoret says, that the image or statue, within was
of wood, but on the outside gilt all over: this also Simon Metaphrastes, in the
place before cited, does justify to be true: where he makes a large
description of the same: Cedrenus affirms, that this image was the
workmanship of Bryxides, or, Bryaxides, as I had rather read with Vitruuius,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Columella; and Pliny, who writes that he was one of the
four that carved the Mausoleum, that is, the tomb of Mausolus king of Caria,
made by his wife Artemisia. It was inhibited by proclamation, That no Cypress
tree should be taken from hence, or cut down, and that whosoever should fell
any of them, was to be grievously punished by an act made by Theodosius the
Emperor. These Cypress trees were preserved here, as Philostratus writes, in
memory of Cyparissus, a young man of Assyria, turned into this tree. Suidas
records, that this place was the native soil of Theon the Philosopher and
Stoicke, who wrote a defense of Socrates. I do also remember, that I have read
in some good author, whose name I have forgotten, that there was one of the
Sibylla's borne here. Ammianus tells of a monster borne here, as he himself
both saw with his eyes, and heard with his ears from the relation of others:
namely, of a child having two mouths, two teeth, a beard, four eyes, and two
very short or little ears. In Strabo I find recorded from the relation of
Nicolaus Damascenus, that from Porus, a King of India, certain Ambassadors
came hither to Augustus Caesar. Procopius in the second book of his Persian
stories writes, that Cosroes the king of Persia did here sacrifice to the
Nymphs. With what pomp and train Antiochus Epiphanes did once come to this
place, what shows and bankets he made here, as also one Grypus at another
time, if any man be desirous to see, let him read Athenaeus his fifth and
tenth books, and I doubt but he will greatly wonder. Of this Daphne, I would
to God that work of Protagorides, which he wrote of the Daphnensian Plays,
Feasts, and Assemblies, whereof Athenaeus makes mention in his fourth book;
together with that oration written by Libanius the Sophister, which Julian in
his epistles speaks of, and so highly commends, were extant. Agathias in
the prooeme to his history affirms that he wrote the histories of this
Daphne in Hexameter verse. I said before out of Tacitus that Germanicus Caesar
kept his Court in this forest, in whom, at this day in the 11 book of his
Annals, we read these words: His tomb was at Antioch, where his corpse was
burnt: his court he held at Epidaphne, in which place he ended his days. Here
for Epidaphne I read Daphne, or, at Daphne: For of Epidaphne, for the name of
a place, I find no mention in any history, beside in Pliny, in his one and
twentieth chapter of his fifth book, where thou have these words: Antiochia
libera, Epidaphnes cognominata: as if this were a synonyme or equivalent to
Antiochia; yet being indeed as corrupt and falsely written as that other, and
ought to be thus amended, Antiochia libera apud Daphnen, Antioch by Daphne is
free. That this is true, Strabo, Plutarch, Ammian, and others do sufficiently
testify, as we have showed more at large in the second edition of our
Geographicall treasury, in the word ANTIOCHIA.

Of the first FOUNDATION and ORDER of the GERMANE EMPIRE in the West. THE FIRST
TABLE.
AFTER that JULIUS CAESAR had by continual wars appeased almost all those
broiles and seditious quarrels which for certain yeeares passed had much
troubled the Roman state, and had sent Pompey and those other unfortunate
enuiers of his valor and prosperous success in martial affairs, either dead
unto the Devil, or alive by banishment had removed them far off into foreign
countries, as a valiant Conqueror of all enters triumphantly into ROME:
where challenging and assuming unto himself a sovereign authority and honor
above all (himself indeed as a Monarch at his pleasure commanding all) was the
first that began the FOVRTH MONARCHY, which of the place where it first seated
it self, was surnamed, The Roman Monarchy. In this dignity, which was the
greatest that could be given to any mortal man, carrying himself most
tyrannously and proudly (for he commanded that his statue or image should be
set up amongst the odious and wicked kings, and that his chair of Estate shoud
be made of beaten gold, and withal requested the Citizens to give unto him
divine honor; and to worship him as a god) certain Aldermen or Senators,
loathing that his lordly government in the Senate house wounded him in three and
twenty several places, whereof he died, in the year 709. after the building
of the city of Rome. Notwithstanding he being thus made away, the chief
authority and Empire ceased not to reside amongst the Romans, for AUGUSTUS,
the sole adopted heir of Caesar, presently steppeth into the Imperial seat,
and by force of arms lays hold upon the sovereign dignity and whatsoever
else his predecessor had by hook or crook possessed and enjoyed. Under his
government all things being still and hushed, there being now not so much as
the least noice of tumultuous wars stirring in the world, all men generally
admiring this blessed and happy peace, do withal in like manner of all
policies, highly extol the monarchy, as author and preserver of the same.
Under the name of this title, the Romans alone for many ages together most
honorable and fearful to others, were victours and conquerours wheresoever
they became; until at length certain idle and cruel minded men being
promoted unto that dignity, did choose rather tyrannouslie to show their force
and power at home against their kinsfolk, friends, subjects, and best men of
all sorts, then abroad against the public enemy and disturber of the state.
These men by all manner of unlawful means succeeding one another, at last the
Empire and managing of the commonwealth was only in the hands of Tyrants and
Usurpers: neither was there any man now that ever would once trouble himself
to defend the same from the furious assault of the raging enemy: and no
marvel. For even the Empire it self, and whatsoever did of right belong unto
the same, was by the soldiers bought and sold for money, or given for favor
and affection. While all things stood thus in the Roman Empire, ODOACER, king
of the Hunnes, with a mighty army inuadeth the same, and in all places
wheresoever he became, overthrows and beats down the Roman forces and
garrisons: for at this time in the idle and dissolute soldiers there remained
neither strength nor true fortitude. AVGVSTVLVS the Emperor, hearing of these
news, being smitten into a great fear, flies, and that he might the better
escape unknown, in the flight throws off his imperial robes and ornaments.
In the mean time Odoacer speedeth himself toward Rome, besieges it, takes
it, and within a few days after he was wholly and quietly possessed of it,
changes the name of it, and after his own name caused it by proclamation to
be called ODOACRIA: but together with the ancient name this city leaves the
former beauty and lusture, there is nothing now here to be seen but miserable
destruction and ruin. This prosperous success and easy invasion of the city
of Rome by Odoacer, within foureteen years after, gives occasion to
THEODORICVS, king of the Goths, who was then in Thrace, to attempt the same.
Therefore mustering his men, with many thousands of Goths, he enters Italy,
drives Odoacer out of Rome, and again the second time near to Verona sets
upon him, and putting him and his forces to flight, follows him to Rauenna,
where he besieges him continually for the space of three years together, but
at length being forced to yield the city he was by him taken and put to death.
Neither did this satisfy frowning Fortune that Rome was thus once or twice
taken, sacked and consumed with fire, except the LONGOBARDI, Lombardes, a
strange and cruel people do also invade Italy, to deface and overthrow all
things whatsoever the former enemies had left untouched and standing. All
things are now deformed and cast down whatsoever in former times were most
beautiful and glorious, the Roman citizen is compelled to forsake that
ancient and famous title so long enioied by them, and by means of this so
irrecouerable a damage the name of an Emperor was for ever banished out of
Italy. The case thus standing with the Romans, destitute of all help at home,
and in vain expecting the same from the Greeks, (who for their Empire
contented themselves only with Constantinople) the Pope of Rome for defense of
the Church was forced in this great distress to entreat aid of Charles, king
of the Frankes, who afterward was surnamed CHARLES THE GREAT. This good king
pricked on forward with a godly zeal for the maintenance of Christian
religion, passing with a great army over the Alps, puts the Lombards to
flight, takes their king Desiderius with his wife and children, utterly
overthrows their kingdom and clean extinguisheth that impious race. The
Pope observing his invincible courage, and his siugular love that he bare to
the Church and religion, with the general consent and admirable applause of
all men, in the year after Christ's incarnation 801. crowns him with the
Imperial diadem, and gives him the title of AUGUSTUS and GREAT EMPEROVR of
the West. This king was the first that of the Dutch was called Emperor, and
that translated that dignity from the Greeks unto the Germans. He valiantly
assailed the Hunnes, and at last with continual wars so afflicted them that
they were never after able to gather head again. The Normanes, Freises, Danes,
Angles, Saxons, and others molesting the Empire, he wonderfully vexed and
weakened. Having on all sides greatly enlarged his Empire, and for the space of
fowreteene years swaied the scepter quietly at home, void of tumults and noise
of war, he committed the government of the same to his son Lewis, surnamed
the Religious, and ended his life at Aquisgran. After the reign of this
Charles, the digni y and title of the Empire remained not amongst the Germans
without continual wars and bloodshed, diverse kings coveting to annex the
same to their crown and nation, by dint of sword assaied by all means to
bring their purpose to pass. To seat it amongst the French, Charles the Bald,
spares no cost, ventureth life and limme, and sets all the world together
by the ears: yet the Germans valiantly fighting for the Imperial ti le and
dignity; do after many sore conflicts quite and clean drive him out of
Germany. Lewis the Fourth most furiously sets upon Berengarius an usurper
lately proclaimed Emperor in Italy, overcomes him in the field, and forces
him to betake him to his heels. The Italians often desired that this dignity
once lost might again be restored to them. (and no marvel: seeing that every
nation does account it a most honorable thing to have the name of an Empire
resident amongst them.) Yet maugre all external spite this dignity for many
ages together remained in the hands of the Germans, the Princes of this
country manfully defending and preserving it by force of arms from all
injuries and foreign invasions whatsoever. Until at length the forenamed
Princes, foreseeing what was best for the state and good of the Empire, did
choose for their Emperor, Otto the Fourth, the natural son of Otto the Third,
a young man brought up at Rome, and had been sometime in the custody and tuition
of Henry Duke of Bayern. This Emperor perceiving that it would not be an easy
thing to appease and end the wars and controversies that did arise about the
election and choice of the Emperor, except by some other means and order this
choice were made, did therefore invent a certain order and manner of election,
whereby hereafter all cause of dissension and tumult, was wholly taken from
all men, and by which for ever it might quietly be retained amongst the
Germans. This order is here expressed in this Map, and is in effect thus
much: In the first rank are the Seven PRINCE ELECTOVRS and Officers of the
sacred Roman Empire, instituted by Otto the Third: whereof the Three upon the
right hand, are Ecclesiastical persons or Churchmen, to wit, the ARCHBISHOP OF
TRIER, (a city situate upon the river Moselle) chief Chancellor for the
Empire in the kingdom of France: The ARCHBISHOP OF COLEN, upon the Rhein,
Chief Chancellor in Italy; and the ARCHBISHOP OF MENTZ, Chief Chancellor in
Germany: The other Four upon the left hand, are Secular or Lay men: the First,
is the KING OF BOHEMIA, the Cup Bearer: the Second is the COUNTY PALATINE of
Rhein, the Sewer: the Third is the DVKE OF SAXONY, the Sword Bearer: the Fourth
is the MARQVESSE OF BRANDENBVRG, the Lord Great Chamberlain to the Emperor.
In the Second rank do follow, first the Four Dukes of the Empire, to wit,
the DVKE OF SVVITZERLAND, the DVKE OF BRVNSVVICKE, the DVKE OF BAYERN, and the
DVKE OF LOREIN. Then upon the left hand, the Four MARQVESSES, videlicet, the
MARQVISSE OF MEISSEN, the MARQVESSE OF MORAVV, the MARQVESSE OF BADEN, and the
MARQVESSE OF BRANDENBVRG. In the Third and last rank do follow the Eight
EARLS of the Empire: whereof the LANDTGRAVE OF DVRINGEN, the LANDGRAVE OF
HESSEN, the Earls of LVCHTENBVRG, and of ALSATIA, are Earls Provincial: the
other Four, MEIDENBVRG, NVRVBERG, RENECK, and STOMEBVRG, are Earls Marshall
or of the field.

depiction of the three ecclesiastical electors of the Holy Roman Empire, the
four secular electors, four dukes, four marchises, four provincial earls. and
four earls marshal, each with a blazon or coat of arms ORDINES SACRI ROMANI
IMP: AB OTTONE III INSTITVTI


Of the FOUNDATION and ORDER of the GERMANE EMPIRE in the West. THE SECOND
MAP.
OTTO the Fourth, or, as some have written, OTTO the Third, of whom we have
spoken in the former Map, understanding that Gregory the Fifth, Pope of Rome,
whom he had not long since promoted to that dignity, was driven out of his Sea,
and Crescentius a Consul or Alderman of Rome by the Romans made Emperor,
passes the Alps with a great power, furiously assaulteth Italy, forces the
Romans, and any other cities that had stood out against him for the adverse
part, to set open their gates and to yield themselves to his mercy.
Crescentius, when he heard that the enemy was received into the city, was
exceedingly amazed, and therefore betaketh himself with Pope John, the usurper
which he had promoted to that dignity, unto Adrians castle, which not long
before he had fortified and repaired, for their last refuge and succor. But
being not able to sustain the battery and violent assaults which daily the
Emperors soldiers made against him, at length yields the castle and
himself to Otto: who presently commands Crescentius the author of this
commotion to have his eyes put out, his nose cut off, and to be carried on
horseback round about the town with his face to the horsetaile: This being
done his judgment was to have his hands and feet to be cut off, and at the
towns end to be hanged upon a pair of gallows, where, before he was
altogether dead, the soldiers do pitifully wound and mangle him from top to
toe. Moreover Pope John, the usurper, being displaced, Gregory vpheld and
maintained by Otto, the Emperors authority, climbeth up again into the Papal
throne, from which before he had most injuriously, by Crescentius, been
expelled. Then Gregory to requite the kindness of the Emperor and his
Germans, and withal that he might sufficiently revenge himself of the
Romans for the intolerable wrongs that they had done unto him, consulteth with
the Emperor about a new law and form of election of the Emperor, to be made
by the Princes of Germany, that this choice might only and for ever remain in
their power, and again that they should always choose one of their
corporation or body, as it were, unto that dignity, which custom remains
even to these our days duly kept and observed. By virtue of this their
choice, he is by and by upon that their election to be called only, CAESAR and
KING OF THE ROMANS, but having received the Imperial diadem from the hands
of the Pope, he was ever after to bear the title of IMPERATOR AUGUSTUS. But
before these ordinances were published, Otto calling together the Princes and
States of Germany, showed them how confusedly and disorderly the choice and
election of the Emperor had hitherto been made, and how many there have been,
which have assaied by all means possible to prefer their friends and
kinsfolk unto that dignity, which thing cannot but in continuance of time,
breed great dissension and danger to the Christian commonwealth: and that it
were therefore good that some of the Princes of Germany were chosen, which
might have the whole power and authority of this election; and withal
admonishes them, that the fewer there were of those Electours, so much less
the contention would be that should arise about the choice. Moreover he
endeavored to persuade them that these Electours might be appointed and taken
out of the Peers and Officers of the Empire, for that they of all other best
knew what was good for the body and state of that kingdom and empire. All men
generally liking of that course and counsel by him proposed, the Emperor and
the Pope nominated unto them first, Three ecclesiastical Princes, bishops of
Germany, which they wished might be the Lord Chief Chancellours of the Empire,
to wit, The bishop of Mentz, for all matters in Germany; The bishop of Colen,
for Italy; The bishop of Trier, for France; To these they adioined Four
Secular Princes, which should in all things aid the Emperor, attend upon his
person, and that should acknowledge him for their Lord and Monarch of the
World: viz. The Duke of Saxony, Sword bearer to his Majesty, signifying that
he is the fountain of Justice: The Marquess of Brandenburgh, Lord Great
Chamberlain: The County Palatine of Rhein, Sewer: and The K ng of Bohemia,
Cup Bearer: these were to attend upon the Emperor and to guard his person. By
these the King of the Romans was chosen, the Caesar (or he that was next to be
Emperor) was appointed: in their hands the whole right, interest and authority
of choosing that king resided, lest any man hereafter, as heretofore had
been usual, should challenge this dignity unto himself as due by inheritance
from his ancestors. Charles the Fourth many years after this comprised this
instrument or act into a bullion or tablet of gold, which to this day is
extant, wherein he explaned every particular more expressly and significantly.
It is reported that this ordinance was decreed upon, and made in the year of
Grace 1001 and did much discontent the Frenchmen, who took it heinously as a
great indignity offered unto them. Yet beside these there were then, and
afterward in succedent ages were, made many and sundry other ordinances and
decrees in the Roman Empire, and diverse other Offices appointed and erected
for the state and greater majesty of the Empire. For beside these seven
Electours, there were appointed, Four Dukes, Four Marquesses, Four
Landtgraues, Four Burggraues, Four Earls, Four Barons, Four Knights of the
field, Four Cities, Four Villages, and Four Yeomen or Rusticks, all which
offices we have expressed in their true characters in these two mappes
appointed for that purpose only. Notwithstanding other Emperors following, not
content with these constitutions and ordinances, have daiely made new Dukes and
Earls, yea and many that were but Earls before they have advanced to the
title and honor of Dukes. To these forenamed dignities, that they might, as
much as was possible, strengthen the state of the Empire, they have adioined
certain other new officers, to wit these which follow: Four HIGH MARSHALS, as
Bappenheim, Gulich, Meissen, and Vnistingen: Four LORDS OF THE SOIL, Millan,
Scala, Padua, and Mirandula: Four BORROVGHS of the Empire, Aldenburgh,
Meidenburgh, Rotenburgh, and Mecklenburgh: Four KNIGHTS or Servants, Waldeck,
Hirten of Fulchen, Arnsperg, and Rabnaw: Four SOVLDIERS, Andlaw, Meldingen,
Strondecke, and Fornberg: Four LORD ABBOTS, Fulden, Campidon, Wissenburgh, and
Murbach: Four HVNTSMEN, Hurn, Vrach, Scomburgh, and Metsch near to Curia:
Four VILLAGES, Ingelheim, Altdorff, Lichtenaw, and Deckendorff: Four
MOVNTAINS of the Empire, Nunsterberg, Friedberg, Heydelberg, and Nurnberg:
Four OFFICES hereditary to the Dukedom of Switzerland, The Sewer of
Waldprugh, The Cupbearer of Radach, The Marshall of Merkdorff, and The
Chamberlain of Kemnat. Yer many of these dignities are altered and changed
into others, or wholly abolished and extinct by the death of those which held
them, as it is at large to be seen in Munsters Cosmography. If any man be
moreover desirous to know the names of the Imperial cities, let him repair to
the same author, he shall be satisfied to his full content. Item Charles the
Fourth, Emperor of Germany did make besides these many other constitutions.
When the Emperor sits in his Majesty and chair of Estate then the
Archbishop of Trier sits over against him, the Archbishop of Mentz upon his
right hand, and the Archbishop of Colen on his left: The King of Bohemia takes
his seat upon the right hand of the Archbishop, and by him the County palatine
of Rhein places himself, the Duke of Saxony sits upon the left hand of the
Archbishop, and by him the Marquess of Brandenburgh. But of these offices,
diverse authors do write diversely; wherefore it being not our purpose to make a
large discourse of this matter, we send the Reader, for further satisfaction
heerin, to the forenamed Sebastian Munster and other Historiographers of
Germany, who have handled this argument more amply.

depiction of four barons of the Holy Roman Empire, four knights, four freemen,
four citizens, four villagers. and four yeomen, each with a blazon or coat of
arms Otho III Saxonioe Dux, Othonis II filius, a princibus Germanis, Imperator
Romoe dictus, a Gregorio Vpontif. Max. consanguineo suo Bruno antea Vocabatur)
quem ille pontificem crearat, diadema imperiale accepit: Sed cum Saxoniam
peteret Imperator, Gregorius pontifex a Iohanne ponti: Vrbe pellitur Quare Otto
irarum plenus maximis copys Italiam ingressus vi Romam capit. De his consule
Munster:
Crescentium consulem dissidy^ authorem cum suis co^plicibus punit,
Gregoriumque pristinae dignitati restituit. Cum vero consideraret
sapientissimus Coesar perpetuo oestuare Gallos et Italos, transferende
imperialis maiestatis cupiditate a Germanis, et inter Germanos quoque propter
electionem nonnu^qua^ dissensiones defuis se apud suos Maiores: tulit cum
Gregorio sanctionem vt in posterum sola authoritas eligendi Imperatoris, penes
septem Germanioe principibus prima rios remaneret: Erat tum Otto natus annos 28
et propter ingeny proptitudinem miraculum mundi dictus: factum hoc as serunt Ao
salutis nonagentesimo septua^^me quarto licet scriptores tempore multum
varient, quod lectori manifestu^ erit ex lecti^^e Historiarum,

Nomina 4 Comitum et Militum Imperij superius omissa, hic legenda ponimus.

4 Comites Imperij. Swartze^burge^sis, Clivensis, Ciliae, et Sabaudiae.

4 Milites Imperij. Andelato, Meldingensis, Strongendoch, Frauwe^berg.



The KINGS MONASTERY of Saint Laurence, for Friars of the order of Saint
Hierome, in Escuriall in Spain.
OLd stories do much talk of seven wonders of the World, whereof hitherto it
has much bragged, yet notwithstanding they, (such is the mutability of
fortune) at this day are all consumed, and by tract of time; brought to
nothing, so that now there remains not any monument or mention of them at
all. This our age also has certain wonders and strange things equal or
superior to the most of those. Spain, amongst other, has a most stately and
princely building, a worthy work of the Catholic King, of infinite cost and
charges consecrated to holy and religious uses; to wit, a Church, not such as
that was in Asia, sometime dedicated to the Ephesian Diana, and at last set on
fire and defaced by Herostratus, but one as gorgeous and sumptuous as that,
consecrated to Saint Laurence, that zealous Martyr and glory of the Spanish
nation, of whom they crake so much. The cause of the dedication, as they say,
was a vow. For in the voyage unto Saint Quintins, the Metropolitan and chief
city of Vermandois, undertaken by the Catholic King, Philip the second, of the
house of Austrich, against Henry the second, the French King, there was a
notable battle fought between the Frenchmen and the Burgundians, in the year
of our Lord 1557. Upon the tenth day of August, in which the flower of
chivalry and chief Nobility of France being slain and overcome, the victory
fell unto Philip and his Burgundians: which victory was such, as I am not able
to say whether the house of Austrich ever saw a greater or not. This day every
year is kept holy for Saint Laurence the Martyr, to whom and his good prayers
this good Prince does think himself beholding for this victory. Therefore,
the King, as soon as he was returned home, remembering his vow, took care for
nothing more then to perform his promise made to God and his holy Martyr Saint
Laurence. Therefore he performs the same very magnificently, and most
bountifully lays on cost, bestows many years and almost infinite
treasures upon this work: so that now it is not only one, and that a most
gorgeous and stately Monastery, but four, according to the number of the
corners of the building, beside a marvelous princely Palace with a Library
well stored with diverse and sundry ancient manuscripts and rare books. The
village, which by reason of the great multitudes of laborers and workmen
which resorted thither of all trades, now is become a pretty town, commonly
called ESCVRIAL ( Escuriacum, in Latin) is five miles from Madrid, an ancient
city which Ptolemey in his time called Mantua Carpetanorum. Round about it are
diverse very steep and high hills, out of which almost all the stone was dug,
that was used about this building. The Friars which do inhabit and possess
these Monasteries are of the order of Saint Hierome, who very devoutly every
day at nine of the clock in the quire of that Church do sing Psalms and power
out their prayers to Almighty God for the health and preservation of all
Christian Princes. There also the King has erected an University, and has
allowed large maintenance not only for the Professors and Readers of
Divinity, Philosophy and other liberal sciences: but also for the scholars and
students of the same. Yet it is a place of no great resort, being of purpose
built a good way distant from the high rode way, lest the great resort thither
of strangers, which often times comes to pass, should corrupt the manners and
minds of the students, or alienate them from their books. But let us come to
some particulars here well worth the observation. Within the inner Court, on
the foreside of this building, you shall see a goodly cloister or walk covered
over head, which beginning at the West side of the Abbey, runs all along by
the North side, paued with small stones partly round and partly square. The
foreside and chief show of this Abbey is toward the West, and in the four
corners of this building there are four turrets. Over the fore-dore of this
Church, upon their several footstals do stand the statues or counterfets of
the six kings of Israel carved out of white marble and black touchstone, each
of them being eighteen foot high. The great porch of this Abbey vpheld and
standing upon pillars of Ionicke and Doricke work is all of Geat or black
Agate. Upon the North side there is a Courtyard, through which they go to the
Kings palace, the four walks of the College and the University: all which
are built upon this North side. Here also you shall see some of the shops and
worke-houses of those handicrafts, tradesmen and others that do belong as well
to the Church and College as to the Monastery. On the South side also are
certain gardens, orchardes, the walk belonging to the Hospital, certain
Stilling houses, with an Apothecaries shop and a gallery by which they pass
from the Monastery unto the guessen parlour. Let us come now unto the inner
ornaments of this stately piece of work. And first, with the stairs by which
they go up from the great door of the Church, a goodly gallery, which leads
unto the open walk which is between the College and the Monastery, does
offer it self to thy view. In this gallery you may go up by a broad pair of
stairs to go into the Church, and from thence you come unto another floor,
which leads to the cross entry which is before the Church, from whence they
of the Monastery go one way, those of the College another way, into the
church, and so from thence into the lower room of the Quire. The place or
platform of this Quire is square, having within the square three Cloisters. By
this place of the lower Quire on each side there is an open Court, from whence
the lower Quire and the two Chapels situate by this Court, do receive their
light. In this Quire there are two stately Altars. Over this Quire, which is
arched, there is another Church with a Quire belonging to it. Which Church
beside the great Chapel, the Inner and Outter rooms of the Quire, is square,
standing upon four pillars, and other necessary stays and vpholders. In it
are two pair of Organes, each of them having, as they term them, two and
thirty Registers. Moreover in this Churh are six and thirty Altars, with a most
stately Door, by which they go unto the great lower Vault, at such time as
prayers are said. This Church is thirty foot higher then the lower Quire: and
the upper Quire is as many foot higher, then the Church it self. The floor is
laid checkerwise with white marble and a kind of black stone, in like manner as
the floores of the outter and inner Quires are: Here are to be seen diverse
and sundry Service books and Mass books, both written and printed, with
others many belonging to such Church businesses. In the roof of this Quire the
Sun, the Moon, the Stars and all the host of heaven are most curiously
painted, like as also upon the walls of the same the counterfets of diverse
virtues are so cunningly portraitured as one would think them to be live
persons, beside certain histories of Saint LAVRENCE and S. HIEROME. The Seats
are made of very fine wood, carved and set out with turned pillars of
Corinthiacke work most artificially. Upon the South side of the Church is the
Porch door beautified and adorned with diverse and sundry goodly pictures. In
this Porch is a Fountain made of diverse kinds of jasper and marble, running at
seven cocks for the use and benefit of such as are purposed to go to Mass
there. The floor is paued and garnished with black and white marble. The
Vestrie also is a very stately place, and richly adorned, in which are diverse
coffers and chests wherein are laid up and kept the copes, vestments and other
ornaments belonging to the altars and Priests which they put on when they say
Mass. Out of this vestry they go up to the high altar which stands up a loft
in the upper end of the Church. The place where this altar stands is paued
with the best jasper stone of diverse colors. To this are adioning certain
Chapels and closets where the Noblemen and Princes do sit to hear mass. This
way depiction of the Royal Seat of San Lorenzo de El Escorial SCENOGRAPHIA
TOTIVS FABRICAE S. LAVRENTII IN ESCORIALI.
AD PHILIPPVM II. HISPANIARVM ETC. REGEM CATHOLICVM.

Michaelis vander Hagen Antverpij carmen.

Caesarcas moles, atque alta palatia Regum
Ne posthac Latium, aut Graecia iactet ouans;
Pyramides, et aquaeductus, mira Amphitheatra,
Et Circos veteres Inclyta Roma premat;
Prisca fides sileat vasti Miracula Mundi;
Nam faciunt nostra ad secula, prisca nihil;
Vitus enim Hesperioe Rex Maximus ille Philippus
Miracla exuperans omnia condit opus;
Non opus; at Molem. qualem neque tota vetustas
Vidit: et hoec oetas non habitura parem.
Nempe Duces olim parti monimenta triumphi
Victi erexerunt ambitione mala;
Atque trophaea Dijs posuerunt capta profanis,
Aut operis magni in secla perenne decus;
Relligionis Apostolicae verum vnicus ille
Defensor, voti Rex memor vsque pij,
Sancti operis dudum aeternos molitur honores;
Quo maius nihil hic Maximus Orbis habet.
Is Collegium enim Augustum, et Regale dicauit.
Laurenti, sacrum, tempus in omne, tibi;
Cuj certo numero praesunt Hieronymiani:
O felix Ordo; o corda sacrata Deo.
Non est hic aliud nisi Magni Sponsa Tonantis;
Maies tate Dei terribilisque locus;
Est vbi Maiestas, et Magnificentia Regis
Prodiga, inexhaustas et been fundit opes.
Regia sic summi est ibi Principis, atque supremj
Numinis. o qualis gloria? quale decus?
Quis gazas? quis splendorem fando explicet omnem?
Angustum ingenium est, linguaque nostra nimis.
Quis vero Regi par, atque secundus Ibero?
Miraclum Mundi solus et ille facit.
Macte animis; porro tua tanta potentia crescat;
O Heroes populi Inuicte Philippe tuj.
Euge autem o felix Hispania, et euge Madrida;
Quoe nisi tam Magno haud Proefide tanta fores.
they go into the chapel which is upon the North side of the church, where
diverse precious relics of Saints are kept enclosed in their several chests
and boxes. Such another there is for all the world upon the South side. Hard by
the high altar there is a little room most richly adorned, where the holy
communion is administered. Within this room by the high altar there is a
closet, where the Sacrament is kept and reserved, set out most statelily with
seven pillars, of the best jasper, and the statues of the twelve Apostles, as
curiously wrought as art might devise. The Doors of this closet made of the
best and purest Crystal, which they call Crystal of the mountain, are
enclosed and hanged in certain hinges of cast metal double gilt and laid over
with gold. This work is thought to be the most curious and artificial that
elsewhere is to be seen in all the world. The survey or and famous architect
of this building, Master Ieames Trezzo, was six whole years at the least in
cutting and polishing of the jasper which was used in this work only.
Moreover the high altar is a work as costly and curious as this, made in like
manner of jasper and marble, and garnished with sundry stately pictures and
statues.

The MONASTERY, or place of residence for the monks and friars, has a very
goodly Steeple wherein do hang a fine ring of Bells, with a Clock and Dial,
with an Index showing the Natural and Planetary hours. The Wardrope, Hall or
Room where the monks and friars do use to dine and suppe, with the spittle,
are most goodlily built with Sollers, Galleries and Walks. Moreover here is a
fair Cloister or Square, where public prayers are daily read: In the midst
of this square is a very fine garden most artificially divided into beds and
curious knots. In the midst of it is a goodly piece of work, built eight
square in manner of a temple, with fountains of the best jasper. To this
Cloister is adioining the Chapter House, with another room very like unto it.
The Seats of the monks are round about by the sides: but the Seat of the
Priour does far excel the rest, a famous piece of work made of marble,
gloriously set out with pictures, and curiously arched over the head. The
LIBRARY which is upon the top of the Abbey, is 185. foot long, and 32. foot
broad. It has three sundry rooms; In the first are all the Liberal Sciences
protraitured. At the feet of every picture, are the Books of that faculty
very orderly and finely placed, all of them gilt, and bound alike. Here also
is an huge Parchment book, wherein all manner of living creatures that are in
all the whole world, elsewhere to be seen, are most curiously drawn and
expressed in their true and lively colors. In the Second are only manuscript
Latin, Greek and Hebrew books of Divinity. In the beginning of every book
is set the picture and counterfeit of the author of the same. In like manner the
third room is furnished only with manuscript copies of sundry writers, and
different argument in diverse languages, to wit, Historiographers, Poets,
Mathematicians etc. These also have, where they might possibly be gotten, the
lively portraitures and counterfets of their authors set before them. This
Library was much augmented by the addition of the Library of Didacus Hurtadus
Mendoza, who having sometime been Ambassador for Charles the fifth, Emperor
of Rome, unto the Venetians, received from the High country of Greece a ship
full of manuscript Greek copies: so that excepting the Vaticane in Rome, which
is the Popes Library, there is not, as most men think, a more stately and
better furnished library then this in all Europe.

I come now to the UNIVERSITY, and the KINGS PALACE, both which are upon the
North side. In the UNIVERSITY there are three several Schools or Hals, where
the three most famous and worthy arts Divinity, Law and Physic are read by
their several and proper Lecturers, beside the other liberal Sciences which
together with them are there taught and expounded unto the younger sort of
students. To this is adioined a Free School for Grammar scholars, with sundry
other court yards, and hals or dining rooms.

The PALACE is so situate, that from thence you may easily go unto the Church,
the College and monastery. It were a long discourse particularly to describe
the several lodgings of the King, the Ambassadors, Comptroulers,
Chamberlaines, Noblemens, Pensioners, Yeomen of the guard and other Officers
belonging to the Court. The Kings Gallery opens toward the North side of the
Church, upon whose wall is painted the battle at Higueruela, in which King
John the Second overcame the Moors of Granado. Which picture does so liuelily
express the whole story and every thing in it as it was done, as it is
wonderful. It shows in what order, and how the maine battle was set, where
the Horsemen, the Footmen, the Pikemen, the Targeters, the Archers, which then
were in great request, did stand, and how and where they severally charged the
enemy. This piece of work was made at the commandment of Philip the second,
king of Spain, by an old pattern drawn in a piece of linen cloth of an
hundred and thirty foot long, found in the old Tower of Segouia, which was
first drawn at that time that this battle was fought. Moreover upon the East
and South sides of this building there is a most goodly and pleasant Garden,
which is an hundred foot broad, and is set out and beautified with diverse
knots, rare herbs, flowers and fountains. To this garden is adioined an
Orchard planted and set with all manner of trees. Within the precincts of this
monastery there are more then forty fountains. Such is the wonderful number
of Keys and Locks about this house, which do amount unto certain thousands,
that there is a several and proper Officer for to look to them only, called,
The master of the Keys. The form of the monastery is foure-square, and every
side is two hundred and twenty four pases long; only that side except that is
next to the Palace, which of purpose was made shorter then the other three,
that the compass or external form of the Abbey might represent the fashion
of the square of a gridiron, for that S. Laurence, to whom this house was
dedicated, was broiled to death upon a gridiron. The Monks which are in number
three hundred, and as I have showed before, of the order of S. Hierome, do
inhabit not past the third part of this whole building. Their yearly reuenews
do amount to 35000. Ducats. The other part of the revenues they do bestow
upon the king and his family. That I may conclude, it is furnished with so many
Hals, Parlours, Chambers and other closets and rooms for necessary uses in an
house, that there is room enough to entertain and lodge four Kings and their
Courts at once, to that it may worthily challenge the first place amongst the
greatest miracles of the whole world.

FINIS.
IRELAND.
GIraldus Cambrensis, a good Writer, that lived in the time of Henry the
Second, and wrote above 400 years since, describes IRELAND on this manner:
HIBERNIA, says he, post Britanniam, insularum maxima, vnius contractioris diei
nauigatione vltra Britannicas VVallias, in occidentali Oceano sita est. Intra
tamen Vltoniam and Scoticas Galwedias duplo fere angustiore spacio mare
coarctatur. Vtraque vero vtriusque terrae promontoria, hinc distinctius, illinc
ratione distantiae confusius, satis aperte sereno tempore perspici possunt and
notari. Insularum occidentalium haec vltima. Hispaniam, ab Austro, trium dierum
naturalium nauigatione, collateralem habet: Britanniam Maiorem, ab Orient:
Solum Oceanum, ab Occidente: Ab Aquilonari vero part, trium dierum velifico
cursu, borealium insularum maxima Islandia iacet. That is: IRELAND, the
greatest island of the world but Britain, lies in the maine sea, distant
Westward from Wales about a days sail: but between Vlster and Gallaway, a
province of Scotland, the Sea is not much more than half so far over. The
promontories, capes, or forlands (as you please to call them) of both these
countries, may very easily, in a bright sunne-shinie day, from hence be seen
and descried: yet these more plainer, those, by reason they are farther off,
more obscurely. Of all the islands of Europe this lies farthest into the West.
Upon the South side it has Spain, distant from it about three days and three
nights sail. Upon the East lies Great Britain. On the West side of it is
nothing but the vast Ocean sea. Upon the North, three days journey off, lies
Island, which of all the Northren isles is by far the greatest. Again, a
little beneath he adds: Hibernia quanto a caetero and communi Orb terrarum
semota, and quasi ALTER ORBIS esse dignoscitur: tanto rebus quibusdam, solito
naturae cursu, incognitis, quasi peculiaris eiusdem NATVRAE THESAVRVS, vbi
insignia and pretiosiora sui secreta reposuerit, esse videtur. Look by how
much Ireland is disioyned from the rest of the known world, and in that
respect is commonly holden to be as it were ANOTHER WORLD: so, for certain
things, by the common course of Nature, to others unknown, it seems to be a
special and peculiar Treasury or STOREHOVSE OF NATVRE, where it has bestowed
and laid up her most excellent and rarest secrets. Orosius (and Isidore from
him) reports, That Ireland is much less than England, but by reason of the
situation, and temperature of the air here, it is generally more fertile than
England. Yea and reverend Beda, our country man, he says, That the air in
Ireland is more healthful and clear than it is in England. (Hiberniam tum
aeris salubritate, quam serenitate multum Britanniae praestare.) Yet Giraldus
denies the latter. For (says he) as France for thinness and clearness of
the air does far excel England, so England for the same does as far excel
Ireland. For, this is certain, the farther you go Eastward, look by how much
the air is more subtle, pure and thin, so much is it more fierce, sharp
and piercing. On the contrary, the farther you go toward the South and West
parts of the world, by how much the air is more thick, cloudy and foggy, by
so much it is more temperate, kind and healthful. For this country, lying in
the midst indifferently seated between frozen Island, and parched Spain, and
by that means getting a mean temperature between hot and cold, as well in
respect of that temperature and holesomnesse of the air, is a most goodly and
fertile island. The champion fields do yield great store of corn; the
mountains do feed many herds of cattle, the woods afford many Dear and
other kind of wild beasts, the lakes and rivers great variety and plenty of
good fish. Yet the soil of this island is better for Pastorage than
Arable-ground; for Grass than Corn. Multam fruges in Hibernia, says he,
plurimam in culmis, minorem in granis spem promittunt. Abunde satis and campi
vestiuntur, and horrea farciuntur, sola vero granaria destituuntur. Here their
corn, as long as it is in the grass (for Hibernia I read herba) is marvelous
good, but much better it seems to be when it is shot up and spindled, only it
fails when it comes to the threshing, then it is seldom found to be casty.
In the field it makes a goodly show, yea ordinarily it is as thick as may
stand upon the ground, their barnes are crammed full and mowed up to the top,
only their garners are empty. Thus far Giraldus: and because we have handled
the general description of this island in another place of this our work, we
will conclude this discourse with a brief description of some few of their
cities and principal towns, as we have learned of that worthy gentleman
Richard Stanihurst, this countreyman bredde and borne. DVBLIN, situate upon the
river Liffe, in the county of Dublin, the Metropolitan and chief city not
only of Leynster, but also of all Ireland, for goodly fair buildings,
multitude of people, ciuility, for sweet air and situation, does as far
excel all the other cities of this i will, as the lofty cypress does the lowest
shrubs. The Cathedral church of S. Patricks was first founded by John Cinim
Archbishop of Dublin, in the year of our Lord God 1197. That great and goodly
strong Castle was built by Henry Loundres Archbishop also of Dublin, about the
year of our Lord 1220. This city is very ancient, and was in Ptolemeys time (as
learned men think) called Ciuitas Eblana, The city Eblan. The next city in
order and dignity is WATERFORD, a well governed town, and one that has been
always faithful to England. It is very populous and civil, and (for that the
haven here is far better and more safe than that of Dublin) much resorted unto
for trade and traffic, by merchants of foreign countries. The streets of it
are very narrow and dark. Here no cutthroat-Iewish usurer is permitted to use
his devilish occupation, that is, as Cato said, to kill men, or to live by the
sweat of other men's brows. The third is LIMMERICK, which in regard of the
goodly river Shenyn whereupon it is seated and stands, as also for the
commodious situation of the same, might justly challenge the first place. For
this river is the greatest and goodliest of all Ireland, whose depth and
channel is such, that notwithstanding the city stands at the least
threescore miles from the maine sea, yet ships of great burden do come up even
to the town walls: besides that it is woonderfully stored with great variety
of fresh fish. King John did like the situation of this city so well, that he
caused there a goodly castle and fair bridge to be built. The last and least
is CORCK, situate upon the river Leigh. This haven is one of the best in all
Ireland, and therefore the citizens are very wealthy and great merchants. These
three latter are all within the province of Mounster. But if thou desire a
larger discourse of these particulars, I wish thee to repair to the foresaid
author Richard Stanihurst, he shall satisfy thee to the full.

map of Ireland IRLANDIAE ACCVRATA DESCRIPTIO, Auctore Baptista Boazio.
SERENISSIMO INVICTISSIMOQVE IACOBO MAGNAE BRITANNIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE
REGI, IOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS ANTVERPIANVS, D. DEDICAT.

Ioannes Baptista Vrints, Geographicarum tabularum calcographus, excud.
Antuerpiae.
EXPOSITIO VERBORVM HIBERNICORVM.
Glyn Nemus. Can Promontorium. Caric Rupes. Knoc Collis. Slew Mons. B. vel Bale
Vicus. Kill Pagus. Lough Lacus. Enis Insula. Mo. Monasterum. Mc. Territorium
filij Satrapae. O Caput familiae.




ENGLAND, OR The I Will of GREAT BRITAIN, as it stood about the time of the
entrance of the Normans, described by a Nubiensis the Arabian. The second
section of the seventh Climate.
IN this second part of the seventh Climate we comprehend a part of the b Ocean
sea, where c ENGLAND, which is a very great island, in form and fashion not
much unlike to a d Storkes head, stands apart from the rest of the world. In
this Island there are many e populous Cities well inhabited, steep Hills,
running Waters, and goodly Champion grounds. f Here it is always Winter. The
nearest of maine land unto it, is g Wady-shant, in the province of Flanders.
Between this Island and the Continent, the passage is about h twelve miles
over. Amongst the cities of this i will, which are in the outmost borders of it
Westward, and in the entrance of the narrowest place thereof, is the city i
SIHSETER, which is distant from the k sea twelve miles. From this city unto
the city l GORHAM, by the sea shore, are threescore miles. Item, from the
city Sihseter, unto the outmost border of the island Westward, are m three
hundred and fourscore miles. From it also unto the haven n DARTERMOVTH, are
fourscore miles. Then from thence unto the o LANDS END called Cornwallia, are
an hundred miles. From the city Sihseter unto the city p SALEBVRES within the
land, Northward, are threescore miles. Item, from the city Gorham unto the
liberties of the city q HANTONA, which stands upon a Creek that falls
into the sea, are five and twenty miles off: into this creek there runs
from the East part thereof the river of r Wynseter. From s WYNSETER unto
Salebures, Westward, are forty miles. From Hantona unto the city t SHORHAM,
are threescore miles. This city is near the sea. From it, along by the sea
coast, unto the city u HASTINGES, are fifty miles. From it, following the shore
Eastward, unto the city w DVBRIS, are seventy miles. This city is at the head
of the x passage whereby they pass from England unto the maine Continent on
the other side over against it. From the city Dubris unto the city y LVNDRES,
vpland, are forty miles. This city stands upon a great river which falls
into the sea between the city Dubris and the city z GIARNMOVTH. From which
city Giarnmouth unto the city a TARGHIN are fourscore and ten miles. This city
Targhin rises up higher into the country about the space of ten miles. From
the city Targhin unto the city b AGRIMES, upon the sea coast, are fourscore
miles. From the city Giarnmouth aforesaid the sea bends all at once
Northward, in manner of a circle. And from the city Agrimes aforementioned unto
the city c EPHRADIK are fourscore miles. This city is far from the ocean
sea, hard upon the borders of the island of SCOTIA, which is notwithstanding
joined to the i will England. From the city Ephradik unto the fall of the river
of d VVyska are an hundred and forty miles. e This WYSKA is a fortification
upon that river, up higher into the country, from the sea twelve miles. From
the city Agrimes, beforementioned, unto the city f NICOLA, vpland, are an
hundred miles. A g river divides this city in the midst, and runs from
it unto the city Agrimes, and so upon the South side of it falls into the
sea, as we have said before. From Nicola an vpland city unto the city
Ephradik, are likewise fourscore and ten miles. From thence, unto the city h
DVNELMA, are fourscore miles Northward, vpland, and far from the sea.
Between the coast of the Wild of Scotia, unto the coast of the i will i IRELAND,
are two days sail, Westward. From the coast of the i will England, unto the
island k DANAS, but one days sail. From the coast of Scotia, Northward, unto
the island l ROSLANDA, are three days sail. From the coast of the i will
Roslanda, Eastward, to the i will m ZANBAGA, are twelve miles. The length of the
i will Roslanda is n four hundred miles: the breadth of it, where it is broadest,
is but an hundred and fifty miles.

ANNOTATIONS, by the Translatour, upon some particulars, for the better help
and direction of the Reader.
a THe Arabicke Geography, imprinted at Rome, in the year of our Lord 1592,
set out by Baptist Raymund, at the cost and charges of the most illustrious
Prince Ferdinand Medices, Graund Duke of Tuscane in Italy, is but an
Abridgement of a greater work, entitled (...) Nazahti'lmoshtak, that is, The
pleasant garden, as the author himself in his Preface, to that his work,
does plainly confess: which Abbreuiatour, as he himself, in the beginning of
the fourth section of the first Climate, testifies, was an African, borne in
Nubia: For he there says, that in this Parallel there be two rivers called
Nilus; whereof the one, which is vulgarly known by that name, and is for
difference sake called Nilus of Egypt, runs along by our country, ((...)
Ardiana) from South to North, upon whose banks almost all the cities both of
Egypt and of the Island are built and situate. By many places of this his work
it is manifest that he was a Mussulman, that is, by profession a Mahometane. He
lived, as I gather, above five hundred years since, presently after the
entrance of the Normans into England: For at the second section of the fourth
climate he writes that when he wrote this his work, Roger was King of
Sicilia: but whether this Roger were Roger the father, son of Tanchred the
Norman, who drove the Saracens from thence; or Roger his son, who in the
year after Christ's incarnation 1103 took upon him the government of that
kingdom, it is uncertain, and (for ought I know) not to be learned out of his
words.

b (...) Albahri'lmodtlim, or (...) Bahri'ldtulimato, The dark or dangerous
sea (for the word in Arabicke signifies both.) Basil map of England and Wales
ANGLIAE REGNI FLORENTISSIMI NOVA DESCRIPTIO AVCTORE HVMFREDO LHVYD DENBYGIENSE
Cum Priuilegio.

the great Divine calls it, Mare magnum, and nauigantibus horrendum, The
Great sea, hideous and fearful to Sailours and sea faring men: whereupon it
was in former times thought to be a miracle or strange wonder for any man to
pass these seas in the dead of Winter, as Julius Firmicus (not the Astrologer
but another a Christian) in his Tractate of the error of profane religions
dedicated to the Emperors Constance and Constantius, in these words does
plainly teach us: Hyeme (quod nec factum est aliquando, nec fiet) tumentes and
saeuientes vndas calcastis Oceani Britannici, sub remis vestris. In English
thus much; In Winter (which never heretofore was known to have been done,
nor ever shall be done hereafter) by strength of men and sturdy oars you cut
the raging sourges of the British Ocean. Thus far out of M. Camdens
Britannia, to whom you are beholding also for that which follows.

c (...) Alinkalaterra, as the Spaniards, Italians and French do call it, that
is, England, or The Angles land (so named by Egbert, king of the West Saxons,
about the year of our Lord 800) is of the three the greatest, most fertile and
flourishing kingdom of this whole i will: and therefore it is hereby this our
author, in this place by a figure put for Great Britain, the part for the
whole. Neither is this any strange thing, not used by any other: for Raymundus
Marlianus, that adjoined those Alphabeticall descriptions of Cities, Places,
Mountains and Rivers, to Caesar's Commentaries, does put Angliam Insulam and
Angliae Insulam, The I Will England and The I Will of England, for Britanniam,
Britain. Such is the marvelous greatness of this Island, that when it was
first descried by the Romans, they thought it almost well worthy the name of
ALTERIVS ORBIS, Another world. And he that made the Panegyricke oration to
Constantius, writes that Julius Caesar, who first discovered it to the Romans,
ALIVM se ORBEM TERRARVM scripserit reperisse, tantae magnitudinis arbitratus,
vt non circumfusa Oceano, sed complexa Oceanum videretur, did write unto his
friends, that he had found Another World; supposing it to be of that wonderful
greatness, that it could nor possibly be environed round on all sides of the
sea, but rather that it contrariwise did enclose the sea. And for that it lies
so far remote from the South, like as Thule, it was by poets and other
ancient writers, entitled Vltima Britannia, Great Britain, the farthest part
of the world Northward.

d (...) Alnaama, In Auicen is a foul called of the Latins, Struthium, an
Ostrich; as Gerardus Cremonensis, his interpretour, understands the word: and
indeed the South part of the i will, the sea falling in between Wales and
Cornwall, does represent the neck and head of such a like foul, with the
mouth gaping wide open. Liuy and Fabius Rusticus did liken it Oblongae
scutulae, vel bipennt, To aswingling stock or sword, which those use that
dress hemp and flax; to a twall or twibill, a kind of warlike weapon used in
fight by some nations. And indeed the whole island being triangular ( triquetra,
they call it) but of unequal sides, (which kind of figure the Geometers call
Scalenum) may also as well as Sicilia be named TRINACRIA. For from Taruisium, a
promontory or forland in Scotland, now called Howburne, all along by the shore,
unto Belerium, the cape of Cornwall, are 812. miles: from whence to Cantium,
The Forland of Kent, are 320 miles: from thence again to Howburne in Scotland,
704 miles. So that by this account the circuit and compass of Britain is 1836
miles: which comes much short of that account of Pliny, and is somewhat less
than that of Caesar.

e The first inhabitants which seated themselves here presently after the
universal flood in the days of Noe, came hither from France, as Necrenesse of
place, Likeness of manners, Government, Customs, Name and Language, do very
demonstratiuely prove and euince. And thereupon they call themselves Cumro, as
come from Gomer the son of Iapheth (called of Historiographers Cimber) from
whom are descended the Celiae or ancient Gauls, the inhabitants not only of
France, but generally of all the Northwest parts of Europe. What think you
then of that story of Brute? Mary I think he wanted honesty that first
invented that fable, and he wit that believes it. But John Wheathamsted,
sometime Abbat of S. Albans, a grave learned man and of good judgment, shall
speak for me; Totus iste processus, says he, de Bruto, poeticus est potius
quam historicus, opinatiuusque magis propter varias causas, quam realis: That
whole discourse of Brute, is rather to be accounted as a fable and fiction
forged in poets brain, then a true history, done and acted indeed. Item
William of Newbury, a writer of good credit, and one that lived at the same
time with this Geffrey of Munmouth, did accuse him to his face of forgery, and
challenged him for the same. For first, for the name of Britons they never knew
what it meant until the entrance of the Romans, and was then as harsh unto
these Cumbri, as the name of Welchman, is to them at this day; which it is
certain diverse of the vpland people do not acknowledge nor understand what it
should mean. Again, Ludouicus Vines, Hadrianus Iunius, Buchanan, Polydore
Virgil, Bodine and other great men, do all jointly confess that there was
never in the world any such man as this Brutus. Moreover, That presently after
the confusion at Babell, in the infancy of the world, when the isles of the
Gentiles were divided into their lands, as the Scripture speaks, every man
after his tongue, after their families in their nations, that is, That such men
as by reason of difference and diversity of language, did separate themselves
from such as they understood not, and therefore could not converse withal,
into their several companies and hords, did bear the name and denomination of
their father and prince of that family, it is very plain and manifest: but
that any nation was named or called after the name of the chief leader and
conductour of a colony, I yet find not avouched by any good author. It is most
certain and without all controversy true, That diverse countries have been
called by sundry names, by forreners and strangers, never known nor
acknowledged of the nations themselves. Do you think that the ancient
inhabitants of Spain did ever know what Hesperia meant? None surely ever
called that country by this name, but the Graecians only. Albion and Britannia
doubtless were names as barbarous unto these our Cumbri, and never heard of
before the entrance of the Romans. There is no Colony, although never so small
and few, but will retain much of their own country language, either wholly
vncorrupt, or else manifestly to be distinguished by the phrase and propriety
of speech. Those few Flemmings who (their country being by the breaking in of
the sea overflowed and drowned) obtained of King Henry the first, a part of
Penbrooke shire in Wales which the Welchmen call Rosse, lying between two
rivers, not far off from Milford haven, are they not to this day
distinguished, from their neighbors round about them by their speech and
language? And because their speech does much resemble the English, is not their
country commonly called, of those which inhabit near unto them, Little
England beyond Wales? The like you shall observe by the British colony, which
above eleven hundred years since took possession of that part of France,
which of them ever since has been known by the name of Britain: Of the
colony of the Scots in Ireland, and of the Irish in Scotland. If any man will
say that there is the like resemblance between the Welsh tongue and the Greek
or Latin, I will justify it that there is as great affinity between the
Welsh and Arabicke, and again that these are as like the one to other as an
apple is to an oister. Moreover, this entrance of Brute was an absolute
conquest, the giants (if there were ever any such) being utterly destroyed or
quite chaced out of the land, and therefore there is no reason to the contrary
but they should have, for the space of seven hundred years, kept their
language from corruption, as well as they have done since, being since the
entrance of the Romans sixteen hundred years and more. The Latins or Greeks
so prodigal always in their own commendation, would doubtless not have
forgotten to record the setting forth of such a famous colony. Could this
affinity have been hid from Caesar? would they not, think you, have claimed
kindred of the Romans? Constans and Constantius Emperors of Rome were the
first, by the testimony of Julius Firmicus, that ever durst venture through
these seas. How then did this Brutus, so many hundred years before, in such
small barks, so slightly built, pass the same? Aeneas, they report, of his
many ships lost all but one before he could get home, in the Midland sea, which
is nothing so dangerous and troublesome. Can it be thought credible that such a
warlike nation as these Trojans, having so lately got footing and seated
themselves in so goodly a country as Italy, would so suddenly remove so far
off, to a place unknown? The Romans having such dangerous wars, and such
occasion to use men and brave commanders, would never have suffered them in
such troops to pass out of their country. If it had took the name of
Brutus, it should doubtless have been called Brutania, not Britannia, as
Caesar names it, nor Bretania, Pretanice, or Pretanis, as the Greeks do write
it. But list what Caesar says of this matter, Britania pars interior, says
he, ab ijs incolitur, quos natos in insula ipsi memoria proditum dicunt.
Maritima pars ab ijs, qui praedae ac belli inferendi causa ex Belgio
transierant. The inner part of the i will is inhabited of such people as were bred
and borne there, as they themselves do report from their ancestors. The sea
coast is possessed of such as have come thither from Flanders and thereabout,
to rob and spoil the country. If this were all that was then known, and
that Gildas Sapiens and Venerabilis Beda knew nothing to the contrary, how came
this our author, so many hundred years after them, to the knowledge of this
so absolute an history, where not only persons, places, and actions are so
distinctly set down with their precise difference of time, as if they had
been done but yesterday? The historian, for things done in his own time, or
not long before, is believed upon his own word, but for such things as were
done many ages before he was borne, he must bring his author to justify his
assertion. If there had been any such tradition commonly delivered from man to
man, it would questionless have been intimated to Caesar. Records can not be
preserved but by writing; and that knowledge came in with the Romans. But if it
be a question whether there were ever any such city as that Troy, so much
renowned by means of that learned poem of the famous Poet Homer, what will
become of the stories of Aeneas (which, if I mistake him not, the great
Historiographer Titus Liuius does make a doubt of) and of this our Brutus never
patronaged by any great learned wise man? I know that is improued by some, and
I think it may be demonstrated. For further satisfaction I refer thee to M.
Camdens Britannia, where this argument is handled at large and most learnedly.
Only in defense of Gaulfridus, lest any man should think that I have all this
while spoken against his person, I conclude with this sayng of a learned man of
our time; Cardanus ait, says he, illius aetatis scriptores tantopere mendacio
and fabulis fuisse delectatos, vt in contentionem venerint quis plura
confingeret. Cardane says, That the Historians and Writers of those times
(between four hundred and five hundred years since) were so much delighted
with fables and lies, that they strove who should lie fastest, and win the
whetstone. It was, you see, the fault of the time and age wherein he lived, not
of the man. The learned Orator Tully, in the second book of his Offices, as I
remember, thus describes the virtues of a true Historiographer: Ne quid falsi
scribere audeat; Ne quid very non audeat; Ne quam in scribendo suspitionem
gratiae; Ne quam simultatis ostendat. A good Historian may not dare to write
any thing that is false; He may not be afraid to write any thing that is true;
He must not show any partiality or favor in writing; He ought to be void of
all affection and malice. Learned Antiquaries follow this good counsel of the
grave Philosopher; Sell us no more dross for pure metal; Refine what you
read and write; Every tale is not true that is told: Some authors want
judgment; others honesty: Let no man be believed for his antiquity: For you
know what Menander said, (...); Grayhaires are not always a sign of wisdom
and deep understanding; old men do sometime dote, and will lie as well as
others. One says; Nesc to quo casu illud euenit, vt falsa potius quam vera
animum nostrum captant. I cannot tell, says he, how it comes to pass, but
surely true it is, that we are more easily carried away with lies and fables,
than with truth. And how hard a matter it is to remove one from a settled
opinion, though never so false and absurd, any man meanly experienced does very
well know.

f Yet Caesar says that Britanniae Loca sunt temperatiora, quam in Gallia,
remissioribus frigoribus: The temperature of the air in England, is better
then in France, the cold is nothing so bitter. That is, as the author of the
Panegyricke oration made to Constantius the Emperor does interpret it, In ea
nec rigor est nimius hyemis, nec ardor aestatis: In it neither the cold of
winter, nor the heat of summer is very excessive. And Minutius Felix he
writes that, Britannia sole deficitur, sed circumfluentis maris tepore
recreatur. In England the Sun shines not very hot, but that defect is
repaied by a certain steame or hot vapor which ascends up out of the sea
that inuironeth this island on all sides round.

g What place this should be, I dare not for truth constantly affirm, Perhaps
he means Vitsam, or as we call it Whitsan, a little town in the country of
Bolloine some five or six miles from Calais, situate upon the sea coast, built
at the mouth of a small river, which peradventure he calls Shant: For in the
Arabicke tongue Wadi-shant, imports so much.

h This is false and by himself contradicted: for in another place, if I be
not deceived, he makes it twenty five miles over: wherefore I doubt not but
for a mile the author did put a parasange, which contains three English
miles: And this is somewhat near the mark.

i I take it that he means Cercester, in Glocestershire, which vulgarly they
now call Ciceter. It is an ancient city called of Ptolemey Corinium, of
Antonine Durocornouium, of the Saxons Cyrenceaster, taking the denomination
from the river Corinus, or Churne, upon which it is situate. The tract of the
decayed walls of it which are two miles about, do testify that it was sometime
a very great city. Many antiquities and ancient monuments do plainly show
that in the time of the Romans it was a place of good rekoning. Now it is
nothing so populous and well inhabited.

k From the Seuerne, I understand it, which at every floude enterteineth the
salt water a great way up into the country.

l Warham, is a sea town in Dorsetshire, strongly fortified by nature, upon
the South and North with two rivers, Ware, and Trent (this now they call
Piddle) and with the maine sea, upon the East, only upon the Wew it lies open
to the assailaunt. Yet it was in times past defended with a fair wall, and a
strong Castle. It was very populous, well inhabited, and graced with the Kings
mint, for the refining and coining of his money, until the time of Henry the
Second: since whose days by reason of civil wars, casualty by fire, and
stopping of the haven, it is much decayed, and has lost much of that former
beauty.

m This distance is much too great, whether he means the lands end in
Cornwall, or the farther part of Wales Westward, which I rather incline to. But
observe this once for all, that there is no great heed to be taken to those his
accounts of miles and distances.

n Dartmouth, an haven town in Devonshire, situate upon a little hill running
out into the sea, at the mouth of the river Dart or Dert, as some write it. The
haven is defended with two strong Castles or Block-houses. It is very populous,
well frequented with Merchants, and has many goodly tall ships belonging to
it. King John granted them certain privileges and every year to choose a
Mayor for their supreme magistrrate and governor in civil causes under the
King.

o Thus our seamen call it at this day: The Arabian terms it (...)
Tarfi'lgarbi mina'lgiezira, The Western bound of the island. Master Camden, in
his Scotland, that I may note this by the way, affirms that Taurus, in Welsh,
does signify the end or limb of any thing. Here in Arabicke, thou see, it
signifies the same. And in English we call, if I be not deceived, the brimmes
of an hatte, The tarfe.

p SALISBVRY or rather SARISBVRY a sweet and pleasant city, within the County
of Wilt, situate in a plain at the meeting of the rivers Auone and Nadder. It
is not that ancient city Sorbiodunum, mentioned by Antoninus in his Iournall,
but built of the ruins of it, as seems very probable. For this old town
being often distressed for want of water, and at length spoiled and rased to
the ground, by Swein the Dane, in the year of our Lord 1003. (although it
revived again a little after, about the time of William the First) was
forsaken and abandoned by the citizens, who laid the foundation of this new
city about 400. years since, at what time Richard the First was King of
England. That most stately Cathedral Church, which they report has as many
doors as there be months in the year; as many windows as the year has
days; and as many pillars as there are hours in the year; was at the same
time begun by Richard, Bishop of Sarum, in a most goodly plot of ground,
which vulgarly was called MERIFEILD, and in forty years with infinite cost
and charges, it was by him and others finished and brought to that perfection
which it is at now at this day.

q SOVTH-HANTON (we now call it,) built upon an arm of the sea between two
rivers, is enclosed with a double ditch and a fair stone wall. For the better
defense of the Haven Richard the Second caused a very goodly castle to be built
all of free stone. It is a passing fine city, very populous, rich, and well
frequented of Merchants. Clausentum, that ancient city mentioned by Antoninus,
and stood sometimes in that field which at this day is called Saint Mary's, was
often spoiled and sacked by the Danes, and at length, in the time of Edward the
Third was utterly consumed and burnt down to the ground by the Frenchmen: Of
whose ruins this New city was built in a place much more better and commodious.

r This river, peradventure, was anciently called WENT, and thereof the city
Wentchester, happily took the name: like as the cite Colnchester in Essex, was
so called of the river Colne, upon Which it stands.

s WINCHESTER, A very ancient city, well known to the Romans, and is often
mentioned in old historians. Afterward in time so the Saxon Heptarchie, the
West Saxon Kings ordinarily kept their court here. Strait after the entrance
of the Normans, and peradventure somewhat before, the Records for the whole
land were here bestowed and laid up. It was once or twice much defaced by
casualty of fire, and often spoiled and sacked by unruly soldiers in time of
civil wars: but Edward the Third, to salve these damages and hindrances of
the citizens and townsmen, placed here THE STAPLE, or mart for wool and
cloth. At this time it is very populous and well inhabited. The walls of this
city are about a mile and an half in compass. It has six fair gates, and
very large Suburbs adjoining to every one of them.

t SHORHAM, an ancient Borough and haven town in Sussex, first called, as
Master Camden writes, CIMENSHORE of Cimen, the brother of Cissa, who together
with Aella their father, landed a greater multitude of their Saxons. But in
continuance of time a great part of that town being eaten up with the sea,
and the mouth of the haven with beech and sand det up, of a goodly town it is
become a small village, at this day known by the name of OLD SHOREHAM, the
decay of which gave occasion of the building and name of another not far off
from it, commonly called NEW SHOREHAM.

u Here Athelstane King of the West Saxons, who made a law that no man should
be so hardy as to dare to coin money out of great towns privileged by the
King for that purpuse, erected a Minte for the coining of his Silver and other
metals, by which means it became so famous that in the time of the Saxons it
deserved the name of a city and was then called by them HASTINGACEASTER. In a
plain, before this town, that bloody battaill between William, the bastard,
Duke of Normandy, that cruel tyrant, and Harold the usurper, son of Earl
Goodwin, was fought upon the fourteenth day of October, in the year of our
Lord 1066. It is one of the cinque ports.

w DOVER, before the entrance of the Saxons was called Dubris, as Antoninus in
his Iournal testifies, who names it Portus Dubris, The haven Dubris. Upon
that side next the sea that was sometime defended with a strong wall, whereof
some part is to be seen at this day. Victred King of Kent did here erect a
goodly Church, which he dedicated unto Saint Martines. The castle which
stands upon the top of an exceeding high cliffe, and is thought to be the
strongest hold of all England, and therefore called by Matthew Paris Clauis
and repagulum Angliae, The key and bar of England, was begun, as is
probable, by the Romans; yet not by Julius Caesar, as they would feign make men
believe. Upon another rock or cliffe, over against this on the other side of
the town, there was, as seems, a lantern or watchtower ( Pharus, they call
it) opposite and answerable to that which the Romans had built at Bollein,
beyond the straights in France, which afterward being decayed was repaired by
Charles the Great, and at this day is called by the French, Tour d'order, by
the English, THE OLD MAN OF BVLLEN.

x This is that famous passage (traiectus,) from the Continent unto this Island,
by which Caesar and the Romans always entered and had access hither: For
until the time of Constans and Constantine Emperors of Rome, it was thought
almost impossible to come hither from Rome, with a navy thorough the maine
Ocean: And since that long, it was, in time of Christianity, by proclamation
forbidden, that, whatsoever he were, borne within the allegiance of England,
that had a mind to go beyond the seas for religion or pilgrimage, it should
not be lawful for him to take shipping any where else but here. The Frenchmen
vulgarly call it Le pas de Calais, but the English call it The streights of
Dover.

y London, (we now call it) but of the French and Strangers it is commonly
called Londres or Londra. Yet Tacitus, Ptolemey, Antonine, and Ammianus
Marcellinus do with one consent write it LONDINVM or LONGIDINVM, so named of
the Britons, as is probable, of Llong, Ships, and Dinas, a City: answerable to
those places of Graecia Naupactus, Naupactus, Naustathino, etc. denominated of
Ships. It is doubtless a very ancient city, as Ammianus Marcellinus
testifies, who twelve hundred years since called it Vetustum oppidum, An
ancient town. Yet Julius Caesar never mentions it in all his writings.
Cornelius Tacitus, who lived in the days of Nero, that bloody Emperor, was
the first, if I be not deceived, that ever wrote of it, calling it by the name
of Oppidum, copia negotiatorum, and commeatu maxim celebre, A Town very
famous both for traffic and great concourse of Merchants, as also for
victuals and all manner ot provision whatsoever. Nay he that made the
Panegyricke oration to Constantius the Emperor, and Marcellinus who lived
after him, give it no better title. Yet at this day it is An abridgement or
brief view of the whole island, The Imperial seat of the British isles,
Regumque Angliae camera, and The chamber of the English Kings: and therefore it
may now justly assume that title of AUGUSTA, The royal city, which Ammianus so
many hundred years since gave unto it. And being situate upon the rising of a
little hill, in a most wholesome and healthful air, in the midst of the
richest countries of the land, all a long upon the North side of the Thames,
one of the goodliest rivers of Europe, it is at this day as famous a Mart, for
all manner of trade and traffic as any in the whole world beside. The walls of
this city, which are about three miles in compass, are not ancient, although
some do write, that at the entreatie of Queen Helena, Constantine the Great
caused them to be built. Beside those many and large Suburbs without the walls,
there is joined to it, upon the West the city of WESTMINSTER, and upon the
South by a fair stone bridge the BOROVGH OF SOVTHVVARKE, equal for bigness
and multitude of people to many great and good cities: So that London in this
respect may justly be called Tripolid' Angliterra. This Bridge was begun
first of timber, and afterward in the time of King John it was made all of
Freestone. The foundation of that goodly Mynster or Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul was first laid by Ethelbert King of Kent.

z Yarmouth, as we now call it, a very goodly sea town in the county of
Norffolke, situate at the mouth of the river Gerne (Garienis,) whereof it took
the name, and was first called Giernemouth, and then by corruption in process
of time Garmouth, and Yarmoth. It is enclosed almost on all sides with water,
upon the West with the river aforesaid: upon the South and East with the maine
sea: only upon the North it lies open to the firm land, upon which side it is
defended from the assault of the enemy by a very strong wall, which together
with the river do make a kind of Square figure longer one way then an other.
On the East side stands a Block-house, well furnished with great ordinance to
defend the haven and town from pirates and sea robbers. It has but one
Church, but that is a marueillous fair great one with a very high Spire, seen
far off both by sea and land.

a What this town should be, and where it should stand I cannot say for
certain. The letters in the Arabicke, and the proportion of distance from
Yarmouth and Grynsby, do directly point at Drayton in Northhampton-shire. But
because it is too far off from the sea, and was never greater then now it is,
and for that I find him so often faulty in those accounts, I do not believe
that he meant that place. The name comes very near to Torksey, which is
situate upon the Trent, and, as Master Camden sath, although now it be but a
small town, yet in times past it has been much greater and more famous. For
in time of William the First, as appears by Doomesday book, it had two
hundred citizens, and enjoyed many great and large privileges.

b Grimsby, in Lincolnshire, sometime a very great Mart town, much resorted
unto from all quarters both by Sea and Land, so long as the haven lay open
ready to entertain Ships of any reasonable burden. But as the haven did in
continuance of time decay, so the glory of the town, by little and little
vanished, and resigned up her trade unto Kingston upon Hull, her ouerthwarte
neighbor, which ever since the time of Richard the Second, has greatly
flourished, in whose days of a small village and a very few poor Fisher-mens
cottages it began to grow to that greatness, that of a sudden it was not much
inferior to many pretty cities.

c York, a very goodly city, situate upon the river Ouse. For beauty,
greatness, strength, riches and pleasure it is inferior to none in all
England, but London only. Old writers call it EBORACVM, the Welchmen Ebrauc, or
Effroc: the Saxons Eferwic: And therefore I suspect that this my author did
write it (...) Efferwic, not (...) Effradic: but I alter nothing. It is a very
ancient city often mentioned in Roman Coins and histories, whereby it is
manifest that Legio sexta victrix, the sixth conquering legion, did ordinarily
reside in this city. The Emperors Seuerus and Constantius, father to
Constantine the Great, so long as they abode in this i will, did keep their court
here, and dying in these parts, were buried, in this city. This Constantius
being a very godly and religious Christian Prince; made it first as our
histories report, a Bishops sea, which Honorius Bishop of Rome, afterward
advanced unto the dignity of a Metropolitan, or Archbishopricke, which, beside
the large jurisdiction that it had here in England, had also under it all
Scotland.

d Wiske, it is called at this day. It rises in Richmond-shire not far from
Wharleton Castle, as Christopher Saxto makes me believe.

e I find no mention at all of this place, either in Master Camden, or any
other. Only in the same Saxton upon the foresaid river, some two or three
miles above Northaluerton, I find Danby Wiske: but whether our author meant
this or not I cannot tell. But I would gladly learn of what place the Lord of
Vescy, took his name.

f Lincoln, a large and fair city, situate now upon the North side of the
river Witham, called by Ptolemey and Antonine LINDVM, by Beda Lindecollinum, by
the Normans, as Master Camden testifies, Nichol.

g This is very false: For this river having hitherto, from his fountain, bent
his course Northward as if it meant indeed to unload it self at Grimesby, does
notwithstanding here alter that determination, and turning it self clean
another way at length falls into the sea at Boston; a place almost full South
both from Lincoln and Grimesby.

h Durham, situate upon the top of an hill, by the river Wear, which runs
almost round about it, and thereupon was called by the Saxons Dun-holme, that
is, if we shall interpret it into English, The hill-ile, is no ancient city:
For the fiirst stone of it, as our histories report was laid by the Monks of
Lindesferne, in the year of our Lord 995. before that we find no mention of
it. William the First built the Castle upon the top of the Hill, which since
that time was the Bishops palace.

i Ireland, the greatest island in these Seas, Britain only excepted: for it
runs out in length from South to North about four hundred miles: and where
it is narrowest it is well near two hundred miles over. But of this we have
spoken in another place.

k Denmark, (we now call it) is for the most part environed and washed with the
salt sea: and therefore he does not greatly err, in that he terms it An
Island.

l Island (if I be not deceived) which Solinus in the thirty five chapter of
his Polyhistor, says, is two days sail from Cathnesse, the North cape of
Scotland: His words are these, A Caledoniae promontorio Thulen petentibus bidui
nauigatio est. Those that do travel between the cape of Caledonia or
Cathnesse and Thule, do make it two days sail. Item in the same chapter, a
little beneath, he writes that, Ab Orcadibus Thulem vsque quinque dierum and
noctium nauigatio est. From the Orkney isles, to Thule are five days, and five
nights sail. Yet Island is not that ancient Thule, as Master Camden, in his
Britania, proves at large. The position and distances answer well to Thule,
but the quantity or bigness argues that he meant Island, which is much
farther off either from the coast of Norway, or borders of Scotland, as we
shall by and by show more plainly.

m So it is written apparently: But observe here, That of the Arabicke
letters, diverse in form and shape of body, are the very same, and are only
distinguished one from another by pricks or points, placed either over their
heads or underneath them. Hereupon it is that that Arabicke word which here I
call (...) Zanbaga, (supposing only one letter to be misplaced, which might be
the fault of the printer) may indifferently be either (...) Norbaga, or
Norwega, as the Danes call it: or (...) Neriga, or Nerigon, whereof Pliny
speaks; which is all one in effect. For Pomponius Mela says that Thule
Bergarum (thus the learned Clarencieux reads, not Belgarum) litori apposita
est: that is, Thule is upon the coast of Norway, oueragainst the city Bergen.
And it is out of all question, says the same author, that by Nerigon Pliny
did understand that same country which at this day we call Norway.

n That our author did mean Island, if there were no other argument, this one
were alone sufficient to prove it. For I do not remember that any one of the
ancient writers ever took upon him to define Thule according to his length and
breadth: only Ptolemey and those other authors have pointed at it, as we have
showed before, and have told us whereabout it lies in the Sea by the longitude
and latitude of it, as also by the situation of it from Scotland, The Orkeney
isles, and Bergen in Norway. Whereas he says that the length of Rosland is 400
miles, it is, I say, apparent that he meant Island. For Ortelius in his Island
thus writes of it: Patet haec insula in longitudiue centum milliarium
Germanicorum, vt vulgus scriptorum habet: The length of this Island, as the
common sort of writers do testify, is one hundred Germane miles: Now that a
common or ordinary Dutch mile, does contain four English or Italian miles, it
is a thing so commonly known that it needs no proof. But having handled,
Gentle Reader, the particulars, for the most part before in their several
places, least I be too tedious in a thing not greatly needful I cease to
trouble thee any longer.

GALIZIA, a kingdom of Spain.
THe kingdom of GALIZIA is bounded upon the West and North, with the Ocean
sea; upon the East, with the Asturias and the kingdom of Leon: upon the South,
with the river Min^o, and the Kingdom of Portingall. It was sometime, as
Ferdinand Oiea, the author of this Map, writes, much greater then now it is
at this day, and was then held to be one of the largest kingdoms of all
Spain: For it extended it self Eastward up as far as the mountains of
Biscaya, and the head of the great river Duero, ( Durius Pliny calls it) and
so from thence it ran all along by the bank of this river even till where it
falls into the maine sea, as our said author proves, by the testimony of
Marius Aretius in his description of Spain, of Annius Viterbius, and Floriano
de Campo in the 40. chapter of his fourth book; and likewise in the third
chapter of his fourth book. It is very uneven, and mounteinous, or every where
full of dry barrein hills and dales; and therefore much of it, by reason it
wants water, is waste and not inhabited. Their Villages and towns,
(especially the greater and better sort of them,) are situate upon the Sea, or
upon some great river not far from thence, except Santiago, Lugo, and
Mondon^edo with one or two more. Yet, which is very strange, here are bred
such wonderful store of horses, that that fable, which reports that
hereabouts in Spain the mares conceive with foale by virtue of the wind, may
seem to be something probable. Yea and this our author Fernandez Oiea, says,
that it has great store of cattle, and of all manner of Dear as well for
necessary provision and mainteinance of the house, as for game and disporte for
the nobility and gentry of the land. But of Fish here taken, not only in the
Sea but also in the fresh rivers, there is such variety and wonderful store
that it is from hence conueighed to most places throughout all Spain. It has
many hot bathes, and other springs and waters of rare and sovereign virtues.
It yields great plenty of wine, and that so good, especially that which is
made about Orense and Riuadauia, that it is transported from hence far and
near into all countries Christian. It offordeth much good fruit of all sorts,
but especially of Limons and Orenges. Silk and Flax, are very great and
gainefull commodities unto the inhabitants. Here were sometime, as Pliny
testifies, very rich Mines of gold. And Niger writes that, amongst the
Artabri, (who inhabited not far from Cape finister,) the rivers and brooks
did bring down, after any great store of rain, Earth mingled with Silver,
Tynne and Gold-ore: yea and that the soil here was so fertile of Gold, Copper
and Lead, that ofttimes the husbandmen with their ploughes did turn up great
cloddes of good gold. Yet we know now, says Maginus, that the Mines of this
country at this day are of no great account. It has also some quarreis of fine
marble. Pedro de Medina reckons up threescore Cities and towns of note in
Galizia, of which these following are the most famous and renowned, and
therefore the more worthy the speaking of in this place. COMPOSTELLA, a goodly
city situate between the two rivers Sar, and Sarela, is now commonly called
and known by the name of SANTIAGO, Saint Ieameses, for that the body of the
glorious Apostle Saint James, elder brother to John the Evangelist, who first
preached the gospel here and planted Christianity amongst the Spaniards, lies
here interred: and in honor of this blessed Apostle, by the consent generally
of all, Prince, Nobles and Prelates, it was long since adorned with the title
and dignity of Metropolitan. This byword is common amongst the Spaniards, That
there be three Apostolical Churches in the world most renowned and famous.
Saint Peter's in Rome, Saint Ieamses in Spain, and Saint John's in Ephesus. They
commonly hold, that the first Church that ever was built in Spain, was that of
our Lady in Saragosa, the second was this of Saint James. Here also is a
goodly University and school of good learning, where all the Liberal Sciences
are professed and taught, and many students are brought up and maintained
until they come to be of age and ability for public service either in the
Church or Commonwealth. The GROINE, is a very goodly town, situate in an
isthmos or demy-ile, between two baies or creeks of the sea, whereof the one
is held to be one of the best havens of the world: And therefore here for the
most part of the Kings ships, in time of peace do lie at anchor. LVGO, one of
the principal cities of all Galizia, stands upon the Min^o, not far from
Castro de Rey where this river arises. It is very ancient, and was out of
doubt, known to the Romans, at such time they bore the sway in these parts:
yet there be some which do think it to have been built by the Vandals, long
since the decay of that estate. MONDONNEDO is a fair city seated upon a little
river toward the Northren sea coast, not far from Riuadeo. It was aunciently
called Glandomiro. ORENSE, situate upon the river Min^o, is a very great and
large city. The wines that are here made, are counted to be of the best, and
equal to those of Riuadauia. Some think that it was in old time called Auria,
yet the Romans, as it is probable, called it Aquas Calidas, of the hot
bathes, which here are found, and are now of the Spaniards called Burgas.
TVY, or, as some write it, Tuyd, built also upon the river Min^o, not far
from the maine Sea, was first founded, as they fable by certain Greeks, who
came hither from Troy with Diomedes. Lucius Marineus Siculus makes BVRGOS to
be a city of Galizia. His words are these: Burgos, says he, is a very famous
and ancient city of Galizia in Spain. It was sometime, as some authors
report, called Masburgi, Liconitiurgis, Brauum, and Auca, or as Pliny writes
it, Ceuca. It is a very rich and populous city, much resorted unto by
Gentlemen and Merchants: of the one sort for pleasure, of the other for
profit; and therefore it is every day greatly enlarged with goodly and
sumptuous new buildings. If thou desire more of this city, I wish thee to
repair to George Braun his Theater of the chief cities of the world: If more
of this kingdom, read Peter de Medina his Las Grandezas ycosas notabiles de
Espan^a, of the strange and memorable things of Spain; and I make no doubt, if
not with truths and good historical discourses, yet with tedious tales and
fables, thou shall have thy belliefull.

map of Galicia, Spain, with inset of four angels with a hymnnal and the blazon
or coat of arms of Galicia DESCRIPCION DEL REYNO DE GALIZIA, AVTH. F. FER.
OIEA, ORD. PRED. A DON PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE CASTRO Y ANDRADE, CONDE DE LEMOS, DE
VILLALVA Y ANDRADE, MARQVES DE SARRIA. etc.
Galizia es vno de los muchos Reynos de Espan^a, que possee nuestro Rey Filipo.
Era antiguamente mucho mayor que ahora, comprendia todas las tierras. y
prouincias que ay dentro de los limits siguientes, de la mar del Norte y
montan^a de Iunto a Vizcaya, husta las fuentes del gran Rio Duero, y de ay todo
lo que el corre hasta dar consigo en la mar, y caminando por las orillas della
hasta-botuer al mismo punto de dunde salimos. Marij Aretij dialog. de descript.
Hisp. apud Berosum, et Viterb. in inquirid. et Florian. de Campo lib. 3. c. 40,
et 42. et lib. 4. c. 3. Oy en dia con la mudanca del gouierno, y de los
tiempos, ha quedado con este-nombre solo lo que parece en esta tabla: de lo
qual tiene V. Exa. vna gran part. y assi por ella como por la mucha afficion
que todos los Principes de su casa han tenido siempre a las cosas deste Reyno;
me parecio se le deuia de Iusticia la ymagen y descripcion del. Supplico a V.
Exa. la reciua con la gracia y amor que suele. etc.

Abunda de carnes este Reyno y de todo genero de caca, de mucho y muy-buen
pescado, assi de mar como de rios, de que se prouee la mayor part de Espan^a.
Tiene grande abundancia de aguas frias y calientes que llaman ban^os, mucho
vino y del mejor que se halla en toda la Europa, particularmente el de Orense,
y Riua dauia, del qual se prouen muchas prouincias del Reyno, y de fuera del.
Tiene muchas y muy buenas frutas, limas y naranjas de todo genero, Seda y mucho
lino, muchos minerales de Oro y plata, hierro etc. y algunas canteras de
marmol. Su temperamento ni frio ni caliente.

JOANNES BAPTISTA VRINTS, AEMVLVS STVDII GEOGRAPHIAE D. ABRAHAMI ORTELII. P.M.
COSMOG. REGII, EXCVDIT.
HOC MYSTERIVM FIRMITER PROFITEMVR.

FRANCE.
FRANCE (or GALLIA, as the Latins called it,) at this day one of the goodliest
and greatest Kingdoms of Europe, has notwithstanding in forepassed ages,
been much larger then now it is. For in Julius Caesar's time it contained all
that Western part of the Maineland inhabited and possessed by the Belgae,
Aquitani, Celtae and Heluetij, bounded upon the North by the Rhein, upon the
West by the maine Ocean sea, upon the South with the Pyreney mountains, and
upon the East with the stately Alps. For thus he writes in the First book of
his Commentaries of the wars of France: GALLIA est omnis diuisa in parts
tres: Quarum vnam incolunt BELGAE, aliam AQVITANI, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua
CELTAE, nostra GALLI, appellantur. Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, a Belgis
Matrona, et Sequana diuidit. All FRANCE is divided into three parts: whereof
the one is possessed of the Belgae, the other of the Aquitani, the third of
those people which they in their language call Celtae, we in ours Galli. The
Galli (or Gauls) are divided from the Aquitanes by the river Garonne; and from
the Belgae by the Marne and Seine. Item a little beneath he says that, GALLIA
begins at the river Rhosne, and it is bounded with the Garonne, the Ocean
sea, and Belgium; moreover toward the Sequani and Heluetij it abbutteth upon
the Rhein: It bends somewhat Northward. BELGIVM begins at the outmost
borders of Gallia; and from thence it costeth along by the inner side of the
river Rhein: It lies North and by East from the rest of Gallia. AQVITANIA
arises at the river Garonne, and so from thence it falls down to the
Pyreney mountains, and the Spanish seas: It lies West and by North from the
rest of France. Nay beside this division, there was yet another much more
large, extending the bounds of France beyond the Alps which did include a good
part of Italy, and therefore it was of the Romans named GALLIA CISALPINA,
France on this side the Alps, or Italia Gallica, France in Italy. But of
these and the like divisions we have in the former spoken plentifully, and
therefore we now surcease to repeat them again in this place. And we are not
ignorant how much of this large compass here described is at this day severed
from the crown of France, and has these many years been governed by
several Lords and Princes. A great part of Gallia Belgica, as namely
Flaunders, Brabant, Artois, Limburgh and other) belongs unto the King of
Spain; Holland, Zeland, with the rest of the Low Countries are governed by the
States: Zuittzerland, Cleue, Lorrain, Alsas, Sauoy, Piemont, and some other
provinces are held of the Emperor, and are subject to their proper Princes:
and no one foot, for ought I know, of Italy beyond the Alps does belong now
to the crown or kingdom of France. The several Shires or Provinces of this
kingdom are very many, whereof the most principal are these, Boulennois,
Ponthieu, Caux, Picardy, Normandy, France, Beausse, Bretaigne, Aniow, Le
Maine, Poitow, Lymosin, Santoine, Guien, Gascoigne, Perigot, Quercy, Champaine,
Berrey, Gastinois, Sologne, Auuergne, Niuernois, Lyomois, Charrolois,
Bourbonois, Maine, Daulphein, Province, Languedocke, Bloys, or Blasois, Forram,
Burgundy, La Franche Conte, Vermandois and some few others mentioned in this
Map. The whole land generally is very fertile and withal passing pleasant
and healthful: and thereupon they use to say that Lombardy is the garden of
Italy, and France is the garden of Europe. Yet some places are more fertile for
some one commodity then others are. Picardy, Normandy, and Languedocke are as
goodly countries for Corn, as any in all Christendom beside. Some places do
afforde great store of fruits, some as great plenty of Wood: In some places
Flax and Hemp do grow in great abundance, in other places they make as great
a commodity of their Woad. The whole country generally in all places
affords much wine, but the best is made in Beausse about Orleans. They have
some mines of Iron, but many of Salt. Whereupon La Noue says, that the Corn,
Wine, Salt and Woad that is from hence transported into foreign Countries,
does bring in yearly to the subjects and crown of France twelve hundred
thousand pounds of current money. And John Bodine affirms that Such springs of
Corn, Salt and wine do here flow so copiously, that it is almost impossible
to empty them or draw them quit dry. Another, a country man of ours, a worthy
gentleman and of as good judgment, as the best of them, says that in the
province of Limosin, are the best Beeues: about Orleans, the best Wines: in
Auuergne, the best Swine; and in Berry, the choicest Mutton, and greatest store
of Sheep. In France there are twelve Archbishoprickes: and one hundred and
four Suffraganes, or Bishops. Bodine says that there are in France twenty
seven thousand and four hundred Parish Churches, counting only every city for
a Parish. The cities and walled towns in this country are very many, but of
them all PARIS is the chief, which does as much excel the rest, as the lofty
cedar does the lowest shrubbes: And I have heard say, if my memory fail me
not, that the King of France, being demanded by an Ambassador, how many
cities there were in all that his whole country and kingdom, reckoned up a
great number, and amongst them made no mention at all of Paris: and being
again asked the reason why he did not account that for one amongst the rest,
answered that Paris was another world. This town is seated in the I Will of
France upon the river Sein, in as pleasant and fertile a place as elsewhere may
be found in this whole kingdom. It is a very ancient city, called by Caesar
Lutetia, by Ptolemey Lucotecia, and by Iulianus in his Misopogonus, Leucetia.
Zosimus names it Parisium, and Marcellinus, Castellum Parisiorum, The castle
of the Parisij: For this province which now they call properly France, or The
I Will of France, was the ancient seat and habitation of the Parisij. The river
Sein, (Sequana) parting it self into two streams, divides this town into
three parts, to wit, The Burge upon the North side: The University, upon the
South: and The Ville, in the midst, in the i will aforesaid, which seems to be
the old town mentioned by Caesar. For thus he writes in the seventh book of
his Commentaries of the wars of France: Id oppidum (Lutetia he means)
Parisiorum, positum in insula fluminis Sequanae. Lutetia that town of the
Parisij, is situate in an island in the river Sein. It is, as our learned
countryman reports, ten English miles about by the walls. The University was
founded by Charles the Great in the year of our Lord eight hundred. For other
particulars I wish thee to look back to that which we have written before
generally of France, or particularly of diverse and sundry several Provinces of
the same. And beside those authors before named, thou may adioine that our
learned countriemam, who not long since set out a discourse of this kingdom
entitled, The view of France.

map of France GALLIA. Geographica Galliae descriptio, de integro plurimis in
locis emendata ac Regionum limitibus distincta; auctore Petro Plantio
Quicquid terrarum Rhene, Alpibus, mari Mediterraneo, Pyrenais montibus, oceano
Aquitanico Britannico et Germanico clauditur; communi nomino Latinis Galliae
appellatur: quibus limitibus potentissimum Francorum regnum, Sabaudia,
Burgundia comitatus, Holvetia, Alsatia, Lotharingia, inferior Germania, et
quaedam aliae regiones hodie continentur.

Ioannes Baptista Vriuts excudit


The Duchy of LIMBORGH, in the Low Countries.
GERMANIA INFERIOR, or, as we now call it, The Low countries, is at this day
divided into these seventeen provinces: to wit, four Duchies, Brabant,
Limbourgh, Lukenburgh and Guelderland: seven Counties, or Earldomes, Flanders,
Artois, Heinault, Holland, Zeland, Namur, and Zurphen: one Marquisate, commonly
called The Marquisate of the Sacred Empire: five Grand Signeories, Frizeland,
Mechlin, Vtreckt, Ouer-issel, and Groninghen. Of the most of these we have in
the former spoken severally and at large, only of Limborgh, which although it
be one of the least, yet in honor and dignity not the least, we have hitherto
spoken little or nothing. The Dukedom of LIMBOVRGH, therefore, is a very
little province, situate in the midst between the Duchy of Gulich,
Gelderland, the Bishopric of Leege and Lutzenburge: The city Limburgh, or as
they vulgarly call it Lympurch, the chief town of this province and whereof
it took the name, stands upon the river Wesse, or Wesdo, as they name it,
and is distant from Aix three leagues, but from Liege it is four at the least
or somewhat more. It is a very strong town both by nature and art: For being
built upon the rising of a stony hill, it is enclosed round with a very
defensible wall, guarded here and there with diverse strong towers, beside a
goodly large Castle all of free stone upon the top of the hill. The situation
and prospect of this city is most pleasant and commendable. For at the foot
of the hill, at the towns side, runs the river, unto which adioineth a
goodly fertile plain where daily great store of cattle are kept and
maintained to the great commodity and gain of the inhabitants round about.
This city is not ancient, nor once mentioned by any old writer, as D. Remacle
Fusch, a learned Physician, this countriman borne, plainly confesses, and yet
he says that he had diligently searched and turned over all authors, who
either of set purpose, or by the way, have handled that kind of argument. The
soil is very good and fertile, both for corn and pasture, especially about
Heruey, a fine village not far from Clermont. Only wine it yields none at
all; but in sted of that, they make of barley steeped and sodden, a kind of
very strong drink, which will as soon make the tosse-pot drunk, as the
strongest wine in France. Lewis Guicciardine writes that, about half a Dutch
mile off, from this town, there is a Mine or quarry of stone, that is very
like to metal: of Pliny, in the 10. Chapter of the four and thirtieth book
of his Natural history it is called Lapis aerosus, Cadmia, and lapis
calaminaris (if I be not deceived) The brass stone, or Copper ore. D. Fusch
testifies that it has also diverse veins of Lead and Iron. A kind of black
stone cole, like unto that which we here call Seacoale, of a sulphurous
nature, a good fuel and much used of Farriers and Smithes, is in diverse places
of the country dug out of the ground in great abundance. Moreover here are
found diverse sorts of stone, not much unlike to Marble or Jasper party
colored, very beautiful and good for building. This country at the first was
no more but a County or Earldome: until that Frederick, surnamed Barbarosso,
in the year of our Lord 1172. graced it with the title and dignity of a
Duchy. The first Duke that enioied this honor was Henry the First, lineally
descended from Henry the Fourth, that valiant and religious Emperor. At length
Henry the Second Duke of Limburgh, dying without heir male, John the First
Duke of Brabant, about the year after Christ's incarnation 1293, by right of
inheritance claimed the same, and by dint of sword, driving out Reynold Earl
of Gelderland, the Usurper, obtained it, since whose days it has been
quietly possessed by the house of Brabant. Therefore for justice in civil
causes, not only Limburg, but also Faulconburg, Dalem and other liberties and
free towns beyond the Mose, do come to the courts of Brabant, which ordinarily
are held at Brussels: otherwise for ecclesiastical jurisdiction they do
belong to the diocesses of that Bishop of Liege. But beside this dukedom of
Limburgh there are diverse other Iursdictions and Signiories described in this
Charte; of the which these following are the chief, whereof it shall not be
amiss to speak a word or two. Faulconburgh, (Valckembourg it is called of the
Dutch, but of the French, Fauquemont) is a very pretty town, which has
jurisdiction and command over a large circuit of ground containing many fine
villages. It is three great Dutch miles from Aix, and but two small miles from
Mastricht. It was conquered and taken by John the third, Duke of Brabant; who
overcame Ramot the Lord of Faulconburgh, a troublesome man, that at that time
laid seege to Mastricht and had much and often vexed the country round about him.
DALEM is a pretty fine town, with a Castle, but of no great strength. It is
three long miles from Aix, and two from Liege: It was honored with the title
of an Earldome, and had jurisdiction and command over many villages and a great
circuit of ground up as high as the river of Mose. Henry the Second, Duke of
Brabant conquered it and adioined it to his dominions. ROIDVCK, or, as
Guicciardin calls it Rhodele-duc, is an ancient little town with an old
Castle, about one long Dutch mile, as the forenamed author would have it, from
Faulconburg: yet this our Map makes it about two. AIX or AIX LACHAPELLE, if
we may believe Munster, was that which the Latins called Aquisgranum so much
spoken of and mentioned in the stories of Charles the Great and others of those
times. Others would have it to be that which Ptolemey in the 9 chapter of the
second book of his Geography calls Veterra, and where he says the thirtieth
Legion, called Vlpia legio did reside. Limprand names it Palais de Grau,
Rheginon, Palais de eaux, that is, the Water palace; which in my judgment
seems most probable; because I find that that city in Prouence in France
which the Romans called Aquae Sextiae, the Frenchmen do at this day call Aix.
This city is situate between Brabant, Limburgh, the Duchy of Gulicke, and the
Bishopric of Liege. Some think that it was destroyed and laid level with
the ground by Attila king of the Humes: others think that it was first founded
by Charles the Great. But to leave all these as doubtful, this is certain
that it stands in a most pleasant plain and as healthful and sweet an air,
as any may be elsewhere found in these parts. That fair Church, of our Savior
and the blessed Virgin his mother, was built by this Emperor, and by him was
endowed with great lands, privileges, many holy and precious relics brought
thither from sundry places of the world. Beatus Rhenanus writes that Charles
the Great made it the head and chief city of the kingdom of France, and
generally of all the whole Empire, the ordinary Court and place of residence
for the Emperor in these Western parts of the same. Moreover he ordained that
here the Emperor should, by the Bishop of Collen, Metropolitan of this
province, be crowned with a crown of Iron: at Millan, with a crown of Silver;
and at Rome with a crown of Gold. Over one of the doors of the Towne-house
are written these six Latin verses, Carolus insignem reddens hanc condidit
vrbem, Quam libertauit post Romam: constituendo, Quod sit trans Alps hic
semper regia seeds: Vt caput vrbs cuncta colat hanc, and Gallia tota. Gaudet
Aquisgranum prae cunctis munere clarum, Quae prius imperij leges nunc laureat
almi. And over another door, these two, Hic seeds regni trans Alps habeatur,
Caput omnium ciuitatum, and prouinciarum Galliae. This famous Emperor having
reigned over the Frenchmen 47. years and worn the imperial diadem 14. ended
his life in the year of our Lord 813. and was here enterred in a tomb of
Marble, in our Ladies Church with this plain epitaph; Caroli Magni
Christianissimi, Romanorum Imperatoris Corpus hoc conditum est sepulchro. That
is, the body of Charles the Great, Emperor of the Romans, lies here interred
in this tomb. Thus far Guicciardine, to whom I wish thee to repair if thou
desire a larger discourse of these particulars.

map of the Low Countries LIMBVRGENSIS DVCATVS TABVLA NOVA, EXCVSA SVMPTIBVS
JOAN. BAPTISTAE VRINTS, AEMVLI STVDII GEOGRAPHIAE D. AB. ORTELLI. P. M.
COSMOGRAPHI REGII. etc.
ILLVSTRISSIMO DOCTISSIMOQVE DOMINO D. GASTONI SPINOLAE COMITI BRVACENSI, etc.
ORDINIS EQVESTRIS S. IACOBI, PRIMO A STABVLIS, ATQVE A CVBICVLIS SERENISSIMI
DVCIS BRABANTIAE, EIVSDEMQVE IN BELLICIS CONSILIIS ASSESSORI ORDINARIO, DVCATVS
LIMBVRGENSIS, TOTIVSQVE REGIONIS VLTRAMOSANAE GVBERNATORI VIGILANTISSIMO,
OMNISQVE ERVDITIONIS ASYLO VNICO HANC TABVLAM GEOGRAPHICAM NOVISSIMIS
DIMENSIONIBVS A SE AD EXACTISSIMAM REDACTAM PERFECTIONEM AEGIDIVS MARTINI
ANTVERPIENSIS IN VTROQVE IVRE LICENTLATVS ET MATHEMATICVS FECIT ET DEDICAVIT.
ANNO M.DCIII.



AN EPISTLE OF HVMFREY LHOYD, WRITTEN TO ABRAHAM ORTEL, COSMOGRAPHER TO
PHILIP, the Second, King of SPAIN, wherein at large and learnedly he
discourses of the island MONA, the ancient seat of the DRVIDES.
TO satisfy your request concerning the Name and situation of the i will MONA,
most learned Ortell, and to set down in writing what I have observed of that
argument in the reading of ancient and modern authors, what I have found by
experience and travel, and what I have gathered by the knowledge of the
British tongue which to this day is spoken vulgarly by the inhabitants of this
island, were but so much as I confess is due to your kind love and manifold
courtesies, whereby you have many ways eternally bound me unto you:
Notwithstanding in so doing I am sure to be severely censured of many,
condemned of some, and generally to be subject and opposed to the obloquy, and
scandalous speeches of the baser sort, such I mean as have no manner of learning
or sound judgment. For a preiudicate opinion, though never so false and
absurd, nay even the grossest errors if they be once received and settled in the
heart, will hardly ever be removed, especially being patronaged and defended by
the authority of Polydore Virgil, a grave learned man, and one that for those
times was accounted very eloquent. But by their leave I may say, That this man
has stuffed his Histories with many manifest errors, mill mendis and
mendacijs, with a thousand faults and falsehoods; which he fell into, not only
for that he wanted the knowledge of the British tongue, (which now the English,
after the manner of the Germans, call Welsh, that is, Strange or Barbarous)
without which even the very name of the island can by no means be truly
understood: But also either for that he never read the best of our Authors, or
else for that he bearing a proud spleen and malice against the Britons, (whom
the best and most honorable of all the Roman Emperors did love and greatly
esteem) little weighed their authority, and haughtilie attributing too much to
his own, neglected the better, and followed the steps, poor blind man, of
one William Little, little in name and little in estimation and credit, as
blind a fool as himself. But let this brazen faced diminisher of the Britons
honor, burst himself if he will, and do what he can to the uttermost of his
might and malice, so long as Diodorus Siculus, Dion Cassius, twice Consul of
Rome, Herodian, Plutarch, Pausanias, Ptolemey and Strabo, are extant amongst
the Greeks; Caesar's Commentaries, Tacitus his Annals, Eutropius, Suetonius,
Orosius, Aelius Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Flauius
Vopiscus, Aurelius Victor, Ammianus Marcellinus, Sextus Rufus, The Panegyricks
of Mamertinus and others, Pliny, Antonine, Mela and Solinus, amongst the
Latins; beside the Annals of the three Gildases, Ninnius, and diverse other
very learned men, written many hundred years since in the British tongue, who
before the coming of the English, (which our countrymen to this day call by
their ancient name, Saxons) have learnedly penned the histories of this their
native country: and beside Asserius, Obbern, Felix Monumetensis, Henricus
Huntingtonensis, Malmesburiensis, Annouillanus, Iscanus, Neccham, Gyraldus
Parisiensis, Trenetus, and infinite others, which since those Saxons conquered
that part of the island, (which they call England, but we, reteining the old
name Lhoegria,) have done the like. Let, I say, this proud Italian burst
himself, and let him snarle at the worthy acts of the Britons, while so many,
and such ancient authors do live to sound the trumpe of their honor, no
impudent lying fellow shall ever be able with his calumnies to obscure the
bright lusture of the Britons glory, to impeach the honorable fame of their
renowned deeds, spread abroad by such worthy men, or to fasten the least infamy
upon them. But now it is time to come to our proposed argument, and to speak
more particularly of MONA, which Polydore Virgil, taking upon him more than he
well might, has deprived of the ancient name, and leaving it namelesse, has
given both it and Menauia, to the I Will of Man, as may thus be proved both out of
the Greek, Latin, and British writers, as also out of the language which here
to this day is spoken by the inhabitants. It is apparent out of Caesar,
Tacitus, and others, that MONA was an island very near to the coast of
Britain, between it and Ireland: In which Sea there are but two (beside the
Hebrides) that are of any note and bigness: Therefore it must needs follow,
that one of those two is that MONA which is so often mentioned in ancient
histories: Wherefore I think it not amiss to set down before your eyes the
position of them both, and how they do lie from the coast of England and other
islands round about them, that by that means that which follows may the
better be understood. The first of these, which Polydore calls ANGLESEY, is
very near to that part of Britain, which we call Cumry, and the English,
Wales, from which it is severed by a very narrow frith or bay of the sea, (the
country people call it Menai) which oueragainst the midst of the island, is
hardly a mile over. Upon the East side of this i will there is a very strong
castle, and a pretty fine city, called Beaumarish, (Bellum mariscum) both built
by Edward the First, King of England. On the other side of the island, opposite
to this city, there is a marvelous convenient place to take shipping for
Ireland, and therefore it is much for that purpose resorted unto and frequented
by the English. They call it Holy-head, but of the Welsh men it is called
Caergybi, that is, Gubchester, or, The city of Kybi. In this island is
Aberfraw, which within these three or four hundred years was the chief seat
where ordinarily the King of Northwales, ( Gwynedia, or as some barbarously
write it Venedocia) did reside and keep his Court. This island, for the
bigness of it, mainteineth and breeds much cattle and sheep. It yearly
yields such plenty of wheat, that in respect of that fertility it is
commonly called, The mother of Wales. They have little wood here growing: yet
every day the bodies of huge trees, with their roots, and sirre trees of a
wonderful length and bigness, are here by the inhabitants found and dug
out of the earth in diverse places, in low grounds and champion fields. The
people speak the Welsh tongue, and for the most part they do not understand
one word of English: notwithstanding they have for these three hundred years
and more been subject, as the rest of Wales has been, to the Kings and
Crown of England. But now let us come to the other island, to which also
Polydore Virgil has not long since without any ground or good authority,
given the name of MONA. That stands in the midst of the maine sea, distant
from the nearest place of England at the least five and twenty miles. It is
almost as big as that other, but it is far more barren and waste, and those
men that are borne and bred there, are weak and nothing so fit for the wars
and service in the field, only those excepted that are sent thither by the
Earl of Darbie, to whom this i will does by right of inheritance from his
ancestors belong. They do speak the Scottish language, or the Irish, as you
please to call it, for they be both one. The one is as far from Ireland as
the other. These things being taught and conceived, let us now hear what the
Romans have written of Mona. The first author that ever made mention of it, as
I remember, was Caesar; next after him, Pliny and Dion Cassius: But they do
but name it only, and withal affirm it to be situate in the maine sea
between England and Ireland. Thus much we both confess. Cornelius Tacitus, a
very learned man, and one that by means of Julius Agricola, his father in law,
very well knew the state of Britain then, of the situation and distance of
Mona from the Continent, teaches us many things making much to this our
purpose. Therefore let us listen awhile to that which he speaks in the
foureteenth book of his Annals: But then was Paulinus Suetonius Lieutenant of
Britain, one that for his great experience and knowledge of military matters,
popular fame, and estimation amongst the meaner sort of men, (which for the
most part suffers no man of rare virtues and qualities to live without a
compere) did always contend with Corbulo, laboring by all means possibly to
match that his honorable service in conquering Armenia, by ouercomming and
quieting those Rebels which in these parts did stand out against the Romans.
Therefore he makes great preparation, and provides all things necessary for
the assault and taking of the island Mona, a place not only by nature, but also
by reason of the multitude of people which do there inhabit, very strong and
defencible, and is indeed the sanctuary and place of common refuge for all
such as run away from their Capteines or Commanders. He caused boats to be
made with flat bottomes, because the sea there near the shore is very
shallow, and every where full of flats and shelfs. Thus they conveyed over the
footmen, the horsemen followed them partly wading through the foords and shallow
places, and partly swimming where the waters were more deep. Upon the shore,
to empeach our landing, a very great army, very well appointed and armed for
all assaies, stood close thronging together, intermedled with women running to
and fro between the ranks with torches in their hands, in mourning gowns and
their hair about their ears, of all the world like to the Furies or mad
women. The Druides also on every side with hands lifted up to heaven, pouring
out many bitter curses and deadly imprecation, with the strangeness of that
sight struck the soldiers into such a dampe, that they stood stone still, not
once moving their bodies, as if they had willingly offered their throats to
the enemy: yet at length by the exhortation and encouragement of the General,
and one animating and heartening on another, that they might not seem to be
afraid of a company of seely women and other frantike people, they advance
forward the standerd, display their banners, and such as offered to resist,
they beat to the ground, and force them to run into their own fires. This
being done, he placed garrisons in their towns and villages, and caused their
woods to be cut down and utterly destroyed; which, by reason of their cruel
ceremonies and superstitious sacrifices there offered, were by them esteemed
holy. For they accounted it lawful to embrue their altars with the blood of
their captives, and to seek to know the secret counsel of the eternal God
and events to come by the entrails and bowels of men. Thou hear, gentle
Reader, how the footmen followed the horsemen in the foords and shallowes, and
where the water was more deep, they swomme over with the horses. The same
Author also, setting forth, in the life of Julius Agricola, the same
Agricola's voyage into this island, writes on this manner: MONAM insulam, cuius
possessionem reuocatum Paulinum, etc. Thus translated by the learned Sir Henry
Sauile (for I know not whether Great Tacitus scorneth any other interpretor or
no) He deliberated to conquer the island Mona: from the possession whereof, as
before I have rehearsed, Paullinus was revoked by the general rebellion of
Britanie: But as in a purpose not purposed before, ships being wanting, the
policy and resolutenesse of the Captain devised a passage, commanding the
most choice of the Aides, to whom all the shallowes were known, and who after
the use of their country were able in swimming to govern themselves with
armor and horses, laying aside their carriage, to put over at once, and
suddenly to invade them. Which thing so amassed the enemy, attending for ships
and such provision by sea, that surely believing nothing could be hard or
invincible to men which came so minded to war, they humbly entreated for
peace, and yielded the Island. Thus Agricola at his first entrance into his
province (which time others consume in vain ostentation and ambitious seeking
of ceremonies) entering withal into labors and dangers, became famous indeed
and of great reputation. Here thou see again, how the soldiers gat into
Mona by swimming without the help of any ships or boats. Neither did this our
author hear this from the report of any obscure fellow of little knowledge
and less understanding in these matters, but even from the mouth of Agricola
himself, his wives father, a man very famous, and one that was the General
and chief commander in this voyage. But mark, I pray you, how Polydore Virgil
answers all this: For thus he writes in the first book of his History of
England. This sometime (he speaks of Mona) was severed from Britain by a
very narrow arm of the sea, so that so often as the sea did ebb, which here at
all times makes very high tides, it was so near to the Continent, that men
might go thither without boats. And again, a little beneath he writes thus of
it: See, says he, what continuance of time can bring to pass, That island is
now five and twenty miles from any part of England, which sometime was scarce
one mile from it. What will not malice, and a cross humor always opposing it
self against other men's opinions, although never so much turning to his own
disgrace and discredit, yea even in the best wits, force a man to do! This
Italian dreameth of a strange inundation and ouerflowing of the sea, whereof
never any Historian, Latin, English, Irish or Scottish ever spoke, I dare
avouch, one word: and that which is most strange of all, the country people
never have heard, as seems, from their ancestors, of any such kind of
drowning. He complains also of the straightness of that other island, and of
the scarsitie of Corn and Wood. Where also I could wish that the Author had
had a little more discretion and honesty: For this island (I mean his
Anglisea, which indeed is the true Mona) is about five and twenty English
miles long, and sixteen miles over, every mile containing one thousand and two
hundred Geographicall pases. Therefore it contains in compass well near
threescore and twelve Italian miles: For in some places it is not full sixteen
miles over. That which he speaks of the scarsitie of wood here, it is very
true: For Tacitus reports that the woods were cut down and destroyed by the
Romans, an infinite number of the bodies of which, as I have showed before,
covered with earth and hid within the ground, are at this day by the country
people found in sundry places of the i will. And that there have been woods here
within these four hundred years or thereabouts, it is very manifest by our
histories. Of the barrenness of this Island I know not well what to say, seeing
that he is not ashamed to write that which all men do know to be most false:
For such is the fertility of this island, that our people use to say
prouerbially, that Anglesey is the mother of Wales (Mon mam Gymry.) Moreover,
the inhabitants (for their proportion, and state of our country) are very
wealthy, and withal, stout and valiant, as appears out of the English
Historiographers: For the English men have often times assaulted this island by
sea, and labored to get the possession thereof, but all in vain: For they
have been always there slain, or put to the worst. This, Hugh Earl of
Shrewsburie and Arundell there slain, can testify to be true. This also
Henry the natural son of Henry the First, with many noble men with him
there slain can well testify. [How true this is I can not tell; but this I
find, that two Hughs of the Norman blood, the one Earl of Chester, the other
Earl of Shrewsburie, did enter this island, greatly vex the inhabitants; and
that they might the better retain them in due obedience, did build the castle
at Aber Lhienioc: and of these two, Hugh Earl of Chester was indeed there
slain: but how? not in the entrance or assault of the i will, but in the defense
of it after he had gotten quiet possession of the same? yet not by the Welsh
men, but by the Norweighians, who under the conduct of Magnus their General
landed here, slew many of the people, robbed the country, and departed with
great spoil. Of that Henry I find not one word in others.] What should I say
more? Polydore Virgils Mona distant from the coast of Britain twenty five
miles, no whit bigger than this, but much more barren, and such as breeds a
weaker kind of men descended from the Irish, even by the judgment of Polydore
himself, does now renounce the title of Mona. But what other men also do
think of this matter, let us hear in few words. Ptolemey the Prince of
Geographers, upon the East side of Ireland places four islands, MONARINA (or
as other copies do read, Monaida) MONA, ADROS and LYMNOS. The two latter are
very well known unto us at this day; for that indeed they do still retain
those ancient names. Adros of our country men is called Ynys ador, that is,
as the words do signify, The island of birds. Lymnos they now call Enlli,
which the English men call Bardesey, that is, as he would feign interpret it,
Insula Bardorum, The Bardes island. [But I doubt whether our Saxons did ever
understand what the Britons Bardi meant: yet of this I am sure, that the
learned M. Camden in his Britannia is of another opinion.] Of the other two
then, the one must of necessity be our Mona, the other Polydores Mona. Monaria
is by Ptolemey placed much farther Northward than Mona, and Mona he makes to
lie somewhat more Easterly than Monaria: For this, Monaria, I mean, or
Monaoeda, as Ptolemeyes copies vulgarly have it, lies, as he writes, from the
Canaries Eastward 17 degrees and 40 minutes, but up so high into the North,
that the pole there is elevated above the horizont 61 degrees and 30 minutes:
when as the other, to wit, Mona, lies from the Canaries but 15 degrees, and
from the North but 57 degrees and 40 minutes. Polydores Mona leans both more
toward the North and East than ours does: Therefore it is Ptolemeys Monaria
that he speaks of, not Ptolemeys Mona. And this our Mona shall still retain
that ancient name of Mona, which Ptolemey gave unto it in his time. This we
have collected out of foreign histories: Now let us come to our own Writers,
who I think, in a matter of names of places in their own country and language
ought rather to be believed than an Italian, a mere stranger borne and brought
up beyond the seas, far from this our country. But that these things may the
better be understood, some few lines are here by the way to be inserted. All
men do know and confess this to be true, that the Britons, before the entrance
of the English or Saxons did possess this whole island: until such time as
being by them conquered and subdued, they were forced to abandon the better
part of the same, leaving it to the possession of their enemies; and to content
themselves with the Western parts only: And they being thus seated, were called
by the names of the places were they dwelt, as for example those which
possessed Cambria, were named Cambri: those which inhabited Cornouia, were
known and called by the name of the Cornouij. Yet the English men did, after
the manner of the Dutch (who name the French and Italians, Welsh) call them all
generally Welshman: Adding for difference sake the names of the countries, as
it is manifest by those histories, which yet are extant, written in the Saxon
tongue. For those our Brits, are in them called VValae: and the Cornouij,
Cornwalae; not, as the unlearned do think, Cornugalliae. Neither can I with
silence ouerpasse that shameless impudency of Polydore, who braggeth that he
was the first that ever found this out, and committed the same to writing; when
it is most certain that he stole this etymology and reason why this our
country was called Wales, out of Syluester Giraldus. But, that I may return
unto that where I left, the Welshmen being thus cooped up into a corner, did
notwithstanding retain the ancient British tongue: so that the Countries,
Cities, Rivers, Islands, and people of Britain, are by the Welshmen called by
those names whereby they were known and called at such time as they possessed
the whole. For our country people, such I mean as are borne and brought up
far within the land, do not know what the name of an English man does mean,
but all the English they do generally term Saisson, that is, Saxons, (for they
have no x) England they call by the ancient name Lhoeger: Wales, Cambri:
Cornwall, Corniw: Scotland, Alban: Ireland, Yuerdhon: and indeed some old
Writers do write the name of this island not Hibernia, but Iuernia, as M. Camden
shows at large in his Britannia. So also we do still call all the Cities of
England by those names whereby they were sometime called before the entrance of
the Saxons. But let us come again to Mona. Our countrymen and the inhabitants
of this i will (speaking now at this day the ancient British tongue) do know no
other name of it than MON, for so they all generally call it. Polydore Virgil
calls it ANGLESEA, that is, The English i will. I grant that this island being
subdued by the English men, was beautified and graced with their name, and that
the English men do so call it I do not deny. But, I pray thee, did the English
men first descrie this island, was it never seen before, or had it no name at
all before their coming? Hear thou Polydore, bethink thy self; thou
may as well say that England is not that land which was sometime called
Britannia, nor that was not Gallia, which now we call France. Nay, which is a
greater matter than this, and more strange, the inhabitants of this i will
(notwithstanding they be subject to the crown of England) do neither know what
England or an English man does mean: For an English man they call Sais, (but
in the plural number speaking of more than one, Saisson) and this their native
country they name Mon. Moreover, that fair city built upon that arm of the
sea or frith, above mentioned, on the other side over against the West part of
this island, is called Caeraruon, that is, The city upon Mon: For Caer, in our
language signifies a walled town; ( Kir, in Hebrew is a wall, and Kartha, in
those Eastern tongues is a walled city:) Ar, is as much to say, as Upon: and
as for the v, in the last syllable, for m, that is the propriety of the
language in some cases: for in all words beginning with m, in consequence of
speech, that letter, after some certain consonants is changed into v, for
which our nation does always use f: because that v, with them is evermore a
vowell: So we call Wednesday (Diem Mercurij) Die Mercher, but Wednesday night
Nos Fercher. Mary, we call Mair; but for our Ladies church we write and
pronounce Lhanuair. Neither is this city only thus named, but even that whole
tract of the continent of Britain that runs along by it is called Aruon,
that is, Opposite or over against Mon. But let it be, that this island was not
that Mona so often mentioned by the ancients, then ought Polydore for his credits
sake have found another name for it, and not to have left it wholly namelesse.
Now let us come unto the other, which our countrymen do call MENAW: and which
all the inhabitants general, as also the English and Scots (reteining the
Welsh name, but cutting it somewhat shorter) MAN. Therefore there is no man,
for ought I know, beside this proud Italian, and one Hector Boethius, a loud
liar, that ever called this island by the name of Mona. But leaving these
demonstrable arguments, which indeed do make this matter more clear than the
noone day, let us come unto authorities and testimonies of learned men, which
in some cases are rather believed than any other arguments whatsoever: by these
I doubt not but the true and proper name shall be given to each of these islands,
and the controversy decided without any manner of contradiction. There is a
piece of Gildas Britannus, that ancient writer, a man every kind of way
learned, at this day remaining, in the Library of the illustrious Earl of
Arundell, the only learned Noble man of his time; in which he has these
words: England has three islands belonging to it: Wight, over against the
Armoricanes, or Bretaigne in France: The second lies in the midst of the sea
between Ireland and England. The Latin Historians do call it Eubonia, but
vulgarly in our mother tongue we call it MANAW. Thou hear, gentle Reader, a
natural Welsh man speaking in the Welsh tongue: For thus we call Polydore
Virgils Mona in our native language even at this day. Moreover, the reverend
Beda, that worthy Englishman, famous through all Christendom in his days for
all manner of literature and good learning, in the ninth chapter of the second
book of his History writes thus: At which time also the people of
Northumberland (Nordan Humbri) that is, all that nation of the Angles which did
inhabit upon the North side of the river Humber, with Edwin their king, by the
preaching of Paulinus (of whom we have spoken a little before) was converted
unto the faith of Christ. This king in taking of good success for his
enterteinment of the Gospel, did grow so mighty in Christianity and the
kingdom of heaven, and also had that command upon the earth, that he ruled
(which never any king of the English did before him) from one end of Britain
to the other, and was king not only of the English but also of all the shires
and provinces of the Britons. Yea and he brought under his subjection, as I
have showed before, the isles of Man (insulae Menaniae.) Here I do think, that
for Menauiae, it ought to be written Menauiae: seeing that there is such small
difference between an n and a u, that they may easily be mistaken, and one put
for another. Moreover, Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon, a worthy
Historiographer, who wrote about the year of our Lord 1140, one that followed
Beda in many things almost foot for foot, does seem also to correct this
fault, and clear the doubt. For he setting forth the great command and
conquests of this Edwine King of the Northumbers, brusteth out into these
words: Eduwyn the king of the Northumbers ruled over all Britain, not only
over that part which was inhabited of the English, but over that also which was
possessed of the Britons, Kent only excepted. Moreover, he brought the i will
Menauia, which lies between Ireland and Britain, and is commonly called MAN,
under the obedience of the Kings of England. Here observe, that this English
man did give also to this island (which Polydore Virgil falsely calls Mona) the
English name: for it is commonly, says he, called Man: by which name it is
known and called at this day of all the English. Besides this also Ranulph of
Chester in the four and fortieth chapter of the first book of his
Polychronicon, does thus speak of those islands which are near neighbors unto
Britain: Britain, says he, has three islands lying not far off from it
(beside the Orkney isles) which do seem to answer unto the three principal
parts of the same: For WIGHT lies hard upon the coast of Loegria, which now is
called England (Anglia:) MONA which the English call Anglisea, pertains unto
Cambria, that is, to Wales: But the i will EVBONIA, which has two other names,
Menauia and Mania, lies oueragainst Scotland. These three, Wight, Man, and
Anglisea (Vecta, Mania, Mona) are almost all of one bigness, and containing
the like quantity of ground. Thus far Ranulph of Chester. The reason why
Gildas and others have called this island Eubonia, I take to be this; because it
was first inhabited of the same nation (to wit, the Irish) of the which the
Euboniae, the West isles, commonly of the Historians called Hebrides, are. The
reverend Beda and Henry Huntington, in that they write it Menauia, do seem to
allude to the Welsh name Manaw: but this is it which we would have thee
diligently to observe, that none of them do call it Mona. By these arguments
and testimonies it is manifest that Mona is that island which the inhabitants
(as I have showed before) do at this day name Mona, or Mon, acknowledging no
other name, and is that which of the English is called Anglisea: but the other,
which Polydore Virgil, and such as do love with him to wallow in the mire,
rather than to seek for the clear streams, do call Mona, is of Gildas
called Eubonia, of Henry Huntington Menauia, and of others Mania. Here I will
conclude this discourse with this one testimony, which may indeed woorthily
stand for many; to wit, this of Syluester Girald a Welsh man borne, a man no
less famous for his learning, than for his noble birth: For he was descended
from that noble house of the Giralds, to whom the Kings of England are
beholding for that footing which they have in Ireland. Moreover, he was greatly
beloved of Henry the second King of England, and was afterward Secretary to
King John his son; whose name also is very famous and often mentioned in the
Popes Decretals: For being but bishop of S. David's in Wales, he did
notwithstanding contend with the Archbishop of Canturburie about the
prerogative and primacy: This man, I say, in that his book which he entitled
Itinerarium Balwini Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, crucem in infideles per
Cambriam praedicantis, The Iournall or travels of Baldwin Archbishop of
Canturbury, when as he preached the Gospel and cross of Christ against the
Infidels thorowout all Wales (whose company he never forsook in all that
peregrination) writes thus of the i will MONA. On the morrow we passed by the
castle of Caeraruon, and from thence through the valleys and steep hills and
mountains we came unto Bangor, where we were most kindly enterteined of the
bishop (whose name was Gwian, who was almost constrained to take up the cross
of Christ) with a great lamentation and shout of all sorts of people both men
and women. From thence, crossing a vety narrow arm of the sea, we passed over
to MONA, an island lying about two miles off from the maine land. Here
Rothericke the younger son of Owen came very devoutly with all the people of
that i will and of the countries round about him, to meet us. There they making as
it were a theater of the craggie rocks, by the preaching of the Archbishop, and
of Alexander the Archdeacon of that place, many were won unto the cross and
to believe in Jesus Christ, but certain young men, lustie-bloods, of the
servants and followers of Rothericke, which sat oueragainst us, would by no
means be drawn to bear the cross. Of these some, within a little while
after, following certain thieves or free-booters, being slain outright,
others hurt and dangerously wounded, did of their own heads lay a worldly
cross one upon another back. Rothericke was married to Prince Reese's
daughter, who was allied to him in the third degree: her, by no admonitions, he
could be made to put away from him, hoping that by her means he should the
better be able to defend himself against his brothers children, whom he had
disherited and put by their lands and possessions: notwithstanding it fell out
contrary to his expectation, for within awhile after they recovered all again
out of his hands. This Island has three hundred three and forty villages or
farms, yet it is esteemed but at three Cantreds. Britain has three islands
lying not far off from it, all almost of like quantity and bigness: VVight,
upon the South; Mon, upon the West; and Man, upon the Northwest. The two former
are very near to the continent, the arms of the sea by which they are severed
from England, being but very narrow and not far over. The third which is
called Man, lies mid way between Vlster, a province of Ireland, and Gallawey
of Scotland. Mona, or Mon, of the inhabitants, by reason of the great plenty of
wheat which it yields ordinarily every year, is called The mother of Wales.
And a little beneath, the same Author writes thus of this island: Hugh Earl
of Shrewsbury and Arundell, with Hugh Earl of Chester, entering this island by
force, did shut dogs all night in the church of Fefridanke, which the next
morning were found all stark mad; and he himself afterward by the
inhabitants of the Orkeney isles, coming thither as pirates and sea-robbers,
under the leading of Magnus their captain, being shot in the eye (which part
of his body only was unarmed and subject to the enemies weapon) fell stone dead
from the deck of the ship into the sea: which Magnus beholding, cried out in
the Danish language, Leit loope, that is as much to say in English, Let him
leap. Moreover, Henry the Second, going into North Wales with an army of men,
joined battle with the adversary at Caleshull in a narrow straight between
two woods, and withal sent a sail of ships into Mona, which spoiled the
foresaid Church with other places there: wherefore they were almost all slain,
taken, dangerously wounded, or put to flight by the inhabitants of that i will.
There were in this company two noble men, and his uncle which wrote this story,
with other mo sent hither by the King, to wit, Henry the son of Henry the
First, and the uncle of Henry the Second, begotten of the honorable lady
Nesta, daughter of Reese, Theodore's son, borne in the confines of
South Wales, I mean in the skirts of it next unto Demetia or West-Wales, and
the brother of Steven, brother to Henry by the mothers side, but not by the
fathers, a man that first in our days, breaking the way for others, not long
after this, attempted the entrance and conquest of Ireland, whose worthy
commendations the prophicall history does at large set forth. Henry being too
venturous, and not being seconded in time, was killed at the first encounter
with a pike. But Robert distrusting his own strength and doubting whether he
should be aided or not, fled, and being sore wounded, very hardly recovered the
ships. This island outwardly appears as if it were barren, rough, and
ouergrowen, like as the country of Pebidion near Menauia does, although
indeed it be very fertile of many things in diverse places. Thus far Gyraldus.
What could ever be spoken or written more plainly and evidently of the name,
situation, fertility and valourous inhabitants of Mona; as also of the
situation and name of that other island? The same author in his description of
Wales, thus speaks of this Island: In North Wales between Mona and Snowdon
hills is Bangor the bishops sea. As of all Wales, the South part about
Cardigan shire, ( Cereticam regionem, he calls it) but especially every where
in West-Wales, (Demetia) by reason of the champion plains, and commodiousnesse
of the marine coasts, are far the more pleasant and better: so North Wales
(Borealis Venedotia) is known to have many countries and places far more
strong and better fortified by nature and situation, many more goodly brave
men, every where to have much better and more fertile ground: For like as
Snowdon hills are thought to be able to find pasture for all the cattle in
Wales if they were all driven thither, so it is reported that the i will Mona
(Anglisea) may for a time find all Wales bread-corne; such is the wonderful
store of wheat that it does yearly yield. What man is he that is so blockish
and void of understanding, that shall read and consider these arguments and
allegations, that will make any doubt whether Polydore's Anglisea be the true
Mona, that ancient seat of the Druides, so renowned by the Roman wars, and
often mentioned in their histories? Moreover, who can doubt, whether that other
Island, which the Welshmen call Manaw, and the English Man, which he and some
other learned men (choosing rather to drink puddle water from a near channel,
than to seek farther for a clear stream or pure fountain) have falsely named
Mona, or whether we ought not rather with Ptolemey to call it Monaria, or
Monaida; Eubonia, with Gildas; Menauia, with Beda and Henry Huntington; or
Mania, with Gyraldus?

Many more arguments and testimonies of learned men I could in this place have
alleged: but lest I should be too tedious and troublesome to the Reader, I
will at this time with these content my self: nothing doubting but these, to
any learned man, or any one well acquainted with the Welsh histories, shall be
thought sufficient to stop the mouth of the scandalous adversary, and to answer
all the cauils of the malicious enuiours of the Britons glory. Therefore I must
entreat thee, most learned Ortell, for that thy kindness and humanity which
thou art wont to show to others, to take this in good part, and in that thy
goodly Theater, to set out this our Mona, in the ancient colors, to the
public view of the world: And I hope before it be long to send you a more
absolute description, not only of this our Mona, but also of all Wales,
illustrated both with the ancient names used by the Romans and Britons, and
also with the modern English, whereby they are known at this day of that
nation. Moreover, I have a Geographicall Chart or Map of England, described
according to the modern situation and view, with the ancient names of rivers,
towns, people and places, mentioned by Ptolemey, Pliny, Antonine and others,
that those gross and shameless lies of Hector Boothe may by that means the
easilier be descried: against which Hector Boothe our Leland, that famous and
learned Antiquary wrote this most worthy Epigramme: Hectoris historici tot,
quot mendacia scripsit, Si vis vt numerem, Lector amice, tibi; Me iubeas etiam
fluctus numerare marinos, Et liquidi stellas connumerare poli. Would have
me, gentle Reader, tell I he lies that Hector Boothe did write? I may as well
count sand of sea, Or stars of heaven in cleerest night. I have also a very
exact description of the marine tract or sea coast of Scotland: all which when
I shall come up to London (which God willing shall be before the end of April
next) I will send unto you: Whereby the manifest and palpable errors of
certain learned men shall be discovered: who in their Geographicall Chart,
trusting too confidently to certain unlearned men's relations and writings have
most falsely and erroneously set down the names of diverse places, cities and
rivers, to the great prejudice and danger of such as shall give heed unto them.
In the mean time I bid you heartily farewell, beseeching you, of all loves, if
there be any thing wherein I may pleasure you, not to entreat it, but to
command it, by the law of friendship and league of learned scholars. Richard
Clough, a very honest man, and one that was the cause and procurer of this our
love and acquaintance, as well your friend as mine, shall both bring your
letters from you to me, and mine to you, that interest I know we both have in
him. Again farewell, most kind ORTELL: from Denbigh in Guynedh or North Wales
this fifth of April, in the year of our Lord God M.D.LXVIII.

Thine to his uttermost power, HVMFREY LHOYD of Denbigh in Wales.

printer's device of John Norton and John Bill, featuring Mercury's hat and
caduceus with two cornucopias and seascape (McKerrow 293)

LONDON, Printed for JOHN NORTON and JOHN BILL. 1606.


