THE TRVE CHRISTIAN CATHOLIQVE OR THE MANNER HOW TO LIVE CHRISTIANLY. GATHERED
Forth of the holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, confirmed and explained by
sundry Reasons, apt^ Similitudes, and Examples.

By the Reverend Father F. PHILLIP DOVLTREMAN, of the Society of Jesus. And
turned out of French into English By JOHN HEIGHAM.

AT S. OMERS, With permission of Superiors. Anno 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY LADY, THE LADY ELIZABETH WILLOUGHBY, DAVGHTER to I.
Thornbrough, Lord Bishopp of Worcester.
MADAM
The Son of God, the supreme wisdom of the Father, setting up his divine
conclusions, and daring (as it were) the greatest wits of all the world, to
enter in dispute against them, says. Do men gather grapes of Thorns, or
Figs of thistles? What shall we say to this demand? Must it needs be
granted, and can it no way be denied? Surely yes, me thinks it may. First
therefore I say (with my Lord and masters leave) that he himself being perfect
man, does gather from many sinful men sons and daughters, of whom he makes
glorious Saints: but this is to gather grapes of Thorns, ergo. Secondly, who
may better help me to maintain this assertion, (Madam) then your self? For
from whence has he gathered your self (so worthy a grape) but of a Thorn? A
grape so rare (albeit gathered of a very Thorn) that having been pressed by
him in his sacred press, has yielded such store and plenty of precious
liquor, as has not only filled his house with the odor thereof, but has
further kindled and enflamed, yea plainly inebriated the hearts of many cold
ones in his burning love.

The press wherein this Lord does press such precious grapes, as your self,
what other is it then the pressor of persecution. The precious juice which is
pressed out of these excellent grapes, are those most precious and excellent
Christian virtues, which manifest the^ selves amidst persecutions. The glorious
Apostle S. Paul, desirous to give unto us, a proof and taste of that precious
liquor which was pressed out of him self, after his conversion to the faith of
Christ, says. Until this hour, we do both hungar and thirst, and are naked,
and are beaten with buffets, and are wanderers, and labor working with our
own hands. And which is there of all these, that you may not truly say as
well as he? Verily it seems to me, that God would in some sort, paragonize
you Ladyshipp, with this glorious Apostle, and make you a spectacle, or rather
pattern to women, as he was to men, in each of these probations and
persecutions.

First therefore, in hungar and thirst as well as he, having been reduced to
that extremity, as to be forced to send to the Spanish and Venetian
Ambassadors to beg your bread: and on Fridayes and Saturdayes, to be taxed to
the allowance of three pence a day, for the maintenance of your self, your
man, and your maid. In nakedness as well as he, as being not only despoiled of
your plate, ie wells, and rich apparel, but also to be stripped so nere, even of
necessaries, as to be forced to set in your chamber in your naked sleeves, not
able to go out of doors, for lack of clothes. In being beaten with buffets as
well as he, pitifully swollen with black and blue, yea trailed by the hair of
the head, and trodden under foot: treatment truly fitter for a dog, then for a
Christian Lady: which yet for the love you still bear to your abuser, I ommit
to enlarge. In wandering as well as he; who have been forced to travel many
miles (not in the day time, and in your Coache, as your custom was, and your
rank requires) but on foot, in the dead of the night, and to fli^ from place
to place, thorough uncouth and unknown ways: and last of all, to fly the
land, to live in a strange and foreign contrie. In labor and working with your
own hands to get your living: whereof many gentlemen of worth can yet bear
witness, who coming to visit you in that poor estate, found you laboring with
your hands to get your living.

But to say in a word with what incredible patience and inward confort you
sustained and suffered the pressures aforsaid, let this remain for an
everlasting memory, that to as many of your acquaintance as you met with all,
with great pleasure and contentment you said, that you could tell them great
good news, to wit, that you were now no more a Protestant, but were become a
Roman Catholic; Which you uttered to all with such alacrity of mind, that
many who heard you, deemed you mad for making that answer; like as the
Apostles, for their enflamed feruor in the faith of Christ, were esteemed
drunk. But o happy food which causes such a happy frenzy! And o happy
drink, which so makes drunk!

I need not (Madam) the premises considered, frame any apology for my self
in this place, why I made choice of your Lady-ship, to protect and patronize
this present treatise, entitled, The true Christian Catholic: for each one
may easily judge, that a book of this title, meriteth to be dedicated to none
other, then to such a true and virtuous Christian Catholic, as your have
manifested your self to be by so evident trial: assuring my self, that of
all the books which ever you saw, you never met with any of so small a bulk,
which does express with more liuelye examples, the virtues meet for a true
Christian Catholic, nor yet set forth with more fearful presidents the
punishments inflicted by God, upon such as are vicious. Receive the same then,
I do beseech you, into the arms of your protection, and I shall never cease
to pray, that you may become peereles in the practice of the virtues and be
perpetually preserved from the vices: and finally of a Thorn in this life, you
may become an everlasting Lilly in the life to come. Amen.

Your Ladyships ever humble servant in our Lord and Savior Jesus JOHN HEIGHAM.

THE PREFACE.
THis Title of a True Christian Catholic, is not of so base and of so small a
reckning as perhaps (my friendly Reader) thou do account it: for I find,
that the greatest and renowned of the world, have glorified more thereof, then
of all their other titles of honor and nobility. Non principis, non terrenae,
etc. We are not honored (says Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 8. in Joan. circa finem,
with the name of Prince, or of some earthly power, not of Angel not of
Archangell, but with the name of the King of the whole world. That valerous
martyred Deacon, called Sanctus (as Eusebius writes l. 5. hist. Eccl. c. 1.)
being asked of the tyrant what his name was, ansvvered. I am a Christian. Of
what family art thou? I am a Christian, quoth he. Of what quallitie, free,
or a bondsman? To all the demandes which were made him, he returned no other
answer but, I am a Christian. The same author vvriteth, that S. Blandinas
martyr, in her confession of faith, and in the midst of all her torments, as
often times as she pronounced these words, I am a Christian, so many times
she felt her self stre^ghtned anew, and rejoiced. And what shall I say of S.
Greg. Nazianzen. Who speaking of him self and of S. Basil, says ( in the
funeral ortion of S. Basil.) Nobis magna res, etc. that is to say. We esteemed
it for a great thing, and held it for a great and noble name, indeed to be,
and to be called Christians: whereof we glory more, then ever Gigas did of the
change of the stone of his ring (if notvvithstanding it were not fabulous) by
the which he possessed himself of al Lidia. Thou shall further see in the first
chapter of this book, that which the great King Lewis of France also judged
of this name.

Consider then the excellency of this book, since it bears a name so lofty
and so honorable; But yet behold rather (o Christian) the glorious name which
thou do bear, and if the life ought to answer to the excellency of the
name, have thou not cause to make account of this book, which teaches thee
in a few leaves, how to live Christia^ly, that is to say, conform to the life
of Jesus Christ, whose name thou bear? Christianismus est imitatio diuinae
naturae etc ( says S. Gre. Naz. tra. denomine professione Christiani.
Christianity is the imitation of the divine nature. If then thou be a
Christian, imitate Jesus Christ thy God. Beware thou bear not a name empty
and vain, but complete. Employ then the measure of so great a name, upon
works worthy of the name. For this it is that thou art Christian (says S.
John Chrysostom, orat. 5. in Iud.) and that thou have received this name, to
the end that thou imitate Jesus Christ, and fulfill by work his commandments.
Briefly, Nemo Christianus vere dicitur etc. (says S. Cyprian) No man is
rightly called a Christian, who endeavors not to become like unto Jesus
Christ by his Christian works. Now to imitate Jesus Christ, one must do two
things. The first is, to root up all the sins and vices that are in his
soul. The second, to plant virtues in their places: for our Lord is not come
into this world, but to destroy sin (1. Joan. 3.) and to teach us by
examples, (1. Pet. 2. 21. Joan. 13. 15. Heb. 10. 20.) and words, the exercise
of virtues, and of good works.

Behold here the sum and abridgement of all Christian justice, says S.
Prosper with S. Aug. (in sent. 98. ex Aug.) to fly from evil, and to do good.
And to this it is, that also Isay, David, and the Apostle does exhort us.
(Isay 1. 1^. Psalm. 33. 15. Romans 12. 9. Colos. 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 22. 23.) This
also is the whole subject of these two books, vvherin as in a most clear
miroir, thou shall find these two pointers taught unto thee, by the holy
Scriptures, and holy Fathers, with sundry notable reasons, rare similitudes
and examples. And note that I have served my self of examples, because I see
that the Son of God him self served him self thereof, as also the holy
Fathers did, especial lie S. Aug. and S. Greg. who in one of his homilies
says (38. in Euang. vvherin he brings sundry examples) that it happens
oftentimes, that the hearts of the hearers, are more converted and moved, by
the examples of the faithful, then by the words of the preachers. Nonnunquam
mentes audentium, plus exempla fidelium, quam docentium verba conuertunt. Which
since it is so, I assure my self that this little book, will bring unto thee
both profit and contentment, if with a serious and attentive lecture, thou
ioynest together the practice and good works. God grant, that both thou and
I, may so well practice these profitable Documents, that after we have by the
means hereof, led a life Truly Christian and Catholic, we may one day have
the recompense promised to all good Christians; life and glory everlasting,
Amen.

Of the true Christian Catholic or The manner how to live Christianly. THE I.
BOOK. Of the flight from sin.
THE I. CHAPTER. Of the name Christian.
1. THIS word Christian, comes of Christ, and signifies him, who being
Baptized, does believe in Jesus Christ, and makes profession of the true and
wholesome doctrine taught in his Church. Canis. c. 1. de fide and simb. q. 1. Or
else, it is like a soldiour, who having left the devils banner, 2. Tim. 2. has
willingly enrolled him self by Baptism, under the standart and banner of
Jesus Christ, making profession to follow him whersoeuer, with his weapons in
his hand, and to fight ince^santly against the world, the flesh, and the
devil, until such time as having got the victory, he enter triumphantly
into heaven, there to receive an immortal crown of glory, and of eternal
contentment. (1. Cor. 9.) What honor will it be, to be enrolled under such a
captain, how happy an hour to arrive at such a triumph, and at such a
crown! You are they which expect and hope for all these things, whosoever
carry by good and true tokens, the name of Christians. But what shame and
confusion shall it be to him, who belying a name so honorable, and despising a
recompense of so incomparable a price, addicteth him self to none but to
things vile and unworthy of a man? nor occupies him self, but only about
that which is of earth, of flesh and blood? nether thinks nor dreameth, but
of eating and drinking, and to stuff top full like a beast, his brutall
appetites? depriving him self by this means of this crown of glory, and
opening to him self by the same means, the way and path to a lamentable
confusion of pains and torments which are eternal. 2. S. Paul (2. Tim. 3.
34.) says. Labor thou as a good soldiar of Christ Jesus, no man being a
soldiar to God, intangleth him self with secular businesses, (understand by
secular, the assembly of the wicked:) and then he adds. No soldiour, that
strives for the masteri^ is crowned, unless he strive lawfully; that is to say,
unless he have exactly observed all the laws of the combat. And in the 4.
chapter. 7. 8. I have fought a good fight, I have consumate my course.
Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our
Lord will rendar to me in that day, a just judge, and not only to me, but to
them also that love his cominge. And 1. Cor 9. 25. Every one that strives for
the mastrie, refraineth him self from all things, and they certes, that they
may receive a corruptible crown, but we (Christians) an incorruptible. I
therefore so run, not as it were at an uncertain thing: so I fight, not as
it were beating the air, but I chastise my body, and bring it into
servitude. S. Peter 1. cap. 4. 15. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a
thief, but if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
in this name.

3. Saint Augustine explicating the name of a Christian, says. He who makes
him self a Christian only to escape the fire of hell, and to come to heaven
with Jesus Christ, counter garding him self against all tentations, and not
suffering him self to be corrupted by prosperity, nor beaten down with
adversity, and who arriueth to this perfection, that he more loves God, then
he fears hell. Who though God him self should say unto him, use and enjoy
the pleasures of the world, commit all the sins thou will, thou shall not be
damned, would not for all this commit sin, for fear of offending almighty
God, such an one is truly Christian. lib. de Catech. rud. c. 16. and 17. tom.
4. Acknowledge thy dignity, o Christian (says S. Leo) and take good heed
that thou return not by a degenerate and unworthy conversation, to thy wonted
vileness and baseness. Ser. 1. de Not.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Lewis king of France, went more willingly to Poissi, then to any other
place in all his kingdom, for that he had been there baptized and made a
Christian: and was wont to say, that he had received more dignity and honor in
that place, then in any other in the whole world. Nicol. Aegid. and Franc de
Belleforest upon his life. Behold (o Christian) the dignity thou have, since
such a King prefers the same before his crown!

2. Now to be a true Christian, one must first fly and detest all sin, as
well mortal as venial; as well that of will only and of thought, as of words
and work.

3. And touching words, to keep him self from swearing without necessity
and reason: from blaspheming: cursing and wicked imprecations: from speaking
words of contumely, detracting, lying, uttering of dishonest songs or words.

4. As touching sins of work, parents ought to take heed, that they be not
negligent, both to instruct and correct their children: and children not to
disobey their parents.

5. Above all, the sin of Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Envy, Gluttony,
Drunkenes, Anger and Sloth, is to be avoided.

6. The most effectual remedies are, to fly the occasion; the memory of the
presence of almighty God; of the passion of Jesus Christ; of death, Judgment,
Hell, and the kingdom of Heaven: thus much concerning the flight of sin.

7. Secondly, one must addict him self to the exercise of virtues and of good
works, as;

8. To make the sign of the Cross, in rising up, and lying down; before
eating, and drinking; before work, and in every necessity.

9. To pray to God, and to give him thanks both morning and eueninge, both
before and after meat, and to inuoke the assistance of our B. Lady, his
Angel Guardian, and of the Saints, namly of him whose name he bears.

10. To sprinkle him self with holy water, and to bear about him an Agnus
Dei.

11. To learn the most necessary points of faith, and of Christian religion.

12. To have a distrust of him self, and a great trust and confidence in
almighty God.

13. To love God above all things, and his neighbor for God.

14. To hear Mass, both with reverence and attention.

15. To Confess often, game Indulgences, and to pray for the souls that are in
Purgatory.

16. To fast, pray, and willingly to give alms unto the poor.

17. To receive often the holy Communion, to hear gladly sermons, and to bear
a singular devotion to our B. Lady.

Lo these are the most necessary points, to live and die a good Christian,
whereof I pretend to treat, thorough all the chapters that do ensue.

THE II. CHAPTER. Of mortal and venial sin.
1. AMongst all the evils that reign in the world, the greatest, and most to
be deplored is, that men know not nor apprehend not, the evils and miseries of
the soul, regarding none but those of the body. The Ass falls into the mire
(says S. Bernard) and both the master, and the neighbors run with speed to
pull him forth: the soul falls into sin, and perdition, and none at all
takes care thereof.

2. What does it profit a man, says our Lord, if he gain the whole world,
and sustain the damage of his soul? Mat. 16. 26. O ye fathers and mothers,
apprehend this point, and teach it betimes unto your children, make them to
suck it with their milk, whilst they are yet in their infancy, and often singe
unto them this goulden sentence of our Savior. Fear ye not them that kill
the body, and are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him that can
destroy both soul and body into hell. Mat. 10. 28. which nether is, nor never
shall be, but for sin.

. What mortal sin is, and what detriments it brings to the soul.
1. S. Augustine speaking of sin in general says, that it is a word,
thought, or deed, against the law of almighty God. lib. 22. cont. Faustum,
cap. 27.

2. Divines say, that it is a foulenes and deformity of the reasonable
creature, whereby it is made displeasing to God, and wherewith it can not see God
in his glory.

3. To be mortal, it must be committed freely and voluntarily, against some
commandment of God, or the Church in a matter of importance.

4. It is called mortal, because it depriueth us of our spiritual life, and
brings death unto the soul, separating it by this death from the kingdom of
God, and making it worthy of fire and pains that are perpetual.

5. The soul that shall have sinned, shall dye the death. Ezech. 18. If I do
this (said the chaste Susanna, being solicited unto sin) it is my death. Dan.
3. And the father of the prodigal child, said unto his eldest son, thy
brother was dead, and is revived. Luc. 15. 32.

6. Besides the spiritual life, that is to say, the grace of God which is lost
by mortal sin, he likewise loses all the merits he had got. Ezech. 18. 24.
All the gifts, and the familiarity of the holy Ghost, and his virtues. Sap.
1. 4. and 5. Abdias 5. 6. He loses the right of the children of God, that is
to say, everlasting life. The especial and particular protection of God. Psalm.
32. 18. The protection of his good Angel. S. Basil in psalm. 33. Communication
in the merits of all the Saints, that is to say, of all good Christians. He
becomes in an instant the slave of the devil, pricked and gnawen continually
with the remorce of conscience, it being the greatest of all torments that are
in this life. S. August. in Psalm. 45. Job. 15. 21. Pro. 28.1. throughout. Sap.
17. Psalm. 50. He meriteth nothing in doing any good work. Isay. 59. Luc. 5. 5.
But that which is the greatest of al mischiefs, he remains obliged to
everlasting pains. Eccles. 21. 10. 11. Iis procella tenebrarum seruata est in
aeternum. Cath. ep. of S. Jude, to whom the storm of darkness is reserved for
ever. Blessed Lord, how many evils does one only pleasure bring!

EXAMPLES.
1. Lysimachus king of Thracia, rendering him self, with his whole kingdom
unto his enemy, for the thirst which he could no longer suffer, after he had
drunk a glass of water; Good God (said this poor Pagan) how great a misery
is it for me, to loose a whole kingdom, for so little a pleasure! Plutarch. Ah
sinner, thou do the same for less, when for a pleasure, but of a moment, of
a wicked work, of a disordered word, or of consent to some evil thought, thou
loosest in an instant, the whole kingdom of heaven, and thine own soul?

2. What a subject of grief was it to accursed Esau, to have lost for a little
dishe of pottage, all his birthright? Genesis 25.

3. Susanna seeing her self solicited to the sinful concupiscence of two
^ould men of Babylon, who threatened her in case of refusal, to accuse her of
adultery, she sighing said. Perplexities are to me on every side, for if I
shall do this, it is death to me: and if I do it not, I shall not escape your
hands. But it is better for me, without the act, to fall into your hands,
then to sin in the sight of our Lord. Dan. 13. 22.

4. Eleazer, one of the princes of the Scribes, being fourscore and ten years
old, being urged to eat swines flesh against the commandment of God, or else
to die, answered. That he would rather be sent unto hell, that is to say, that
he had rather die: For (quoth he) although at this present time, I be delivered
from the torments of men, yet neither alive nor dead, shall I escape, the hand
of the almighty God: and so at the last was put to death. 2. Mac. 6.

5. Seven brethren also, together with their mother, being taken and most
cruelly scourged for the same cause, one of them, which was the first said.
What seek thou, and what will thou learn of us? we are ready to die, rather
then to transgress the laws of God, coming from our fathers. ibid. cap. 7.

6. All the martyrs, both of the old and the new Testament, have they not
chosen rather to die, then to sin?

7. This also was that which S. Blanch so greatly recommended unto S. Lewis
King of France, saying unto him. That she had rather to see him die, then to
see him offend God mortallie, which point he imprinted so deeply in his pious
heart, that it is houlden for certain, that in his whole life he never
committed any mortal sin.

8. And the same S. Lewis, in the instruction which he gave to his son
Phillip at the hour of his death, said unto him. My son, take heed to thy
self, that thou offend not God mortallie, although thou should suffer all
the torments in the world.

9. S. Thomas of Aquin said, that he knew not how a man who saw him self in
mortal sin, could either laughe or be merry in any time whatsoever. Ribad. 7.
of March. And the king of Spain Philip the third, could not comprehend, how
such an one could ever sleep.

10. S. Stillites of Edessa, obtained this favor of almighty God, as to see
his Angel guardian, and that of others, but differently: for those which were
in the grace of God, he saw them accompanied with their good Angels, who
guided them with a torche alighted; but those which were in mortal sin, he
saw them detained in chains by the devils, and their Angels which followed
them a far off, heavily weeping. Ex Patrico Grecorum M. S. Biblioth. Reip.
Augustana. Raderus in virid. sanct. page 2. cap. 6.

Weep, weep ye, o ye blessed Spirits, since the sinner him self is so
unfortunate as not to see nor deplore his own ill fortune. Desire you to see
yet more, read the. that does ensue.

. 2. How much mortal sin is detestable, horrible, and stinking.
1. Fly from sin (says the wise man) as from a serpent. Eccle. 21. 2. One
may well say of a soul fallen into mortal sin, that which the Prophet
Jeremy said, of the sons and daughters of Jerusalem, during the time of
their affliction. From the daughter of Sion, all her beauty is departed.
Thren. 1. 6.

2. And again. How is the gold darkened, the best color changed. the stones of
the sanctuary dispersed, in the head of all streets? The noble children of
Sion, and they that were clothed with the principal gold, how are they reputed
as earthen vessels, the work of the potters hands? Her Nazarits whiter then
snow, purer then milk, ruddier then the old yuorie, fa^rer then the sapphire,
their face is made blacker then coals, and they are not known in the
streets. Ibid. cap. 4.

3. They are become abominable, like to the things which they loved. Osee. 9.
Ask (says S. Ambrose) the conscience of the sinner, if it be not more
stinking then all the sepulchers of the dead. lib. 1. offic. cap. 12.

4. Even as the rottenes takes away all the beauty, color, sent and favor of
the apple: even so sin takes away the beauty of the soul, the odor of her
good name, the goodness of grace, and the savor of glory. S. Bon. in Dieta
salutis c. 2.

EXAMPLES.
1. The Son of God, having taken upon him self the sins of men, lost in
such, wise his excellent beauty, that of the fairest that he was amongst all
men, he became so disfigured, that the prophet behoulding him, said. There is
no beauty in him, nor comelines, and we have seen him, and there was no
sightlines. Isay 53. 2. Now if the only pain of sin, has so disfigured our
B. Lord, what shall the guilt it self do unto us?

2. The devil is most horrible ghastly, but mortal sin is yet much more; for
a holy hermit, seeing him self honored for the miracles which he did, in
driving devils forth of bodies, for fear of falling into vain glory, he
instantly asked of almighty God, to be him self possessed of the devil, as he
was. Sever. Sulpit. in the life of S. Martin c. 1. Do you see how this holy
man was more afraid of sin, then of the devil?

3. Our B. Lady appeared to S. Catharine virgin and martyr, before such time
as she was baptized, houldinge her little Son betwixt her arms, and she
recommended Catharin unto him: our Lord turned his face from her, saying that
she was too il favored. Which was the cause that she made haste to be baptized,
and within awhile after, our Lord bethrothed him self unto her, in the
presence of his holy mother, and of an in^init number of B. Angels, and put a
ringe upon her fingar, the which she kept during her life. Pet. de natal. l.
10. c. 105. and Ribad. in her life.

4. S. Catharine of Sienna, discoursing with a gentlewoman which was defiled
with the sin of the flesh, stopped her nose. And when father Raimond her
co^fessar was amazed thereat, she said unto him, that unless she should have done
so, she should have been forced for to vomit, because of the stink which came
forth of the soul of the same woman.

5. S. Anthony relates the like of an Angel, who passing with an Hermit hard
by an effeminat youngster, stopped his nostrils, which he had not done, passing
by a dead carrion. And when the Hermit was astonished thereat, he said unto him:
that young man, by reason of his sins, was much more stinking and abominable
unto him, then was the most corrupted carrion. D. Antonij 4. p. sum. tit. 14. c.
6.. 1. O sin how horrible, detestable, cruel, ghastly, and stinking art thou
etc? Let us fly, from a monster so abominable.

6. S. Edmond had an exceedinge horror thereof, since he said, that he had rather
cast him self into a burning furnace; then to fall into one mortal sin. Sur.
in his life. c 29. Nou. 16.

7. Yea S. Anselme said, that he had rather fall into hell, then into sin. S.
Ansel. de similit. and Sur. 2. of April. See hereafter lib. 2. c. 3.. 1. the
like answer of an old Iaponian.

. 3. By mortal sin, we crucify again Jesus Christ.
1. O the full measure of all mischief! that sin is not only extremly
injurious to him who commits it, but even to God him self, the author of
health. It is the sentence of S. Paul Heb. 6. 6. saying that sinners, crucify
again to themselves the Son of God, and make him a mocquerie. And in the 10.
c. 29. he says, that they tread the Son of God under foot, and esteem the
blood of the testament polluted, wherein they had been sanctified. By one
mortal sin, we crucify again the Son of God, because we do that which
was the cause of his crucifixion. And if his death had not been sufficient for
the ransom of all the sins of the world, he must for the expiation of every
sin which we commit, have again been crucified and put to death.

2. With great reason then said that good doctor Ioannes Taulerus, if God would
suffer some one to see his own sins, as they are seen of God him self, he
would burst a sunder with very sorrow at the same instant, perceiving the
injury and contempt that he has done by them, to his Creator and Redeemer.
lib. de vita and pass. Christi c. 7.

EXAMPLES.
1. At the time that the Albigensian heretics ransacked France, our Lady
appeared unto S. Leutgarde with a sad and weeping countenance. The saint having
enquired the cause of her heaviness, she answered unto him, that it was because
that the heretics and evil Christians, crucified again by their sins, her
dear Son Jesus Christ. Sur. tom. 3. ex Tho. Cantiprat.

2. S. Bridgit of Sueede, haueing heard preached upon a day, the passion of our
B. Savior, the night ensuinge our Lord appeared unto her, al bloody and full
of dolors, as when he was fastened to the Cross, and said unto her. Behold my
wounds. The Saint believing that they were fresh, said unto him in weeping
wise. Alas my Lord, who has hurt thee in this manner. They (quoth he) that do
contemn and make none account of my charity. Sur. to. 4. Ribad. in her life
the 23. of July.

3. See more in the 2. book c. 7.. 3. Example 4. of S. Collect. O execrable
malice of mortal sin! Let us now speak of venial sin.

. 4. Of venial sin.
1. Venial sin, does not exclude the grace of God, nor charity; it
diminishes notwithstanding the feruor thereof, and as S. Paul speaks Ephesians.
4. does contristat the holy Ghost, obfuscat the conscience, and hinder the
advancement in virtues, and by little and little, draws a man to mortal sin.
He that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little, says the
wiseman. Eccles. 19. 1. S. Aug. compares venial sins unto the itche, which
spoil the beauty of the face, and disgusteth the behoulders: fear them not,
says he, because they are lesser then the others, but because they are in
greater nombre. The gnattes and flies are little beasts, which yet if they be
many in number, are able to take from a man his life. Grains of Sand being
multiplied, do sink the Ships: and drops of waters gathered together,
make rivers swell, and ruin houses.

2. Venial sin is like to a third, tied to the foot of the soul, which
hinders it to fly to perfection. It is a mothe, which eats by little and
little beams and summer posts, which not able at the last to support the
weight that is laid upon them, do cause the fall of the whole house.

No polluted thing shall enter into the celestial Jerusalem, says S. John.
Apoc. 21. 27. unless therefore venial sins be blotted forth in this life, they
traile a man to the fire of Purgatory, a fire so terrible, that in respect
thereof, the pains of this life are in a manner nothing, as both S. Aug. and S.
Greg. say (in psl. 37. and ser. 41. in 3. psl. paenit. And our Lord him self
says. That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall render an account
for it in the day of judgment. Mat. 12. 36. And do thou set so light by
venial sin?

EXAMPLES.
1. The Abbot Moises, was posessed with the devil, for having thorough
impatience spoken a little over roughly unto another. Cassian Colat. 7. c. 27.
Another Monk was also possessed, for having drunk with too much sensuallitie, a
glass of water. S. Greg. dial. l. 1. c. 4. And another, for having been
distracted voluntarily in his prayer. Ibid. l. 2. c. 1. Is not this enough to
give to understand, that venial sins are not so little before God, as men
imagine?

2. S. Marie of Ognia, was so circumspect, and so advised in her actions, even
in the very least of all, that none could ever observe, the least idle word to
issue out of her mouth, nor any other uncomely carriage: and was accustomed to
confess her self of her least faults, with as much contrition, as if they had
been mortal sins. Iac. de vitriaco Card. in her life l. 1. c. 6.

3. Eusebius Monk, casting once his eye thorough curiosity, upon the the
workmen which labored in the fields whilst Amyan read the gospels unto him,
and for this cause not having well understood a certain passage, whereof the
other asked him the explication, had so great repentance for it, that he ever
after mortified his sight, duringe the time of his whole life, carrying
continually his head inclined toward the earth, by means of a great iron
chain, which tied his neck unto his girdle: and this for the space of forty
years, so great esteemed he this little fault. Theodore in hist. sanct. pat.
sect. 4. and Sophron. in prato^ spirit.

4. The B. Mother Teresa of Jesus, foundresse of the discalceat Carmelits,
makes mention in her writings of her sins, with such excess of exaggeration
(albeit they were but very little) as if they had been exceeding grievous, If in
reciting any lesson in the quire, she chanced to fail but a little, she
prese^tlie prostrated her self upon the ground in the midst of the quire: which
all the other sisters seeing, could not abstain from tears, and were
constrained to interrupt their service, for the great feeling they had thereof.
Ribera in her life: and in the 10. c. of that which she wrote with her own
hand.

Now if the Saints have so apprehended the malice of venial sin, what great
horror had they of mortal sin?

THE III. CHAPTER. Of sins of will only, and of thought.
1. THere is a great abuse, ignorance, and blindness, which reigns amongst
simple people and such as are idiots, to think that one offendes not God,
unless by work, and by word, and not with the will alone: for he that has
forbidden to commit the sin of the flesh and adultrie, has likewise
forbidden to covet his neighbors wife.

You have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shall not commit
aduoutrie: but I say to you, that whosoever shall see a woman to lust after
her, has already committed aduoutrie with her in his heart. Mat. 5. 28. And the
like is, of every other evil will.

Concupiscence, when it has conceived, brings forth sin, but sin when it
is consummate, ingendreth death. Iac. 1. 15.

Blessed is he, that shall dashe his little ones (that is to say, his first
thoughts) against the rock. (that is to say, Jesus Christ. psl. 136. 9.

Whilst your enemy is but little, kill him (says S. Herom) and crush malice in
the very seed. Epist. 12. ad Eustoch.

Man sees those things which appear, but our Lord behouldeth the heart. ^.
Reg. 26. 7.

EXAMPLES.
1. King Pharao, for having coueted Sara the wife of Abraham, albeit he
touched her not in any sort, both he him self, and all his family were out of
hand chasticed of God most rigorously, with diverse great and sharp afflictions.

2. A Jew, gotten into a temple by night, saw a troop of devils, which gave
account to one who seemed to be the chief of the rest, of all their
comportment toward men: and heard one who bragged, that he had induced Andrew
Bishop of Fonda, to embrace a dishonest thought. S. Greg. l. 3. Dial. c. 7.

3. At Cosma, a town of Itallie, a citizen given for a long time to follow a
concubine, felt him self at last to be brought to the point and pinche of
death. A father of the Society of Jesus, was called to hear his Confession.
At the first beginning being informed of his life, as he was before, he
represented unto him, that the hour was now come, that he must needs depart
this world, and therefore exhorted him to forsake his harlot. The obstinat and
accursed wretch, having death in his face, replied that he could not be without
her in that extremity, but that she would serve him very well. The father
pressed him again, cast him self at his feet, and besought him with tears
to take compassion on his soul, causing all the fathers and brothers of his
college, to pray to this effect and purpose. At the last, our Lord touched
him, he caused this she wolf to depart his lodging, confessed him self with
exceeding sorrow, and with other signs of true repentance, and the very day
after this confession, he dyed. Upon the morrow, as this father went from his
chamber to the sacristie to say Mass for his soul, he felt him self scuffeld
with all and thrust back, and heard a voice most distinctly which said unto him.
Whether go thou? The father went on his way, and being arrived at the
vestrie door, he felt him self pusht back more forceibly then before, and was
constrained to recoyle, two or three great steps. He ommitted not for all this
to inuest him self, and to go unto the Altar. As he descended thence, he that
asisted him being come to the Confiteor, behold a horrible monster most
gastfull and fearful, showed him self visiblie upon the Altar, on that side
where the Epistle is read, and looking upon the priest, said. Pray not for me,
beware thou do not. The father replied, why not, art not thou such an one?
Did thou not confess thy self to me yesterday, with so great contrition and
with tears? Had thou no^ pardon of thy sins? What then is betided of new
unto thee? Yea (quoth the Spirit) I am even he in very deed, I confessed my
self, it is true, and that entirely, and withal received pardon of my sins;
But after that thou wast departed, that accursed strumpet that had kept me
captive all my life, entered again into my house, drew nere unto me to do some
service, and forthwith the accustomed fancies awaked in me, I yielded entry to
a wicked thought, stayed therein, and consented; and thereupon I died. For which
I now burn, and shall burn for all eternity. Extracted out of the annual
histories of the Society, and alleged by Vallad. in the sermon upon the
Thursday of the passion, who assures to have learned it of a religious man,
who knew the father that heard the confession of this miserable man, and had it
from his own self. Good God, what a tragical example! And shall we then say,
that evil desires, are no sins?

THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the sins of the Tongue.
DEath and life, are in the hand of the tongue, says the wise man. Prou. 18.
21.

Out of the mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. The tongue is certes a little
member and vanteth great things. Behold how much fire, what a great wood it
kindles: and the tongue is fire, a whole world of iniquity. Finally he
concludes, saying. If any man offend not in word, this is a perfect man. Iac.
1. 2. 10. 5. That is to say, according to Hugo of S. Victor, it is a sign,
that he has a great care to keep his heart, and therefore has a great inward
perfection. In cap. 13. ep. ad Romans

Philo says, that the word is as the hand of the dial, which gives to
understand the estate of the inward spring, and of the wheels, that is to
say, of the good or bad constitution of the soul. And our Savior says. That
out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Mat. 12. Luc. 6.

EXAMPLES.
1. Nicephorus writes that a certain learned man, went upon a day to visit S.
Pambonus Abbot, one very holy, but somewhat simple, and labored to persuade
him, to join and link, learning with his virtu. And when the Saint had showed
him that he was well content as he was, this Doctor took the Bible, and
openinge the same, expounded unto him the first passage that he fell upon,
which was out of the 36. Psalm. I have said, I will keep my ways, that I
offend not in my tongue. Enoughe (quoth the Saint) you shall teach me the
rest, when I shall have first well learned and practiced this. Giving to
understand, that the first and principalest point of a spiritual life, is to
refrain and bridle the tongue. Niceph. and Socrat. l. 4. hist. eccles. c. 18.
hist. trip. Cassiod. l. 8. c. 1.

. 1. of Swearing.
The second commandment of the first table is. Thou shall not take the name of
thy Lord thy God in vain, for God will not hold him guiltles that takes his
name in vain. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 11.

Thou shall not swear at all, nether by heaven, because it is the throne of
God: nether by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet etc. but
let your talk be, yea, yea, no, no, and that which is over and above these, is
of evil. Mat. 5. 37.

Yet must we understand these words of swearing, used without any necessity:
for our Lord in Jeremy cap. 2. permits to swear, with truth, judgment and
justice: that is to say, touching a thing that one knows for truth, and that
one judges that there is necessity: and if it be an oath promissiue, that it
be of a thing just and lawful.

Let not thy mouth be accustomed to swearing, says the wise man; and verse. 12.
A man that swears much, shall be filled with iniquity, and plague shall not
depart from his house. Eccl. 23. 9.

Is it not a thing absurd, says S. John Chrisost. that if we have one
precious garment, we use it not but once a week, and yet that we dare, rashly
usurp upon each occasion, the most precious and sacred name of almighty God?
Hom. 9. ad pop. Antioch.

I had a custom to swear every day, says S. Aug. but having read how great a
sin it was, I was afraid to commit the same; I have combatted against this
evil custom, and in this custom, I had recourse unto God, and he has given
me the grace to swear no more, now nothing is more easy unto me, then not to
swear; I tell you this, to the end that you may see that it is not
impossible, even to one that is accustomed to swear, to swear no more; the
fear of God, ouercometh all. Aug. fer. 10. de sanctis.

To swear, is to call God for a witness of that truth which we auerre; If then
it be a great sin to swear rashly and without necessity, it is a great
deal more when one knows well, that which one auerreth to be false, or that
one douteth of the truth: for this is to call God, to witness a lie, and so to
make him the author and defender of our own malice: and what impiety can be
more enorme then this?

For this reason, all sorts of nations, even the most barbarous, have had
periuries in great horror.

The Egiptians and Scithians, put them to death. John. Boemus, in the
description of Egypt.

The Indians cut off the tops of their feet and hands: and in sundry places
of Europe, they cut off their hand. Couuarruuias in c. quamuis pactum. p. 1..
7. n. 2.

According to the decrees of the Canon law, perjured persons are infamous. c.
infames 6. a. q. 1.

They ought to fast forty days with bread and water, and after for the space
of seven years, perform some penance a little milder: nor never may be
admitted for witness. c. quicunque 6. 9. 1.

S. Lewis king of France, caused their tongues to be pierced thorough. S.
Antonin. 3. p. chron. tit. 19. c. 9.. 4. Paul. Aemil. l. 7. hist. Franc. Ribad.
in his life.

Charles the good Count of Flanders, made them to fast forty days. Hist.
Fland. Behold the apprehention which these great personages had of this sin.

EXAMPLES.
1. In the city of Tours, a certain person being entered into our Ladies
church to a^ouche by oathe, a thing that was false, he had no sooner laid his
hand upon the Altar to swear, but that he fell backward, and was grievously
wounded. S. Greg. of Tours, the first miracle c. 20.

2. Another having set a house a fire, swear in S. Martins church, that he did
it not, and at the self same instant he was smitten with a reuenginge fire
which fell from heaven, which slew him outright upon the place. The same
author l. 8. of the hist. of France c. 16.

3. A little after the death of S. Omer, a burgess of the same city, having
received a sum of money lent him of another, and swearing to repay it him
again upon a certain day, the creditor demanded his money, but he denied to
have received it, and went to take his oathe upon the tomb of S. Omer. As they
came near to the Church, his creditor said unto him: let us not go to
profane the sacred tomb of the Saint, swear here that thou receiuedst
nothing, and I shall be satisfied. The other presently lifted up his hand, and
begins to pronounce his perjury, having his face turned toward the church
of the Saint: but before he was able to utter one word, he fell to the
ground, with his eyes rolling in his head, deprived of the use of all his
members, and so dyed within three days after. Surius in the life of S. Omer c.
26. Sept. 9. and Vincent of Beauuais, in his miror, hist. l. 23. c. 109.

4. Two sisters, the daughters of a Duke, wra^gling for their goods against
their brother, came from France to Valencie^ there to find king Charlemaigne,
to have redres of the wrong their brother did them in detayninge their goods.
And as he denied the fact, the king made him to swear upon the body of S.
Sauue, that he owed them nothing. The which he did, but to his cost, for at the
same instant, he burst asunder in the midst, rendered al his intralls, cast
great abundance of blood forth of his mouth, eyes, ears, and nostrills, and
two hours after gave up the ghost. Vincent of Bauuais in the same hist. l. 24.
c. 24.

5. But behold here of a fresher date. In the year 1599. the 26. of November,
at Grandmount in Flanders, at the sign of the Ship, two gatherers of impost,
giueing up their accounts before their magistrates, the one of the^ called Peter
Clippel, and the other Antonie Haek, this Peter said, that Antonie had received
of him twenty french crowns more then he owed him. Which Antonie denied,
saying that he was contented to be fried in his own fat, and to be reduced to
ashes, if it were so as the other said. The magistrates and other which were
present, trembling at such terrible execrations, withdrew them selves deferring
this affair until the morrow. Antonie remained alone in his chamber, and
after he had supped merrily with the host and hostis, they bid him god night.
On the morrow morning about eight a clock, his brother came to speak with him,
and having knocked sundry times at his chamber door, receiving no answer, he
caused the host to open the door. Good God, what a spectacle! they had no
sooner set their foot within the chamber, but that they saw a form
overwhelmed and half burned, and the two feet of the man, with some two
handfulls of his legs betwixt the anckles, yet having on his shoes and hose,
all the rest of his body, and his apparel entirely burnt and reduced to ashes:
the chamber pot was also melted: the stool likewise whereon he had set by his
beds side, was also wholly burnt, excepting to ends only of the feet. His
budget also was there found, and the gold and silver that was therein, all
turned to ashes, save only the twenty crowns which he denied to have
received, which were found al whole amidst the ashes. Of this, information was
since taken by our most Excellent Archdukes of Brabant, and the whole found to
be most true. Herrie Culens licentiat in divinity, pastor of the said
Grandmount, and an eye witness, in his book of New Years gifts. O the terrible
judgment of God against periurers!

6. An host in Germany, having received a great sum of money in depositum,
of a certain soldiar who lay sick in his house, denied it afterward
impudently, and said in the presence of the magistrates, that he would that the
devil should carry him away, both in soul and body, if it were true: which he
repeating, the devil (disputing against him visiblie) took him, and lifted
him up in the sight of all, and was never seen after: and whether think you?
but to the eternal fires and flames. This is that which God threatens to
perjured persons in Malachie 3. 5. and unto liars in the Apoc. 21. 8. This
history is written by one I. C. German, in the 3. book of Fairees c. of the
malice of the devil. And by P. M. Delrio. lib. 3. of his disq. mag. p. 1. q.
7. ^. 1.

7. In Saxony, a very wealthy maiden promised marriage to a young man, of a
meaner condition then her self, swearing that she would that the devil should
carry her away the day of her marriage, if she gave her self to any other.
Notwithstanding this, she married another, and upon her wedding day, two
devils, disguised like gentlemen, came and knocked at the gate of her house, and
desired to speak with her. Being brought into the chamber where they danced,
one of them danced a dance with the bride, and the dance ended, carried her in
body and soul unto hell. The same author, in the same place.

8. The year a thousand six hundred and ninteene, in the month of August, a
young man, a Shoemaker by trade, playinge at Barleduc in Lorraine, toward
the evening, took a testron from the table, and hid the same within his shoe.
When they came to count, they found this testron to be wanting, each one
assuring that he saw it not. At the last, this shoemaker being asked, waxt very
angry, and said. The devil break my neck, if I took it. No sooner said, but
it was as soon done, for behold at the same instant, he fell to the ground,
having his head wrested and turned to his back. His companions affrighted
hereat, called his master and his mistress, they strove to set his head
straight, but all in vain, until such time as pulling off his stockinginges
to lay him on the bed, they found the testron in his shoe, which having taken
forth, the head suffered it self to be turned again upon the shoulder. A
father of the society of Jesus was called for to hear his Confession, who
found the youngman speechles, his eyes open, his head turned upon his
shoulder, all trembling and terrible ghastly: and not finding him in estate to
be confessed, fell to prayers, and read the Litanies: after he applied unto him
certain relics of S. Ignatius, which having done, the young man by little
and little came to himself, and was confessed. His Confession ended, he said to
the father, that having pronounced these words. The devil break my neck if I
took it, he saw the devil enter in form of a great mastife, walkinge like a
man upon his hinder feet, having those before, like to the hands of a man,
wherewith he cast him self upon him, threw him to the ground, and brake his
neck. All this was certified by the testimony of his companions, who subsigned
the authentical attestation of this accident, before public Notaries: and
was printed at Tournay the year 1620. with approbation. Blessed Lord, how
dangerous is it, to pronounce such damnable execratio^s, against him self, or
against others!

. 2. Of Blasphemy.
Blasphemy, is a contumely pronounced against God himself, or against his
Saints: as to say. By Gods heart. etc. As true as God: God has no kind of care
over me. He sees me not etc.

Cursed shall they be, that shall contemn thee, and damned shall they be, that
shall blaspheme thee. Tobie. 13. 16.

He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, he has not forgeuenes
forever, but shall be guilty of an eternal sin. Marc. 3. 29.

Dare thou (says S. Ephrem) open thy mouth, and cast forth oaths and
blasphemies against heaven, and do thou not fear, that that burning sight,
which the prophet saw, remain in thy house, and cut thee in two, thou who art
so hardy as to open thy mouth against the almighty, upon whom the Angels,
Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins, dare not lift up their eyes? S. Ephrem
Paraenesi 43.

Even as there is nothing better then thanksgiving: even so there is nothing
worse then blaspheming, says S. John Chrisostom Hom. 1. ad pop. Ant. The
reason is, for that by blasphemy, God is touched in his proper person, and not
in the things created, as in theft, manslaughter, and adultery etc. S. John
also says, that blasphemy is proper to the damned. Apoc. 16. 10.

EXAMPLES.
1. In Leuiticus 24. God commanded, that he who had blasphemed, should be
stoned to death.

2. Senacharib, king of the Assyrians, having blasphemed against God, was killed
by his own daughters, having first lost, a hundred and eighty five thousand
of his people, which an Angel cut in pieces in one night. Isay 37. 4. of
Kings 19.

3. A child of the age only of five years, vomiting forth blasphemies against
God betwixt the arms of his father, was snatched from him, and carried away by
a devil, in the form of a black a More, or Ethiopian. S. Greg. Pope, l. 4.
dial. c. 18.

4. Another likewise blaspheming S. Hierom, of the age of twelve years old,
playing at dice with his father, was carried away by the devil. S. Ciril of
Hierus. in his epistle of the miracles of S. Hierom, written to S. Aug, and is
to be found amongst the epistles of S. Aug. ep. 206.

5. In the territory of Bullen the fat, two fellows being at table, the one
having cut and dismembered a roasted Cock, and poured thereon a spiced sauce, the
other said. Thou have so cunningly cut asunder this Cock, that S. Peter cannot
join him together. Tut (quoth he that had cut him) God him self, although he
would, can not make him a live again: and thereupon they burst out into
laughing. A strange case! They scarcely had concluded these words, but that
the Cock joined him self together again, stood up in his fathers, and all
alive, beating his wings, began to crow, and with beating them in the platter,
spatterd the sauce against the faces of the blasphemers, who at the self same
instant, became covered all over with leprosy, and their whole posterity,
were since infected also with the same. Blessed Petrus Damianas Cardinal, has
left this in writing, in his epistle to Desiderius Abbot of mount Cassin. l. 2.
ep. 17. And S. Antoninus does relate it likewise, in the 2. p. of his Sum
tit. 8. c 7.. 3. and Vincent in his history.

6. A wicked man, having by main force constrained an Indian woman to lie with
him, behold how at midnight, a tempest arose with a terrible thunder. The
woman stricken with fear, cried out saying. O blessed virgin Marie keep me.
Which this dissolut companion hearing, he said unto her. That it was needles to
call upon our Lady, for that she had not the means how to help her. Scarce
had he uttered the last words, but a thunderbolt carried him out of the bed
into the midest of the chamber, and burnt all his shirt. The woman lept forth
of the bed, and pulled him by the feet, but his feet remained in her hands, as
if they had not held to his body. She endeavored to draw him out of the chamber,
but a flame entering at the door, hindered him that he could not get forth. She
cried for help, and the neighbors run, and find this accursed caytiffe
stark dead, with his mouth open in a horrible manner, without teeth, without
tongue, and all his members bruised and grounden in such a sort, that in pulling
of them though never so little, one divided and rent them from the body.
Franciscus Bencius in the Annals of Col. of Pacen, of the society of Jesus in
Peru. in the year 1588. And Matheus Timpius in the Theater of the divine
vengance.

Happy was this poor wenche, that she called upon our B. Lady so luckelie:
but cursed was this hoore-master, and blasphemer, so to have mocked her.

. 3. Of Malediction, and of wicked Imprecation.
To curse any one, is to wish him some evil, as the plague, death, the devil
to take him, or the like.

In the old law, he that cursed father or mother, was to be put to death.
Leuit. 20. 9. etc. 24. 15.

The mothers curse, rooteth up the foundation. Eccles. 3. 11. that is to, say,
overthrows her whole family.

Maledictio^, according to S. Thomas, is of its nature mortal sin, because
it repugneth unto charity: and is so much the more grievous, as the person
which one curses, ought to be more loved and reverenced, as for example God,
Saints, Superiors and our parents. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 76. a. 3.

EXAMPLES.
1. Surius upon the life of S. Zenobius martyr, writes, that a mother angry
with her child (who afflicted with a terrible ague, asked her drink unto the
fourth time in one night) said unto her child in choler, in giuinge him the
goblet. Hold, drink, and swallow down the devil and all together: and at
the same instant, the child was posessed of the devil.

He writes likewise of another mother, who being beaten of her children, sent
them all unto the devil: and that forthwith they were seized and possessed, in
such sort, that they fell a bytinge, and tearing of one another. The mother
repenting her of her fact (albeit a panim) brought them unto S. Zenobius, who
by the sign of the holy Cross delivered them, and baptized them, together
with their mother, and all the household. Ioannes Archipresbiter Aretin. in the
life of S. Zenobius, and Surius 25. of May.

3. S. Aug. in his 22. book of the city of God, and de diverse. ser. 94.
writes, that a certain woman in Capadocia, having seven sons, and three
daughters, was stricken of her eldest son, with the consent of all the
others. Which she supported so impatiently, that she went to Church, to curse
them upon the holy Font, wherein they had been baptized. As she was in the way,
the devil appeared unto her, in the likeness of her husbands brother; who having
aked her whither she went, she answered that she went to curse her son. The
devil told her, that she should curse them all. When she was come to the place
of the Font, all in a fury she toused her hair, and discoueringe her
breasts, besought God that he would send upon her children the punishment of
Cain, making them all trembling and rogues. This being said, she returned, and
behold instantly her eldest son was stricken with a trembling of all his
members; and before the end of the year, all the others were in the like
perplexity; The mother seeing the unfortunate disaster of her children,
conceived so great sorrow therefore, that she hunge and strangled herself, her
children became vagabound rogues here and there about the contrie, whereof two
brethren and sisters were seen of S. Aug. at Hippo, who healed them at the
relics of S. Steven. Learn here, you fathers and mothers, to restrain your
choler, and to bridle the intemperance of your tongue, that you become nor the
cause of such disaster unto your children.

4. That famous posessed person at Laon in Lannois in France, anno 1566. fell
she not into the power of the devil, thorough the wicked imprecation of her
parents, which has likewise happened to so many others?

. 4. Of contumelious words.
To give one some evil name, or to object unto him some vice, either of body or
mind, as, to call him liar, dolt, theife, drunkard, or the like, is a
contumely, which of its nature is a mortal sin.

Whosoever shall say to his brother. Thou fool, shall be guilty of the hell
of fire. Mat. 5. 23.

And the Apostle S. Paul Romans 1. 30. ^ancketh the co^tumelious, with those that
do deserve death.

EXAMPLES.
1. As the holy prophet Eliseus went up to Bethell, certain children came
^oorth of the city, who seeing him with his head balde, mocked him, saying.
Go up bald-pate, which the Saint hearing, he turned him toward them, and
cursed them, and behold at the self same instant, two Bears which came forth
of the forest, ran upon these children, and devoured of them, forty two. 4.
Reg. 2.

2. The Chamberlain of the Emperor Valens, having vomited forth a number of
injurious and contumelious words against S. Aphrates, went to prepare the
Emperors bayne, but he was come no sooner in, but he became stark mad, and
cast him self into the scalding water, wherein he dyed. Theodoret. l. 4. hist.
eccles. c. 26. Card. Barron. tom. 4. of his eccles. Annals, in the year of
our Lord 370.

3. John Aratus, a great fauorer of the Jews in Lacedemonia, after he had
disgorged a many of contumelies against S. Nicon, was in the night time whipped
in his sleep of two venerable old men: who having sharply rebuked him for his
sin, cast him into a deep prison. Hereupon he awaked, and found him self
taken with a strong ague, and knowing that this was a punishment from God,
arose, and went and sought forth the Saint, and asked him forgiveness. S. Nicon
forgave him, but withal told him, that God had decreed to take him out of this
life, and that therefore he should dispose him self for his death. Hereupon he
returned to his house, lays him down on his bed, and three days after gave
up the ghost. Baron. tom. 10. of his annals, anno 932.

See you not by these examples, that contumely is a great sin! You shall
then be chasticed, either in this life or in the other (you fathers and mothers)
who hearing your children to pronounce the like words, do not punish nor
reprehend them: yea, do ofttimes excite them to utter them by your evil
example.

. 5. Of Detraction.
Contumely takes away the honor of persons present, but Detraction takes away
the good name of the absent. Now to detract in that which may diminish notably
the renown of another, is mortal sin, as says S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 7. a. 2.
and much more grievous then to steal his goods.

Have care of a good name (says the wiseman) for this shall be more permanent
to thee, then a thousand treasures precious and great. Eccles. 41. 15.

Better is a good name, then much riches: above silver, and gold, good grace.
Pro. 22. 1. Detractors are odible to God, and men. Romans 1. 30. Pro. 24. 9.

Detractors were of old represented by those Locusts which S. John saw, having
the faces of men, and teeth of Lions. Apoc. 9. 3. for as much as under pretext
of humanity and compassion, they tear with fair teeth, the good renown of
other persons.

They have again been represented, by the fourth terrible beast which Daniel
saw, which having teeth of iron, devoured al he met with all, trampling the
rest underfoot. Dan. 7.

By the Crow, which flying forth of the Arc, went and fell upon the carions.
Genesis 8.

The scripture does compare them also, to open sepulchers, from whence comes
forth nothing but filthe and abomination. psl. 13. 3.

To Serpents, which give their venim in secret. Eccl. 10. 11. psl. 139.

They be compared also unto hogs, which tread underfoot the fair flowers,
and have their snowt always groueling in the dirt.

To flies, which leaving the fairest parts of the body, setle them selves no
where else but upon the scabbes.

To the Hen, which scraping in the dirt, casts from her the pearls and
diamonds, and takes nothing but worms and vermin.

To the Spider, for that insteede of drawing of honnie from the flowers of
virtues of their neighbor, they draw venim, wherewith they kill them selves and
others.

Is it any marvel then if David said. One secretly detractinge from his
neighbor, him did I persecute. psalm. 100. 5.

S. Peter was wont to say, that the mansleyar, and the detractor, were equal
in malice, according as S. Clement recounteth; in his Epistle to S. James, and
by Gratian de penit. did. 1.

What does the detractor meritt (says S. Basil) and he that harkneth to him?
And he answers. They must be both chased and banished away, from the
conuersations of others. Reg. 26.

He that detracteth, and he that harkneth, do both of them bear the devil;
the one in his mouth; the other in his ears. S. Bern. in sermon.

And it is to be noted, that in this sin, as also in theft, it suffices not
that one confess him, unless withal he make restitution.

EXAMPLES.
1. Marie the sister of Moses, having detracted from her brother, our Lord
God, was so angry thereat, that the cloud which covered the Tabernacle,
withdrew it self, and Marie became instantly, covered all over with leprosy.
Number. 12. The cloud (says Origin) withdrew it self: to signify, that the
grace of the Holy Ghost, withdrawes it self from the detractor, and that his
soul remaynes all full of the leprosy of sin. Hom. 7. upon Number.

2. At another time the Israelites detracted Moses, and God punished them by
the means of Serpe^ts, which devoured the greatest part of them. Number. 21.

3. Core, Dathan, and Abiron, did likewise detract Moses, and within a while
after, were swallowed up of the earth, and descended quick into hell: and two
hundred and fifty of their accomplices, were consumed with a fire which came
forth from our Lord. Numb. 16.

4. A detractor of S. Vincent Ferrier after his death, albeit he had satisfied
in the fire of Purgatory, yet could not enter into heaven, till first he had
been to make restitution to the good name of the Saint, to those before whom he
had taken it away: as him self said unto S. Vincent, appearing unto him a
little before he went to heaven. S. Vincent sermon. Dom. in albis.

5. Donatus an African by nation, and a priest of Milan, setting at the table
with certain religious, began to detract S. Ambrose who whas dead: and at the
same time, almighty God struck his tongue with such a soar, as laid him on
his bed, and in his sepulcher.

6. A while after, at Carthage, Mauranus bishop of Bolitan, did as much: and
was also punished with the same chasticement, and self same death. Paulinus
upon Baron. tom. 5. anno 397.

7. A certain detracting Priest falling sick, became as out of his wits
before his death, tearing him self, and cutting out his own tongue. Thomas a
Cantip. l. 2. ap. c. 37. p. 3.

Lo the effects of the threatening of God against detractors, in the 24. 21. of
the Proverbs, where he says. With detractors meddle not, because their
perdition shall sodenlie rise, and the ruin of both, who knows? that is to
say, of the detractor, and of him that harkneth to him.

. 6. of Lying.
To lie, is to speak against ones thought, or to speak otherwise then one
thinks: which never is permitted, no not to conserve a whole city, nor
which is more, not to conserve the whole world. S. Aug. l. de mendacio ad
Consentium c. 3. Innocentius 3. c. super eo. de vsura: and it is the common
opinion of all the holy fathers and Doctors, in 3. d. 37. and 38.

When the devil speaks a lie, says our Lord, he speaks of his own,
because he is a liar, and the father thereof. John 8. 44. And David says. Thou will destroy at all that speak lies. Psalm. 5. 7.

Six things there are which our Lord hates, and the seventh his soul
detesteth. Lofty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood. Pro.
6. 16.

The mouth that lies kills the soul. Sap. 1. 11.

A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not
escape. Pro. 19. 5.

To all liars, their part shall be in the poole burning with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. Apoc. 21. 8.

The holy fathers affirm no less, S. Basil says. The most mighty thing of
all is the truth: and the extremity of malice, is lying, In proemio de Spir.
Sanct. And in another place he says, that lyinge is the proper fruit of the
devil. ep. 63. and 79.

And B. Cesarius says, that every liar, has within him the malignant spirit.
Hom. 16.

S. Hierom says, that a virgin esteems it sacrilege for to lie. ep. 7. ad
Laeta^.

Have thou heard, thou wretched liar, the orracles of holy scriptures, and
doctors of the Church? Hear now then the examples that follow.

EXAMPLES.
1. A certain woman accused wrongfully to have committed adultery with a young
man, was taken with him, and both put upon the torture. The young man not able
to support the pains, confessed to have committed the fact, which yet
notwithstanding he had not done. But she, not able to lift up her hands which
the hangman had tied, lifted up her eyes to heaven, with rivers of tears, and
said. Thou art witness my Lord Jesus Christ (thou who searchest the reins and
heart) that I will not deny the adultery for fear to die, but that I will not
lie, for fear of offending thee. But thou o wretch (quoth she, turning her
self to the young man, who for fear of the torments, had told a lie) if
thou do hasten thee for to perish, yet why will thou kill two innocents? I am
ready to die, but not as an adultres, I will carry mine innocence together
with me. To conclude, she was condemned with the young man to have her head cut
off; At the first stroke that the hangman gave to the young man, his head was
divided from his body: but to her, seven blows were given, and yet the sword
did her no hurt: which the Emperor seeinge, he knew the innocence of the
woman, and thereupon set her at liberty. See you, how lyinge was the cause of
the young man's death, and how maintayning of the truth* gave life unto this
good woman? This history is related by S. Hierom, ep. 45. ad Innocent.

S. Anthimus Bishop of Nicomedia, during the persecution of the Emperor
Maximian, was sought for by the Seargeants; He seeing that they sought for him,
received them, and treated them right courteously, making them a good dinner:
and in the end said unto them, that he was he whom they sought for. They not
able sufficiently to admire his charity, said that they would make report to
the Emperor, that they could not find him. No (quoth the B. Saint) it is not
lawful for Christians to lie, to save the life of whom soever: and this being
said, put him self into their hands, and after diverse great torments,
endured death. Surius 27. of April, out of Metaphrast.

O great Saint, who had rather that his body should be killed by the hands of
the hangman, then conseruing his body, to kill his soul by a lie.

. 7. Of songs, and of dishonest words.
Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not so much as be named amongst you, as
it becomes Saints, or filthiness, or foolish talk, or scurrillitie. Ephesians. 5.
3. 4.

Theodoret infers from this prohibition of the Apostle, how execrable
fornication is, since he will not that it be so much as spoken of, nor that it
be at all remembered.

Be not seduced, evil communications corrupt good manners. 1. Cor. 15. 34. And
S. Clement Pope, forbids the same amongst Christians. l. 5 constable. Apost.

Dishonest talk, says S. Isidore, has oftimes more force to gain hearts, and
to persuade them to vice, then the sight, then evil example, and then all
other deceits and allurements.

Even as a stone, says S. Basil, cast into the water of a Cesterne, does not
only stir that part of the water which it touches, but also does stir up
circles, which continually multiplied, arrive at the last to the edge and
brimme: even so lascivious talk, falling into a chaste heart and soul, as it
were within a pure water, do excite diverse dishonest thoughts, which
multiplying them selves, make the soul to be all to tossed with the waves of
voluptuousnes, and carnal thoughts. lib. de vera virginitate.

The philosophers say, that the word, is the shadow of the action, and deed.
Now when one sees some shadow approache him, he may well judge that the body
is not far off: even so may thou say, that from whence dishonest words
proceed, the work of the flesh is not far. Plutarch. in the treatise how
children are to be nourished.

If a dishonest word has so much force of it self to spoil a soul, what
will it have then sunge and pronounced with a sweet enchantment of the voice?

The sweetness of the voice, says S. Basil, renders the soul wholly enclining
to lubricitie. It is better, says S. Cyprian, to hear the venomous whistle of
a Basiliske, then to hear the wanton and lascivious voice of a woman.

EXAMPLES.
1. The sister of B. Petrus Damianus Cardinal, was in purgatory fifteen
days, for having conceived pleasure in hearing certain maids to sing as
they were a dancing. Flor. Harlemus Carthus. Institut. Christiana l. 2. c. 25.

S. Bernard, being yet but a young youth in the world, as soon as he heard
any filthy word to be pronounced, he felt the same in such sort, that for very
shame al his face was set a fire, as if had received some box on the ear.
Which his play fellows perceiuinge, as soon as ever they saw him come, they
said one unto another. Lets hold our peace, lo where Bernard comes. Ribad and
Surius the 20. of May. The like is read of B. Lewis of Gonzaga of the society
of Jesus.

S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, studying at Paris, and walking on a day
in the Clerks meadow with his companions, who sunge there a number of songs,
he went aside from them, not able to suffer them: Then our Lord appeared unto
him, in the form of a fair child, such as the espouse does paint him in the
Canticles. White and ruddy, chosen amongst thousands, and said unto him with a
smyling countenance. I salute thee my well beloved. S. Edmond was astonished at
the first, and waxt ashamed at those words; But our Lord said unto him; Do
thou not know me? I set hard by thee every day in the schole: and then made him
both to see and to read, that which was written in his forehead; and he
perceived written in letters of gold. Jesus of Nazareth, king of the Jews.
Surius tom. 6. Ribad, 6. Nou.

4. S. Vallery Abbot, returninge upon a day into his Abbey in the winter time,
entered with his people into a Priests house to warm him self: as he
approached to the fire, the Priest and the Mayor of the place, began to utter
great store of dishonest words; from which they not desistinge for ought the
Saint could say unto them, he went forth of the place, shakinge off against
them the dust of his shoes. And behold, at the same instant the Priest became
blind, and the Mayor was stricken with a shamfull disease. They perceiving
that this was in punishment of their evil tongues, ran after the Saint, and
besought him to return again: but he refused. Thus the Priest remained blind
his whole life, and all the members of the other rotted by little and little, and
in the end dyed most miserably. Surius upon the life of S. Vallery. 1. of
April.

Durannus, of an Abbot made a Bishop, was diverse days in purgatory, for having
sometimes told tales to excite and make others to laugh: and could not get
thence, till first seven religious persons had kept silence for him, for the
space of seven days. Vincent Bellouac. spec. hist. l. 26. c. 5. Now if one
go to purgatory for light words and only of laughter, what punishment then
do dishonest words deserve?

5. The very Pagans are ashamed to speak of dishonest things: for Agellius a
Roman historian, writes of Socrates, that finding him self enforced to mix
amidst his discourse some one point but little honest, he covered his face for
very shame. O Christian, learn honesty of this Pagan: and you above all,
fathers and mothers.

Hitherto have we spoken of sin in general, mortal, venial, sins of
thought, and of the tongue. As touching that which follows after of sins of
work, to the end that this little discourse do not enlarge it self too long,
I will content my self to speak of capitail, to wit, of those which are the
spring and fountain of all. Save only before I come thereto, I will insert this
alone.

THE V. CHAPTER. Of the sins of parents and their children.
LEt not fathers and mothers think it strange, if I address my self more often
and more particularly to the^ in this little discourse, and that I set before
them particularly, this little chapter: since all the good or evil fortune of a
commonwealth, proceeds from no other cause, then from their good institution,
or negligence to frame their children as they ought, and to bring them up in
the fear of God. See the last chap. of the 3. book of the life of our B.
Father Ignatius, by Ribadeneira.

As God has commanded children, to honor, love and help their parents. (Exodus
20. 11.) and to obey them in all that is reason, so will he, that parents love
their children (Eccl. 7. 25. 26.) nourishing them, and bringing them up
according to their power and quality, in all that which is needful for them,
as well for body, as for soul. Et Ephesians. 6. 4. 1. Tim. 5. 8. S. Christ. to. 6.
ho. 27

. 1. Of the negligence of parents to correct their children from their tender
youth, and to instruct them in matters of faith, and of good manners.
Can I conceal from Abraham the things that I will do, whereas he shall be
into a nation great, and very strong, and in him are to be blessed, all the
nations of the earth? For I know that he will command his children, and his
house after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and do judgment and
justice. Genesis 18. 18.

Forget not the words that thine eyes have seen, and let them not fall out of
thy heart, all the days of thy l^fe: thou shall teach them thy sons and thy
nephews. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. And in the 11. Chapter. Teach your children my
commandments, when thou sit in thy house, and walk on the way, and
lie down and risest up, that thy days may be multiplied, and the days of
thy children. Deuteronomy. 11. 19.

Have thou children? instruct them, and ^ow them from their childhood. Ecc. 7.
25.

The notable negligence of parents to see that their children know and
understand the contents of the Creed, the Pater, Aue, Commandments, and the
use of the holy Sacraments, is mortal sin, says Nauar. Man. cap. 14. number.
17.

He that spares the rod, hates his child, but that loves him, does
instantly nurture him. Pro. 13. 24.

The child that is left to his own will, confounds his mother. Pro. 29. 15.

An untamed borse, becomes stubburne, and a dissolute child will become
headdy. Pamper thy son, and he will make thee afraid: play with him he will
make thee sorrowful. Laugh not with him, lest thou be sorry, and at the last
thy teeth shall be on edge. Give him not power in his youth, and contemn not
his cogitations. Curb his neck in youth, and knock his sides whiles be is a
child, lest peshaps he he hardened and believe thee not. O beautiful sentence!
Eccl. 30. 8.

He that loves son or daughter above me, is not worthy of me. Mat 10. 37.

If the child by the conuiuencie or winking of the parents, come to fall into
any sin, his parents shall be answerable for his soul. S. Clement successor
to S. Peter. constable. Apost. l. 4. c. 20.

S. Basil says, that children are like unto soft wax, wherein one printeth
what he list, and with the self same singars, one forms an Angel or a
devil. Reg. fus. disp. interrogat. 7.

Those parents (says Saint Chrysostom) which care not to correct their
children (I tell them the truth and without passion) are more wicked their
paracides, for these do but seperat the body from the soul, but such parents
by their conuiuence, send both the bodies and souls of their children, to
eternal flames: and he that is killed as touching the body, must of necessity
have once died, but these poor children, might have escaped the fire of hell,
if the negligence of their fathers and mothers had not sent them thither. l. 3.
aduers. vituperat vitae monast.

This is that which the wiseman says. Withdraw not discipline from a child;
thou shall strike him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell. Pro. 23.
13. 14.

EXAMPLES.
1. Helie the high Priest (albeit a Saint as S. Hierom writes in c. 6. ad
Ephesians.) not having reprehended his children, as he ought to have done, for
their sins of Gluttony, and Lubricitie, God called the prophet Samuel, and
said unto him. Behold I do a thing in Israel, which whosoever shall hear,
both his ears shall tingle. In that day will I raise up against Helie, all
things which I have spoken touching his house, I will begin and accomplish it,
for I have foretold him, that I would judge his house for ever, because of
iniquity, for that he knew that his sons did wickedly, and has not
corrected the^. 1. Reg. 3 11. etc. And what betided then unto him? 1. He became
blind. 2. His soul melted. 3. The life of his posterity was shortened. 4. He
lost the battle against his enemies, thirty thousand of his foot men,
remaining slain upon the place. 5. The Ark of God was taken and carried from
them. 6. His two sons, Ophin and Phinees, were likewise killed the same day.
7. He hearing the news, fell backward and broke his neck. 8. His daughter in
law, at the rehearsal of so strange a fortune, was delivered before her time,
and so died. How many mischifes does the conuiuence of a father, trayle after
it!

2. You have seen a little before, a child of five years old, borne away by
the devils forth of his fathers arms, for his blasphemies: (c. 4.. 2. Ex. 3.)
what a heart breaking was it to this father. to see his child carried to hell,
from whence he might have delivered him, with three or four ierkes of a rod?

3. S. Augustine, preaching to the religious of the desert, told them, that
that very day wherein he preached unto the^, the son of Cyrillus, one of the
most notable bourgesses of Hippo, having been always over well beloved of his
father, yea more then God, and therefore left to all kind of liberty, either to
say, or to do whatsoever he list: after he had wasted all his wealth in
dissolutenes, cominge drunk in a doors, had forced his mother great with
child, and strove to violate one of his sisters, had killed his father, and
dea^ly wounded his two sisters. Aug. ser. 33. ad fratres in eremo. Dear God,
what greater disaster could possibly befall unto a family!

4. A certain woman, damned for having taught her daughter all sorts of
mondanitie, appeared to S. Bridgit, as coming forth of some darksome lake, with
her heart torn forth of her belly, her lips cut off, her nose all eaten, her
eyes pulled out of her head, hanging down upon her cheeks, her breast covered
with great worms, and with most fearful and lamentable cries and
lamentations, complaining of her daughter, and saying as if she had spoken to
her. Understand my daughter and venomous Newte, accursed be I, that ever I was
thy mother, for as often as thou do imitate and follow the works of my
wicked customs, that is to say the sins which my self have taught thee, so
often my pain is renewed. S. Bridgit in her revelations l. 6. cap. 52.

5. A certain person, saw upon a day hell open, and in the midst of the flames
the father and the son, which bitterly cursed one another: the father said.
Cursed be thou my son, who art cause of my damnation, for to enriche thee, I
have done a thousand iniustices. The son on the contrary said; It is thou
cursed father, who art the cause of my damnation, because for fear to
displease thee, I have remained in the world. Dionis. Carth. l. de 4. nouis.
art. 42. toward the end. Lo here a goodly looking glass, for those which
hinder their children to enter into religion, principally when one sees that
God does call them.

6. A certain crack-rope led to the galloes, called for his father, and making
as if he would tell him somewhat in secret, approached with his mouth unto his
ear, and then tore it off with his teeth, saying. Auantwretch, if thou had
whipped me in my youth, I had not now been where I am. S. Bernardinus ser. 17. de
euang. aeterno.

7. Another called Lucretius, being likewise led unto the galloes, and having
called for his father to bid him farwell, tore off his nose with his teeth,
saying unto him as the other did. Boethius de discipline. scholarium. Joan.
Hieroso. sermon. 16.

8. Pretextat a Roman Lady, by the commandment of Hymettius her husband,
ouncle to the virgin Eustochium, for having changed the habit and dress of
this maiden, and renewed her head-geare, after the model of such as were
secular, contrary to the mind both of the virgin, and the desire of her mother
Paula, saw the same night in her sleep, her Angel address him self unto
her, threatening her with a terrible voice. Dare thou to touch the head of
the virgin of God, with thy profane and sacriledgious hands? the which shall
wither from this very hour, and five months hence, thou shall be carried into
hell: and if thou persevere in thy sin, thou shall be deprived both of thy
husband an^ thy children altogether. The succes whereof ensued in order, for
sudden death, made evident the late repentance of this wretched woman. S.
Hier. l. 2. ep. 15.

All these examples, prove they not apparently, that the negligence and
conuiuence of the parents, is both heir own, and their childrens ruin? Thus
the Ape, making overmuch of her little ones, does stifele them.

. 2. Of the sins of Children, toward their parents.
The first commandment of the second table is. Honor thy father and thy
mother, that thou may be long lived upon the earth Exodus 20. 12.

Three obligations are comprised in this commandment. The first, to love,
honor, and reverence our parents. The second, to obey them in that which is
reason. The third, to asist and succor them in their necessities. S. Tho. 2.
2. q. 101. a. 2.

Cursed be he that honoreth not his father and mother. Deuteronomy 27. 16.

If a man beget a stubburne and froward son, that will not hear the
commandments of his father and mother, and being chastned, contemns to be
obedient, they shall take him and bring him to the ancients of his city, and
to the gate of judgment, and shall say to him. This our son, is froward and
stubburne, be contemns to hear our admonitions, he gives him self to
commessation, and to riot and banquetinges. The people of the city shall
stone him, and he shall die, that you may take away the evil out of the midest
of you, and all Israel hearing it may be afraid. Deuteronomy. 21. 18.

He that curses his father and mother, his lamp shall be extinguished in the
midst of darkness. Pro. 20. 20.

He that curses his father and mother, dying let him d^e. Exodus 21. 17.

The eye that scorneth his father, and that despises the travail of his
mother in bearing him, let the Ravens of the torrent pick it out, and the
young of the Eagle eat it. Pro 30. 17.

It is most certain, that whosoever curses father or mother, or utters
against them injurious threatninges, or smites them, or wishes them dead, or
pronou^ceth words which of them selves may greatly put them into choler; or
being in honor, despises his father or his mother that are poor, or shall
accuse them before a Judge, or shall not obey them in a point of importance
touching the government of their famillie, especially if it be done by contempt
or self opinion, or does not asist them in their great necessity, offends
God mortallie. Toletus l. 5. Instruct. c. 1. S. Tho. 22. q. 101. art. 4. ad 4.
Siluest. verbo filius Nauar. c. 14. n. 11.

EXAMPLES.
1. Cain was cursed, and all his posterity, because he mocked his father Noe.
Genesis 19. nor would receive the instructions which he gave him to serve God.
Lactantius.

2. Esau, for taking a wife against the will of father and mother. Genesis 26. 34.

3. Ruben fell from his birthright, for having wrought shame to his father
Jacob. Genesis 49. 3. 4.

4. Absalon was hanged in a chain made of his own hair, and perced with
three strokes of a spear, because he had taken arms against his father David.
2. Reg. 18. 9. and 14.

5. The year of our Lord 873. and the first year of John the 8. Pope, in the
assembly of Bishops and Lords which was made in Francfort, by the commandment
of Lewis king of Germany. Charles his younger son, was thorough the just
judgment of God, posest of the devil, for that he had conspired against his
father, as he him self confessed being delivered, saying. That as often as he
consented to this deliberation, so often was he seized on by the devil. Taken
out of the Annals of France by Pitheus, and of Amonius l. 5. c. 30. and of
Card. Baron, the year abousaid.

6. A boy of eighteen years old being hanged, at the same instant a beard
grew forth of his chinne al gray, and his hair also became white, God
manifesting by this miracle, till what age he should have lived, if he had not
been disobedient to father and mother. S. Bernardinus to. 2. dom. 40. ser. 17.

7. A Young married man, seeing his father cominge, hid a roasted Goose, which he
had made to be set on the table, to the end he should have none thereof, but
bidding it afterward to be set on the board, as he went about to break it up,
a Toade appeared upon the same, which leapt upon his face, and stuck fast
thereto in such manner, that it was never possible to pluck it away, until such
time as he was dead: and which was yet more, whatsoever the Toade endured in
his body, the miserably man did endure the same also. This was to preach
without speaking a word, to all those that saw the same, the honor and
affection which children owe unto their parents. S. Bon. l. de 10. precept ser.
5. Tho. a Cantip. l. 2. ap. c. 7. art. 4.

8. A certain merchant, not furnishing two of his sons with as much money as
they desired, was set upon by them as he went to a certain fair in Germany,
and was slain. And having made them selves rich by means of his horse and of
his purse, they went to the Tavern to play who should have the whole. As the
one saw that he lost all, in a rage he pulled out his poyniard, and threw the
same against the floor, saying to God. If could pierce thee, I would do it.
At this hellish word, the earth and hell did both open at the same instant,
and swallowed him up all alive. The other more then half dead, departed that
house, went to Geneua, presented him self unto the Magistrates, confessed his
fact, and was put to death. Ioannes Honthemius Leod. S. Hieronimi relig.

9. A young gentleman native of Flesche in France, seeing that his father sent
him not as much money as he would spend, wrote a letter unto him full of
reproaches, contumelies, and grievous curses. But he had no sooner sent the
same, but that he found him self stricken with so great a deafnes, that he
could not hear so much as the noise of a Canon; He tried the art and remedies
of the most part of the Phisitiens and Doctors that were in France, but all in
vain. At last he advised him self, to have recourse to our B. Lady of
Loretto; He went then, and having made a general Confession, he continued so
nine days, with a great deal of devotion. The night of the feast of the
Assumption, as he was laid in his bed, behold how he saw a venerable and
dreadful matrone enter his chamber, accompanied with his father and mother,
and asked them if that were their son; who answered, I. She asked them
moreover, if they were willinge to have him healed; They answered, that they
had no other desire. Then approaching to the beds side, she put one of her
fingars within the ear of the young gentleman, and pulled out a paper, which she
showed unto him. He read it, and saw, that they were all the words of his
letter, and then she presently disappeared, he finding him self entirely
healed of his deafnes, save only a pain of that ear, from whence the paper
was taken forth, which lasted him diverse days. Then he arose, and went and
sought forth presently, father Henry Campege of the society of Jesus, his
Confessar, who led him to the holy chamber of the virgin, and made him there to
swear, that the matter had passed, as I have here put it down: and the one
and the other gave thanks to God, and to the holy virgin Marie. This happened in
the year 1613. and was related unto me, by the self same father Henry, the
year 1616. Is not this a very notable and rare example?

10. A young youth, upon a day cast his mother forth of a Chariot with a kick
or blow of his foot; Within a while after, he had some quarrel with his
master, who without any reason, cut off one of his feet. Whereof a holy Ermite
complaining to God, an Angel came and told him, that God had permitted the
same, in punishment of a blow of the foot, which he had sometimes given to his
mother. Raderus in virid. sanct. in anot. ad vitam S. Ephrem, ex Iosepho
Balardino l. 3. c. 47. O God, how just and admirable are thy judgments, against
rebellious children toward their parents?

. 3. Other considerations for the fathers of families, touching the gouuerment
of their household: and particularly toward their men and women servants.
Even as God commands, men and women servants to obey their masters and
mistrisses, in all that which is reason, with fear and tremblinge, in the
simplicity of heart, as to Christ: not serving to the eye, as it were pleasing
men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Ephesians.
6. 5. even so will he, that masters and mistresses have care of them, as well
in that which concerns the body, as the soul.

And as touching the body. First giving them convenient nourishment, and paying
them faithfully, and with the soonest, for their service: for it is a sin
which cries for vengeance from heaven, to defraude the labourer of his hyer.
Hearken to S. James. You have stored to your selves wrath in the last days,
behold the hire of the workmen that have reaped your fields, which is
defrauded of you, cries, and their cry has entered into the ears of the Lord
of Saboth. c. 5. 4. Secondly, not ouerburdening them, nor molesting them.
Thirdly, if they be sick, nether turning them away, nor sending them unto the
hospital, but keeping them with them, and having a care of them, after the
example of the Centurion, with all charity, as members of Jesus Christ, and
their Christian brothers.

As touching the soul, instructing them, or causing them to be instructed in
points of faith, and not to dissemble hearing them swear or speak unseemly
words, or seeing them commit any kind of sin.

2. Making them to hante the Sacraments, hear Mass, and as much as they may
Catechizing, or sermons.

3. Recommending often unto them, the examine of the Evening, and never to go
to bed, nor yet to rise, without thanking and praying to God, in the manner that
we shall show in the book ensuing.

Lo here the duties of good and Catholic masters, for as the Apostle says.
If any man have not care of his own, and especially of his domesticalls, he
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. 1. Tim. 5. 8.

EXAMPLES.
1. The good Centurion of Caphernaum, albeit a Panim, having his servant lying
sick, so far was he from turning him out of doors, that he went him self to
seek our Lord, to beseech him for to heal him: which he performed so well,
that he obtained his perfect healing. Mat. 8.

S. Elzearus Count of Arie in Prouence, had a marvelous care of his servants,
and to the end that every one should studdie and advance him self in the way
of virtu, he ordained.

1. That every one should every day hear a whole mass.

2. He would not that any should eat of his bread, which he knew to be in
mortal sin, for fear least he should spoil the others, and that he should
seem to feed and nourrish sin.

3. That all should confess them once a week: and once a month, should receive
the B. Sacrament.

4. That none should be so bold, as to speak any blasphemy, oaths, or
dishonest words. And if any one were fallen in to either of these things, he
made them to sit upon the ground, whilst the others dined, not giving him ought
for his dinner but bread and water.

5. He would not suffer, that any should play at dice in his house, or at
other forbidden game.

6. He was careful, that all agreed well together, and if he percei^ed any
quarrel to be moved amongst them, he endeavored that they should forthwith be
reconciled.

7. After dinner, or toward the evening, he made them in his presence to
speak of spiritual things. Sur. 27. of Sept. c. 18. upon his life.

8. The mother of S. Marie of Ognies, appeared unto her upon a day, as she
prayed for her in the time of Mass, and said unto her, that she was damned,
for that she was careless of that which was done in her house against God, by
those of her famillie. Iacobus de Vitr. Card. in the life of S. Marie of
Ognies, lib. 3. c. 11. Thomas a Cantip. lib. 2. ep. c. 54. p. 18.

O that God would be pleased to give to famillies, a great many of Ce^turions,
and Elzears, and preserve them from such mothers or fathers of families, as
this wretched woman was. What great good would ensue thereof, not only to
famillies, but to the whole commonwealth?

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the Seven capital sins.
THe sins of Pride, Covetousness, Lechery, Envy, Gluttony, Anger, Sloth,
are called capital, because they are as the heads and fountains, from whence
as from a corrupted root, do proceed the pestiferous fruits of all sorts
of sins and vices. Canis. Hic.

. 1. Of Pride and Superbitie.
Pride (a) is a disordinate appetite of ones proper excellence; and is as the
(b) mother and Queen of all vices. Her principal daughters (c) are,
disobedience, boasting, hipocrisy, debates, pertinacitie, discord and
curiosity.

(a) Chrysostom hom. 43. ad pop. Bernard. de grad. humil. Greg. 34. mor. c.
17. and seq. and l. 23. c. 7. Isidor de sum. bo. l. 2 c. 38. (b) Greg. l. 13.
mor. c. 31. Prosper l. 3. de contemplat. c. 2. August. ep. 56. Bern. ser. 3. ex
paruis. and ser. 4. de Aduent.

(c) Deuteronomy. 17. Sap. 5. Mat. 23. Pro. 13. Genesis 49. Pro. 6. 1. Tim. 5. 5. Tob. 4.

Never permit pride to rule in thy word, for in it all perdition took its
begininge. Tob. 4. 6.

God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Iac. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 5.
5.

He that exalts him self, shall be humbled, and he that humbles him self,
shall be exalted. Mat. 23. 12.

Pride is odious before God and men. Eccl. 10 7.

S. Bonauenture compares the proud man, to the wind: for that, even as the
wind puts out the light, dries up the dew, and sturres up the duste; even
so the proud man, puts out the light of wisdom, dries up the dew of grace,
and stirs up the dust of vanity.

2. He compares it next unto the smoke, for as much as the smoke, the more it
arises, the more it vanishes and scatters it self.

3. To the spider, for that as the spider emptieth out his own bowels weauing
his cloth to catch a fly, even so the proud man loses all the good he has
in his soul, to catch a little honor and humain praise. Isay 59.

4. To the hen, who as soon as she has laid an egg, she makes it known to
all the house by her cackling, which is the cause her egg is taken away, as S.
Chrysostom says. And so does the proud man, for as soon as he has done any
good thing, he makes it known and publishes it abroad, desiring that every
one should know it. S. Bon. in dieta salut. tit. 1. c. 5.

And of such persons our Lord says, that they have received their reward in
earth, and that therefore they shall have none in heaven. Mat. 6. 2.

EXAMPLES.
1. Lucifer the noblest and fairest amongst the Angels, for his pride, has
lost heaven, and has encurred an eternity of pains. Isay 14. 12. and seq.

2. Pharo king of Egypt, after diverse most horrible chasticements, was
swallowed up with all his troop, chariots, and baggage, within the waters of
the sea. Exodus 14.

3. Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, were swallowed up alive of the earth, which
gave way unto them, to let them sink down in to hell. Number. 16.

4. King Senacherib was slain of his own children. 4. Reg. 19. 37.

5. Nabuchodonoser became like a beast, and for such, lived for the space of
seven years, of nothing else but of grass and hey, Dan. 4. 30.

6. Holofernes had his head c^t off with his own sword, by the hand of a
woman. Judith 13. 10.

7. A man was hanged upon the same gallous, which he had caused to be made for
humble Mardocheus, and he exalted to honor in his place. Esther 7. 10.

8. King Antiochus, having first endured a world of dolors, was at the last
ea^en up of lice. 2. Match. 9.

9. King Herod dyed of the same death. Act 12. 23.

10. Iesabell was cast down headlong from a windoe, and eaten of dogs. 4.
Reg. 9. 33. 37.

Of all which, that may be verefied which David said of all the proud. I have
seen the impious highly exalted, and advanced as the Cedars of Libanus, and I
passed by, and behold he was not, and I sought him, and his place was not
found. psalm. 36. 35.

11. About the year of our Lord 1570. in a certain convent after Complin,
appeared in the refectorie at all the tables certain religious, which being
coniured by the Prior of the Convent, in virtu of the most holy Sacrament which
he held in his hands, to tell who they were; He that seemed to be chief of
the rest answered, that they were all religious of the same order, and the
greater part of them, Doctors, Bachelors, Priors, Subpriors, Readers, and al of
them damned for their pride and ambition. Which having said, they opened all
their robes, and appeared all in fire. Anno 1599. Brother Tiberius, a holy man,
entering into the same refectorie, saw and understood the same. This fearful
history, is recounted by brother Anthony of Sienna, in the Chronicles of the
brothers preachers, anno 1570.

Lo here the end of the smoke of worldly honors, to vanish suddenly away, and
not to leave to him who was addicted to them, but tears in his eyes, tears I
say, and eternal confusion!

. 2. Of Covetousness.
Covetousness, is a disordinate appetite of having. See touching this vice S.
Basil in ditesc. auar. hom. 6. and 7. S. Prosper l. 2. de vita contemplat. c.
1^. etc. 16. Isid. de summo. bono. l. 2. c. 41. S. Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb. c.
17. and sermon. 196. de temp. S. Amb. l. de Nabuthe Iesaraelita.

Her daughters are, treason, fraud, deceit, perjury, unquietness, violence,
want of mercy, or inhumanitie, and hardness of heart. S. Greg. l. 31. mor. c.
31. 2. Tim. 3. 1. Cor. 6. Eccl. 11. Zachar 8. Mat. 6. Pro. 22.

The Apostle S. Paul calls it, the service of Idols. Colos. 3. 5. And to the
Ephesians. 5. 5.

They that will be made rich, fall into tentation, and the snare of the
devil, and many desires unprofitable and hurtful, which drown men into
destruction and perdition: for the root of all evils, is covetousness. 1. Tim.
6. 9.

Nothing is more wicked then the covetous man. Eccl. 10. 9.

S. Bonauenture compares the covetous man, unto the hog: for even as the hog
is nothing worth so long as he is a live, and is only profitable when he is
dead: even so the covetous man, is nothing worth so long as he lives, because
he keeps all to him self, and does no good to any body, until he be dead:
for then he gives his soul to the devils his body to the worms, and his
wealth to his kinsfolks. S. Bon. in diaeta salutis tit. 1. c. 6.

The scripture likewise compares him to one sick of the dropsy, who the more
he drinks, the dryer he is: the more he has, the more he would have. Eccl.
5. 9.

S. Gregory of Nazian, compares the covetous, to the cursed Tantalus, who is
pictured by the poets, plunged in the infernal waters as high as the chinne,
and dies for drithe; and having the Apples of delight hanging nere their nose,
can not eat them. The covetous also bear their hell in their own bosom, and
do endure it: the more riches they swallow, the more they thirste: the more
they abound in victuals and food, the more are they famished. Is not this a
hell in this world, to be oppressed with sleep upon a bed of feathers, and to
be enforced to watch? To be pinched with extreme hungar, at a table full of
good meats, and not to be able to eat? To burn with thirst, having the
goblets full of delicious wine hard at his mouth, and not able to drink?
Be^hould the hell which the miserable covetous do endure, is there then a more
miserable sin in the whole world?

EXAMPLES.
1. Giesi, Elias servant, was for his covetousness, punished with leprosy. 4.
Reg. 5. 27.

2. Judas egged by avarice, sold his master for thirty pence: and after hunge
him self, burst asunder in the midst, and gave his bowels to the earth, and
his damned soul to the devils. Mat. 26. 14. and 27. 5.

3. Ananias and Saphira, retayning the half of their goods thorough avarice,
dyed both one after another with soddanie death. Act. 5. Achan in Iosue 7. of
Saul. 1. Reg. 15. 20. Of Acha^ and Iesabell 3. Reg. 21. and 4. Reg. 9.

4. During the Empire of Constantine son of Heraclius, there was in
Constantinople a rich man, who being in danger of death, gave to the poor,
thirty pounds of gold, but recovering after, he repented him self of his
alms. A certain friend of his, endeavored to take this sadness from him, but
seeing that he profited not, he said unto him. I am ready to restore you your
thirty pounds, upon condition that you shall say in the Church in my presence.
Lord, it was not I that gave the alms of thirty pounds, but this is he. He
accepted it, and said it. But o incomparable secret of the justice of God, as
he thought to go forth of the Church with his money, he fell to the ground
stark dead. Baron. tom. 7. annal. an. 553. ex Cedreno, and Raderus ex Menoeo
Grecorum.

5. A woman, under the cloak of piety and religion, having made a great many
of pilgrimages to holy places, she had gathered together a great deal of
money, which she feigned to be for the redeeming of prisoners, and for the
necessity of the poor: ^he hid the same under the ground within her house,
that none but her self should singar the same. Her daughter was asked, what her
mother had done with her money? And because she could tell no tydinges, they
sought so long, that at last they found it. The Bishop caused it to be carried,
to the grave of this covetous woman, and to be cast upon her carkas. About
midnight, most pitiful cries were heard to issue forth of the hollow places
of that sepulcher, and a voice which said with a lamentable accent. My gold
burns me, my gold burns me. These cries lasted three whole days, at the end
whereof, they opened the grave (a fearful thing) and saw the gold, that had
been there laid, all melted and in flames, to run into the mouth of this
wicked woman. S. Greg. of Tours reports the same l. 1. of the glory of Martirs
c. 106.

6. S. Atoninus writes, that an a^aritious man, admonished of his parents and
friends, being sick even to death, to confess him self, answered. I have no
heart, how then will you that I confess? And that you think not that I do but
ieste, go to my coffre, and you shall find it amidst my gold, wherein I have
put my whole hope. This said, he died without any repentance. His coffre is
visited, and just as he said, his heart was found amidst his gold: so true it is
which our B. Savior sometimes said. Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart
also. Mat. 6. S. Ant. in Summa 2. p. tit. 1. c. 4.. 6.

7. Behold another like case arrive unto a covetous man, whose heart was found
in his coffre after his death, betwixt the claws of a Dragon, which lay upon
the gold and silver, saying, that heart was given unto him by the dead, during
his life. In Gabr. Inchinoser. 1. of the purity of heart.

8. Another being at the point of death, could never be induced to be confessed,
but as soon as he saw the priest depart, he called his wife, and caused a
platter full of gold to be brought unto him, to which he said. Thou art my
gold, in thee it is that I do hope, let the Priests say what they please, thou
art it that should asist me. Having said these words, he bowed his head
into the platter, and there rubbing it amidst the gold, which he kissed and
adored for his idol, he so died miserably. Extracted out of the annals of the
society.

9. Such another also was he of the city of Constance, recounted by Niderus
and Pinelli, who falling sick, of set purpose to spare his money, caused him
self to be carried to the hospital. And seeing him self near his end,
caused to be made him some pease pottage, and cast his gold into the same, and
having stird it with his spoone, endeavored to swallow it down, but he choked
him self, and died before he had eat it up. Pinelli. page 1. c. 5.

10. Reginherus bishop of Misne, haueing buried his treasure in his own
chamber, was found on the morrow laid thereon, with his face against the ground,
and stark dead. Lambert Schafnabur apud Baron. to. 11. anno. 1067. O strange
and tragical deaths of covetous parsons!

. 3. Of the sin of Luxury.
Luxury, is a disordinate appetite of carnal pleasure, her daughters are,
blindness of spirit, inconsideration, inconstancy, precipitation, self-love,
hatred of God, too great a desire of this life, horror of death, and of the
judgment of God, together with despair of eternal felicity. Greg. l. 31.
Mor. c. 31. Ose 4. 2. Reg. 11. Dan. 13. Pro. 13. Sap. 4. Psl. 51. Tim. 3. Psalm.
20. Iac. 4. Ephesians. 4.

Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not so much as be named among you, as it
becomes Saints, that is to say, Christians. Ephesians. 5. 3.

Know you not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? Taking therefore the
members of Christ, shall I make them the members of an harlot? God for bid. 1.
Cor. 6. 15. 19.

Do not err, nether fornicators, nor adulterers, nor the effeminate, shall
posesse the kingdom of God. ibid. 10.

If you live according to the flesh, you shall die. Romans 8. 13.

You have heard, that it was said to them of old, thou shall not commit
adultery: but I say to you, that whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her,
has already committed adultery with her in his heart. Mat. 5. 28.

S. Bernard says, that Luxury is one of the chariots of Pharao, who pursued
the servants of God, and carries them that sit thereon, to the red sea of the
infernal flames. Her four wheels are, Gluttony, and drunkenness, curiosity
of apparel, i^lenes, and ardor of concupiscence. The two Coursers, or horses,
are prosperity of life, and abundance. Upon these two horses, do sit, stupid
ignorance, and blinded assurance. Sor. 39. in Cant.

EXAMPLES.
Behold the horrible punishments which God has imposed upon this sin.

1. For the sin of the flesh, God has drowned all the world. Genesis 7. 21.

2. The cities of Zodome and Gomorah, and all the contrie round about, with
their inhabitants, were con-consumed by fire sent from heaven. Genesis 19. 25.

3. Hemor son of Sichem, with all the inhabitants of the city of Sichem,
were put to the sword. Genesis 34. 26.

4. All the tribe of Benianim, were cut off, for the same cause. Judge. 20. 48.

5. Sampson was blinded with overmuch affection toward his wife. Judge. 16. 21.

6. Amnon was slain, by his brother Absalon. 2. Reg. 13. 29.

7. David was persecuted of his son. 2. Reg. 11. and 15.

8. Solomon became an adulterer 3. Reg. 11.

9. The husbands of Sara, were strangled by the devil Asmodeus. Tob. 3. 8.

10. The two old men that coueted the chaste Susanna, were stoned to death. Dan.
13.

11. Four and twenty thousand of the people of Israel, were put to death. Number.
25.

12. Marie daughter to the king of Arragon, wife to the Emperor Othon the 3.
having solicited the Count of Modena, to condescend to her lubricitie, and he
most constantly refusing her, was accused by her calumniously, that he would
have induced her to sin, whereupon the Emperor cut off his head. But before he
died, having declared his innocence to his wife, he prayed her to carry his
head after his death, upon her bare feet into a great fire, in witness of the
integrity of her husband: which she performed, nether that head, nor yet her
body, being hurt any whit at all. Which the Emperor seeing, he commanded the
Empress to be cast into the fire. Thus God permitted that this terrible
chasticement, shauld befall her, not only for this calumny and filthy desire,
but also for that she had sometimes abandoned her body, to a young youth,
disguised like a wenche, who served her for a chamber maid, and was also
burnet alive by the commandment of the Emperor, but she received pardon by the
intercession of the princes and Lords of the court. The 2. Chron. Gotscalcus
Holenser 23. p. Hyem. Licosthemes in theatro mundi. D. Antonin. p. 2. tit. 6.
c. 3. Baron anno 998. Iacobus Serada in these. Imp. Krantz l. 4. Saxon. c. 26.

13. Raimond of Capua, confessar to S. Catharin of Sienna writes, that this
Saint could nether see, nor abide to come near those, which were infected with
the sin of the flesh, and that if she spoke with them, she was enforced to
stop her nose. Sur. 20. of Ian.

14. Palladius writes, that S. Pachomus, having given a box on the ear unto
the devil, which appeared unto him in the form of an Ethiopian, had his hand
so infected, that he spent more then two years to take away the stink thereof.
In his Lausiaca.

15. S. Euthimius Abbot, as Cyrillus Monk writes in his life, passing by one
who had consented to a dishonest thought, smelt such a stink, that he supposed
him self to have been posest of the devil.

See before a terrible and fearful history of this matter, in the 3. cap.
example 3. and another in the 4. cap.. 2. example 6. and in the 2. book, cap.
2.. 2.

Lo here the gain and reward which is got by this sin, for a beastly
pleasure, and which lasts so little, plunging ones self into so many evils,
temporal and eternal! Let us say with that wise Pagan Demosthenes, I will not
buy a repentance at so dear a price. Agell. noct. Act. l. 1. c. 8.

. 4. Particular Considerations, against the sin of voluntary Pollution.
It is with great grief that I speak at all of this sin, yea that I do so
much as name it, because it is so enorme and detestable: yet so it is, that I
cannot altogether ommit the same, for that it is (o heavy case) so common and
so universal.

Hearken hereupon to Cardinal Toletus. The sin of voluntarily pollution is
amongst al others the most difficult to be amended, and this by reason that one
has always with him, the occasion for to fall therein: and is so universal,
that I believe that the most part of those that go to hell, are damned for the
same sin. l. 5. Instruct. sacerd. c. 13.

Ioannes Benedictus, in his Sum upon the 6 commandment of the de^alogue,
written after Conradus Clin^ius, be it that the same be known by
reuelauelation, or else by experience, that those which are habituated in this
sin, as many years as our Lord lived, that is to say, thirty three, are
incurable, and as it were without hope of their salvation, unless that God do
succor them, by a marvelous, rare, and extraordinary grace; This is that
which this author says. But touching the sin it self, according to the
mind of the Cardinal before alleged, there is no better remedy, then to be
confessed often, to communicate twice, or thrice aweeke, and this unto the same
confessar.

Note all this Christian, and if ever thou felst into this curssed sin,
resolve to rise out of it from this very instant that thou read this page,
for fear lest habituating thy self therein, thou can not afterward rid
thee thereof, and that thou twist not by little and little, the netts and
vnloosable lines, which draw thee in the end, into the abisse of mischief, and
eternal torments. For according to the Apostle, Effeminat, nor liers with
mankind, shall not possess the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6. 10.

EXAMPLES.
1. Her the eldest son of Judas, was killed (by the devil Asmodeus, and dyed
an horrible death, as Abulensis writes) as also his brother Onan, for that
retiringe him self in the conjugal act, they polluted them selves. Genesis 38.
7. And the scripture speakinge of Onan, says. Therefore our Lord struck him
(weigh well these words) because he did a detestable thing. If God punished
in this sort these two brethren in an age so rude, wherein there was so little
knowledge of the goodness of God, and malice of sin, how think you will he
punish those, which being enlightened with the light of the euangellicall
gospel, do commit this detestable sin.

2. The admirable S. Christine, saw upon a day in spirit, all the whole world
repleat and drowned in this sin, and that for this cause God prepared most
terrible scourges where with to punish them: who to the end to auert these
horrible scourges, he afflicted and chasticed him self, with diverse horrible
and strange punishments. P. Cornel. a Lapide in c. 38. Genesis 7.

Take heed sinner, for it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. Heb. 10. See the 7. cap. of this 1. book. ^.

. 5. Of the sin of Envy.
Envy, is a sadness and hatred, at the good and felicity of another: of
superiors, for that one is not their equal: of inferiors, for fear, lest one
be made equal to them: of like, because that one is equal to them. Canis. ex
Aug. l. 11. de Genes. ad lit. 6. 14. Prosper sent. 292.

Her daughters are, hatred, whispering, detraction, leaping of the heart at
others adversities, and afliction of spirit for their prosperity.

The Envious are like unto the devil, for the wiseman says. By the envy of
the devil death entered into the world, and they follow him, that are of his
part. Sap. 2. 24.

Where Envy is (says the Apostle S. James) there is contention, inconstancy,
and all sorts of wicked works. Iac. 3. 16.

There is nothing more pernicious in the whole world then Envy, who hurtes
none but its own author. S. Basil Hom. 11. var. argument.

Envy (says S. Cyprian) is the root of all evils, the fountain of all
misfortunes, the school or seminary of sins. Sermon. de zelo and liuore.

S. Bonauent are says, that Envy is, as the worm to the wood, the rust to
the iron, the mothe to the garment. In diaeta salutis. tit. 1. c. 4.

S. Basil compares the Envious to vipers, who tear and kill their own
mothers. Supra.

S. Chrysostom, unto mad or enraged dogs. Hom. 41. in Mat.

EXAMPLES.
Consider the grieuousnes of this vice, by its effects.

1. By Envy, Caine slew his brother Abell. Genesis 4.

2. Jacobs children sold their own brother. Genesis 37.

3. Saul seeing that David was more extolled then him self, sought to kill
him, and in the end killed him self. 1. Reg. 18. and 31.

4. A man enuyinge the honor which king Assuerus had done to Mardocheus,
conspired his death, and the utter ruin of all the Jews: but all fell upon
his own head, for he him self was hanged upon the same gibbet, which he had
set up for him, and all his race and kindred, was put to the sword. Hester 7.

5. Finally, it was this cursed Envy, which incited the Jews, to procure the
death of the Son of God, the author of life. Lo from what degree of malice,
this vice does throw down its own servant!

. 6. Of Gluttony and Drunkenness.
Gluttony, is a disordered appetite of eating and drinking. S. Greg. lib. 30.
Moral. c. 27. S. Bernard. l. de passione Dom. c. 42.

Her daughters are, immoderat laughter, babbling, scurillitie, filthiness, and
impudicitie, with stupiditie of the senses and understanding, l. 31. moral. c.
31. Aug. l. 30. etc. before alleged.

S. Gregory declares five manners or fashions, by which one falls into this
vice.

1. Preventing the time to eat and drink: so Iona^ has sinned, the son of
Saul. 1. Reg. 14. 27.

2. Seeking for delicate and exquisite meats and drinks: as did the
Israelites. Number. 11. 4.

3. Commanding to prepare and season meats, albeit common, with extraordinary
licorish sauces, like the son of Hely. 1. Reg. 2.

4. Exceeding in the quantity and measure: as did the Zodomites. Ezech. ^6. 49.

5. Eating with over much greedines, base and gross meats, as Esau did his
dishe of pottage. Genesis 25. 33.

Let us now see what the holy scriptures say.

Of surfeit many have dyed, but he that is abstinent, shall add life. Eccl. 37.
34. and 31. 36. Psalm. 77. 29. 30. 31. Number 11. 33. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. 24. 32. 33 Pro.
21. 17.

Look well to your selves, lest perhaps your hearts be ouer-charged with
surfeting and drunkenness. Luc. 21. 34.

A workman that is a drunkard, shall not be rich. Eccl. 19. 1.

To whom is woe? to whose father woe? to whom broils? to whom ditches and
dangers? to whom wounds without cause? to whom blood shedding eyes? Is it not
to them that pass their time in wine, and studdy to drink out their cups?
Pro. 23 29. By wine, is to be understood, all that which may make one drunk.

No drunkards shall posesse the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 21. O
see 4. 11. Pro 31. 4. Eccl. 19. 1. ^.

Woe to you that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to drink even unto
evening, Isay 5. 11. and 22. 13. Pro. 23. 20. Amos 6. 6. Luc. 6. 25.

Are not these thunder-darting sentences which the spirit of God, does launche
forth against drunkards? Let us see if the holy fathers do say any less.

S. Basil says, that drunkenness is, a voluntarily devil. Hom. 14.

The drunkard is worse then the Ass, says S. Chrisostom. For an Ass can
never be induced, nether by fair means, nor yet by force, to drink more then
may suffice his thirst: but the drunkard bursts him self with drinking,
without thirst, or necessity. Hom. 29. in Mat.

Where drunkenness is (says this Saint in another place) there is the devil.
Hom. 57. ad pop. Ant.

If this vice be so detestable in a man, how much is it in a maiden or a woman?

A woman given to drunkenness, is great anger (says the wiseman. Eccle. 26.
11.) and her contumely and turpitude shall not be hid.

There is nothing more villainous and infamous, then a drunken woman, says 5.
Chrisostom. Hom. 16. in Mat. and 71. ad pop.

EXAMPLES.
1. Noe being drunk, presently was infamously uncovered, mocked, and
dishonored by his own son. Genesis 9. 21. 22.

2. Lot being drunk, fell into double incest. Genesis 19. 33. etc.

3. Holofernes ready to burst with wines and abundance of other meats, had
his head cut off with his own sword by a woman, and his soul cast into the
eternal flames. Judith 11. 12. and 13.

4. Balthazar king of Babylon, making him self drunk with his concubines and
curtisans, saw his sentence of death, written with the fingar of God upon the
wall, and the same night it was executed. Dan. 5.

5. The rich glutton made good cheer every day, but in the end, he found his
grave to be made in hell. Luc. 16.

6. Thomas de Cantip. writes, that in his own time in France, two elderly
religious men being set at table to make themselves drunk according to their
custom, one of them, at the fourth morsel which he put in his mouth, choked
him self, and so dyed suddenly. The other having shaken off the fear he had
conceived of so horrible a case, returned to the table, and pursued alone to
eat and drink, until such time as he could no more: and not being able for
to stir (so full was he stuffed) he was borne like a beast unto his bed, and
there died a little after. l. 2. ap. c. 12. n. 15.

7. See in the 2. book c. 2.. 2. a terrible example of three drunkards, whereof
the one was roasted alive by the devil, in the sight of his companions.

8. Two gentlemen, all soldiars, at Apeldorne, a village of Velue in Germany,
agreed together, to drink so long till they burst asunder, and that the first
that should arise from the table, should be in the power of the devil (who
ever heard a thing more execrable?) A merchant passing by that way, was
solicited to do the like. Then they began to drink after a strange fashion,
but their pastime lasted not long, for hardly had they begun, but that in the
presence of this merchant, the devil brake the necks asunder of them both. O
heavy and horrible end of drunkards! Petrus Thyreus de loco infest. p. 1. c.
19. ex Mich. ab Isselt an. Dom. 1584.

9. Certain drunkards fillinge out the pots and glasses, moved diverse
discourses touching the immortallitie of the soul; And one of them said, that
he was ready to sell his to whosoever would have it. A merchant arrived
thereupon (which was the devil in the guise of a merchant) who prayed to have a
place in their company. He set him down at the table, and having heard their
discourse, he offered to buy the soul of this Athist, he bought it for some
certain pots of wine, and having laughed with them for awhile, he demanded if
he which has bought a horse, should not have the bridle also? They all
answered, that it was but reason, which was no sooner said, but he presently
seized upon his man, and carried him away both body and soul. Thom. Cantip. l.
2. ap. c. 56. p. 2.

10. In the year 1595. the 14. of March, the first Sunday of Lent, at
Baccharach, a city seated upon the Rhine betwixt Constance and Mayence, a
good woman great with child, seeing her husband go to the tavern, to play and
drink away all that he had got the week before, endeavored with many wholesome
reasons to divert him, but receued nothing of him but dry blows, and was so
sent back with her devil (for so he called the fruit which she carried in her
womb.) Being returned to her house, thorough the pains and sorrow which she
conceived, she was delivered before her time, and brought forth a monster,
which from the head unto the girdle, was like a man, but all the rest like to a
Serpent, having a tail of three else long. The night being come, her husband
returns with his purse empty, and his belly full: but scarce had he put his
foot within the chamber, but that this devil in carnate leapt upon him,
wrapped him within his tail, and gave unto him so many pricks, that he killed
him upon the place. The poor woman in childbed, behoulding from her bed this
horrible spectacle, gave up the ghost, and the monster also imediatly after
ceased to live. Mich. ab Isselt in his Merc. Gallo-belg. l. 12. an. 1595.

11. An other, in the year 1583. spending all his money at the tavern, did
likewise beat his wife in such manner, who came to show the poverty of her own
house, that he left her there for half dead. After she was returned home, she
was beset with seven little children, which pullinge her by the coat, cried.
Mother, a little bread, good mother a little bread, we have not eaten yet to day.
What shall I give you? said she unto them, I have nothing, your father has
eaten and consumed all. This said, all desperate, she goes and fetches a great
knife from the kitchen, and killed her two little children. The husband returning
stark drunk, threw him self upon the bed, and as he slept, she likewise cut
asunder his throat. The fact is known, she is apprehended, and executed for
it without delay, making a goodly exhortation to husbands, to govern them
selves better in their hous-keepinges. Ioannes Benedicti, in the Sum of
sins.

7. Of the sin of Anger.
Anger is, an immoderate desire, to punish him, of whom one deemeth to have
received wrong.

Her daughters are, quarrels, arrogance, contumely, clamor, indignation and
blasphemies. S. Greg. l. 31. Moral. c. 31.

An angry man, provoke brawles, and he that is easy to indignation, shall
be more prone to sin. Pro. 29. 22.

Whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of judgment. Mat. 5.
22.

Envy and Anger, diminishes the days, and thought will bring old age before
the time. Eccl. 30. 26.

Let not the sun go down upon your anger. Ephesians. 4. 26. that is to say,
reconcile your selves before the evening.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall posesse the land. Mat. 5. 4.

Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you etc. and you shall be the
sons of the highest. Luc. 6. 27. and 35. and Mat. 5. 44. 45.

There is nothing more ungrateful (says S. Chrysostom) then an angry body,
nothing more insupportable, more pernicious, and more horrible. Hom. 29.

He that is easily angry (says S. Bonauenture) is like unto an empty pot of
earth, which being set nere the fire, crackes and makes a great noize: even so
he who is easily angry upon each slight occasion, evidently shows, that he
is empty of grace, and of virtues. In diaeta salut. tit. 1. c. 5. This being
conform to that which the wiseman says. The furnace tries the potters
vessels, and the tentation of tribulation, just men. Pro. 27. 6.

EXAMPLES.
1. The Emperor Theodosius being at Thessalonica, moved to choler for a murder
committed in a popular tumult against the parson of one of his fauorits,
assembled the people in a certain place, under pretext of some sport or play
to be there performed, and then caused them all to be cut in pieces, unto the
number of seven thousand. But he paid dearly for his offense, for being
excommunicated and shut out of the Church by S. Ambrose, he was enjoined to do
most severe penance for the space of a year: and after this received not his
pardon, before such time as prostrate in the presence of all the people, with
his face upon the earth, he often repeated this little verse of the prophet
David, with tears and sighs, saying. My soul has cleaned to the pauement.
psl. 118. 25. Niceph. l. 12. hist. eccl. c. 40. Sidon de occid Imp. l. 9.
Baron. an. 390.

2. S. Bridgit, having upon a time, given some sign of impatience, our Lord
appeared unto her, and said. I thy Creator and thy spouse, have endured for
thee whippes and scourges, and thou, could thou not endure for me a few
words? Being presented before the judge, I held my peace without so much as
opening my mouth, and thou have answered sharply, and used reproaches, with
lowdnes of voice. Thou in truth ought to suffer all patiently for the love
of me, who have been nailed an hunge upon the Cross for the love of thee. Be
thou then for the time to come better advised, and if thou be provoked to
anger, hold thy peace and say not a word, until the time thy choler be past,
and then thou may speak with sweetness and meeknes. Lud. Blos. mon. spirit.
c. 4.

3. Sapritius Priest, after he had suffered much for the faith, as he was led
to his execution, he met with Nicephorus, with whom he had some former quarrel:
who cast him self down at his feet, beseeching him he would forget what was
past, and receive him again into grace. This he did diverse times, and in
diverse places, but all in vain, for the wicked wretch would never forgive
him; but God punished him by and by, taking from him the crown of martyrdom
which was already prepared for him, and gave the same unto Nicephorus. For
being at the point to be beheadded, he said he would adore the Idols, as he
did: which Nicephorus seeing, he declared him self to be a Christian, went up
upon the scaffold, and was beheadded. O what obstinacy and blindness, rather to
loose and be deprived of heaven, then for to pardon! Surius 9. of Feb.

4. Iacobus of Vitriaco Cardinal, preaching the expedition of Christians in
Brabant, it came to pass, that a certain man cast him self at the feet of
another, beseeching him to forget their surpassed enimitie, and to forgive him
that wherein he had offended him: which having done for three or four several
times, and the other still saying, that he would not forgive him, he turned him
toward the assembly and said. I protest before you all, that I have done that
which was my duty, I therefore beseech you all to pray unto God, that he would
show by some evident sign, that this man does amiss. This said, he heard out
the rest of the sermon, and now behold a strange case, how this obstinate man
fell to the ground, his eyes rouling in his head, and his mouth full of the
some of blood. The holy Cardinal fell to prayer, and taking him by the hand,
lifted him up, and brought him to his perfect sense. Then all changed into
another man, he cast him self upon his enemies neck, kissed him, and asked him
forgiveness (in his turn) with the tears in his eyes. Tho. Cantipr. l. 2 ap.
c. 18. p. 2.

5. Behold here another more admirable then the former. S. Bernardin writes
to have seen in the year 1419. upon the mount of Caluarie in Jerusalem, a
woman carried quite away by the devil, and cast into a well in the sight of a
great number of people, for having by mischance amidst a press of people, been
shouldred by a young man and thrust a ground, she never would vouchsafe to
pardon him, albeit he praid and besought her sundry times with joined hands,
and upon his knees. Sermon. 15. Quadrag.

Here we see the verifying of this evangelical sentence. If you will not
forgive men their offenses, nether will your father forgive you your offenses.
Mat. 6. 14. Luc. 6. 37. Eccl. 28. 2.

. 8. Of the sin of Sloth.
Sloth is a langor and feeblenes of spirit to work well: and taking it more
strictely, it is a sadness of spiritual things. Canis.

Her daughters are, malice, despair, and benumdnes to fulfill the commandments
of almighty God, and a wandering of spirit toward unlawful things. S. Greg
l. 31. Moral. c. 31.

To this vice are subject such as are idle (a) and are without any art or
knowledge, and such as the scripture calls (b) lukewarm: and lastly al those
who employ in vanities, this precious time of grace, and day of salvation (c)
(a) Mat. 20. 6. Pro. 6. 6. and 10. 13. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 24. 25. 26. 28. and
in sundry other places (b) Apoc. 3. 15. (c) 2. Cor. 6. 2.

Thou have left thy first charity (that is to say, thy first feruor) be
mindful therefore from whence thou art fallen, and do penance, and do the
first works; but if not, I come to thee, and will move thy clandelstick forth
of his place. Apoc. 2. 5.

I would thou were cold, or hot; but because thou art lukewarm, and nether
cold, nor hot, I will begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. Apoc. 3. 15.

Cursed be he who does the work of God negligently Ierem. 48.

He that pursues idleness, shall be replenished with poverty. Pro. 28. 19.

Idleness has taught much naughtines. Eccl. 33. 28.

Lo this was the iniquity of Sodom thy sister, pride, fulness of bread and
abundance, and the idleness of her, and of her daughters. Ezech. ^6. 49.

Because of cold, the slothful would not plough, he shall beg therefore in
the summer, and it shall not be given him. Pro. 20. 4.

Go to the Emmot, o sluggard, and consider her ways, and learn wisdom: who
whereas she has no guide nor master, nor captain, prepares meat for her
self in the summer, and gathers in the harvest for to eat. How long will thou sleep, o sluggard, when will thou rise out of thy sleep? Thou shall
sleep a little, a little shall thou slumber, and penury shall come to thee as a
way faring man, and poverty as a man armed. Pro. 6. 6.

Every tree that yeldeth not good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be cast
into the fire. Mat. 7. 19.

And the unprofitable servant, cast ye out into the utter darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25 30.

Are there not here most goodly sentences, all taken forth of the book of God,
against slothful and lazy persons? Let us hear what the holy Doctors say to
the same purpose.

If thou had a servant (says S. John Chrysostom) that were nether thief,
nor detractor, nor drunkard, nor addicted to any other vice, but yet remaining
whole days together, houlding his hands one within another, would thou not
bast him? But it may be said he does no evil? He does ill enough, when he does
not that which he ought to do. Hom. 16. in epist. ad Ephesians.

S. Thomas of Aquin was wont to say, that idleness was the fish hook, wherewith
the devil went a fishinge, and that with it all sort of bayte was proper.
Ribad. in his life 7. of march.

Be always in action, that so the devil may always find thee occupied. S.
Hier. epist. ad Rusticum ep. 4.

We must fly idleness, the mother of fooleries and of fopperies, and the
stepmother of virtues. S. Ber. l. 2. de consid. ad Eugen.

My father works until now, and I do work, said our Savior. Joan. 5. 18.
The Angels, are they not all occupied in their ministry? says the Apostle.
Heb. 1. 14. Behold the Sun (says S. Aug.) the Moon, the Stars, the
beasts, and all creatures, do they not al employ them selves to do that, for
which God the Creator has created them? And thou a man, will thou remain
alone doing nothing? Ser. 16. ad fratres in eremo. How much is the little
Spider busied to catch a fly? How dilligent the Cat, to catch a Mouse? How
long are maidens and women tampering to trick up and adorn them selves, to
gain the favor of a poor and silly mortal man? And will thou do nothing to
gain heaven, and the grace and favor of almighty God? See the 6. examp. of
this paragraphe.

EXAMPLES.
1. Idleness caused the Israelites to fall into the sin of Idolatry. Exodus
32. 6.

2. Those of Zodome and Gomorrha, into the sin of Sodomy. Ezech. 16. 49.

3. David thorough idleness, fell into the sins, both of murder and adultrie.
2. Reg. 11. 4.

As long as Sampson exercised him self to set upon his enemies, he could not
be taken: but as soon as he laid him down and slept upon a woman's lap, he was
both taken, and made blind. Judge. 16. 21.

5. Whilst Solomon employed him self about the building of the Temple, he was
not assaulted with the sin of Leacherie. Does he cease? Behold him suddenly
set on fire by his concupiscence, courts strange women, and becomes an
idolater. 3. Reg. 11. 4. Watch then my brethren (says S. Aug.) for you are not
more holy then David, stronger then Sampson, nor wiser then Solomon. Ser. 16.
supra.

6. Pelagia a courtly lady of Antioche, passing upon a day before certain
Bishops, mounted upon a goodly Mule, all bespangled with gold and precious
stones, followed and attended upon with a great number of youthful pages and
damoselles most daintilie attired, and her self so fair, that she ravished
the hearts of all her behoulders, as soon as the Bishops had espied her, they
turned away their faces from her, only Monnus, Bishop of Edessa, looked upon
her fixedlie, and that for a pretty space of time, and after asked of the
others what they supposed. And seeing that they said not a word, he bowed him
downwards, hid his face with his handkercher, weeping with most bitter tears.
Which having done, he errected him self and said: that he had been greatly
recreated by looking upon this dissolute woman, for (quoth he) I considered,
how many hours she spent to sponge and beautify her self to gain the grace
and favor of men, and I wretch that I am, who ought to please the great God of
heaven, who promises me goods and pleasures which are infinite, am yet so
negligent and slothful to adorn my soul? This said, he drew his Deacon by
the arm, and being retired into his chamber, he cast him self upon the
ground, lamenting before the face of God, his tepiditie and his sloth. She was
after this converted to the faith, and to a better sort of life, by a sermon
which she heard of this holy Bishop, and retyring her self into the mount of
Oliuet, disguised in the habit of a man, passed the rest of her life most
holilie, and is now placed in the catalogue of the Saints of the Church. Surius
and Ribad. 8. of October.

7. S. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, passing his way upon a day thorough
the street Ambrosienne of the same city, saw Angels upon the top of a little
house: whereat astonished, he entered in, and found there a good widow with her
three daughters, who all tottered and bare-foote, spunne with their spindell:
and moved with compassion, gave unto them a good sum of money. He past by
there again within a while after, and saw there devils instead of Angels. He
went into the house, and asked if they had not committed some kind of sin
since he had visited them; and understood that they spunne no more, but spent
their time in doing of nothing, amusing the^ selves about naught else, save
only to pranck and adorn them selves to please men. Vincent Mainardus in vita
S. Antonini, Sur. 2. of May.

O the singular good to be always exercised in things that are good! O the
great evil, that proceeds of iolenes! An advertisement touching this vice,
for such as are Magistrates and fathers of families.

8. At Florence in Toscanie, according to the laws and customs of the co^try,
the magistrates have a very great and especial care, that there be not found
in the city, any vagrant or idle persons: and if they find any such, they
examine them whereon they live, whence they got their garments, and if they
answer not pertinently, they are presently punished and expeld the city, as
pernicious to the common welthe. Sabellius l. 6. c. 3.

9. The Egiptians according to their laws, anciently punished by death, al
those who could not prove by what art they got their living. Diod. Sicul. And
Solon, the law giver of the Greeks, made an ordonance, that the father should
not be nourished of his own child, to whom he had not taught some occupation.
Laert. l. 6.

O ye Magistrates, who either read or hear this, be wise after their example,
and see that youth be not nourished and entertained in idleness in your towns.
And you, fathers and mothers (who must rendar a most strict account to God of
your children) for Gods sake, suffer not, that they be idle and vagabonds.
Employ them betimes, and from their youth in some honest exercise, according to
your calling, and their capacity. Send them as soon as they are five or six
years old unto the schools, there to learn to write and read. Why should
you grudge them a groate a monthe, for a thing so necessary and pro^itable to
them, who grudge not to give unto your belly and your guts after dinner, all
the gettinges of a whole week?

After they know how to write and read, put them to some honest exercise,
either of learning, or of some art and occupation, and take great heed of
retaining them by you, doing of nothing, for else you lose the bridle to them,
to run headlong to all kind of malice and mischief, perhaps also unto the
gallouse. I know a man, who for this only reason, saw two of his children
hanged before his own door. O what a hart-breaking was this accident to him.

It is not the Judge (quoth a young stripling carried upon a day for to be
hanged) that leads me unto the gallouse, but it is mine own mother. Iansen.
in Pro. 23. See touching this matter chap. 5.. 1. examp. 6. and 7.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Of certain remedies and means, whereby not to fall into
sin.
HItherto we have alleged that, which makes for the detestation of the
principal sins and vices, which suffices in mine opinion, to move a heart,
were it of stone or hardest marble; for what is there more efficacious or more
energicall, then the holy scripture? then the enflamed words of the holy
fathers, and examples? Thou see then (o Christian) by what has been said,
how pernicious and horrible sin is, and consequently what reason thou have to
detest and fly it as much as thou may. But yet perhaps thou would
willingly have some remedies, to preserve thy self from this accursed monster.
Besides the fear and love of God, the ^istrust of ones self, the due
frequentinge of the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Eucharist, spiritual
lecture, daily examen of conscience, and holy prayer, whereof we will treat by
Gods asistance in the book ensuing: behold here seven singular remedies and
most effectual.

1. To fly the occasions, as are dangerous places, and evil companies. The
memory 2. Of the presence of God. 3. Of the passion of our Lord. 4. Of death.
5. Of judgment. 6. Of hell, and of the eternity of the damned. 7. Of heaven,
and of the eternity of the saved.

. 1. Of flying the occasions of sin.
The Proverb says, that the occasion causes the thief. The Flies and
Gnattes, houering about the candle, fall at the last into the flame; He must
not walk nere the water, who will not be drowned. If thou then (o Christian)
wilt keep thy self so as not to fall into sin, fly the occasions, such as
are evil companies, the dangerous places of tauernes, and other houses of
dissolute women, in the evening and time of night. For a maid (for example)
does put her self in great hasard of offending God, and of her own honor, who
undertakes to talk with a young man alone, in a place apart, in the dark, or
in the night. You shall rendar account fathers and mothers, who give such
liberty unto your daughters. See. l. 2. c. 3.. 4. examp. 3.

He that loves danger shall perish in it Eccl. 3. 27.

Can a man hide fire in his bosom, that his garments burn not? Or walk upon
heat coals, that his soales be not burnt? Pro. 6. 27.

My son, if sinners shall entise thee, condescend not to them. If they shall
say: come with us, etc. walk not with them, stay thy foot from their paths.
Pro. 1. 10.

Depart from the wicked, and evil shall fail from thee. Eccl. 7. 2.

He that touches pitche, shall be defiled with it: he that communicates with
the proud, shall put on pride. Eccl. 13. 1.

With the holy, thou shall be holy, and with the innocent man, thou shall be
innocent. psl. 17. 26.

If thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it
is expedient for thee, that one of thy limbs perish, rather then thy whole
body be cast into hell. Mat. 5. 30.

By the eye that scandaliseth, is to be understood all occasion of scandal and
of offense. The master then must quit him self of his maid, if she give him
occasion to offend God: and, if it be the master which inciteth the maid to
commit evil, then must she leave him; and so of others.

There is no assurance (says S. Hierom) to sleep nere unto a serpent: it may
be that he will not bite me, but it may be also that he will bite me. l. cont.
Vigilant.

And writing to Furia touching her widdowhood, he says. Fly the company of
young youths, let not your house admit these young courters of girls which
wear their perewigges, who have their hair f^sled, their habits spruce, and
their looks lascivious: admit not likewise near unto you, singers and players
etc. but instead of these, holy widows. Epist. 10.

S. Aug. bewayling the stealth of apples which he had committed in his youth,
says. If I had been alone, I had never done it: it was wicked company, that
caused me to do it. O frindship too too iniust, seduction of spirit, when one
says; Let us go, let us do it, and one is ashamed, not to be without shame.
l. 3. Conf. c. 8. 9.

EXAMPLES.
The children of Seth, were good before they were married, but as soon as they
were allied with the daughters of Caine, they became so wicked, that God was
constrained to drown them all by the deluge. Genesis 4. 6. 7.

2. Loath being retired from the holy company of Abraham, was taken by the
Infidells, all his goods were burned in Sodom, he made himself drunk, and
being drunk, violated his two daughters. Genesis 14. and 19.

3. Salomo^ co^uersing with the Egiptia^ Ladies, became an Idolater. 3. Reg.
11. 4.

4. S. Peter, leaving the company of our Lady and the Apostles, and rancking
him self amongst the wicked, denied thrice his Lord and Master. Mat. 26. 70.

5. Gordiana aunt to S. Gregory, delighting overmuch to be in company of
certain secular maids, forgot the vow she had made to serve God, and by little
and little turned all worldly: and after the death of her two sisters, Tharsilla
and Emiliana which went to heaven, she plunged her self entirely in vanities,
with the final perdition of her soul. S. Greg. 4. Dial. c. 14. and Hom. 38.
in Euang.

6. A young scholar studying in the dioces of Mastrick, finding him self upon
a day in the company of some young and dissolute libertines, was conducted
into a certain house, where it wanted little, that (together with the purity
of his heart) he lost not the flower of his virginity. Seeing him self therefore
assaulted with an impudent woman, he forsook his companions, and departing
forth of that debauched lodging, it being now night, he went toward his own
dwelling, and as he went, he began to think, not without great astonishment,
upon the evident peril which he had passed, to make an irreparable loss of
the precious treasure of his chastity. As he entertained him self in this
thought, behold a young man of a most marvelous beauty appeared unto him,
and gave unto him a box on the ear, and that so fierce and soundly set on,
that he feld him flat upon the ground, saying unto him. Learn then, learn
thou for another time, to fly evil company, and so disappeared suddenly.

The scholar all shaking and trembling for very fear, got him self up some
while after, and waighing more seriously what had passed, knew more clearly,
that this young man, was his Angel gardien, which had delivered him that day
from so great danger, and had admonished him so charitably of the fault which
he had committed: for which cause he gave thanks unto God and to his good
Angel, making a firm purpose, to fly for the time to come more carefully
then ever before, all kind of evil company. And the better to assure that it
was not a dream, the cheek whereon the Angel smote, remained sweld sundry
days after. P. Francis. Albertin in his treatise of our Angel Gardien. c. 7.
ex speculo ex did. 10 ex 9. See also another as remarkable in the treatise
aforsaid c. 19. and here before c. 4.. 7. examp. 3. of S. Edmond. and in the 2.
book c. 3.. 4. exampl. 3.

If we have so great care to conserve our body from evil airs, and from all
that which may be hurtful to it, shall we not have the same of our soul? What
permutation shall a man give for his soul? Matt. 16. 26. Marc. 8.

. 2. Of the mindfulnes of the presence of God.
This also is a most singular remedy, for who is he, I pray you, unless he be
quite out of his wits, that dares and would offend, when he calls, to mind,
that God (that almighty and redoubted judge) sees even to the very bottom of
his heart?

In all thy ways think on him, and he will direct thee in thy steps. Pro.
3. 6.

I will show thee, o man, what is good, and what our Lord requires of thee;
verily to do judgment, and to love mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy
God. Mich. 6. 8.

He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he has turned away his face not
to see forever. psalm. 10. 11.

Remember God, and thou shall never sin, says S. Ignatius Martyr. epist. 6.

Behold the whole means never to sin, if one suppose God to be always nere
unto him. Clem. Alex. 1. 3. pedag. c. 5.

The remembrance of God, shuts the gate to all sin. S. Hierom. l. 7. c. 22.

Even as at the arriving of the Provost, thieves withdraw them selves from
their common hauntes: even so at the remembrance of the presence of God, the
infamous passions of the soul, are chased away, and it becomes the temple and
habitation of the Holy Ghost. But where the memory of God is not, there does
darkness dominiere with stench, and all kind of wickedness is there exercised.
S. Ephrem. l. de virtute tom. 2. c. 10.

Think thou that thou art alone, when thou committest fornication? And
rememberest not that the eyes of God, do behold the whole world? All the
holy Trinity is hard by thee, the Angels his ministers, the Cherubins and
Seraphins, which continually cry. Holy, holy, holy, all the earth is full of
thy majesty. Think thou, that in the brothel house Jesus Christ does not
behold thee, he who saw thee enter into the same? Think thou, that he sees
thee not committing adultery, he that sees the adultery which thou
conceiuest in thy soul? S. Amb. in psl. 118. Sermon. 1. O careless Christians!
o mortal men, how then live you!

You offend God, as if God saw you not. What, God, that great God, does he not
see you? He that is above you, beneath you, round about you, yea even within
you? GOD IS EVERY WHERE.

What do thou then (forgetful of thy God) what do thou?

Hearken in what place soever you be: Shall a man be hid in secrets, and shall
not I see him, says our Lord? Ierem. 23. 24.

Hear this, and tremble for fear, for GOD SEES ALL.

What say thou, thou who art forgetful of God? What do thou say? What, he
that planted the ear, shall he not hear? psl. 93. 9.

I live, says our Lord, according as you have spoken, I hearing it, so will I
do to you. Number. 24. 28.

Take heed then what you say, for GOD UNDERSTANDS ALL

Alas what think you in your heart? What do you think? What, know you not
then, that at that great day, he will visit and examine Jerusalem with torches?
Sophon. 1.

Deceive not your selves, it is a point most assured, that GOD KNOWS ALL.

Yea even the most secret thoughts. What, dare you then offend God in his own
presence?

No Christian, let us say now, let us say for ever; rather die, then be damned,
rather die, then be defiled, rather die, then to offend before the face of so
great, and so good a God. Dan. 13 28.

EXAMPLES.
1. The holy scripture, speaking of the old men who coueted carnally the chaste
Susanna, says. And they subverted their sense, and declined their eyes that
they would not see heaven, nor remember just judgments. Dan. 13. 9. And a little
after; Perplexities are to me on every fide, for if I shall do this, it is
death to me, and if I do it not, I shall not escape your hands. But it is
better for me, without the act, to fall into your hands, then to sin in the
sight of our Lord. v. 22. O right worthy and generous resolution!

2. S. Dorotheus Abbot, writes, that at the beginning when Dosithus his
disciple took the habit of religion, he gave this sentence, worthy to be
written in letters of gould. Let God be never out of thy heart, think always
that God is present with thee, and that thou art before his face. Which
Dosithus imprinted so deeply in his heart, that he never forgot it, no not in
his greatest sickness. And by this exercise of the presence of God, he profited
so well, that of a knight and soldiar of the world, of one debauched, and
utterly addicted unto vanities, he became a most perfect, and a most holy
religious person, and was seen after his death of diverse holy personages, most
glorious and triumphant in heaven amongst the holy Anchorets S. Doroth. in his
life.

3. Saint Catharine of Sienna, to keep her self always recollected amiddest
the distractions, and occupations which her mother prescribed her, made
(according as her heavenly spouse had taught her) an oratory of her heart, in
the midst whereof she placed her God. O most goodly and wholesome practice.
Raymond in her life.

4. Palladius affirms to have learned of a certain religious man called
Diocles, that a devout person, as soon as he leaves the remembrance of the
presence of God, becomes a beast, or else a devil. In hist. lausia. c. 93.

5. An unmannerly woman, who dwelt hard by the house, where S. Ephrem was one
day lodged in Edessa, came and solicited him to lubricitie. The Saint asked her
if she were content to come unto the open market, and that there he would
satisfy her demand. What (quoth she) dare we do this before men? If we dare
not do this before men (replied the Saint) how dare we to do it before God,
who understands all things, even the most secret, and is to judge us of all
our works? These words touched the woman so exceeding deeply, that detesting
this enterprise, and all her fore-passed life, from that very hour she gave
the farewell to the flesh and the world, retyring her self, according to the
council of the Saint, into a monastery, where she lived and died most holily.
Blessed Lord, what change does thy remembrance make within a heart! Give it us,
we beseech thee continually, to the end that this evil never arrive us, as to
sin in thy presence!

. 3. Of the remembrance of the most dolorous passion of our Lord.
O Christian, can thou offend thy God and thy Redeemer, when thou remembrest
that he was wounded for our iniquities, and that he was broken for our sins?
I say 53. 5.

Can thou well commit any kind of sin, when thou remembrest those
lamentable cries of thy Savior, all peirced and wounded upon a Cross. O all
ye that pass by the way, attend and see, if there be sorrow like to my
sorrow. Thren. 1. 12.

If in the green wood they do these things (that is to say, to him who was
even justice it self) in the dry what shall be done? Luc. ^3. 31.

Who is he so irreligious (says S. Bernard) that remembringe himself of the
pass^on of his Savior, is not touched with compunction? Who so proud, that is
not humbled? Who so choleric, that is not appeased? Who so voluptuous, that
is not cooled? Who so wicked, that is not restrained? Who so malicious that
does not penance? And this with great reason, since the passion of our Lord,
has moved even the earth it self, bruised the stones, and opened the
monuments? In sermon. seria 4. heb. poenosae.

Acknowledge (says the same Saint in another place) how grievous the wounds
are, for the which it behooved that the Son of God should be wounded, if they
had not been deadly, and to death eternal, never had the Son of God died for
their remedy. Ser. 3. de natiuit.

Greater love then this no man has that a man yield his life for his friends.
Joan 15. 13. And if love be not requi^ed but by love, art thou not more cruel,
and more in human the^ the Tigers, that remembering thee of this exceeding
charity of the Son of God (who gave his dearest life for thee) thou will
offend him, and crucify him again anew? Heb. 6. 6.

EXAMPLES.
1. Zenophon writes, that Cyrus king of Persia, having upon a day caused
Tigranes king of Armenia (whom together with his wife he held captive) to
come unto his table, demanded of him, how much he would give to ransom his
wife? I should be content (replied Tygranes) to give for her all that kingdom
which thou by force have taken from me: and yet more, all my blood and my life.
Cyrus admiring so great affection, restored them their realm and their
liberty. A while after, Tygranes being in his palace, demanded of her, what
she thought of the beauty of Cyrus? In sooth (quoth she) I do not know what
you would say, nor what Cyrus is; for all the time of our cap^iuitie, I never
cast mine eye upon other, then upon him, who was ready to give his blood and
his life for the love of me. O Christian, admire and imitate this pagan
princess. Thou have before thine eyes, the Son of God, who was not only
content to give his life and his blood for thee, but de facto has given it:
would thou the^ leave him, to love a vile and catife creature?

2. Our Lord said upon a day unto S. Gertrude, that a man casting his eyes upon
the crucifix, ought to imagine, that our Lord who is nailed thereon, says unto
him. Thou see what I have endured for thee, to suffer my self to be hanged
all naked upon a Gross etc. and yet notwithstanding I love thee ^o much, that
if it were expedient for thy salvation, I would endure for thee alone, all that
which I have endured for the whole world. Lud. Blos. Mo^il. spirit. c. 1.

He sometime said the self same unto S. Carpus, as S. Denis of Areopagita
reports. Ep. 2. ad. Demophil. and Baron. ^m. 1. anno 59.

3. But he said yet more unto Saint Bridgit; I love men (said he unto her) ^t
this present, even as much as I did when I died for them: yea if it were
^ossible, I would be ready to dye for ^uery one in particular, and as many
^imes as there are damned souls in ^ell. Ibid.

4. S. Collecta, reformer of the or^er of S. Clare, praying to our Lady ^the
behalf of sinners, our B. Lady appeared unto her, with a platter full of
pieces of flesh, as of an infant newly slain, and showing her the same, said
unto her. How will thou that I pray for them, who by their sins (as much as
lies in their power) cut and dismember my Son into more pieces ^hen here
thou see? Surius tom. 7. ex Stephano Iuliaco S. Coletae contemporaneo.

5. S. Elzear, Count of Arie in Prouence, being asked by his wife Delphina,
whence it was that he never troubled nor vexed him self; answered, that he set
before him, the injuries done unto our B. Lord, and that at the self instant,
his choler ceased. Surius 27. of Sept. c. 23.

See thou now, o Christian, the singular efficacy of this remedy.

. 4. Of the memory of death.
Who is he that would offend God, that does reflect upon his death? Who
pondereth, that peradventure he is already arrived to the last degree and step
of his life, and now at the point to make the last leap, unto happy, or
unhappy eternity?

It is appointed to men, to die once, says S. Paul unto the Heb. 9. 27.

I know that thou will deliver me to death (quoth holy Job) where a house is
appointed for every one that lives. Job. 30. ^2. And yet nether know we when,
nor how.

Watch ye therefore (says our Lord) because you know not the day nor the
hour. Mat. 25. 13. Whether at eueninge, or at midnight, or at the cock
crowinge, or in the moringe, lest cominge upon a sudden he find you
sleepinge: and that which I say to you, I say to all, watch. Marc. 13. 35.

In all thy works remember thy latter end, and thou will not sin for ever.
Eccl 7. 40.

Thou art afraid to die ill, and art not afraid to live ill. Correct thine evil
life, for he can never dye ill, who has lived well. S. Aug. l. de disciplina
christiana c. 2.

There is nothing which does more withhould a man from sin, then the memory
of death. Ibid. l. 2. de Genesis cont. Maniche. ser. 3. de Innoc. Cassian c. 6.
col. 10.

He who has promised pardon unto the penitent, has not promised to the sinner
the day of to morrow. We must then fear continually this latter day, which we
can never foresee. S. Greg. Hom. 10. in euang.

Fleres, si scires, vnum, tua tempora, mensem,
Rides, cum non sit, forsitan vna dies.
If one months certainty thou had to live,
And could not have thy death deferd no longer,
Thy eyes would pour forth tears, thy heart, would greiue,
For that thou had not fallen to penance sooner.
Yet now uncertain of the shortest day,
Thou spendst thy time in dalliance sport and play.
It is a thing of great moment, whereon eternity does depend. Eternity
depends upon death: death upon life; life upon an instant. Choose whither
thou will, if once thou be lost, it is for all eternity.

EXAMPLES OF SUDDEN death.
1. The children of Job feasting together, were suddenly ouer-whelmed with the
fall of a house Job. 1.

Isboseth (a) Sisara (b) Holofernes (c) lost they not their lives, in the dead
of their sleep? (a) 2. Reg. 4. (b) Judge. 4. (c) Judith.

Balthazar making great cheer, received the sentence of his death. Dan.

Manlius Torquatus in eating a cake. P. Quintus Scapulus in supping. Decimus
Sauferus in dyning. Apeius Saufeius in supping off an egg. Fabius Maximus
eating of milk, swallowed down a hair, and died. Plin. hist. l. 7. c. 53.

The poet Anacreon, swallowinge down the stone of a reasin, at a weddinge.
Plato.

Foulques Count of Aniou, runinge after a Hare. Cardinal Columnus Viceroy of
Naples, in the time of Charles ^he fifth, tasting of Figs, refresht in ice,
gave up the ghost betwixt the arms of his servants. P. Coton in the sermon of
death.

And that foolish Richman in the gospel, who thought him self so sure of his
health and of his substance, heard he not all unexpected the sentence of his
soddaine death? Luc. 12.

Finally, deceive not thy self, for death slays in every place, Aristobulus
in the bathe; The Apostata Emperor amidst his army, Philippes by the Altar,
Caligula in a cave under ground, Carloman a hunting, Caesar in the senate,
Erricus by his mother, Alboinus by his wife, Ariston by his servants, Baiazeth
by his son, Mustapha by his father, Conrad by his brother, and Cato by him
self.

EXAMPLES OF THOSE who refrained from sin, by the remembrance of death.
1. A certain brother Converse an Alman called Leffard, having for many years
exercised the office of a porter in his monastery, at the last debauched him
self, thinking that (notwithstanding his nobility and decrepid age) he was
still put unto so base an office, he who might be in pleasures and delights in
the world: and so resolved to leave his monastery and his habit. Now as he
was on a night in this fond fancy, waytinge for the breaking of the day to
run his way, behold a venerable old man which appeared unto him, and
commanded him to follow him, the which he did. They came at the last to the
gate of the Church, which opened of its own accord; from thence they went into
the churchyard, where they were not so soon entered, but all the graves opened
of them selves. The old man caused this religious to draw nere to the one, and
showed him the carrion that was therein. See thou (quoth he) this man? Thou
shall be like unto him within a while, why then wilt forsake thy cloister? From
thence he would have led him to another, but Laffard had conceived such horror
at the sight of that one, the he besought the old man to bring him back unto
his dortorie, swearing unto him, that from that time forward, he would never
more think of departinge thence, which he performed. Vincent de Bauuais in his
miroir. Hist. and P. Albertinus in his treatise of our Angel Gardien c. 6.

O how many such repentants would there be at this present day in the world,
if only by a serious reflection of spirit, they would look down in to the
sepulcher! Arise and go down into the potters house, said God our Lord unto
leremie (that is, to the church yardes and sepulchers where the pots of earth,
that is, bodies are turned into earth by the almighty hand of him that made
them) and there thou shall hear my words Ierem. 18. 2.

2. A young effeminat fellow, who could by no means or reason be brought into
the right way, was at lenght visited of a good religious man, who at his
departing from him, said unto him. Under thee shall the mothe be strawed, and
worms shall be thy covering. Isay. 14. 11. and thereupon withdrew him self.
These words (though few) yet were not spoken in vain, for this young man
imprinted them so profoundly in his heart, that whasoeuer he did, he could not
think of any other thing. Hence by little and little, he had a holy disgust of
the world, and in the end quite forsook it, and became religious. Plautus l.
3. de bono stat. relig. c. 38.

3. Theodosius chief superior of a monastery, taught his disciples for the
first foundation of a religious life, to have ever before their eyes, the
remembrance of death; And to this effect commanded them, every one to make him
a grave, the sight whereof should reduce to their minds, that they must die.
Sur. tom. 1. Ribad. 11. of Ian. ex Metaphrast.

4. Lord Francis of Borgia Duke of Gandia and Viceroy of Catalognia: by one
only sight of the dead body of the Empress Isabella, wife to Charles the fifth,
was so touched, that he resolved from that time to forsake the world: and
within a while after, having given order to his affairs, entered into the
Society of Jesus, and therein died the third General, leaving to all persons,
great opinion of his sanctity. Tom. 1. Hist. of the Society.

5. A noble Knight named Rouland, having passed a whole day in feasting and
dancing, as he was returned to himself, he fell to consider, how all the
pleasures of that day were past and vanished, and that all the rest that he
could take, would slide away in the same manner: and in the end what shall I
have (said he within him self) what will all these vanities avail me? These
thoughts lasted him the whole night, and made such a breach in his heart, that
the morning being come, he went and asked the habit of the Friar Preachers,
received it, and lived and dyed therein most holily. Plautus as before.

6. A certain Damsel, wholly given unto vanities, refused all the pennances
which her Co^fessar proposed unto her, but at the last she accepted this, as
the most easy of all the rest in her opinion, to say within her self, as
often as she washed her hands; This flesh shall be eaten up of worms: she
performed it, and with such good success, that she wholly changed her self
within a while after, and became so virtuous, as she had been vicious, and as
exemplar, as she had been scandalous. P. Coton in his sermon of death.

7. A monk of Egypt, being upon the point to satisfy his sensuallitie, was
hindered by the remembrance of death, as he confessed him self to S. John
Climacus.

8. Another which had lived very licentiously and scandalously, fell sick and
was reduced to the point of death, yea held for dead. And having been an hour
in that estate, he came to him self, and presently besought his companions to
withdraw them selves, and to stop and damme up his chamber door with stones.
The which was done, and so shut up, lived there for twelve years, without
speakinge to any person, and eating nothing but bread and water, having his
eyes continually fixed upon the self same place, with abundance of tears. At
last, when he was to die, his fellows brake a passage into his chamber, and
praid him to give then some words or council of edification. Pardon me (said
he unto them) for no man can ever sin, who does effectually remember him of
his death. S. John Climachus, as an eye witness, relates the same, in his book
entitled. Scala coeli. grad 6.

9. M. Guido Priest of Niuelle, being Regent at Schonege in Hainault, having
thorough curiosity, cast his eye a little too fixedlie upon a woman, was in
such wise tempted, that for the space of three years he could do nothing but
think of her, although she was dead. And seeing that this tentation was most
perilous unto him, to surmount the same, he went by night, to open the grave
of the same woman, and being slidden down therein, he applied and laid his
nostrils unto the carrion, as long as he was able to suffer the stink that
proceeded thence, but at the last he fell backward as half dead. Being come to
him self, he issued thence most victorious, in such sort, that he never after
felt any provocation of the flesh. Tho. de Cantip. affirms to have known
this Priest, and writes the history in his 2. book of Ezech. c. 30.

10. A holy Ermit did almost the like: for not able to blot out of his
imagination, a woman which was already dead, he went into her grave to cut a
piece of her flesh, which he applied afterward unto his nostrils, as often as
the remembrance of this woman returned unto him, and the stink which issued
forth of this rotten flesh, rendered him as many times victorious. In vitis
patrum. p. 2. de fornic. n. 10.

. 5. Of the memory of Judgment.
The memory of Judgment, is a most strong bridle, to with hold and stay a
man in the course of sin. For who (I pray you) is so hardy as to commit any
sin, who considers that within a little while (and perhaps also the self
same day) he is to give an account of all the thoughts, words and works of
his whole life, unto a Judge infinitely just, infinitely wise, infinitely
powerful, and receive from his mouth (according to the good or evil he shall
have done) the definitive and irreuocable sentence, either of life, or death
eternal?

It is appointed to men to die once, and after this the judgment. Heb. 9. 27.

We must all be manifest before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the proper things of the body, according as he has done, either
good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. 10.

I will search Jerusalem with lamps Sophonia 1. 12.

It is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10. 31.

What shall I do, when God shall rise to judge? And when he shall ask, what
shall I answer him? etc. I have always feared God: and cap. 9. 28. I feared
all my works, knowing that thou did not spare the offender.

What can a man imagine more dreadful, more repleat with anxiety, and vehement
solicitude, then to be presented at this so terrible tribunal, there to be
judged, and to awaite there upon a Judge so exact, and for a sentence so
doubtful? S. Bern. Ser. 8. in psalm. qui habitat.

Before sickness take medicine, and before judgment examine thy self, and in the
sight of God, thou shall find propitiation. Eccl. 18. 19. 20.

Fear the examen of the Judge, dread him who says by his prophet, in that day
I will search Jerusalem with lamps: he is sharp of eyesight, he will suffer
nothing to escape. S. Ber. Ser. in 55. in Cant.

The just do fear whatsoever they do, considering before what Judge, they
must one day infallibly be presented. S. Greg l. 8. Moral. c. 13.

O what fear and affrightment will there then be, what tears and groninges?
For if the pillars of heaven do tremble before him, what then shall sinners
do? If the just shall scarcely be saved, where shall sinners then appear? Who
is he that redouteth not a Judge infinitely powerful, infinitely wise, infinitely
just? Innoc. 3. l. 3. of the contempt of the world c. 15.

Sensual love, and the prickinge of lubricitie, shall soon be extinguished, if
one do set before his eyes the latter judgment, said S. Anthony to his
Disciples. S. Athanas. in his life.

As often as thou feel thy self provoked forward to any sin, call to
mind the day of judgment, and thou shall by this means give a bridle unto thy
soul. S. Basil. in psl. 35. S. Ambrose also says the same, ad virg. lap. c.
8. Climachus. grad. 20.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Hubertus Bishop of Liege, said to his servants at the hour of his
death, that he greatly feared the judgment of God, whereat he was to render
account of all his life. Sur. 3. of Nouemb.

2. S. Hilarion likewise, a little before he rendered up his blessed soul, said.
Go forth my soul, go forth, what do thou fear, thou have served God
nighe seauentie years, why fear thou then to go forth? S. Hierom in his
life.

3. S. Arsenius trembling and bitterly weeping a little before his death,
demanded by his disciples wherefore he wept, answered. Since the time I have
been religious, I never was without this fear. Sur. ex Metaphrast. c. 27. July
19. If the Saints them selves do tremble, what shall the sinners do at that
dreadful hour?

4. In the year 1082. a Doctor of Paris, reputed of all for a holy man, being
dead, as they read for him the office of the dead, being arrived at the Lesson,
Responde mihi, he lifted him self up out of his coffin in the open church
before all, and said. I have been accused before the just judgment of God. This
gave great matter of fear unto all, and was cause that the office was deferred
until the morrow. Upon the morrow they began again, and being come to the
self same words, he that was dead arose again, and said. I have been judged,
by the judgment of God. These words were very fearful, but yet gave clearly
enough to understand the estate of his soul: wherefore it was thought good, to
defer this office yet once more. It can not be spoken how many people ran
flockinge on the morrow, to so strange a spectacle. They singe as before, and
when they were come to the self same words, the dead arose again, and said
with a voice, much more lamentable then before. I am condemned by the just
judgment of God.

S. Bruno was then amongst the other spectators (a Doctor of Paris, and Cano^
of Rhemes) who affrighted with so horrible a fact, resolved from that instant,
freely to forsake, all the vanities of the world; and to this purpose having
found forth six others of the same resolution, went together with them, and
shut up them selves in one of the desert mountains, which are seated upon the
confines of France and Sauoy, and there gave beginning to the holy order of
Charterhouse monks. Franc. Puteus general of the same order, upon the life of
S. Bruno. Sur. tom. 5. and Ribad. 6. of October.

Thus the Saints forsook all the occasions of sin, at the only memory of
their judgment, and thou (o Christian) remembering thee of a thing so horrible,
which most infallibly also must arrive to thee, dare thou to dwell in the
occasions of sin? See that which follows after.

. 6. Of hell, and of the Eternity of the accursed.
If the fear of death, or some temporal pain, does hinder us ordinarily to
do that, which otherwise we would do, the apprehension of the evident danger
of a death and punishment which is eternal, shall it not have the force to
bridle our will, not to consent unto some sin?

There is a hell, it is a point we must believe, a place designed for all those
which die in mortal sin; where in the company of the wicked Angels, they
are deprived for ever of the sight of God and of all good, and of the joyful
society of the Saints, and plunged in a fire unspeakably active, to be bruned
therein so long as God shall be God, for ever without end, without truce,
without repose.

Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after this have no more to do,
but I will show you whom ye shall fear, fear him, who after he has killed,
has power to cast into hell. Luc. 12. 4.

Then the king will say (to wit, at the day of judgment) to the wayters, bind
his hands and feet, and cast him into the utter darkness, there shall be
weepinge and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22. 13.

Then he shall say to them also that shall be at his left hand, get ye away
from me, you cursed into fire everlasting, which was prepared for the devil
and his Angels. Mat. 25. 41.

The servants of the goodman of the house coming said to him. Sir, did thou
not sow good seed in thy field, whence then has it cocle? Will thou that we
go and gather it up? And he said No, lest perhaps gathering up the cocle, you
may root up the wheat also together with it. Suffer both to grow until the
harvest, and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather up first
the cockle, and bind it in bundels to burn, but the wheat gather ye into my
barn. Mat. 13. 27.

The sinagogue of sinners, is as to we gathered together, and their consumation
a flame of fire. The way of sinners is paued with stones, and their end hell
and darkness, and pains. Eccl. 21. 10,

Which of you can dwell with devouring fire? Which of you shall dwell with
everlasting heates? Isay 33. 14.

The rich man dyed, and he was buried in hell. Luc. 16. 22.

Consider what an evil it is, to be excluded from the swee^e contentment of
the sight of God; to be deprived of the most happy company of all the
Saints; to be bannished from heaven, and to die to everlasting life; to be
cast with the devil and his Angels, into an eternal fire; where the second
death is; where damnation, is exile; the pain, life; not to feel in this
fire, that which does lighten; to feel that which does torment; to suffer the
horrible crakinges of a fiery furnace; to have the eyes put out with a blind
obscurity, of the smokinge abisse; to be plunged into the bottom of the
infernal waves; to be everlastingly gnawen with most prickinge worms. To
consider these things, and many more, is nothing else, but to bid adieu to
all vices, and to refrain all carnal allurements. Prosp. l. 3. de vit.
contemp. c. 12.

But what is it to burn eternally? (will you say unto me) what does this word
Eternal or Eternity mean?

Eternity, is a continuation of time always present, or else the measure of
all continuation, says S. Thomas 1. p. q. 10. a. 6.

It is a circle, whereof Always is the center, and Ever is the circumference.

The measure of eternity, is Always: as long as Always shall last, so long
shall Eternity last: so long as heaven shall be heaven, so long as God shall
be God, so long shall the blessed be blessed in heaven, and so long shall the
damned be damned, and burn for ever, always, and world without end.

Imagine to your self a mountain, as high and as large as the whole world,
and that by the permission of God, a little Wrenne (the least of all the birds)
should come once in every hundred thousand years to bear away in her bille or
break, as much of this mountain, as the tenth part of a grain of mustard
seed, so that at every million of years, she should bear away only the
quantity of a grain of mustard seed, when should all this mighty mountain
be removed away? Yet notwithstanding this should one day be, for albeit such,
yet should it be finit in all its parts; And if God should give this hope unto
the damned, to be delivered after this little Wrenne had thus tra^sported the
whole mountain, they would be conforted maruellouslie. But alas, after so
long a term, they shall have as long to burn as they had before. Dionis
Rickel Charterhouse Monk in the place entitled; the looking glass of the
lovers of the world.

What is Eternity (says Adamus Sasbout) who shall expres or comprehend, what
Eternity is? I think a thousand years, I think a thousand millions of
years, I think as many millions of years, as all the time contains
moments, which has slid and past away since the creation of the world, and
shall pass unto the end: yet nevertheless I have thought nothing, that
approaches to Eternity. O Eternity, Eternity, how long art thou, without
bottom, without brimme, without end. Hom. upon the first sunday of Lent.

O heavens stand astonished, for a pleasure of a moment, men purchase eternal
torments! Eternal! Eternal!

EXAMPLES.
1. A certain Religious man, demanded upon a day of another monk named
Achilles, whence it came, that being in his ce^le, he was always weary and
slothful? The holy old man made him answer, it is because thou have not yet
seen, the repose which we expect, nor the torments which we fear. For if thou
consideredst well and maturely these things, although thy celle were full of
worms, and that thou were plunged therein to the very neck, thou would
nevertheless remain therein very gladly and content. In vitis Patrum did. 2.
parag. 103.

2. S. Fursinus patron of Peronne, having seen by the permiss^on of God, in
one of his trances, the pains of the damned, conceived so great a fear, that
in the very depth of winter, and most peircing frost, at the holy remembrance
thereof (albeit he had but one simple habit only) sweat throughout his whole
body, great drops of sweat. Ven. Bedahist. Aug. l. 3. c. 19. Alas, what
would he have done, had he endured them reallie?

3. S. John Climacus, affirms to have known a certain Converse (cook of a
monastery) who each time that he approached to his fire, he always wept. And
being asked why he wept, he answered. When I see the fire, I always think
upon the fire of hell, and forthwith I melt into tears, for the compassion
which, I have of the poor damned. Clim Grad. 4.

4. A certain Clearke, about the year of our Lord 1090. appeared to his
companion, saying that he was damned, for that not believing the immortallitie
of the soul, he had had no kind of care to do good works. And to give to
understand what kind of pains he endured, he wip^e his forehead with his
hand, and let a drop fall upon the flesh of the other, which peirced it at the
same instant, and left a hole therein as big as a hazell nut, together with most
terrible pains, and then said unto him; This fountain shall be unto thee a
perpetual memory of my misery, and aspur unto thee, to incite thee to lead a
better life then I have lived: and if thou be wise (quoth he) thou will go
render thy self religious nere S. Melanius: which being said, he disappeared,
returning to his accursed center, there to burn in all eternity. The other,
for fear lest one day he should follow him, turned back from the way of hell
which he had taken until that time, and impathed him self in the good and
happy way of heaven, making him self a religious man. Vincent. spec. hist. l.
25. c. 89 Math. Paris in hist. Ang. in the year 1072. in the time of William
king of England. What will it profit thee, o mortal man, to have two or three
days, weeks, months, or years of contentment, if thou must be afterward
tormented and tortured for all Eternity? That is momentary which delights,
that eternal which tormenteth.

. 7. Of the memory of heaven, and of the eternity of the blessed.
O Israel, how great is the house of God, and how great is the place of his
posession? It is great, and has no end, high, and unmeasurable. Baruch 3. 24.

And he showed me the holy city of Jerusalem (Apoc. 21. 10.) The building
of the wall thereof, was of Iaspar. (v. 18. the gates, of Sapphire and Emraulds
(Tob. 13.19.) and the street of the city, pure gold (Apoc. 21.21.) There are
nether the coldes of winter, nor the heates of summer, but an everlasting
springtime: nothing is heard thoroughout all this city, but a perpetual
Allel^ia. Tob. 13. 20. Farewell tears from all those that are there, for they
shall never weep more, for God shall wip^ away all tears from their eyes, and
death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor crying (Apoc. 21. 4.) They all follow
the Lamb, who leads them to the living waters, and to the fountains of the
water of life. ibid: where they drink their full draughts of that Angellicall
Nectar, which contains in it, all the pleasures and contentments that can be
wished.

Will you know how great this contentment is? Eye has not seen, no^ care
has heard, nether has it ascend^ into the heart of man, what things Go^ has
prepared for them that love him. Isay 64. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 9.

The passions of this time, are not condign to the glory to come, that shall
be revealed in us. Romans 8. 18.

For that our tribulation, which presently is momentary and light, works
above measure exceedingly, an eternal weight of glory in us. 2. Cor. 4. 17.

S. Peter said upon a day unto our Lord. Behold we have left all things, and
have followed thee, what therefore shall we have? And Jesus said to them. Amen I
say to you, that you which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the
Son of man shall sit in the seat of his majesty, you also shall sit upon
twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that has
left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
posesse life everlasting. Mat. 19. 27. etc.

Come ye blessed of my father, posesse you the kingdom, prepared for you from
the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and you gave me to eat: I
was a thirst, and you gave me to drink. Mat. 25. 34.

For this sovereign good it was, that all the Saints have suffered so much,
choosing rather to be afflicted, yea rather to loose their lives after a
thousand torments, then to enjoy for a little while the delights of sin, for
they looked unto the remuneration. Heb. 11. 26.

I have fought a good fight (says the same Apostle) I have consummate my
course, I have kept the says. Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a
crown of justice, which our Lord will render to me in that day, a just judge:
and not only to me, but to them also that love his cominge. 2. Tim. 4. 7.

S. Augustine, by the pleasures of this life, coniectured the contentments of
the life eternal. If thou do us so much good Lord (quoth he) in this
prison, what will thou do us in thy palace? If there be so much contentment
in this day of tears, what will thou give us in the day of marriage? Silloq. c.
21.

These are certain testimonies drawn forth of the book of God, touching the
pleasures of heaven, and of the life eternal. Now so long as thou art the
friend and child of God by grace, thou art inheritor of all these goods. If
sons, heirs also, heirs truly of God, and coheires of Christ. Romans 8. 17.
Would thou then expose and adventure at a cast at dice, or a momentarie
pleasure, all the right thou have to an enheritance so rich, and so
delightful? If thou offend God mortallie, thou loosest in an instant all this
right.

Who shall ascend into the mount of our Lord, who shall stand in his holy
place? the innocent of hands (that is in his works) and of clean heart. psalm.
23. 3.

There shall not enter into it any pollu^ed thing. Apoc. 21. 27.

Labor the more, that by good works you may make sure your vocation and
election, etc. for so there shall be ministered unto you abundantly an entrance
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus. 2. Pet. 1. 10.

What lamentations read we of the miserable damned, at the consideration of so
great a good, as they have exchanged and forgone for a fading pleasure? Sap. 5.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Francis being one day extremely afflicted with the headache, gave
thanks to God, and asked strength of him to suffer the same; and behold he
heard a voice which said unto him. Francis, if all the earth were converted
into gold, the sea, the rivers, and the fountains into baulme, the rocks and
stones, into precious pearls; and further that thou had found a treasure as
much more precious then all this, as gold is more estimable then the earth,
baulme then water, precious pearls then common stones, and that it were given
thee for this infirmity, should thou not have matter to rejoice thee? Alas
Lord (said Saint Francis) I am not worthy of such a treasure. The voice replied
unto him; Know notwithstanding, that this treasure is, the life eternal which I
prepare thee, and this headache which thou endurest, is the earnest. Tom. 2.
Chron. frat. minor. l. 1. c. 51. The glory which I expect (would he sometimes
say) is so great, that all pain, all sickness, all humiliation, all
persecution, all mortification, does rejoice me.

2. S. Thomas, being asked of his sister (to whom he appeared) what the glory
of heaven was: until the time that you have tried it (quoth he) no man is ever
able for to tell you. Rib. in his life.

3. S. Adrian, being as yet a soldiar, of the age of eight and twenty years,
behoulding the co^stancy of the martirs amidst the sharpest of their torments,
asked of them, what good they hoped to have by those torments? who made him
answer; We hope for those goods which nether eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor yet has entered into the heart of man. This answer moved him so
much, that he also would be enrolled in the catalogue of the martyrs, and
endured constantly to have his members cut asunder piece by piece, in the sight
of his wife, who likewise encouraged him thereunto. Ribad. upon his life.

4. Theophilus advocate, having received certain Roses and Apples from
heaven, which S. Dorothe dying, sent unto him by an Angel, found them so fair
and so good, that desiring to enter in the garden from whence they were
gathered, he became Christian, and suffered martyrdom. Ribad. in the life of
S. Dorothe virg. and mart.

5. Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chancellor of England being in prison, his wife came
and importuned him to condescend unto the pleasure of the King, presentinge
unto him on the one side, her future poverty, and the miserable estate of all
her family: and on the other part, the honors and riches which king Harry had
promised him, if he would be on his side. Sir Thomas demanded of her; How long
(my dearly beloved) shall we enjoy these honors and riches? Very easily yet
(quoth she) these twenty years. Then Sir Thomas, all angry with her, said
unto her; Get thee gone (quoth he) thou foolish merchant: what, shall I for
twenty years of temporal goods, loose all the infinite goods of life
eternal? God forbid that I ever make any such market, yea, know that I had
rather lie in this prison as long as I live, suffer confiscation of my goods,
all kinds of contumelies, and death it self, then to expose so foole-hardily,
my felicity: as indeed he did, for he was put to death for this cause.
Sanderus de schismate Angl.

Would to God we did the same, as often as over flesh (like to this woman)
incites us to sin: and that at the smiting of the clock, yea in all times, we
had in our mouth and in our heart, this short sentence.

O glory eternal, what is it to have thee, and what is it to loose thee!
The true Christian Catholic, or The manner how to live Christianly, THE
SECOND BOOK.
THE PROLOGVE.
IT is an error of the heretics (who under the name of a Christian, which
they carry with false marks, and under the skin of a sheep, nourish the heart
of a woulfe) that to go to heaven, it is not necessary to do good works.
Such an one was Valentinus as S. Ireneus testifies (l. 1. c. 1.) and S.
Epiphanius (l. 1. cont here is. c. 32.) And Eunomius and Aetius his Disciple, of
whom S. Aug. makes mention (l. de heresibus c. 54.) and in the age last past,
Luther, Calvin, Melancthon etc. (Bellar. tom. 11. controuer. l. 4. c. 20. de
iustificatione.) Yea Luther says, that faith is nothing worth, unless it be
deprived of all good works, how little soever. Did any ever hear, more absurd
and pernicious doctrine? Thou art better taught, o true Christian Catholic
(and it is by the fruits also of thy good works, that the sanctity of thy
soul is known:) for thou houldest with the universal Church, according to
the lesson, which the holy Ghost has taught her in the scripture, and the holy
Fathers, that he who intends to go to heaven, ought to to keep the
commandments of God, and to exercise him self in good works.

This is that which our Lord said unto a certain Doctor in S. Mat. 19. 17.
etc. 7. 22. Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, (like as heretics
do, who have often in their mouth the name of the Lord, but have the devil in
their heart) shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven.

Lord (says David) who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy
holy hill? Psalm. 14. 1.

Thou will render to every one according to his works. Ps. 61. 13. Mat. 16.
27.

And if I should have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
not charity, I am nothing. 1. Cor. 13. 2.

See the sentence of S. Peter, in the 1. book last chap.. 7.

We have before brought and alleged that, whick makes for the extirpation of
vice; And since it is not enough for a Gardener, to have rooted up the naughty
herbs out of his garden unless he likewise sow good seed therein, and set
good plants, I will with Gods asistance in this second book, give advice unto
the Christian, who desires to live as a good and virtuous Catholic, ought do
do, and show him the means proper and easy, how to plant in his soul such
virtues as are most necessary, for the exercise of good works: following the
self same order which I did before, to wit, of holy Scripture, holy Fathers,
and Examples.

THE 1. CHAPTER. Of the sign of the Cross.
THE soldiars of this world accustom, to wear upon them a scarf or riban, of
the same color of their Ensign, to give to understand, under what head and
banner they bear arms. In like manner the Christian, who is the soldiar of
Jesus Christ, and serves under the sta^dart and ensign of the Cross, has a
custom to give this sign (a) at all times, and in every hour, imprinting it,
either on his forehead, on his mouth, or on his breast (b) in the morninge at
his up risinge, in the eueninge at his down lying, at the striking of the
clock, in yaninge, both before and after work, eating, drinking, and in each
necessity: which from all antiquity has been used in the Church (c) yea both
prefigured and fore-tould by the Prophets (d) in the old law, and taught and
recommended by our B. Savior in the new. (e)

(a) S. Ephrem l. de ver a poenitentia c. 3. S. Aug. l. de Cat. rud. c. 20. (b)
S. Ambrose de Isaac and anima c. 8. (c) Tertul. de corona milit. c. 3. (d)
Ezech. ^. (e) Mat. 28.

. 1. Of the ancient use and custom, to make the sign of the Cross, at the
beginning and ending of our works: and how dangerous it is, either to eat or
drink, not making before hand this holy sign.
The prophet Ezechiel, saw upon a day six men enter into the temple of
Jerusalem, and heard a voice which commanded them, to pass thorough the mids
of the city, and to strike or kill without mercy, all the inhabitants, except
every one upon whom they should see the sign of Thau. Ezech. 9. 5.

S. John in the Apoc. c 7. 1. saw four Angels, who had commandment from
almighty God, to afflict all the men upon the earth. And as they went to
execute this commandment, another Angel came from the risinge of the sun,
having the sign of the living God, who turning him self toward the others
said. Hurt not the earth and the sea, nor the trees, till we sign the servants
of our God in their foreheades. And S. John says, that the number of those
that were thus signed, were a hundred forty four thousand, of every tribe of
Israel. Ibid. v. 4.

Our Lord said unto his Apostles. Going therefore teach ye all nations, bap
tising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Mat. 28. 19.

Tertullian who lived in the year of our Lord 198. says, that the true
Christian is accustomed in entering in, going forth, in putting on his clothes,
at his vprising, at his letting down at the table, when candles are lighted,
when he goes to bed, and when he sets him down to rest him, in all his
conversation, and in all his exercises, to make the sign of the Cross upon
his forehead. If one ask you (quoth he) what the origin is of such like
things? Answer, tradition has left them, custom has confirmed them, and
faith has practiced them. lib. de corona milit. c. 3.

S. Cyrill catechisinge a Christian, says as follows. Be not ashamed to
confess the Crucifix, engraue with thy fingars confidently, the sign of the
Cross upon thy forehead, and on every other thing, upon thy bread, upon thy
drink, at thy going out, at thy coming in etc. Cyrill. Hier. Cat. 13. The same
S. Amb. says of Isaac and the soul. c. 8. S. Basil in his book of the holy
Ghost. c. 27. S. Hier. ad Eustoch. de custod. virg. S. Aug. de Cat. rud. c. 20.
See thou then (o Christian) that it is not a new thing to use this sign?

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Gregory the great, writes in his dialogues, that a certain religious
woman was posessed of the devil, in earing the leaf of a lettice, for not
making thereon before hand the sign of the Cross. L. 1. dialog. c. 4.

2. Ioannes Niderus, of the order of the Preachers, writes to have understood
from the mouth of a Doctor in divinity, and inquisitor of his order, as an eye
witness, that a religious man of the covent of Boisleduc, was possessed also of
the devil, tasting but the leaf of a cabbedge, ommitting to make thereon the
sign of the Cross. l. 3. formicarij. c. 1.

3. S. Bennet, having made the sign of the Cross upon a pot, wherein some
illwillers of his had put poison, and presented it to him, the pot broke in
pieces, and all the liquor was sted a ground, as if the sign of the Cross,
had been unto it the blow of a stone. S. Greg. l. 2. Dtal. 6. 3.

4. A gentleman of Arras, in the low contries, having prepared in his house a
most sumptuous banquet for King Cloitarus, and for S. Vaast, Bishop of the
said city; as the Saint had set his foot within the place where the banquet
was, he made the sign of the Cross, and behold instantly all the potts,
cups, glasses, and vessels, broke and cracked all in pieces. The King and
the asistants astonished thereat, S. Vaast said unto them, that these vessels
polluted with panims superstitions, could not suffer the sign of the Cross,
which he had made upon them in entering in. Doctor du Val in in the life of S.
Vaast 6. of Feb. Is not this a marvelous virtu of this sign.

5. Ribadeneira in the life of S. John the Evangelist writes, that a certain
Christian finding him self pressed by his creditors, not having wherewith to
content and pay them, all in despair, resolved for to kill him self, and for
this purpose had bought of a Jew a poisoned drink. But yet before he drank
it, he made thereon the sign of the holy Cross, and behold it did him no
manner of harm. He returned to the Jew, and made his complaint: he astonished
thereat, gave him another yet more stronger. But having taken it in the self
same fashion as he had the former, he received no kind of damage thereby. The
Jew gave thereof in his presence to a dog, and the dog died instantly. Then he
enquired of the Christian, what he had done before he drank it. Who answered,
that he had done no other thing, save only made upon it the sign of the
Cross, according to the custom of all good Christians. The Jew admiring the
virtu of the Christian ceremonies, went and sought out S. John Evangelist,
recounted unto him the fact aforsaid, and caused him self to be baptized.
Afterward S. John made the Christian that was thus in despair to come unto
him, bearing a little bundle of herbs, and having made thereon the sign of the
Cross, converted it into perfect gold, where with the miserable man contented
his creditors. Good God what an Antidote, and what a treasure is this holy
sign?

. 2. That this sign is a preservative against all danger, and particularly
against the tentations of the devil?
S. Cyrill says. Make the Cross upon thy fore head, that so the devils
perceiving the caractar of the king, all affrighted, may take their flight.
Catec. 4. And in another place he says. This sign is the protection of the
faithful, and the terror of the devils. Catech. 13. The same does S. Basil
also say. lib. de Spiritu Sanc. S. Efrem de poenit. c. 3. and de armat. spirit.
c. 2. Origin. hom 6. in c. 5. Exodus S. Aug. ad Catech. c. 2. de Simbolo. S.
Paulinnatal. 8. S. Felicit.

S. Antonie was wont to say, that the sign of the Cross, was an vnexpugnable
rampart against the devils. Arm your selves, said he to his disciples, both
your selves and your houses with this sign, and the devils shall vanish away
immediately.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Gregory writes, that a Jew was converted to the faith, for having
being preserved by night from the devils, within the ruins of an old temple
of Apollo, by the sign of the Cross, which he had made upon him self,
according to the imitation of the Christians; the devils crying. An empty,
but, a signed vessel. l. 3. dial. c, 7. Now if the sign of the Cross made by
a Jew, had so much force, what shall it have, being made by a true Christian
Catholic?

2. Palladius writes, that a good old man, having espied in the bottom of a
well, an ouglie serpent, made the sign of the Cross upon the well, drew of
the water, and dra^k thereof with out receiving any detriment. Lausiac. c. 2.

3. Theodoret in the life of Julian and S. Martian martyrs, writes that these
Saints only by the sign of the Cross, slew sundry great and horrible
Dragons. The same also did S. George, as Metaphrastes writes in his life.

4. Certain Persians being sent to Constantinople to the Emper or Mauritius by
the king Cosroas, were demanded by the said Emperor, why they bore the sign
of the Cross imprinted and graven upon their foreheads, seeing that according
to their own law, they did no kind of honor to it? Who answered, that this
they did, to recall to their mind the benefit received by that sign, saying,
that according to the instructions which they had learned of the Christians, in
arming the^ selves with this sign, they had been delivered from the plague.
Niceph. Calist. in his history.

5. S. Aug. writes, that in Carthage, one of the chiefest matrons of the city
called Innocentia, having had a cankre upon her breast, was told of a
principal physician, that there was no manner of means for to heal her. She
then seeing her self utterly destitute of humane help, resolved to have
recourse unto God. Hereupon our Lord said in her sleep unto her, that toward
the holy feast of Easter, she should go nere to the baptismall fontes, and
that the first baptized maiden or wife that she should meet, should make the
sign of the Cross upon her breast. She believed this council, which being
done, she found her self perfectly healed. Aug. l. 22. ciuit. c. 8.

6. Tilmanus Bredembachus, recounteth in his conferences, that an heretic
going from Geneua to Lausania, in the company of a Catholic, the heavens
were troubled upon a soddaine, with abundance of thunderclaps and of
lightninge. The Catholic (according to the pious custom of the Christians)
armed and blessed him self with the sign of the Cross; which the heretic
seeing, asked him in scoffing at him, if he did the same to drive away the
flies? But this his blasphemy escaped not without present punishment, for
scarcely had he pronounced those words, but that the thunder began to redouble
its blows, and stroke him with a bolt, which slew him outright upon the place,
without any hurt in the world unto the Catholic. l. 7. col. sacr. c. 58.
What say you (o you scoffing heretics) unto these maruelles of the Cross?
But behold here more.

7. A certain Witch, confessing one day upon the rack, her wicked witchcraft,
said that she had been carried above fifty times by the devil, to kill the
little son of one of her kindred, which was as yet in the cradle, but that she
never had any power over him, for that his mother, before she laid him down,
made always the sign of the Cross upon his forehead. Bartholomeus Spineus
master of the sacred palace, quest. de stigibus l. 17. and seq. Martinus Delrio
disq. mag. l. 2. q. 10.. Lo what a goodly example this is for you, fathers and
mothers.

8. Editha daughter to the King of England, having all her life this for a
custom, to make upon all occasions the sign of the Cross, with her thu^be
upon her forehead, when her body was taken up, thirteen years after her
death, S. Dunstan found, that her eyes, her hands, and her feet being
rotten, the thumb only of the right hand, wherewith she was wont to bless her
self, still remained whole and entire. Sur^us in her life tom. 5. 16. Sept. e.
4. 5. Pet. de natal. l. 11. c. 70.

What can be more clear to prove, that to make the sign of the Cross, is a
thing marueillouslie aggreable to almighty God?

THE II. CHAPTER. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving which a Christian ought to make
morning and evening, before, and after meat. And of the invocation of our B.
Lady, of our Angel Guardian, and our other Patrons.
AS the night and sleep, are not given to man, but for the ease and rest of
the body, (a) for that our enemy the devil sleeps not, whilst we sleep (b)
either to strangle us, if we be in sin, or to fill us with dreams and filthy
illusions, if we be in grace; And seeing that the day is not given us but to
work our salvation (c) and yet can do nothing (d) say nothing (e) think (f)
nor have anything, without the asista^ce of almighty God, from whom we have our
being, moving and life (g) does it not follow, that it is more the^ reason, and
altogether necessary, to have recourse unto God in all seasons, especially in
the morning, to pass the day profitably, and in the evening, to avoid the
dangers of the night? (h) And if an humble acknowledgment, be the means to
draw and attract new benefits, (i) how much ought we to thank the divine
bounty, which from moment to moment, bestows upon us so many favors, gifts,
and graces?

Consider moreover, that he who will obtain any favor of a King, is wont
after he has presented some request unto him, to repair to the Queen, and to
such other courtiers as are most and highest in his favor; judge the^ if it be
not the part of a wise man, after he has presented his prayer unto God, to
have recourse to our B. Lady (k) the Queen of Angels and mother of God, to
the holy Angels, and (l) particularly to him that keeps him (m) and next unto
the other Saints (n) but above al others, to those of whom one bears the
relics or their name, or else has taken them for his especial patrons, all
which do love us with a most perfect charity (o) and can prevail exceedinge
much with almighty God (p) as those which are his courtiars, his domesticalls,
and his fauorits (q)

(a) S. Bernard ad fratres de monte Dei (b) Mat. 13. 25. 1. Pet. 5. 8. (c) Luc.
19. 13. (d) Joan. 15. 5. Phil. 2. 13. (e) 1. Cor. 12. 3. (f) 2. Cor. 3. ^. (g)
Art 17. 28. (h) Psalm. 90. 6. (i) Cassiod. in psalm. and in epist. (k) Chrisost.
Genesis Hom. 9. (l) Ber. in sermon. in Not. B. Mariae (m) Amb. l. de viduis (n) Heb.
1. 14. Tob. 12. Apoc. 8. 3. (o) Job. 5. 1. psalm. 150. 1. (p) Ber. ser. 2. de S.
Vict. (q) ibid in vigil Pet. and Paul. Apost. (r) Damas. l. 4. de orthod. fide
c. 16.

. 1. Of the prayer which a Christian ought to make, morning and evening.
It is a thing unbeseeming a Christian (who nether sleeps nor waketh, but
for the glory and service of almighty God) to employ together with the night,
a part also of the day in slothful sleeping, and to lie a bed without
necessity, especially then, when all creatures (even the unreasonable) do
laud and praise their Creator, every one after his kind: and that artificers,
for the pelf and goods of this present world, are busied about their work
from the break of the day. How much is one hour worth to him, which lives
not, save only to negociat his salvation? And what loss is it, to loose that
which is worth so much, and never can be recovered again? Ber. sermon ad
scolares.

It is enough to sleep seven hours, both to young and old, says the proverb.

Love not sleep, lest poverty oppress thee, says the wisman. Pro. 20. 13.

S. Bernard says. Take heed, as much as possible thou may, that thou give
not thy self wholly to sleep, lest that which ought to serve for repose to
the wearied body, and for reparation of the spirit, serve for the burying of
the body, and for the extinction of the spirit. Ad fratres de monte.

As soon as thou art awake, make the sign of the Cross, and say this short
prayer (much recommended by S. John Chrysostom, ser. 21. ad pop. Antioch.) I
renounce the devil, and rely upon thee o Jesus Christ, who art the way, the
truth, and the life: and by this means, thou shall present and give thy first
thought to almighty God, which the devil labors and casts how to carry
away.

At the hour of risinge, slack not thy self, but run before, first into thy
house, and there withdraw thy self, and there pray (says the wiseman, Eccl.
32. 15.) For fear lest that befall thee, as it did to the Spouse in the Cant.
Whilst thou deliberatest to arrise, Jesus Christ thy spouse, do depart. Can. 5.

In arising and making thee ready, reject says S. Bonaue^ture, all the dreams
and thoughts of the night, wherein the devil endeuoreth to occupy thee, and
offer to God the first fruits of all thy thoughts, and labor by meditation or
by prayer, to excite good thoughts and affections of devotion; and this will
make thee more prompt and ready to do good works, all the day after. Tract.
de interiori Hom. p. 1. c. 4. Clymachus c. 21.

Recite the Pater, Aue, Credo, Anima Christi, or the soul of Christ etc.

We ought, says S. Ambrose, every morning before day, to say, especially the
Creed, as the seal and lock of our heart, and as often as we are seized with
any fear: for when is it, I pray you, that the soldiar enters into his tent,
or marches in battle, without his watchword? S. Amb. l. 3. de Virg. S. Aug.
says the same, tom. 9. l. de simb. ad catechum. c. 1. and l. 2.

Being apparrelled, fall upon your knees in your oratorie, or before some
picture, and say with heart, and with affection.

I give thee thanks, o my God, for all the benefits which I have received of
thee, and in particular, for having preserved me this night from all evil.

I offer unto thee, my soul and body to thy service, with all whatsoever I
shall do, to thy greater glory and honor.

I purpose likewise, to live better then I have done, and rather to die a
thousand times, then once to offend thee mortally. O my God, give me the grace,
to put in practice this my good purpose.

Then addressing you to the Queen of Angels and of Saints, you shall say.

Holy Marie mother of God, pray for me. My Angel guardian, pray for me. My
patron Saint N. pray for me. All the Saints of heaven, pray for me. Pater.
Aue, Credo, De prosundis.

It is good to confess to our Lord (that is according to the exposition of Card.
Bellarmine, it is reasonable, profitable, and delectable) to singe to thy name
o Highest, to show forth thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth in the night.
psalm. 91. 1.

It is now the hour for us, to rise from sleep, for now our salvation is
n^erer then when we believed. The night is passed, and the day is at hand, let
us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and do on the armor of light; As
in the day let us walk honestly, not in banquettinge and drunkenness, not in
chamberinges and impudicities, not in contention and emulation, but do ye on
our Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh in concupiscences.
Romans 13. 11.

Alas who knows (but only God) whither that hour wherein thou arisest, shall
not perhaps be the very last of all thy life? Watch ye therefore, because you
know not the day, nor the hour Mat. 25. 13.

EXAMPLES.
1. Ioannes Niderus writes, to have known a gentleman of note, named Sucher,
who whilst he kept in a castle nighe the town of Halle in Germany, as he grew
cold in the service of God, nor frequenting the Sacraments as he was wont,
because of the quarrels which he had against those of Halle, went and filled his
castle with a company of lewed servants, all trained up in wars, and enured
to their weapons: the devil (disguised like a soldiar) came also to present
and offer his service to him. This covetous gentleman, seeing that this soldiar
offered to serve him without any wages, he accepted of him, and made him his
horse-keeper. The devil began from that time, to serve his master with all
fidellitie, but it was observed after a long while, that he never went unto
the Church, conducting his master only unto the door, and then returning to
his work.

The gentleman although desbauched, yet still continued his good custom, now
and the^ to hear Mass, and went not to bed, nor yet arose, but first be made
the sign of the Cross, and said some certain Aue Mary's. And having been
could and observing him self, that his horse-keeper never went to Church, he
urged him upon a day, to tell him freely who he was. The hors-keeper told him,
that he was the devil, but bid him for all this, not to have any apprehention,
sith he had still til then found him faithful, and should still find him
more and more from that time forward. The gentleman was at the first a little
afraid, notwithstanding, moved with covetousness, resolved to keep him yet a
while.

One night as he slept, behold this devil horse-keeper, awaked him with a
sudden starting, crying. Master, Master. The gentleman asked what was the
matter; Quickly, quickly (quoth the devil) put on your apparel and your
arms, for those of Halle are coming for to take your castle. The gentleman
affrighted at these news, clothed him, and put on his arms with all possible
speed, nevertheless not forgetting him self to make, the sign of the Cross,
and to say his prayers he was wont to say. Being up, and ready, he looked forth
at all the windoes, and saw nothing, whence he perceived that this was nothing
but a false alarm: and all in cholar, asked of his devil, what had moved him,
so to trouble and molest him, in the midst of his sleep. The devil a^swered
him, that he had done it for this design, thinking that the affrithtment and
sudden haste to get him up, would have made him forgot the making of the sign
of the Cross, and saying of his prayers, and by this means he would have set
upon him. The gentlma^ hearing this, was ever after much more dilligent in this
his duty then he was before, but he could not for all this be quit of this
deuelish servant, until such time as he began to frequent the Sacraments: for
the very first time wherein he had recourse unto them, the devil vanished quite
away, and he never saw him afterward. Niderus l. 3. form.

Lo what diligence the devil uses, to hinder us to pray in the morning? What
virtu the sign of the Cross has, the Aue Marie, and the Sacraments?

If the devil tempt us, we have also a good Angel which does counter-gard us.
God has given his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee in all thy
ways. Psalm. 9^. 11.

2. S. Raimondus, of the order of the friar Preachers, had an Angel which
often times appeared unto him, and for the most part before the belles were
ru^ge to Matins at midnight in the Couents where he was, who awakened him, and
invited him to prayer.

3. S. Cecily and S. Francis the Roman, and one S. Stilites of Edessa, who
lived nine and forty years upon a pillar, had an Angel which showed him
self unto them visibly, and conuersed with them familiarly. Surius and
Ribadeneira. Raderus in virid. sanct. p. 2. c. 5.

4. Ioannes Carrera of the society of Jesus, from the time that he was a
nouice, had a familiar Angel, with whom he discoursed very often, and received
of him, the full resolution of his doutes: who was wont every day, about four a
clock in the morning, to awake him. And as once (overcome with sleep) he did
not arise at the Angels waking, he was deprived for certain days of his
visitation, until such time as having done penance, he entered again into his
favor. Notwithstanding the holy Angel wild him, that from thence forward, he
should be more diligent to arise early. L. 13. hist. soc. anno 1551.

If we al have a particular Angel, who does accompany and secure us every
where, is it not reason that we should honor him, and often reclayme him? But
mark with all, what a heart grief it is to our good Angel, when he must
attend nere unto us, whilst we play the truants and slouthful sluggards in our
beds!

For invocation of Saints, see. 3. following, sect. 2.

. 2. Of thanks giving which we ought to render to God in all times, but
particularly after meat and drink.
If all benefits require at the lest a God-a-mercie, the Christian, who at
every moment, receives so many benefits and favors of almighty God, can he
do less, morning and evening (and sometimes also during the day) then render
humble thanks unto him? The Cocks and Hens, albeit unreasonable, never
drink, but they lift up their head and eyes to heaven, as if they would at
every beak-ful, acknowledge and thankfully bless, God their Creator. O
Christian, art not thou worse then the beasts, if so often fed and refreshed
by the liberal hand of this our Lord, thou vouchsafest not once to lift thine
eyes toward heaven, to give and rendar thanks unto him? If a man condemned to
perpetual imprisonment, were every day fed deliciously, by one which would let
him down from above both meat and drink, should he not be a very beast, if he
daigned not to lift up his head, to see and acknowledge that good person, which
should do so great a good unto him? Alas, we are all prisoners, as long as we
live in this valley of tears, our good God notwithstanding, moved with mercy
and compassion, causes to fall upon us from heaven, an infinite number of good
things: he clotheth us, gives us both to eat and to drink, there is no
moment nor yet minute, wherein he does not pour into us of his favors, both for
our body and our soul. Yet how many are there, notwithstanding, which not at
every hour, nor yet in every day, daigne so much as to lift up their head
toward heaven, to acknowledge him?

Our Lord gave upon a day to understand, how grievously he took it, that
having healed ten Leapers, there was but one of them which returned to thank
him. Luc. 17.

I have brought up children and exalted them, but they have despised me, says
our Lord by his prophet; Isay 1. 2. 3.

In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus 1.
These. 5. 18.

When thou have eaten and art full, thou may bless the Lord thy God. Deutr^.
8. 10. Although thou eat twice a day, yet take always thy meat with giving
of thanks. S. Ephrem adhort. 1.

What may we (says S. Aug) think, speak, or write better, then Deo gratias,
thanks be to God! Nothing can be pronounced more briefly, heavd more
willingly, nor practiced more profitably. Aug. ad Marcellinum ep. 5.

EXAMPLES.
Father Martinus Delrio, in his treatise of Magic, writes, that three lewed
companions in a certain place of Flanders, each he, with his each she, after
they had set at table till midnight was past, the one of them said. We have
eat and drunk, it is now time to give God thanks. As for me, replied
another, I give thanks unto the devil, for he it is whom we do serve. These
words were entertained of all with great laughter, but not of God; for as they
lay by their strumpets, behold how on a sudden, the chamber door opened of
it self with a great noise, and a man of a high pitch, in the habit of a
hunter, horribly frightfull, black of face, and his eyes sparkling, entered in,
and two servants after him, who carried a countenance and instruments, as if
they were Cooks.

Having walked awhile up and down the chamber, he turned him toward the beds
wherein these whores and knaves were lodged, and said. Where is he, that not
long since gave me thanks, I come to requite him for his kindness? And as none
made answer, he him self approached to the bed where this blasphemer was,
more dead then alive, took him by the arms, and pulled him forth upon the
floor, then commanded his two Cooks, to put him upon the spit, and to roste
him; The which was done as instantly, for he was put upon the spit, and after
roasted like a quarter of mutton, so that the others from their beds, felt the
odor and the smell.

After that he was all roasted, this great devil thus disguised, addressed him to
those others who remained in their beds. You (quoth he) have merited as much
as he, but God has not given me power, save only upon him who gave me thanks:
amend your selves, or else you also shall shortly be mine: which having said,
he disappeared. Where I leave you to think, whither the residue of that night
seemed long unto them, yea, or no, and ^n what a transe they passed the same.

The day being come, they lept out of their beds, and (a thing most fearful)
saw their companion all roasted, and stark dead. Ah good God, what a horrible
spectacle, and what an example for them, and for us, beloved Reader? Delrio
disq. magic. l. 3. p. 1. q. 7.

. 3. Of prayer, examen of conscience, and Invocation of Saints, which a
Christian ought to make before he sleep.
Reason wills, that the child acknowledge his father, saluting him at his
vprising, and before he go to bed to reconcile him self unto him, and to ask
him blessing. The soldiar convinced of enormous crimes, and for the same in
danger of his life, should he not merit to be hanged without mercy, if he
might have presently pardon for his faults, by casting him self only with
true repentance at the feet^ of his captain, and yet should disdaigne to do
it? Now so it is, that God the Creator, is our father (a) yea our Head and
sovereign Emperor, as we have said here before (b) what then do they deserve
who daigne not to acknowledge him, laying them selves down in their beds,
like very beasts, without thanking him for the benefits received the same day?
without demanding his blessing to escape the dangers of the night? and that
which is yet more to be weighed, without making any reuiew of their life past,
and asking him forgiveness for the faults committed in the day? In the mean
while death (perhaps) is at their beds feet, who the same night is to let fly
his dart and arrowe at them, and to send them from their bed, to hell, and
from their soft boulster, to a burning furnace of fire and of eternal flames.
Happened it not so to Holofernes? (c) Sisara? (d) the rich glutton? (e) to the
slothful servant in the gospel? (f) and ^o a thousand others, who laying
the^ down like unto these, and falling a ^leepe in perfect health, have been
found stone dead on the morrow morninge? (a) Malach. 1. 6. Mat. 5. 6. 23. Romans
8. 15. and 16. (b) l. 1. c. 1. (c) Judith 13. (d) Judge. 4. (e) Luc. 16. (f)
Luc. 12.

Watch ye therefore, says our Lord, that is to say, stand upon your guard,
put your selves in good estate) for you know not when the Lord of the house
comes, at evening, or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, lest coming upon a
sudden, be find you sleepinge (that is to say, in sin, without care,
without solicitude for the salvation of your soul:) and that which I say to
you, I say to all, watch. Marc. 13. 35,

. 1. Of the examen of our conscience.
The examen of our conscience consists in three points.

1. To thank God for all benefit^ received, and particularly of that day*

2. To search and seek forth diligently, all the thoughts, words, and works
of that day, in the self same manner as if one should confess himself*

3. To excite an act of Contrition, with a firm purpose of amendment, and to
be confessed with the first occasion. (See the act of Contrition page 265.

Next to recommend him self to the good protection of almighty God, of our B.
Lady, his Angel guardian, and of his patrons.

This practice is marvelous profitable, for by an act of true contrition, all
sins are forgiven (albeit we remain obliged to confess them to the priest) in
so much that, if a person having committed a great number of mortal sins,
after he shall have excited in him such an act of contrition, should come to
die suddenly, not having the means for to confess them, he should be assured of
his salvation; as contrariwise, not having made this act, he should be damned
infallibly.

See you the importance? Mark now what the holy scripture, and holy fathers
say.

In the 4. psalm. 5. The things that you say in your hearts, be ye sorry for
(that is to say, for evil thoughts, and with much more reason for evil
works) in your chambers. That is to say, ask God forgiveness in going to bed.

Which S. Chrysostom explicating, says. What means this, The things that
you say in your hearts? etc. that is to say, after supper when you go to bed,
being alone, in peace and silence, judge your conscience, and demand an account
of your self: seek forth all the bad actions of the day, and having set them
before you, take vengance of them, and put them to death by a holy compunction.

And in the 76. Psalm. v. 6. I thought upon old days, and the eternal years I
had in mind, and I meditated in the night with my heart, and I was exercised,
and swept my spirit: that is to say, examining my conscience, and cleansing i^
by a holy sorrow, as S. Aug. expounds it? And the same that holy David did,
the same did king Ezechias, as is to be found in Isay, 38. 15.

S. Anthony was wont to recommend it seriously to his Disciples. Athanas. in
his life, as also S. Cyprian ser. de pass. Christi. S. Basil. ser. commonit.
admonach. ser. de Ascen. and ser. d^ instit monach.

The merchants of the world (says S. Efrem) are accustomed, to calculate
every day, the gain or loss betyded to them in their traffic: and you,
every evening, consider in what terms your traffic stande^h, examine what
you have done that day; and in the morninge, that which you have done during
the night. Ser. Ascet. de vita relig. See S. Chrisost, Hom. 43. in Mat. S.
Greg. Hom 4. in Ezech and 35. moral. in Job. c. 6. and 7. S. John Climach.
grad. 4. S. Doroth. de vita recte and pie instit. c. 11. S. Bernard ad fratres
de monte Dei. S. Benet. c. 4. of his rule. instru. 48. according to the
explication of Trithemius l. 1. comment in hanc. reg. S. Bon. in opusc. de
purit. cons. c. 12. and alibi. Tho. a Kemp l. 1. de Imit. Christic. 19. and l.
2. de discipl. claust. c. 9. and discipl. mon. c. 11.

The Act of Contrition put in practice.
An excellent prayer, which every Christian ought to have by heart.
MY Lord Jesus Christ, true God, and true man, who art my Creator and my
Redeemer, I am sorry from my very heart, for that I have offended thee, and this
for that thou art my God, and for that I love thee above all things; And I
purpose firmly never more to offend thee, and to withdraw my self far off
from all occasions of sin. I purpose also to confess me, and to fulfill the
penance which shall be imposed me; Moreover, I offer unto thee in satisfaction
of all my sins, my life, my labors, and all the good works which I shall
ever do. And as I humbly ask pardon of my sins, so I hope in thy goodness
and infinite mercy, that thou will forgive them all, thorough the merits of thy
most precious blood, death, and passion, and give me the grace for to amend me,
and to persevere in good estate unto the end, Amen.

EXAMPLES OF CONtrition.
1. Thomas of Cantimpre, sometimes Suffragan to the Archbishop of Cambray,
writes, that a wicked man, after he had violated his own daughter, came to
the reverend Archbishop of Sens, to confess him self unto him of his sin, and
having declared it with many tears and true remorce of soul, he demanded if
he might hope for pardon at Gods hands. Yes (quoth the Archbishop) if you be
ready to fulfill the penance which I shall give you. All whatsoever your
Lordship shall please (answered the penitent) although I should endure a
thousand deaths. I enjoin you only (quoth the Archbishop) seven years of
penance. What is that, replied the penitent? Albeit I should do penance
until the ending of the world, yet shall I not satisfy sufficiently. Go,
said the Archbishop, I will that thou fast only three days with bread and
water. Here the poor man began to weep, beseeching him to impose upon him a
penance answerable to his crime. The Archbishop seeing him so truly contrite,
said unto him finally. I^ ordain that thou only say one Pater ^oster, assuring
thee that thy sin is forgiven thee. Which the penitent hearing, he entered in
to so great compunction, that having cast forth a deep sighe, he fell down
stark dead upon the place. The Archbishop assured since in his sermon, that
this man by reason of his great contrition, went straight to heaven, without
passinge thorough Purgatory. Tract. de vniuerso lib. 2. c. 51. p. 7.

2. Iacobus of Vitry Cardinal, writes the like, of a maiden (who had sinned
with her own father, and afterward cut his throat, and poisoned her mother)
who died at her confessars feet, thorough the vehemency of her contrition:
and he assured that it was needles to pray for her, for that she was already
saved. Iul. Mazaim, reports it of the said Cardinal upon the 50. psalm. p. 1.
discourse 10.

3. A great sinner died also of very sorrow, at the feet of S. Vincent
Ferrier, and appearing to him said, that he was in glory, without passing at
all thorough Purgatory, God being satisfied with his sorrow, for the full
expiation of his sins. Ribad in his life 5. of April.

4. S. Gregory also writes, that a religious man bewaylinge his sin, heard
a voice which said unto him, that his contrition had blotted it out. Hom. 34.

Seeing then that contrition is of such most singular force, is it not wisdom
often to excite acts thereof, but especially, before we go to bed, or fall a
sleep, to the end to put our selves in full assurance by this means?

EXAMPLES.
. 2. Of the Invocation of Saints.
1. S. Edmond, Archbishop of Canterbury in England, from the time that he
studied in Paris, was wont to say every day in honor of our Lady and of S.
John Evangelist, the prayer which begins. O intemerata, And chancing once to
forget him self, S. John appeared unto him in the night with a feruler, make
show that he would strike him. Notwithstanding he appeased him self and
withheld his hand already lifted up, gently admonishinge him, no more to ommit
it. Surius and Ribad. in his life the 16. of Nouemb.

2. The self same Saint, experienced at another time, how dangerous it is to
go to bed, not having first said his prayers. For having ommitted them upon a
certain hollieday, behold how at the breaking of the day, the devil appeared
unto him in a horrible form, who seasing both his hands, hindered him so, that
he could not make the sign of the Cross. But the virtuous Saint, seeing that
he could not make it, nether by deed, nor yet by word, he made it in his heart
and in spirit, and forthwith the devil fell down upon the pauement betwixt
the bedsted and the wall; Which S. Edmond seeing, he lept upon his belly, and
took him fast by the throat, and coniured him in the virtu of the passion of
Jesus Christ, and of his precious blood, to tell unto him by what means he was
most easily overcome? By these means (quoth the devil) which thou have even
now named to me.

3. The devout Thomas a Kempis canon regular, being yet a young scholar at
Dauentrie, was wont daily to offer up a certain number of prayers, in the
honor of our Lady, to who^ he carried a singular affection: but as youth is
light and inconstant, he grew by little and little to be so lukewarm, that he
began to be, first one day without saying them, then two, then four, and at the
last, he left them off for all together.

But behold, one night in the dead of his sleep, he thought he was in the
halle (of Master Florence his teacher) full of scholars: amongst whom, as he
harkned as he thought with great greedines unto the word of God, which the
religious men of that order expounded unto them, heaven did open upon a
sudden, and in a fair and most bright cloud, the queen of Angels descended
into this halle, with a sweet and smiling countenance, and in a habit very
sumptuous: then she embraced them all with great demonstration and signs of
love. This good Thomas thought with him self that his turn also would come at
the last, but he was foully deceived herein, for having embraced all the
others, she turned to him, and looking upon him with a discontented eye, said
unto him. It is in vain that thou expectest this my kindness (light and
inco^stant that thou art) who thorough an accursed and wretched sloth, have
left to pay me that number of prayers, thou was accustomed. Where are those
deuotio^s wher-with thou seruedst me? Where are those sighs and those loving
dartinges? There is now no more love in in thee, and yet thou awaitest
(audacious that thou art) to be cherished and made much of by me. Hence (quoth
she) get thee gone from me, for thou art unworthy of my embracinges, and shall
so be, as long as thou ommittest to offer unto me thy accustomed prayers:
which having said, it seemed unto him, that she ascended again up to heaven,
and disappeared.

Thomas awaking after this vision, remained maruellously perplexed and sorry:
he examined his conscience, and found to have failed for some weeks past, in
his exercise of devotion; whereupon he presently arose, fell upon his knees, and
humbly asking God forgiveness and his mother, made a firm purpose, never more
to ommit those prayers, for any occasion whatsoever: which he afterward
observed faithfully even till his death. Specul. exempl. did. 10.. 7.

4. A certain Dominican, had for a time kept this good and godly custom,
never to go unto his bed, but first to offer up some prayers in the honor of
S. Barbara, and by this means, had often been preserved from sundry perils.
At the last, he utterly left it; And behold upon a night, Saint Barbara
appeared to him, saying unto him, that as he had left her, so she likewise
would leave him, nor would no longer do him the favors, which he had well
found and proved unto that present.

He related this vision to his brethren, but yet for all this, did not amend
him. Whereupon forsaken of the succor of this Saint, he debauched him self by
little and little, in such sort, that at the last he cast his habit upon the
hedge, and left his religion. After he had wandered abroad here and there, he
came to Nuremberg, where he fell sick, and was forced to lodge in the common
hospital. Father Conradus (one of his order) having knowledge thereof, sent
unto him the habit by some of his religious, and prayed him to return again
unto them, but he swore with an oath, that he would not. They returned back,
and forthwith he fell into an ague, and so died miserably. Joan Niderus S.
Theol. Doct. ord. pred. formicatorij l. 2. c. 4.

5. About Erklentz in low Germany, a young man was wont to say every day
certain prayers, and sometimes to fast, in the honor of S. Barbara, that she
should obtain for him that he might not die without confession and communion.
It chanced that he was taken prisoner, and there remained the space of twelve
whole days, without so much as eatinge or drinking, by the prayers and
intercession of S. Barbara, until such time as he had received those
Sacraments, and presently after he deceased. Ibid. l. 4. c. 2.

6. Another at Gorcome in Hollande, was all burnt by a sudden fire which took
in the house, and nothing remaining whole, save only the tongue and the eyes,
was taken forth of the flames by S. Barbara whom he had inuoked, to the end he
might not die without Confession and Communion: and being confessed, and
communicated, dyed in the year of our Lord. 1548. Surius 8. of December. Et
Bredembachus l. 4. c. 1.

Lo then, is not this enough to prove, that it is good to recommend our selves
unto the Saints, and that it is dangerous to go to bed, not having first
implored their asistance?

. 4. Of holy water, wherewith a Christian ought to sprinkle him self, at his
going in, or coming out of his bed and chamber.
Holy water is of great virtu, and of singular efficacy, by reason of the
prayers which holy Church uses at the benediction and hollowing thereof. For
she prays, that God vouchsafe to give the virtu of his blessing upon it, to
drive away the diuills and other diseases, all immondicities and dangers, all
corrupted or pestifferous airs, and other snares of the malignant spirit, and
that all which may trouble the health or peace of the inhabitauts, may be
expelled by the aspersion of this water. This lo, is the reason, why we ought
to sprincle our selves often there with, but principally when as we rise and
go to bed, enter in, or go out of our chamber, or house: for we have every
where the devil, who follows and pursues us even to death.

EXAMPLES.
2. With holy water, S. Hilarion dissolved the enchantments of a carter that
was a gentile. S. Hieron in Hilarion.

2. With holy water, S. Marcellus bishop of Apamia, put both to fear and
flight, the very devils, who would have hindered to burn the temple of an
idol. Theod. hist l. 8. c. 21.

3. With this water, S. Macarius, drove away the illusions of the devils and
magicians. Pallad. in lausiac. c. 6.

4. With this water, S. German bishop of Antisiodore, appeased the sea, which
the devils troubled. Venerable Bede, de gest. Aug. l. 1. c. 17.

5. But behold here one of a fresher date. In the year 1609. at Limoges in
Guienna, a Baker that had good store of customers, was much enuyed of an old
witch, which entering into his house, charmed the oven and the dowe, mumbling
out certain barbarous words and unknown. She was forthwith taken with the
fact, but they did naught, save only laugh a little thereat; until that on the
morrow morning, the Baker coming to look upon his past, which he had made
ready the day before, found that it was all spoiled and plainly stunke. The
like happened unto him the day followinge, and the third day also, so that he
found him self in great necessity, and so perplexed, that wanting means to
pay his creditors, and forced to go beg his bread, he was upon the point to
forsake his house, and to go like a vagabond about the contrie.

But before he put in practice his design, he went and recounted his
affliction to a father of the Society of Jesus, who counseled him to confess
him self with all his family, and made him to promise, to do the like from
that time forward, once a monthe. After that they were all confessed, he gave to
either of them an Agnus Dei, and a little botle full of holy water, enioining the
Baker to sprinckle his paste there with every day.

He did as he was wild, and at the first sprinckling (a strange case) he saw
issue forth of his dowe, a stinkinge vapor, which caused a trembling thorough
all his body, but blessing him self with the sign of the Cross, it vanished
away, and he found his dow or past all changed, and the loaves well come. He
continued the same a whole year with the like success, but at the last quite
neglected this good custom, to sprincle his paste with holy water: and behold
presently, the aforesaid witchcraft began again, and for a month together he
found his paste all corrupted, al black and so stinking, that none durst come
nere unto it, nor would the very dogs so much as eat it. Whereupon he
sprinkled it again, and behold he was presently seized with so great a
fear, that it was needful to carry him to his bed; but this past within a
while, and on the morrow he found his dowe both fair and good, and his batch
of bread came passing well. Taken out of the history of the college of
limoges, of the Soc. of Jesus, anno 1609.

. 5. Of Agnus Deies.
It is an ancient custom in the Church, to bear or wear an Agnus Dei
hanged or tied about our neck; for Cardinal Baronius makes mention in the
year of our Lord 58. and says, that this was practiced, to cou^terpoint the
superstition of the panims, who were wont to carry hanged about their necks,
certain ticquers or lotteries, wherein there was a heart printed, against the
enchantments of sorcerers, whereof Varron also makes mention. The holy Church
has consecrated certain images of wex with holy chrisme, imprinting thereon
the figure of a Lamb representing Jesus Christ our Lord, and this is the cause
why we call them Agnus Deies; to the end that Christians bearing them about
them, may be counter guarded against the devils, and against witch crafts, the
plague, thunder, lightning, and other dangers. These are the things which the
Pope asks of God, at such time as he does hallow them, who only has this
power, and does it not but only once in seven years.

EXAMPLES.
1. At Drepano in Sicilie, the year of our Lord 1585. the devil having
tormented a maid for sundry months, together with those of the fame family,
a father of our compapanie, caused her to hang an Agnus Dei about her neck.
The devil, not able to endure it, threatened her to wreste her neck in two, if
she took it not off; but by the council of the said father being resolute,
the devil was confounded, and forced to leave both her, with all her family,
in rest and peace. Out of the history of the Societit anno 1585. Father Martin
Delrio to 3. disq. mag. l. 6. c. 2. sect. 3. q. 3.

2. In the confines of Treues, the same year as aforsaid, a child of eight
years old, which had been led sundry times to the assembly of witches, was
taken and brought unto the Archbishop, who sent for a father of the Society to
instruct him in matters of faith. The father having catechized the child,
hunge an Agnus Dei about his neck. The night following, the devil appeared
unto him, sharply reproouing him, to have suffered him self to be seduced by
the father, and commanded him to take off that Agnus. The child did as the
devil commanded, and presently was carried by a Buck to the dances, and
afterward brought ^ack again. Thus much is the power which the devil has
of those, who are disfurnished and destitute of this holy armor. Mart. Delrio.
6. disq. mag. c. 2. ser. 3. q. 3. tom. 3.

3. The year followinge, another boy somewhat elder, was brought before the
same Archbishop, for the like subject, who assured him, that one of theirs, had
access unto his chamber, to give unto him a poisoned drink, because he had
left in going to bed, an Agnus Dei upon the table, forgetting to wear it about
his neck: and that if the glass had been greater, he had been dispatched. Then
the Archbishop remembered him self, indeed to have been one night without his
Agnus Dei, and that in the morning of the same night, he found him self
stricken with a troublesome disease, which lasted him for some days after.
This boy going afterward to the Provost of the city of Treues; and you Sir
also (quoth he) were in great danger, for certain witches have been twice
attempting to betwich you, but yet they could not, because you bear (I know
not what) hallowed about you. It was also an Agnus Dei. Father Martin Delrio
above.

4. Not far from the city of Arima in Iaponia, in a place called Iamada, a
young youth of the age of fifteen years, was very often tormented with the
malignant spirit. An oncle of his, Bonze (for so they call the religious panims
of Iaponia) labored to deliver him, by his prayers and panim ceremonies,
addressed to Chami and Fotoqui their false gods, but all in vain. Which the
youth seeing, he went and complained to a certain Christian woman. She
confiding in her holy faith, pulled forth her Agnus Dei, and put it about the
neck of this boy. Instantly the devil moved, cried, and kept a grievous stur,
and at the last was constrained to dislodge. Father Lewis Froez, in the history
of the Society of the college of Arima anno 1595.

What think you now (o Christians) of Agnus Deies? Is it not worth the while,
to carry them about you both night and day?

. 6. Of the Relics of Saints.
Besides Agnus Deis, many bear about them some relics of Saints, which also
serve them for armor against the devils, and for effectual means to obtain
favors and blessings of almighty God. For the council of Nice in the 7.
act, calls the relics of Saints, health-some fountains, which distill into
us, the graces and gifts of almighty God. And S. Basil says, that who so
touches the bones of the holy Martyrs, by reason of the grace which resideth
in the bodies, becomes partaker of their sanctification. Hom. in psalm. 115.

The bodies only of Saints (says S. Greg. Nazianzen) have the same power which
the holy souls have, be it that they be touched with our hands, or that they
be honored: yea, the drops only of their blood, and the very least signs of
their passion, have the same power that their bodies have. Orat. 1. in Julian
about the midst.

S. John Chrysostom says, that the devils are not able to endure the shadow,
nor yet the garments of the holy martyrs. Lib. cont. gent. de vita S. Babylae
Ant. ep^s. and Mart. The same S. Ambrose writes, ser. 93. Not. 55. Martij,
Nazarij, and Celsi.

EXAMPLES.
1. How many perils did the Israelites escape, for the space of forty years
in the desert? The scripture noting, that they carried with them, the holy
body of Joseph and of the other holy patriarchs. Exodus 13.

2. The Emperor Theodosius, marching in battle, was wont to carry in ^teede
of a casket, the little cloak and ^oode of S. Senuphius Monk; and for his
lance, the staff of the same Saint: esteeminge that those holy relics,
would counter guard him a great deal better, then all other sorts of armor
whatsoever. Acta Cyri and Ioannis apud Metaphrast 31. Similia habet Glicas 4.
p. ^nnalium.

3. A certain Ermit of the desert of Sennaar, as the chief of al those which
were carried by Araches, to Auenir King of the Indes, bore about his ^eck a
little purse made of hair, full of relics of the holy fathers of the de^ert.
S. John Damascen in the life of ^arlaam and Iosaphat. c. 22.

4. S. Antonie wore upon the fea^tes of Easter and Whitsontide, the garment of
S. Paul, the first Hermit: whereof S. Hierom speakinge, who wrote his life, he
says at the end thereof. If God would give if it me, I had ^ather have the robe
of S. Paul with his garments, then all the purple o^ kings, with their
kingdoms.

5. S. Thomas of Aquin, was neue^ without relics of S. Agnes, which he had in
a Reliquarie, fastened about his neck. Ribad in his life. 7. of March.

6. S. Bernard bore so great affection to the relics of S. Thaddeu^ Apostle,
which he received in the la^ year of his life from Jerusalem, tha^ not
contented to have honored them* and borne them about him during hi^ life, he
commanded that they should be laid upon his body in his tomb* after his death.
Guliel. Abbas subfine l. 3* c. 2. vitae eius.

From all this which has been said* who sees not, that it is good to carr^
about us, both night and day, some relics of Saints? And what, I pray^ you,
can the devils do, against ^ Christian, which lays him down* armed with a
good conscience, by the excited act of contrition, fenced wit^ the weapons of
holy water, Agnu^ Dei, and relics of Saints? And mark in this place, that
even as our holy mother the Church, concludes each cannonicall hour with
the prayer for the departed. Et fidelium animae etc. even so ought thou to
finish thy days journey, recommendinge to God the same souls, saying for their
refreshinge, one Deprofundis, or one Pater and Aue. See for this purpose the
8.. of the 6. Chapter of this book.

Lo in few words, that which we must do morning and evening. Let us now see
that which we ought to practice during the day.

THE III. CHAPTER. Of the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
IT is not enough to carry the exterior marks and signs of a Christian
soldiar, who so expects recompense from his captain, for all those which
shall say Lord, Lord, shall not for all this enter into the kingdom of heaven
Mat. 7. but the interior must also be answerable to the exterior. The interior
signs of a true Christian, are the virtues, whereof the chief and most
necessary of all other are, Faith, Hope, and Charity, as the Apostle says. 1.
Cor. 13. and S. Aug. l. 2. Retract. c. 63. and Enrichid. c. 2. and 3.

. 1. Of faith.
Faith, is a gift of God, and a light, whereby a man being enlightened,
believes and holds firmlie, all whatsoever God has revealed to us, and is
proposed to us to believe, by our holy mother the Catholic Church. Canis. de
fide and simbolo.

This virtu is the basis and foundation of all the others, without the which we
cannot approache unto God, nor obtain his grace. Heb. 11. 6.

To show that one has a true faith, he must believe simply, without enquiring
curiously, how this or that can be done, submitting and captiuating his
judgment, to all that which the Church proposes. One must believe firmly,
without sufferinge him self to be shaken, for any kind of opposition or
contrariety whatsoever. Freely, and holding up his head, without leaving or
ommittinge any thing, of that which touches the profession of his faith, for
any respect or humane consideration.

EXAMPLES.
1. Such an one was S. Paul, who in the 8. of the Romans says v. 38. I am
sure, that nether death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor
Powers, nether things present, nor things to come, nether might, nor height,
nor depth, nor other creature, shall be able to separate us from the charity
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Whence had he this assurance (says
S. Ierom) but from the firmitie of his faith? In cap. 1. epist. ad Galat.

2. Surius in the life of S. Hughe bishop of Lincoln, writes, that a certain
Priest of a scandalous life, upon a day saying Mass, when he was come to the
breaking of the B. Host, he saw the blood run down, whence being touched
inwardly, he amended his life, and published the fact to every one. It came to
pass, that S. Hughe, passing by the village where this Priest dwelt, not to
see this miraculous blood but to discourse with him of spiritual things (for
this priest had at that present the bruit and fame of a holy man) after sundry
discourses, the Priest began to speak of this stupendous miracle, and
besought S. Hughe to go as far as the Church, for to see that miraculous
blood, which was there reserved unto that present: but the holy Bishop would
not go. And as his followers did likewise press and importune him, he said
that those who will show some signs of their infidelity, may go: but to us
who firmly believe, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ, is truly under
the Sacramental species, what do these signs and miracles profit? And then
alleged that worthy sentence of our Savior. Blessed are they that have not
seen, and have believed. John 20. 29.

3. See the like answer of S. Lewis king of France, in Ribadeniera, in the
discourse upon the feast of the most holy Sacrament.

4. S. Bernard writing to Pope Innocentius, against the heretic Peter
Abailard, says. If our faith be doutfull (as this heretic said) shall not
our Hope also be in vain? All the martyrs then were great fools, to suffer so
great torments, for things doutfull and uncertain? No, no, our says is
founded upon the truth etc. Epist. 190.

Seeing that from the East unto the West (says Lactantius Firmianus) the
divine faith is received, and that every sex, age, and nation, are found, who
serve God unanimously, and that we see in all, one self same patience; one
self same contempt of death; we ought to know, that there is great reason for
this law, since it is defended unto death, for the ground and soliditie of this
religion, since injuries and torments can not overthrow it, but rather from day
to day, do make it stronger. lib. 5. c 13.

Of Popes only, there are found twenty seven, who chose rather to loose their
life, then their faith. And in the Church of Rome only, there have been above
three hundred thousand Christians, who to maintain the faith, have endured
death; whereof a hundred and eighty thousand are buried in the Churchyard of S.
Calistus. Tho. Bozi^s de signis eccle. l. 20. Now if in one city alone so
many are found, how many are there in the whole world?

Where are the eleven thousand virgins? where those twenty thousand, which in
the time of Diocletian, were all burnt for the faith, in one church? Niceph. l.
7. hist. eccl. c. 6.

All ages have furnished us with these brave soldiars and Amazo^s, who to
defend their faith promised to Jesus Christ their Captain, have given their
lives.

5. In Iaponia in our age, the year 1613. eight persons were burnt alive men,
women, and children, in the city of Arima for the Catholic faith, and were
accompanied with more then twenty thousand Christians in white robes, and with
their Beads in their hands: and seven and twenty beheaded in another place.
The year 1614. two brethren, with another Christian, were likewise burnt
alive, and their sister beheaded. Others had their noses, and their thumbes cut
off, and the tops of their hands and feet, and were marked with a hot iron
upon their foreheades. And the year 1618. other fifty endured death also for
the same cause.

6. The year 1612. at Cocura in the same Iaponia, as the Prince persecuted the
Christians, a Neophite demanded of a little child of four years old, saying.
If the Tyrant would kill thee, would thou forsake the faith? No Sir, said
the infant. What then, quoth the Christian, will you be a martyr? I forsooth,
said he, and my father and mother, and I with them, shall all be martyrs. But
perhaps you know not, replied the Christian, what it is to be a martyr. Yea
but I do, yea but I do, answered the child, it is to have our heads cut off
for the faith of Jesus Christ. I marry, but yet when this shall happen, you
will cry a pace, quoth the Neophite; Quite contrary, I will rejoice (replied
the child) and with a cheerful countenance, will I present my head unto the
hangman. These answers made the Christian to stand astonished, and ceased not
to give thanks to God, for having put into so little a body, a soul so manly
and so generous.

7. Another child of six years old, understanding of the Governor, that he
caused twenty Crosses to come from the city of Sanga, to crucify the
Christians, answered. O how glad I am of so good news, for I hope, that there
will also come a little one for me. Go Christians, go to school to these
little children, you who at every least occasion, turn your backs to almighty
God.

8. In the same Iaponia, and the same year aforsaid, nere unto Nangasachi, an
old man a Christian, very simple, and of little understanding, who could never
learn other prayer then Jesus Maria, the which he had continually in his
mouth, fell sick: his frie^des who were paga^s, endeavored to make him forsake
his faith, but he said unto the^. I am very sorry that being a Christian, I am
so ignorant in heavenly things: but yet know you, that if I knew for
certain, that I were to be condemned by God to everlasting fire, I would not
for all this forsake the Christian faith; for I had rather be tormented in hell
being a Christian, then (if it were so possible) to be in heaven, and be a
Ge^tile. O excellent answer! All this hitherto, is taken out of the history
of Iaponia, sent to our reverend father General.

. 2. Of Ignorance in things of faith, how dangerous it is, and which the
points are, that necessarily are to be known.
It is not enough to have habitual faith, which we have received in holy
Baptism, but moreover (being come to age and understanding) we must excite
acts thereof: but how can we do it, if we know not in particular what we
ought to believe? There is then, a strict obligation to learn the principal
points of our faith: which is the cause also, that God does threaten so often,
and with such efficacy, those which are ignorant.

Pour out thy wrath upon the Gentiles, that have not known thee. psalm. 68. 6.
If the Gentiles and Pagans, merit to be chasticed of almighty God for their
ignorance, what may the Christians merit?

If any man know not, he shall not be known, 1. Cor. 14. 38. that is, shall be
reproved, as S. Aug. explicateth.

Be thou taught Jerusalem, lest perhaps my soul depart from thee, lest perhaps
I make thee a desert land, not habitable. Ier. 6. 8.

What is it then that we must know necessarily? The unity of God, and Trinity
of persons, and the mystery of the Incarnation and passion of Jesus Christ,
for so our Lord him self says in S. John. 17. 3. And we must likewise have
the knowledge of hell and heaven. Heb. 11. 6.

Now all these points are contained in the Creed which the Apostles have
composed, as a sommarie of all that we are to believe. It is necessary then
that it be learned: and this it is which both S. Aug. and S. Ambrose recommend
so much. Aug. l. 1. de simb ad Catech. tom. 9. and sermon. 181. de tempore Amb.
l. 3. de Virg.

We must likewise know the commandments of God. Marc. 10 18 and 19. of the
Church, and the Sacraments, at lest those which we purpose to receive. Good
God, how many are there to be found, who from their tender youth, know
exactly that which concerns their t^ade and profession: and yet know not at
thirty or forty years of age, nether the commandments of God, nor their
belief? Ye fathers and mothers, you shall render an account to God, to have
so great a care to instruct your children in that which does concern the body,
and to be so careless of their soul, to send them to school, and to the
Catechismes.

The time, the time will come (says Saint John Chrysostom) that we shall be
chasticed for our ignorances. The Jews are ignorant, but their ignorance,
deserves not pardon. The Greeks are ignorant, but they have no just excuse. If
thou be ignorant of that which can not be known, thou shall not be blamed at
al: but if thou know not that which both is possible and easy to learn, thou
shall be chasticed rigorously. Homil. 26. in epist. ad Romans

EXAMPLES.
1. What miseries were they, which the people of the Jews did not endure, in
the time of their captivity? All which arrived unto the^ by reason of their
ignorance, and of their great carelesnes, to learn things belonging to
faith. The^rfore is my people led away captive (says the prophet) because they
had not knowledge etc. Therefore has hell dilated his soul, and opened his
mouth without any limite, and their strong ones, and their people, and their
high and glorious ones, shall descend into it. Isay 5. 13. O how easy is it
for the devil, to captiuate and enter into a soul, which knows in a manner
nothing concerning God? Hence do heresies, witcheries, and sorceries proceed.

2. Julian the Apostata, did never so great damage to the Church, as then when
he forbid all the Christians by edict, to instruct youth, ordaining that the
Gentiles alone should have the authority and credit to keep schools.
Ammianns l. 22. 23. Eunap. in Muson. Ambros. epist. ad Valent. Imp. Hier. in
Chron. Baron. Annal. eccl. tom. 4. anno Christi 362.

He knew full well (wicked that he was) that as ignorance in matters of faith
and religion, is the spring and nurcerie of all evils, Christians not being
instructed in the points of their faith, would be easily drawn to the worship
of the false Gods, and to panim superstitions.

. 3. Of Hope.
Upon this foundation of Faith, Hope is builded, which is a virtu, infused
divinely into the soul, by which we expect from God with certain confidence,
the goods of salvation, and of everlasting life. Canis. c. 2. de spe and orat.
Dom. q. 1.

We have access thorough Jesus Christ, and thorough faith, into this grace,
wherein we stand and glory, in the hope of the glory of the sons of God.
And not only this, but also we glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation
works patience; and patience, probation; and probation, hope; and hope
confounds not; because the charity of God is poured forth in our hearts.
Romans 5. 1. etc.

The grace of God our Savior has appeared to all men, instructing us, that
denying impiety and worldly desires, we live soberly and justly, and godly in
this world, expecting the blessed hope and aduent of the glory of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. 1. Tit. 2. 13.

This is the confidence which we have toward him, that whatsoever we shall
ask according to his will, he hears us. 1. John. 5. 14.

This virtu, is the staff of all the pilgrims of this life, which does
support them and strengthen them, in the deepest of their afflictions.

EXAMPLES.
Job having wholly lost his children, goods, honor, and health, and assaulted
with all the diseases that might be imagined, and that al together (by the
entermise of the devil) were encamped like a company of armed men within his
body, laid upon a dunghill, and utterly forsaken of humane help, comforted him
self nevertheless in the hope that he had of the resurrection, and life
eternal. I know (quoth he) that my redeemer lives, and in the last day I
shall rise out of the earth, and I shall be compassed again with my skin,
and in my flesh I shall see God: this my hope is laid up in my bosom. Job. 19.
25. And in another place he said. Although he shall kill me, I shall trust in
him. Job. 13. 15.

2. The Prophet Jeremy said, speaking to God; Thou art my hope, in the day of
affliction. Ierem. 17. 17.

3. The Apostle S. Peter (a) S. Maurus disciple of S. Benet (b) S. Raymondus of
Rochefort (c) thorough only confidence in God, walked with all assurance upon
the waters. (a) Mat. 14. (b) S. Greg. dial. 2. c. 7. (c) Surius 1. tom. 6. Ian.
Ribad.

. 4. Of distrust of our selves: and how we must never begin, nor undertake any
thing, but first to recommend the same to God.
Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm: for he
shall be as little bushes in the desert, and shall not see when good shall come,
but be shall a well in drynes in the desert, and in a land of saltnes, and not
habitable. Ierem. 17. 5.

Woe unto renegate children, says our Lord, that you would take council, and
not of me: and would begin a web, and not by my spirit. I say. 30. 1. What
else is it, to begin a web, and yet without the spirit of God, but to begin
some work, without recommending it first to God?

Unless our Lord build the house, they have labored in vain that build it.
psalm. 126. 1. That is to say, without God, one can do nothing, as him self
affirms in S. John 15. 5. And the Apostles having labored all night long
without our Lord, they took nothing. Luc. ^. 5. but as soon as they had cast
their net upon his word, they had a great and happy draught.

For this it is that S. Paul so much recommendeth, that all whatsoever we do,
we would do it in the name of God. Col. 3. 17. and 1. Cor. 10. 31.

David compares himself to a little child, newly weaned psalm. 130. 2. Even
then as a little infant, newly taken from the dugges, can not go a step, if his
mother guide him not by the arm, and as soon as she lets him stand alone
without houlding, he extends his arms, and cries with tears after his
mother: even so we (for we are a great deal, yea infinite less before God)
never ought to go, nor to do ought whatsoever, but to hold God by the hand,
and as soon as we feel our selves in any distress, to implore, more then
ever, his asistance, saying with David. O God intend unto my help, Lord make
haste to help me. Psalm. 69. 1.

EXAMPLES.
1. I thought (said S. Aug.) that I was some body of my self, and I saw not
that thou art he who did conduct me, until such time as thou retyredst thy
self a little from me and thus forthwith I fell. Then I saw and knew that thy
hand governed me, and that to be fallen, came from me, and to be risen again,
came from thee. Soliloque c. 15.

2. S. Dominique nether did, nor ever undertook ought, without having first
recommended him self to God, and to our Lady, by the intercession of whom, he
said he always obtained what he would of her Son. Sur tom. 4. and Ribad. 4.
August.

3. Albeit S. Francis had triumphed over his flesh, and quenched the flames of
sensual fire, and that it was revealed to brother Leo his companion, that S.
Francis was numbered in heaven in the number of those, which were true virgins
both in soul and body, yet was he nevertheless maruellously retired and strange
among women, having his eye so modest when he spoke unto them, that he hardly
knew so much as any one by sight. For he was wont to say, that by occasions
the strong became weak, and the weak was vanquished: and that to converse
familiarly in the company of women, or women with me^, without being burned or
so^what singed, was as hard as to walk upon hoate coals, or to bear fire in
ones bosom, without being hurt. He further added, that he who is hardy, is
not crafty, and that the devil so that he find whereon to take hold (although
it be but at a bare hair) will make thereupon a terrible war. Ribad. 4. of
October.

4. Our holy Father Ignatius, so much distrusted his own self, that in all his
affairs, he never resolved ought, albeit he knew all reasons probable, without
first reco^mending it to God. Ribad. in his life.

5. The sixth of November, together with the four crowned martyrs, the Church
celebrateth the feast of five other martyrs, Claudius, Nicostratus,
Simphorianus, Castorus, and Simplicianus, which were most excellent grauers and
Christians, except Simplicianus who was a panim; who seeing that the works of
marble and of other rich stuffes of his companions, were found so perfect and
complete, and that in laboring of them, all things succeeded as they
desired, where to the contrary he spoiled a number of tools about his art; he
demanded of Simphorianus (who was the chiefest of the rest) whence this
proceeded? Who answered him, that always in taking any instrument to work
with all, they called upon the name of Jesus Christ their God: and instructed
him so well, that thorough the grace and goodness of our Lord, he was converted
and baptized, and after martyred in their company. Ribad. 6. of Noue^br.

So true it is, which our Lord said to his Disciples, so many ages past. He
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings much fruit: for without me
you can do nothing. Joan. 15. 5.

. 5. Of Charity, and particularly of that which we owe unto God.
Charity is a virtu divinely infused, by the which we love God for him self,
and our neighbor for God. Canis. cap. 3. de charitate and decal. q. 2. ex S.
Aug. l. 3. de doctrina Christ. c. 10.

A certain law^er, asked of our Lord upon a day. Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? Mat. 25. 35. Or according to S. Luke. c. 10. 25. By
doing of what thing shall I posses life everlasting? Our Lord made answer.
Thou shall love thy Lord the God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul,
and with all thy strenght, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy
self. Upon which passage S. Bernard says. The reason to love God, is God him
self, the manner and the measure to love God, is to love him without measure:
God must be loved for him self, and that for two reasons. First, because we
can love nothing more justly. Secondly, because we can love nothing more
profitable. God deserves to be loved for him self, yea even of an Infidel,
for although he know not Jesus Christ, yet Jesus Christ knows him. This is
the cause why even a Panim is inexcusable, if he love not God with his whole
heart, with his whole soul, and with all his strenght: for the justice and the
reason which is in him, cry, that we ought to love him above all, whose dettor
we know our selves to be in all. Tract de diligendo Deo.

With how much more reason ought thou to love him (o Christian) who
illuminated with the light of faith, have more particular knowledge of his
bounty?

All the other virtues are merely nothing without this, for. If I speak with
the tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding
brass, or a tinkling cymball. And if I should have prophecy, and knew all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and if I should have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And if I should
distribute all my goods to be meat for the poor, and if I should deliver my
body so that I burn, and have not charity, it does profit me nothing. 1.
Cor. 13. 1.

Will you have a certain proof of the love of God? If you love me (says our
Lord to his Apostles) keep my commandments. Joan. 14. 15.

This is the charity of God (says S. John) that we keep his commandments,
and his commandments are not heavy. 1. Joan. 5. 3.

How do thou love him, whose commandment thou hate? Who is he that will
say; I love the Emperor, but I hate his laws? S. Aug. tract. 9. in ep. Joan.
The proof of love, is the performance of the work, and the keeping of the
commandments of God. S. Greg. Hom. 30. in Euang.

The properties of the love of God.
The first property of the love of God, is gladly to be with God, and not to
be auerted from him, but with grief.

So the espouse loved her spouse in the Canticles, saying. I found him who^ my
soul loves, I held him, nether will I let him go. Can. 3. 4.

2. To be insatiable, and never to become weary to do any thing for the love
of God; for this cause it is, that the Holy Ghost compares charity unto
death, to the grave, to hell, and unto fire, who never say, it is enough. Prou.
30. 15. Cant. 8. 6.

3. To have a simple and upright intention, addressing all his thoughts,
words, and works only to God.

That (says S. Bernard) is called true simplicity, which has a will
perfectly converted to God alone, and which with David desires but one thing
alone, that is to say, to please God. S. Bernard ad fratres de monte Dei. The
espouse says in the Canticles. In our gates, all fruits, the new and the old,
my beloved, I have kept for thee. Cant. 7. 13. By the fruits of the year
passed, are to be understood, the works of nature, as to eat, to drink, to
sleep, and the like. By the new, the works of grace, or supernatural, as all
the works of virtu are: as if she said, I offer unto thee all my works, good,
indifferent, supernatural, and natural, without any sort or manner of
reservation.

4. To be invincible, that is to say, never to suffer him self to be beaten
down, for any kind of difficulty. Who shall separate us (says the Apostle)
from the charity of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? Romans 8. 35.

5. To think always upon God, and by the creatures, as by so many steps,
to ascend and lift up him self always to him. Come my beloved (says the
spouse) let us go forth into the field, my beloved to me, and I to him, that
I may behold thee, as thou behouldest me. Cant. 7. 10.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Marie Magdalen so greatly loved our Lord after her conversion, that she
could in no wise be separated from him, following him even in his passion,
amidst the press of soldiars and people unto the mount of Caluarie, and there
also standing nere unto him, until such time as he was dead and buried. And
what greater proof of her love could be give, then the testimony of our Lord
him self, who says (defendinge her against Simon the Pharisie) Many sins
are forgiven her, because she loved much. Luc. 7. 44.

2. Who then shall separat us from the charity of Christ? Tribulation, or
distres, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or persecution, or the sword? But
in all these things we overcome, because of him that has loved us: for I am
sure, that nether death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor
Powers, nether things present, nor things to come, nether might, nor height,
nor depth, nor other creature, shall be able to separate us from the charity
of God, which is in Christ Jesus Lord. Romans 8. 35.

3. S. Peter being asked by our Lord if he loved him, bouldly answered him
three several times. Thou know Lord that I love thee. Joan. 21. 15. 16. 17.

4. S. Ignatius bishop and Martyr, was so enflamed with this burninge charity,
that he said (writing to the Romans when he was led prisoner to Rome there to
be executed.) I make it known to all the Churches, that I die for Jesus
Christ, with exceeding joy, unless you trouble me. I beseech you, let not your
affection, be domageable to me, let me be torn in pieces by the wild beasts,
that so they may send me soon to God. I am the corn and grain of God, and
shall be ground betwixt their teeth, so to be made the wheat and delicious
bread of Jesus Christ. And a little after he says. Let fire, cross, beasts
come, let all my members be cut in pieces, bruised and ground, let the death of
this miserable body, and all the torments of the devil come upon me, so that I
may come, and be united with Jesus Christ. Epist. ad Romans Hier. in Ignat.
Ribad. 1. of Feb. After his death, his body being opened, the name of Jesus was
found engraven in his heart.

5. S. Bonauenture writes of Saint Francis, that he considered God in every
thing, making of all the creatures a ladder, to ascend to him, who is to be
desired above all things. In his life cap. 9.

6. S. Iacopon, of the order of Saint Francis, being all alone in a certain
garden, ran as a man besides him self, embracing the first tree that there he
found, crying. O sweet Jesus, o my well beloved Jesus! etc. Raderus in vita
sanct. p. 2. c. 3.

7. Our Lord upon a day commanded S. Gertrude, that she should offer him more
especially, then she had yet done until that time, all her actions, as all the
letters which she wrote, the meat she eat, the words, the steps, the
respirations, and beatinges of her heart, all in the union of the life and
natural actions of his Son. She did so, and by means of this exercise, she
arrived unto so great perfection, that our Lord speaking of her to S.
Mechtildis (a religious woman of the same monastery) said. There is no place
upon the earth (after the most B. Sacrament) wherein I abide more particularly,
then in the heart of B. Gertrude. Lud. Blos. in monil. spir.

8. The blessed father S. Xauerius, seeing in the night by divine reueuelation
(in an hospital in Rome) all the pains and afflictions which he was to suffer
in the Indes, cried out to God. Yet more, yet more, (o Lord) yet more. Ribad.
in the abridgment of his life: and Horatius Turselinus: so greatly desirous was
he, to endure and suffer for the love of God.

If these examples do not suffice, read the lives of the B. Saints, and you
shall find no man nor woman Saint, which were not enflamed with this love.

. 6. Of Charity toward our neighbor.
After that our Lord had delivered the first commandment of charity, he said.
And the second is like to this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: on
these two commandments, depends the whole law and the prophets. Mat. 22. 37.

If any man shall say, that I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar.
For he that loves not his brother whom he sees, God, whom he sees not, how
can he love? 1. ep. c. 4. 20.

Before all things, have mutual charity continually among your selves. 1.
Pet. 4. 8.

The manner how to love our neighbor, is comprehended in these few words.
According as you will that men do to you, do you also to them in like manner.
Luc. 6. 31. And contrary-wise. That which thou hate to be done by thee to
another, see thou do it not to another at any time. Tob. 4. 16.

The properties of this charity, are set down by S. Paul. 1. Cor. 13. 4.
Charity, is patient, is benign; charity enuieth not, deal^th not peruersly,
is not puffed up, is not ambitious, seeks not her own, is not provoked to
anger, thinks not evil, rejoices not upon iniquity, but rejoices with
thee truth, suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things,
bears all things.

We are all brethren (Mat. 23. 8.) members of the same body (1. Cor. 12. 27.)
created for the same end, to enjoy the celestial enheritance (1. Pet. 1.4.)
What should let us then to love one another?

Blessed is he (says S. Aug.) whom thou love, o Lord, his friend in thee,
and his enemy for thee: For he alone loses no friend, who loves all his
friends in him, who can not be lost. Confess. l. 4. c. 9.

Even as (says S. Dorotheus) two lines drawn from the circumference after the
center, the nerer they approache unto the center, the nerer are they one to the
other: even so the nerer that we approache unto God, who is our center, the
nerer also are we by affection, one to another. In the 6. discourse, not to
judge our neighbor. The same does S. Bonauenture say. In stimulo amoris p. 2.
c. 7.

EXAMPLES.
1. Our Lord has so exceedingly loved us, that he has given his very life for
us. He could not possibly give a greater proof of his love, as him self says
in S. John. cap. 15.

2. The first Christians, loved one another so entirely, that S. Luke says.
The multitude of believers had one heart, and one soul. Act. 4. 32.

And Tertulian, who lived about that time writes, that the Infidells seeing the
Christians so to love, as to dye one for another said. Behold how they love
together?

3. Moses so loved his people, that seeing God would punish them for their
sins, he said. Lord pardon them, or blot me out of the book of life. Exodus
32.

4. I wished my self (said S. Paul) to be an anathema from Christ, for my
brethren. Romans 9. 3.

5. S. Serapion became a slave to certain tumblers and players, to the end to
have some means to discourse with them, and to convert them to the faith:
which he effected. Theod. in hist. sanct. pat. c. 83. and Marulus l. 3. c. 2.

6. Paulinus bishop of Nola, did as much, to deliver the son of a poor
widow, forth of captivity. S. Greg. l. 3. dial. c. 1.

7. S. Leo Abbot, to redeem certain of his monks that were captives, gave a
good sum of money to the barbarous people which detained them, and praid them
to accept him in their place: as they did, and within a while after, they cut
off his head. Sophon. prat. spirit. c. 112. and Baron. tom. 7. anno 586.

8. S. Sanctulus of the province of Nursie, having access unto the prison
where a Deacon was detained, caused him to get out secretly, and he remained in
his place. And when afterward those of Lu^bardy would have behedded him, he
called upon S. John, and the hangmans arms instantly became benumd. Which the
Barbaria^s seeing and admiring, they gave him life and liberty, and to all the
other captives also. S. Greg. dial. l. 3. c. 37.

O great and renowned Saints, who after the example of our Lord, have
postposed their own lives, to their neighbors! And thou (o Christian) for a
little point of good or honor, wilt enter into process and quarrels against thy
neighbor? O how far is this to give thy life for him!

Let us now come to the seven virtues, contrary to the capital sins,
ommitting the others, lest we be too tedious.

THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the seven virtues contrary to the capital sins.
GOod the Creator, commanded the prophet Jeremy, at the very beginning of his
missio^, to go thorough the realms, to pluck up, destroy, wast, and
dissipate, and to build and plant. Jeremy 1. 10. to wit, to take from souls,
by the force of his words, and examples, sins and vices, and to plant
virtues in their places.

This is the whole endeavor of a good Christian; which we labor to persuade in
these two books. In the first I have laid down the means to take away
sins, amongst others the seven capital, which are as the fountain and
root of all the rest. I will now (God willing) open the way, to plant virtues
in their places, and namlie those, which are also by contrary, as the spring
and fountain of all the others.

. 1. Of the virtu of Humility.
Humility (according to S. Bernard) is a virtu, by the which a man does
villifie or despice him self, by a true and perfect knowledge of him self.
Lib. de grad. Humil.

This virtu is so noble, that the Son of God him self would teach the same,
both by words, and by examples. Learn of me (says he) because I am meek and
humble of heart, and you shall find rest to your souls. Mat. 11. 29. And in
cap. 5. 3. he places the poor of spirit (even of this life) in the rank and
number of the blessed: and by the poor of spirit, S. Aug. understands the
humble. De sancta virginit. c. 232.

Humility, is called by the holy fathers, the firm foundation of a spiritual
buildinge (a) the head (b) the mother (c) the mistress (d) and the treasure (e)
most assured of all virtues. (a) Cassian Collat. 15. c. 7. (b) Ambros. in Psalm.
118. ser. 20. (c) Greg. l. 23. mor. c. 13. (d) ibid and Cassian. (e) Basil. in
constable. mon. c. 17.

The swathing clothes and cloutes of our B. Savior, are more precious then all
purples: and the manger much more glorious then all the golden throanes of
Kings: the poverty of Jesus Christ, is much more rich, then all the
treasures and storehouses in the world: for what is there more rich and
precious, then humility, wherewith the kingdom of heaven it self is bought
and purchased? S. Ber. ser. 4 in vig. not. Dom. And in the 2. ser. of the
Ascension, he says, that humility is the mark of the predestinate.

What shall we say of the necessity thereof? That which Truth him self has
pronounced of it. A men I say to you, unless you become as little children, you
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 18. 3.

Persevere (my dearest) says S. Bernard, in the discipline which you have
undertaken, to the end that by humility, you may ascend unto sublimitie, for
she is the way, nor is there any other. He that walks by any other way, he
rather falls, then ascends, for it is humility alone which exalts, it is
humility alone which leads and conducteth unto life. Ser. 2. de Ascensione.

Her profit is great, for she it is who procures us access to the secret
cabinet, and especial graces of the king of heaven, and makes us to
participate of all his treasures: behold the proofs.

The prayer of him that humbles him self, shall penetrate the clouds. Eccl.
35. 18.

The prayers of the humble, have ever been agreeable unto thee, said the chaste
ludith. c. 16. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Iac.
4. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 5. Will you that I comprehend all in one word? He that
humbles him self, shall be exalted. says our Lord. Luc. 14. 11.

To attain to the top of this virtu, S. Anselme gives seven degrees or
stepps. 1. To acknowledge ones self contemptible, or worthy to be despiced.
2. To rejoice thereat. 3. Freely to confess it. 4 To persuade it to others. 5. To
suffer patiently that the same be said to him self. 6. To suffer him self to
be treated contemptibly. 7. To take contentment and pleasure in it. De
similitud. c. 10. ad. 18.

EXAMPLES.
1. The Son of God, is the true miroir and pattern of al humility (for
which cause he said, learn of me for I am humble.) For who saw, or ever shall
see the like humility as that, of God incarnate? God a little infant? God in a
stable, in a manger, betwixt an Ass and an Ox? Who was ever more abased then
God circumcised? God, baptized? God amongst sinners, serving them, washing
their feet, wiping them, and kissing them? God subject and obedient unto a
poor carpenter, and to the base hangmen? God nourishing his servants with his
flesh, and giving them his blood to drink? God bound, howted, mocked,
bespitted, cudgelled, buffeted, trampled under feet, whipped, crowned with
thorns, bearing his cross, nailed, hunge and dying on a gibbet betwixt two
thieves?

Behold the humility of the Son of God, who (as the Apostle says) hum^led
him self, made obedient unto death, ^uen the death of the cross: for the
which thing God has also exalted him, and has given him a name which is
above all names, that in the name of Jesus every knee ^ow, of the celestialls,
terrestrialls, and infernalls. Phil. 2. 8. Behold Christian and imitate this
goodly example.

2. The first in humility, after the Son of God, is his most holy and
immaculat mother, who albeit endued with all the graces which a pure creature
could possibly have, yet was troubled at the praises of the Angel, called her
self the handmaide of God; and having conceived the Son of God, went
instantly to serve her cousin Elizabeth. What humble patience had she in her
humiliations, not finding an Inn to lodge in, when she was at the point of her
lying down, constrained to withdraw her into a stable, and to bring forth at
midnight, in winter time, both her creature and her Creator, and to lay him
upon a little straw, in a maunger, betwixt beasts? Moreover, what patience, to
bear him in haste into Egypt amongst Idolaters? To see him taken, bound,
whipped, hunge, and dying on the Cross?

It is no marvel then, if casting our eyes upon these two so beautiful
mirors, so many Saints of all ages, sexes, and conditions, have humbled them
selves? If one S. Gregory Pope (a) and S. Lewis (b) king of France, esteemed
them selves honored to serve the poor. If a S. Helen Empress (c) took some
time so great contentment, to give water to poor virgins when they went to
dinner; if she served in the platters, filed forth drink, and set her on her
knees before them. If one S. Heduuige (d) Duchess of Polonia, besides the
services above said, kissed (when no body was aware thereof) the very printes
and steps where the poor had passed. B. Father Ignatius (e) being general
of the company of Jesus, exercised him self with so great contentment in the
most humble and basest offices, even to the playing the scullian, to wipe the
pots, rub the stoue-house, scour the platters, carry wood, kindle fire, draw
water, serve in meat, and other like services. If infinite others,
notwithstanding their estate and greatness, have abased them selves in all
sorts of humiliation, they knew full well, that the honor and glory of good
soldiars, is, to follow their captain, as nere as they can (a) Joan. Diac. in
eius vita (b.) Ribad. 25. of Aug. (c) Rufin. li. c. 8. Socrates l. 1. c. 13.
Theod. l. 1. c. 18. Sozom. l. 2. c. 1. Baron anno 31. 6. (d) Surius tom. 5. 16.
October. (e) Ribad. l. 3. of his life.

. 2. Of Liberallitie.
Liberallitie is a virtu, which moderateth the love of riches, and makes a man
facile and prompt to employ them and spend them, when reason judges it
expedient. S. Tho. 2. q. 117. art. 1. 2. 3. ex Arist. l. 4. Ethic. l. 1.

Liberality is a great virtu, says S. Hierom, and a royal way, from hence he
declineth on the right hand, who so is scarce, nether giving to others, nor
yet to him self that which is necessary: and on the left hand he, who eats
and consumes his means amongst strumpets, and says. Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we must dye, lib. 16. in Isay.

Hear how Saint John Chrysostom speaks. Even as the daughters of such as
are rich and noble, are wont to wear some jewel about their neck for an
ornament, without ever putting it off, because it is a sign of their
nobility: even so must we clothe and adorn our selves in all times with
bountifulnes, to declare that we are the children of him who is merciful, and
causes his sun to shine upon the good and bad. Chrisost. Hom. 1. vel in
praefat. in ep. ad Phillip. See hereafter of this virtu. Chap. 7. 2. 3. and 4.

. 3. Of Chastity.
Chastity is a virtu necessary to every Christian that preteneth to come to
heaven, which does repugne to the sin of Luxury, and gives a bridle to
concupiscence. The Apostle calls it sanctification. 1. These. 4. 3. and holiness,
without which, no man shall see God. Heb. 12. 14.

Now, there are three sorts of cha^tities; The first is, of virgins. The
second, of widows. The third, of married folks. Isidor. Pelusian. compares
virginal chastity to the sun, that of widows to the Moon, that of
married folks to the stars. epist. 391. S. Ierom expounding the parable of
the seed. Mat. 13. attributes the hundred-fould fruit, to virginity, the
^xtie fould, to viduitie, and the thirty fould to marriage. The same S. Aug
says. de virgin. c. 44. and venerable Bede.

I would all men to be as my self (says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 7. 7. but every
on^ has a proper gift of God, one so, and an other so. But I say to the
unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they so abide as I also, but
if they do not contain them selves, let them marry, for it is better to
marry, then to be burnt. And a little lower. v. 25. And as concerning virgins, a
commandment of our Lord I have not, but council I give, as having obtained
mercy of our Lord to be faithful. I think therefore that this is good for the
present necessity. Art thou tied to a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou
loose from a wife. Seek not a wife. And v. 32. He that is without a wife, is
careful for the things that pertain to our Lord, how he may please God: but
he that is with a wife, is careful for the things that pertain to the
world, how he may please his wife, and he is divided. And the woman unmarried
and the virgin, thinks on the things that pertain to our Lord, that she may
be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is married, thinks on the
things that pertain to the world, how she may please her husband. And he
concludes in the end. v. 38. He that joins his virgin in matrimony, does
well: and he that joins not, does better. A woman, if her husband sleep, she
is at liberty, let her marry to whom she will, only in our Lord: but more
blessed shall she be, if she so remain, according to my council; and I think
that I also have the spirit of God.

O how beautiful is the chaste generation with glory, for the memory thereof
is immortal! Sap. 4.

All weight is not worthy a continent soul. Eccl. 26. 20. that is to say,
there are no riches nor treasures, which can be compared to a chaste soul.

I praise marriages (says S. Ierom) but in as much as they engendre virgins. I
gather the Rose, from amongst the thorns, the gold from the earth, the pearl
from the shell. epist. ad Eust^ch.

S. Ciprian speaking to virgins, says. You have already begun to be, that
which we shall be hereafter, you have even from this life, the glory of
resurrection, passing by the world, without the thoughts of the world; when as
you persevere chaste and virgins, you are equal to Angels. Cyp. de hab. virg.

O chastity (exclaimes S. Ephrem) which reioycest the heart, and give wings
to the soul to fly to heaven! O chastity, which do diminish passions, and
deliuerest the soul from all unquietness! O chastity, which give light to
the just, and darkness to the devil! O chastity, spiritual chariot, which
cariest us to things sublime and celestial! O chastity, who like a sweet
smelling Rose amidst the soul, replenishest it with all good odor! Tom. 1.
ser. de cast.

Humane bodies, resemble glasses, which cannot be borne one with another
touching together, without encurring danger to be broken; And unto fruits,
which albeit sound and well seasoned, yet receive detriment by touching one
another; Water it self, how fresh soever it be with in a ^essell, yet being
touched by any ter^estriall creature, can not long keep ^ts freshnes. A chaste
soul, must be like the spouse in the sacred Canticles, having her hands
distilling mirrhe, a ^iquour preserving from corruption: ^er lips are bound
up with a vermilian riband (a mark of the shamfastnes of her words:) her
eyes, are of Doves, by reason of their purity and implicitie: her nose is like
the Cedars of Libanus, a wood incorruptible.

EXAMPLES.
Of the purity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his most holy mother, ^s now
no need to speak, then which nothing can be imagined more ^oble or better;
Let us therefore speak of some Saints, both of the old, and ^w law.

1. How exceeding chaste was the patient Job, who said. I have made a covenant
with mine eyes, that I would not so much as think of a virgin. Job. 31. 1.

2. The patriark Joseph, being sundry times solicited unto lubricitie in the
very flower of his age, by the wife of Putephar his Lady and mistress,
consta^tly refused her, for fear of offe^ding God. And at the last, as she
instantly urged him upon a day, he fled from her, leaving his cloak behind
him. Genesis 39.

3. For that thou have loved chastity, and after thy husband not known any
other, therefore also the hand of our Lord has strenghtned thee, and therefore
shall thou be blessed forever. Judith 15. 11.

4. Godfrie of Bullen in the conquest of Jerusalem, being enquired of by the
Turks (after diverse notable exploites and stratagemes which he had done)
whence it was that his hand was so mighty, answered. Because he had never been
stained with any unchaste or dishonest touch. Th. Sallius c. 8. Of his
spiritual practice.

5. Susanna, seeing her self reduced to so hard a case, as either to dye, or to
consent to the wicked concupiscence of the two old men, chose rather to die,
then to defile by so filthy an act, the purity of her body and soul. Dan. 3.

6. S. Potamiana, an Egiptian virgin, being requested sundry times by her
master, to yield assent to the act of uncleanness, did always deny him
constantly; and being delivered by him into the hands of the Prefect of
Alexandria, and threatened to be thrown into a cauldron full of boylinge
pitche, unless she condescended to her masters pleasure, she still withstood him,
and chose rather to be plunged by little and little in this scaulding cauldron,
and see al her flesh boiled to pieces: until such time ^s after the torments of
an hour, being put therinto up to the neck, she rendered up her soul into the
hands of her celestial spouse, the^ for so short a pleasure, to loose the
precious treasure of her pudicitie. This history has been declared by S.
Antonie, to one Isidorus, and he recounted it afterward to Palladius, who
reports it in his Lusiac. c. 1. Card. Baron. tom. 3. anno. 310.

7. S. Euphrasia led to the stews, seeing that she could not escape the hands
of a young lecher, she said unto him, that if he would leave her honor
untouched, she would bestow an ointment upon him, wherewith being anointed, he
should never be hurt: whereupon she prayed him to make proof in her. He was
content, and when she had caused her neck to be rubbed with wax melted in oil,
she said unto him, that he should strike with his sword with all the might that
he was able. He did so, and at the first blow, smote off her head. Niceph. l.
7. hist. eccles. c. 13. Baron. to. 3. anno 309.

8. Casimirus, son to Casimirus king of Polognia, being in danger of death,
according to the judgment and opinion of the best physicians, unless he gave him
self to the pleasures of the flesh, chose rather to die, then in so doing, to
loose the flower of his virginity. Cromerus l. 29. Rer. Polon. And Politianus
writes that the like ^apned to Michael Vernius Poet, of the age of eightene
years.

9. S. Macrina virgin, sister to S: Basil and S. Gregory of Nice, being often
requested by her mother, to put into the Chirugians hands, a sore breast which
she had, which threatened an incurable cancker, if it were not lanced in d^e
time: she was so chaste and so shamfast, that her disease seemed nothing unto
her, in respect of exposing to the eyes and hands of men, some part of her
body. She went then into her oratorie, and there besought God with trickling
tears, that he would heal her, without discovering her flesh to the sight of
men. This done, she went and looked forth her mother, and besought her to make
the sign of the Cross upon her disease; which she did, and thereupon was
healed instantly. Ribad. in her life, the 19. of July.

10. S. Anthony being enforced upon a day to strip himself naked to pass the
flood of Lycus, besought Theodorus his companion, to remove him self a far off
from him; and being upon the point to unclothe him self: he was ashamed of him
self: which thing was so grateful unto God, that he passed him over
miraculously on the other side, without the puttinge off his clothes. S.
Athanasius in his life.

11. S. Nympha of Palermo in Sicilia, having preferred virginity before
marriage, received of her good Angel, a crown made of Lillies and of Roses.
Baron. in Martirolog.

See the lives of S. Agnes, S. Agatha, S. Cecilie, S. Vrsula, S. Dorothe and
others in Ribadeneira.

12. S. Julian having induced her husband Basillisses the first night of her
marriage, to keep with her, his virginity, a most sweet odor dispersed it
self thoroughout the chamber, and a resplendant light appeared to them, and
two quires, one of Saints, wherein our Lord presided, the other of virgins,
wherein our Lady presided. The quire of Saints began to singe. Thou have over
come Julian, thou have over come: That of virgins, Blessed be Basillisses, who
has followed such holy council, and despising the vain pleasures of the
world, has made him self worthy of everlasting life. This done, two men
clothed in white, took them by the hands and joined them together: then a
venerable old man presented them a book, wherein he read unto them these
words ensuinge, the which were written in letters of gold.

Who so desiring to serve God, shall contenine the deceitful delights of the
world, as thou have done, o Julian, shall be written in the number of those,
who have not defiled them selves with women. And Basillisses, because of the
intention which he has to remain a virgin, he shall be put into the book of
virgins, whereof Marie the mother of virgins, holds the first place. See their
lives, in the flowers of the lives of Saints, by father Ribad. 9. of Iulie,
taken out of Metaphrastes.

. 4. Of Charity.
Abstinence is a virtu, which bridleth the disordinat pleasures and desires of
meats, and prescribes a due moderation unto eating. By disordered desires,
are to be understood those, which draw and allure a person to that which is
unlawful, as to eat meats forbidden, or in time and place not convenient, or
in too great quantity, or in an indecent manner, or else for that these desires
be too importunat, having no other thought but of the guts, and the belly.

By due moderation is understood, that which is agreeable to the health of the
body, and to the functions of the soul. For which cause it was that S. Aug.
said. Thou have taught me, O Lord, that I approach unto meats, no otherwise
then I would do unto physic. l. 10. Confess. c. 31.

Sobriety (according as it is taken in Eccles. c. 51. Titus. 2. 1. Pet. 1.) is
a virtu, which does duly moderate, the affection and use of drinking which may
make drunk. This virtu, as also the precedent, is the mother of health, in
that she takes away, and hinders all the cause of sicknesses, which is over
much fulness, and cruditie or rawnes. For it is a maxim received of all
Physicians; None shall be seized on by maladies, who is careful not to fall
into crudities. But it is much better to hear the same from the spirit of God.
Be not greedy in all ^easting, and pour not out thy self upon all meat, for
in many meats there shall be infirmity. Because of surfeit, many have died,
but he that is abstinent, shall add life. Eccl. 37. 32.

Add hereunto, that this virtu makes the body lively, and expeditious, to al
its motions and its functions.

But what shall I say of the v^ilities the soul receives thereby? It both
conserueth and augmenteth memory, sharpneth the wit, and renders it more
capable to receive divine inspirations, and contemplatio^s. Whom shall he teach
knowledge? And whom shall he make to understand the thing heard? (says the
prophet) them that are weaned from the milk, that are plucked away from the
breasts. Isay 28. 9. That is to say, to those that withdraw themselves from the
delights and pleasures of the belly. Hence it proceeds, that the abstinent
and sober, do better discover the snares of the devil, and are more strong
for to resist him. For which cause S. Peter said. Be sober and watch, because
your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion goes about, seeking whom he may
devour. 1. Pet. 5. 8.

EXAMPLES.
1. All the first men which were from the creation of the world, until the
deluge, the space of a thousand six hundred years, abstained both from wine,
and from flesh: whence it was that they lived to nine hundred years old.
Theodoret. Chrisost. Hieron. in Genesis

2. Venerable Bede, entering into religion at seven years old, by reason of
his great abstinence, lived therein until the age of nintie two. S. Hilarion
till eighty four. S. Paphnutius, and S. Macarius, until nintie. Saint lames
hermit, till a hundred and four. Saint Antonie, till a hundred and five. Saint
Simeon Stillites, till a hundred and nine, whereof he passed eighty one, upon
a pillar, exposed to the sun and wind; S. Paul the first heremit, until a
hundred and fifteen, whereof he lived a hundred in the desert. S. Arsenius, and
S. Romualdus lived a hundred and twenty. S. Hier. in vita Hilarionis and
Pauli. Athanasius in Antonio. Cassianus collat. 3. c. 1. Theodoret in Iultano.
Deceteris vide Lessium in suo Hygiastico fol. 60.

3. Some years past, the Suffragan of the bishop of Bamberg, visiting his
dioces, penetrated as far as into Turing, where he gave the Sacrament of
Confirmation (which since a hundred years, had not been given out of the
cities of this Bishopric) to six thousand persons; amongst which, above the
number of two hundred, had past above a hundred years: so that the children
were a hundred years old, the nephues seauentie, and so of the rest, unto the
fourth regeneration. Extracted out of the annals of our Society. And I my
self above four years past, spoke at Teux in Franchimont with a poor
contriman, who was above a hundred and twenty years old, and was yet lusty:
and this by reason of the sobriety which he had observed in his living.

4. Josephus writes, that the Essenois, lived for the most part, to a hundred
years old, by means of the simplicity of their food, and the good government
which they observed, for (says he) there is given to each one, nothing else
but bread and pottage. Lib. 2. de bello Iudaico.

5. From this abstinence and sobriety, it proceeded, that all the Saints
aforsaid, were evermore in vigor of spirit, spending both the days and nights
in holy prayer and contemplation, with such contentment, that it seemed unto
them, even already to taste the delights of the blessed: as amongst others, S.
Anthony and S. Arsenius, who from the setting of the sun, to the rising
thereof, remained in prayers without so much as once moving them: angry that
the sun, (beating with her beams upon their eyes) disturbed them from their
prayers, so able were they, and contented for to pray. Athanas. Ribad. 19. of
July.

6. To conclude this matter, it will not be from the purpose, to set down in
this place, what Tertulian writes as an eye witness, of the sobriety and
abstinence of the first Christians. They never (says he) set them down to
table, but first they make their prayers to God. They eat as much, as those
do, that rise a hungered. They drink as much, as is meet for those that are
chaste and modest. They fill them selves, as those who remember, that they are
to pray unto God in the night. They talk together, as those that know that God
does hear them. After meat, they wash their mouth and hands, and after
discourse turn by turn, upon some point of holy scripture, and by this means
it is one knows, how much they have drunk. They arise from the table, not to
enter into debates and quarrels, not to talk of lasciuiousnes and knauerie,
but of that which is both honest and modest, vt qui non tam caenam coenauerint,
quam disciplinam, as those who had not so much fed of a supper, as of
discipline, so that a man would judge, that they rather came from some lesson,
then from the table. Tertul. c. 39. Apologet. O admirable sobriety of these
first Christians, from which how far off are we at this present!

. 6. Of the virtu of Patience.
Patience is a virtu, whereby we endure voluntarily, and with tranquillity, the
evils which do happen to us, sent from God, from the devil, or from men, as
sicknesses, loss of goods, of children, of parents etc; injuries, sadnesses,
scruples, and other afflictions of spirit: and this for the hope we have of
better goods.

There are six degrees of patience. 1. To receive the injury or the evil,
without any resistance. 2. Not to revenge it. 3. To bear no hatred to the
party, from whom the evil does proceed. 4. To love him. 5. To do good unto
him. 6. To pray to God for him.

All that shall be applied to thee, receive; and in sorrow, sustain; and in
thy humiliation have patience (says the wiseman) for gold and silver, are
tried in the fire, but acceptable men, in the furnace of humiliation. And v.
16. Woe be to them, that have lost patience.

He that is patient, is governed with much wisdom, but he that is impatient,
exalts his folly. Pro. 14. 29.

My son, cast not away the discipline of our Lord, nether do thou faint when
thou art chasticed of him: for whom our Lord loves he chasticeth, and as a
father in the son, he pleases him self. Pro. 3. 11. The same does the
Apostle say. Heb. 12. 17. and S. John in the Apoc. 3. 19.

The most effectual motives which one can give, to excite and advance him
self to this holy virtu, are.

1. To consider the patience of God the Creator, who gives so many good things
unto sinners, and indures, so gently all their injuries; who makes his sun
to rise upon good and bad, and rayneth upon just and iniust, as our Lord says
in S. Mat. 5. 45. Which point Tertullian deduceth elegantly lib. de patientia:
and S. Cyprian, lib. de bono patientiae.

2. To consider the patience which our Lord Jesus Christ had during his whole
life, in whom God (as Tertullian speaks) has placed his spirit with all
patience, who when he was reviled did not revile, when he suffered he threatened
not, not but delivered him self to him that judged him unjustly. 1. Pet. 2. 25.

3. To consider all the Saints of the old Testament, as Abell, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David Tobie, Job, what is it they have no^ endured? Now,
if in that rude world, before the doctrine and examples of Jesus Christ, all
these holy Saints have been so patient in their adversities, what ought we to
be (says Tertullian) in the light of the gospel, in the school of Jesus
Christ, in this abundance of grace, amongst the infinite examples of the Saints
of the new testament?

4. To consider the great vtilities of this virtu. 1. It satisfies for sins,
redeeming by a little pain, the most horrible torments of the other life. It is
easy to suffer the loss of ten crowns, when one knows that by this means,
one redeemeth the confiscation of then thousand. 2. It aideth, confirms, and
perfecteth all virtues. Esteem it, my brethren, al joy, when you shall fall
into diverse tentations (says S. James) knowing that the probation of your
faith works patience, and let patience have a perfect work. Iac. 1. 2. 3. It
makes us also to merit everlasting life. 2. Cor. 4. 17.

And our Lord says. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when they shall revile you
and persecute you, and speak all that naught is against you, untruly, for my
sake, be glad and rejoice, for your reward is very great in heaven. Mat. 5. 10.

EXAMPLES.
1. Job, one of the greatest Princes of all the east, being spoiled by the
devil of all his goods, afflicted with all sorts of diseases that might befall
unto a man, and this thoroughout all the members of his body, and for the space
of many years despiced of all men, yea even assaulted by his own wife, who
provoked him to deny God: having no other lodging then a dunghill, and for all
sorts of moueables, an ilfauored piece of a broken pot, to scrape his soars,
and to cleanse the filth that issued out of them: not withstanding all these
afflictions, he never changed nor lost his courage, no not so much as of
speech or of visage, but singing cherefully these words, so full of
resignation to the will of God. As it has pleased our Lord, so is it done.
Job. 1. 22.

2. Tobias falling a sleep against a wall, a Swallow let fall her dunge upon
his eyes, which made him blind at the same instant. God permitted this
affliction to happen to him (says the holy scripture) that an example might be
given to posterity of his patience, as also of holy Job. For whereas he feared
God always from his infancy, and kept his commandments, he grudged not
against God, for that the plague of blindness had chanced to him, but continued
immovable in the fear of God, giving thanks to God all the days of his
life. Job. 2. 12. And after the Angel Raphael had healed him, he said unto him.
Because thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary that tentation should
prove thee. Tob. 12. 13.

3. S. Serulus a beggar, lying paralitique his whole life at a gate of Rome, at
each new access of dolor, always rendered thanks and praise to almighty
God; for which cause he deserved at his death, to be visited and recreated with
the music of Angels. S. Greg. Pope writes it in his Dialogues l. 4. c. 14.
and Hom. 15. in Euang.

4. S. Galle daughter to Simachus Consul of Rome, being left a widow in the
flower of her age, had all her body covered over with an infamous scale: and
the Physicians assuring her that she should soon die, yea that a beard would
grow out at her chinne like to a man, unless she married her self again, she
chose rather to endure both the sickness and death, then to marry again the
second time. At last, as she drew by little and little unto her death, having
one of her breasts all full of soars, and that S. Peter appeared unto her,
she asked not of him to be healed, but only if her sins were forgiven her:
and understanding that they were, she died with most exceeding consolation S.
Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 13.

5. The Emperor Mauritius, having been the cause of the massacre, of sundry of
his captive subjects, which he might have set free for a small matter, besought
of God to have his punishment in this life, and wrote to all the Patriarchs and
Monks of the east, to the end they should offer up to God their prayers for
this effect. God granted him his demand, for he saw all his children put to
death before his eyes, he saying no other thing, save only that verse of the
psalm. 118. Thou art just o Lord, and thy judgment is right: and within a
while after, he him self had his head cut off. Niceph. l. 18. hist. c. 38. and
Card. Baron. anno. 602.

6. S. Liduuine native of Holland, from the age of fifteen years, to fifty
three, was never without sicknesses and diseases. And first having an Apostume
broken within her body, was afterward smitten with the palsy, and fire of S.
Anthony, had al her members rotten and full of holes. Out of her breasts,
worms issued by whole hundreds, which eat and gnawed all her body; She had
her head afflicted with most sharp pains, her forehead open, her chinne
cleft, one eye out, and the other not able to behold the light; cast commonly
blood out at her mouth, eyes, nose, and ears; had the squinzie in her throat,
the toothache, agues, single, double, triple, quadruple, and the dropsy: and
besides all these evils, she was accused of witcherie. Now what feeling could
she have amongst so many and such afflictions? notwithstanding, she said no
other thing, but. O my sweet Lord, augment my pains. Wretch that I am, alas,
what is it that I endure? Alas how little is it in comparison of that which thou
endurest for me? Surius to. 7. 14. of April. See the example of Saint Frauncis
here before lib. 1. c. 7.. 7. example 1.

7. S. Nichola or Colecta, having craved of our Lord, to make her partaker of
his pains, for the space of fifty years was never without sicknesses and
most grievous dolours, which always redoubled upon solemn feasts. And as
they that looked unto her, wept at the very sight of her torments, she in
smyling wise said unto them. Wherefore weep ye, my good sisters? that which I
suffer, deserves not so much as to be thought of. If God have sent it me, alas,
should I be so perfidious, as to quarrel against the bounty of my sweet Lord,
who has so great a care of his poor servant? And as she ommitted not for all
her pain to come and go, to do some service unto God, some saying unto her;
You will die by the way. So that (quoth she) we die betwixt the arms of good
Jesus, what forces it (my poor sisters) whither we die in the fields or in
the city upon the pauement, or upon a matteras? We cannot fall amiss,
falling betwixt the hands of God. Surius 6. of March ex Stephano Iuliaco. See
Binet in ses consolations des malades c. 7.. 4.

8. S. Spiridion being called by the Emperor Constance as he entered the
palace, a courtiar seeing him poorly apparelled, gave him a box upon the
ear; the Saint presented him the other. Which touched in such sort the heart of
this arrogant person; that he cast him self before his feet, and asked him
forgiveness. Surius 24. of December.

9. S. Romuald, of the house of the Dukes of Rauenna, being often stricken with
a pole by Marinus the Hermit, when he happened to miss in saying his psaulter,
replied not a word, until such time as after certain days, seeing that by
this means he lost the hearing of one ear, he said unto him, that if he
thought good, he should from thence forth strike him upon the right side,
because he had lost the hearing of the left, by reason of the blows that he
had given him. Marinus was extremely amazed at this patience, and was the cause
that he ever afterward respected him so much the more. The B. Card. Damian in
his life, and Ribad. 7. of Feb.

10. Our Lord said upon a day to the B. mother Teresa of Jesus; Believe my
daughter, that he that is most beloved of my Father, is he to whom he gives
the greatest troubles. Behold and consider my wounds, never will thy evils
be equal to my pains. This so encouraged her, that she had no other desire
but to suffer, so that being buffeted, spit on, and trod under foot, she fell
a laughing: being calumniated in all that possible might be said, she set not
by it. Yea, she prayed to God, that she might never be without pains, as she
was not. And after she had been once tormented for the space of five hours by
the devil, with great dolors and interior and exterior troubles, so that she
thought that she was able to endure no more; she notwithstanding, ceased not to
crave patience of our Lord, offering her self according to her custom, that if
he would make use thereof, that then this pain might last her till the day of
judgment: and this was her ordinary prayer. My Lord be it to dye, or to
endure, I for my self ask naught else of thee.

11. Blessed Father Zauerius, endured much in the Indies, but it was nothing in
regard of that which he desiered to endure: for amidst his greatest pains, he
prayed to God to give him greater. And when upon a day, our Lord had showed him
the cross and torments by the which he was to pass, he began to cry. Yet
more, yet more (o Lord) yet more. Ribad. in the abridgment of his life.

12. S. John Gualbertus having pardoned from his heart the murdering of his
brother, as he prayed a while after before a crucifix, our Lord. who was nailed
thereon, inclined his head down unto him. Blas. Mediolan. general. ord. val.
vmbrosae circa annum 1040. and Baron. tom. 11. anno. 1051.

13. An English gentilman, having likewise pardoned him who had killed his
father, as he praid before a Crucifix, the King (who was present) perceived
that at each genuflexion which he made, the Crucifix bowed its head unto him.
Math. Paris. hist. Anglic. anno 1090. Thou confirmest (o Lord) by this miracle,
the truth of thy doctrine, uttered so many ages past. Forgive, and it shall be
forgiven you. Luc. 6. Mat. 6.

14. Our Lord said upon a time unto S. Gertrude, that even as the ringe which
is given at a making sure, is a sign of the faith which the parties promise
one to another: even so patience in corporal and spiritual adversities,
endured for the love of God, is a sign of divine election, and of the marriage
of the soul with almighty God. Blos. l. de consol. pusillam.

He said the same, to the B. Mother Teresa; Thou know full well (quoth he
unto her) the marriage there is betwixt thee and me, and that by this means,
all that I have is thine. I give thee then, all the sorrows and pains which I
have suffered. In the book aforsaid cap. 10.

Length of time can nether be yrksome nor tedious upon this subject, there
being nothing more profitable and necessary for us, as S. Paul says, Heb.
10. 36.

. 7. Of spiritual diligence.
That which I have alleged heretofore against Sloth and Idleness, suffices
to excite us to the love of this virtu: yet to the end to say somewhat, more
directly and particularly.

We must consider, that this life is given us for no other end, but to negociat
our salvation, for which cause it is, that our Lord compares us to laborers,
sent to the vyniard there to work, who are to receive our wages, answerable to
our labor. Mat. 20. 8. and 16. 27. The Son of man shall come in the glory
of his Father, with his Angels, and then will he render to every man
according to his works. The same also S. Paul says. 1. Cor. 3. 8. Every one
shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor. And S. John in the
last of the Apocalips 12. and in the Galat. 6. 9. Doing good, let us not fail,
for in due time we shall reap not failing: therefore while we have time, let us
work.

We shall have no more glory in heaven, then we have acquried merits in our
life. If the Saints could be sorry, nothing would so much pierce their heart,
as to have let the time to pass so unprofitably, which was given them for the
gayning of their glory.

Our Lord compares him self unto a master, who going to travel into a far
contrie, gave to each one of his servants, certain tallents to trasique with
all: who at his return, was to call them to account for the diligence or
negligence, loss or gain, which they had made in their trasique, and
accordingly to give them recompense. What joy has a Christian at the hour of
his death, who having carried him self like a good servant, may truly say.
Lord thou did deliver me two talents, behold I have gained other two. And to
hear his Master say. Well fare thee, good and faithful servant, because thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will place thee over many things,
enter in to the joy of thy Lord. Mat. 25. 22.

How much more courageous ought thou to be in the field of God (says S.
Aug.) since thou have the promise of the truth, which can nether fail, nor
deceive? And what is it which is promised to thee? Gold or silver, which men
do love so excessiuelye? Or enheritances, for which men do melt gold? Or
gardens, houses, or heardes of beasts? No this is not the recompense for which
God does encourage us for to travail. What is it then? Life eternal. Aug.
tract. 3. in ep. Joan.

S. Gregory of Nazianzen, compares our life, to a fair or market, the day
whereof being expired, one finds no more to sell of that which he desired. In
sentent.

Behold the industry of sundry tradesmen, who moyle and toil from the
break of day unto midnight, and this with joy and songs of myrthe, only to
gain a little bread: and thou (o Christian) to gain the bread of Angels,
heaven it self, and life eternal, will thou refuse the labor and diligence of
a few days?

EXAMPLES.
1. In the monastery of Arnsberge of the order of the Premonstrenses, a
certain English monk called Richard, to fly idleness, spent the time which he
had free, to write forth the books of the monastery, hoping that for this
pain and diligence, God would one day recompense him. Twenty years after his
death, his grave being opened, his whole body was turned to ashes, excepting
only his right hand, which was still as fresh and as whole, as if at that
instant it had been cut or plucked from the living body. This arm is yet kept
unto this day in the same monastery. Caesarius l. 12. c. 47.

2. S. Bernard seeing upon a day one of the brethren of his covent laboring in
the field with great feruor, and above his forces, said unto him in the
presence of all the other religious, who labored as well as he. Follow on my
brother, I assure thee, that thou shall have no other purgatory after this
life. Thom. a Cantipr. lib. 2. ap. cap. 5.

3. S. Marcian Anchoret, meeting with a hunter, was demanded of him, what he
did in that desert? But the Saint demanded likewise of him, what he did there?
The hunter answered, that he hunted there after Hares and Deeres. And I (said
S. Marcian) hunt here after my God, nor will never give over this goodly chase,
until I take him, and embrace him. Theodor. in Philotheo. Blessed is he who
emploies his time and labor in such a chase See more upon this matter. c. 6.
the Examples of the 7..

THE V. CHAPTER. Of the holy sacrifice of the Mass.
THe Mass is a sacrifice (a) wherein the body and blood of Jesus Christ, is
consecrated and offered up to God, with sundry ceremonies, prayers and sacred
words, instituted by our Lord him self, as touching the substance, in his
last supper (b) and as concerning the rest, by the B. Apostles, and
principally by Saint Peter, Saint James, and by their successors. (c) (a)
Justin. in dial. cum Tryph. Basil. ser. 2. de baptis. c. 2. Tertullian. de
orat. Aug. ep. 23. and lib. 20. cont. Faust. c. 21. (b) Luc. 22. Iren. l. 4. c.
32. Cypr. ep. 63. Aug. l. 10. de ciuit. c. 20. and alibi sepe. Conc. Trident.
sess. 2. c. 1. (c) Conc. Trid. ibid. cap. 5.

. 1. Of the fruits and vtilities of the Mass.
By means of this Sacrifice we re^dre thanks unto God, for all the benefits
we have received of his infinite bou^tie: and as we are infinitely bound and
obliged unto him, so is there nothing by the which we can better satisfy him,
then to offer unto him the immaculat host of his B. Son, which of it self
is of infinite value and merit. Nether are they Priests only, which may make
this offringe, but all those likewise who asist at Mass.

Moreover, by means of this sacrifice, there is obtained and applied unto us,
all that which our Lord has purchased for us by his death and passion (a) And
what other thing is the holy Mass, but the self same representation of the
passion of our Lord? (b) (a) Greg. Naz. orat. 1. in Julian. Greg. mag. Hom 37.
in euang. (b) Luc. 22. Chrisost. Hom. 17. in ep. ad Heb. Aug. ser. 4. de Innoc.
See the Catechism of Bellarmin.

There are yet many more vtilities.

1. By the sacrifice of the mass, we satisfy for our sins: and venial
sins are forgiven us. Cyp. Basil. Chrisost. Ambros. citati a Canisio Hic.

2. We receive grace, to resolve to confess our mortal sins, how enorme or
in how great number soever they be: and not to fall again into them.

3. We receive sundry graces and helps, to resist the malignant spirit, and to
surmount the difficulties of this life. Aug. l. 22. de ciuit.

4. We asist the souls detayned in Purgatory. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 57. Joan.
Damas. ser. de ^efunct. Aug. l. de cura pro mortuis and alij.

5. Our Lord is wont also to impart a great deal of prosperity to the
temporal goods of those, who devoutly asist or serve at Mass. Chrysostom. hom.
77. in Joan. and hom. 18. in Act. Apost. O what fruits and vtilities are these
for those, who daily asist at the holy Mass!

. 2. Of the reverence and attention we ought to have, during the sacrifice of
the Mass.
Where the King is, there is the court; we have already said, that the Mass
is no other thing, then the sacrifice of the precious body and blood of the
Son of God, which is offered up to God him self. Here then is present the
King of Kings, yea all the most holy Trinity, together with the whole
celestial court: what attention then and modesty ought we to bring with us
unto the same?

Hearken how S. John Chrysostom speaks. The lamb of God is offered up, the
Seraphins asist thereat, couuering them selves with their wings, all the
Angels intercede for thee with the Priest, the spiritual fire descends from
heaven, blood is drawn forth of the side of the immaculat Lamb, and put into
the Chalice for thy purification; and thou have nether shame nor respect, nor
endeuorest not to make thy God propitious to thee. The week has 168. hours,
and God has retained but one only for his service, and yet thou employest
this, in secular and ridiculous affairs. Sermon. de Euch. and Hom. 36. upon the
first of the Corinthians. The Church is nether a Barbers nor Apoticharies shop,
but the place of Angels and Archangells, the court of God, heaven it self. So
S. Chrisostom.

EXAMPLES.
1. The same holy Doctor says, that a certain devout person, saw one day as
Mass was said, a great multitude of Angels in shining garments about the
Altar, with their heads inclined. Lib. 6 de Sacerdot. Which the same S.
Chrisostom was wont also to see, as B. Nilus Abbat writes. Epist. ad Anastas.
and Baron. tom. 5. annal. anno 407. Other holy persons have had the like
visions, as is to be seen in Sophron. prat. spirit. cap. 199. And in Cyril
Ermite in the life of S. Euthymius. The Angels, for lack of asistants, have
some times them selves served Mass: as amongst others, S. Oswald bishop of
Vigorina. Sur. 16. of October. To Saint Gregory Pope. Joan. Diaconus in his
Life. To brother John of Parma, a Fraunciscan Friar, after he had discharged
him self of his Generalls-ships. Chron. Fratr. Minor. tom. 2. l. 1. c. 57.
Hence you see, what honor it is to asist at Mass, and what attention and
reverence is required thereto, since the Angels them selves asist and serve
thereat.

2. S. Ambrose writes after Valerius the great, that whilst Alexander the
mghitie King of Macedony sacrificed, one of his pages let fall at unawares, a
burning coal into his sleeue betwixt his shirt and his flesh, and albeit that
his flesh burnt, yet he showed no manner of sign, nor cast so much as one only
sighe, for fear he should disturb the sacrifice. Learn o virgin (says S.
Ambrose) with what modesty thou ought to asist at the Sacrifice of thy God.
lib. 3. de virgin.

3. S. John the Almes-giuer, Patriarch of Alexandria, had a custom to cause
those to go forth of the Church, whom he saw to talk or tatle during Mass.
Sur. tom. 1. fol. 569.

4. The king of Porca in the Indies, being yet but a young man (the year
1605.) had nine hundred Pagodes or Idols, to each of which, he exhibited
every day, a particular reverence and adoration, and offered up a present unto
them: entering into the place where they were, at six a clock in the morning,
and remaining there until twelve, during which time, he gave no audience to
any person. O what confusion is this for Christians, who scarclie once in eight
days, deuote so much as one hour, to the only true God which they adore? P.
Petrus Iarr^c l. 6. hist. Ind. orient. c. 10.

5. The father in law of the king of Congo being baptized, as upon a day he
heard Mass, there were some of his pages (Princes children) who played the
fools during the same, and and made a noize at the entry of the chapel. He,
judging it a heinous crime, not to bring such attention and reverence as was
convenient for so dreadful a sacrifice, commanded that his pages should
instantly be put to death. And de facto they had been executed, if the
Portugalls (taking compassion on the tender age of these young nobles) had not
begged and obtained their pardon. The same author in the 2. tome of the
history of the oriental Indies, anno 1484.

. 3. Of the vtilities of the Mass proved by examples, with some remarkable
punishments of those who have despiced the same.
1. S. Thomas of Aquin, after he had said Mass, was wont to hear another
whereat he served: wherein (as he confessed to S. Bonauenture) he received more
light and more knowledge, then he had done in all his studies. Aut. Sennen.
Ribad.

2. S. Monica made so great account of the Mass, that coming to die, she
requested no other thing of her son S. Augustine and his brother, then to
remember her when they should stand at the holy Altar (whereat she had not her
self omitted to asist one only day) which he performed. Aug. Cons. l. 9. c.
11. etc. 13. Inspire (o Lord) (says he) inspire my brethren thy servants who
shall read these things, to remember thy servant Monica at the Altar, and her
husband Patricius.

3. Ferdinandus Antolinus, being upon the point to give battle to the
Sarazens, would first before hand hear Mass. And whilst he was busied in this
good office, the battle was begun, and his Angel Guardian took his place,
mounted upon Ferdinandus horse, each one thinking that it was he, and with so
good success, that the victory was attributed to him; And there was
afterward found in his armor and his horse, the marks and wounds, which it
seemed he had received who fought in his place. Joan. Vaseus in Chron. H^span.
anno. 941. Simile refert Caesarius l. 7. mirac. c. 39.

4. The like happened to Paschalis Viuas, a great knight of the troop of Don
Garcias Ferdinandes Count of Castile, in the battle which was fought against
Almancor king of Cordoua. For as he heard Mass in S. Martius Church, he was
seen to fight, kill the Standar bearer, and bear away the victory. Joan.
Osorius ex hist. H^spanic. tom. 4. conc. de Sacrificio Missae.

5. Andreas Dacq being in Jerusalem, would not go with his companions, unless
he first had heard Mass. And behold at his coming forth of the Church, a
horsman presented him self unto him, who invited him to get up behind him
upon his horse: where being got up, he fell asleep, and at his waking, he found
him self the self same day in his contrie, just at the gate of his own
house. Thom. a Cantip. l. 2. ap. c. 40.. 3. And adds, that the horseman in
bi^ding him God buy, said unto him; That this benefit had been granted him of
almighty God, for the devotion that he had to hear Mass.

6. Caesarius relates the like lib. 10. of his miracles c. 2. See you the old
proverb is proved true? To hear Mass, does never hinder.

7. In Alexandria in the time of S. John the Almes-giuer, there were two
Shoomakers, the one whereof (charged with children, and also with his father
and mother whom he was to nourish) hearing Mass every day, became rich: the
other having no child at all, and neglecting Mass, was always poor,
notwithstanding he labored night and day. Surius in vita S. Joan. eleemos.
tom. 1. fol. 570.

8. For the fruits which redounde to the souls in Purgatory, there needs no
more but to consider that which Cardinal Baronius writes, of one from whom
the chains and bands fell off in prison, every time that his brother caused
Mass to be said for him, thinking he had been slain in the war. Tom. 8.
annal. anno 679. Giving sufficiently to understand, that had he been in
Purgatory, he had been delivered. The like accident is recounted by S. Gregory
hom. 37. in euang. and l. 4. dial. c. 57.

See the life of S. Malachias written by S. Bernard; with a multitude of other
goodly examples, in the flowers of the lives of Saints by father Ribadeniera,
in the discourse of the commemoration of the faithful departed.

9. In Styria, a gentleman becoming desperate, and being tempted to hang him
self, received counsel of a good religious man, every day to hear Mass: the
which he did, giving wages for this purpose unto a Chaplain, who said Mass
unto him in his castle, and by this means, was delivered of his tentation. Now
it came to pass upon a day, that his Chaplain went to a place near by, to
help and pleasure a friend of his; The gentleman seeing him self to be
frustrated of his only redress, went to seek his Chaplain, thinking to hear
Mass where he was, but he was told in the way by one of the village, that the
Mass was already said, and instantly his former tentation took him again;
which made him so sorry, that he presently fell down at the feet of the
contrie man as in a sound; Who seeing him make so great account of the Mass,
asked him if he were contented to give him his cloak, and he would yield to him
all the merit of that Mass which he had heard. He answered yea, that he was
well content; But being departed the one from the other, behold the gentleman's
tentation took hold of the villager, and that so vehemently, that not able to
surmount it, he hunge him self with his cloak, which the self same gentleman
saw at his return. Aeneas Syluius, who being afterward created Pope, was
called Pius the second, in the history of Bohemia. Petrus Messiah c. 22. p. 3.
Judge by this, what ought to be the value and efficacy of the Mass.

10. S. Anthony Archbishop of Florence writes, that two young youths, being
gone upon a holly day to shoot at birds (one of which had heard Mass, the
other not) a storm arose upon a sudden, with great lightninges and store of
thunder, and a voice was heard which said; Strike him, strike him: and
presently the thunderbolt fell, and stroke him that had not heard Mass. The
other all affrighted, ran to the place he had resolved to go to, and behold
the voice rebounded again; Strike him, strike him. And as he expected nothing
but death, another voice was heard, which said; I can not, because he has
heard to day. Verbum caro factum est: giueing hereby to understand, that God
forbad to kill him, because he had heard that day a whole Mass. 2. p. Chron.
tit. 9. c. 10.. 2.

11. At Serrelionne in the Indies, two young men going a fishing upon a Sunday,
as they were on the sea, one of them heard it ringe to the last Mass, and
knowing that he had not as yet heard Mass, he exhorted his companion to go
with him to hear the same, and thereupon went out of the boat. I will not go
(quoth the other) unless I have first taken somewhat. He had no sooner spoke
these words, but a vehement eddy suddenly arose which turned all vpside down,
and sent the boat unto the bottom, in the sight of the other, who learned by
his example, what account one ought to make of the Mass. Taken forth of the
letters of Father Emanuel Aluares, sent from the Indies into Portugal. anno
1610.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of Confession, or of the Sacrament of Penance.
Penance is a Sacrament, wherein priestly absolution is given of all sins, to
him who has entirely confessed them, and detested them. Canis. Trid. ses. 14. c.
1. and can. 1. Item. ses. 6. c. 14. and can. 29. Florent and Constant. ses. 15.

The holy fathers call it, the second table after shipwreck, in as much as
those who have once escaped the shipwreck of sin by Baptism, if since they
be fallen into sins, how greuou^ and enormous soever they be, may again
escape by the Sacrament of Penance, and arrive safely at the harbou^ of grace,
and friendship of God. S^ Pa^an epist. 1. ad Symp. Hier. in ^ 3. Isay. and ep.
8. ad Demetriad. Ani^ ad virg. laps. cap. 8. Trid. ses. 6. cap* 14. and ses.
14. can. 2. Tertul. de poen^ Ezech. 18. and. 33.

Penance has three parts (a) Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction:
because as S. Chrisost. (b) says) God will that we reconcile our selves unto
him, by the same means, that we have disgraced our selves, to wit, by heart, by
word, and by work. In heart by Contrition, in word by Confession, in work by
Satisfaction. (a) Conc. Flor. and Trid. ses. 14. can. 3. and can. 4. (b)
Chrisost. ser. de poenit.

. 1. Of Contrition.
Contrition (the first part of Penance) is a sorrow of the soul, and a
detestation of sins committed with a firm purpose to commit them no more.
Canis. Trid. ses. 14. can. 4. Florent.

I will recount to thee all my years, in the bitterness of my soul. Isay 38.
16. quoth the good king Ezechias.

A Sacrifice to God, is an afflicted spirit, a contrit and humble heart, o God,
thou will not despice. Psalm 50. 19.

Rent your hearts, and not your garments. Joel. 2. 13.

To obtain this contrition, it is necessary for a man well and exactly to
examine his conscience, and next to consider the enormitie of his sins, by
the points set down heretofore. l. 1. c. 2. See the act of Contrition in this
2 book c. 2.. 3. sect. 1.

Sect. 1. EXAMPLES FOR THE first part of Contrition.
The holy scripture does furnish us with most goodly examples for this first
part.

1. Of king Ezechias. Isay. 38. 2. Of king David. 2. Reg. 12. 13. 3. Of Marie
Magdalen. Luc. 7. 4. Of S. Peter. Mat. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 5. Of the good
thief. Luc. 23. 6. Of S. Thomas Apostle. Joan. 20. 7. See before two goodly
ones. l. 2. c. 2.. 3. Sect. 1. The one of a maid Example 2. 1. 8. The other of
the Emperor Theodosius. l. 1. c. 6.. 6. 9. Of Henry 2. king of England, in the
flowers of the lives of Saints by Father Ribadeniera in the life of S. Thomas
of Canterbury 29. of December. 10. Of Othon the 3. Emperor, in the same book,
in the life of S. Romuald Feb. 7.
Sect. 2. of the second part of Contrition.
This is a point much to be noted, because it is greatly to be feared, that
many do amiss and fail in this point, by reason whereof their Confessions are
void.

It is, a firm purpose, no more to commit the said sins: to fly the
occasions of falling into them: to satisfy those, from whom one has taken
away either goods or honor; for as S. Aug. says. ep. 54. ad Macedon. The theft
is not forgiven, unless the thing stolen be restored, or at the least that one
have the will to restore it. And that which is said of theft, is also to be
understood of ones good name taken away by detraction.

EXAMPLES.
1. Father John Locinus, a great divine of the Society of Jesus teaching at
Paris, related to a father of the same society (who since preached the same at
Bruxells before their most excellent Hignesses) to have known a gentleman in
Italy, who for that he was a usurer, and coming to Confession, would not leave
his sinful vsuries, could not be absolved, nether of his Curat, nor of the
fathers of the Society: whereupon he went at the last, and found forth a
certain Religious man, who taxing the other of scrupulositie, without any
difficulty, gave him absolution as often as he presented himself unto him, and
by this means won the favor of this gentleman, and was almost day by day at
his table. Upon a night they having well supped and made good cheer together,
the Religious man being retired into his monastery, this gentleman died
suddenly. And at the same time that he lay laboring for life, two devils in
the shape of serving men, knocked at the gate of the monanasterie, asked for
this Religious, and led him to the house of the sick. As they were come to the
market place, the Religious man espied the gentleman in his furred gown,
walking in the moon light, and supposing him self to be deceived, entering into
choler with him self, the gentleman said unto him, that he had indeed been
sick, and that he was dead and damned for his vsuries, and for his profaning
of the Sacraments. And because, he instead of reprehe^ding him as he was bound,
had supported him in his sin, that it was but reason that he should be also
punished with the like pain. This said, the two dissembled servants, caught
betwixt their clutches, the one the gentleman, the other, the Religious, and
were never seen since that day. His companion remained alone half dead, who
went and related the whole to the other Religious of his order. See you by this
most horrible example, that it is not enough for one to confess his sins,
unless he have a will also, never more to committ them, and to restore the goods
which one has stolen?

. 2. Of Confession.
Confession, the second part of Penance, is a secret accusation of all the
sins which one remembers, after he has duly examined him self, made to a
Priest to have absolution. Canisius.

We must carefully mark and consider all the circumstances.

I said, an Accusation; because it is not to confess, when one excuses or
diminishes his sins; or when one says nothing, unless he be asked.

I said, Secret, to distinguish it from public, which was sometimes made in
times past: and to signify, that one ought to tell his sins in such sort,
that none may hear them but the Priest.

Of all; for if you remember a hundred mortal sins, and do confess but
nintie nine, your confession is void, and you commit in doing this, another
most grievous sin of sacrilege.

What sin can be more horrible, then to set on his knees before the king,
and to make show to ask him forgiveness, and to desire to enter again into his
amity having offended him greuouslie, not withstanding at the self same time
that his pardon is pronounced, to raise him self up against the King, tread
him under his feet, and to stab his poynard into his throat? Thou do this
(o sinner) when thou concealest any mortal sin in thy Confession.

How much more think you does he deserve worse punishments, which has trodden
the Son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood of the Testament polluted,
wherein he is sanctified, and ha^h done contumely to the spirit of grace? Heb.
10. 29. S. Amb. and Theophilact, explicat this sentence, of those who approache
unworthily to the Sacraments.

What avails it the sick, stabbed with diverse mortal wounds, to discover to
the physician one or two, if he conceal the others? The confessar is a
spiritual physician (a) who can heal thee infallibly, provided that thou
discover thee as thou ought.

That which is not discovered (says S. Ierom) the physician can not cure. In
c. 10. Eccl. (a) Council. Lateran. can. 21. Wormatien. c. 25. Orig. Hom. 1. and
2. in Psalm. 37. Trid. sess. 14. c. 5.

He is also a Judge (b) He cannot then absolve the criminal penitent, unless he
have full and perfect knowledge of his crimes. (b) Aug. l. 20. de ciu. c. 9.
Greg. Hom. 26. in Euang. Chrisost. l. 3. de sacerd. and hom. 5. de verb. Isay.
Hieron. ad Heliod. ep. 1.

There is no part of the body so shamfull, which one discovers not to save
life: and shall the sinner dout to discover the spiritual sickness of his
soul, for his everlasting health?

I have said, of his sins; to give to understand, that one must not reveal
the sins of another.

Note further, that they must be told in particular, and not in general, which
is a fault too too frequent and ordinary in many persons.

To the priest; for it is to the Priest, and to no other, that God has given
power to pardon sins. Joan. 20. 23.

EXAMPLES.
1. A holy father saw upon a certain day, the devil make his circuit to all
the seats of confession: and asking him what he did there, he replied, that he
restored to the penitents that which he had taken from them. And being asked,
what it was. I took (quoth he) all shame from them at the time they sinned,
that so they might sin so much the more freely: and now I restore it unto
them again, to the end they may not confess them. In vitis patrum.

2. A Lady in Italy reputed for holy, appeared to her daughter in form of a
roasted Sow, saying that she was damned, for having concealed in Confession a
carnal sin which she had committed with her husband. Seraph. Raz. in hortulo
exempl. tit. 1. de conf. c. 3. and Gabr. Inchino chanon. Reg. Lateran.

3. An other concealing in confession a sin of the flesh, seemed to cast out,
and to take in toades at his mouth; and after his death, appeared to his
confessar horribly tormented, saying, that he was damned, for that he had
concealed his sin. Adding, that people went to hell by all sorts of sins,
but women principally by four: by the sin of the flesh, by vain ornaments,
by witchcraft, and by shame for to confess them. I^. Junior in scala coeli.
Gulielmus Pepin 1. sup. Confiteor c. 13.

4. At Itate a city of the oriental Indies, the year 1590. a christian
maiden called Catharin, giueing and abandoning her self secretly to the
filthiness of the flesh, never confessed her self at all. Falling sick, a father
of the Society went to see her, and endeavored to induce her to a good
confession; She confessed her self nine times, but allwaies co^cealing her
sins of the flesh. And as the other servants of the house fell a talking with
her, she said unto them, that every time her ghostly father was nere unto her,
a Black a More appeared unto her by her beds side, who said unto her, that she
should take good heed not to confess all her sins, saying that they were but
petty faults: and that on the other side, S. Mary Magdalen exhorted her to
confess them. The servants hearing these her speeches, called back the father,
but he profited nothing, so that she dyed in that estate. After her death, she
appeared to one of the servants all in fire, saying that she was damned, for
having confessed none but little sins, and concealed the great; adding that
she was forced to tell them this, for their example. An Angel appeared also at
the same time, who willed the servant to harkne unto her, and to related the
whole unto the rest. Taken forth of the history of the Indes, written by F.
Iacques Sam^tiego superior of the mission of the Itatins anno 1590. P. Thyreus
de loco infest. p. 1. c. 1 fus^ narrat pat. Delrio in suis disq. mag.

5. At Arone in Lombardie, the year 1595. and little maid but six years old,
dyed, crying out that certain Black a Mores, went about to throw her into a
boiling cauldron, and finally she said. Devil carry me away, devil carry me
away, and in saying this, she gave up her soul unto the devils. Her parents
knew by her no other thing, but that she was of a quick spirit, had been seen
to play too liberally with little youths, and that she never had been at holy
confession.

Taken out of the history of the Society anno 1595.

. 3. Of frequent Confession, and how dangerous it is for to delay it.
If thou had swallowed poison, and that thou knew it, would thou tarry
to seek after physic and after the physician, til the poison were dispersed
thoroughout all thy body?

If thou were taken of the enemy, and might insta^tly be delivered, would
thou tarry till some one had tied thee with more chains, and put thee into a
deeper dungeon? As long as a man is in mortal sin, he meriteth nothing by
his good works, he does not participat of the merits of our Lord, nor of his
Church: he is deprived of the particular asistances of almighty God, and of
his Angel Gardien; And that which yet is worst of all, he is hunge by a third
over the well of the infernal pit; and who knows, whither this third shall
not perhaps be cut a sunder before to morrow? Why then in an affair of such
importance, and wherein is treated of thine eternal salvation, do thou
defer the time until to morrow (whereof thou art uncertain) to do that, which
thou may now do assuredly?

Slack not to be converted to our Lord, and differ not from day to day, for his
wrath shall come suddenly. Eccl 5. 8.

Son have thou sinned? do so no more, but for the old also, pray that they
may be forgiven thee. Eccl. 21. 1.

Do thou contemn the riches of his goodness, and patience, and long
animitie, not knowing that the benignity of God brings thee to penance? But
according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou heapest to thy self wrath,
in the day of wrath. Romans 2. 4.

He that has promised the penitent pardon, has not promised the sinner the
day of to morrow. S. Greg. Hom. 10. in Euang.

He that does penance, and reconcileth him self at the end of his life, that
he departs this life with assurance, I am not assured. I say not that such an
one is damned, nor yet say I, that he shall be saved. Will thou be delivered
from this dout? Will thou avoid that which is uncertain? Do penance whilst
yet thou art in perfect health, and whilst thou can as yet sin: for if thou will do penance when thou can sin no more, sin leaves thee, but thou
have not left sin. S. Aug. lib. ^. Homil.

EXAMPLES.
1. Chrysaurius, a rich man, having passed all his life in pleasures, seeing
him self reduced to the point of death, and compassed about with devils,
ready to carry him to hell, turned him toward heaven, crying out. Inductas vel
vsque mane, inducias vel vsque mane. Truce only till to morrow, truce only til
to morrow: and with these words gave up the ghost. S. Gre. Hom. 12. in Euang.
and l. 4. dial. c. 38.

2. A Courtiar of Coenredus king of England, admonished by the king himself
to be confessed in his sickness, refused to do it, saying that he would not be
confessed then, but when he was well recovered and able to go broad, saw,
being nere his death, the devils, who showed him all his sins written in a
huge book, and the Angels who gave place unto them: he saying, that two
devils were entered into his body, the one by his head the other by his feet,
to devour his soul; and so dyed at the same time. Venerable Bede, lib. 5.
hist. Aug. c. 14. anno 704.

3. An other deferring his repentance after the like manner, saw a little before
his death, his place in hell, near unto Caiphas. The same author cap. 15.

4. At Squira a city of the Philippine isles, an Indian woman, feeling her
self moved of God to make a Confession of her whole life (and that for many
days together) she imparted the same unto her parents, who gave her council
to defer it. A little after she fell sick; a Priest was called, but he could not
hear her, for he found her dumb to every thing, save in these words which
she repeted oftentimes, stretching forth her hands toward her parents. Take
hence these Ca^s, what make they here? Ah wretch that I am, behold the
blackmores who will carry me away. They prayed for her, but all in vain, for
she sunge no other song: and having cried that they burnd her, she gave up the
ghost. After her death, God declared that she spoke into these things thorough
idle rauing: for as they went about to wind her up and to bury her, her body
was found all black, as if it had been burned in the same instant. The rest
made their profit hereof, for fearing to fall into the same misfortune, they
made from that present a firm purpose, never to defer their Confession: gen^le
Reader, do thou the like. Extracted out of the history of the Society of
Jesus anno 1609. in the life of Michael Ayaturnus, a young Phillippine
scholar, of a holy life.

. 4. Of General Confession.
It is good for the most part, to make a general confession of our whole life,
and afterward every year to make one, beginning from the last, so to supply
the defaults which might have happened in the former: for it often happens, that
the Confession is of no value, either because of the Confessar, who is not
approved ordinarily to hear Confessions: or because he is not thy pastor, nor
appointed by him, nor privileged by the Pope to hear Confessions every where:
or else because he is very ignorant, or because he was confessed without any
sorrow, or purpose to amend him, and to fly the immediate occasions to fall
again: not to make restitution and the like: or for that he has co^cealed
volu^tarily some sin in Confession: or because he had not a will to accept or
fulfill the penance, which the Confessar enjoined him.

In all these cases, the Confession is void. And for as much as these faults
arrive often, it is therefore good, sometimes to make general Co^fessions. And,
notwithstanding this were not, yet are there sundry other reasons which move
us thereto, which one may see else where. As fa. Costerus l. 1. Of the S^dalitie
c. 4. Fa. Puentes, in his book^ ^ Perfection 3. treatise c. 7. and heretofore
^. 4. of this cap. l. 1. examp. 4.

. 5. Of Satisfaction, the third part of the Sacrament of Penance.
For as much as ordinarily with the fault, all the pain is not pardoned, which
one has encurred by the sin, and that satisfactorie works, have much more
efficacy, being done by the ordonance of the Confessar, as well by reason of
the act of obedience, which is of inestimable valor, as for the virtu which
they receive of the Sacrament, and from the merits of Jesus Christ, applied
unto us by meane^ thereof, one ought to receive with ^ cheerful heart, the
penance enioyne^ by the Confessar, how great and har^ soever it be, and to
endeavor to accomplish it with the soonest.

It is not enough for him who dot^ penance, says S. Ambrose, to wip^ away his
sins by tears, but he mu^ moreover labor to cover them by goo^ works. l. 2.
de poenit. c. 5. and l. 1. c. 1^ To a great wound (quoth he) must b^ applied a
great plaster, and a great sin requires great satisfaction. Ad Virg. laps.
cap. 8. and lib. 1. de paenit. cap. 2.

See touching satisfaction, most worthy examples, out of the flowers of the
lives of Saints of Ribadeneira, of the Emperor Othon and Theodosius, of Henry
2. king of England, in the places cited heretofore. l. 1. c. 6.. 6. and l. 2.
c. 6.. 1. sect. 1.

. 6. Of Indulgences.
Indulgences is the remission of the temporal pain, due by reason of the
actual fault, which is made by the application of the satisfactions, which are
in the common treasury of the Church: to wit, of the merits of our Lord, and
of the Saints; of which treasury, the Pope has the keys, given by our Lord
himself unto S. Peter and his successors. Mat. 16. 18.

The fault being forgiven, yet that there remains some pain to be suffered,
is apparent by the 12. cap. of the 2. book of Kings, where the sin of
murder and of adultery, having been forgiven David, yet God did chastise him
with temporal pain in the death of his son. He did as much to Adam, Genesis 3.
and Sap. 10. to Moises sister Number. 12. and to a Prophet 3. Reg. 13.

And albeit these pains may be pardoned, as well by the satisfactorie works
enjoined by the confessar, as by those which one does voluntarily of him self,
yet ordinarily all the pain is not remitted by such like works: whence it
follows, that the rest is to be paid in Purgatory, unless we have recourse to
the treasure of the Church by Indulgences. Wise and well advised is he, who by
a way so easy, does free him self from a payment, which else he is to make by
fire, and by such a fire, as that of Purgatory is.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Francis having obtained of our Lord and of Pope Honorius the third, a
plenarie indulgence for his Church of our Lady of Portiuncula near to
Asissium, the bruit being spread every where abroad, a hundred and twenty
Sclauonians were moved from heaven to travel thither, as they did. It came to
pass, that a woman fell there soar sick, and having ended her devotions, died.
The rest being embarked to return into their contrie, she appeared to them,
saying. Fear ye not, for I am one of your compaine sent by our blessed Lady
for to tell you, that by the benefit of the Indulgences, which I gained
together with you at our Ladies of Portiuncu^a, I am departed directly to
heaven, without passing thorough Purgatory. Which having said, she
disappeared, ^auing all these good pilgrims greatly comforted. See you the
efficacy and virtu of Indulgences? Taken out of the annals of the Friar
Minors to. 1. l. 2. cap. 5.

2. Our Lord has maruelously praised Indulgences to S. Bridgit, as appears
by the 102. cap. l. 6. of her Revelations.

. 7. Of the pains of Purgatory.
The Apostle S. Paul, speaking of the diversity of those, who build
spiritually in this world, says, that he who dies with small sins shall be
saved, yet so as by fire. Upon which words S. Aug. discoursing in Psalm. 37.
says. Because it is written we shall be saved, therefore we despise the fire of
Purgatory: yes truly we shall be saved by fire, but by a fire more grievous and
painful, then all whatsoever a man can suffer in this life. The same S. Greg.
says upon the 3. penitential psalm. Venerable Bede upon the same psalm. S.
Anselme upon the 1. Cor. 3. S. Bernard sermon. de obitu Humberti.

S. Thomas houldeth, that the pains of Purgatory are greater, then are the
pains of all the Martyrs, yea then those which Jesus Christ him self suffered
in his most holy and painful passion. 3. p. q. 46. art. 6. ad 3.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Antoninus writes, that a certain person given to debauchement, was
visited of God, with a long and painful sickness; At the last, loosing his
patience, he instantly besought of God that he might dye; and behold an Angel
appeared unto him, who gave him his choice, either to remain two years more in
this infirmity, and then to go directly to heaven, or else to dye that very
hour, and be three days in purgatory. This ill advised person, chose rather
to dye, and to endure for three days the pains of Purgatory; He (...) same
Angel came to visit him in his pains, and asked him how he found himself. Ah
(quoth he) you have deceived me, for you promised me that I should be but three
days in Purgatory, and behold I have already been here many years. No,
(replied the Angel) I have not deceived you, but it is the greuousnes of the
pains that do deceive you, for you have not as yet been here but only an
hour. Alas bring to pass then (quoth he) that I may return to life again,
and I am ready to endure my sickness, not two years only, but even as long as
ever it shall please God: which was granted him, and never after did he
complain of his pains. S. Antoninus 4. p. Sum. tit. 14. cap. 10.. 4. Ribad.
l. 1. de tribulat. c. 7.

The greuousnes of these pains may be further proved, by all the revelations
which venerable Bede alleges in the 3. and 5. book of his history, (...)
Bridgit.

. 8. Of prayers or suffrages for the departed.
It is a holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be
loosed from sins. 2. Mac. 12. 46.

It is holy, because it comes from a holy beginning, which is charity. It is
healthful, first to the departed, for it delivers them from their pains. 2.
To him who does it, for as much as he by this means, increases his own
merits, and consequently his glory, and makes him self as many friends and
intercessors with God, as he asisteth souls.

Again, that which is said of prayer, may be also understood of fasting,
alms, pilgrimages, and whatsoever good work offered to God to this intent,
but above all, the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

I am of the mind, says S. Ambrose (speaking to Faustinus of his sister
deceased) that we should not so much weep for her, as asist her with prayers,
and recommend her soul unto God. lib. 2. ep. 8.

S. Aug. says. We must not dout, that the dead are helped by the prayers of
the Church, sacrifices, alms etc. Ser. 32. de verb. Apost.

Saint Chrisostom says. Let us asist the dead, not with tears, but with
prayers and alms. Homil. 41. in 1. Cor.

An Angel in the history of venerable Bede, came to tell in the behalf of God
to a holy personage, that the prayers of the living, alms, fastinges, and
principally the sacrifice of the Mass, did succor sundry faithful souls
departed, to the end they might be delivered before the day of judgment, lib.
5. hist. Aug. cap. 13.

Who sees not then, that it is the duty of a good Christian, in the morning at
his arising, and in the evening before his sleeping, hearing, or saying Mass,
to pray for the souls detayned in this fire, which we have seen in the
precedent paragraph, to be so terrible? but above all for those of our parents,
and to whom for sundry respects we may be obliged; and sometimes also in the
day time, to asist the^ by some good work.

If in this life we saw some one of our friends amidst a fire, from whence he
could not deliver him self, and yet that we might do it easily, could we be
so cruel to him, as not to asist him? With such measure (says our Lord) as
you shall have measured unto others, it shall be measured to you again. Mat.
7. 2. Marc. 4. 24.

EXAMPLES.
1. A certain religious of S. Francis, albeit of a holy life, appeared the
year 1541. unto a nouice, who prayed for him, saying that he was in
Purgatory, for having been negligent to pray for the departed. Franc. Gonzaga
de orig. Seraph. relig. part. 4. in prouincia Canariae conu. 7.

2. Brother Bertrand, provincial of the Dominicans, said Mass every day for
the expiation of his sins, but very seldom for the dead. And when upon a day
he was asked the reason, he answered, that the souls that were in Purgatory,
were assured of their salvation, and therefore had not so great need of prayers
as the living had. The night following, one that was dead appeared unto him ten
several times, beating with his hand upon his coffin, as it were in
threatening of him: whence he conceived so great a fear, that the day did no
sooner appear, but he went and said Mass for the dead, and all the rest of
his life after, he employed him self to asist the deceased. Lib. 1. Chron.
frat. Praedic. c. 27. and Theod. de Apoldia lib. 3. vitae S. Dominici cap. 8.

3. S. Christine native of S. Trou in Hasbaye being dead, her soul was led by
Angels into a place, which by reason of the horrible torments which they there
endured, supposed her self to be in hell, but one of the Angels told her,
that it was Purgatory. From thence they led her to heaven, before the throane
of the most holy Trinity, who put it to her choice, either to remain in heaven
for all eternity, or to return to her body, to deliver by good works, all
those souls which she had seen in Purgatory, and afterward to come to
heaven, laden with the more merits. She accepted this last condition, and
immediately entered again into her body, whilst Mass was said, the body being
set in the midst of the Church. Afterward, until her death, she suffered so
many and so horrible torments, that she merited the name of Christine the
admirable. Thomas a Cantipr. in her life, and Surius tom. 3. c. 23. of June.

4. S. Leibertus Bishop of Cambray, praying upon a day in the churchyard of S.
Nicholas of the same city, for the souls of those, whole bodies were buried
in that place, saying. Animae omnium fidelium defunctorum requiescant in pace.
The souls of all the faithful departed, rest in peace, this voice was heard
in the air most intelligibly, Amen. In the Martyrologe 23. of June.

See the life of S. Lidwine, and the discourse of the commemoration of the
faithful departed, in the flowers of the lives of Saints; by Ribad. 2. of
November.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Of satisfactorie works, Fasting, Alms, and Prayers.
THe Archangell Raphaell in the 12. of Tobie, teaching young Tobias the
practice of of good works, said unto him. That prayer accompanied with fasting
and alms, was very healthful and profitable. Yea all the satisfactorie works
which we are able to do in this life, are referred to these three: for which
cause S. Aug. says. Behold all the justice of man in this life, fasting,
alms, and prayer. Will you that your prayer fly up to heaven? Give it two
wings, fasting and alms. S. Aug. in psalm. 42.

. 1. Of Fasting.
The Church commands us to fast the Lent, the four Ember days, and certain
vigills: that is to say, not to eat then but one meal a day, and to abstain
also from flesh; and in Lent, from flesh and eggs: which has been practiced
even from the Apostles times. 68. canon. Ap. S. Hier. ep. 54. ad Marcellam.

She also commands, that the Fridayes and Saturdayes, and the Rogation days,
we abstain from flesh.

She declares the vtilities of Fasting, in the preface of the Mass in Lent,
taken from S. Gregory. 1. That it represseth the flesh and vices. 2. That it
eleuateth the spirit. 3. That it acquireth virtues and merits. For which cause
the holy scripture recommendeth the same so much unto us. Joel. 2. psalm. 101.
and 34. Luc. 5. Mar. 2. and 9. and 17. Luc. 4. 2. Cor. 11. and the holy
Fathers S. Basil hom. 1. and 2. de Ieiun. Aug. ser. 55. de temp. Amb. ser. 23.
25 34. 36. and 37. And our Lord him self has both honored and recommended it
by his example. Mat. 4.

EXAMPLES.
1. The prophet Daniel by fasting, obtained the knowledge of things to come.
Dan. 9.

2. The Ninevites appeased the anger of God. Jonas 3.

3. Elias and Moses by the fast of forty days, obtained the company and
familiarity of almighty God. 3. Reg. 19. 11. Exodus, 24. and 25. and 33. 11.

4. Eleazer a gentleman of note, being nintie years old, chose rather to
loose his life after diverse grievous torments he had endured, then to eat
swines flesh, contrary to the commandment of God. 2. Mac. 6. 18.

5. The seven Machabean brethren, together with their mother, did the same.
2. Mac. 6. 18.

6. The Emperor Justinian, seeing his people afflicted with famine, caused the
but cherie in Constantinople to be opened, in the second week of Lent, and
gave permission to buy and sell flesh, but the good people chose rather to die
by hunger, then either to buy or to sell flesh. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 32.

At Vartisla^ or Breslaw in Silesia, an heretical Minister, to deride and mock
at Catholic religion, having put a peace of meat into his mouth upon a
Friday, his mouth remained open and wistly gaping, without being able to shut
it again, nether by force, nor yet by art. In the history of the Society.
Anno 1592.

8. A woman in the same place, having put flesh into her mouth upon a Saturday,
fell down stark dead. Ibidem.

9. At Poldachie, a city of Polognia, in the year 1585. a young man eating
flesh upon a Friday, was possessed of the diuill, who a little after, stopped his
throat and killed him out right. In the same hist. anno 1585.

10. A married man, mockinge at the fast of Lent, which S. Elphegus bishop of
Winchester in England had recommended, died suddenly the night ensuing,
according to the prediction of the Saint. Baron. tom. 10. annal. eccles. anno.
Dom. 947.

. 2. Of Alms.
Redeem thy sins with alms (said Daniel to Nabuchodonoser) and thine
iniquities with the mercies of the poor. Dan. 4. 24.

Blessed is the man that understands concerning the needy and the poor, in
the evil day our Lord will deliver him. psalm. 40. 1.

Lo this was the iniquity of Sodom thy sister, pride, fulness of bread and
abundance, and the idleness of her and of her daughters, and they raught not the
hand to the needy and the poor. Ezech. 16. 49.

Alms giving is a mark of predestination, according to S. Paul, for in the 3.
of the Colos. verse. 12. he says. Put ye on therefore as the elect of God,
holy, and beloved, the bowels of mercy.

I remember not to have read (says S. Hierom) that any one came to an evil
death, who gladly during his life, practiced the works of mercy, because such
an one has many intercessors: and it is impossible, that the prayers of many
should not be heard. S. Hier. ad Nepotian. And the same S. Aug. says. sermon. ad
fratres in Eremo.

Hear for the last S. Chrisostom. Alms (says he) is one of the greatest
friends of God, and which is always near unto him. She has in such sort
gained his grace, that all whatsoever she asks of him, and for whomsoever,
she does obtain without difficulty. She it is that vnbindes the ba^des, the
shackles, and manacles of sinners, she expels darkness, and puts out the fire,
for which respect, she enters with all assurance into heaven, for that the
gates of this great pallais, are instantly open to her, and as if it were the
Queen her self, none nether porters nor guard, dare say unto her, who art
thou? whence come thou? but contrariwise all the courtiars of heaven, do go
before her to entertayne her. S. Chrisostom. Hom. 9. in Matt.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Catharine of Sienna, having given a silver Cross unto a poor body,
our Lord appeared unto her the night following, saying: that he would show that
Cross at the day of judgment to all the world. Ant. Senen. in her life.

2. S. John the Almes-giuer (so styled because of the continual alms which he
bestowed) called the poor his Lords, for as much (quoth he) as they had the
power to help him, that he should not be shut out of the kingdom of heaven.
Ribad. in his life.

3. S. Lewis king of France, and B. Amaedes Duke of Sauoye, were wont to serve
the poor bare-head: and this latter called the^ his hunting hounds, where
with he hunted after, and caught the kingdom of heaven. In their lives.

4 Robert king of France, as Hegaldus writes, and after him cardinal
Baronius, the year of our Lord 1033. whersoeuer he went, drew always after
him, great wagons all full of poor people, and when any asked him why he did
so. I go (quoth he) to besiege the city of paradise with these troops: God
has said, that he will open the gates of paradise to the rich, who have
opened to them their hearts and their treasures. Who then shall enter into
heaven, if this army shall not enter, and I also who am the Colonnel of the
company?

See the lives of S. Martin, S. Francis, S. Edward King of England, and S.
Oswald: of S. Gregory pope, S. Julian bishop of Guence, S. Nicholas, S.
Bernardine, S. John Chrisostom, with infinite others, and you shall see them all
maruellously addicted to this virtu. Is it not true then, that Alms giving is
a mark of predestination?

5. Euagrius philosopher, being converted to the faith by the Bishop Senesius,
gave him three hundred crowns of gould for an alms, receuing an obligation
from the bishop under his hand, to receive them again in heaven. Being dead,
he appeared to this bishop, willing him to go unto his grave and to open it.
The which he did, and found his obligation in the hands of him that was dead,
wherein was written that he held him self well content, for he had received his
money in heaven. Sophron. in prat. spirit. cap. 195. Joan. Zonaras 3. annal.

6. S. Gregory writes, that two Martyrs appeared after their death in the
habit of pilgrims to a devout matrone; and as she gave them her alms
according to her custom, they said unto her; You help us now, and we will
also help you at the day of judgment. Hom. 32. in euang.

7. The like did certain Charter House Monks martyred under Henry the eight,
to a devout woman at the hour of her death, which had sometimes asisted the^ in
the time of their prisonment. P. Cornelius in Deuteronomy. cap. 26 12. See the happy
death of Peter Velleio, a Portugal marcha^t, for the alms which he had
bestowed upon the blessed father Zauerius. In his life lib. 4. cap. 3.

. 3. That we never loose any thing, no not in this present life, by giving
alms.
He that gives to the poor, shall not lack: he that despises him that
asks, shall sustain penury. Prou. 28. 27.

Give, and it shall be given to you. Luc. 6. 38.

Give to usury unto God (says S. Amb.) he will keep your pawn most
faithfully, and will restore you, your money augmented with usury. lib. de virg.

The favors of benefactors, return to those who give them. Have thou given the
poor to eat? Thou have provided well for thy self, for that which thou have
given, will return unto thee with increase. S. Basil. hom. 6. in ditescentes.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. John the Almes-giuer, the more alms he gave, the more did God enrich
him where with to give; in so much as, it seemed that there was a certain holy
strife betwixt God and S. John, which of them should give most; S. John to give
unto the poor, and our Lord to give unto S. John. For so he has assured us,
that God did always restore him the double of that, which he had given for the
love of him. Going one day unto the church, he met a gentleman, which besought
him to asist him, saying that thieves had robbed him of all he had. He commanded
fiftene pounds of gould to be given unto him. The steward thinking it to be
too much, gave unto him no more then five. At his going out of the church, a
Lady gave him a bill to receive five hundred pounds of gould, and to
distribute it to the poor: in reading whereof the Holy Ghost discovered unto
him, that his steward had cut off two thirds of the alms which he had
commanded him to give unto this gentleman. Which having auerred, he sharply
reprehended him, and knew by the Lady that gave him the bill, that at the first
she had an intention to give unto him, fifteen hundred pounds of gould, and
had so written within the bill, and that afterward not knowing how, she found
the thousand blotted out. Surius tom. 1. ex Simon. Metaphrast. and Bredembach.
lib. 6. collat. cap. 1^.

See the like case arrived to S. German bishop, in Surius tom. 4. lib. 2. cap.
11. July 31. And to S. Marcellus Abbat. In the same Surius, December. 29. cap. 1.

2. In the city of Nisibie, a christian woman councelled her husband being a
pagan, to give to the God of the christians, by the hands of the poor, fifty
crowns (which he intended to put out to usury) telling him, that God would
assuredlye pay him the double use of his money together with the capital. He
did so, and after three months, he went and found out the same poor, begging
at the portall of the church, to see if they would rendar him his money. But
instead of restoring to him, they put forth their hands again to receive of
him, whereat he was offended with them. And as he returned home all heavy, he
espied one of his pieces of gould upon the ground, took it up, and carried it
unto his wife, and bought therewith bread, wine, and a fish. And as he emptied
out the gerbage of the fish, he found within her guts a precious stone, the
which he sold to a gould-smith the same day, for three hundred crowns. This
miracle touched him at the very heart, and was the cause that he became a
Christian. Sophron. in prat. spirit. cap. 185.

3. S. Boniface bishop of Ferento in Italy, being yet but a little child, was
wont to give his apparel to the poor, for which his mothes often chid him.
Upon a day as she was out of doors, he called in the poor, and gave them all
the wheat that was in the garner. Which his mother finding a^ her return, she
began to cry and to lament, saying that she had lost the whole revenue of a
year. The little Saint endeavored to confort her, but seeing that he profited
nothing, he besought his mother to go out of the garner, and then began to
pray to God upon his knees. This done, he calls his mother back again, and
behold (a thing most marvelous) she found all her garner filled with most
goodly and most excellent grain. This taught her, that to give alms, does not
empouerish: for which cause, she from that time gave her son leave, to give
to the poor whatsoever he would. S. Greg. dial. l. 1. c. 9.

. 4. How rigorously God has punished those, which had no pity of the poor.
He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, him self shall also cry,
and shall not be heard. Pro. 21. 13.

Judgment shall be done without mercy to him, that has not done mercy. Iac.
2. 13.

Thou have not showed mercy (says S. Basil) thou also shall not find mercy.
Thou have not opened thy house to the poor, and God also will not open his
kingdom to thee. Thou have not given temporal bread, and thou shall not have
eternal life. Assure thy self, that the fruits which thou shall reap, shall
be like to the seed which thou have sown. Have thou sown bitterness? thou
shall likewise reap bitterness. Have thou sown cruelty? thou shall likewise
reap cruelty. Thou have fled mercy, and mercy likewise will fly from thee.
Thou have abhorred the poor, and he likewise shall abhor thee, who for thy
sake made him self so passing poor. S. Basil orat. ad diuites.

EXAMPLES.
1. Hatto, of Abbot of Fulde, made Archbishop of Mayence, filled his barn with
an assembly of poor (fayninge that he would give them alms) and then set fire
at the four corners thereof, and burned them all, saying that they were Rattes,
which eat and consumed the corn of the rich. This cruelty escaped not
unpunished, for before three years after were expired, he him self was eaten
of Rattes, nether he, nor any of his people, being able to prevent it. Joan.
Trithemius in Chron. monast. Hirsau. ad an. Dom. 967. Munsterus and Maria Scot.
lib. 3. Genebrard l. 4. Chro. an. 970.

2. A poor man asking an alms of the master of a Ship, he was refused by him,
saying, that he had nothing in his Ship but stones: and at the same instant,
all therein was turned into stones. S. Greg of Tours. lib. de gloria Conf. cap.
108. recounteth this as an eye witness. And Sigebertus in Chron. an. Dom. 606.
Baron. tom. 8. an. Dom. 605.

3. A certain rich man at Constantinople, being sorry for that he had given
a sum of money in an alms, had no sooner received his money, but he died
suddenly. Baron. tom. 7. annal. eccles. an. 553.

4. A covetous person, who would not hear the cries of the poor, as Mass was
said for him after his death, at each Dominus vobiscum, the Bishop saw the
Crucifix vnfasten its hands from the Cross, and stop its ears. Was not
this to confirm that which we alleged out of the wiseman hertofore, that he
that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, him self shall also cry, and
shall not be heard? Pro. 21. 13. nor they who cry or pray for him? Joan.
Duegnius Hisp. in speculo tristium.

. 5. Of Prayer. How excellent, profitable, and necessary it is.
Prayer (according to S. Greg. of Nice) is a discourse and colloquy of the
soul with almighty God, touching that which concerns its health and
perfection. lib. de orat. Dom. cap. 1.

It is an elevation of the soul into God (says S. John Damascen) to enter
into amorous discourse with him. lib. 3. de fide cap. 14. It is the key of
heaven, says S. Aug. sermon. 226. de temp. It is the best posession that one can
have in this human life, says Saint Ephrem. tract. de orat.

How happy is a soul, which may in every hour as often as it lists open
heaven, and have free access to the secret cabinet of God him self, and there
discourse familiarly with him? O, if the fauorits of the world could do the
like with their Prince, how happy would they repute them selves to be? For
which cause also, all the Saints have made so great account thereof, as we shall
hereafter see; The profits thereof, will appear by the effects.

Amen, Amen I say to you, if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will
give it you, said our Savior to his Apostles. Joan. 16. 23. And in another
place. Ask, and it shall be given you. Luc. 11. 9.

The necessity thereof is the same, that air and breath is for the body. The
body can not live without air and breathing, nor the soul without praying.
For which reason it is that our Savior said. It behooves to pray always
without ceasing. Luc. 18.

Be not hindered to pray always, says the wiseman. Pro. 18. 22.

The Apostle recommendeth the same in sundry places. Phil. 4. 6. Colos. 4. 2.
2. These. 5. 16. And S. Peter in his 1. ep. c. 4. 7.

Prayer is also as necessary for man (says S. John Chrisostom) as water the
fish. lib. 2. de orando Deum.

EXAMPLES.
1. Will you have a proof of its excellency and efficacy? As long as Moses
prayed, and stretched up his arms to heaven, his people had the upper hand of
their enemies, and cut them quite in pieces. Exodus 17.

How many times has he held the arms of God, when he was angry, by his
prayer? Exodus 32. psalm. 105.

2. The Prophet Jeremy, praying for the Isralites, God said unto him. Pray not
for them, and hinder me not. Ierem. 7.

3. Joshua by his prayer, staid the Sun and the Moon, until such time as he
had overcome his enemies. Joshua. 10.

4. Isay made the Sun go back to the point, where it had been ten hours
before, in favor of the King Ezechias. And this King by his prayer, drove
away death which was about to give him his last blow, and lenghtned his life
fifteen years. 4. Reg. 20.

5. S. Dominick confessed to a certain Prior of Cisteau, never to have asked
ought of God, which was denied him. And when the Prior said unto him. Why then
do you not demand of him, Doctor Conrade? It is a thing hard to obtain
(replied the Saint) but if I shall ask it him, I do not dout but to obtain
it. He prayed all the night ensuinge, and (a thing most admirable) in the
morning Conrade came unto the Church, and cast him self at the Saints feet,
asked the habit of religion, and obtained it. Ribadeneira upon his life.

Is it any marvel the^, that prayer being so excellent, so profitable, and so
effectual, all the Saints have loved it so much?

6. Read the life of S. Anthony, and of S. Arsenius, you shall see them pass
the whole nights, without stirring from off their knees, and to complain of
the Sun beating upon their eyes, that it took from them the repose and
sweetness of their soul. Ribad. ex Athanas. and Cassiano.

7. S. Simeon Stillites prayed continually both day and night, one while
standing upright, another while prostrate; and praying upright, made so many
reuerences, that one of the servants of Theodoret, having undertaken to number
them, counted in one day to the number of twelve hundred forty four, and then
was weary of counting more. From the Euensonge of the principal feasts,
until the morrow morning, he stood upright, with his hands lifted up to
heaven, without being weary, nor suffering him self to be oppressed with
sleep. Theodoret Cyri. epist. lib. 9. cap. 27.

8. S. Apollonius, Abbot of two hundred monks in The baidis, prayed a hundred
times a day, and a hundred times a night. Ruffinus lib. 2. cap. 7. Pallud. cap.
52.

Abdias writes as much of S. Bartholomew Apostle, S. Antoninus of S. Martha,
Palladius of S. Macarius; and what shall I say of S. James the Apostle, who by
the use of praying, had his knees as hard as a Camels skin.

9. A certain Cobbler named Zachary, was wont night by night, to go and
salute the most B. Sacrament in the church of S. Sophie in Constantinople, and
there to make his prayers. A holy man named John, who also passed the nights
in prayer at the portalls of the Churches, praying on a night at the portall of
S. Sophie, saw a light to come which ouertooke him: and the better to consider
what this man came to do, he hid him self aside in a corner. Zachary being
come to the church door, he there made a short prayer, and then the sign of
the Cross upon the door, and at the same instant it opened to him: and the
same happened to two other doors. Being entered into the church, he went before
the high Altar, and after that he had ended his prayer, he returning home to
his house, all the Doors shut them after him of their selves. Raderus in his
Row of Saints, taken forth of the Greek Calendar.

. 6. Of the conditions required to pray protfiably.
You ask and receive not, because you ask amiss. says S. James. cap. 4. 3.

To ask aright, we must observe four points.

1. To be in good estate. If our heart do not reprehend us, we have confidence
toward God (says S. John) and whatsoever we shall ask, we shall receive of
him. 1. John. 3. 22. And our Lord said to his Apostles; If you abide in me, and
my words abide in you, you shall ask what thing soever you will, and it
shall be done to you. John. 15. 10.

Offer sacrifice no more in vain (quoth God by his prophet) incense is
abomination to me; when you shall stretch forth your hands, I will turn away
mine eyes from you, for your hands are full of blood. Wash you, be clean,
take away the evil of your cogitations from your hearts. Isay. 1. 13.

2. The second point is, to consider the greatness of the Majesty of almighty
God, to whom we speak. What means is there (says S. Basil) to pray without
distraction? And he answers; If we remember that we are before the majesty
of God. lib. 1. Hexam. and in reg. breu. 201. and 306.

3. Ask nothing, but what is either profitable, or necessary, to thy
salvation. And that which is indifferent, as health, prosperity etc. ask it
also with condition: for example, Lord give me health, if it be to thy greater
glory, and my salvation.

This is the confidence which we have toward him, that whatsoever we shall
ask according to his will, he hears us. 1. Ioh. 15. 14. And the will of God
(says S. Paul) is your sanctification. 1. These. 4. 3.

4. To ask all in the name, and by the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen I say to
you, if you ask the Father any thing in my name, he will give it you. John
16. 23.

EXAMPLES.
1. God the Creator, received the gift of Abel, but that of Cain was rejected,
because Cain offered it with a heart, full of envy and rancor against his
brother. Genesis 4.

2. At Toulouse in France, a young man being in quarrel and enmity against an
other, albeit he frequented the churches, and recited there sundry prayers, yet
never could he for the space of seven months, once recite the Pater noster,
until such time as following the council of a father of the Society, he was
reconciled to his enemy. In the annals of the Society anno 1584.

3. I w^ll speak unto God (was Abraham wont to say before prayer) I that am
but dust and ashes. Genesis 18. 27.

4. S. Hierom writing to Saluina says, that Nebridius was wont to ask
nothing in his prayer, but that which God knew to be best for him. Epist. ^.

5. Another holy person was wont to pray reciting A. B. C. and after at the end
said. Lord do thou join the letters together, I ask thee only that which is
most agreeable to thee, and most expedient for me, and what this is, thou
know better then I. And S. Macarius said, that this manner of prayer was the
best; Lord give me what thou will, and what thou please. Salmeron tract. 12.
de orat. Christi in horto.

6. Jacob being reuested with the garments of his eldest brother Esau, received
the benediction of his father Isaac. Genesis 27. If we will receive the blessing
of our celestial father, we must approache unto him, with the garments and
merits of our eldest brother Jesus Christ. It is the practice of the Church,
never to conclude any prayer in the divine office, or in the Mass, but. Per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum etc.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of Communion.
THe holy Church obliges (a) every Christian, who has attained to the use
of reason, to receive at the least once a year, and that about Easter: but
this is not to say, that she is not marvelous desirous (b) that we receive the
same more often, and that because of the necessity which the soul has of
this nourishment, and of the great vtilities she receives thereby. (a) Council.
Lat. Can. 21. (b.) Council. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 26.

. Of the necessity and utility of Communion.
Amen I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, you shall not have life in you. Says our Savior in S. John. cap.
6. 53.

The bread which I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world. Ibid. 51.

He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.
Ibid. 56.

I am stricken as grass, and my heart is withered, because I have forgotten to
eat my bread. psalm. 101. 5. that is to say, the holy Eucharist.

To communicate every day (says S. Aug.) I nether praise, nor yet dispraise,
but I council and exhort, to communicate every Sunday. Lib. de eccles.
dog-mat. The same S. Hierom says, in apolog. ad Pamachum.

O ^acred ba^quet (sings the church) wherein Christ is received, the memory of
his passion is renewed (a) the mind is filled with grace (b) and a pledge of
future glory is given unto us. (a) Basil. ser. 1. de baptis. cap. 3. (b) Amb.
in psalm. 18. ser. 15. v. 4. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 2.

It is the viaticum of our pilgrimage (a) which is given unto us, as the manna
to the Isralites (b) to pass happily the desa^t and warfare of this life,
until we arrive to the celestial Jerusalem, bringing to us all consolation
(c) virtue and graces. (a) Council. Nice. can. 12. 2. Arelat can. 12. Chrisost.
l. 6. de sacerd. Paulin. in vita Ambros. Greg. hom. 4. in Euang. (b) Exodus 16.
Deuteronomy. 8. (c) Sap. 16. Joan. 6.

Hear what S. Ambrose says. Our Lord in the Eucharist, is unto us all in all.
If you will heal your wounds, he is the medecin. If you be thirsty, he is
the fountain. If you be laden with sins, he is justice. If you stand in
need of asistance, he is virtu. If you fear death, he is life. If you will
go to heaven, he is the way. If you fly darkness, he is the light. If you are
hungry, he is food. Taste then and see how sweet our Lord is. S. Amb. de
virginit. ad Marc. sor. l. 3. tom. 4.

EXAMPLES.
1. A certain woman, having been five weeks without communicating, appeared
like a Mare. Pallad in hist. Lausiac. sect. 17. c. 19.

2. Sister Agnes Abbess, having forbidden S. Lutgarde to communicate every
Sunday, was at the same instant stricken with sickness, whereof she could not be
healed, till after she had revoked that sentence. Surius tom. 3. c. 12.

3. S. Gertrude praying for one of her religious, who thorough an indiscreet
zeal diuerted her fellows to frequent the communion, our Lord said unto her,
that all his delight was to be with men, and that therefore this religious did
ill, in withdrawing others from the communion. Lud. Blos. in Monil. spirit. c.
6.

4. S. Bonauenture, out of reverence and humili^ie, abstayninge sundry days
to say Mass, as he heard the same, the priest having broken the holy Host,
one piece thereof flew to the mouth of S. Bonauenture. Then giving thanks to
God, he understood that those were more agreeable unto him, who approached to
the communion by love, then those who for fear abstained from it: which he
has since committed to writing. In the treat. of spiritual exercises,
entitled Fascilulus cap. 7. and lib. 2. de prof. relig. cap. 78.

5. A little child, after he had communicated, was cast by his own father,
being a Jew, into a burning furnace, without receiving any hurt. Gregor. Turon.
lib. 1. de gloria mart. cap. 10. Nicephor. Eccles. hist. lib. 17. cap. 25.

6. S. Liberalis, receiving the communion every Sunday, took no other kind of
sustenance, and was in good health. Marul. lib. 4. cap. 12. and Pet. de Natal.
lib. 4 cap. 93.

7. Iulia Zerbina at Parma, lived also many months, without other sustenance
then the B. Sacrament. Orlandinus in the hist. of the Society lib. 2. of the
year 1539.

Who sees not then, that the holy Eucharist, is the true nourishment of a
Christian man, and a sovereign remedy against all danger? and that therefore
it is wisely done to approach often thereunto.

. 2. Of the preparation and devotion requisite to communicate well.
Let a man prove him self (that is to say examine him self, and if he see him
self in mortal sin, that he confess him self) and so, let him eat of that
bread, and drink of the chalice. For he that eats and drinks unworthily
(in mortal sin) eats and drinks judgment to him self (that is to say,
his condemnation) not discerninge the body of our Lord. Therefore are there
among you, many weak and feeble, and many sleep (that is to say, are in the
death of sin.) These are the words of the Apostle. 1. Corinthians. 11. and so
explicated by Theophil. Saint Anselme. Saint Greg. lib. 2. cap. c. 1. in l. 1.
Reg. sermon. 1. temp. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 7.

Now four things are requisite to communicate well.

1. Faith. 1. Tim. 3. S. Basil. quest. 172. in reg. breu; That is to say, to
believe the reallitie of the precious body of Jesus Christ in the holy Sacrament.

2. Penance and Confession.

3. An attention of soul, and devotion excited by prayers and meditations.
Chrisost. hom. 83. in Mat. and 3. ad Ephesians. 60. and 61. ad pop.

4. A decent carriage and comportment, to be fasting, chaste, modest, humble,
having our face, mouth, and hands clean. S. Aug. ad Ian. epist. 118. cap. 6.
Orig. hom. 5. ^n diverse. euang. locos.

O what horrible indignity is it, to believe that Jesus Christ is in the most
holy Sacrament, and yet to presume to receive him, having thorough mortal
sin, the devil harbored in his soul?

EXAMPLES.
1. A holy Bishop having asked of God to know the interior estate of two of his
subjects, which were reported to be adulterers, as they communicated, he saw
the one of them to have his face black, and his eyes full of blood: and the
face of the other, bright and shining, and al his garments as white as snow.
And not knowing what it meant, an Angel told him, that the first was an
adulterer, and was yet in sin. The other, albeit he had likewise committed
adultery, yet had he cleansed him self by Confession before communion. In
vitis patrum page 2.. 156. The same also Saint Euthymius Abbat, saw in some
communicants, as Surius writes in his in life Ian. 20.

2. Widekindus Duke of Saxony, being come disguised into the camp of
Charlemaigne, saw the priest upon Easter day give to those that did communicate,
a very beautiful little child, who entered into the mouth of some, with a face
laughing, and into others with a countenance frowning, and as it were by force.
Albertus Crautz. l. 2. de hist. de Sax. c. 23.

3. A young man in Guienna anno 1600. communicating in mortal sin, had never
power to open his mouth. Whereat the priest amazed, asked of him if he were
confessed, who answered with tears, no? Florimond Reimond tom. 1. of the
beginning of heresy lib. 2. cap. 12. S. Greg. of Tours, writes the like
history, lib. de gloria mart. c. 89.

4. King Lotharius, having for a long time kept a concubine, came to Rome to
Pope Nicholas to be absolved, assuring that he had put her from him, which
notwithstanding he had not done. The Pope to prove his saying, caused him to
communicate with all the Lords of his train. A strange case, the king died
within a few days after at Placentia, and within the year, all the others of
his company. Sigebert. in chron. anno 870.

5. At Dulaca, a city of the Phillippine Islandes, a young man, receiving
the B. Sacrament in mortal sin, felt instantly most strange pains
thoroughout his body. He cast up the holy Host in a privy, and the pain
ceased; our Lord choosing rather to be in that dirt, then within that sinful
soul. Within a while after, he fell again to his former sins, and went
notwithstanding unto the communion, and behold he was at the same instant, as
seized with a fire in his throat, he withers, and consumes quite away, which
his parents them selves perceived well, and yet descouered not the cause. He
communicats again, and behold an infinite number of little flies which fly to
his mouth, and gave him so many pricks with their stinges, that at the last he
knew him self, confessed him, and presently all those little flies, and all his
pains departed. In the annals of the Society anno 1605. O the blindness and
obstinacy of the sinner! O the admirable patience and benignity of God!

THE IX. CHAPTER. Of hearing sermons, or the word of God.
BLessed is the man, whom thou shall instruct o Lord, and shall teach out of
thy law. psalm. 93. 12.

Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that thou did suck (said
a woman unto our Lord after his sermon) yea rather (quoth he) blessed are they
that hear the word of God and keep it. Luc. 11. 28.

He says yet more in another place. He that is of God (that is to say,
according to the explication of the holy fathers (a) he that is predestinat to
eternal life) he hears the words of God, therefore you hear not (quoth he
to the Jews) because you are not of God. John 8. 47. (a) Aug. tract. 42. in
Joan. Greg. hom. 12. in euang. Ber. ser. 1. in Septuag.

Certainly (says S. John Chrysostom) I have great proofs of your profit and
spiritual advancement, to see you every day to run with so great
promptitude, and to be so greedy and desirous, to feed and fill your selves
with spiritual doctrine. For even as the appetit to corporal meat, is an
argument of the good constitution of the body: even so the desire of spiritual
doctrine, is an evident sign of the good constitution and health of the soul.
Chrisost. hom. 32. in Genesis

The words of sermons, are called by our Lord, the words of God, because it
is God who speaks by their mouths. He that hears you, hears me. Luc. 10.

And Mat. 10. 20. It is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that
speaks in you.

We gives thanks to God without intermission, because that when you had
received of us the word of the hearing of God, you received it not as the word
of men but (as it is indeed) the word of God. 1. These. 2. 12.

EXAMPLES.
1. S. Ephrem being one day in prayer, he heard a voice which said unto him.
Ephrem eat; What shall I eat (quoth he) and who shall give me food? Go to
Basil (replied the voice) he will teach thee, and will give unto thee the
everlasting bread. He arose, goes seek S. Basil, and found him preaching in
the church. Surius 1. of Feb.

2. S. Gregory of Nice, and Metaphrastes write, that S. Ephrem saw a Dove to
prompt unto S. Basil, all that he preached. And Amphilochius adds, that he
saw the tongue of S. Basil all on fire.

3. An Arrian heretic, and a great enemy of our faith, was converted to the
truth, for that he perceived whilst S. Ambrose preached, an Angel to dictat
into his ear, all that which he said. S. Paulinus in his life.

. 1. Of the efficacy of the word of God.
Why, are not my words as fire, says our Lord, and as a hammer breaking a
rock? Ierem. 23. 29.

They are also called Trumpets. Isay 58. Iosue. 6. By the trumpets which the
priests caused to be sounded, the walls of Hiericho were overthrown: a most
assured presage, that at the voice and sound of the preachers (the true
trumpets of the church) the walls and ramparts of our vices, should be
overthrown.

EXAMPLES.
1. A certain woman that had poisoned her husband, hearing S. Hughe bishop of
Grenoble preach, felt so greiuous a sorrow in her heart, for having committed
so great a sin, that without regarding where she was, she confessed it aloud
and publicly. Ribad. in the life of S. Hughe.

2. S. Vincent Ferrier, being about to preach, he perceived two wicked persons
which were a leading to the gallouse, he made them to be brought unto him, and
a cloth to be put before their face. Then he preached of the malice and
deformity of sin, and of the pains of hell, and that with such fervor and
efficacy, that these two thieves touched with repentance for their sins,
began to sweat, and to smoke or reake, as if they had been burnt, and their
faces being discovered, they were seen become as black as coals. Platus de
bono stat. relig. l. 2. c. 32.

O what reformation would there be both in towns and villages, if sinners
would frequent sermons and catechismes! But al as it is to be feared, lest that
which our Lord said to his Apostles, arrive not to sundry Christians. Whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your words, amen I say to you, it shall be
more tolerable for the land of the Sodomites and Gomorrheans, in the day of
judgment, then for that city. Mat. 10. 14.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of the singular devotion, which the good Christian ought to
have to our B. Lady.
ALl the holy Saints have been so affected to the mother of God, and have
thought so highly of the desire which God has of her honor and her service,
that they have been bold to assure, that who so shall be truly deuo^t unto
her, shall be never damned, but that she will obtain him of her Son, all
that which shall be necessary for him to be saved. They prove the same by the
words of the wise man. Prou. 8. 34. saying. Blessed is the man that hears
me, he that shall find me, shall find life, and shall draw salvation of our
Lord.

For this cause, S. Epiphanius calls the holy virgin, the root and seed of
glory. orat. de Annunt.

And in Eccles. 24. 24. I am the mother of beautiful love, and fear, and of
knowledge, and of holy hope, in me is all grace of way and truth, they that
explicate me, shall have life everlasting.

S. Anselme and S. Bonauenture lib. 1. phar. cap. 5. say. Sicut o beatissima
etc. Even as, o blessed virgin, all auerted from thee, and despiced of thee,
must needs perish: even so all converted to thee, and respected of thee, it is
impossible they should perish.

Hear S. Bernard. God has placed the whole plenitude of all good things in
Marie, that we should know, that if there be any hope in us, any grace of
heaven, any hope of salvation, all this comes from God by the hands of Marie.
Ser. de not. virg. Mariae.

And in another place. She is called, the Q^eene and mother of mercy, because
we believe, that she opens the bottomless depth of divine mercy to whom she
will, when she will, and after what manner and fashion she will; in so much,
that even the most enormous sinner, ca^ not perish, if this Saint of Saints,
honor him with her intercession and as^tance. Sermon. 1. in Salve regina.

Who has ever (says a certain holy personage) reclaymed thy most powerful
favor with a faithful heart, and has been rejected? Never, never has one
been heard of. Eutichianus in vita Theoph. anno 600. The same, Saint Bernard
says, in the sermon upon the Assump^on.

EXAMPLES.
1. My mother ask (said king Solomon to Bersabee) for it behooves not that I
turn away thy face. 3 Reg. 20. Solomon was a figure of the Son of God, and
Bersabee of our B. Lady.

2. When Jesus therefore had seen his mother (from the Cross whereon he was
nailed) and the Disciple standinge whom he loved, he says to his mother.
Woman, behold thy Son. And after that he says to the Disciple, behold thy
mother. Joan. 19. 26. From which hour, S. John took her for his mother. Our
Lord recommended us also then unto his mother in the person of S. John. Have we
not then just occasion, to hold her for our mother as well as he?

3. S. Thomas of Aquin assured before his death, never to have asked ought of
our Lord, by the means of our B. Lady, which he obtained not. Ribad. 7. of
March. The same is read also of S. Dominick. Ibid. 4. of August.

4. Theophilus having given his soul unto the devil, and signed the gift with
his own hand, had recourse unto our Lady, and prayed unto her so fervently
and so efficatiously, that the devil was forced to bring him back again his
bill. Metaphrast. 4. of F^b. and. S. Antoninus. Which the B. Cardinal Damian
admiring, says. What may be denied thee, o most holy virgin, to whom was not
denied to pluck Theophilus out of the very throat of hell? Certainly nothing is
impossible for he, since thou can from the very bottom of the bottomless
depthe, raise up the despaired, to lift them up into the bosom of glory.

5. See such other like examples, in the history of Loretto, by Horatius
Turselinus lib. cap. 4. cap. 33. In Cesarias, lib. 6. mirac. cap. 26. 27. In
Delrio disq. magic. lib. 6. cap. 2. S. 3. q. 3.

6. A certain Hermit upon a day, saw our Lady sitting upon a sumptuous
throane, and at her feet, S. Wadrus and S. Aldegundus, who besought her to do
justice upon Theodoric Count of Auesne, who unjustly usurped the goods of the
Church. Our Lady answered them, that his wife held her hands, for as much as
every day she offered for him sixty Aue Mary's. In the 3. volume of the annals
of Hainna^ cap. 19.

7. Lewis king of France and Emperor son of Cha^lemaine, bore always the
picture of our Lady, hanging at his neck (as did also S. Heduuige Duchess of
Pol^gnia Sur tom. 5.) and if he were either weary of huntinge, or stayed
amongst the thickets, he fastened this picture upon some tree, and offered up
his prayers upon both his knees. In the history of France. Canis. l. 5. cap.
2^. and Crautz.

7. Andronicus, Emperor of the cast, being reduced by a sudden acci^ent to
the point of death, and seeing that he could not receive the most precious body
of our Lord for his voyage food, he put within his mouth a golden image of the
most holy virgin, which he always bore about his neck, and so meltinge into
tears, dyed. He believed that the B. mother would make his excuse toward her
Son, and that he should not be excluded heaven, presenting at the gate
thereof, the picture of her who was the Queen of heaven, and having his har^
all graven with the marks of her devotion. Binet in his treatise of devotion
to our Lady.

8. The B. mother of Teresa of Jesus, being appointed prioresse of the
Incarnation at Auila, before she began any thing touching her office, placed
in the Prioresses chair, an image of wood of our B. Lady, and offered up unto
her, the whole house and the keys thereof. This act was so aggreable to our B.
Lady, that within a few days after (as she her self has left in writ^inge)
she saw at the beginning of the Salve, the mother of God come down from heaven
into the same chair, with a great multitude of Angels who said unto her, that
she had done rightwell to set her in her place, and that for this fact, she
would present their prayers and praises unto her Son. F^b. l. 3. cap. 1. of
her life.

9. A certain religious man of the order of S. Francis, had a custom never to
take his refection, if first he had not said his Beads once to our B. Lady.
One day being set at the table, he called to mind, that he had not discharged
that day, that pious duty. Having then obtained leave of the Guardian to go
forth, he went and said his Bedes in the Church; and as he stayed somewhat
long, another went for to call him. Who as he entered into the Church, he saw
our Lady, accompanied with a multitude of Angels, who gathered from the mouth
of this religious as he said his Beads, most fair Roses, the which they
placed about our Ladies head: and at every time that he pronounced in the Aue
Marie the name of Jesus, our Lady and the Angels bowed down their heads.
Extracted out of the Chronicles of the Friar Minors. Part. 3. l. 1. c. 36. and
3^.

10. A Sodaliste of our B. Lady, in the year 1586. confessed a^ his death, that
he had been presented before the judgment of God, and in great danger of being
saved, had he not been suddenly asisted by our B. Lady. Franciscus Bencius in
the annals of the Society, anno 1586. and Ioannes Bonifacius in the history
of the virgin l. 4. c. 18.

12. Martin Guttrich an heretic, having heard in the sermon of Doctor
Frederick Fornerus preacher of Bamberge, that none could die ill, who devoutly
served our B. Lady, and daily offered unto her son Aue Mary's, he began from
that very time, to say unto her every day, seven in the morning, and as many
at night, which he continued for three whole years: at the end whereof being
fallen sick, our B. Lady appeared unto him, warning him to be confessed, and to
receive the B. Sacrament, tellinge him, that she had obtained of her Son,
that he should not die in his wicked heresy, in requit all of the service that
he had done her, and that she would come and fetch him, at the same instant
that she was delivered of her Son: as it came to pass, for he deceased on
Christmas night, betwixt twelve and one a clock, the year of our Lord 1607.
This history was written more at large by the preacher aforsaid, as an eye
witness, in a letter sent to a certain friend of his at Monich. the 4. of
January 1608.

If an heretic has merited so much favor of the mo^her of God, for some few
Aue Mary's, which he recited during his heresy, what ough^est thou to hope for
(true Christian Catholic) if being in the state of grace, thou rendrest unto
her every day, some pious service recitinge the Rosarie, or the Bedes, or at
the least a little Coronne of twelve Aues, interposing three Paters, in honor of
the crown of twelve Stars or favors, wherewith the most holy Trinity has
crowned her soul? And how much more, if rancking thy self in some Sodalitie
of hers, thou resoluest to be particularly and singularly devout unto her? Will thou be assured more and more, one day to rendar and give up thy soul betwixt
her arms? Put thy self in the company of those, who pray one for another to
this purpose, reading the Litanies of Loretto, with some other prayers unto S.
Joseph.

Lo here that which I had to impart unto thee, touching the manner to live
Christianly, that is to say, to live in such sort, that thou may, as a true
soldiar of Jesus Christ, having driven away sin from thy soul, trampled upon
the devil, the world, and the flesh thy mortal enemies, having gotten many
merits and virtues by the exercise of good works, thou may one day at the
last, ascend upon a chariot of honor, and triumphantly enter into everlasting
glory and felicity, Amen.

To the greater glory of God, and of his glorious mother the Virgin Marie.
APPROBATIO.
Ego infrascriptus testor me perlegisse libellum intitulatum, The Christian
(...). Per R P Philippum Doultreman Societatis Jesus Sacerdote^ Gallice
compositum, and in linguam Anglica^am per Ioannem Heigham traductum, nihilque
in eo, contra fidem Catholica^ aut bonos mor^s deprehendisse, sed magnam potiu
vtil^atem and consolationem Catholicis Angliae^ aturum fore Quare secure
imprimi potest. Datum Aud^mari in Collegio Anglorum Soc. Jesus, die 18. Aug 1622.

Hugo Buccleus Soc. Jesus Sac.

A Summarie of the Chapters and Paragraphes, contained in these two books.
THE I. BOOK. Of the flight from sin. THE I. CHAPTER. Of the name Christian,
page 18. THE II. CHAPTER. Of mortal and venial sin. page 25.. 1. What
mortal sin is, and what detriments it brings to the soul, p 27.. 2. How
much mortal sin is detestable horrible and stinking, page 33.. 3. By mortal
sin, we crucify again Jesus Christ, page 37.. 4. Of venial sin, page 40
THE III. CHAPTER. Of sins of will only, and of thought, page 45. THE IV.
CHAPTER Of the sins of the Tongue, page 50.. 1 Of Swearing, page 52. 2. Of
Blasphemy, page 64.. 3 Of Malediction, and of wicked Imprecation. page 69. 4. Of
contumelious words, page 73. 5 Of D^traction, page 76.. 6 Of Lying, page 81..
7. Of songs, and of dishonest words page 86.
THE V. CHAPTER. Of the sins of parents and their children page 92.. 1. Of
the negligence of parents to correct their children from their tender youth,
and to instruct them in matters of faith, and of good manners, page 93 2. Of the
sins of Children, toward their parents, page 102. 3. Other considerations for
the fathers of families, touching the gouuernment of their household: and
particularly toward their men and women servants, page 110.
THE VI CHAPTER. Of the Seven capital sins, page 115. 1. Of Pride and
Superbitie, page 116. 2. Of Covetousness, page 121. 3. Of the sin of Luxury,
page 129. 4 Particular Considerations, against the sin of voluntary
Pollu^ion, page 135. 5. Of the sin of Envy, page 138. 6. Of Gluttony and
Drunkenness, page 141. 7. Of the sin of Anger, page 150. 8 Of the sin of
Sloth, page 156. An aduertiseme^t touching this vice for such as are
Magistrates and father of families, p. 165.

THE VII CHAPTER. Of certain remedies and means, whereby not to fall into
sin, page 168. 1. Of flying the occasions of sin, p. 169. 2 Of the
mindfulnes of the presence of God, page 176. 3 Of the remembrance of the most
dolorous passion of our Lord, page 183. 4 Of the memory of death, page 188. 5.
Of the memory of Judgment, page 200. 6. Of hell, and of the Eternity of the
accursed, page 206. 7. Of the memory of heaven, and of the eternity of the
blessed, page 215.

THE II. BOOK. The Prologue, page 225. THE I. CHAPTER. Of the sign of the
Cross, page 228. 1 Of the ancient use and custom, to make the sign of the
Cross, at the beginning and ending of our works: and how dangerous it is,
either to eat or drink, not making before and after this holy sign, page
229. 2. That this sign is a preservative against all danger, and particularly
against the tentations of the devil? page 235.
THE II. CHAPTER. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving which a Christian ought to make
morning and evening, before, and after meat. And of the invocation of our
blessed Lady, of our Angel Guardian, and our other Patrons, page 241.. 1 Of the
prayer which a Christian ought to make morning and evening, page 243 2 Of
thank^giuing which we ought to render to God in all times, but particularly
after meat and drink, page 254. 3 Of prayer, examen of conscience, and
Invocation of Saints, which a Christian ought to make before he sleep, page
259. Sect. 1 Of the examen of our conscience, page 261 Sect. 2 Of the Invocation
of Saints, page 269
4 Of holy water, where with a Christian ought to sprinkle him self, at his
going in, or coming out of his bed and chamber, page 276 5. Of Agnus Dei, page
280. 6. Of the Relics of Saints, page 285.
THE III. CHAPTER. Of the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, page 289. 1. Of Faith, 290. 2. Of Ignorance in things of faith how
dangerous it is, and which the points are, that necessarily are to be known,
page 298. 3. Of Hope, page 303. 4. Of distrust of our selves: and how we must
never begin, nor undertake any thing, but first to recommend the same to God,
page 305. 5. Of Cha^itie, and particularly of that which we owe unto God, page
311. The properties of the love of God, page 314
6 Of Charity toward our neighbor, page 320
THE IV CHAPTER. Of the seven virtues contrary to the capital sins, page
325 1. Of the vir^u of Humility, page 326. 2. Of Liberall^ie, page 333. 3. Of
Cha^itie, page 335. 4 Of Chari^e page 346. 6. Of the vi^u of Patience, page 353.
7. Of spiritual dilig^nce, page ^7.
THE V. CHAPTER Of the holy sacrifice of the Mass, page 372. 1 Of the fruits
and vtili^es of the Mass, page 373 2 Of the reverence and attention we ought to
have, during the sacrifice of the Mass, page 375 3. Of the vtilities of the
Mass proved by examples, with some remarkable punishments of those who have
despiced the same, page 380
THE VI CHAPTER. Of Confession, of the Sacrament of Penna^ce, page 388. 1. Of
Contrition, page 389. 2. Of Confession, page 394. 3. Of frequent Confession,
and how dangerous it is for to delay it, page 401. 4. Of General Confession,
page 406. 5. Of satisfaction, the third part of the Sacrament of Penance, page
408. 6. Of Indulgences, page 409. 7. Of the pains of Purgatory, page 412. 8. Of
prayers or suffrages for the departed, page 415
THE VII. CHAPTER. Of satisfactorie works, Fasting, Alms, and Prayers, page
420 1. Of Fasting, page 421. 2 Of Alms, page 424. 3. That we never loose any
thing, no not in this present life by giving alms, page 430. 4. How
rigorously God has punished those which had no pity of the poor, p 434. 5.
Of Prayer How excellent, profitable, and necessary it is, page 437. 6 Of the
conditions required to pray profitably, page 444
THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of Communion, page 448. 1. Of the necessity and utility
of Communion, ibid 2. Of the preparation and devotion requisite to communicate
well, page 453.
THE IX. CHAPTER Of hearing sermons, or the word of God, p 458 1 Of the
efficacy of the word of God, page 461.
THE X CHAPTER. Of the singular devotion, which the good Christian ought to
have to our B. Lady, page 463.

FIN.

