AN EXPLANATION OF THE GENERAL Epistle of Saint Jude.

Delivered in one and forty SERMONS, by that Learned, Reverend, and faithful
Servant of Christ, Master SAMVEL OTES, Parson of Sowthreps in Norfolk.

Preached in the Parish Church of Northwalsham, in the same County, in a
public Lecture.

And now published for the benefit of Gods Church, by SAMVEL OTES, his son,
Minister of the Word of God at MARSHAM.

2 PET. 1. 15. I will endeavor always, that ye also may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departing.

PROVE. 13. 9. The light of righteousness shines more and more, but the candle
of the wicked shall be put out.

PROVE. 13. 13. He that despises the Word, shall be destroyed; but he that
fears the commandment, shall be rewarded.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Purslow for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold
at his Shop, at the South Entrance of the ROYAL EXCHANGE. 1633.

TO THE RELIGIOUS AND RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Knight and Baronet, Sir JOHN HOBERT of
Blickling, Deputy Lieutenant and High Sheriff of the Country of Norfolk:
SAMVEL OTES wishes all felicity here, and eternal salvation hereafter.
Right Worshipful,
THese Sermons of my Fathers upon Saint Jude (Right worshipful Sir) after that
once I was persuaded, for Sions sake, to have them printed, I thought good to
dedicate them to your worthy self: as Saint Luke dedicated his Gospel to
Theophilus, so I to you, another Theophilus, a true lover of God and of his
Word, so right honestly affected to Doctrine and Religion, that your
Comportment in Gods Church, and in all your courses, and in all good causes,
persuades the Country, your Piety and Devotion to be unfeigned. The causes
why I present them unto you, are these: First, the true respect you merit from
all them who profess Learning: Secondly, the many excellent gifts worthy of
much commendations in your self: Thirdly, that my Father (whom God has taken
to his Mercy) was sometime Chaplain to my late Honorable good Lord your
Father (who now rests with God, his body being laid up in peace, and his
memory with good men precious) and one of the first Chaplains that ever he
entertained: Lastly, to testify my own engagement, you being my worthy
Patron, humbly desiring, that as you succeeded your Honorable Father in his
Virtues; so I may succeed my Father in your favors. Touching these Sermons
upon Jude, the natural sense thereof is so clearly opened, and the Doctrines
arising so powerfully applied and enforced, and all manner of sin so
reproved, that I doubt not, but Gods Church and People shall hence reap much
benefit, which was the Authors only intent in the exercise of his Ministry.
But it becomes not me to say much; they are exposed to public view, and
as men's eyes shall be upon them, so my prayer to God shall be, that their
hearts may be informed and reformed by them. For my part I intend especially
(though I be of all men most unworthy to be an instrument herein) to further
Christ's Kingdom, which if it may, I have my desire: howsoever, I shall leave it
to the blessing of God, and your worthy Patronage. Now the God of all
consolation, according to the riches of his Mercy, bless you with the
Honorable good Lady your Wife, your hopeful Children, and whole Family, with
all external, internal, and eternal blessings of his Spirit, that all your
actions may be prosperous, your troubles few, your comforts many, your life
long, your death blessed, your election sure, and your salvation certain. Amen.

Your Worships in all Christian offices to command, Samuel Otes, Minister of
the Word of God,
at Marsham in Norfolk.
TO THE GODLY AND Well-affected Reader whosoever.
COurteous Reader, I am bold at the length to present to thy view these Sermons
of my Fathers upon the Epistle of Saint Jude, which though in this Learned age,
among so many excellent and accurate Sermons and Treatises, it may seem
presumption to publish, yet in this sinful age, I thought they might prove
most useful for the beating down of sin, and convincing the consciences,
and converting the souls of sinners, there being not many of this kind: for
though knowledge abound, and learning flourish, and most desire to have their
understanding informed, and affections pleased, yet true godliness and
righteousness is daily decaying, and few desire to have their lives reformed;
though they have the form of godliness, yet they have denied the power thereof;
and though they profess they know God, yet in their works they deny him. Which
this man of God considering, did bend all his labor and learning to the
beating down of sin, and building up in virtue and saving knowledge: wherein
how powerful and prevalent he was, thou may guess by these Sermons tanquam
ex ungue leonem. Concerning himself, his learning, life, etc. It is not meet
I should say much, seeing I may seem to speak partially out of affection, yet
I hope I may without blame give testimony to that truth which all that knew him
will acknowledge; namely, that he was a faithful labourer in the work of the
Lord, a workman that needed not to be ashamed, a burning and a shining light,
burning with zeal, shining both by divine Doctrine and godly conversation.
Burning so, as he consumed himself, to give light to others; and shining, not
only before his Parochial charge, where he lived and exercised his
Ministry; being as an Augustine Sowthreps in Norfolk.
to that Hyppo, a Polycarpe to that Smyrna, but the whole Country; so as they
all knew him a faithful Samuel, a learned, laborious, and godly Preacher, who
did empty himself, to fill others, and did waste and consume his strength, to
instruct the flock committed to his charge. Neither was the luster of his
light confined in that Parish or Country wherein he lived, but shined further
into other parts of this Kingdom, so as three very Godly and Eminent Persons
in this State; worthy instruments of Gods glory, flourishing in their time with
many excellent graces and virtues on earth, and now all shining glorious Saints
in Heaven, did take notice of him, and did successively entertain him
Chaplain (namely, Sir Francis Walshingham, Secretary to the State, Sir John
Popham, Lord-Chiefe-Iustice of England, and Sir Henry Hobart, Knight and
Baronet, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Common Pleas;) all which notwithstanding,
he continued so lowly in his own eyes, and so zealous in his Function, as he
neither carelessly, nor ambitiously, left his Cure to seek other preferment:
But having at any time performed his due observance to those Honorable Persons,
according as he was engaged, he presently returned to his accustomed weekly,
and almost daily task of preaching: for his heart was so inflamed with the
zeal of Gods glory, and yet so balanced with the fear of God, and true
humility, that neither the learning nor graces that were in his own heart, nor
the luster and grace he had with other, did puff him up with price: and this
humility and lowlines in his own eyes (Magna and rara virtus, as S. Bernard
terms it) made him think neither these nor any of his Sermons or writings
worthy of public view, so as though he were much importuned by offers and
earnest entreaties, yet would not be drawn to publish any of them. But for as
much as it is not meet, those learned labors should dye with him, whereby,
he being dead, may (with Abel) yet speak, and the living be furthered in the
way of life, I resolved to publish these Sermons upon S. Jude, Preached in a
weekly Lecture to a public audience on the market day at Northwalsham in
Norfolk; Intending (God assisting) if I may understand these to become
acceptable and profitable to the people of God, to publish more. In the mean
time I shall send these forth, with Jacobs blessing and prayer for his Sons,
Genesis 43. 14. God Almighty send thee mercy in the sight of the man, etc. In the
sight of the proud man, that he be no more high-minded, as Herod; In the sight
of the poor man, that he may be content with the things he has already, as
Paul; In the sight of the stubborn man, that he may yield with Saul, and say,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? In the sight of the penitent man, that
his wounds may be bound up, and Wine and Oil powered into them; In the sight of
the barren man, that he may live and bring forth much fruit; In the sight of
every man, that they may draw near to God with a pure heart in assurance of
faith, sprinkled in their hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in their
body with pure water. But especially in the sight of our Joseph, our Jesus, who
bless thee and these to thee, and all other means of furthering thy
salvation; to whose grace I commend thee, this tenth of April, 1633.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Samuel Otes.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST SERMON Upon Saint IVDE.
A Brief description of the Author, Penman, Argument, Occasion of the Epistle.

The division of it into five parts: 1 Superscription. 2 Exordium. 3
Proposition. 4 Exhortations, Dehortations. 5 Conclusion.

Superscription in three: 1 Person writing. 2 Person written to. 3 Salutation.

Person writing by three: His Name. Office. Alliance.

The Contents of the second Sermon.
THe persons to whom he writ, described by their Vocation, and Sanctification.

In Vocation, he describes the fruits, kinds, and parts, necessity, diversity,
in respect of time and place.

In Sanctification, that it follows Vocation, and is threefold; how
distinguished from Justification, what place it has in salvation.

The Contents of the third Sermon.
THat we may have the benefit of Redemption, we must have both
Reconciliation. Sanctification: and Continual preservation in the estate of
grace.

In Reconciliation there is necessary Remission of sins. Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness.

Sanctification consists in Mortification. and Vivification.

Arguments to urge Sanctification: preservation both of body and soul,
especially the soul in sanctification, till brought to glorification.

The Contents of the fourth Sermon.
THe Salutation, wherein he wishes three: Mercy. Peace, and Love. Of Mercy and
Peace in this Sermon: Mercy fourefold.

That that concerns the soul, and salvation thereof, is sevenfold.

Peace threefold: External. Internal. Eternal.

Outward prosperity and happiness.

The Contents of the fifth Sermon.
HAving spoken before of Mercy and Peace, here he speaks of Love: Love is
twofold: Of God to Man, Of Man to Man both set out by their Excellency, and
their Effects.

The want of the latter noted, the kinds of Love condemned: finally, not only
Mercy, Peace, and Love, as positive graces are wished; but the continnall
increase and multiplication of them.

The Contents of the sixth Sermon.
THe proposition in the second part of the Epistle unfolded, that faith must be
maintained, wherein two things: 1 They must labor to maintain faith. 2 The
reasons: and they are three: 1 From the person of the Apostle. 2 From the
person of God. 3 From the person of the Adversary.

In this Sermon of the first, viz. that Faith must be maintained with all
earnestness; and of the first reason drawn from the person of the Apostle;
namely, his love, his pains, and his mildness.

The Contents of the seventh Sermon.
THe second reason drawn from the person of God that gives faith: wherein
three: 1 That Faith is a gift. 2 That given once. 3 That given to the Saints.

In the first, the diverse acceptions of faith: 1. How the true faith is given.

In the second, that the same Faith is in all ages.

In the third, that only the Saints have this true faith, wherein the diverse
acceptions of faith are set down, and that here is meant the Saints upon earth.

The Contents of the eighth Sermon.
THe third reason is drawn from the persons of the Adversaries, who are
described 1 By their life. 2 By their end.

By their life that they 1 Creep into the Church. 2 Be A (...), men without
God. 3 Be Libertines. 4 Are blasphemers, denying God and Christ, etc.

The three first here handled.

The Contents of the ninth Sermon.
THe third reason from the persons of the adversaries, is further prosecuted in
regard of the fourth branch, of their impiety in their life, (...), the only
Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ: wherein is showed how many ways God and
Christ are denied.

And prooved that God is the only God And that Jesus Christ is our Lord Iure
Creationis. Iure Redemptionis.

The Contents of the tenth Sermon.
THe third reason from the Adversaries is further prosecuted in regard of the
end, which is by the Apostle here said to be condemnation, and in that they
are said to be before ordained to this condemnation, as by Gods decree.

The two parts of Gods decree, Election and Reprobation, largely handled.

The Contents of the eleventh Sermon.
NNotwithstanding they to whom he wrote knew before, yet he puts them in
remembrance of the mercies of God in delivering the Israelites; and his justice
in destroying them, growing rebellious, Wherein note: 1 The necessity of
inculcating, and often reiterating doctrines before known. 2 Gods mercy to the
Israelites, especially in their deliverance out of Egypt, which is largely
described. 3 The greater his mercies, the more grievous his punishments upon
the contemners thereof.

The Contents of the twelfth Sermon.
THe Israelites sin that brought their destruction, was infidelity; though
other sins, yet this the root of all, as proved in them and all.

The nature, the kinds, the necessity, excellency, and utility of faith is set
out.

Secondly, the sin of the Angels what it was, wherein their nature, and
office, their number, kinds, their sin being in general Apostasy, the nature
of that sin, and wherein it consists, and how odious it is, is described.

The Contents the thirteenth Sermon.
THe punishment of the Angels that fell, which is to be reserved in
everlasting chains: hence 1 Comfort to man, that though his malice be
infinite, yet his power is limited. 2 Confusion to him, that though he be
already punished, yet but like the malefactor in prison and fetters till the
Assise: so he in chains till the general judgment, then his torments, as
also the torments of all the damned are to be ^ncreased (...) of the Saints and
Angels shall be increased.

The Contents of the fourteenth Sermon.
THe sin of Sodom and Gomorrah, fornication and all manner of uncleanness:
the odiousness of this sin, the evils that flow from it, the evil it
brings upon the Actors described.

The falls of the Saints, Noah, Lot, Solomon, not to be imitated.

The polygamie of the Fathers discussed, not justified.

The causes of Sodoms uncleanness.

The Contents of the fifteenth Sermon.
SOdomes punishment set out for an example to all unclean persons:

So all examples, though not for imitation, yet for instruction.

The kind of their punishment, Fire, and that eternal.

This described by diverse names, by comparing it with elementary fire, by the
degrees of punishment in it, all eternal and irremissible.

And how God squared their punishment to their sin, and so does he usually
with all sinners.

The Contents of the sixteenth Sermon.
MAny of the wicked mentioned, two handled: 1 They are sleepers. 2 Defilers of
the flesh.

In the first what kind of sleepers: 1 Such as sleep in sin and security. 2
How fitly called sleepers. 3 How dangerous this sleep is, and hereupon
exhorts to awake and watch.

In the second, who these defilers of the flesh are, what misery God brings on
them in this life, and will bring in the life to come.

The heinousness of the sin aggravated by diverse arguments.

The danger and filthiness set out to make all to loath it.

The Contents of the seventeenth Sermon.
A Third sin formerly mentioned here handled, namely, Despising Government.
This showed by rebellion and despightfull speaking. This sin is odious, being
the devils sin, and all rebels his children. Christ taught and practiced
obedience, and so did the Apostles, and Orthodox Fathers, and all Christians,
even to heathenish and persecuting Emperors, rebellion unnatural, a resisting
Gods ordinance, a cause of all wickedness and confusion.

They that despise government, do (...) war against God, and seek to bring
all to confusion; these especially, the Anabaptists and Papists, who are here
refuted and reproved, and obedience urged.

The Contents of the eighteenth Sermon.
THe confutation of raylers and despisers of government, by the example of
Michael, that would not rail on the Devil.

The distinction between an Angel and an Archangell.

The History of this dspute not extant, and the reason thereof.

The impudency of Satan assaulting an Archangell.

Meekness taught us by the example of the Archangell, Christ, his Apostles,
and all the Saints.

Railing and cursed speaking, though ordinary, yet odious, dishonours God,
disgraces our brethren, and hurts our selves.

Whether railing and cursing be lawful, and how far further we must learn
to govern the tongue.

The Contents of the nineteenth Sermon.
A Further reproof of Raylers, whose hearts being poisoned with malice, make
them incapable of grace, but like dogs to bark and bite, and like Serpents to
vent poisonous speeches.

The Separatists infected with this poison.

Ignorance for the most part the cause in them, and Papists that rail on our
Church and Doctrine: and in others that they practice this sin. Therefore all
should use the means to get knowledge, which means are briefly described.

They that rail upon ignorance are condemned, much more they that do it upon
knowledge, as Julian the Apostata. But the general cause is Ignorance, though
in some simple, yet in many affected and wilful; and these latter worse then
the brute beasts, for they make use of their natural knowledge; these abuse
themselves in those things they know.

The Contents of the twentieth Sermon.
HAving described, and confuted the wicked, he execrate them, Because they
follow the way of Cain, which is described to be 1 Envy, 2 Prophannesse, 3
Hypocrisy, 4 Despair.

Every of which he describes by many resemblances, and fearful effects and
dehorteth from them.

The Contents of the one and twentieth Sermon.
HE prosecuteth the second cause why Jude execrate the wicked; which was
because they became subject to destruction by the deceit of Baalams wages,
transported by cotetousnesse.

The odiousness of which sin, he describes in diverse respects.

First, because i^ i^ the (...) of all (...). Secondly, because so many woes
are denounced against it.

Thirdly, it is the original of all sins against God and Man.

Fourthly, it deprives of all the beatitudes mentioned, in Mat. 5. and of
Heaven it self.

He dehorts from this sin, by many arguments, especially two; First, because
the desire is never satisfied.

Secondly, because things desired be 1 Uncertain, 2 Unprofitable, 3 Hurtful.

The Contents of the two and twentieth Sermon.
HE prosecutes the third cause why Jude execrate the wicked, because rebellious
as Corah, where having prooved all government is Gods ordinance, whether
Monarchy, Aristocraty, or Democrity; and preferred Monarchy, he concludes
rebellion to be a resisting of Gods ordinance, and pernicious to Church and
Commonwealth, and to the rebels themselves.

He proceeds to the twelve and thirteen verses, and observes in them these
wicked to be described 1 By their sins, 2 By their judgment. Their sins to
be three: 1 Epicurisme, they eat and drink without fear, feeding themselves.
2 Pride, like swelling waves, 3 Hypocrisy, set out by three comparisons. There
First, like clouds without rain.

Secondly, like trees without fruit, Thirdly, like stars without light.

Their judgment black darkness, and this after amplified, Verse. 14. and 15.

In the handling, from the manner how the Apostle describes these sinners, by
diverse metaphors.

He observes first, that it is usual with the Spirit of God to use such
metaphors, and therefore lawful for all Preachers in their Sermons to do the
like.

Secondly, that the creatures, beside the consideration of their natures, give
occasion of moral meditations.

He enters upon the first sin, Epicurisme, describes it, shows the
drowsinesse of it in respect of the effects and end.

He dehorts from this sin by many arguments.

Further in that they are said to feed themselves, two things are noted.

First, they do not glorify God, secondly, not releeve others.

Lastly, in that they are said to be blots in their Love Feasts, that it is a
stain to the godly, to eat and feast with those Epicures, or other wicked
ones.

And he describes the Love Feasts, the institution, abuse, and abolishing of
them.

The Contents of the three and twentieth Sermon.
HE prosecutes the other two sins, Pride and Hypocrisy.

He shows Pride to be a vice abominable to God in general. In particular
he prooveth it vain, in respect of 1 God, 2 Men, 3 the Proud themselves.

That is naturally in all men, the godly themselves are sometimes overtaken by
it.

It is expressed both in things pertaining to God and Man many ways, though in
all, yet most in the worst; and it is not only seen in life, but after death
it brings shame and destruction, temporal and eternal.

Hypocrisy is described by the Apostle, by a threefold comparison, viz. of
clouds without rain, trees without fruit, stars without light.

He sets it out by many elegant and apt resemblances, insisting especially
in the resemblance of it to unfruitful trees.

Dehorts from it, first, because it is odious to God, which desires and
delights in sincerity of the heart; 2. because Christ denounces so many woes
against it, Hell being prepared for it, and Heaven being shut against it.

The Contents of the four and twentieth Sermon.
HAving spoken of the sins of the wicked, mentioned by Saint Jude, viz.
Epicurisme, Pride, Hypocrisy: He proceeds to their judgment, which is
eternal damnation, it is described by diverse names, yet by none sufficiently
expressed. All sufferings here but shadows, the beginning of sorrows in
respect of them. He sets out the torments of Hell by the contraries, the
joys of Heaven, and in themselves being of all sorts, yea more than can be
either expressed, or conceived: upon the consideration hereof, he exhorts to
live godly, that we may escape them; and this exhortation he urges further,
because they are eternal, irremissible, and by fire which is intolerable,
showed by comparison with our fire in diverse respects, and these torments to
be multiplied according as they have multiplied their sins.

The Contents of the five and twentieth Sermon.
HAving showed that all the former sinners shall be judged, he prooves it out
of the Prophecy of Enoch, and because this Prophecy being not extant, the
Papists gather that this, and many truths beside, being preserved in the Church
by traditions, therefore traditions are to be embraced, together with
Scripture, as grounds of faith.

He proves the all sufficiency of the Scriptures, for faith and manners
without tradition, and refutes their blasphemous slandering and sleighting the
Scriptures: and so proceeds to speak of the judgment that Jude intends,
being the last general judgment, prooving that it must (...). Secondly, that
it must be executed by the Son, the second person in the Trinity. Thirdly,
the manner how he shall appear, which shall be in humane shape, yet with
power and great glory; and this he sets out by comparing the second coming
with his first: and his proceeding with them in foro justiciae, with this here
in foro misericordiae. Fourthly, the end of his coming to judge all,
concerning all their works, words, thoughts, that the Swearers and
blasphemers, shall have the greatest doom. Fifthly, that this judgment is most
certain, God having appointed it, and men's consciences witnessing and telling
them it internally.

He concludes with a threefold use 1 For terror of the wicked, 2 Comfort of
the godly penitent, 3 Instruction of all.

The Contents of the six and twentieth Sermon.
HE enters upon Saint Iudes description of the wicked by foure-sinnes: 1
Impatience, 2 Lusts, 3 Pride, 4 Flattery.

He handles the two former, Impatience and Lusts, Showing impatience to be
double, 1 Against God, 2 Against Men.

The first, the root of many sins, occasioned many ways, often mentioned in
the Scripture, ever reprooved, and severely punished: he exhorts to patience,
shows three means to effect it, and shows the danger of impatience.

Impatience against men manifold in all sorts and degrees, which he does
sharply reprove, and persuades patience in regard of our mutual wants: he
enters upon the second sin, viz. Lust, he shows that they be most base,
most pernicious, which though God has taught us to tame by many means, yet we
are too much led by them, yielding both to evil motion and natural affection,
all which we must repress by the word, and though we have them remaining in
us, yet we must not suffer them to reign in us. And further, that we may avoid
them, he sets out what they be, what sins they bring forth, that they are
insatiable, infectious to soul and body, and make us incapable of grace and
salvation, and subject to damnation.

The Contents of the seven and twentieth Sermon.
HAving spoken of the two first sins of the wicked, viz. Impatience and
Lusts, he proceeds to the other two, Pride and Flattery.

In speaking of Pride, he shows, that though it be in the heart, yet it
vents it self most at the mouth, as all corruption does.

That Pride by (...) is in all, yet the godly repel it, as David and Paul, and
glory in the Lord, and that is the true glory, it is vain to glory in any
thing else.

That proud men show their pride in speaking (...) ^hing^, yet usually they
vaunt most that have lest worth in them; as their hearts and speeches are
vain, so they get nothing but vanity, though they speak proudly for gain.

Among all vaunters the Pope is chief, and his flatterers in the next rank,
secondly, he speaks of the last sin, viz. Flattery; shows the property of
Flatterers, their aim and their punishments, as also of them that listen to
them, and therefore we should stop our ears against them, as Ulysses against
the Sirens song.

That this sin has its name from servility, and therefore Flatterers are
base and servile creatures.

It is odious in all, but especially in Ministers.

The desire to be flattered, the cause of flattery; yet he that flatters has
--; and he that reproves, love. We should therefore embrace truth, and detest
flattery, though it please.

The Contents of the eight and twentieth Sermon.
HAving observed the opposition between the Saints to whom he writ, and these
wicked of whom before he had written, he shows that the godly and the wicked
are every where opposed, and though the wicked, the more in number, yet not to
be followed; seeing Christ's flock is little, and there be few that shall be
saved, and better to be blessed with those few, then to be condemned with the
multitude. After commending you for remembering the Word of God, he sets out
the excellency and utility thereof, taxing our negligence herein, and teaching
how we may hear and remember: and because it is called the Word of the
Apostles, he first shows that the Doctrine of the Apostles, and not humane
writings or traditions, are to be relied upon. And secondly, he confutes those
that gather from hence, that the Author of the Epistle was no Apostle, and the
Epistle not Canonical, and shows this to be Iudes modesty to allege others,
yet no infirming, but a confirming of his own authority. Lastly, from his
kind compellation (beloved) he notes his mildness, and commends that grace,
and shows that it must be used in all our courses, yet so, as with it some
tartness and severe reprehensions must be used, with respect of due
circumstances to persons, place, time, kind of offense; and he reprehends
three sorts, that reprehends for sinister ends, and shows what should be our
chief aim in our reproves.

The Contents of the nine and twentieth Sermon.
IVde prophesing of mockers that should be in the last times, he treats of
their sin, observing that Jude put it in the forefront. That there have been
mockers in ages, some of God and Religion, some of men; but they that have
been mockers of God and Religion, most odious, most severely punished, yet all
condemned as being persecutors, carnal, lose Libertines; though they think
themselves (...), yet they (...) the bondslaves of sin and Satan; they are
only free that are the servants of God, and subdue their lusts, and they have
thereby assurance of their election and salvation.

The Contents of the thirtieth Sermon.
HEre he condemns Sectaries, that make a division in the Church, which is
one, and the true members thereof preserve unity among themselves; these
Sectaries are dangerous, as Idolaters. Three sorts of them, viz. Heretics,
Schismatikes, and Apostates, who are described and condemned.

Pride the root of Heresy and Schism, though the Scriptures, the means to
confute them, yet they pervert them to maintain their errors. That we may
avoid these, we must keep our hearts from infidelity, our minds from false
opinions, and our conversation from scandal; they are the chief Engines.
Satan's use to overthrow the Church, making Sects and divisions, either for
matters Ecclesiastical or Temporal. These Sectaries are by Jude called
natural men, that is, unregenerate; having no more then they drew from Adam,
without grace and knowledge of heavenly things, yet practiced many civil
virtues, invented Arts, and in many things exceeded many that bear the names
of Christians, though they had but natural illumination, not the Spirit of
Sanctification, and so Saint Jude adds, having not the Spirit, that is, the
Spirit of God; and being without it, had no spiritual grace, but were led by
the spirit of pride, error, etc.

The Contents of the one and thirtieth Sermon.
HAving noted the opposition between the wicked and the godly from the
conjunction discretive. But, that though Sectaries pull down, yet the godly
must build up themselves in their holy Faith; he justifies, first, in the
metaphor Edify, he inferres two things; first, that we must be builders,
using the Word of God for our rule or square, and confute the Papists that
took it away; secondly, that we must increase daily in knowledge, grace, and
goodness, and reproove our non-proficiency, and show that it is a property of
the wicked to decrease, and tax both such, as think they know enough, and
such as will not endeavor to know, exhorting all to use all diligence to learn
and to build, so as when their earthly tabernacle be dissolved, they may have
assurance of a house in the Heavens, he proceeds with the Apostle to the
thing wherein he must be built, and that is, in their Faith; and this not
barely named, but with a note of excellency above all virtues, being called,
Most holy Faith. He sets out the necessity of Faith in all our actions that
they may be pleasing to God; and having showed that Faith is the original of
all good works, he shows the end, and manifold uses of them. Finally, that
Faith is the life of the soul, by it God lives in us, and we shall live
eternally with him. He proceeds to the note of excellency, that is called most
holy: and first shows the excellency of it, above all other virtues, and that
holy: first, in regard of the subject, purifying the heart, and making our
persons and (...). Secondly, in respect of the object, the holy Trinity:
Thirdly, in respect of the officient cause, the holy Ghost, and hence
concluded, that the Papists works are not holy, being not done in Faith, and
that the wicked have no Faith, because no holiness. And lastly, he shows
that this holy Faith must be begotten by hearing the holy Word of God.

The Contents of the two and thirtieth Sermon.
HAving set out the relation between Faith and Prayer, and the manifold and
marveilous effects of Prayer; and that it is not only powerful, but pleasant
to God and the Saints themselves, he descends to divide Prayer into diverse
kinds in diverse respects; and shows how all must be uttered. He proceeds
further, to set out the excellency of Prayer by many resemblances, and manifold
effects and uses; having spoken of Prayer in general, he comes to show that it
must be in Spirit; and shows what it is to pray in the Spirit, and that he
de^ineth, so as either the holy Ghost must be the Author of Prayer, being the
Author of all Graces, yet so as the holy Trinity have a hand in it; or
secondly, that our Prayers must be spiritual and zealous, not carnal; and
with the lips he reprove the Papists that require but an actual intent, and
shows it is the manner, not matter that God respects, That we must take
heed, that neither business nor multitude of cogitations steal away the times
of prayer; but that we pray always, with pure, zealous, and faithful hearts,
and then we may rely upon his promises for all good things.

The Contents of the three and thirtieth Sermon.
HAving briefly showed the relation betwixt Faith, Prayer, and Love; he
instanceth in Love, sets out the excellency of it above all virtues,
bewailes the want of it, and exhorts unto it, yet distinguishes and shows it
must be the Love of God which we must keep our selves in, this he describes by
four properties: that it must be 1 Holy. 2 Just. 3 True. 4 Constant.

And condemns the love of Atheists, carnal wordly men, and Papists,
distinguishes the love of God into 1 His love to us. 2 Our love to him.

His love to us, though infinite, yet described in diverse respects: 1 By
comparison. 2 By distinction. First, into his love 1 Immanent. 2 Transient.
Secondly, 1 General. 2 Special. Thirdly, 1 Temporary. 2 Sempiternall

Our love to god he shows to be an effect of his love to us, and uses four
reasons to excite us to the love of God: First, a, mandato, from the
Commandment of God: Secondly, (...), from the Law of equity: Thirdly, a
commodo, from, the manifold good that redounds to us by it: Fourthly* (...)
from our duty, he being our Father. Lastly, he shows the manner how we should
perform it, and taxes our failing in the manner.

The Contents of the four and thirtieth Sermon.
FIrst, observing how Saint Jude having give diverse Precepts to the godly,
commforts them with the hope of eternal life, he shows this to be the duly
means to support the souls of the faithful, and enters into a large,
learned, and elegant discourse concerning eternal life and the joys of
Heaven; and sets them out, firtst to be in themselves both unspeakeable and
incomprehensible, yet that may be guessed at by comparison with the most
excellent earthly things, and sets out the glorious estate of the Saints
both in body and soul, and reprooves such as are so delighted with this life,
as they think not on eternal life, and confutes diverse erroneous conceits
concerning this life, and again describes it 1 By the eternity. 2 Infinite
extent of the place. 3 The infinite kinds of pleasures.

Lastly, having set out the glorious estate, he shows the means how we
should attain to it, and that not by our merits, but Gods mercies, and the
merits of Christ Jesus: and here he confutes the error of the Papists, holding
justification by works, either of themselves, or joined with Christ's merits,
discovering the error, and discoursing the point largely and learnedly, and
shows that both election, vocation, justification, sanctification and
salvation are all of grace and mercy.

The Contents of the five and thirtieth Sermon.
HAving showed the sum of the Apostles exhortation to be, that they should
use discretion, he teaches the necessity thereof in all sinners, that they and
all should be compassionate over the souls of them that are in danger to
perish, comforting the weak, and terrifying the obstinate; and he admonishes
all to suffer not only the words of exhortation, but reprehension also.
Lastly, expounding the Apostles phrase of saving by fear, to be the
endeavoring to save by excommunication, the chiefest discipline of the Church,
he shows how fearful a thing it is to be cast out of the Church by
excommunication, and distinguishes of the kinds thereof, and describes thevses
and ends thereof.

The Contents of the six and thirtieth Sermon.
FRom Saint Iudes phrase of saving by pulling (...) of the fire, he observes
first the fearful estate of the wicked, by that and many other resemblances
used by the holy Ghost, and especially that they are subject to sudden
destruction, whereas the godly are provided against sudden accidents, or death;
secondly, in that he exhorts to save such, he takes occasion to set out the
excellency and necessity of the Ministry, being Gods ordinance to save souls;
and confutes the conceit of them that vilify this function as unnecessary, and
shows that it is the greatest happiness that can come unto a people, to have
a godly and learned Ministry, seeing they have thereby light, life, and
salvation.

The Contents of the seven and thirtieth Sermon.
Upon Saint Iudes Caveat, Hate the garment spotted by the flesh, etc. he
shows that we must be so far from sin, as we^ must abstain from all
appearance of evil, and avoid evil company, both in respect of God, those
enemies they are; and of our selves, both in regard of our outward and inward
estate. Further he shows, that we must hate sin: first, because the whole
Trinity hates it: secondly, because Satan, the enemy of God and our souls, is
the Author of it: yet so as we must hate it, as it dishonours God, not as it
dishonours us, and hate the sin it self, not the person (except a known
reprobate) and hate it for conscience sake, not for by respects: and he
reproves those that are so far from hating sin, as they will not be drawn
to leave sin. And here taking occasion, of a fearful earthquake happening on
Christmas Eve 1601. whilst he was in the Pulpi^ preaching, he discourses
first of the fearfulness of this presage of judgment, as if the earth
(trembling under sin) threatened to swallow up sinners, or that some fearful
judgment was at hand. Secondly, for the time being Christmas Eve, he applies
it as a Caveat given of God, that the solemn Feast following might not be
profaned.

The Contents of the eight and thirtieth Sermon.
HE comes to the conclusion of the Epistle, wherein the Apostle commending
them to Gods grace, to keep themselves from falling, he observes two things: 1
Man's weakness ready to fall. 2 The power of God able to keep him.

First, he sets out man's weakness, showing that he can do nothing of himself
without Christ's grace, and therefore though he be exhorted to stand and keep
himself, yet God works in him the will and the deed, otherwise he would not
stand among so many powerful enemies and temptations; and therefore we should
continually pray. He shows that our pronenesse to fall, came from our fall in
Adam, yet by grace we are either preserved from falling, or raised being
fallen. That the Saints are sometimes suffered to fall, it is for the further
manifesting of Gods grace and mercy, yet they never fall totally nor finally.
Not only particular men, but the whole Church may err, though not totally and
finally. And the Popes have erred shamefully.

The Contents of the nine and thirtieth Sermon.
PRaying for them that they might be preserved blameless, he shows how this
can be, not for that they should have no sin, but for that none should be
imputed; for our righteousness stands rather in the remission of our sin,
then in the perfection of virtue: and he confutes the opinion of the Papists
and diverse others, that vaunt of perfect purity, and expounds those places of
Scripture, that ascribe purity or perfection to the Saints, and shows how
they are so called: namely Imputative, Comparative, or Inchoative. Non
perfective.

Distinguishes of the degrees of perfection in the Church, and confuteth the
opinion of Papists concerning justification by works. Lastly, praying for them
that in the life to come they may behold his presence with joy, he sets out
the joys of the life to come both simply and comparatively, and exhorts to
seek to attain to them, and contemns the glory and joys of the world in
respect of them.

The Contents of the fortieth Sermon.
HEre he enters upon the last point in the conclusion of the Epistle, namely,
Praise and thanksgiving to God; shows that the Apostles concluded their
Epistles with it, and often upon the mentioning of Gods abundant mercy in
Christ, breaks out into it: that David is very frequent in it, and so are all
the Saints, and we ought to imitate them, and praise God according to all the
Attributes, whereof Jude mentioning six, viz. Wisdom, Salvation, Glory,
Majesty, Dominion, Power, he insisteth in this Sermon in three of them, namely,
Wisdom, Salvation, and Glory; and shows first, that only God is wise, all
men are either ignorant, or have but natural worldly wisdom, not true wisdom
until God infuse it.

That Gods Wisdom appears in creating and disposing all things, but
especially in preserving and governing his Church, and exhorts to submit unto
it.

Secondly, he proceeds to the second Attribute of Savior, and shows that this
is the most comfortable to us, and that he saves by Christ, yea, that the name
of Savior is proper to Christ, who purchased salvation for us by his death,
that we must therefore be thankful to him, not derogate from his glory (as
the Papists do) minsing Christ's merits, and mixing with it their own, and
ascribing too much to nature and free will.

He proceeds to the third Attribute of God, namely, Glory; that this is an
acceptable Sacrifice to God, but neglected by us; we pray in our wants, not
praise God when they be supplied: that we ought to perform this duty
continually, and if we do not glorify God here, we shall not be glorified
with him hereafter. He reprooves two sorts that rob God of his glory, the
Proud, and the Envious. We must not imitate them, but praise God always in all
things, with all the parts of our bodies and powers of our soul.

The Contents of the one and fortieth Sermon.
HEre he proceeds to the other three Attributes, viz. Majesty, Dominion, and
Power; and shows what it is first to ascribe Majesty to God: that it is to
acknowledge his Majesty and Greatness in all his Works, and reprooves our
dullness that admire only his Miracles, when all his Works declare his
Majesty. Many regard not his Miracles, nor signs of his wrath.

He proceeds to the fifth, namely, Dominion; and shows that to consist in
that authority, whereby he commands in all Kingdoms, Places, Persons; and he
distinguishes these into three kinds, viz. his kingdom of 1 Power. 2 Grace. 3
Glory. and describes them: But insisteth in his Kingdom of Grace within us,
and reprooves our rebellions and trecheries, that yield subjection to sin and
Satan, and set up our own wills and lusts to bear rule in us, and so make a
mock of Christ's Kingdom, and that we ought to subject as the Angels, and do
his will as they, most willingly, speedily, and faithfully. And to this end to
have our souls and bodies purified, that he may dwell and rule in us.

He proceeds to the sixth and lost Attribute, of Power; and shows that this
consists in that he does whatsoever he pleases in all places and persons,
being present in all places by his power, though not in body, and that this is
an ascribing Power to him, to depend upon his Power, and to trust to his
Strength, being all-sufficient: after that, he observes all the six
Attributes to belong to the whole Trinity, and that for ever. Lastly, he
shows the diverse significations of Amen, and therewith, how powerful a
conclusion it is in all prayers, implying in it faith and zeal in him that
prays.

Laus Deo.
The Analysis of the Epistle of Saint IVDE.
The Epistle has five parts. 1 Salvation: in it three. 1 The person saluting,
described by three: 1 His name, IVDE. 2 His calling, a Servant of Jesus Christ.
3 His kindred or alliance, the brother of James.
2 The persons saluted; and they are all that are called and sanctified of God
the Father, reserved to Jesus Christ, Verse 1. 3 The matter of the salutation,
wherein he wishes to them three things: Verse 2. 1 Mercy. 2 Peace. 3 Love.

2 Exordium, or entrance; wherein he expresses his purpose in this Epistle,
which was, to write to them concerning salvation, and here he testifies, 1 His
love to them, by his kind compellation, Beloved. 2 His desire and earnest
endeavor to further them in the way of salvation, in that he gave all
diligence to write of the common salvation.
3 Proposition, the maine means to further you in the way of salvation, Verse
3. The maintenance of the true Faith. Not acquired by the power of Nature. But
given once to the Saints.
4 Illustration and enforcement by Exhortation, Verse 3. that contend earnestly
for the maintenance of faith, and use motives, 1 In respect of God giving,
because given to the Saints, and to neglect it, is to neglect Gods grace giving
means of salvation. 2 In respect of some wicked Apostates, whom he describes
1 Generally by their Verse 4. 1 Subtilty crept in. 2 Sin, turn the grace of
God into wantonness, and deny God. 3 Judgment ordained of old to this
condemnation.
Admonishing them to whom he writ, to take heed both of their sin and
judgment, by the examples of the Israelites, both their Sin, unbelief,
Judgment, destruction. Verse 5. Angels, both their Sin, pride, Judgment,
everlasting chains, etc. Verse. 6. Sodomites and Gomorrheans, both their Sin,
uncleanness, Judgment, eternal fire. Ver. 7
2 Particularly, calling them dreamers, and describe 1 Their sins ranged into
two heads. 1 Uncleanness, defile the flesh. 2 Rebellion, in two things: 1
Despising Government, Verse 8. 2 Railing on This latter, aggravated V. 9, 10
He parallels them by their patterns: Verse 11. Cain for envy. Balaam for
counselling to uncleanness. Corah for contempt of government.
He sets them out by godly resemblances. Verse 12. 1 Spots, in regard of their
defiling and staining. 2 Dry Clouds, Barren Trees, in respect of hypocrisy.
Verse 13. 3 Raging foming waves, in respect of their pride and vain glory. 4
Wandering Stars, in respect of their error and ignorance.

2 Judgment, the blackness of darkness for ever; this he confirms out of
the prophecy of Enoch, wherein two things. 1 Prophet, by two: 1 His name,
Enoch. 2 Order of descent from Adam, the seventh from Adam. Verse 14.
2 Prophecy, the matter of it, Verse 14, 15.

3 Their properties: Verse 16. 1 Murmuring. 2 Repining. 3 Licenciousnesse. 4
Boasting. 5 Flattery.



Direction for maintenance of true faith in three things: 1 How to avoid these
impious Apostates, which draw from the faith, which is 1 By remembering the
predictions of the Apostles, that forewarned of such Mockers and lustful
livers. Verse 17, 18. 2 Observing their practice answerable to the Apostles
prediction, making sects, being not spiritual, but carnal. Verse 19.
2 How to preserve themselves in the faith, and this by four means: Verse 20,
21. 1 Mutual edification. 2 Zealous and spiritual invocation. 3 Keeping
themselves in the love of God. 4 Constant expectation of eternal life by the
mercy and means of our Lord Jesus Christ.
3 How to preserve others in the faith. 1 The weak by compassion, Verse 22. 2
The obstinate by fear, Verse 23.


5 Conclusion, with prayer and praise to God, wherein he insinuates 1 What
they are to expect and desire at Gods hand, and their ground, because he is
able being Verse 24, 25. 1 To keep. 2 To present blameless, etc. 1 Only
wise, 2 And Savior.
2 What is to be ascribed to him 1. Glory. 2 Majesty. 3 Dominion.





AN EXPOSITION UPON THE whole Epistle of Saint Jude.
VERSE. 1. The Author and Penman of this Epistle.
Jude the servant of Jesus Christ, etc.


BEfore I enter upon the handling of this Epistle, I will speak briefly, first
of the Author, 2. of the Penman, 3. of the Argument. 4. of the Occasion of this
Epistle. For I cannot dilate at large as Solomon did of trees, from the Cedar
to the Isop: nor as Pliny did of beasts, from the Elephant to the Pismeire, nor
as Lactantius did of Fishes, from the Whale to the Lamprey. And first, for the
Author of this book: it is the holy Ghost For all Scripture is given by
inspiration from God, and Prophecy, came 1 Timothy 3, 16. 2. Pet. 1. 20. Luke 1.
not in old time by the Will of man, but holy men spoke as they were moved by
the spirit of God, and it was God that spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets
which have been since the World began. And as he directed the tongues of Holy
men to speak, and therefore says our Savior, It is not ye that speak but
the spirit of my father in you; so he directed Mat. 10. 20.
their pens to write, so that it was not they that wrote, but the holy Ghost by
them. By this therefore it evidently appears, of what reverent account this
Epistle, ought for to be, seeing it has the holy Ghost for the Author.

2 The penman or writer was Jude, or Judas, and of this name our Savior had
two disciples: The one called Judas Iscariot, Who for thirty pieces of silver
betrayed, and basely sold his Lord and Master. Servus Dominum, discipulus
magistrum, homo Deum, creatura Mat. 26.
creatorem vendidit, The servant betrayed, sold, most basely sold his Lord. The
disciple his Master, man God, the creature the Creator; Infoelix mercator
Judas, O unhappy Merchant, Judas!

The other called Judas, the son of Alphaeas, called also Thaddeus and Labbeus,
who was brother to James, and cousin to the Lord Jesus, in the flesh: The
occasion of which name, with the reason thereof, is set down in the 29. of Genesis
the 35, V. For when Leah had borne Judge. 15. Act. 18. 28. cap. 6. 10.
three sons to Jacob, she conceived and bare a fourth Son, saying, Now will I
praise and confess the Lord, and she called his name Judah.

This Jude was as rare and notable an Apostle to beat down the Heretics of
that time, as Sampson did the Philistines, as Apollo did the Jews, as Stephen
did the Libertines and Cirenians, as Paphuntius did the Council of Nice in
Ministers marriage.

Concerning the Argument, of this Epistle, it is a stirring The Argument and
occasion or this Epistle.
them up to a Christian life, to show forth the fruits of faith to join with
Words, Works, with communication, conversation, with hearing, keeping, with
profession, practice: For after planting must come growing, after light walking
Col. 1. Ephesians 5. 9. 2 Pet. 1. Esa. 2. 3. Iam. 1. 22.
after faith works, after teaching obedience, after a good profession some
good practice.

Beside, here in this Epistle, he inveigheth sharply against carnal
profession, and gross abusing of Christian Religion. And also he admonishes
them to beware of imposters, seducers, false teachers, cunning deceivers, which
were craftily crept in amongst them, drawing men from purity in Religion to
impurity of the flesh: Whom the Apostle lively painteth out in their several
colors, and against whom he denounces many Judgments of God.

The occasion of writing this Epistle was this; It is affirmed by the most
learned of all times, and agreed upon by the best writers, that this Apostle
Jude, outlived many (yea most) of the Apostles, continuing and preaching in
Mesopotomia, Pontus, Persis, and other parts of the world, till the Reign of
Domitian the Emperor; in whose reign Iniquity reigned, Impiety abounded,
corruption of manners and dissolution in life raged in every place; for many
there were, that were Wantons in manners, and heretics in opinion, against
whom he did lift up his voice like a trumpet. So that this Epistle is notable,
and written for our learning; howsoever some deny, this Epistle to be
Cannonicall; as Cardinal Cajetane, who Esa. 58. 1. Romans 15. 4.
calls it Aprocriphall: Which I note the rather, to meet with Campian, and
Reighnolds, who say, that we Protestants reject the Scriptures, that we leave
no ground for a Christian to rest his Faith on, because Luther doubted of James
his Epistle, and we of the Apocripha. But did not Dionisius Alexandrinus say,
that most of his predecessors rejected the Apocalips? Did not the Council of
Laodicia leave it out of the Canon? Did not Eumil^us Africanus, deny the books
of Esra, Job, Paralipomenon? Did not Jerome call the history of David's
Marriage, a Poetical fiction, an unseemely jest? Did not Cardinal Caietane, a
Pillar of the Church, a Peer of the Court of Rome, accuse the Epistle to the
Hebrews to contain too weak grounds to prove Christ's divinity, and yet left
they ground for our faith to rest on. So that there was no cause for Campian
and Reighnolds to perch on their rowses, to clap their wings, to crow so loud,
to whet their dogs eloquence against us. Some Scriptures have been doubted
of of some Churches, as the second Epistle of Saint Peter, the second and
third, of Saint John, and some have been rejected of all Churches, As the
Epistle of Barnabas. The Acts of Peter, The book of the Pastor. The Gospel of
Nicodemus and Thaddaeus, etc. God has kept the Scriptures. Of the parts the
Epistle. The person writing it.


God has kept the Scriptures in all ages, so much as is necessary for our
salvation. At the giving of the Law, it was reserved in tables of stone. After
the giving of the Law the writings of the Prophets were nailed to the door of
the Temple, and reserved in the Lords treasury. Before the captivity the
Septuagint turned them into Greek, and Ptolomaeus Exodus 34. Heb. 2.
the King kept them; After the captivity; Ezra gathered all into one volume,
in the days of Artaxerxes; and the Church have kept them as Aarons Rod, and
the pot of Manna, and as the two Tables were kept in the Arc, etc. In the
primative Church, the Gospel of Matthew was kept in Iewry, the Gospel of Mark
at Alexandria, that of Luke at Antioch, that of John and the Apocalips at
Ephesus: Nam triplex est munus Ecclesiae, the Churches office is threefold;
Sacros libros servare instar testis, eos promulgare instar proeconis, eos ab
aliis discernere; to keep these sacred books as a witness, to promulgate
them, as a Preacher, and to discern them from other books whatsoever. And
thus the Church has kept this Epistle of Jude, unto this day. Fremat licet
C^jetanus. All Tyrants have raged against the Scripture; Antiochus, for his
hatred of the Scriptures is called (...), for he beheaded them, that had the
Bible; Dioclesian commanded the books of the Scripture to be burnt, yet by the
wonderful providence of God they are preserved.

And thus much being spoken concerning the Author, the Penman, the Occasion,
and Argument of this Epistle, I will now come unto the Epistle it self: the
which may be divided into five parts.

First, The title or superscription.

Secondly, The Exordium.

Thirdly, A proposition.

Fourthly, Exhortations, and dehortations.

Fifthly, The conclusion, or the shutting up of the Epistle, with a prayer to
God.

But first to begin with the title or superscription, and therein observe with
me three things.

First, The person writing.

Secondly, The persons written unto.

Thirdly, The Salutation.

Now the person writing is described three ways:

First by his name, Jude.

Secondly, By his calling, a servant of Christ.

Thirdly, By his kindred, The brother of James.

But first, the person writing is described by his name, and that was Jude, or
Judas, not Judas Iscariot, the traitor, but Judas the brother of James, and
Cousin to the Lord Jesus Christ in the flesh, yet both were the Apostles of
Christ, but this man good and godly, that wicked and ungodly: For it is nor the
name or The Writer by his name and calling described.
office that makes a good man; but the Grace and Mercy of God; If outward
titles could make good men, Judas Iscariot, had been as good as this Apostle,
Nay better, for Judas Iscariot was Christ's steward, his pursebearer, disburser
of all things for Christ and his company, and yet a thief, a traitor, a
devil: Non omnes filii Sanctorum, qui loca sancta tenent. They are not all the
sons of Saints, nor Saints themselves, which hold the places of Saints. God
oftentimes bestows upon wicked men lofty titles and high places, partly to
their greater condemnation; the mighty, shall be mightily tormented; and partly
for the punishment of ungrateful people, as Saul over the Israelites.

Again, in that Jude was not ashamed of his name, but in the very first
inscription of this Epistle sets down his name, we which are the Ministers
of God are taught, not to be ashamed of our calling, though scornefully by
scorners of Religion, we are termed Priests. The Jews though they mocked
Christ, when bowing their knees, they cried, Hail King of the Jews, against
their wills they honored him; for indeed he was King of the Jews, and of the
Gentiles: So these graceless contemners of our glorious calling, when they
think to vilify us, by calling us Priests, (against their wills) they magnify
us: their reproachful scoffs should not daunt us, nor discourage us in our
calling, for he that has called us and sent us, will be with us, as he was
with Moses, and as he was with Jeremy. Be not afraid Exodus 3. 12. Ier. 1. 8.
of their faces, I will be with thee.

Secondly, the person writing is described by his calling, for he calls
himself, Servum Dei, The servant of God.

Of servants there be three sorts: Some are servants by slavish and voluntary
subjection; these the Apostle calls, The servants of sin; Qui facit peccatum
servus est peccati; He which John 8. 34. Romans 6. 16.
commits sin, is the servant of sin, and they which serve sin, Duram
serviunt servitutem, serve an hard service, for the wages of sin is Death.

Secondly, There be servants by condition; which are either born such by
nature, or taken captives in War, or bought with money. To these servants,
Saint Paul speaks thus, Servants obey those which are your Masters, according
to the flesh, with fear and Ephesians 6. 5, 6. August de Civu Dei, lib. 19. Cap.
15.
trembling, and with simplicity of heart, not with eye-service, as
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ: Nomen istud culpa mervit, non
natura, This name of servant not nature but sin deserved; For the name of
servant was never heard of, till Noah cursed Canaan, the son of Cham, Who
discovered his fathers nakedness, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants
shall he be. Genesis 9. 25.


Thirdly, Servants by Office, Calling and Profession, and these are of two
sorts; for men are either the servants of God generally, or particularly.

Generally, they are Gods servants, which acknowledge Servants of God, divors
kinds of them.

To be Gods servant the greatest honor.


him for their Lord, and do that service which is due to him, Hi very servi
Dei, These are the true servants of the true God; and such servants must we
be, if we will be saved.

Particularly, they are the servants of God, who in some several calling do
service to God, as Magistrates and Ministers, these, (...), in a special
service be the servants of God. Now Jude professes himself a servant of Jesus
Christ; First, by condition, because by Christ he was redeemed and delivered
from the slavery of Sin, and tyranny of Satan. Secondly, by Office, and
calling also, he was the servant of Jesus Christ, not only in his general
calling, as he was a Christian, but also in his particular, as he was an
Apostle. And note that Saint Jude does not call himself a governor, a or
teacher, or an Apostle, but the servant of Jesus Christ, as Paul does, and as
James and Peter did; For this is the best title, above the title of Lords,
Dukes, Phil. 1. 1. Iam. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Esa. 40. 23.
Kings, Emperors, who perish. For God brings the Princes to nothing, and
makes the Judges of the Earth as Vanity. It is more to be the servant of
Jesus Christ, than to be the greatest Prince, Potentate, or Personage in the
World, for if the servants of Jesus Christ, though never so poor, base, and
beggarly, yet happy and blessed: if not the servants of Jesus Christ, though
never so rich, noble, and great, yet miserable and wretched. This knew Paul,
and therefore trod all his titles under his feet as Phil. 3. 5, 6.
dung, so that he might know Christ and serve him. This service lasts for
ever, as a color set on with oil. And the Lord Jesus as Man is called a
servant, as God he was Lord of men and Angels, for he was the man Jesus, and
the Lord Jesus. Gods service is perfect 1 Cor. 8.
freedom, Gods servants on Earth, are freemen in Heaven. Citizen with the
Saints, Free Denizens of the celestial Jerusalem, their Ephesians. 2. 19. Romans 6.
22.
fruit is in holiness, and their end everlasting life. What honor should we
desire but this, to be the servants of God? Godliness 1 Timothy 1, 6.
is great gain; and to serve God, has promise, both of this life, and the
life to come. If the service of Solomon was so good a service: That they were
counted happy that stood before him. 1. Chro. 12.
What is the service of God, and how happy are his servants? Many think
themselves much graced and honored, if they can get into some Noblemans
service, and wear his Livery, as did Doeg, and the servants of Saul; how much
more honor is it to 1 Samuel 22.
be Gods servant? Who will make us of servants Sons, heirs Ephesians. 5, 6.
and coheires with Christ. The Israelites found Gods service to be the best
service, 2 Chronicles. 12. 8. Cyrus at the conquest of Babylon, offered largely to
them, that would serve him; but God offers more largely. Theodosius held it
more noble to be membrum Ecclesiae, quam caput imperii, a member of the Church,
than the head of the Empire. So we may resolve, that it is better to be a
servant of God, than Lord of all the World. For while we serve him, all other
creatures in earth and in heaven serve God needs not our service, we need his
Lordship.
us. But if we will be Gods servants, we must addict our selves wholly to his
service, and to serve God in earth, as the Angels do in heaven: for so we
pray, Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven. And for this end were we
created; therefore says the Mat. 6. 10.
Apostle, We are the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works. And what better work than to serve the Lord Jesus? Nay, the service of
God is the end of our Redemption, For he Luke 1. 74.
has delivered us from the hands of our enemies, that we should serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Nay,
the service of God is the end of our glorification; Therefore the Apostle would
have us to walk worthy our God, who has 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
called us unto his Kingdom of glory. And therefore unless we esteem vilely
of our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification, we must become Gods servants,
and serve him in fear, and rejoice Psalm. 2. 11.
before him with trembling.

Austine Observes, God was never called Lord, until he had placed Adam in
Paradise, before he was called God simply; but now the Lord God, because he
was not so much a Lord to Angels and other creatures as unto man, to teach him
that he must live under Gods lordship, and serve him. For though Adam was lord
of the creatures, and the creatures must serve him; yet Adam had a Lord whom he
must serve. And yet God needs not our service, and therefore says David, O
my soul, thou have said unto Psalm. 16. 2. Psalm. 50. 10, 11.
the Lord, my well doing extends not to thee: all the beasts of the Forests
are his, and the beasts on a thousand Mountains, he knows all the fowls on
the Mountains, and wild beasts of the Fields are his. Who (says the Apostle)
has known the mind of the Lord? or Who was his Counselor? or Who has given
unto him first? and he shall be recompensed? Romans 11. 35, 36.
But howsoever he stands not in need of our service, we stand in need of
his Lordship and protection; that we may be safe under his Wings; that we
fear not the fear of the Psalm. 91.
night, nor the arrow that flies by day, nor the pestilence that walks in
the dark, nor the plague that destroys at noonday. And do we stand in
need of his Lordship? Let us understand our wants, and perform our service and
duty to the Lord: For thus he reasons by the Prophet; The Son honors
his Father, the Servant Mal. 1. 5.
his Master: If I be your Father, where is my honor? If your Master, where is
my fear? Let not God say of us, as of the Israelites, I have nourished and
brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. Ravenna says thus, A
move radium a Sole, and non lucet, rivulum Esa. 1. 2, 3.
a font, and arescit, a radice ramum, and exiccatur, a corpore membrum, and
putrescit, obedientiam a Christiano, and perit. Take away the beam from the
Sun, and it shines not, the river from the Fountain, and it dries up, the
bough from the Root, and it withers, the member from the Body, and it
rotteth, and obedience from a Christian, and he perishes.

Consider what Adam lost by his evil service, he fell from purity Adams loss
for his evil service.

If we will serve God, the creatures shall serve us.


to corruption, from eternity to mortality, from Angels to men, from heaven
to hell, had not the promised seed come in. He was expelled out of Paradise as
a Rebel, an Outlaw, and a shaking Sword hanging to keep him out. He came out
of Eden a pleasant garden, to toil among Nettles, Briars, brambles, like the
men of Penuel: He became a slave to the creatures, Genesis 3. 15. Judge. 9.
the creatures rebels against him to this day. Homo nascitur cum dolor, man is
borne with grief; Vivit cum labor, he lives by labor; Moritur cum moerore,
he dies with sorrow. Quis mihi dabit fontem lachrymarum, ut defleam hominis
miserabilem ingressum, culpabilem Innocentius.
progressum, desolatum egressum? Who shall give me a fountain of tears, that
I may bewail man's miserable ingresse, his culpable progress, and desolate
egresse? I know that God has turned this curse into a blessing; for Plus in
Christo lacrati sumus, quam perdidimus in Adamo, we have gained more in
Christ, than ever we lost in Adam. For if by the offense of one (says Saint
Paul) Death reigned through one, much more shall they which Romans 5. 17. 18.
receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness reign in
life through one, that is Jesus Christ. Likewise then, as by the offense of
one, the fault came on all men to condemnation: So by the justifying of one,
the benefit abounded toward all men, to the justification of life. Thus we
have gained more in Christ than we lost by Adam. Yet this is of mercy, not of
merit; of favor, not of duty; Witness the Apostle, saying, But when the
bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward man, appeared not by the
works of Tit. 3. 4, 5.
righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us,
by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost: Which he
shined on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. But Augustine
answers this more fully, and says, That Adams disobeying God lost his
honor, he serving God, all creatures served him, he disobeying God, all
disobeyed him: The earth brings forth Weeds, Thorns, Venomous things: The
sea swallows us up, with flows and storms: the air fights against us with
Thunders, Lightenings, Tempests, the heavens conspire against us with mortality
of Pestilence, the wild beasts devour us. But to them that serve God, God
makes his creatures serve them, the earth to bring forth corn, grass,
fruits; the air, to be sweet, the sea, to be calm, the beasts, to be
helpefull: Even so the Lions hurted not Daniel, the Viper stung not Paul, the
Whale crushed not Jonas, the Crows Dan. 6. Act. 28. Job. 2. 1. Reg. 19. Luke
16. Number. 21.
fed Elias, the dogs licked Lazarus, the Serpents of Sinai poisoned not
Israel. The Ecclesiastical and tripartite history tells us how the Crows
nourished Anthony an Hermit: and Paulus Thaebeus, how a Lioness fed
Marcarius; how an Heart brought Egidius meat into the Wilderness; how Helenus
commanded a wild Ass to carry his burden. I pass over that of Linus,
Romulus and Rhemus nourished of a shee-Woolfe; and God must be served: sin
brought in the first service.
that of Plutarch, of the Elephant that loved a Maid of Etholia; and that of
Pliny, of a Panther that led a man out of the desert into a plain way; and
that of Lucian, of a Dolphin that carried Arion. If we serve God, The stones
in the street shall be in league with us, and the beasts of the field shall
be at peace with us; Ieb 5. 23.
that is, all creatures shall serve us.

Let us then addict our selves wholly unto his service, not serving any other
Master, but him, not the World, not the Flesh, not the Devil, not Antichrist.
Not the World, Ne illecti, lest we are allured with vain pleasures, and the
lying vanities thereof: not of the Flesh, Ne infecti, lest stained, polluted,
defiled therewith: not the Devil, Ne interfecti, lest devoured and destroyed
by him; not Antichrist, Ne decepti, lest seduced and misled by him. It is a
base service to serve the World, for that is to become a vassal unto our
servants; it is an uncertain service to serve the Flesh, this master is so
choleric, so weak, so sickly, that we may look every day to be turned out
of doors, and that which is worst of al he is least, contented when he is most
satisfied: It is an unthrifty service, to serve the Devil, all his ways are
death, the more service we do him, the worse is our estate: It is an
irreligious service to serve Antichrist, for such as have the mark of the
Beast, shall perish with the beast: But he that serves God, has the greatest
Lord, who is most able, and the best Lord, who is most willing to prefer his
followers, and reward his servants. Let us then serve him, for we are his
servants, Iure creationis, jure sustentationis, jure redemptionis; By right of
creation, sustentation, redemption. If every hair of our head were a life, and
every life as long as Methuselahs, it were too little to serve God.

True it is, that Cham was pronounced the first servant, as I observed Gen 3.
Genesis 8.
before; for man was made to rule, and not to serve. But as sin brought in
the first nakedness, and the first travel of women in pain, and the first
death, and the first sorrow, and the first flood; so it brought in the first
service: Only by Christ we are Manumised: Hominis dignitas in tribus
splendet, The dignity of Romans 8. 15.
man shines forth in three things, In imagine Dei, in the image of God; In
ejus creationis ex nihilo, in his creation of nothing; In eius dominio super
omnes creaturas, in his dominion over all his creatures; ut ergo tria haec per
peccatum amisit, sic per gratiam recuperavit, as he lost these three things by
sin, so by grace he has recovered them, dum Domino servit, a quo defecit,
while he serves God from whom he fell.

Now therefore by grace, we are called servants; and if that John 15. John 3.
Mar. 3. Gal. 3.
be too little, we are called the Friends of God, Friends of the bridegroom:
and if that be too little, we are called Brethren, Sisters of Christ: if that
be too little, we are called The Sons of God: if that be too little, we are
called the Spouse of God, the wife of the Apoc. 19. 7.
Lamb: And if all this be too little, we are called the members of The Pope
no Apostle of God, yet calls himself, servum servorum.
God, and of Christ Jesus. O the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of
the love of God toward us, that we should be called, not forreiners, but
servants; not servants, but friends; not friends, but brethren; not brethren,
but sons; not sons, but wives; not wives, but members. 1 Cor. 12.


By the way observe here, that the Pope not calling himself, servum Dei, the
servant of God, but servum servorum, a servant of Genesis 9.
servants; calls himself by a cursed title, as Cham was, and indeed he is a
servant of servants, that serves not Christ.

But (say some) he calls himself a servant of servants, to show his
humility. Indeed he is lowly in name, as any Apostle, but as proud in spirit
as the Whore of Babylon, that makes herself Lady over Kings and Emperors. For
did not Pope Zachary make Childerike the French King, to trot by his bridle
three miles together? Did not Hildebrand cause Henry the fourth to stand three
days at his gates, with his wife and his child barefooted? Did not Clement the
fifth make Dandalus Duke of Venice to lie under his Table like a dog, to
gather crummes? Did not Alexander the third tread on the neck of that noble
Frederick in Venice? Did not Innocent depose King John of England? Did not
Clemens the seventh labor to depose Henry the eighth? Did not Pius quintus
send a Bull against our Queen? Did not Clemens the eighth cause the French
King to go barefooted to Saint Dennis, as a Penitentiary? The troubles of
these five hundred years past, may be ascribed to Popes; all Grecia yet rueth
it; all Africa, the mother of Martyrs, feels it; the German Emperors tossed
like tennise balls, may not forget it; the Kings of France have felt it; the
States of Italy have been shaken with it: the Kings of England have been
deposed, whipped, murdered; Let King John speak, Richard the second, Henry the
eighth, and Queen Elizabeth. Is this a servant of servants, that will thus
insult over Kings and Emperors? Oh no, no.

But to leave him; Are we with Jude, the servants of Jesus Christ? Then must we
not only apply our selves to serve him, as I have already said; but we must
imitate the virtues of Jesus Christ, and we must attend his pleasure.

But first, we must imitate his virtues. In our Lord and Master Christ Jesus
shined many excellent virtues: Yea, all virtues; Love, Patience, Humility,
Meekness, Mildness, Mercy, Purity, Piety, Constancy, Obedience, etc.
these must shine in us, else falsely we are called the servants of Christ.
Christiani nomen frustra ille sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur: August.
de vita Christian^.
Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es? In vain has he got the name of a
Christian, which does not imitate Christ: What does it profit thee to be
called that which thou art not? To be called a Christian, and not to be
indeed a Christian; a Saint, and not to be Saint; the servant of Jesus Christ,
and not to be We must attend to Gods service. We owe more to God than servants
to their Masters.
the servant of Jesus Christ. Qualis haberi velis, talis sias: If thou will be
the servant of Jesus Christ, thou must be holy as he is holy, gracious, as
he is gracious, merciful, as he is merciful, yea, perfect as he is
perfect, though not by adequation, for that is beyond our power, yet by
imitation, for that is all our duties.

Again, are we Christ's servants? then must we attend his Pleasure, and
depend upon his Will, and perform all such holy offices as becomes servants.
But as Peter Martyr says, we In Romans cap. 1.
are contrary to servants, we are rather Quarter Masters, and checkemate with
God; for servants bestow all their time in their Masters business, we no time,
or little time in Gods matters: For our goodness is as the Morning cloud, and
as the Morning dew it Hos. 6. 4.
goes away. Servants beaten fall to prayers, we being chastised of God, fall
to murmuring and cursing, like Job, that cursed the day of his birth; Like
Jeremy, that cursed him, that told his father of a man-child. Servants are not
familiar with their Masters Job 3. Ier. 20.
enemies: we countenance Gods enemies in all places: Many Protestants are like
Aesops Crow, of diverse feathers; their Religions like Joseph his party-colored
coat, or like the rainebow, of all colors: we read how Iehoshaphat joined with
Ahab to Ramoth-Gilead; how the Corinthians drew the yoke with infidels; how the
2 Chro. 19. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Esa. 31. 13.
Jews strengthened themselves with the Egyptians: I wish the like were not to
have been found among Protestants. We have sat with Psalm. 26. 4.
vain persons, and kept company with dissemblers. Servants, if they be
threatened, tremble; We, if Gods Prophets reprove us, are the prouder: We say
of Gods Prophets, as the Jews did of Jeremy, Come, let us imagine some device
against Jeremy* For the Law shall not perish from the Priests, nor Counsel
from the Wise, nor the Word from the Ier. 18. 18.
Prophets: Come, let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to
any of his words. And yet we owe a thousand times more to God than servants to
their Masters; God does not only feed us and cloth us, as Masters do their
servants, but he gives us all things besides: He ladeth us daily with
benefits. Servants, by Psalm. 68. 19.
their travel profit their Masters, we profit God nothing: If thou be
righteous, what give thou unto him, or what receives he at thy hands?
Servants receive small wages, God to us has given Job 35. 7. Romans 8. 32.
his Son, and with him all things: his face was buffeted, his checks nipped,
his eyes blinded, his hands nailed, his side lanched with a spear: He was as
water powered out, all his bones were out of joint, his heart like Wax molten
within the midst of his bowels, his strength was Psalm. 22. 14, 15.
dried up like a pot-sheard, his tongue did cleave to his jaws, and he was
brought unto the dust of death: Non ergo caput, faciem, oculos, manus, cor illi
trademus, ut illi serviamus? Must we not therefore give him head, face, eyes,
hands, and heart, to serve him? We must not give our members, weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin: What then? All servants in Gods Church.
We must give our selves to God, and our members of righteousness, to serve
God. But alas, we serve not God, he has the least part of our service, if he
has any at all: The Covetous serve Mammon; the Malicious, their Envy and
Rancour; the proud, their Arrogancy; the Gluttonous, their Belly; the
Voluptuous, their Pleasure. Tot Dominos habemus, quot peccata, We have so many
masters, as we have sins, according to the Axiom of the Apostle. Of whom
soever a man is overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage. Thou art a
slave to thy malice, thy ambition, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
thy belly: Sed nemo potest duobus Dominis servire, Non man can serve two
masters.

Again observe, That this title Servus Dei, the servant of God, meets with
the Manichoeans and Libertines, who rail on all the Apostles; for they call
Paul, Vas confractum, a broken Vessel; Peter, abnegatorum Dei, a denier of his
Master; Andrew, Medicantem piscatorem, a begging Fisherman; John, Stolidum
adolescentem, a foolish young man; Luke, Ineptem medicum, an unskilful
Physician; Matthew, Faeneratorem, an Usurer.

To conclude this point: in that Saint Jude calls himself a servant we
learn, that we are all but servants in Gods Church, and therefore to make no
Laws, to alter no decrees, to change no ordinance, to injoyne no orders, but
such as the Word of God allows, and likes of. Moses, the greatest Prophet
that ever Hebr. 3. 5.
rose, or should rise in Israel, yet but a servant; David, a rare Prophet, the
sweet singer of Israel, a man after Gods own heart, yet he calls himself a
servant, Thy servant, Lord, thy servant lo, Psalm. 116. 16.
I do my self confess, etc. Paul, taken up to the third heaven, taken into
Paradise, where he heard (...), Secrets not to be uttered, honored above all
the Apostles, yet but a servant: What is the Romans 1. 1.
Pope then, or what is his parentage, that he may dispense with the Doctrine of
the old and new Testament? a vile man, that was never further than Rome, and as
far from Paradise, as Heaven from Hell: Abolebit eum Dominus, for the Lord shall
abolish him: I confess, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
that Gregory matcheth the four Oecumenicall Councels, with the four Gospels,
the Nicene, Constantinople, Ephesian, and Chalcedon, he calls them, Lapidem
quadrantem, ex quo sanctae fidei Structura assurgit: The four corner stones,
upon which the building of the holy Faith does rise. But he spoke like a man,
for those Councels could make no orders, but from the Lords.

The third thing to be considered in this Apostle, is his alliance and
kindred; he names himself the Brother of James.

First, Honoris gracia, for honors sake to distinguish himself from Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon, whom our Savior calls a Devil. Have not I
chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil. For John 6. 70.
James? was a pillar in Gods Church, he was Bonarges, the son of Thunder; he
was a chief man in the Council of Jerusalem, he was Bishop of Jerusalem, and
Paul answers before The alliance and kindred of the Apostle Jude.
him, he was with Christ at his transfiguration, he was one of the three at
his passion, he was the brother of the Lord, that is, a kinsman unto Christ,
for he was the son of Marie Cleophas, Sister to the Virgin Mary and so Christ
cousin germane, called his Brother, Mat. 17. Mat. 26. Gal. 1.
after the manner of the Hebrews, Mar. 3. 32. Behold thy Mother and thy
Brethren seek for thee without: and Mat. 13. 55. Is not this the Carpenters
Son? is not his Mother called Mary, and his Brethren James and Ioses, and
Simon and Judas.

This Judas is elsewhere called Thaddeus and Labbeus: but he graceth himself
by this, that he was the Brother of James, a Mat. 10. John 6. 70. John. 12. 6.
Act. 1. 18.
rare Apostle, not Judas the traitor whom Christ (as ye heard before) called a
Devil, whom Saint John calls a thief, whom Peter calls an hangman who
burst asunder, but the Brother of James, the son of Alpheus, who wrote the
Canonical Epistle: for there were two Iameses, one the son of Zebedie,
Brother to John, the other the son of Alpheus Brother to Jude.

Secondly, He calls himself the Brother of James, to win more credit, not
to his person, but to his Doctrine: that all men might know that this Epistle
was penned, not by Judas the traitor, but by Jude the Brother of James the
just, and therefore might more reverently receive it, and more religiously
regard it: Nam dictum clari hominis facile admittitur, For the saying of an
excellent man is easily admitted, these are the causes why he calls himself
the Brother of James.

And observe with me here, that first he glories of his Profession, that he
was the servant of Jesus Christ, before he makes any mention of his alliance:
For no kindred, Fatherhood, or Motherhood can grace us with God: God is no
accepter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness Act. 10. 34, 35.
is accepted with him.

Many will glory of their alliance and kindred, and albeit they have neither
Learning, nor Living, nor Wisdom, nor Civility, nor Honesty, nor Piety at
all: yet if they can fetch their Pedigree from some Noble or Worshipful House,
they boast thereof, and hold themselves worthy of reverence and honor. The
Jews gloried, that Abraham was their Father, but what gained they by it? When
Christ told them, Vos estis ex patre John 8. 44.
diabolo, You are of your Father the devil, and his works ye do. 2 Reg. 21.
2. Reg. 20.
David, had Absalom: Solomon, Rehoboham: Amon a wicked Father, had Josiah to
his son, a good man: and Ezekiah a good father, had Manasses to his son, a
vile man: Ismaell had Isaac to his brother, so had Esau Jacob: Caine had Abell,
Absalom had Solomon: But Caine was a Vagabond, Ismaell a persecutor, Absalom a
Rebel, Esau a Reprobate. It Is folly in men to glory in Genesis 4. Gal. 4.
stock or kindred: If they will glory, let them glory in this that they are
the servants of Jesus Christ: for outward titles without inward virtues avail
nothing, for what shall it profit Not to glory in Alliance and Kindred.
us to be entitled Christians, and yet live as profanely as Infidels? to be
called the Church of God, and yet in conversation to resemble the Synagogue of
Satan? to be counted the children of God, and yet spend our times like the
sons of Belial? to be reputed the servants of Christ Jesus, and serve the
World, the Flesh and the Devil? to descend of noble, godly Parents, and yet
degenerate from their noble, godly ways? God is not pleased with shadows, but
with substance; not with outward titles, but with truth in the inward parts. If
then Psalm. 51.
thou will boast of thine honorable Kindred, labor, strive, endeavor that
thou may glory and say, That God is thy Father, the Church thy Mother,
Christ Jesus thy elder Brother, that is most High, Holy, Honorable Kindred.
Thus much for the Person writing, his Name, his Calling, his Kindred.

THE SECOND SERMON
VERSE. I. To them which are Called and Sanctified, etc. Vocation the beginning
of Salvation.



I Am now come to the persons, to whom he wrote this Epistle, and they are
described three ways:

1 By their Calling. 2 By their Sanctification. 3 By their Preservation.
But first, they are described by their calling, To them that are called, says
he. The beginning of our Salvation is, that we are first called of God, we
come not of our selves, God calls us, Nemo venit ad Christum nisi pater
traxerit: John 6. 44.
No man comes unto Christ except the Father draw him: Et ista attractio est
nostra vocatio per Evangelium and Spiritum sanctum: and this drawing is our
calling by the Gospel, and holy Spirit. Caro and sanguis non revelat, etc.
Flesh and Blood do not reveal these Mat. 16. 17.
things, but God our Father by our calling in the Gospel: As the Shepherd
with his whistle calls his sheep: as the two silver trumpets called Israel
to war; as the master-Bee calls the Number. 10.
whole hyve together with his humming; So God calls his Church running from
him, by his Word and Spirit.

Wisdom (says Solomon) cries without, she utters her voice in Prove. 1.
20.
the streets, she calls in the high street, among the prease in the entrings
of the gates, and utters her words in the City. And again he says, Wisdom
has built her house, and hewn out her seven Pillars, she has killed her
Victuals, drawn her Wine, and prepared her Table, she has Prove. 9. 1, etc.
sent forth her Maidens, and cries in the highest places of the City, saying,
Whosoever is simple, let him come hither, and to him that is destitute of Wisdom,
she says, Come and eat of my Meat, and drink of the Christ profitable to
none but to them that are called.
Wine that I have drawn: Wisdom there, is Christ Jesus, who calls us by
his Gospel.

The lowest staff or step of Salvation, is Vocation; the highest, is
Glorification. For whom he predestined, them also he called: and whom he
called, them also he justified: and whom he justified, Romans 8. 30.
them also he glorified. I speak in respect of men: For with God
praescientia, his prescience is the first step of salvation, For those which he
knew before, he predestined: We run from God, but he Romans 8. 29.
calls us, and cries after us, as the Canaanite did after Christ, he
seeks us being lost, he calls us being deaf, he lighteneth Luke 4. 18. 1 Samuel 26. 14.
us being blind, he freeth us being slaves, he heals us being lame, he
quickens us being dead, he awaketh us by his Gospel, as David did Abner with
his showting: The top, the root, the foundation, and the roof, the beginning,
increasing, and finishing of our salvation is of God. Coepit and perficiet, He
has begun, and he will finish it. So says the Apostle, He that has begun
this good work in you, will perform it, until the day of Jesus Christ.

Paul arrogateth nothing to himself, but places himself in the rank of the
Wicked, till God called him: his words are, We are by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. And to the Ephesians. 2. 3. Gal. 1. 13. 15.
Galathians, he writes thus, Ye have heard of my conversation in times past,
in the Jewish Religion, how that I persecuted the Church of God extremely and
wasted it: But when it had pleased God, which had separated me from my mothers
womb, and called me by his Grace, etc. The Galathians, were Idolaters, and knew
not God, til God called them. The Ephesians were darkness, but being called,
they were lux Gal. 4. 8. Ephesians. 5. 9.
in Domino, Light in the Lord: The same is said of the Corinthians. But what
do I light a candle at noonday, or add legs 1 Cor. 12.
to the Dromedarie, who runs most swiftly? or power water into the Sea,
which overfloweth? or prove a known truth received of all men?

But to proceed; Christ is not profitable, but unto them that are called;
otherwise he is as a Medicine not taken, as a Plaster not applied, as Meat
not eaten, as Light to them that are in a dungeon: Hereupon says Paul, We
preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-blocke, to the Gentiles
foolishness, but to them that are called of God, the Wisdom of God, and the
Power of God. Persius wept when he saw a Toade, that he had not given thanks
to God, who made him not a Toade, but a Man. Socrates thanked Nature, that had
made him a reasonable creature, and not a Beast, and among them a Man, and not
a Woman, and among men an Athenian, not a Thebane. Philip, rejoiced that
Alexander was borne, in the days of Aristotle. The Queen of Sheba, pronounced
Salomons men happy, for hearing him. How happy 1 Reg. 10.
are we then, that live in the call of the Gospel? Blessed are the eyes (says
our Savior to his Disciples) which see that ye see, for I A little part of
the World called.
tell you, that Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things that ye hear, and
have not heard them: O terque, quaterque beati oculi nostri, O Luke 10. 23.
thrice and four times blessed are our eyes. For as God called a little angle
of Iewry, and passed over all the World besides: For he suffered all the
Gentiles to walk in their own ways. So God Act. 14. 16.
has passed over all Africa, Asia, America, and called a little piece of
Europe; all nations else are polluted. The Grecians adore the Virgin Mary, and
Saints painted, the Creature for the Creator. The Aethiopians adore the
Emperor Presbyter Johannes. The Tartarians, the Great Cham. The Persians, the
Fire and the Sun. The Turks, Mahomet. The Borussians, many gods, as
Antrimpus, Protrimpus, Pelintus, etc. The Indians, spirits called Zemes. The
Papists, Images: But we adore the true God: They worship they know not what,
we worship that which we know: God has given his John 4. 22.
Word to Europe, he has given to other Nations other blessings. To the
Muscovites, hides and precious skins; to the Moors of Barbary, sugar and
sweet spices: to the Spaniards, wine and fruits; to the Indians, gold and
silver; to them of Cathai, pearl and precious stones; to the Persians, silk
and margarites; to them of Island, Finland, Greenland, fish and fowls: But to
us he has given his Gospel, Blessed be the day, and happy be the hour,
wherein it came to us. Let that day, be as the day wherein Israel came out of
Egypt, let it be the head of the year, let no cloud stain it, nor
darkness possess it. If we had as many tongues as Argus had eyes; if every
hair of our head were a life, and every life as long as Methuselahs; all were
too little to praise God. Thank God that thou live in this time of the
Gospel, Let thy soul praise God, Let all that is Psalm. 103. 1.
within thee praise his holy name. Thus must God call us by his Word, else we
are reprobates in the Church, but not of the Church: For as excrements are in
the body, and not of the body; so reprobates are in the Church, but not of the
Church. They wet 1 John 2. 19.
out from us; but are not of us: for if they had bin of us, they would have
continued with us. Many that hear this Sermon are among us, but not Mat. 25.
of us: and the time shall come, that the Goats shall be separated from the
Sheep, the Dogs from the Lambs, the Crows from the Doves, the Bastards from
the Children, the Chafe from the Corn. Oh then hear the call of Gods
Ministers.

Calling is of two sorts; External. Internal.

External, is either common to all, by the instinct of nature, and works of
God, or not common to all, by the Word preached.

Internal and effectual, is the work of the whole Trinity, whereby God the
Father, through the Son, by the holy Ghost, not only offers Grace but gives
it to the Elect. Vocantur electi Calling external and internal.

External calling unprofitable without the Internal.


vel foris per externam praedicationem, vel intus efficaci operatione spiritus
Sancti: The Elect are called either without by outward preaching of the Word,
or within, by the inward effectual operation of the holy Ghost.

This has two parts; The one, Invitement. The other, Admission.

Invitement is, when God offers remission, and life everlasting to all that do
believe, and this outwardly by the preaching of the Word, and inwardly by
inspiration of heavenly desires.

Admission is, when men are entered into the kingdom of Grace, and this
outwardly by Baptism, and inwardly by the spirit, engraffing them into Christ,
and making them real members of Gods Kingdom.

Of this effectual calling speaks Jude here, the greatest blessing in the
World, For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Spiritus Dei
non amittitur totaliter and finaliter, quos semel, Romans 11. 29. John 13.
semper diligit Deus: The spirit of God cannot totally and finally be lost,
for whom God loves once, he loves ever. Et quos semel, semper vocat deus,
ejus vocatio irrita fieri non potest: And whom God once, he ever calls, for
his calling cannot be frustrate, For all things work for the best to them that
love God, even to them that are called of purpose. Romans 8. 28.


The external calling is often unprofitable, because it is not joined with the
internal: the Ministry of man in the Church wants the Ministry of the
spirit in the heart. Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God gives the
increase: We call you, but 1 Cor. 3.
God chooses you: We light a candle often before them that Mat 22. 14. Eccles.
24. Psalm. 58.
are blind, as Christ did to the Pharisees: We cry to them that are deaf, as
David did to Abner: We set meat on the graves of dead men, that cannot eat:
We charm deaf Adders, which will not hear: We mourn to them that will not
weep: We pipe to them, that will not dance: We preach to them, that will not
repent. Luke 7.
Laterem crudam lavamus; We wash a raw brike. For if the internal calling
wants, we may preach all our life, and you may hear ten thousand Sermons,
and yet be never the better, except the inward Schoolmasters, the Spirit of
God join with the Preacher. We cannot command Grace; For to one is given by
the Spirit, the word of Wisdom: to another, the word of Knowledge, by the
same Spirit: to another, is given Faith, by the same Spirit: to another, the
gift of Healing, by the same Spirit: and 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11.
to another the operation of Great works: to another, Prophecy: to another,
the discerning of Spirits: to another, diversity of Tongues: and to another,
the Interpretation of tongues: and all these things works even the self same
Spirit, distributing to every man severally even as he will. The Blacke-moore
will not change his skin, nor the Leopard alter his spots; the Panther will not
be tamed, nor the Adder The Gospel powerful to them that are called.
charmed, nor the crooked Serpent made straight, nor the salt Sea made fresh,
and wicked men will not be taught; we can but preach to you, God by his
Spirit must call you.

Lactantius speaking of the Word and the Minister, means the inward calling
joined with the outward; Da mihi (inquit) Libro 3. de falsa sapientia.
hominem iracundum; and uno verbo Dei reddam placidum ut ovem, da avarum, and
liberalem tibi reddam, da timidum, jam Cruces, ignes Phalaridis taurum
contemnit; da libidinosum, and continentem reddam; tanta Doctrinae vis est,
etc. that is, Give me an angry man, and with one Word of God, I will make him
as meek as a Lamb; give me a covetous man, and I will render him again
liberal; give me a fearful timorous man, and by and by he shall contemn
Gallows, Fire, yea and Phalaris his Bull; give me a lecherous man and I will
make him chaste and continent; such is the force of Doctrine. As the Lodestone
draws not Iron except it be pure: So the Word of God does not draw men from
the mire and dirt of sin, except they be purified with the Spirit. Briefly in
one word, I say with Tertullian in Apologetico, Fiunt homines Christiani, non
nascuntur; Men are made Christians, not borne; Ephesians. 2. 2. Tit. 3.
we are by nature the children of Wrath, by grace we are the Sons of God.

Once again, Christ is not profitable, the Gospel is not availeable, but to
them that are called; but being called, it is powerful.

When the men of Cyprus and Cyrene spoke unto the Grecians, and preached the
Lord Jesus, The hand of the Lord was with them (that is, the power and virtue
of the Spirit) so that a great number Acts 11. 21.
believed and turned unto the Lord: Whereupon Chrysostom, libro adversus
Gentiles, proves the deity of Christ, that using no Arms but twelve poor
Apostles, silly, weak, unlearned men, subdued the whole world to him: He
overthrew the Laws of the Fathers, he abrogated the ancient customs. A
marvelous power by the Doctrine of Fishers, Toll-gatherers, Tent-makers, to
raise the dead, to cleanse the Lepers, to expel Devils, to vanquish Tyrants,
to put death to flight, to stay the tongues of the Philosophers, to shut the
mouths of the Orators, to conquer Kings and Princes, Barbarians, Grecians, and
all men: Alexander with the sword, and the Apostles with the Word to conquer
the World: For their sound went out through all the earth, and their Romans 10.
18.
words unto the ends of the World. Pray therefore, that God by his Spirit would
make the Word effectual, to be odorem vitae, a favor of life to life, and not
a favor of death unto death; (...); surely God, even God by his Spirit does
all.

In a word, God calls us, else we come not; and his calling is diverse. 1. In
respect of time: 2. In respect of place. In respect of time; For God calls in
diverse hours of the day, that is, in diverse ages of the world, and in diverse
years of our age. Gods calling diverse both for time and place.
Some before the Law, as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham; some under the Law, as
Moses, David, Josias, Esaias, with other Kings and Prophets: Some after the Law,
as the blessed Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Some in the first hour (their
childhood) as Samuel, Jeremy, John Baptist; some in the third hour (their
youth) as Daniel and John the Evangelist: some in the sixth hour (their middle
age) as Peter and Andrew: some in the eleventh hour (their old age) as
Gamaliel, Joseph of Arimathea: some in the last hour of the day (the last
hour of their life) as the Thief upon the Cross.

In respect of place; For God calls some from their ship, and some from their
shops, some from the Markets, some from under the hedges.

This diverse calling, at diverse times, and in diverse places, intimates A
Caveat. A Comfort.

A Caveat for such as are called, that they magnify not themselves and vilify
others. Nemo dicat ideo me vocavit, quia colui Deum, quomodo coluisses si
vocatus non fuisses? let no man say, God August. de verb. Apost.
has called me for that I worship him, how should thou worship him if thou
were not called?

A Comfort for them, that feel not themselves sufficiently called, that they
rest in hope. God can and will call, when, where, and whom he will, either at
the last hour, with the thief upon the gallows, or out of oppressing Egypt,
with the Israelites, Luke 23. Exodus 3.
or in the midst of the persecution of the Saints of God, as he did Saul. Let
us then patiently attend our calling. Deus adversum Acts 9.
vocat, credentem docet, sperantem consolatur, diligentem exhortatur, conantem
adjisvat, precantem exaudit, and tamen Deus solus fidem, spem, charita tem,
laborem, preces operatur: God calls the adverse, teaches the believer,
comfort him that hops, exhorts him that loves, helps him that
labors; and yet God alone works faith, hope, charity, etc.

Ille vocat aversos, vocatos justificat, justificatos sanctificat,
sanctificatos glorificat: He calls the averse, justifies them that are
called, sanctifies them that are justified, and glorifieth them that are
sanctified. The Whelps of a Lion are borne dead; but at the yelling and
roaring of the Lion they are quickened, and raised from death: So we are borne
dead, dead in our trespasses Ephesians. 2. 1. Phil. 2. 16.
and sins; but by the calling of the Gospel, as by the roaring of the Lion,
we are quickened. It is a word of life, our calling, and all good is wrought by
it. As it is verbum scientiae and prudentiae, a word of knowledge and wisdom;
and potentiae, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Acts 14.
and of power; and gratiae, and of grace; sic est verbum vitae, so it is the
word of life: Nulla scientia, nec potentia, nec gratia, nec vita sine
Evangelio; there is no knowledge, nor power, nor grace, nor life, without the
Gospel.

Well, God calls inwardly by his Spirit, outwardly by his Our Vocation what
it teaches us. Sanctification.
Word. This should teach us: first, to walk worthy our calling, that as he
which has called is holy, so should we be holy in all our life and
conversation, according as it is written, Be ye holy for I am holy: We are
called not to ncleannesse, but unto sanctification; Levit. 11. 44. 1 These. 4.
for unto this end has the grace, goodness and bountifulness of our Lord
appeared, that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world: because sancta conversatio confundit inimicum, aedificat proximum,
glorificat Deum; a holy life, a godly conversation does confound and stop the
mouths of our enemies, does edify and build up our Brethren, does glorify
God.

Secondly, Seeing the internal means of our calling is the Spirit, this
should teach us never to grieve the Spirit, by whom we are called out of
darkness into light. Nature teaches us not to grieve our natural parents,
and Religion should teach us not to grieve the Spirit: Grieve not the Spirit by
whom ye are sealed Ephesians. 4.
to the day of Redemption.

Last of all, seeing we are called not only inwardly by the Spirit, but
outwardly by the holy Word. This word must be unto us dearer than thousands of
silver and gold, more precious than the gold of Ophir; sweeter than the Honey,
or the Honycombe: For albeit God can only, by the inward motion of his blessed
Spirit, work out, make-sure, and perfect our salvation; yet it pleases him in
his eternal wisdom, to use the word as an ordinary means of our vocation
and salvation. As then God gives learning by study, wisdom by experience,
riches by travel, and like things by like means: so he makes perfect the
calling of his Saints, by the preaching of the Word, which Romans 1. 16.
is the power of God to salvation to every man that believes.

The second title of honor given here to the Saints, is Sanctification; he
calls them sanctified of God the Father: this is the next grace wherewith he
adorneth them. For God continues his graces, as Jacob continued his wrestling,
as Peter continued his knocking till they let him in: and God will not leave
calling and working till he has sanctified and perfected his graces; like the
Sun that never leaves shining, but comes Psalm. 19. Exodus 17.
forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run
his course. Like the Fountain of Elim, and waters of Shilo, that never leave
running. The calling of God is without repentance: Romans 11. 29.
For God is not a man, that he should lie; neither as the Son of man, Numb.
23. 19.
that he should repent; as Balaam, though a false Prophet, said most truly.
Whom God calls, them he justifies; whom he justifies, he sanctifies; and
whom he sanctifies, he glorifieth. The learned call this Text in Romans 8.
Auream catenam, a golden Romans 8. 29, 30.
Chain; he that draws one link, draws all the Chain: For as he that
has one damnable sin, has all sin, and is guilty of all; so he that has
one grace effectually, has all. God perfects his Works.
God is not like a stepmother, that puts out her child to nurse; he is not
as the Partridge or Bird, that forsakes her nests; nor Ier. 1. 17. Job 29. 1
Reg. 3.
like the Ostrich, that leaves her eggs in the dust; like Salomons Harlot, that
exposed her child to the sword: But he is as the Eagle, that carries her young
in her wings, till they can fly; as the Pelicane, that feeds her young ones
with her heart-bloud till they can feed themselves: He blesses us, until he
has brought us into his Kingdom of bliss, where we shall never hunger nor
thirst any more. For, He will destroy Death for ever, and the Lord God will
wipe away tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his Esa. 25. 8, 9.
people will he take away out of all the Earth, for the Lord has spoken it,
and in that day men shall say, Lo this is our God, We have waited for him, and
he will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoice
and be joyful in his Salvation. So the Lord Jesus has perfected the work of
our Redemption; he was borne for us, he lived, he died, he rose again, he
ascended, he makes intercession for us, and he will glorify us: so says
our Savior; Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me,
even where I am, that they may behold my glory, that is, that they may enjoy
the John 17. 24.
eternal glory with me.

This is a Doctrine of singular comfort, like the wine and oil that revived
the wounded man; like the news of Joseph's honor, Luke 10. Genesis 45. 28. Luke 2.
that comforted old Jacob; like the song of the heavenly soldiers, that
rejoiced the Sheepheards; like David's Harp, to drive away Saul's melancholy.
Has God begun with thee? has he called thee? have thou felt the motions of
his Spirit in thy heart? Noli timere, be not afraid; he will end with thee,
and accomplish all his graces in thee; I mean not in perfection: Nam sanctitas
tribus gradibus perficitur, Holiness consists in three degrees: In this
life, while we are regenerate by water and the holy Spirit: after this life,
while the Soul enjoys the presence of God: after the day of Judgment, when
in Soul and body we shall be united to our head Christ Jesus.

In this life there is a threefold Sanctification:

1 Imputed unto us. 2 Wrought in us. 3 Wrought by us.
Imputed Sanctification is, when God imputes unto us the sanctification of
Christ; Who is made to us Wisdom, Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Sanctification and Redemption, By this we are said to be sanctified, when
the virtue of Christ's Passion, the fruit of his Death, the power of his
Resurrection is applied unto us, and Christ's Sanctification made ours, by
imputation. Therefore the Apostle says, That Jesus Christ to the end that he
may sanctify his people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Heb.
13. 12.


Sanctification wrought within us is, the inward change of a man justified,
whereby the image of God is restored in him, a Protestants Religion teach
Sanctity.
change, not a non esse ad esse, from a not being to a being; for the faculties
of the soul were before; not ab esse ad non esse, from a being to a not being,
for the faculties of the soul remain still; but ab esse ad esse, from an ill
being to a good being; not abolishing the will, mind, and affections, but
rectifying and renewing them, a change of a man justified; for we are justified
before we are sanctified. Justification is actus individuus, Sanctification is
actus dividuus; we are justified at once, we are sanctified by degrees: we are
justified when our sins are not imputed unto us; we are sanctified when a
clean heart is created, and a right spirit renewed in us.

Sanctification wrought by us, is that, whereby we sanctify and make holy the
outward works and actions of our life. This the Lord requires, Be ye holy for
I am holy. To this Saint Paul Levit. 11. 44.
exhorts; let us cleanse our selves from all silthinesse of the flesh and 2
Cor. 7. 1.
of the spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. The
righteousness of Justification is by faith without works; the righousnesse of
Sanctification is by works, and by faith; justifying righteousness is
perfect, but not inherent; sanctifying righteousness is imperfect, but
inherent; glorifying righteousness is perfect and inherent: nevertheless we
must confess, that all our sanctification is from God.

Here the slander of the Papists is answered for Justification, for whom God
calls, he justifies; and whom he justifies, he sanctifies: We preach not
an idle faith, as they say, opening windows and doors to all wickedness, by
a Solifidian error, and an imputative Justice. A late Papist in his Treatise of
the Eucharist, says, We preach liberty, we hinder good works, we teach a
naked faith: No, no, we teach sanctity, holiness, more than they, who with
Alexander the third, call whoredom and adultery, Peccadilia, little sins;
who cry, Si non cast tamen caute, if not chastely, yet charily: who maintain
open Stews with Pius Quintus, who dispense with all sins. Allen the arch
Papist said, Commit our men what sin they list, omit what goodness they
list, yet we teach them that bare faith justifies them. No, no, we say with
Zachary, God has delivered us out of the Luke 1. 74, 75.
hands of our enemies, that we should serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. We say with Paul, that The Tit. 2.
11, 12.
grace of God that brings salvation to all men has appeared, and teaches us
to forsake all impiety and wicked worldly desires, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. We say with Saint Peter, If ye
call him Father, which without respect of persons judges according 1 Pet. 1.
17.
to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. We say
with Saint John, and all other holy men, Let us love one another, for love
comes of God, and every one that loves is borne of God and knows God; he
that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. We say with Christ, Blessed
are they that hear the Word of God, and Justification and Sanctification
though joined yet distinguished.
keep it. We urge men more to holiness than they do; we use more sharp
and effectual reasons, not like the leaden blunt Doctors in Popery, but
arrows drawn out of a better Quiver. Paul thought this a principal reason
above others, to move them by the wounds, and blood, and merits of the Lord
Jesus: For having spent eleven Chapters in the Treatise of Justification, at
last he breaks out, as the Sun out of a cloud, and moves them to
holiness, by the name, the death, and merits of Christ Jesus; saying, I beseech
you Brethren by the mercies of GOD, that ye give up your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, Romans 12. 1, 2.
which is your reasonable serving of God, and fashion not your selves like unto
this world. A more effectual reason, than to argue from our works, our
merits, our deserts, which is death; For the wages of sin is death. Romans 6.
23.


Justification and Sanctification go together, yet we enter not into heaven
chiefly as we are sanctified and regenerated: For that is but in part, but as
we are justified by the death and righteousness of Christ, which is perfect,
complete, and absolute. Yea, say the Romanists, faith and works cannot be
sundred: Ergo, we are justified by works as well as by faith. But I deny the
Argument, they reason like blind men, the light of righteousness has not
shined on them, they feed on ashes. For many things are conjoined, which yet
have diverse operations; as the light and heat of the Sun, where the one is
there is the other, yet are we not warmed by the light, but by the heat, nor
yet directed by the heat, but by the light of it. Fides est sola, at non
solitaria, sola in actu justificationis, at non solitaria in usu and operatione
quotidiana, nam operatur per dilectionem; Faith is alone but not solitary,
alone in the act of justification, but not alone in the use and daily
operation, for it works by love, or as Chemnitius reasons against
Andradius, and the Council of Trent: We have eyes and ears at once, and they
are joint members of the body, yet we hear not with our eyes, and see not with
our ears; Manus non est sola, sed coniuncta cum reliquiis membris, at manus
sola scribit; the hand is not alone, but joined with the other members, but the
hand alone writes; the tongue is not alone, nor severed from the rest of the
members, yet the tongue alone speaks; the Prince goes not without the Court,
yet the Prince rules alone, and not the Court; Fidem and opera coniungi magis
quam confundi vellem, I had rather conioine faith and works than confound them.
Finely therefore, says a Schoole-man; Deus justificat effective, fides
iustificat apprehensive, opera iustificant declarative, God justifies
effectually; Faith justifies apprehensively; Tho. Aquin.
Works justify declaratively; that is, they show and declare unto the world
that we are justified; Iustificatio est verbum forense, nec qualitatem aliquam
denotat sed absolutionem a reatu, non Romans 4. 26.
consistit in qualitatum infursione, sed peccatorum remissione, Justification
Justification how wrought.
is a Law word, neither does it note any quality, but absolution from guilt,
neither consists it in the infusion of qualities, but in the remission of
sins. Our invisible faith justifies us before our invisible God; for he
sees into the heart, and our visible works do justify us before men that be
visible and which behold our lives and conversations. And Paul places our
Justification, Non in qualitatum infusione, sed peccatorum remissione, not in
the infusion of qualities, but in the remission of sins. Deus dat
beatitudinem, Christus redimit, Spiritus obsignat, Fides apprehendit, Opera
testificantur; God gives happiness, Christ purchases it, the Spirit seals
it, Faith apprehends it, and Works testify it.

THE THIRD SERMON.
VERSE. I. Reconciliation part of Redemption.


AS I have begun to speak of this Heavenly Doctrine of Sanctification, so will
I proceed therein. And to speak in order, we must know that of Christ's
Priesthood there be two parts: Redemption and Intercession.

Redemption is the first part, whereby he has wrought for us the matter of
our Deliverance from all evils; as Hell, Death, Damnation. Heb. 7. 24.
Now of this Redemption, there be two members: The Luke 1. 74.
merit or matter of Reconciliation, and Sanctification. According to that of
the Apostle, But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1.


Reconciliation is the first part of our Redemption: whereby we are restored
from the Curse into the love and favor of God: For when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, etc. for he is our peace.
And it pleased the Father that in him Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 2. 14. Col. 1. 20. 22.
all fullness should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things unto himself,
and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross, both the things in Earth
and the things in Heaven.

Now again of Reconciliation there be two parts: Remission of sins, and
Imputation of righteousness: For says the Apostle; He was delivered to Death
for our sins, and is risen again for our justification. And again, God was in
Christ, and reconciled the Romans 6. 25.
World to himself, not imputing their sins unto them, and has committed to
us the Word of Reconciliation. Now then are we Ambassadors 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20,
21.
for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's
stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. For he has made himself Justification
upon remission of sins, and Christ's righteousness imputed.
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God, through him.

Remission of sin is the first part of Reconciliation; whereby the
guiltiness and punishment of our sins is removed from us by Christ's
sufferings. For thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and
to rise again the third day, that Repentance and Remission of sins might be
preached in his name to all nations. And, He through Death, has destroyed him
that had the power of Death, that is the Devil; and that he might deliver all
them, which for fear of Death Hebr. 2. 14, 15.
were all their life time subject to bondage. Yea, it is Christ alone: That
Apoc. 1. 5.
has washed us from our sins with his blood; Yea, His blood it is that
cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 1. 7.


Imputation of righteousness is the other part of Reconciliation; whereby, by
Christ's righteousness being imputed unto us, we appear just and blameless
before God our Father: For by him we have received the atonement. And as by
the offense of Romans 5. 11, 16.
one, the fault came on all men to condemnation; So by the justifying of one,
the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. And He has
now reconciled us in the body of Col. 1. 22.
his flesh, through Death, to make us holy and unblameable and without fault in
the sight of God his Father.

Now again, of Remission and Imputation spring Justification and Adoption:
For, Being justified by Faith we have Peace Romans 5. 1.
toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. For, when the fullness of time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, and made under the Law, that
he might redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of Sons.

Justification is that, whereby we being delivered before God of the guiltiness
of sin, are accounted just. For, Who shall lay any thing Romans 8. 33.
to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn?
As by one man's disobedience many are made sinners; so by the obedience Romans 5.
19.
of one, shall many also be made righteous.

Adoption is that whereby we are accounted. Sons and heirs of God, For ye
have not (says Paul) received the spirit of Romans 8. 15.
bondage to fear again: but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
we cry Abba Father: And he further affirms, That we are all the Sons of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus.

From these two, we obtain these two blessings: First, that all crosses turn
to us to the best: so says the Apostle, All Romans 8. 28:
things work together for the best, ^o them even them that are called of
purpose. For though he visit (...) sins with rods, and our offenses with
scourges, yet his loving kindness will he never take from us, nor suffer his
truth to fail.

Secondly, by Justification and Adoption we obtain a chiefety or rule over
all Creatures, except Angels. For so says David; Thou have made him little
lower than Angels, and crowned him Psalm. 8. 5, 6.
with glory and worship: Thou have made him to have dominion in the Works of
thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet. And the Sanctification in
Mortification and viyification. Sanctification imperfect in this life.
same also the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms.

Now for Sanctification, whereby God begins in us holiness; that has two
members: Mortification to sin, and Resurrection to righteousness.

Mortification is the first part, whereby the power of sin is killed in us;
and of this Mortification Paul speaks thus: Our old man is crucified within,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. And again, That Romans 6. 6. Gal. 2. 19.
I might live unto God, I am crucified with Christ.

Resurrection unto righteousness is, whereby sanctity, holiness, is really
inherent, and begun in us, and is increased daily more and more. For, We are
buried with Christ by Baptism unto his death, that like as Christ was raised
from the dead by the glory of his Romans 6. 4.
Father; So we also should walk in newness of life.

These parts of Sanctification, referred unto the Soul, are called (...) but
referred to the Body, they are called frustus seu (...), fruits. This (...) is
a renewing of all the faculties of the Soul; a converting them from evil to
good; A bringing forth of fruits worthy amendment of life. And Luke 3. 8.
this (...) has his Initium, beginning, and comitem, and his companion. His
beginning is is godly sorrow: for whose heart Gods spirit does touch, is sorry
for his sins committed against so merciful a Father. His Companion is a
spiritual combat: for, the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh. Gal. 5. 17.


This Sanctification, being the second principal part of our Redemption, is
the quallity, whereby Gods spirit does renew us, and begin in us newness of
life: but it is not perfect, absolute in us. Paenitentia and amor sequuntur
noticiam nostram: Repentance and Love follow our Knowledge, but our knowledge
is 1 Cor. 13. 9.
but in part. And this I note against the blasphemy of Osiander, who says that
the essential righteousness of Christ is in us: but the righteousness of
Christ is without us, not within us, and is apprehended by Faith. And therefore
Paul's care was to be found in him, that is in Christ, Not having (says Paul)
mine Phil. 3. 9.
own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through Faith. For the
righteousness whereby we are justified, is the mere imputation of Christ's
work unto us: and therefore this word Imputation is ten times recited in one
Chapter. When a friend Romans 5.
of his own goods and not of mine, pays debt that I owe, that payment, or
satisfaction is mine, it is imputed to me, when as yet it is the work of my
friend, and none of mine. After the same manner, the righteousness of Christ
is ours. This righteousness therefore, whereby we are justified, is Grace and
not Nature; Imputation, not Essence; it is a Communication of the benefit of
Christ, not a commixion of essence: it is Holiness is said in diverse senses.
an effect of the proper work of Christ, non substantia ipsa Christi; not the
very substance of Christ. The other righteousness, wherewith he sanctifies
us, is but begun only, it is not absolute: For as the Sun shines, and as
the fire warmeth us, and yet do not transfer their essence into us: So
Christ does regenerate and sanctify us by the virtue of his Spirit, (quo homo
and Deus est) as he is man and God, not as he is man alone, or as he is God
alone; and yet he does not transfer his essence into us: and therefore
Osiander is much deceived. The place of Paul, quoted by him, helps him
nothing; for we are the righteousness 2 Cor. 5. 21.
of Christ, ut ille fuit peccatum pro nobis, as he was sin for us: but sin
was not really in Christ, no more is Christ's righteousness really in us, but
only imputatively: faith as the hand applies it unto us, and flies into
heaven, and there makes us partakers of his Sanctity. Our faith wrastleth with
God in heaven, our charity wrastleth with men here below on earth; both of them
are exercised, neither idle nor unfruitful: and therefore the Apostle joyneth,
Faith in Christ and love toward Col. 1. 4.
all Saints together. O Brethren, how many be there that can tell a smooth
tale of Christ, and yet cannot speak one wise word of Justification and
Sanctification; and yet Peter requires it of all.

Hence am I to derive an exhortation to all men to holiness and
sanctification, seeing that Rahabs house was known by a Ios. ^. Judge. 11. Mat.
26. 2 Reg. 9.
red thread, and the Ephramites by lisping, and Peter by speaking, and Iehu by
driving his Chariot: So Christians are known by sanctification. Every child of
God is sanctified, Secundum plus aut minus, either more or less. But first let
me speak of the diverse acceptions of the word, ne inpingamus ubi non est
lapis, lest we stumble where there is no stone.

1. It is taken for that which is pure and perfect and clean: Levit. 19. 2.
So God alone is said to be holy.

2. It is taken for that which is lawful, as 1 Cor. 7. 14. The unbeleeving
husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by
the Husband, else were your children unclean, but now they are holy.

3. For that which is separated and set apart from common uses, and reserved to
sacred and holy uses. Thus in the Law, those things were called holy and
sanctified, which were taken from the common use of the people, and set apart
for the use and service of God; as the Oil, Show bread; first fruits, vessels
of the Tabernacle. In this sense the Priests were called holy, because they
were separate from the common life of men, to serve in the Tabernacle. Thus the
people of Israel, separated from the rest of the Nations, were called by Moses,
a sanctified people to the Lord; and by Jeremy, a thing hallowed to the Lord.

4. For that which is consecrated to a godly and holy use: We must be holy
because God is holy.
In which respect it is opposite to profaneness. So the Temple was holy,
Jeremy was sanctified, that is, consecrated to be a Prophet. So Christ
sanctified himself, that is, dedicated himself to be a sacrifice for the
sins of the world.

5. It is taken for purity of body and mind; as 2 Cor. 7. 5. So it is taken
here.

And that we should be holy, that is, pure both in body and in mind, it is
the will and commandment of God. Would you know his will and do it, that thou
may enter into heaven? For not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven: then
be holy; For Mat. 7. 21.
this is the will of God, even your holiness. 1 These. 4. 3.


There be many reasons to move us to Sanctification, to Holiness; whereof one
is often used, drawn from the person of God our Father; that children must
resemble their Father, else are they Bastards rather than sons. So reasons
God, Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy: repeated by Peter, As
he Levit. 19. 2.
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
because it is written, Be ye holy for I am holy. All that is in God our Father
is holy, all that pertains to Gods name is holy: Holy is his name. His person
is holy. Hereupon the Seraphins cried Luke 1. 49.
one unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole
world is full of his glory, his works are holy: So says David, Esaias 6. 3.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his Works. His
Judgments are holy: O my God, (says the Prophet in his distress) Psalm. 45.
17.
I cried by day, but thou hear not, and by night, but have no audience, but
thou art holy, etc. His Temple or House is holy: so Psalm. 22. 1, 2.
says Paul, The Temple of God is holy, which ye are. His Mountain is holy,
and therefore called A holy Mountain. His Kingdom is 1 Cor. 3. 17.
holy, for no unclean thing shall enter his Kingdom, neither whatsoever Psalm.
15.
works abomination or lies. Therefore we must be holy if we Apoc. 21. 27.
look to live with God; Extra sunt Canes, without be dogs, profane and
polluted persons. Apoc. 22. 15.


The same reason holds for holiness, that does for mercy, clemency, love,
meekness, and all other attributes of the Lord. Let me reason as the
Scripture reasons. God is merciful, therefore we must be merciful; God
forgiveth his enemies, therefore we must forgive. So reasons Christ himself;
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that hurt you and persecute you, that you may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven. God is love, therefore we must
love: So reasons Saint John; Beloved, let us love one another, 1 John 4. 7, 8.
for love comes of God, and every one that loves is born of God and knows
God, he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. God is meek,
therefore we must be meek: Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek, etc. So God
is holy, therefore we must be holy. Mat. 11. 29.


Another reason is taken from the end of our Redemption, urged Holiness the
end of our Redemption: without it we shall not see God.
by the Apostle, saying; The grace of God that brings salvation to all men,
has appeared, and teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and holily in this
present world. Has Christ sweat water and blood? has his heart been molten
like wax? his strength dried up Tit. 2. 11, 12. Psalm. 22. 14, 15.
like a potsheard? has his tongue cloven to his jaws and brought to the dust
of the earth, that we should be wantons? O caecas hominum mentes! O pectora
caeca! nati sumus e silice, nutriti lacte ferino: O blind minds of men! O
blind hearts! we are borne of a flint-stone, and nourished with the milk of
wild beasts. If Jacob sorrowed so for Joseph; if David would have dyed for
Absalom; if Rachel wept for her children and would not be comforted because
they were not. Let the death of Christ Genesis 37. 35. 2 Samuel 17. Mat. 2. Luke 1.
75. Luke 7. Mat. 26. Psalm. 51.
pierce our hearts, and move us to holiness, and let us serve him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life. The Lord sustain our hearts,
that with Mary we may wash his feet with our tears, and with Peter we may
weep bitterly. Create in us Lord a clean heart, and renew in us a right
spirit.

Another reason is taken from our Salvation, for without holiness we cannot be
saved. For though we be not saved for it, yet we are not saved without it.
Hereupon says the Apostle; Follow peace with holiness, without the which ye
cannot be saved. A Heb. 12. 14.
sore, a fearful speech, like the thunder in Mount Horeb; which I add the
rather, because men mock at holiness: Oh say they, you are holy men, you are
men of the Spirit, you are Saints, you are Sermon-men. The Bastard Ismael
flowted at Isaac, Gal. 5. 29. 2 Samuel 6. Ier. 18.
Michol skorneth at David's dancing before the Arc, the men of Anathoth did
smite Jeremy with their tongue, the Adversaries of Judah jested at the people.
But if thou be not holy, if thou be not a Saint, thou art a devil: and
know, that if ye Esra 4. Romans 8. 13. Gal. 6. 8.
live after the flesh ye shall dye; for he that sows to the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption. As Naomi said, Call me not Naomi, but Mara: So call
not these men Christians, Gospellers, but call them swine, dogs, that tread
pearls under their feet; call them Adders that will not be charmed; call them
Wolves that hear Mat. 7. Psalm. 58. John 10. Hebr. 12. John 6.
not their shepherd; call them Bastards, and not sons; yea, call them
devils, as Christ called Judas; and say unto them, as Christ said to Peter,
Come behind me Satan, thou understandest not the things that be of God, but of
man. I marvel that the Sun, that is witness of these villainies, stands in
the heavens, that the heavens rain not down fire and Brimstone, as Genesis 19.
23. that the earth swallow them not up, as Numb. 16. that the creatures put not
on their harness, as Joel 1.

Lastly, we are sanctified; we must therefore be holy, that our names and our
natures, our calling, and conversation may be correspondent; if then we will
have part with Christ we must live after the example of Christ; if we will
have Communion Causes of Sanctification. The whole Trinity sanctify.
with the Saints, on Earth, we must be Saints on Earth, if we will have the
company of Saints in Heaven, our conversation on Earth must be heavenly:
Partly, We are chosen in Christ that we should be holy, and without blame
before him, and partly, because the heavenly Court receives none, but such as
are pure, Ephesians. 7. 4. Apoc. 21. 27.
holy, innocent.

David says, holiness becomes thy house for ever. If holiness become Gods
house, much more us, which are the servants of his house. Well, the God of peace
sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your Spirits, Souls and Bodies
may be holy and harmless, until the coming of the Lord Jesus.

For all our sanctification and holiness is from the Lord, as it appears
plainly by the words of my Text; Sanctified of God the Father: Causa efficiens
sanctitatis; the efficient cause of holiness is God the Father: Instrumentalis
causa fides; the isntrumental cause is Faith; for, Fides cor purificat, Faith
purifieth the heart. Materialis causa, the material cause, est energia
sanctitatis quae est in Act. 15. 9. John 1. 16.
Christo, for of his fulness we have all received, even grace for grace.
Formalis causa, the formal cause; est nostra renovatio ab impuris qualitatibus
ad puras and integras: is our renewing from impure qualities to pure and sound:
Finalis, Dei cultus, the final, Gods worship, to the honor of God and the
edifying of our neighbor.

But yet observe with me, that though sanctification be attributed to the
Father, yet the Son, and the holy Ghost are not excluded: for we hold the
principle of the Schoolmen; Opera Trinitatis quoad extra sunt indivisa; the
outward works of God are common to the whole Trinity; and so are we sanctified
by Father, Son, and holy Ghost: yet sanctification is here ascribed to the
Father, as being the ground and first author thereof. For the Son ne
sanctifies by meriting sanctification; the holy Ghost sanctifies by working
it; but the Father sanctifies, both by sending his Son to merit it, and also
by giving the holy Spirit to work. Thus Opera Trinitatis, the outward works
of God are common to the whole Trinity. Sed opera Trinitatis, quoad intus esse
singularia; the inward works of God are singular, and proper to some persons
of the Trinity: Vt patri potentia, filio redemptio, spiritu sanctificatio
tribuitur; as power is ascribed to the Father, redemption to the Son,
sanctification to the holy Ghost: and yet these three now and then be
attributed to all the three persons. Quod Vrsinus; servato ordine agendi, for
as the Father and the holy Ghost do redeem, and yet mediately by the Son,
so the Father and the Son do sanctify, yet mediately by the Holy Ghost. The
proper or incommunicable works of the Trinity, are the inward eternal and
hypostaticall properties, as thus, Pater generat, the Father begets, the
Son is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeds, Distinction of persons in the
Trinity.
and yet the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the holy
Ghost either Father or Son. The other works of the Trinity are indivisible,
how soever sometimes distinct, as Creation to the Father, Redemption to the
Son, Sanctification to the holy Ghost. Peter Martyr says thus; Pater ut
fons, filius ut flumen, spiritus ut rivus ab utroque procedens; The Father as
the Fountain, the Son as the flood, the Spirit as the River proceeding from
them both. The fountain is not the flood, nor the flood the fountain, nor the
river either fountain or flood, and yet all these be one water. So the Father
is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Spirit either Father or
Son; and yet but one God. Et hi tres sanctificant, and all these three
sanctify: quoth Lactantius. Ab uno omnia, per unum omnia, in uno omnia, a quo,
per quem, in quo omnia, unus a se unus ab uno, unus ab ambobus; una tamen and
eadem operatio? All things from one, all things by one, all things in one: from
whom, by whom, and in whom are all things: one of himself, one from one, one
from both, and yet one and the same operation. Tres sunt in trinitate, non
statu, sed ordine, non essentia, sed forma, non potestate, sed specie, unus
status, essentiae and potestatis, quia sunt unus Deus. There be three persons
in the Trinity, not in state and condition, but in order; not in essence, but
in form; not in power, but in kind: for there is one and the same state of
essence and power, because these three persons be but one God.

But to leave this: The persons of the Trinity are here distinguished: they are
sanctified of God the Father, and reserved unto Jesus Christ. The persons of
the Father and the Son are discerned, as in all other places: Pater quasi
fons exuberans; filius ut rivus defluens; ille ut Sol, hic ut radius; ille ut
os, hic ut vox procedens: nonautem separantur, sicut nec rivus a font, nec
radius a Sole, nec vox abore: quia aqua fontis est in Rivo, and solis lumen in
radio, and oris virtus in voce: The Father, as the fountain abounding, the
Son, as the river flowing; he as the Sun, this as the beam; he as the
mouth, this as the voice proceeding: they are not separated, as neither the
river is separated from the fountain, nor the beam from the Sun, nor the
voice from the mouth, for the water in the fountain is in the river, as the
light of the Sun is in the beam, and the virtue of the mouth in the voice.

The distinction of the persons obscurely delivered in the Old Testament, in
the New is made clearer than the noonday. For at the Baptism of Christ, the
Son was seen: The holy Ghost descended like a Dove. Again, Christ bade them
Baptize, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Again, Mat. 3. 16.
this was Paul's farewell to the Churches: The grace of our Lord Jesus, the love
of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with you, etc. Mat. 28. 19.
Again, Saint John says, That there are three that bear witnessein
Sanctification not available without preservation.
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one:
Also the place, Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the power
of the highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing that shall
be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God; does 1 John 5. 7, 8.
sufficiently prove the Trinity; which places the Confession of Belgia quoted
against Jews, Mahomitans, Marcion, Man's, Sabellius, Samositanus, etc.

The third title of honor here given unto the Elect, is reservation, that they
are reserved unto Christ Jesus; that is (as St. Peter says) They are kept by
the power of God, through faith unto salvation. All former blessings without
this is to small purpose, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
in that God not only calls us, but sanctifies us, and not only so neither,
but also reserveth us in Christ Jesus. This makes Luke 6. 38.
up the measure of our joy, till the Bushel run over. So Paul told the
Corinthians, that God had called them, and would confirm 1 Cor. 1. 8.
them unto the end, that they may be blameless in the day of Lord Jesus. This
is the Anchor of our hope, as the Sun at noone day, as the Moon in the Full,
that God preserves us for ever. He that keeps Israel, does neither slumber
nor sleep; the Lord is thy keeper, the Psalm. 121. 4, 5.
Lord is thy defense upon thy right hand, the Sun shall not burn thee by
day, nor the Moon by night. He that keeps a sick man, sleeps; but he that
keeps us, never sleeps: his eyes are always open day and night, like the
gates of the new Jerusalem. Apoc. 20.
Christ gives this reason why his sheep do not perish: My sheep (says he)
hear my voice, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck John 10. 27, 28.
them out of my hand. Our life is like a Ship in the Sea, beaten with wind,
tossed with waves, turmoyled with all kind of troubles; and were it not that
Christ is in this Ship, we were like to sink, nor with Peter into the Sea, but
with Judas into hell. And this point is most notably handled by Master Calvin,
who affirms, that Gods providence is over all the parts of our life; we
cannot Calvin libro 1. cap. 17. Instit.
(says he) take heat nor cold without danger; by heat we may surfeit, and by
cold catch an ague, if we mount up an horse, In lapsu unius pedis
periclitatur tota vita; in the sliding of one foot is the danger of our life;
if we enter into a Ship, we are but an inch from death; if we walk in the
streets, so many tiles, so many deaths hang over our heads, walk into the
Forests or Fields, so many beasts, so many enemies that conspire our
destruction, shut thy self in a Garden, there a Serpent may kill thee: Latet
anguis in herbis. And to recapitulate all this: Bibulus a noble Roman, riding
thorough the streets in great pomp, a tile fell from the house, and struck
him so deep into the head, that it killed him. Pope Adrian, drinking at a
Fountain, was choked with a fly: Anacreon the Poet was choked with the grain
of a Grape; Gregory the 13. was suddenly strangled with a rheum, and it is
said of Plato, that he dyed in a Gods providence watches over all, especially
his.
dream, and of Publius Crassus, that he dyed laughing. Into these dangers
might we have fallen, if God had not preserved us.

Mavelous is the providence of God in our lives: Job in his misery saw the
want of it, and therefore wished, saying, Oh that I were as in times past, when
God preserved me, when his light shined upon Job. 29. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
my head, and when by his light I walked through the darkness; as I was in
the days of my youth, when Gods providence was upon my Tabernacle, when the
Almighty was with me, and my children round about me; when I washed my paths
with butter, and when the rock powered me out Rivers of Oil, etc. In all the
parts of our life God miraculously preserves us, miraculously does he preserve
us in our conception: and therefore says the just man; Thou have powered me out
like milk, turned me to Curds like Cheese, thou have clothed me with skin
and flesh, and joined me together with bones and sinews; thou have given me
life and grace, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit. Miraculously did
he nourish us in our Mothers womb, Psalm. 8. 2.
miraculously nine months preserved he us; miraculously did he deliver us out
of the womb of our Mother; for at our birth Psalm. 34.
not only women but Angels did assist us; miraculously God keeps us in our
youth: For CHRIST speaking of his little Mat. 18. 10.
ones, says, The Angels of his little ones do always behold the face of his
Father which is in Heaven. Miraculously does he keep us until the day of our
death: Therefore says David, Thou have showed me great troubles and
adversities, but Psalm. 71. 18.
thou will return and revive me, and wilt come again, and take me from the
depth of the earth. Miraculously does he continue his benefits toward us:
Therefore says the sweet Singer of Israel; Cast me not away in the time of my
age, forsake me not when my strength Psalm. 71. 8.
fails me: let it be our Prayer. If God had not as well preserved us and kept
us, it had been to small purpose to call us and sanctify us. This Doctrine
then is a Doctrine of comfort, that God preserves us; it is as David's Harp,
which rejoiced Saul in his melancholy. God has not only made us, but also
preserved us in a wonderful mercy. He tells all our steps. He numbreth Job
14. Psalm. 56. Psalm. 38. Psalm. 139. Psalm. 34. Mat. 10.
our tears. He counts our days and times. He tells our members. He
reckons our bones. Yea he tells our hairs.

Our steps, our tears, our days, our members, our bones, our hayres are told;
and yet all these are but little; a step is but a little space, a tear is
but a little water, a member is but a little flesh, a bone a little substance,
our days a little time, our hair a little exerement; yet all these are kept
of God; he that keeps these little things, will keep our bodies and souls:
As Paul prayed for Thessalonica, Now the very God of peace sanctify you
throughout, and I pray God, that your whole spirit, soul and body may 1 These.
5. 23.
be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord and Savior jesus Christ.
God therefore is continually to be praised: (quoth Ambrose) The Saints though
afflicted yet delivered.
In prosperis, quia consolamnur; in adversis, quia corrigimur; in prosperity,
because we are comforted; in adversity, because we are corrected; before we
were borne, because he made us; after we were borne, because he saves us; in
our sins, because he Ambr. in ora fu. nebri in Theodosium.

Apoc. 2. 10.


pardons us; in our conversion, because he helps us; in our preservation,
because he keeps us and crowns us. But some will say, do we not see good
men take harm, sometime break an arm, a leg; yea, and sometime their
neck? Where is Gods providence? how are they preserved? I say, that GOD
sometime throws them down, and leaves them to themselves, that they may the
better see their weakness and Gods power; and being delivered, glorify him
in it, according to that precept of the Almighty; call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Hereof come all
those tragical Psalm. 50. 15.
speeches of the Saints, that God makes them as Buts, and all his arrows
stick deep in them; that he fears them with Job 7. 12. 14, 19.
dreams, and astonisheth them with visions, and will not give them so much
rest, as to swallow their spettle; that their heart pants; that their
strength fails; the light of their eyes is Psalm. 38. 5. 8. 10.
gone; that their wounds are putrified and corrupt; that they are weakened and
sore broken, and do rore for the very disquietnesse of their hearts; that they
are as water powered out; that all their bones be out of joint; that their heart
is as wax melted Psalm. 22. 14.
in the midst of their bowels; that God bruiseth them as a Lion; like a Crane
or Swallow, so God makes them to chatter, and to mourn like Doves. True it
is, that they be often Esaias. 38. 12, 13. 14.
in peril for a time.

Jacob lies in the Fields.
Genesis 30. 1 Samuel 24. Psalm. 125. Ier. 20. Dan. 3.
David in the Wilderness.
Joseph in Prison.
Jeremy in the Dungeon.
The Three Children in the Oven.
John in the hot Oil at Ephesus.
Elias among Crows.
Moses among Sheep.
1 Reg. 17. Exodus 2. Mat. 12. Dan. 6. Luke 16. Acts 27.
Jonas among Fishes.
Daniel among Lions.
Lazarus among Dogs.
Paul among Snakes.
But at last comes the year of Iubile, and they are freed; the cloud is
dispersed, and the Sun shines; the clay is removed, and the water runs;
the ashes is scattered, and the fire burns; the snare is broken, and the
Birds are delivered. It is God that preserves all things, that he may have the
glory. Psalm. 174. 7.
He kept the old world many years from perishing; and when it was destroyed,
he reserved a seed of 8. persons: He will keep Genesis 8.
this new World in the great burning: For there shall be a new God has
preserved his Scriptures. God preserves Bodies and Souls.
Heaven and a new Earth. He kept the primitive Church from ten great
persecutours, when the rivers were dyed with blood; when five thousand died
every day, except the Calends of January; he kept the Scriptures from
Antiochus (...) and Dioclesian, the one made monthly Inquisition for the
Bibles, and 2 Pet. 3.
beheaded them that kept them; the other commanded all to be burnt, yet Ezra
and they continue to our good; he kept the knowledge of his Name in all the
darkness of the World. For as Josephus says, Adam made two tables of stone,
or pillars, Eusebius. lib. 1.
in the one he wrote, Hominis lapsum, Man's fall: In the other Promissionem de
Messia, the promise of the Messiah; and so that (...).
continues to this day: he kept the Religion in the days of Queen Mary, as
he kept the Law in the days of Manasses and Amon; two or three Berries were
left on the top of the tree, some grapes after the vintage, some ears of corn
after the gleaning. He kept our late blessed Queen, when Stephen Gardener
bad, Hew at the root, and when some others used her roughly, when the plot of
her death was laid. Let our Souls praise the Lord, and Psalm. 103.
all that is within us, praise his holy name.

God preserved the Fathers, Egypt received Athanasius from exile, having been
seven years in a Cisterne at Treveris: France received Hilary, returning from
battle: Antioch received Chrysostom, from the malice of Arcadius, and
Eudoxia: Italy welcomed Eusebius, from exile: and Millaine entertained Ambrose,
from the rage of Valentinian and Iustina; God preserves the World, and all men
in it; and this preservation of the World is greater, than the Creation of the
World, greater than the Ios. 10. John 2. John 6.
drying up of the red Sea, greater than the standing of the Sun and Moon
in Aialon, greater than the turning of Water into Wine, greater than the
feeding of five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes: Et tamen haec
omnes mirantur, non quia majora, sed quia rariora: Vilescunt miracula, and Dei
opera assiduitate; And yet all men wonder at these things, not because they
August. Tract. 24. in John.
be greater, but because they be rarer Miracles, and the works of God wax
vile by assiduitie. August. Oh brethren! It is as great a work of God to keep
us in body from the Devil: For if he might have his mind, he would tear us
in a thousand pieces; and there should not be a man left a live upon the
Earth. He that deceived Eva, he that slew Jobs children and Genesis 3. Job 1. 1
Reg. 22. Act. 19. Tob. 3.
cattle, he that was a lying Spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets, he
that wounded the seven sons of Sceva a Jew, overcame them and prevailed, he
that killed Sara her seven husbands, in seven nights, would kill us every
night, if God kept us not. Let us therefore commit our selves to God.
Tertullian says, Tertul. libro de Patientia.
Si injuriam apud Deum deposueris, ultor est; si dolorem, consolator est; si
morbus, medicus est; si damnum, restitutor est; si mortem, resuscitator est. If
thou indurest wrong for Christ sake, he is a revenger; if sorrow, God
preserves bodies and souls.
he is a comforter; if sickness, he is a Physician; if loss, he is a
restorer; if death, he is a reviver, he is the resurrection and the life. He
is (quoth one) in our sickness a restorer; in our prisonment, a deliverer; in
our sail, a mariner; in our cities, a Mat. 9. Psalm. 146. Psalm. 107. Psalm.
127. Exodus 15. Act. 17. 1 Cor. 13. Psalm. 30. 5.
watchman; in our buildings, a carpenter; in our battles, a soldier; in our
life, a keeper; in our death, a restorer. Blessed be God who always keeps
us. In how many Agues, Palsies, Gouts, Apoplexies, has God kept us? in how
many sick nights, has he watched at our bed side, and joy has come in the
morning?

But if I would speak of our spiritual Deliverance, Preservation from Satan,
in our Souls; Where shall I begin? or Where shall I end? Dies citius quam
dicta, tempora citius quam verba deficerent: The day sooner than words, the
time sooner than speech should fail me. A most large field is offered me to
walk in; but I will confine my self. God has kept us in Soul from the great
sins of the World; though we cannot say with Christ, Which of you can accuse
me of sin? yet we can say, who can accuse us of notorious, gross, open
sins. Wherein we have been scandalous to the Church of God? John 8. 46.
We are content to walk by good report, and evil report: and are loath to
give occasion of offense in any thing. August. has a patheticall speech, to
noto how God keeps us in Soul: Quantum (inquit) debeo diligere Deum? redimit
me, cum perieram; quando ignoravi, 2 Cor. 6. 3.
docuit me; quando erravi, reduxit me; quando peccavi, corripuit me; quando
cecidi, erexit me; quando steti, tenuit me; quando ivi, deduxit Aug.
me; quando veni, suscepit me; quando clamavi, exaudivit me; How much am I
bound to love God? I had perished, if he had not redeemed me; when I was
ignorant, he taught me; when I erred, he reduced me; when I sinned, he
corrected me; when I fell, he erected me; when I stood, he held me; when I
went, he led me; when I came, he received me; and when I cried, he heard me.
Therefore this was Saint Augustines prayer, Custodi me Domine, hic and ubique,
nunc and semper, intus and foris, ante and retro, circum circa; in me nullus
pateat locus insidiis Diaboli. Preserve me o Lord here and every where; now and
ever; within Aug. lib. Medit.
and without; before and behind; round about me; that no place may lie open
for the snares of the Devil. Christ praying for his Apostles, and in them for
us, says thus; I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou keep them from evil. If God kept us not in Soul, the Devil would
destroy us all; John 17. 15.
not a man in the World should be saved, all should go to Hell, note his
malice to Adam; he was by Satan's envy, formed and deformed, made and marred in
one day; he lodged not (say the Fathers) one night in Innocence.

We read of one in the Gospel, that had a deaf Devil, of another that had a
dumb Devil, of Mary Magdalen, that had seven Devils: of a man that had a
legion of Devils, that is, No safety from Satan except God preserve.
eight hundred Devils: For a Legion contains five hundred footmen, and three
hundred horsemen. Ecce tetendit Satanas ante pedes nostros laqueos insinitos,
etc. Behold, Satan lays before Mar. 2. Luke 5. Luke 7. Luke 8. August. in
soliloq.
our feet (says Augustine) infinite snares, he fills our ways with
deceits to catch our poor Souls. He lays snares for us in Riches, in
Poverty, in Meat, in Drink, in Sleep, in Waking, in Word, and Work, and in
every thing. In Riches, we are proud; in Poverty, we murmur and steal; in
Meat, we surfeit; in Drink, we are drunken; in Dreams, we wander, etc. It
is reported of Anthony, that on a time looking up to Heaven; he saw all full
of snares, and he cried out; Who shall deliver us? Answer was made. I the
Lord will deliver you. Oh then let us always pray with Augustine, Dominetur
carni anima, animae ratio, rationi gratia, etc. Let the Soul rule the Flesh,
Reason the Soul, Grace Reason, and subdue me to thy will Lord, both within
and without: sharpen my Tongue, to sound forth thy praises, illuminate my
mind, enlarge my heart to receive thee, give me a wise and understanding
heart, etc.

Iovem and Iunonem a juvando dictos esse, ait Cicero: Cicero says, that
Jupiter and Juno were so called, a iuvando, of helping: Sed hoc in Deum (quoth
Lactantius) optime quadrat, but this, says Lactantius, Lactan. lib. 1. cap. 10.
does best of all befit God, Qui juvat, servat, salvat, who both helps us,
keeps us, and saves us, who by Faith Ephesians. 8. 17.
quenches all the fiery darts of the Devil. That we have not filled our eyes
with vanity, our ears with slander, nor our mouths with blasphemy, nor our
bellies with gluttony, nor our bodies with lechery, nor our hands with bribery,
it is Gods work. For seeds of all sin are in us by nature, and we are no
better than others; but he reserveth and keeps us: we need not then fear
what man can do unto us. Nay Ephesians. 2. 4.
we need not fear the day of Death, or the day of Judgment. For in the last
day it shall be said to every one reserved and kept of God, Hodie mecum eris in
Paradiso, this day shall thou be with Luke 23.
me in Paradise. And in the last day of the World to them all, Venite
benedicti, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom Mat. 25. 34.
prepared for you: and therefore as the Heart desires the water-brookes, so
long their Souls after God, their Souls after God, yea after the living God,
and they cry day and night, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Thou which art our
Lord by right of creation, by right of redemption, by right of gubernation,
Apoc. 22.
by right of preservation, Come, come away quickly, and crown us with glory,
receive us into thy kingdom, where is Gaudium sine fine, sine metu finis, Joy
without end, without fear of end. Thus much of the Persons saluted, their
vocation, sanctification and reservation to Jesus Christ.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
VERSE. II. Mercy unto you, and Peace and Love, etc. Mercy, Peace, and Love
from Father, Son, and holy Ghost.



I Am now come to the Salutation, wherein the Apostle wishes and prays for
three things.

1 Mercy. 2 Peace. 3 Love.
Three things more excellent than Mat. 2.
the three gifts, which the Wisemen bestowed on Christ; Gold, Frankincense, 2 Samuel 23.
and Myrrh; three things more puissant to overthrow the Devil, than the three
mighty men that were in the host of Israel to overthrow the Philistines, and
to fetch water out of the well of Bethelem, that David longed for; three things
more comely, than the three things that Solomon commended, that is, a Lion
Prove. 30.
among beasts, a Gray-hound, and a Goat.

Mercy, which is the first thing here wished for, is ascribed to God, the
Creator; Peace, which is the second, to Christ, the 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 14.
Romans 5. 5.
Reconciler; Love, which is the third, to the holy Ghost, the Comforter. For
God he is called, The Father of Mercies, Christ is called, Our Peace, and the
holy Ghost, Love. The Apostle therefore in saying, Mercy, Peace, and Love be
multiplied, is as if he should have said; The God of Mercy forgive you your
sins, the God of Peace give you Peace that passes all understanding, and the
God of Love grant that your Love may abound more and more, that ye may be
rooted and grounded in Love.

And yet all this proceeds from one and the same person; General and
special Mercies of God.
for albeit Mercy be ascribed to the Father, Peace to the Son, and Love to
the holy Ghost: Creation to the Father, Redemption to the Son, and
Sanctification to the holy Ghost, yet all these create, redeem, and sanctify.
For we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; we confound neither
the persons, nor yet their work.

Mercy be unto you, Mercy in God is not passive, but active, Non quoad
affectum, sed quoad effectum. No suffering with us in our wants, but succouring
us in them.

Mercy is here taken for grace and the mere favor of God: The Apostle
therefore in wishing Mercy, Peace and Love to the Saints, teaches us, Quales
esse debent Christianorum salutationes, nos literis nostris and epistolis,
honorem, opulentiam, salutem, longam vitam amicis optamus, Judas vero,
misericordiam, pacem, charitatem, and dona coelestia, his tribus, Ecclesia opus
est, aliter, actum esset. And first he begins with Mercy: For instead of
Grace used by the Apostle Paul in sundry of his Epistles, Jude here names
Mercy, which is all one; Mercy and Grace is that, whereby all good is conveyed
to us: therefore an excellent blessing to be prayed for, and this Grace and
Mercy of God is fourefold:

1 General.

2 Special.

3 Temporal.

4 Eternal.

The general Grace and Mercy of God, are those graces and mercies, that he
bestows upon all men; Hence is it, that he causes, the Sun to shine upon
good and bad, and his Rain to fall upon the just and unjust: For there be
some good things, which God gives indifferently both to the good and bad, as
Riches, Honor, Strength, Beauty, Health, etc. And there be some good things,
which God gives only to the good, and not to the wicked; as saving Faith,
saving Grace, a new Heart, a right Spirit, peace of Conscience, joy in the holy
Ghost, eternal Life: And there are some evil things, whereof the good taste
as well as the bad; as Sickness, Sorrow, Weakness of body; Imprisonment,
Famine, Sword, loss of Friends, etc. And there are some evil things which God
lays upon the wicked, and not upon the good; as intolerable horror of
conscience, desperation, Psalm. 104. 17, 18.
damnation, etc. This general Grace and Mercy of God is over all his cratures,
the Fowls of the Air, the Fishes in the Psalm. 145. 9.
Sea, the beasts of the Fields; His Mercy is over all his Works.

His special Mercy is that, whereby he succoureth his elect. This was the
Mercy of God, that preserved Lot, from the burning of Sodom; Daniel, from the
devouring jaws of the hungry Genesis 19.
Lions; David, from the cruelty of Saul; and the Israelites, Dan. 6.
from the fiery Furnace. This is that Grace and Mercy, which the child of God
above all things desires. Lord lift thou up Psalm. 4.
the light of thy countenance upon us.

His temporal Mercy is that whereby he spares sinners, and stands at
their doors, expecting and waiting their conversion. Temporal and eternal
Mercies.
Hereupon one descanteth very finely, saying, When vain pleasure bids us to
sell God, and be gone, his Mercy and Grace will not so part with us; when we
are lost in our selves his Mercy and Grace finds us out; when we lie long in
our sins, his Mercy and Grace raises us up: when we come unto him, his
Mercy and Grace receives us; when we come not, his Mercy and Grace draws
us; when we repent, his Mercy and Grace pardons us; when we repent not, his
Mercy and Grace waits our repentance.

The eternal Mercy and Grace of God is that, which concerns our everlasting
Salvation; and this is that Mercy and Grace principally wished for, By Grace
we are saved through Faith, not of Ephesians. 2.
our selves, for it is the gift of God.

This word Mercy or Grace teaches us to look up unto God, not unto our
selves, if we look to be saved; we choose not the Lord, but he us, Vt salus
esset penes figulum, non penes lutum: Aug.
Paul ascriberh all to Grace and Mercy, By the Grace of God (says he) I am
that I am, and his Grace which is in me, was not in vain: and thus he taught
the Romans: At this present, there is a remnant through the election of Grace;
and if it be of Grace, it is no more of Works, or Romans 11. 5, 6.
else Grace were no more Grace; but if it be of Works, it is no more Grace,
or else were work no more work: an invincible Argument.

Peter lets the Jews see, Terminum a quo, and terminum ad quem pervenerunt;
their state under the Law, and under Grace. He has called you (says Saint
Peter) out of darkness into his mavelous 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
light, which in times past were not a people, but now the people of God: which
in times past were not under Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. We have not
loved God, but he us, Venit medicus ad aegrotos, via ad errantes, lux ad
tenebras, vita ad mortuos, redemptor ad Bern.
captivos: The Physician came unto the sick, the way to wanderers, light to
darkness, life to the dead, a redeemer to the captives. We were sick, he
healed us; we wandered, he reduced us; we were blind, he lightend us; we
were slaves, he redeemed us: No man comes to the Father but by him. John 14.
6.


This is not only that general (...) Mercy and Grace of God, which pertains
to all creatures, Beasts, Foul, Fishes, whereof I spoke before: but this is
(...) peculiar to man only: the Scripture calls it, (...) the riches of his
bountifulness, etc. For The Lord is rich in Mercy: rich in mercy, because
Ephesians. 2. 4.
the treasury of his Mercy and Grace is never exhausted, the fountain never
dried up; rich in Mercy, because he never cease to communicate the riches of
his Mercy and Grace to us; rich in Mercy, because he pardons all our sins
upon our true repentance; rich in Mercy, because he not only pardons al our
sins upon our true repentance, but gives us repentance, and The abundant
riches of Gods mercies.
faith to believe the remission of our sins; rich in mercy, because he gives
us privative grace to escape evils, and positive enabling us to do good;
finally, rich in mercy, because he preventeth us with mercy and grace, before
we seek him, and follows us with mercy and grace when we have found him.

Bernard in a certain Sermon, makes mention of a sevenfold De Evang. septem
panum.
mercy or grace, which (he says) each child of God may find in himself.

The first is a preventing mercy or grace, by which the Lord preserves his
Elect from falling into gross evils; Fateor and fatebor (says he) nisi quia
Deus adiuvit me paulo minus cecidisset in omne peccatum anima mea; I do and
will ingeniously confess, that unless the Lord had preserved me by grace, my
soul had gone near to have fallen into all sin.

The second is his forbearing mercy or grace, whereby the Lord waits for the
conversion of a sinner: in regard whereof, the same Author writes thus; Ego
peccabam, and tu dissimulas; non continebam a sceleribus, and tu a verberibus
abstinebas, I sinned, O Lord, and thou seem not to regard it, I contained
not my self from wickedness, and thou abstainest from scourging me for the
same.

The third is an altering and changing mercy or grace, which makes a man settled
in the resolution of holiness, whereas before he was profane, and loose in
behavior.

The fourth is an embracing mercy or grace, whereby God assures the Convert of
his favor.

The fifth is a confirming mercy or grace, which strengthens and upholdeth the
righteous in his goodness.

The sixth is a mercy or grace, that sets him in hope and expectation of glory.

The seventh is a crowning mercy or grace, which is the Livery and seisin, and
full possession of the Kingdom of heaven.

Thus the LORD has seven mercies or graces, nay seventy times seven mercies,
even an innumerable multitude of compassions; all which Saint Jude here wishes
unto the Saints; by which it appears how great a blessing the Apostle wishes
in wishing mercy. Mercy be unto you.

For indeed all that we have is of mercy; not of merit, of favor, not of
debt; of grace, not of nature. It is his mercy that we Lament. 3. 2.
be not consumed: therefore when we pray, let this be our petition, O God be
merciful unto me a sinner: and when we give thanks, let Luke 18. 13. Psalm. 36.
this be the foot of our Song, For his mercy indureth for ever; For his mercy
indureth for ever.

His mercy is Communis peccantium portus, the common harbor of all penitent
sinners: For it is not the wisdom God, nor his power, noriustice that
preserves us from destruction, but his mercy. So many idle words uttered in a
day, so many vain Mercy that we are not consumed.
thoughts conceived, so many evil works committed; I speak positively, and
now privatively; so few prayers in us, so few thankesgiving, so few alms, so
weak faith, so little knowledge, so cold zeal, so small love; It is not a
mercy, but a miracle, that we are not all consumed, that the air infecteth us
not, as it did Judah; that the heavens rain not down fire and brimstone, 2 Samuel 24.
as they did upon Sodom; that the clouds open not and drown us all, as they
did the old world; that the earth does not open Genesis 19.
and swallow us all, as it did Dathan; such pride in the rich, such envy in
the poor, such peevishness in age, such riot in youth, Genesis 6. Numb. 16.
such robbery on the land, such piracy on the Sea, such impiety in the Church,
such injury in the Commonwealth, such wickedness and Atheism in all; it is a
rare mercy that we be not all consumed.

The Angels desire an end of this evil world, the Saints departed wish the
accomplishment of the Elect, the number full, the body of Christ made perfect.
The Saints in earth cry, Veni Esa. 6. Apoc. 6. Apoc. 22.
Domine Jesus, veni cito; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Why do we not desire
to be loosed, that as we are partakers of his general, special, and
temporal mercies and graces here: so we may be partakers of his eternal
mercies in heaven.

The second blessing, which the Apostle prays for, is peace; which is taken
three ways:

First, for external peace between man and man.

Secondly, for internal peace, betwixt God and man, peace of conscience.

Thirdly, for prosperity, and the happy event of all things.

And in all these significations it may be taken in this place, in a godly
sense; if we take it in the first sense, it is a notable blessing, and to be
prayed for of all men, as Jude does here: for peace is the ornament of all
places, as a Crown of gold upon their head, the Kingdom of Christ is adorned
by it. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with
Esa. 11. 6. 7. 9.
the Kid, and the Calfe and the Lion and the fat beast together, and a little
Child shall lead them, and the Cow and the Bear shall feed together, their
young ones shall lie together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock,
and the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned
child shall put his hand upon the Cockatrice hole, then shall none hurt nor
destroy in all the Mountain of my holiness. Here men by reason of their
cruel affections are called by the name of beasts; but Christ by his Spirit
shall so reform them, and work in them such mutual peace and unity, that they
shall be as Lambs favoring and loving one another, and cast away all their
cruel affections. And again, the Prophet speaking of the Kingdom of Christ,
says, They shall break their swords into mattocks, and their spears into
sithes, Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither Mich. 4. 3, 4.
shall they learn to fight any more, but they shall sit every man under his
Peace both good and pleasant.
Vine and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid; meaning that
peace and unity shall flourish among them, and division and dissension shall be
utterly banished.

Our God is the God of peace; the Devil on the contrary is Heb. 13. 20.
the Author of all dissension; it was he that caused division between Abimelech
and the men of Sichem. He was a murderer Ind. 9. 23.
from the beginning: But God is the Author of peace; Litigiosi John 6. 44.
ergo non sunt ex Deo; Contentious persons therefore are not of God: For God is
not the author of confusion, but of peace. Peace is one fruit of the Spirit: so
says the Apostle, The fruits of the Spirit 1 Cor. 14. 33.
are love, joy, peace, etc. but no peace, no Spirit of God. Paul is not
earnester in any thing, than in moving men to embrace peace: Writing to the
Philippians he says thus; If there be any Phil. 2. 1, 2.
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy that ye be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment, that nothing
be done through contention or vainglory, etc. And again, I pray Phil. 4. 2.
Evodias, and beseech Syntiches, that they be of one accord in the Lord. This
was Christ's Ave and Vale ever, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you: Dulce nomen pacis, res ipsa tum jucunda, tum salutaris; the very name of
peace is sweet and comfortable, the fruit and effect thereof pleasant and
profitable; Innumeris potior triumphis, more to be desired than innumerable
Triumphs. This blessed peace is the language of heaven; the Angels brought it
from heaven: Glory in the highest heavens to God, in earth peace, toward Luke
2.
men good will. This is the Legacy which Christ bequeathed to his Disciples;
Pacem meam do vobis, My peace I give unto John 20. 19.
you; this was the usual salutation of the Jews, Shenim Vbenim, peace be unto
you: this is one of those special blessings, which all the Apostles in all
their salutations pray for; Grace be with you and peace: this David
commends; O quam bonum, and quam Gal. 1. 9.
jucundum, O how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together
in unity; it is not bonum and non jucundum, good Psalm. 133. 1.
and not pleasant, or jucundum and non bonum, pleasant and not good, but bonum
and jucundum, good and pleasant. There be some things that be bona sed non
jucunda, good and not pleasant, as patience and discipline; some things be
jucunda sed non bona; pleasant but not good, as voluptuousness carnal
pleasure; some things are nec bona nec jucunda, neither good nor pleasant, as
envy, worldly sorrow, etc. and there be some things, and bona and iucunda,
which are both good and pleasant, as peace, honesty, charity. This peace Christ
commends to his Disciples; Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with
another: this was a Mar. 13.
piece of the blessing which God taught the high Priest, that God would grant
them his peace. When GOD would have a Numb. 6. 6.
Temple builded for his worship, he would not have it in David's 2 Samuel 7. 5.
time, because it was troublesome, and full of War: but in the Contention
cause of Destruction.
days of Solomon, who is interpreted Rex pacis, the King of Peace. When Christ
came into the World, it was in the days of Augustus, when the whole World was
at Peace; and Christ is the corner Luke 2.
stone, making peace among men. Tale bonum est bonum pacis, Aug.
ut in rebus creatis nihil gratiosius soleat audiri, nihil delectabilius
concupisci, nihil utilius possideri, such and so great a good, is the good of
Peace, that among all the things created, nothing is heard of more acceptable,
nothing desired which is more delectable, nothing possessed more profitable;
Peace is the sweetest harmony that ever sounded, the strongest bond that ever
united political bodies together, the chiefest prop, pillar and preservative
of common wealths. Cum alii sunt pacem recipientes, alii retinentes, alii
facientes; when some embrace Peace, others retain it, others make it.

Let us therefore, Brethren, Be diligent to keep the unity of the Ephesians. 4.
3, 4, 5.
spirit in the bond of peace, being one body and one spirit, even as we are
called into one hope of our calling. For there is but one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father over all, which is above all, through all, and in us all.
For contention breeds division, and division is the mother of destruction,
here and ever hereafter, here it impoverisheth us; so says the Apostle, If ye
bark one at another, and bite one another, ye shall at last be devoured one
of another: the end of Gal. 5. 15.
barking is biting, the end of contention is consumption, the end of dissension
destruction. This Christ lays out by two similitudes, saying, Every Kingdom
divided against it self shall be Mat. 12. 25.
brought to naught, and every City or House divided against it self cannot
stand, hereafter it damneth us. For unto them that are contentious and disobey
the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, etc. Herein the Devils are wiser than Men, Est
Daemonum legio concors, there is an agreement among Aug.
the Devils. In Mary Magdalen, of seven; in another of a whole leagion: and
Christ says, That if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself,
and how shall his Kingdom endure? The Devils Mat. 12. 26. Luke 11. 15.
agree in mischief, and they all obey one head to do a mischief: Conyes are
but small things, yet joining together, they overthrow the Isles of Anaph,
Maiorica, and Minorica. The Cranes are not great, but being conjoined they
beat the Pigmae, Herrings are but little, yet their forces being put together,
overturne a great ship. Gnats are but small creatures, yet many being united
together, drove back Julian the Apostata. Rats are not great yet many of them
together devoured Hatto of Moguncia. Hist. tripart.
Our bodies stand of four contrary Elements, Fire, Water, Air, Earth; but
because they are combined together, therefore live we well, but if there be a
jarre among them, that one overcome another, the body then perishes by and by.

What shall I say then of these brawling, sewing, wrangling spirits; they are
like the Salt pillar, that Lots wife was turned Genesis 45.
unto; they be of a salt and fiery humor, like the seven blasted Motive to
true Peace.
ears, that consumed the full ears; like the seven lean kine that eat up
the fat; like the worm that smote Jonas wild gourd, they hurt themselves and
others also, they strive in the law, like the mouse and the frogge for the
marish ground, till the kite swee^s them both away, till the Lawyer eat them
both up; they are like Fools that bore holes in ships to let out the water,
and to let in the whole Sea; so to gain six pence, they will spend six pounds,
and at last die beggars. As the Friars of old lived of the ignorance of the
people: so the Lawyers now live of the sin and malice of the people; they, as
the Locusts, eat up all. Wherefore if ye love your wealth; Seek peace and
ensue Psalm. 34. 14. Romans 12. 18.
it, and if it be possible as much as in you lies, have peace with all men.
Remember that our God is the God of peace; Christ the Prince of peace; Angels
the messengers of peace; the Ministers, the preachers of peace; the
Magistrates, defenders of peace, and that we are the children of the God of
peace. Let us have therefore peace amongst our selves; not polluted peace, such
as was anong David's enemies, which laid wait for his soul, and took Psalm.
71. 10. 2 Samuel 13. 28.
counsel together against him; nor counterfeite peace, as was between Absalom
and Ammon: for Absalom prepared a feast for Ammon his brother, but caused him
to be murdered in the midst of the banquet. So the Spaniards, in 88. treated
of peace, but prepared themselves to war: nor inordinate peace: for of this
peace says our Savior, I came not to bring peace into the world, but a sword:
nor peace with sin, the world and the flesh: For this is the Devils peace.

Of every of these kinds of peace, I say with a Father; Melior est talis pugna
quae proximum facit Deo, quam illa pax quae separat a Greg. Nazian.
Deo; Better is that fight and conflict, which makes a man draw near to God,
than that peace which separates a man from God; such agreement is not union,
but conspiracy. Our peace therefore must be a Christian peace; and this peace
has for her elder sister, Righteousness: So says David, Iustitia and pax
osculatae sunt; Righteousness and peace have kissed each other: Psalm. 85. 10.
As Augustine upon the place, fiat justitia, and habebis pacem; if thou will
have peace, work righteousness so peace shall be within thy walls, and
plenteousnesse, within thy palaces.

Secondly, peace is taken for the quietness and peace of conscience betwixt
God and man; and of this peace the Apostle speaks thus; Being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God. This Romans 5. 1.
peace passes all understanding, the tongues of men and Angels cannot utter
it; the goodness of this peace cannot be perceived by the eye, nor received by
the ear, nor conceived by the heart; yet the ear can hear much, as Saul
asleep heard David; and 2 Samuel 24. Sap. 1. 10.
The ear of Jealousy hears all things. The eye can see further: for Moses
saw Canaan from the top of Pisgah. The tongue can utter more than the eye can
see; so Achitophels mouth was as an Oracle Peace of conscience most excellent.
of God. The heart can conceive more, than the tongue can utter; so Salomons
heart is said to be large, like the sands of the Sea; yet cannot our eyes, nor
ears, nor hearts comprehend this peace. It passes all understanding. It is
nothing to have all peace, and to Phil. 4. 7.
want the peace of God, the peace of conscience. It is nothing to have 900.
chariots of Iron, with Sisera; to have stately buildings Judge. 4. Dan. 4. Act.
4.
with Nabuchadonezer; to have the applause of the people with Herod; to plant
orchardes, to dig fountains, to water gardens, to heap and gather gold, to
provide men singers, with Solomon; to have all pleasures, with Xerxes, and to
want this peace. For Sisera died miserably; Nabuchadonezer was turned into a
beast; Herod was eaten of lice: Solomon called all delights, vanities; and
Xerxes promised reward to him, that could find him out a new pleasure. Qua tum
inventa non fuit contentus; Which being invented, yet he was not contented.

Has God given thee house and lands, wife and children, menservants, and
maidservants? Have thou thy coffers full, with Croesus? thy purse full with
Dives? thy barnes full with the Epulo? thy grounds full with Job? thy stable
full, with Solomon? and thy table full with Balthazar? yet all is nothing
without this peace; and therefore look into thy heart: Is there peace between
God and thee? as he said finely; Is it peace Iehu? is there not Intus vermis? a
worm within biting thy conscience? if there 1 Reg.
be, look to thy self, suffer not thine eyes to sleep, nor thy eye-liddes to
take any rest, until thy peace be made with God, and thy pardon sealed; O
pray, pray, that thou may have this peace, it is the peace of peace, and
without it there can be no peace. The name of peace between man and man is
sweet, like the precious ointment upon the head of Aaron, that ran down unto
his beard, and from his beard unto the skirts of his clothing, but this peace
of conscience is far sweeter. Judge Convivium, a continual Pro. 15. 15.
Feast, a daily Christmas unto a good man. This peace the godly seek: so says
David; mark the upright man, and behold the just for the end of that man is
peace, but the transgressors shall be destroyed Psalm. 37. 37, 38.
together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off. The comparison is, inter
pium and impium, between the godly and the ungodly man; the end of the godly
man is peace, when he goes to bed, he says, I will lay me down in peace,
and take my rest: When he Esa. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Luke 2.
rises, He is careful to be found in peace. When he is sick he says, Lord
let thy servant depart in peace. Let us then be diligent to be found in peace,
then shall we see hell abolished, death trodden under feet, the first sorrow
cast out into shame, immortality shall lengthen our days, and the glory of
God shall be before us as in a glass. This testimony is true, the Heavens have
sealed unto it, and the living God has spoken it of the Sons of men; and
blessed are we, if we do believe it. There is more happiness in one day in
Gods service, than in ten thousand days of vanities, No peace to the wicked.
in which we fall from the Lord of life: One day in thy Courts (says David) is
better than a thousand other where: I had rather be a door keeper in the house
of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness.

Sed impiis non est pax; there is no peace unto the wicked, their hearts never
rest, they are never quiet, their sin lies at the doors, Esa. 57. 20. Genesis
4. 7.
always dogging them, and ever ready to pull out the very throat of their
souls. As good men have the first fruits of the Spirit, and certain tastes of
heavenly joys in this life. So on the contrary, the wicked have certain
flashings of hell-flames on earth, and are as the sea, which always rages and
never rests. And as the good man when he dies, bequeatheth his body which is
earthly to the earth; and sins which are divellish unto the Devil, and his
goods that are worldly to the world, and his soul that is heavenly to heaven:
So the wicked when he dies, bequeatheth his goods to the world, his body to
the earth, his soul to the Devil. But some will say, The wicked are merry and
quiet, none so merrry as they, they sing like birds in May, like Nightingales
in a clear night.

I must distinguish, and say, that some wicked are blockish and senseless like
swine, their consciences are seared like dead flesh; Mat. 7. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 2.
others are desperate, having an hell in their conscience, trembling like Agag:
but yet both states damnable. For is the fish that skippeth in the net? or the
bird that sings in the snare? or the prisoner that is merry in the iayle in
any good case? No, 1 Samuel 13. 1 These. 5. 3. Esa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 2. 17.
no: Even so is it with the wicked: when They cry peace, peace, sudden
destruction shall come upon them, as upon a Woman in travel: But there is
peace to the godly: Peace shall come, they shall rest in their beds, etc.
Christ is their peace. Pacem Evangelizavit iis qui prope, iis qui procul: he
preached peace unto them that are near, and unto them that are afar off. To
this end he died, rose again, ascended into heaven; the first was the lowest
step of his humiliation in earth, the second the highest step of his
exaltation in earth, the third the highest step of his glorification in
heaven; In the first he suffered, in the second he conquered, in the third he
triumphed; the first took away sin, and destroyed death, and him that had
the Lordship of Death: The second brought Righteousness, for he rose again
for our justification: The third Heb. 2. 14. Romans 4. 25.
brings glory, and all to this end, to make peace between God and man.

Thirdly, peace is taken for prosperity and happy success of all things; as
in the Psalm, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall Psalm. 122. 6.
prosper that love thee; peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnesse be
within thy palaces. Peace and plenty are here Synonymies, the one opens the
other, he prays for plentiful peace, or peaceable plenty. God has promised
his Church this peace (saying,) The Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in
the fruit of thy body, in the Prosperity is termed peace.
fruit of thy cattle, in the fruit of thy ground, the Lord shall open unto
thee his good treasure, even the Heaven to give rain unto thy land in due
season, and to bless all the works of thy hands, thou shall lend to many
Deuter. 28. 11, 12, 13.
nations, and not borrow thy self. The Lord shall make thee the head, and not
the tail, and thou shall be above only, and not beneath, etc. Jacob blessing
Judas, says, That he shall bind his Ass fool to the Vine, and his Asses colt
to the best Vine, he shall wash his garments in wine, and his Cloak with the
Genesis 49. 11, 12.
blood of the grape: that is, he shall have all prosperity: and this
prosperity Jude wishes unto them (saying,) peace be multiplied upon you. Esaias
prophesied of the wealth and abundance of the Church (saying,) Thou shall suck
the milk of the Gentiles, and shall Esa. 60. 16, 17.
suck the breasts of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior,
and thy redeemer the mighty one of Jacob: For brass I will bring gold, and
for Iron I will bring thee silver, and for stones Iron: I will also make thy
government peace, and thine exactors righteousness, violence shall no more be
heard in thee, neither desolation nor destruction, etc. And God wishes that
his Church had hearkened to his commandments, Then had thy prosperity been
as the Flood, and thy righteousness as the Waves of the Sea. In six evils God
would have delivered Esa. 48. 18. Job. 5. Psalm. 65. 11. Mal. 3. Job. 1. Genesis
26. 1 Reg. 10. 27.
it, the clouds shall drop fatness upon it; God would open the windows of
heaven, and power down a blessing with plenteousnesse. God has enriched the
members of his Church in all ages, as Job in Huz, Isaac in Gerar, Solomon in
Israel, who had silver as stones.

Yea this peace and plenty is proper and peculiar to the Church only, to the
godly; the wicked have no right nor interest in the blessings of the earth: For
the elects sake God made Genesis 1. 1 Timothy 4. 8. John 3. Mar. 13. Apo. 6. Romans 8.
the world; For them he enriched it; for them he redeemed it, for their sakes
he preserves it, for their sakes he deferreth his coming to judge this
world. That the wicked enjoy air, fire, water, let them thank the godly, who
are coheires with Christ in all things: the wicked are usurpers intruders into
all Gods blessings, they have no right to any furrow or foot of land. The
faithful only are coheires with Christ, in whose right they are invested into
all the benefits of this life. Thou art no more a servant but a Son, (says
Paul) now if thou be a Son, those art also the heir of Gal. 4. 7.
God through Christ. As a bastard has no inheritance among the legitimate
Children; So the wicked, as bastards, have no inheritance among the faithful.
They may say of God and heaven, as the ten Tribes said of David and his
Kingdom. What portion have we in David? we have no inheritance in the Son of
Ishai. So they have no portion in heaven, no inheritance in the Son of God,
Christ Jesus; they are Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from
the Covenant and promise: But the godly have right and interest in earth, and
heaven also; In their elder brother Christ Jesus, heaven is theirs, heaven and
earth is theirs, land and sea are theirs, yea all theirs, men and Angels are
subject unto them. Prosperity often hurt to the Church.
All things are ours, (says the Apostle,) whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or the World, or Life, or death: Whether they be things present, or
things to come, even all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ 1 Cor. 3.
21, 22, 23. Psalm. 112. 6, 7. 9.
Gods, (an elegant Climax or gradation.) For he rises by steps. Such a like
figure, (...); is 2 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Obiter now, that peace and plenty are so
far given unto the Church as is profitable for it, and expedient for the
setting out of Gods glory. The Church sometime eats ashes as bread, and
mingleth her drink with weeping, she is as a Pelicane in the wilderness, and
like an Owl, that is in the desert: She is as a Sparrow, that sits alone
upon the house top, and her enemies revile her all the day long; Sometime she
is eaten up like a Sheep, and scattered among the Heathen, she is sold for
naught and made a rebuke, Psalm. 44. 9. 11, 12.
rebuked of her neighbors, laughed to scorn and derided of all: Nay, sometime
she is smitten into the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of death.

The Church is oftentimes more hurt by plenty, than penury, according to the
voice in Constantines days: Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam; this day
is poison powered into the Hierom.
Church. The Church, when it came to Christian Princes to be defended, Major
erat divitiis, virtutibus minor.

Again, God puts off her sackcloath and girdeth her with gladness. He
gives her beauty for ashes, and rich apparel instead of sackcloath, Psalm. 30.
12. Esa. 61. 3.
as he sees it expedient. Non audit ad voluntatem, ut audiat ad salutem.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
VERSE. II. And Love be multiplied. Gods love the cause of all good.



THe third and last blessing, which the Apostle here prays for, is Love,
which of some learned men is thought to be the cause of Mercy and Peace: For
Mercy and Peace are the fruits of Love; Love is the fountain, Mercy and Peace
the water that flows from the fountain; Love is as the mother, Mercy and
Peace as her daughters; Love as the cause, Mercy and Peace as the effects; yea
Love is the cause of al blessings, and as I may say, the cause of it self:
yea, Causa causarum, the cause of causes; or Causa causae, the cause of the
cause; or Causa causati, the cause of the thing caused. God is merciful
because he loves us, and he loves us because he loves us. Eligit quia
diligit, and ideo diligit quia diligit; thee has chosen us because he loves
us, Aug.
and therefore he loves us because he loves us: No reason can be rendered
of the love of God, but the love of God. Let us not buzze too near the candle,
with the fly Farsalla, lest we burn: Let us not soar too high with the
Eagle, lest we melt; let us not wade too deep with the Elephant, lest we
drown. Let us not be curious in these things: It is enough that Moses sets
down, Love to be the cause of all blessings. So God turned Balaams curse into
a blessing unto Israel. The cause Moses affirms to be Gods love (saying)
Because the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 23. 5.
loved thee. So Moses tells Israel, that God did set his Love upon them, and
did choose them, not because they were more in number than any people. For they
were the fewest of all people; but Because he loved them. Jude here prays
for it, as a most excellent blessing, without which all is nothing. For as
Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.
we say, In triviis. He is poor whom God hates; so he is rich and happy
whom God loves; his favor is as the dew of the Gods love abundant,
unmeasurable, immutable.
morning, as the shadow in the heat, and as an haven to them that are tossed;
as the Cities of refuge to them that are pursued. In thy presence (says
David,) is fullness of joy. That is; where God loves and favors, there is
perfect felicity.

John calls all men to behold the love of God: Behold what love the Father
has showed us, that we should be called the Sons of God: behold his love,
that he calls us his servants: and behold a 1 John 3. 1. 2 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 2.
greater love, in that he calls us his Sons: and yet behold a greater
love, that he calls us his heirs and coheyres with Christ; and yet behold a
greater love, in an higher degree, that he calls us his Mother, Brethren and
Sisters; but behold the greatest love of all, that he calls us his Spouse, or
Wife, to note, that he loves us, with all loves; with the masters love, as
Abraham loved Eleazar; with the friends love, as David loved Jonathan; with the
Childs love, as Ruth loved Naomi; with the Genesis 15. 1 Samuel 16. Ruth. 1. Gen 29.
husbands love, as Jacob loved Rachel: What heart of stone is not moved with
this love: Nati sumus e silice, nutriti lacte ferino. This love of God is
gratuitall free, partly because it flows from his grace and goodness, and
partly because he loves, not for his own, but for our good. And it is
unmeasurable; therefore says the Apostle, Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he 1 John 4. 10.
loved us, and sent his Son to be a reconciliation for our sins: greater
love could not the Father show, than to send his Son out of his own bosom,
and greater love could not the Son show, than to die for his enemies.

Yea, this love of his it is immutable and constant: For whom he loves, he
loves to the end, hereupon the Apostle calls God love. God is love (says
he) and not only love; for there are many properties and attributes in God, as
Truth, Mercy, Justice, Power, Eternity: Novit omnia, ut veritas, tuetur ut
salus, John 13. 1 John 4. 16.
sedat ut aequitas, dominatur ut majestas, operatur ut potentia, manet ut
aeternitas; he knows all things as verity, defends all things as health
and salvation, appeaseth all things as equity, rules all things as Majesty,
works all things as omnipotency, and abides and remains as eternity. God
is not made of love only as wood of trees, as a fountain of water, as a
plaster of Balm; but all these attributes are in the Lord equally: But
because God delights in love, and he reposeth a great part of his glory in
love, therefore is he described by that attribute of Love; by this attribute the
Evangelist describes him, God so loved the John 3. 16. Cap. 10. 16. 1 John 4.
18.
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. And by this attribute the
beloved disciple describes him, saying, God is love, and he that dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him. By this attribute David describes him,
As a Father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that love him. And again; The loving Psalm. 103. 13. 17.
kindness of the Lord indureth for ever and ever, upon them that fear him,
etc. This made Paul to say, Who shall separate me from the Love exceeds all
other virtues.
love of God? shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? I am persuaded that neither death nor life;
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
Romans 8. 35. 37, 38.
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Malitia nostra
finem habet; Our malice has an end, but Gods love has not; our malice is
finite, but his love infinite. As a drop of water to the whole Sea, so are our
sins in regard of the love of God, his love is so great, as it cannot be
measured; so much as it cannot be numbered; so precious, that it cannot be
valued; so large and long, that it cannot be ended: the breadth and length, the
height and depth of his love, all the tongues of men, and of Angels cannot
utter. As Jude wishes unto them, the love of God, so he wishes them also
mutual love, whereby we love one another; he means both these loves in this
place.

Mutual Love is a chief and principal virtue: Faith and Love, the one with
God, and the other with men, be as the root and the branch, as the mother and
the daughter, as the foundation and pillars of all Christian building: the end
of all is Love; the end of the first table is the Love of God, the end of the
second table is the love of man: so says the Apostle; The end of the
Commandments is Love, out of a pure heart, out of a good conscience, and 1 Timothy 1. 5. Gal. 5. 22. Exodus 16. Judge. 6.
out of a faith unfeigned, Paul reckoning up the fruits of the Spirit, names
Love first, as the Gentleman Usher to go before all: For as Manna excelled all
bread, as Aarons rod did eat up all the rods of the sorcerers, as Gedeons
sword passed all the swords of the Madianites; so love passes all other
virtues: all our debts should stand in love; Owe nothing to any man, but this,
that ye love Romans 13. 8. Number. 14. John. 2.
one another; our debtes were sooner paid, and our executors but smally
troubled, if this were; of this debt, we cannot be discharged so long as we
live. The journey of the Israelites was ended in forty years; Herod's Temple
was finished in six and forty 1 John 4. 7, 8. 16.
years; Noah's Arc was perfected in an hundred and twenty years, but this
debt is never ended. Let us therefore love one another: For love comes of
God, and every one that loves, is borne of God, and knows God, he that
loves not, knows not God: but he that dwells in Love; dwells in God and
God in him. S. Peter naming 2 Pet. 1. 5. 7.
many virtues, makes up the measure, and ends in Love. Join (says he) virtue
with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and
with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness,
brotherly kindness (Love.) This virtue above all is as the hoope or faggot
bond, that keeps all close. Therefore let me exhort you, with the Apostle,
Above all Col. 3. 14.
things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. As the Sun gives
light to all planets, as salt seasoneth all meats, as the Moon rules over
the Sea, and all moist bodies, as the rod of the tribe of Levi passed in honor
all other tribes: So love passes Little love to be found on earth.
all qualities in men; therefore let us follow after Love, and let us not give
over till we have overtaken her.

Love is as the apple tree of Persia, which buddeth and blossometh and bears
fruit every month. Now abides faith, hope and Numb. 17. 1 Cor. 14. 1. 1 Cor.
13.
love, but the chief of these is love. It lasts longer, like a pillar of
salt, it reaches further, it profits more among men. Faith flies up to
heaven, Love is occupied below, on earth; Faith wrastleth above with the
promises of God, Love is busied in good works, as Faith is with God: Paul
prays for it, in respect of the scantnesse and excellency of it: For Charitas
laudatur and alget; Aug. de eivitate Dei. lib. 14. c. 7.
yet, diligi non potest Deus sine proximo, nec proximus sine Deo, qui proximum
amare negligit, Deum diligere nescit.

England is as the Land of Canaan, we have corn, cattle, flesh Psalm. 65. 11.
Judge. 1. 1 Samuel 13, 1 Reg. 8.
fish, wool, cloth; our valleys stand thick with corn, we have plenty of
all things, but of Love, that is scant: As in the days of Debora there was
neither spear nor shield; As in Saul his days there was no Smith; as in the
days of Solomon, there was no Manna to be found: so in our days little or no
Love.

When I behold the state of many towns, me think I see Bulls, Bears, Lions,
Tig^es, Wolves shut up, as it were in an iron cage biting, tearing, renting and
devouring one another, view all Courts, Assizes, Sessions, Leets, Law-dayes,
and you shall see, there is no difference betwixt us, and the Corinthians, but
they went to law under Infidels, and we under Christians. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. 15.
We forget Paul's Caveat; If ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be
not devoured one of another: If there be an hundred men in a town, scarce two
love together as they should: We are divided into three companies, like Labans
sheep, some white, some black, some speckled; some Protestants, some Papists,
some Neuters: Nay, even among Protestants there is hard agreement. But God I
hope will make us friends in heaven, where al injuries shall be forgotten;
where are those noble pair of lovers David and Jonathan? Who had but one soul;
Eusebius, and Pamphilus, Martyrs, 1 Samuel 18.
who had but one name; Pilades and Orestes, who had but one life, Ruth. 1.
the one being dead, the other died also: Ruth and Naomi, who had but one
grave; Basil and Nazianzen, of whom it is said, Anima una erat inclusa in
duobus corporibus, one soul was included in two bodies: Marriage makes two
bodies, one, but love makes two souls, one; yea many souls, many bodies, but
one: If an hundred love, together it is but one heart; as it is said of them of
the primative Church, That they had but one heart and one soul. If a man has
an hundred friends, that man is become as an hundred Act. 4. 32.
men: Nam amicus alter idem, a friend is a second self: Charitas Chrysostom.
est res augmentativa. There was a day when Herod and Pilate, were made
friends, but that day (I fear) with many will never be, they are like the
stone Asbestos, found in Arcadia, being once kindled is never quenched; once
angry never pleased. The Heathens We must love as God does without desert
were wont to say of themen of the primitive Church; Ecce ut invicem se
diligunt: behold, how they love one another; they knew Christians by that
badge: but we may say (quoth one) Ecce Zaneh.
ut invicem se oderunt: behold, how they hate one another, oppress one
another: not Christians but Wolves, Lions, Leopards, Devils, nay worse: for one
Lion eats not another, and the Devils strive not amongst themselves, but
maintain their kingdom. Let Tigers, and Bears, and Leopards tear one
another; Let Scythians and Cannibals eat one another, who Mat. 12.
know not God nor good humanity. Let them be, without natural affections;
but let us love one another, and let the Apostle his precept be our practice;
Be of one mind, one suffer with another, 2 Timothy 3. 3.
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil,
nor rebuke for rebuke, but contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are thereunto
1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.
called, that ye should be heirs of blessing.

But ye will say, such and such men deserve no kindness nor love at our
hands: I but see what Christ deserves, his eyes blinded, his face smitten, his
hands nailed, his feet pierced, his heart thrust through with a spear; how
ought we then to love one another? Beloved (says the Apostle) if God so loved
us, we ought to love one another. In no quality do we resemble God 1 John 4.
11.
more than in this Love: God the Father is Love, God the Son is Love, God the
holy Ghost is Love: God the Father in Love gave his Son, God the Son in
Love gave himself, God the John 3. 16. cap. 10. 16.
holy Ghost in Love applies all this unto us, Charitas Dei diffusa in corda
nostra per spiritum.

But note here what love Jude praying for, a true Christian love: framed by
knowledge, for among thieves, murderers, Drunkards, there is a kind of Love.

First, therefore the love of Atheists is condemned, which come from profit or
from pleasure, which love men, as the dog does the bone; but this love
proceeds not Excorde puro, from a pure heart, therefore to be condemned.

Secondly, the love of Gamesters, Drunkards, and Pot-companions is here
condemned: For to gloss, play, eat, drink, game be no good works,
therefore this is not to love; we call it good fellowship, but such good
fellows will go to the good fellow the Devil, if they repent not.

Thirdly, all carnal love is here condemned: For love in man may be a vice
as well as a grace, it is a vice, when it is set upon a wrong object, or is
disordered, and that three ways:

First, when we love things unlawful, as sin.

Secondly, when we love things lawful, but too much, as the world.

Thirdly, when love is turned into lust, and so it is the mother of
fornication, adultery, incest, and such like.

But if we will have our love a grace, it must be a Christian Our love must be
truly Christian.

Graces must be daily increased.


love, we must love one another in the Lord, and for the Lord: this love is the
badge of Christ's disciples: By this shall all men know that you are my
disciples indeed, if ye love one another as I have loved you. To this S. Peter
exhorts, Above all things have fervent love among your selves, for love shall
cover a multitude of sins. Non expiando, non veniam John 13. 1 Pet. 4.
promerendo, sed fraterne condonando, non vindicando, non diffamando; not by
purging or satisfying for sins, not by deserving pardon, and binding God to
forgive sins, but by brotherly forgiving trespasses, not revenging our
selves, not defaming others.

Here also is condemned the love of Papists, In cathedra unitatis Deus posuit
doctrinam veritatis; In the chair of unity God has put the doctrine of
verity: they agree as the false Prophets did, not in the Lord, but against the
Lord; they make ado of their council of Trident, and how they agree in all
meetings. Alas a few buckrome Bishops of Italy conspired together, but thirty
eight Bishops in all, not like the council of Nice, where were three hundred
and eighteen; or of Arimine, where were six hundred Bishops: Nor like the
Council of Constance, where were four Patriarks, twenty nine Cardinals, two
hundred threescore and ten Bishops, forty seven Archbishops, five hundred
threescore and four Abbots and Doctors, at the deposing of Benedict the third.

But let our love be, as it should be, Christian love: Let us love as
brethren, and then the God of Love and Peace shall be with us: and so much for
this love, that Saint Jude prays for.

But before I shut up this heavenly doctrine, note that the Apostle wishes an
increase of Mercy, Peace and Love; he would have these things to be multiplied,
Mercy, Peace, and Love be multiplied unto you: in that he wishes a
multiplication of these Graces, he shows that there is no perfection of
virtues in this life: for there is a double grace of God.

A Restraining and A Receiving Grace.

The one to keep us from sin, the other to increase all virtues in us; for
in all virtues we creep like Snayles, we glide like Worms, we go like the
Messenger of evil news: but in all vices we run like Hazael, or the Roe of
the field, we fly like Doves, we grow like the Lily in a night. Paul
therefore exclaimed; The Law is Spiritual, but I Carnal, sold under sin, for
Romans 7. 14, 15.
I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, Impii and volunt and valent
peccare, pii volunt sed non valent, been agere, quia nequiunt quod desiderant;
the wicked are willing and able to sin, the August.
godly are willing, but not able to do well, because they cannot do that
which they desire to do. This made this holy Father Never perfect till we
come to Glory.
to pray, Domine dominetur carni anima, animae ratio, rationi gratia, etc.
Lord, let the Soul rule the Flesh, Reason the Soul, Grace Reason; subdue me
to thy will inwardly, outwardly sharpen my tongue more and more to sound forth
thy praises, illuminate my mind more and more to see thee, enlarge my heart
more and more to believe in thee, etc. For we comprehend not the Mercy, Peace,
and Love of God in any measure; Beatitude nostra tribus gradibus perficitur: in
hac vita per spem and fidem quotidie crescentem; post hanc vitam, cum anima Dei
praesentia fruetur; post extremum judicium, cum anima and corpore
glorificabimur. Our happiness is perfected in three degrees; in this life by
Faith and Hope increasing and growing daily; after this life, when the Soul
shall enjoy the presence of God; after the last Judgment, when as in Body and
Soul we shall be glorified; and when as we shall sing the songs of triumph,
such as none can understand save the hundred and forty four thousand which are
Apoc. 14. 3.
brought from the Earth.

Let us therefore pray for grace to increase in us, and say with Augustine, Si
quando steti, per Dominum steti; si quando cecidi, per me cecidi, etc. If at
any time I stood, I stood by the Lord; if at any time I fell, I fell of my
self: his Grace did prevent me, saving me from evils past, preserving me from
evils present, and defending me from evils to come. But I will follow this
point no further: but as Jude prayed that Mercy, Grace, and Love might be
multiplied; So shall I pray, Mercy, Peace and Love be unto you. Mercy from
God the Father, the Father of Mercies; Peace from God the Son, the Prince of
Peace; Love from God the holy Ghost, the Love of the Father and the Son:
Mercy unto you releasing your sins; Peace unto you, quieting your
consciences; Love unto you, joining you to God, and one unto another: Now the
very God of Mercy, Peace, and Love give you Mercy, Peace and Love. Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON:
VERSE. III. Beloved when I gave, etc. Faith and Gods worship must be maintained.



HAving spoken of the Title or Inscription of this Epistle, I am now come unto
the second part thereof, namely, the Proposition, which is a stirring of them
up to maintain the Faith, worship and religion of God, which was now at an
ebb, like the Sea, and eclipsed like the Sun with false Apostles, and had
shaken her leaves like a tree in winter. Where note two things.

1 That they must labor for Faith.

2 The reasons, why they must so labor.

The Reasons be three:

The first, taken from the person of the Apostle.

The second from the person of God.

The third from the person of the Adversaries.

From the person of the Apostle three ways:

From 1 His love. 2 His pains. 3 His mildness.

The second reason is taken from the person of God, in that he gave this Faith;
where note three things:

The necessity and excellency of Faith.
That it is 1 His gift. 2 Once given. 3 Given to the Saints.

The last reason is taken from the Adversary; where note two things:

1 The qualities 2 The end of the Adversary.

But first, for Faith; all men must labor for it, that they may say on their
deathbeds with Paul, I have fought a good fight, I 2 Timothy 7, 8.
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from henceforth there is laid
up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge will
give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also, that love his
appearing: None can speak of a Crown of glory, but he that can say, that he
has kept the Faith; For without Faith, it is impossible to please God: Will thou please God as Enoch did? and Hebr. 11. 6.
not grieve God like Israel? then get faith. Quod enim non est a fide, peccatum
est; whatsoever is not of faith, is sin Paul describing (...) Christiani, the
armor of a Christian, compares faith unto a shield; all armor is necessary,
but specially a shield: Therefore says the Apostle, Above all things take the
shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 17.
wherewith we shall be able to (...) all ^he (...) of the wicked. Where note,
that the Apostle contenteth not himself with a bare exhortation to stir us
up to labor for faith, but with weighty reasons presses his exhortation
before and behind: before comparatively, preferring it before all other graces
(Above all:) behind simply, declaring the virtue and efficacy of it (Whereby
ye shall be able to quench, etc.) By the first, he makes way to his
exhortation; by the last, he knocks it down fast, even to the head, as we
use for to say.

And the Apostle writing to Timothy, wills him to get faith 1 Timothy 1. 19.
and a good conscience, naming two fearful examples; One of Hymenaeus,
another of Alexander, who had made shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience:
And therefore Paul delivers them up to Satan; That they might learn not to
blaspheme; that is, he did excommunicate them.

Faith is the virtue of all virtues: As all rivers run into the Sea; so all
virtues come of faith. It gives light to all virtues, as the Sun does to all
planets: therefore the Apostle is so prolix in it: Faith makes us the sons
of God, else are we bastards illegitimate; So many as received him, to them
gave he power to be the Hebr. 11. 4, 5. John 1. 12. Epist. ad Adimanth. Genesis
26. 2 Timothy 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4.
Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. Augustine distinguishes
of Sons, that they are threefold; sons by Nature, so Esau was the son of
Isaak; sons by doctrine, or imitation, so Timothy was Paul's son, so he
begat the Corinths, so he traveled of Galatia: Lastly, sons by inspiration
or faith, so are we the sons of God: Christ is the natural, we the adopted
sons of the Almighty. The third is best; for well is he that has God to
his Father: for the Son abides in the house for Faith must be striven and
labored for.
ever. Faith is the life of the soul, as the soul is the life of the body:
Quod carni esca, hoc animae fides; what food is to the flesh, the same is Faith
to the soul; quod cibus corpori, hoc verbum spiritui; what meat is to the
body, the same is the word to the Spirit. John 8. 35.


To stir us up to strive for this Faith, the Holy Ghost adorneth it with many
Epithetes: he calls it Rich faith, 1 Pet. 1. Holy faith. Jude verse. 20.
strong faith, 1 pet. 5. 8. a saving faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. a pure faith, Act. 15.
9. a precious faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. If their we regard riches, strength,
holiness, salvation, purity, let us maintain Faith, which has all graces in
it; as Paradise had all fruits in it, as Lapis Indicus has all cures in it.

And note, that they must contend, strive for faith, for all they are accursed
that do the work of the Lord negligently; and all Ier. 48.
they shall be spued out of Gods mouth who are key-cold, lukewarm, and not
fervent in the faith. Most men therefore shall Apoc. 3. 15.
go unto the Devil, and be vomited out of Gods mouth; for they are, Tepidi in
Fide, they care not what become of faith and religion, so they may prosper in
the world: they say unto God, Ioh 21. 14, 15.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Who is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we
should pray unto him? they say with Alexander Borgia; Da mihi divitias, caetera
toll tibi, fidem, spem, charitatem: Give me riches, take all the rest to thy
self, (speaking unto the Devil,) Faith, Hope, Charity, body and soul, and
what thou will: for many are cold in faith and many are utterly ignorant in the
faith, and regard no faith; they are like Horse and Mule, in whom is no
understanding; Psalm. 32.
but are men Omnium horarum, as one says, like the rainbow of all colors,
like the Troianes tun to hold all liquors; like the Israelites, that cried
hail King Solomon, hail King Adonia: So they have cried, hail Queen Marie,
hail Queen Elizabeth; they can live in all times, for they can shift their
sails for all winds; they regard no faith, but are fit for all faiths, all
Princes; yea, for the Devil, as the men of Calecut at this day; they have two
faces with Ianus, two tongues with Judas, two hands with Ioab, Psalm. 78.
one to embrace withal, the other to stabbe withal; they have two hearts with
Israel, a double heart, a heart, and a heart. Paul compares a Christian to a
husbandman, to a wrestler, to a soldier, all which labor hard or else they
get nothing. No man that 2 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6.
warreth (says Paul) entangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
because he would please him that has chosen him to be a soldier: and if any
man also strive for a masterie, he is not crowned except he strive as he ought
to do: the husbandman must labor before he receive the fruits. Such like
similitudes he has in another place: know ye not that they which run in a
race run all, etc. In this sense says Solomon, Buy 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. Prove.
23. 23.
the truth, purchase it, redeem it with the loss of all that thou have. But
we will give all gold and silver for lands, but not a Ministers must maintain
true faith to death.
penny for Gods truth and Religion, that ware is out of request; So Christ
says, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many shall seek to enter
and shall not be able. The Antithesis is between seeking and striving; some
seek, and have some cold desire but they Luke 13.
strive not; Paul therefore calls it, The fight of faith: and he 1 Timothy 6.
12. 2 Timothy 4. 7. Jude v. 9. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
says of himself, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, etc. The
Devil never so strove with Michael for Moses his body, as he does with us for
faith; therefore resist him in the faith. Thus Ambrose said to Valentinian,
Prius animam, quam fidem auferes mihi, o Imperator; O Emperor, thou shall
first take away my life, before my faith: Hic; hic occidite; here, here kill
me, and do with me what 1 Reg. 21.
thou will: Si Naboth vineam patrum tradere noluit, if Naboth would not depart
from the vineyard of his Fathers; Absit ut vineam Domini tradam; God forbid,
that I should depart from the vineyard of the Lord: So Jerome said to Ruffine;
Si veritas est causa discordiae mori possum, tacere non possum; If truth be the
cause of discord and jarre, I may dye, but I may not hold my peace: thus
Chrysostom would not give place to Arcadius and Eudoxia, but went into exile;
and Calvin said in a like case to the Syndici of Geneva, Exarescet hoc brachium
pr^^squ^m coenam Domini indig^i^ praebere velim; this arm of mine shall first
wither, before I will give the supper of the Lord to the unworthy. Hemingius
says, that there Libro de Pastorum.
is a fourfold fight and a fourefold-flight in Ministers; his words are
these; Quatuor modis sunt mercenarii, cum se non apponunt Sophisticae,
tyrannidi, flagitiis, and Hypocrisi; exponant Sophisticae veram doctrinam seu
fidem tuendo; tyrannis, tum voce tum precibus, non adulando; flagitiis, ea
accusando; quarto hypocritis eorum larvam detrahendo. Men become hirelings
four manner of ways, etc. Quia tacuisti, fugisti; tacuisti, quia timuisti;
because thou were silent, thou fled'st; thou were silent, because thou
fearedst. Aug.


Thirdly, they must strive, and that earnestly, even strive unto death; so
says the Wiseman, Strive for the truth unto death, and defend justice for thy
life, and the Lord God shall fight for thee against Eccles. 4. 28. Esa. 59. 4,
5. 14.
thine enemies. God complains of the want of this, saying, No man calls for
justice, no man contendeth for truth, they trust in vanity and speak vain
things, they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, they hatch
Cockatrice eggs, and weave the Spiders web; he that eats of the eggs
dies, and that which is trodden upon breaks out into a serpent; therefore
judgment is turned backward, and justice stands far off, for truth is
fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. In Gods matters we must be
earnest, and say, Be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, 2 Samuel 10.
12.
and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his
eyes. Even so let us fight for our God, the Gospel, and the sacraments of our
God. If every hair of our head were a life, and every life as long as
Methusalah's, all are to be ventured for the faith of Genesis 5.
our God, every drop of blood must be powered out. So the Apostle tells the
Hebrews, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving The earnestness of
Idolaters must make us zealous.
against sin: yet had they striven much, and long; and therefore the Apostle
tells them, that they had endured a great fight in afflictions, partly whiles
they were made a gazing stock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly
while they became companions of them, which were so tossed to and fro: he
puts in Heb. 12. 4.
this word (Earnestly,) because of the adversaries, that will so earnestly
impugn it. Who use their profession, as Iehu used his chariot, he drove as if
he had been mad; who plead for Baal, 2 Reg. 9. 20.
as Crassus pleaded for Pompey; who brake his sides, and died within three
days after; for they are earnest in all errors. The Israelites gave all their
Jewels to make an Idol, a Golden Calfe: The men Exodus 32. Ier. 44. 19. Act.
19. 1 Reg. 18. 28. Mat. 23. Levit. 20.
in Ieremies time were at great cost and burnt incense to the Queen of heaven,
and powered out drink offerings unto her, made Cakes, etc. The Ephesians yelled
together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: Baals priests cried loud, and cut
themselves, as their manner was, with knives and Lancers till the blood gushed
out upon them: The Pharisees compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte: The
Canaanites burnt their children to Moloch. The Pagans did eat Cyrils heart or
liver with salt: The Turks in the service of their Mahomet on fridayes houle,
that ye may hear them (...) off* The Aethiopians tread not in their Temples
but barefooted: The Indians kill their Children to the Zemes: The Papists take
great pains in their pilgrimages and fastings: A condemnation to us, that are
so cold in Religion.

But will some say though we be not so earnest; yet we love God and his truth:
I confess, that there be degrees in zeal; All have not the like earnestness,
yet all must have some earnestness and fervencie of spirit; some creep, some
go; some run, some fly, and, all do well, that tend to perfection. For we
must all forget that which is behind, and endeavor our selves to that Phil. 3.
13, 14.
which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling, which is in Christ Jesus: some creep like snailes, some go like
horses, some run like dromedaires, and some fly like Eagles, and all do
well, that do their best to Godward: Some creep like Agrippa, who was almost
persuaded to be a Christian; Act. 26. 28.
some go in Religion, like the Galathians, Ye did run well, (says the
Apostle) but who did let you that ye did not obey the truth? Some Gal. 5. 7.
Psalm. 119. 32.
run like David; I will run (says he) the way of thy Commandments, when
thou have set my heart at liberty. Some fly like Monicha: volemus in Coelos;
volemus in Coelos; Let us fly into heaven; let us fly into heaven. Christ
riding to Jerusalem, all strawed not carpets and coverlets in the way; some
strawed their garments, some cried Hosanna. All did their endeavors; and he
that does his best, does as much as God requires. For if there be a willing
mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has, and not according to 2
Cor. 8. 12. Luke 8,
that he has not. All have not the like measure of zeal; some have thirty,
some sixty, some an hundred fold; and he that has the All have not the same
measure of zeal.
least zeal, if it be in sincerity, it is not rejected of God. A drop of
water, is water, and a dram of zeal, is zeal. Let every man strive to his
power, and do that he may, and God will accept it: Saul slew his thousand, and
David his ten thousands, and both did valiantly. Still I say, that he that
has some heat, must labor 1 Samuel 18.
to have more; we must both shine and burn, like John the Baptist, who was A
burning and a shining candle: Lucere parum est, John 5. 35.
ardere parum est; lucere and ardere perfectum est; To shine, it is not enough,
to burn, it is not enough; but to shine and burn, this is as it should be: he
that burns a little, like a sea-cole, must burn more like the Juniper, that
keeps heat a month long. Some shine, like the glow-worme, but have no
heat; some burn like rotten wood, but have no light: But a Christian must be
like the Sun at Noonday, which has Magnum splendorem, magnumque fervorem;
great shining, and great heat. Where the dead carcass is, thither the Eagles
resort, Christi doctrina est cadaver, and nos aquilae; Christ his doctrine is
the carkase, and we be the Eagles; Contendamus pro ea, ut aquilae pro
cadavere; Let us strive for it, as Eagles for the carkase; Let us not as Iayes,
hop and skippe here below, sed (...), but let us fly aloft like the Eagles.

Yet still I say with Ambrose, Qui non potest volare ut aquila, volet ut
passer; he that cannot soar as the Eagle to the circle of the Sun, let him
flicker like a Sparrow to the house top. If we cannot with Paul set our feet
in the third heaven, yet let us lift up our eyes and hearts to heaven: Let us
strive in believing, as 2 Cor. 12.
the Nightingales do in singing, Qui prius spiritum quam vocem Strigelius.
amittunt; that lose their breath before their voice. So much for this that we
must labor for the faith, yea strive for it, and that earnestly.

And now to the reasons, why we must so labor and strive: and the reasons be
three:

The first, taken from the Person of Jude, and that three ways:

First, from his love and good will toward them: For he calls them Beloved,
I love you, I care for you, I desire your salvation; thus he shows his love to
win them. Now love asks love, and it pierces a man much and deeply, like
an arrow out of the hand of a Giant, when he sees the party that speaks, to
speak in love: then vulnera diligentis, the wounds of a lover, are better
Prove. 28. 23.
taken than oscula blandientis, the kisses of a Flatterer. Therefore Paul to
persuade the Churches, ever protested his love; writing to the Church of
Philippos, he says thus; God is my record, how I long after you all from the
very heart root in Christ Jesus. And writing Phil. 1. 8.
to the Church of Corinth, he says thus; Ye are our Epistle written in our
hearts, not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in 2 Cor. 3.
2, 3.
tables of stone but in the fleshly table of the heart. And again, O ye
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is made large, ye Love
ought to be the motive in all actions.
are not kept strait in us, but ye are kept strait in your own bowels. And
having chidden the Corinthians, saying, Now are ye full; now are ye made
rich, ye reign as Kings without us, and I would to God, ye did reign, that
we also might reign with you. For, I 2 Cor. 6. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10.
think that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to
death, for we are made a gazing-stocke unto the World, unto Angels, and unto
Men. We are fools for Christ's sake, and ye are wise in Christ; We are
weak, and ye are strong; Ye are honorable, and we are despised. And though
he did thus taunt them, yet he protested, that he did it in love; and
therefore he says, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved
children, I admonish 1 Cor. 4. 14. Gal. 3. 1.
you. And though he spoke roughly to the Galathians, saying, O ye foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched you? Yet he did it not as one that hated them,
but as one that loved them; and therefore he says in the subsequent Chapter,
Am I therefore become your enemy, Gal. 4. 16. Ephesians. 4. 15.
because I tell you the truth? (...), Let us follow the truth in love, and in
all things grow up to him which is the head. Let us pray in love, not as James
and John did, for fire to come down from Luke 9.
Heaven to destroy Samaria; Let us argue in love, not as the Ephramites did
wi^h (...) fuerunt verbera, whose Judge. 8.
words were nothing else but wounds; Let us talk in love, not as the men of
Anathoth did with Jeremy, Qui loquuti sunt ampullas, Ier. 11. 21.
and sesquipedalia verba, which spoke proud, haughty, great, and stout words;
Let us reprove in love, not as Saul, who breathed Act. 8.
out threatenings and slaughter against the Congregation of Christ; but Let all
things be done in love. For love is like honey 1 Cor. 16. 14.
in bitter broth, and sugar in sour wine; it is like the Sun unto the world,
and a candle unto the house; a light for our journey, a line for our life, and
a rule for our reprehensions: Si diligis, fac Aug. in Epi. John
quicquid vis; If thou be in love, do what thou will, speak, or be silent,
exhort and rebuke, call or cry, so it be in love, all is well.

But we are like the dogs of Coriben, we speak not, but bark and bite one
at another. Such were the men, that Paul Phil. 3. 2.
gives us warning of, saying, Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware
of concision. The mother of Nero, showed him her womb to move him, but he
unnaturally ripped it up: but the mother of the seven children showed them her
breasts, in token 2 Match. 7.
of love, and they would not eat Swines flesh, to dye for it. Sic Bern.
ministri proferant ubera, non verbera, so let Ministers show their breasts,
not their battes; Docendo, non jubendo, movendo potius quam minando procedant,
let them proceed and go forward in teaching, not in commanding; in monishing,
not in menacing: Nam Aug.
plus penetrant mollia quam aspera verba, mild and gentle speeches do more
penetrate and pierce, than tart and bitter. As for example, the mild zeal of
Paul, preaching before Agrippa, persuaded Chrysostom.
him almost to become a Christian. They that go about In Gods matters we must
be diligent and zealous.
to persuade with roughness; Quos volunt meliores, plerumque faciunt
deteriores, whom they would amend and make better, many times they mar and
make worse. Ministers must be like unto Paul, and handle their people as he did
the Philippians, kindly Act. 26. 28. Aug. Phil. 4.
and lovingly, My brethren, beloved, and longed for, my joy and my Crown: they
must strengthen the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring again
that which is driven away, they must seek up the lost, and not rule with
cruelty and rigor; they must be as the Pelicane, that feeds her young with
her heart blood; like the Eagle, that carries her young on her wings: so much
for the first reason.

Another reason drawn from Iude's person, is taken from his pains; He gave
all diligence to write of Faith, In Gods matters, we must be diligent, like
the Dromedaries of Egypt, like the wild Ass used to the Wilderness, that
snuffeth up the wind Ier. 2. 24.
at her pleasure, etc. we must be swift as Hazael or the wild Roe in the
cause of God; not creep, nor go, nor run, but fly. We must march on in
Religion, like Iehu in his Chariot, swiftly and courageously; we must be like
the ships of Merchants, that be good under fail. Esaias compares the Church
unto Esa, 60. 8.
Doves; Who are these that fly like a Cloud, and as Doves to their Windows?
Doves they fly swiftly, and they fly in companies, so should we in matters of
Religion.

Demosthenes was ashamed, if he heard the Smiths hammer go, before he read
his book in the morning; Plus olei quam vini expendisse dicitur; he wrote
more than he drank. If this diligence was in him for humane learning, what
should be in us for divine Knowledge? It is said of Alphonsus King of Naples,
that he read the Bible over forty times in his life; such pains did he take
for Salvation, and so diligent was he in the work of the Lord; and so must
we. Many for the goods of the World, Rise early, go to bed late, eat the
bread of carfulness. Psalm. 127.
Look upon the covetous man, he runs through thick and thin for gold;
the voluptuous, he refuses no pains in pursuing his pleasures: Now this care
must be in the Church, for the Religion and the worship of God. Let us learn
husbandry for our Souls, from the husbands of our bodies, they are diligent to
provide for the body, let us be as provident for our Souls: let us say with
the faithful, We, o Lord, have waited for thee in the way of thy Judgments,
the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee; with my
Soul have I desired thee in the Esa. 26. 8, 9.
night, and with my Spirit within me will I seek thee in the morning. We
must take all pains to do the Church good; Jewel said, oportet Episcopum
mori concionantem, a Bishop must dye preaching: Paul for the space of three
years ceased not to warn every one Act. 20. 31.
night and day, he was as diligent in teaching, as Jude was in writing, and as
diligent must we be in reading and hearing, like Most men more diligent in
earthly than heavenly things.
the men that followed Christ into the Wilderness, and abode with him three
days, hearing him and eating nothing. The Artificers left their trades, the
Chapmen their shops, the Merchants their exchange, the Mariners their nets, the
husbandmen their fields and vineyards, yea blind Bartimaeus left his cloak John
6. 2.
to follow Christ and to hear him. Solomon would have men labor for Wisdom,
as they do for Silver, and then they should have it; If it concern our
profit, or our pleasure, Lord, what pains will we take? Impiger extremos
currit mercator ad Indos, the unwearied Merchant runs to the furthest Indies.
Again, as touching pleasure; pernoctant venatores in nive, pugiles cestibus,
contusi non ingemiscunt, the Huntsmen sleep in the Snow, watch Tulli. in
Tuscuk.
upon turffes, though bruised they are not moved. Only for Faith we will take
no pains, though Christ cry unto us, Ho, every one that thirsts, come unto
the Waters, and ye that have no money, Esa. 55. 1.
come buy and eat; come I say, buy wine and milk without silver, and without
money, yet we come not.

But to proceed, why was Jude so careful and earnest, that he gave all
diligence to write unto them? It was because he wrote to them of Salvation,
(...) was it that carried him into this heat; as the Apostle said, They could
not but speak the things which Act. 4. 20.
they had heard and seen: So Jude gave all dilgence to write of Salvation
which he had heard and seen. If a man had as many hands and pens as Argus
had eyes, all were too little to write of Salvation, the worthiness and
rareness of the Argument is such.

What a care had Paul of his Salvation; it carried him away in such sort, that
he said; Behold I go bound unto Jerusalem, and know not what things shall
come unto me there, saving that the holy Ghost Act. 20. 24.
witnesses in every City (saying) that bonds and afflictions abide me: but I
pass not at all, neither is my life dear unto my self, so that I may fulfill
my course with joy, and the ministration which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, etc. And how desired he it in the Jews? Brethren. Romans 10. 1.
my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
And he bids Timothy lay hold on it, saying, Fight the good 1 Timothy 6. 12.
fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto ye are also called, etc.
And when the Church would triumph, it is in this, Now is Salvation in Heaven,
and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Apoc. 12. 119.
power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused them day and night before God. And this was the earnest Psalm. 67. 1, 2.
prayer of the Church, God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his
face to shine among us, that thy way may be known upon earth, Tit. 2. 11.
thy saving health among all nations, not a bodily health, but a spiritual
heavenly health. When Paul will commend the grace of God, and make way for it
in the Gretians, he calls it a saving grace. The Physician can give thee but
health, as the Ier. 9.
Physicians of Gilead did; The Lawyer can but plead for thee, as Many regard
more vain pamphlets than found doctrine.
Tertullus did for the Jews; The Magistrate can give thee but thine own, as
Solomon did to the two harlots; The musician can give thee but pleasure, and
tickle thine ear a little, as the Sons of Asaph did: The historiographer can
give thee but the knowledge of the times: But the Divine offers thee
salvation, Act. 24. 1 Reg. 3. 2 Samuel 23. 1 Timothy 4. 16.
he writes and speaks of salvation. Hereupon says Paul to Timothy, Take
heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine, and continue therein, for in so
doing thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. If one should come
from the Prince, and offer to every one of you an acre of Land; how would you
hear him? as they heard Paul at Troas, till midnight. But we from God offer
you an inheritance in heaven, and yet ye regard it not: Pausanias wrote of
Act. 20.
Nettles; Erasmus, of Foolishness; Demosthenes, of the shadow of an Ass;
Musonius, of the wool of a Goat; Virgil, of Gnats; but Jude wrote of
salvation. If Alexander slept always with Homers Iliades under his pillow; If
Lepta forgot to sleep, reading Tullie de oratore; If Cyprian read daily
Tertullius Apologiticon: If Chrisippus, read Logic, so that he had perished,
but for Melissa his maid: how should the Church read this Epistle? There be
many that follow the Apostles diligence in writing, but then it is in foolish,
filthy, bawdie matters. To this purpose we have gotten our songs and sonnets,
our palaces of pleasure, our unchaste fables and tragedies: Our fathers had
their spiritual enchantments; as Gui of Warwick, Bevis of Hampton, Arthur of
the round table, and a number of such vanities: as Garagantua, Howleglasse,
Friar Rushe, the Fools of Gotham; strong illusions of the Devil to keep them
from reading the Scriptures: And we, like newborn Moabites, that wallow in
our vomit, have gotten the Court of Venus, the Castle of love,
Perce-pennylesse, etc.

But if he was so careful to write of salvation, we must be as careful to
hear and learn salvation. The Iaylor made inquiry after it, saying to Paul,
and Silas; Sirs, what must we do to be saved? And let us also search, and
enquire after salvation. For many never Act. 16. 29.
look in what state they stand, whether in the state of grace and salvation,
or in the state of death and damnation. But as it was said of Bonosus the
Emperor, That he was borne not to live, but to eat and to drink, and to
scrape in the ground like molles, or to play like the dormise of India, that
sleep all winter, and play all summer. There are none, but must have a care of
salvation, except they be Reprobates. The scoffing Jews cried, Da John 6.
nobis semper hunc panem, give us evermore of this bread. The man in the
Gospel would eat of the bread of heaven, and therefore cried, Happy is he
that eats bread in the Kingdom of Heaven. Balaam prayed to die well; O that
my soul might die the death of the righteous, Luke 14. Numb. 23. 10.
and that my last end might be like unto his. There is none so wicked, but he
would be saved; but if that wilt be saved, examine thy Every man to be careful
to know in what state he stands in.
self, and ask thy soul; whether thou be a dog or a Lamb, a Citizen or
a stranger, a sheep or a goat, to stand on the right hand or the left.

All men know their state, saving Christians; the Merchant can tell whether he
gains or loses; the Mariner can tell his Mat. 25. 40.
course, whether he be right or wrong on the sea; the Husbandman knows his
times for earing and reaping; the Physician knows his body whether it be in
a (...), consumption, or in good estate? But we look not whether we be saved
or damned; but look into thy self as thou do into the world, whether thou
be even with God, whether his debt-booke be discharged, whether thy sins
be forgiven, or no, whether God has given thee Faith to apprehend his
promises, whether the fruits of Faith appear in thee or no. A prisoner will
look unto himself before the Assizes, and look into thy self before the
Judgment day, empanell a Quest on thy self and let thy heart be the Foreman
of the Jury.

And note, that he calls it Common salvation, not proper to Abraham, Isaak,
Jacob, David, Peter, etc. but common to all.

1. First, he calls it common salvation. First, to admonish all men to lay
hold of it. So says Paul to Timothy, lay hold of eternal life. And also to
admonish Ministers to neglect no sheep of God, not the very least. Paul said
that he was a debtor both to the Grecians and Barbarians, both to the wise and
unwise, that he was not Romans 1. 14. 16.
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it was the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes, to the lew first and also to the Grecian. And further
he says, that he made himself a servant unto all men, that he might win
the more, that unto the Jews he became as 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22.
a Jew, that he might win the Jews; to them that were under the law, as
though he were under the law, that he might win them that were under the
Law; to them that were without law, as though he were without law, that he
might win them, that were without Law; to the weak he became as weak, that
he Act. 20. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
might win the weak; and became all things to all men, that by all means he
might win some: He taught publicly and privately, throughout every house,
exhorting and comforting every one, as a Father does his Children: Even so the
Minister of God must be careful of every soul, that he may be partaker of
this common salvation.

2. Secondly, he calls it common salvation, because it is not prepared for
some few, as the Arc was for the Deluge; For 1 Pet. 3. 20. Exodus 19. John 4.
22.
then but a few, that is, Eight persons were saved in the water: Neither
because it appertains to one nation, Kingdom or people, as the Law of Moses
to the Israelites; Salvation is of the Jews: But the doctrine of the Gospel
is offered unto all. Christ sent his Apostles in orbem, non in urbem; Go into
the world, preach the Gospel to every creature. Erunt illi testes usque ad
fines terrae, they were As Salvation is common, so the Church is Catholic.
his witnesses to the end of the world. With these places, Augustine refuted
the Donatists, which tied the Church to a small corner of the world, Africa.

Thirdly, he calls it common Salvation, because we are all saved by one
common means, that is, by Christ; Salvation is of the Lord. Ego sum, ego sum,
and praeter me non est Salvator, I am, I Psalm. 13. Esa. 43.
am, and besides me there is no Savior, no true Savior. All other come
short; Vana salus hominum, Man's salvation is in vain. And therefore the
Elders, the Angels, and all Creatures give this glory to Christ, Salvation is
of him that sits on the Throne, and of the Lamb; and they all together,
cry, Amen. For these causes it is called common Salvation.

In this sense, as Salvation is called common, so the Church is Apoc. 4.
called common or Catholic in three respects:

First, it is not tied to any time, as the time of the Law, but it endures
ever. Mar. 16.


Secondly, it is not tied to any place as to Judah: For in Judah was God known,
and his name was great in Israel; but to the whole Psalm. 76. 1. Act. 10. 34.
world: For God is no accepter of persons, but in every nation he that fears
him and works righteousness, is accepted. And the true worshippers, worship
him in spirit and truth: As Christ said unto the woman. John 4. 23.


Thirdly, it is not tied to any persons, as to the seed of Abraham, but to all
that believe: There is neither Jew nor Gentile, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female, but we Gal. 3. 28.
are all one in Christ Jesus. In these respects Salvation is called catholic,
or common, and so is the Church.

It is worth your noting, that Jude says, he gave all diligence to write. For
Jude speaks here of necessity of writing. For Hosius, Eckius, Pigheus,
Andradius say, that Christ commanded the Apostles to preach, not to write; and
that their writings are subesse, non praeesse fidei nostrae; that Scripturae
sequuntur Ecclesiam, the Scriptures follow the Church, and not the Church the
Scriptures. But Saint Peter says, he wrote that the truth might remain to
posterity; his words are these; I think it meet so long as I am in 2 Pet. 1.
13, 14, 15.
this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance, seeing I
know the time is at hand, that I must lay down my tabernacle, etc. I will
endeavor therefore always, that ye also may be able to have remembrance of
these things, after my departing. So Saint John wrote to all, Little children I
write unto you that your sins are forgiven you. And again, I write unto you
Fathers, because ye have known him 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14.
that is from the beginning. And again, I write to you young men, because ye
have overcome the world. I write unto you babes, etc. Chrysostom writing upon
these words, They that are in Iewry let them fly to the Math. 24. 16.
mountains: Id est, qui in fide sunt, conferant se ad Scripturas, that is,
quoth Chrysostom. Let them that are in the* Faith fly unto the Scriptures. I
love not allegories, but it is true, that Chrysostom said, Traditions the
means of propagating errors.
though not upon that occasion. S. John saw three Gospells written; viz.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and approved them. S. Peter allowed of Paul's Epistles,
and commended them unto the Churches; yea, the Prophets nailed their prophecies
in writing 2 Pet. 3. 15. Hebr. 2. 2. Hebr. 2. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
to the doors of the Temple, which the Priests reserved in the Sanctuary,
lest the things should run out that they received by word of mouth. Paul at
the end of his life says of all the books of the New Testament, that they
were able to make the man of God perfect.

Traditions, and unwritten verities, or vanities, have been ever the
Pandora-boxes, full of poison; the Troiane horse, out of which all enemies have
issued; that cursed water of Styx, that kills them that taste it. These
traditions the Holy Ghost sometime likeneth to sour grapes, which cannot be
eaten; Sometime to broken cisternes, that can hold no water; Sometime to sand,
whereupon Esa. 5. Jer. 2. Mat. 7. Esa. 64.
to build it is not lawful; Sometime to a menstruous cloth; And sometime to
things more base and vile than any of these.

On the Contrary, the written Word is called a Fountain, waters of life, a
Rock whereupon the Church is built, the sword of the Esa. 55. Apoc. 21. Luk 6.
Ephesians. 8. Ephesians. 2. 19.
spirit; Basis Ecclesiae, the foundation of the Church. But what will not
hungry dogs eat, and Papists receive? all the spite of the Papists is against
the written word, that they may give us poison for meat, sour Leaven for
sweet dough, thorns for grapes, thistles for figs, the Legend for the
Gospel, men's traditions, Mat. 15. 9. Genesis 8.
for Gods precepts; the cup of the whore of Babylon for the cup of the Lord.

But as Noah's dove found no rest, but in the Arc; so our consciences find no
rest, but in the Word: Augustine calls the scriptures, the Lords Scales,
which show Quid grave, quid leve, what August. contra Donat.
is heavy, and what is light; Vbi non appendimus, quid volumus, sed omnia per
trutinam Domini; whereby we apprehend not what we would, but all things
according to the balance of the Sanctuary, of the Lord himself: And he says
unto them often, Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, procedat in medium codex
Dei; take away from among us our own writings, and let the book of God be
brought forth: Non audiamus, Haec dico, haec dicis; sed hoc dicit Dominus; Let
us not hear these words, This say I, this say thou, but this says the
Lord. Christ entering into his glory, could have said much of the traditions of
the Prophets; yet notwithstanding he alleges only those things that are
written; Luk 24. 44, 45.
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, etc. Traditions and
leaving the written word, is the original of all mischief: Hence came the
Jewish Cabal and Thalmud, the Turks Alcoran, the Russian tales of S. Nicholas,
the Irish fables of S. Patricke, the Romish traditions of their new Saints:
hence come the horrible opinions of Ebion and Cerinthus de regno Christi
terreno, of the earthly Kingdom of Christ, and of the Leviticall observations,
under Mild exhortations more powerful than menaces.
color or pretext of Apostolical traditions: And the Apostles being all dead,
Sua dogma vocarunt (...) as though it contained the most deep knowledge of
heavenly things, but was indeed drawn out of the dungeon of hell. Thus, as
Midas had power to turn all he touched into gold, so these men have power to
turn all they touch into lies, and all under color of traditions. The
Apostles dehortation therefore is to be embraced; Beware lest there be any man
that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, Col. 2. 8.
through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and
not after Christ.

The third reason, taken from the Person of the Apostle, is from the mildness
and manner of his doctrine: For he exhorted them, he entreated them, as if a
man should lay his hands under their feet; he came not in the Imperative, but
in the Optative mood; he came not like Tyrants, or great men, with Sic volo,
sic jubeo: For me^ will rather be drawn with lenity, than driven by
extremity. He came not with a searing iron, not with vinegar to ulcerate, but
with oil to mollify; he came not with a rod, as Paul to the Corinthians,
sedspiritu lenitatis, with the spirit of gentleness. 1 Cor. 4.


Exhortation is Gods whetstone to ^et an edge of our zeal, it is Gods spur
to make us run faster in Religion; it is Gods milk to nourish us: What face
of flint or heart of Adamant, but will be moved with exhortation? The three
thousand Jews, though vile men, were moved by it, it pricked their hearts, and
made them cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? It moved Valentinian
much when Ambrose said, Rogamus Augustum non Act. 2. 46.
pugnamus, we pray Augustus, we fight not; Arma nostra sunt preces and
lachrimae, our weapons are prayers and tears. And it moved Arcadius much, when
Chrysostom wished that the Emperor might see his heart as he saw his face,
that he might see his care to do him good.

The Minister must learn here to be diligent in exhorting: So says the
Apostle; Preach the Word, be fervent in season and out of season, improve,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine; and 2 Timothy 4. 2.
as Paul commanded it, so he practiced it: You know (says Paul) how we
exhorted you, and comforted you, and besought every one of you, as 1 Thessalonians. 2.
11.
a father his Children. The shepherd has his whistle and his dog, and the
Minister has exhortation and reprehension; witness the Apostle; These things
speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

And as the Minister must exhort, so you the people must suffer the word of
exhortation. I beseech you brethren (says the Author to the Hebrews) suffer
the word of exhortation. The wounded man must suffer the Surgeon to lanche, to
sear his wounds; The Hebr. 13. 22.
sick man must suffer the Physician to prescribe sweet or bitter potions unto
him; and the ignorant man of a dull spirit must suffer the Minister to exhort
him. So God cried unto Jerusalem, As Ministers must exhort so the people must
suffer the word of exhortation.
Be you instructed o Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from you, lest I make you
desolate as a land not inhabited. So we cry to you to be instructed; O
England, be instructed; O Norfolk, be instructed, O Northwalsham be
instructed, lest the soul of the Lord depart from you; and the rather, because
we have cried long, like Cocks that crow at midnight, and again, at three of
the clock, but Ier. 6. 8.
longest and loudest toward day. The ministers are Gods Cocks, they crowed in
King Edwards days and in Queen Elizabeth's days, but longest and lowdest in
King James his days. As Peter therefore wept at the crowing of the Cock; so
let us weep and wake at the crowing of these cocks: For now considering the
season, it is high time for us to wake out of sleep, for our salvation is
nearer than Romans 13. 11.
when we believed: the night is past, the day is at hand; let us cast away the
works of darkness and put upon us the armor of light: Be awake therefore and
strengthen the things which remain and are ready to dye; Even so awake
England, thou have slept fifty years, like Endimion, like the seven boys of
Ephesus mentiond by Nicephorus; like Abner, that would not be awaked. The
cruellest Lion is tamed 1 Samuel 28. 15.
by long art; the stiffest ice is thawed with long heat: the hardest marble is
pierced with continual dropping; and let us be pierced with continual
exhorting. We teach and exhort you from year to year, from thursday to
thursday; let us not roll Sisyphus stone, nor reach for Tantalus apples; let
us not cast pearls before swine, nor give holy things to dogs. Mat. 7. 2 Cor.
5. 20.


We entreat you, as Paul did the Corinthians, That ye will be reconciled unto
God; we pray you to hear the word, not to swear; we pray you to sanctify
the Sabbath, to be chaste, liberal, merciful, etc. The unrighteous Judge,
though a vile man, was overcome with importunity, and let our importunity
overcome you, Suk. 18.
and be you moved with continual exhortation: Let not God say of us, as he did
of the Jews; I have spread only my hand all the day unto a rebellious people,
which walked in a way that was not good, even after their own imaginations, a
people that provoked me ever to my face, Esa. 1.
etc. But let us be warned by the admonition of the Prophets: for by these God
exhorts continually, and stretches out his hand to draw us.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
VERSE. III. For the maintenance of the faith, which was once given to the
Saints. Faith a gift of God a fruit of the spirit.



THE second reason is taken from the person of God, that he gave Faith. Now
every man must maintain the ordinance of God: For we can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth: So reasoned Ambrose with Valentinian, when he
commanded him to give up his 2 Cor. 13. 8.
Church to the Arrians; Si Naboth vineam patrum tradere noluit, etc. If Naboth
would not deliver up the vineyard of his fathers, he must not deliver up the
vineyard of the Lord. 1 Reg. 21.
Here note three things:

1 That Faith is a gift. 2 That it is once given. 3 That it is given unto the
Saints.
And first, that faith is a gift, it is evident by the Apostles own words,
where he calls Christ, The author and finisher of our faith; as the Athenians
were called, Inventrices and perfectrices omnium doctrinarum, the inventers and
perfecters of all good learning: The Hebr. 12. 2.
Romans had their learning from the Grecians, and the Grecians from the
Egyptians, and the Egyptians from the Chaldees, and they from Adam, Seth,
Noah and the old Patriarchs: but the Church 1 Cor. 2. 22. Act. 7. 222.
has all her learning, religion and faith from God; he gave it at the first,
and he confirmed it at the least: He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, for gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification Faith diversely
taken.
of the body of Christ, till we meet together in the unity of faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God, etc. Luke, having spoken of Stephens faith,
notes the cause of it, that is, that Stephen was full of the Spirit; Ephesians. 4.
11. Act. 7. 55. Gal. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 3. 3.
For God works it by his Spirit: All good works are the fruits of the
Spirit, therefore faith; The fruits of the spirit are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, etc. and it is reckoned up among
the gifts of the spirit; To another is given faith (says the Apostle) by the
same spirit: But faith is in the Scriptures diversely taken; sometimes it is
given to God, and it signifies his faithfulness in his promises: In this
sense the Apostle uses the word, saying, Shall their unbeleefe make the faith
of God of none effect? when it is given to man, it is taken seven manner of
ways.

First, it is taken for Fidelity, as it is a virtue in the second Mat. 23. 23.
table; So Christ uses the word; where speaking to the Pharisees, he says,
Ye tithe Mint, Anise and Commin, and leave the weighty matters of the Law, as
judgment, and mercy, and faith.

Secondly, It is taken for the doctrine of faith, and Christian Religion; so it
is said, Many were added unto the faith; that is, to Act. 6. 7.
Christian Religion. And again* God opened the door of faith unto the
Gentiles; that is, of Religion. Act. 14. 27.


Thirdly, It is taken for profession of religion; thus Elimas is Act. 13. 8.
charged, To turn the Deputy from the Faith; that is, to make no more
profession of Religion.

Fourthly, It is taken for Christ himself, by a Metonymie, who is both the
object and cause of faith: So the Apostle uses the word saying, But after that
faith is come, we are no longer under a Gal. 325.
schoolmasters.

Fifthly, It is taken for knowledge only; and thus the Devils are said to
believe.

Sixthly, It is taken for the gift of working miracles; If I had 1 Cor. 13. 2.
all faith so that I could move mountains, etc.

Lastly, It is taken for that grace by which, felicity and the chief good is
applied; and thus it is taken in my Text.

And this the Apostle Paul calls the faith of Gods elect; For none but the
elect, have it, and all the elect have it, at one time or another; and once had
it can never be finally and totally lost, but it continues with them, till
they come to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living and then
they shall have no more need of it: It is therefore called Saving faith, because
it brings us to salvation: Ephesians. 2. 8.
And Justifying faith, because it is that means or instrument which Gods
spirit works in us, whereby we apply unto our selves Christ Jesus, in and by
whom we are justified: And Sanctifying faith, because by it God purifieth our
hearts. This saving, justifying, sanctifying faith is Gods gift: for he is the
Author of this faith; From whom every good gift, and every perfect gift
comes. And that which is said of Lydia, is true The means to beget faith.
of all the faithful, That the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, so that she
believed. And Christ says, This is the work of God, that ye believe; not the
work of the Father alone; or of the Son alone, Iam. 1. 17. John 6. 29.
or of the Holy Ghost alone, but of the whole Trinity: For this is one of the
works of God, which are said to be Ad extra, and therefore attributed to all
the three persons. To the first, where Christ says, No man can come unto me,
(that is, believe) except the John 6. 44.
Father draw him: to the second, where the Apostle calls Jesus, The author
and finisher of our faith: to the third, where the Apostle reckons faith,
amongst the fruits of the spirit: And the only Hebr. 12. 2.
thing that moved God to work this precious gift in us, is his mere good
will: So says our Savior; It is so Father, because thy good pleasure was
such. And the end at which he aimed in working Mat. 11. 26.
this grace, is, first, the setting forth of his own glory: secondly, the
salvation of mankind; and therefore S. Peter calls salvation, The end of our
Faith. 1 Pet. 1. 9.


This doctrine serves to humble us; to let us see, that it is not in our
power, that faith is not hereditary: God begins it, and increases it, and
finisheth it. The Apostles prayed, Lord, increase Luke 17.
our faith: The means to get this ^aith is double; Outward; Inward. The
outward mean is the word; hereupon says the Apostle, How shall they believe
in him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14. Romans 10. 8.
and thereupon thus concludes, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God: and hereupon it is called, The Word of faith. And Paul says of
the Ephesians, that they believed, After they Ephesians. 1. 13.
heard the Gospel. And finely says Chrysostom, Accenditur fidei lampas igne
divini verbi; the lamp of our faith is lighted by the fire of the divine word.
And this faith, is wrought in us, both by reading and preaching of the word,
and both are commended and ordained of God: and first for reading, God himself
commands it; and by reading, S. Augustine was converted: for he confesses
Deuteronomy. 3. 1. 9.
of himself, that being inclined to the heresy of the Manichees, he heard a
voice, saying, Toll and lege, take up and read; meaning the book of God;
which he presently did, and so by reading was converted: for surely the reading
of the word is a means appointed of God, to the begetting of faith and raising
up the Kingdom of God in the hearts of men; And to say that bare reading is
bare feeding, and a thing unable to work faith in us, is to avouch a great
untruth.

But the especial ordinary means, and the most powerful usual means, is
the word preached. This is that which the scripture lays down: How shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? how shall they hear without
a preacher? And again, It pleases Romans 10. 14. Gal. 3. 1
God by preaching to save. Reading is profitable, but preaching does profit
more than reading does: Spice, when it is whole smells sweetly, but when it
is broken and bruised by the hand of the Apothecarie, it smells a great deal
more: So is the word read of The ministry of the word and motion of the spirit
means of faith.
us, or to us, sweet as they honey, and brings the light of life to many; but
if the spiritual Apothecarie break it and bruise it, cut it, and divide it,
as the Lord has appointed by preaching, then reaches the savor of such
heavenly sweet to many more, in a fuller measure, by reason of the blessing,
that God gives unto it. The Eunuth read, but he understood not; but when
Philip preached unto him, the sweet brake out to his lasting good. Act. 8.


The inward means whereby faith is wrought in us, is the blessed Spirit of God,
which softeneth, and opens our hearts, and makes them as good ground, that
when the seed of the Word is cast into them, it takes deep rooting, and
brings forth the blessed fruit of faith. The Apostle says, that His
preaching was 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
in demonstration of the spirit, that their faith might be in the power of God.
And the preaching of the Gospel is termed, A ministration of the Spirit: yea,
he uses this phrase, The Spirit of faith; because 2 Cor. 3. 8. cap. 4. 15.
that faith is wrought inwardly by the Spirit. Thus ye see, faith is wrought
in us outwardly by the word of God, and inwardly by the Spirit of God; he is
(...) and (...).

Where are confuted Andradius, Latomus, Hosius, who say, that Philosophy
justified the Gentiles; that Socrates, Plato, believed as well as Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob. Yet Howlet, a Papist says, that faith is both begun and
increased by the word preached, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
and that therefore it is called Incorruptible seed.

Here are confuted also the Atheists, that think, that faith is common: For
all of them say, that they believe: but faith is a gift, yea a most rare gift
of God; God sent his Patriarchs in the ancientest age of the world, and could
find no faith: He sent his Prophets in a latter generation, and could find no
faith: Last of all, he sent his own Son, a man approved of God, and approved
his doctrine with miracles and signs following, and could find no faith. And
when the Son of man shall come, shall he find faith on the earth? We read but
of two believers in all the host of Luke 18. 8. Number. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 20. 2 Timothy
1. 26. Act. 1. 15. Apoc. 3. 4. Mat. 16. Iam. 2. 19.
Israel; but of eight in all the old world; but of one family that believed in
all Asia; but of a hundred and twenty in all Christ's time; but of a few in all
Sardis: Caro and sanguis non dant fidem, sed pater in coelis; Flesh and blood
give not faith, but the Father in heaven. Many boast of faith, but if they have
any, it is the Devils faith. Nay, many believe not so much as the Devil does;
but say with the fool, Non est Deus, non est demon, non est infernus, non
Psalm. 14. 1.
est coelum; There is no God, no devil, no hell, no heaven. All by nature are
Infidells, we draw it from Adams loins, and sucked Genesis 3.
it from the breasts of Heva, who believed the devil before God. And in that
some few believe, it is by grace, not by nature. Now grace is rare; therefore
says the Apostle, unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should
believe in him, but also, etc. If any ask me, when God gave this faith, I
answer, that he did it in the beginning and it has, does, and shall continue
for ever. This As God is immutable, so true faith and Religion.
commends the Faith, the Religion of God, that it is before all religions;
the ancientest Philosophers, and Poets, as Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, exceeded not
the days of Solomon, who yet lived five hundred years after Moses the writer
of the Law.

Again, all the wonderful things recounted in the Scripture are recorded by
the Heathen; as Noah's flood by Berosus, the tower of Babel by the Sibyls, the
story of Abraham by Dupolimus, the acts of Solomon recorded by Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus.

But to proceed to the next point: This faith was once given, once for all,
once for ever; which commends unto us the constancy of God, With whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of change: He Iam. 1. 17. Psalm. 33. 9.
speaks, and it is done; he commands, and it is made; he gives and
grants without revocation. Therefore it was well said Balaam, God is not as
man that he should lie, nor the Son of man, that he Number. 23. 19.
should repent: Shall God say, and not do? shall he speak, and not perform?
With men there is unconstancy; as in Iael; who offered Sisera rest and milk,
but there withal a nail and a hammer. Saul granted peace to David, with a
breath, and with a breath revoked Judge. 4. 1 Samuel 26. 2 Samuel 13. John 6.
it. Ammon loved Thamar once, but hated her by and by more than he loved her.
The Jews gave Christ the title of a King, and anon after the title of a
Rebel. The Antiocheans honored Paul as a God, but after changed their mind.
There is such mutabilitie in men, that they change like the Moon, they alter
like the Cameleon; but God alters not; but gives his gifts to his Church once
for ever. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11. 29.


Note this word (Once) so often repeated, once God gave the Law, once he gave
the Gospel; Once more will I shake, not the earth only, but also Heaven: And
again, After he had offered one sacrifice Hebr. 12. 26, 27.
for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God. And again, with one
offering he has consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. And again,
Heb. 10. 12. 14. Hebr. 9. 27, 28. Romans 6. 10.
It is appointed for men once to dye, etc. so Christ was once offered to take
away the sins of many. And again, In that he died, he died once to sin.
Note all these Texts; one Gospel, one Sacrifice, one death, one appearing of
Christ, one death of Christ, one for all, and one for ever.

If any object, and prove a change in God, because God gave Circumcision, the
Passover, the Sabbath, the Sacrifice, and after took them away again; ye
shall understand, that he gave them as figures and shadows, and therefore no
mutability in the Lord: The shadow must give place to the body, the figure to
the truth, the green blossom to the ripe fruit, the seed time to the harvest.
So reasons Paul, Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect
of an Holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabboths, which are but a shadow
of things to come; but the body is in Christ. The day star must give place
to the Sunne-rising, and that to the Sun at Noonday. Chrysostom compares
Though types cease, yet truth and substance remain ever the same.
the Jews to a candle; the Christians, to the brightness of the Sun; The
Jews, to the first draught of an Image in bare lines; the Christians, to the
same Image filled up with all due proportion and furniture of colors; the one
to the seed-time, Hom. 10. in Mat. Gal. 4.
the other to the harvest, and reaping of the Corn: So Paul compares the
Jews to a Child, the Christians to a perfect man: the same light, though not
in the same quantity; the same Image, though not with like furniture; the same
corn, though not grown to the like ripeness; the same person, though not in
the like perfection of age.

The Jews note five things wanting in the Gospel, and in the latter Temple,
that were in the first (to disprove this that I have said.)

First, the fire that came down from heaven, to burn the Holocausts.

Secondly, the glory of the Angels appearing among the Cherubins.

Thirdly, the inspiration of Gods spirit speaking in the Prophets.

Fourthly, the prefence of the Arc.

Lastly, Vrim and Thummim. But all this is nothing: for there is now a fuller
knowledge of God, and greater liberty to the conscience; yet the same faith
still. For the Fathers and we have all Col. 2. Ier. 23. 5.
but one faith; they believed that Christ should come, according to Ieremies
prophecy, Behold, the days come, says the Lord; that I will raise unto David
a righteous branch and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth. We believe that he is come, and that Christ
our Passover is sacrified for us. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Esa. 7.
They said, Virgo concipiet, a maid shall conceive, and bring forth a Son; we
say, Virgo concepit, a maid has brought forth her S^^ne: For when the days
were accomplished, that she should be delivered, Luke 2. 7.
she brought forth her first begotten Son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a Cratch. They had sacrifices that prefigured his
coming, we have Sacraments that represent his coming Heb. 9.
and being with us: they and we had but one light; they had Lucem matutinam,
the moning light; we, Lucem meridianam, the light at noonday. We differ but
In plus and minus: therefore says Christ; Blessed are the eyes that see the
things that ye see: Mat. 10. 24.
For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see the things
that ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things that ye
hear, and have not heard them.

If any object, that God gives us daily new Paith, new graces.

I answer, that God gives not a new, a strange faith, but adds to our old
faith, to our old graces, God increases, faith and his graces in us, but not a
new, a diverse faith, like the Arrians that had Fidem annuam and menstruam, a
yearly, and a monthly The Gospel immutable: Traditions uncertain.
Faith; For whom God loves, he loves to the end.

This also commends unto us the Gospel: that whereas other Laws and
Doctrines are changed, altered, augmented, and diminished, Gods Law is not: The
Law of the Lord is perfect. John 13. 1. Psalm. 19.
The Laws of the Romans written by Numa Pompilius, in Gold; The Laws of the
Athenians, written by Draco, in Blood; the Laws of the Persians, written in
Brass; The Laws of the Lacedaemonians, written in Milk, were altered; but
Gods Laws are not. Quoad substantiam, as concerning their substance; Sed quoad
maledictionem, as concerning the curse. 2 Cor. 3.


All traditions therefore, all Gospels of Thomas, Nicodemus, Thaddeus, and the
eternal Gospel invented in Saint Cyrils time, by abusing the place in the
Revelation which runs thus, I saw another Angel flying in the midst of
Heaven, having an Apoc. 14. 6.
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, etc. must fall
to the ground, like the house built upon the sand; as also all those
Revelations of the Paraclete, devised by Montanus, together with all those that
came after the giving of the Gospel, which is perfect for ever, and so
perfect, that If any man shall add unto it, God shall add to him the plagues
that are written in Apoc. 22. 18, 19.
the Book; and if any man shall diminish from the words of the Prophecy of
Gods Book, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of
the holy City, etc. Let us not then add nor diminish from the Gospel being
so perfect; for there is but one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one Christian
Hope, once revealed Ephesians. 4.
for all.

But of the late Romish traditions, which have entered long since the Gospel
entered, one may say to Rome as Esaias said to Jerusalem, Thy Gold is turned into
Dross, thy Wine is mixed with Water, thy Seed with Cockle; thou were sometime
a faithful Esaias 1.
City, but now become an Harlot, thou were once the house of God, but now
turned into a cave of thieves. Thou say that thou art rich, and increased in
wealth, and stand in need of nothing; Apoc. 3. 17.
but thou art poor, and blind, and naked, (as God said to the Church of
Laodice) poor, and blind, and naked indeed, God give them hearts to
understand, and eyes to see their poverty and nakedness.

But to pass with this heavenly Scripture, as Moses did with the people to the
land of Canaan.

Thirdly, this Faith is given to the Saints: By Saints he means the children
of God, truly converted; not because they are perfectly holy and without
sin, but in these four respects:

First, in respect of Separation: for they they are elected, and gathered out
of this world, and joined to Gods people, and dedicated to holy services and
uses.

Secondly, In respect of Vocation, and therefore the Apostle The Saints the
subjects of Faith and all Graces.
when he said, they were sanctified, he said by explication, that they were
Saints by calling.

Thirdly, In respect of Regeneration, because they are now new creatures. 1
Cor. 1. 2.


And lastly, In respect of Justification or imputation, because the holiness
and sanctity of Christ is imputed unto them. For men may be Saints in this
life; For there are Saints in Earth as well as in Heaven: Hereupon says David,
All my delight is upon Psalm. 16. 3. Psalm. 37, 28. Ephesians. 3. 8.
the Saints in Earth, and on such as excel in Virtue: And again, He
forsakes not his Saints. And Saint Paul calls himself, The least of all
Saints. And Saint Jude here speaks of Faith given unto the Saints. The
Papists will acknowledge no Saints till three things come unto them: first,
they must be canonized, by the Pope; secondly, they must be dead first; and
thirdly, it must be an hundred years after death: Risum teneatis amici?

But to leave all this. In that this Faith is given unto the Saints, we
learn, that holy things are not to be given to Dogs, Mat. 7. 6.
a Gold ring becomes not a Swines snout; Cardui benedicti are not for the
mouths of Mules, the songs of Nightingales are not for the ears of Asses.

Faith is not given to the Reprobate: God has made other Pro. 11. 22.
things for them, and they for other things: He has made them For Prove. 16. 4.
Deuteronomy. 4. Jer. 6.
the day of evil. God gave the Law, yet to the Israelites, not to the
Hittites, Canaanites, Peresites: He gave the Arc, but not to the Philistines:
He gave Incense to Sheba, Balm to Gilead, fine Spices to Arabia, Ezekiel. 37.
Milk and Honey to Canaan, Silver to Tharsis, Gold to Ophir: but He gave his
word to Jacob, Ier. 9. Ezec. 37. Deuteronomy. 6. 1 Cbr. 29. Psalm. 147. Mat. 13. 11.
13. 1 Cor. 10. 15.
his Statutes and his Ordinances unto Israel; he has not dealt so with every
nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Law, Christ speaks
mysteries, but he explaned them only to his Apostles, Paul spoke, but yet unto
them that had knowledge; I spoke to them (says Paul) that have understanding,
judge, ye what I saw. So we speak, but not to them, that are wilfully
ignorant, that shut their eyes, stop our ears, and harden their hearts
against the Word, with such men we meddle not, but in the sin wherein we find
them, in that we leave them; we speak only to bear witness of their sin,
against the day of the Lord, they have sinned, and their sin will find them
out; as Moses said to the two tribes, Behold ye have sinned against the Lord
Numb. 32. 25.
and be sure your sin will find you out; and ye shall be assuredly
punished for your sin; All things are given unto the Saints, and nothing is
given to the Reprobate but in Gods wrath, and for the elects sake: for their
sake God made the world; for their sakes he redeemed it: For God so loved the
World, that he Genesis 1.
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him might not
perish but have life everlasting: For their sakes he preserves it, and John 3.
16.
when the body of Christ is made perfect, the number of the The wicked usurpers
of Gods gifts.
Saints accomplished, God will dissolve the frame of this evil World: and
therefore when the souls of the Saints that were killed cried out, How long
Lord holy and true tariest thou, to judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the Earth? Answer was made, that they should rest for a little season
until their fellow servants Apoc. 6. 10, 11.
and their brethren, that should be killed, even as they were, were fulfilled.

That the wicked live, they may thank the Saints, the Godly; how soever they
hate them, yet they enjoy all for their sakes: the wicked are but usurpers and
intruders, to gift of God is due unto them, but plagues only; Upon them he
shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempests, this shall be
their Psalm. 11.
portion to drink: For judgments are prepared for the scornful, and stripes
for the fools back. For tribulation and anguish shall be upon the Soul of
every man that does evil. Romans 2. 9.


As Elisha would not have spoken, but for Iehosaphats sake, so we would not
speak unto you, but for some good men's sake that are amongst you, otherwise
you should dye in your sin, and rot and dye in your sin; you have neither
part nor fellowship Act. 8. Apoc. 22.
in Jesus Christ, as Philip said to Simon Magus; Let him therefore that is
filthy be filthy still.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
VERSE. IV. For there are certain men crept in, etc. The Church and Religion,
has their adversares.



WE are now come to the third reason, taken from the person of the
Adversaries; and it lies thus; The adversaries impugn the Faith; therefore
the Saints must stand for it.

The Church has many adversaries, like Bees in an hyve, like Moates in the
Sun, like Pismires on a molehill. John says, That Apoc. 12. 7.
he saw a great battle in Heaven, that is, in the Church, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragonfought and his Angels: And Paul
said, There were many 1 Cor. 16. 9.
adversaries: We may say of the Church, the Faith and Religion of God, as
David said of his own person, Mine enemies Psalm. 38. 19.
live and are mighty, and they that hate me wrongfully, are many in number.

As there is a contrary in all, day and night, cold and heat, sickness and
health, life and death; so in Religion. Chrysostom In ser. de nequitat depulsa.
says, Ferrum rubigo laedit, lanam tinea, ovem lupus, Polium segetes, grando
vineam, etc. Rust hurts Iron, the Moth Wool, the Woolfe the Sheep, the
Leopard the Kidde, the Hail the Vine, the Cockle the Corn, the Caterpillar
the Fruits; few but have their adversaries. So Faith and Religion, Atheists,
Papists, Pagans, Heretics, Schismatickes, Sectaries, all these bark against
the Saints, as dogs against the Moon.

Religion divides men in an house, I am come (says Christ) Secret enemies
most dangerous that pretend Love.
to put fire on the Earth; and what is my desire, if it be already kindled?
Think ye that I am come to give peace in earth: I tell you nay, but rather
debate: From henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three
against two, and two against three. The Father shall be divided against the
Son, and the Son against the Father; the Mother Luke 12. 49, 51, 52. 53.
against the Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother; the mother in law
against the daughter in law, and the daughter in law against the mother in law.
The godly, the faithful are as Lambs amongst wolves, as Lilies amongst
Thorns, as Doves amongst Ravens; Mat. 10. 16.
many oppugn the Faith, therefore we must be ready to defend it, yea strive
for it unto death, as Ioab fought for God: so let us speak for God, and write
for God. If we had as many tongues and pens, as Argus had eyes, let them all
speak and Eccles. 4. 2. Sam. 10.
write for the Truth; yea, if we had as many as hairs on our heads, as Jerome
said to Helvidius, Si veritas est causa discordiae, mori possum, tacere non
possum; If Truth be the cause of our discord, I may dye, but I may not be
silent: We cannot but speak the things Act. 4. 20.
we have seen and heard.

But to come to the description of these Adversaries; they are here described
two ways.

By their Life, End.

By their Life they are described four ways:

First, they creep into the Church.

Secondly, they be (...), men without God.

Thirdly, they be Libertines.

Fourthly, they are Blasphemers, Denying God and Christ.

By their End also they be described; they are ordained to Judgment, written
in the black Book, not of Life, but of Death.

But first, they are described by their Life: and they are said first, to
creep into the Church. The Greek word signifies a crafty entrance into the
Church; they come not in by the Door John 10.
into the Sheepefold, but clime up some other way; they come not in the Day but
in the night, like thieves; they are Woolves in Sheep clothing, Caterpillars
to devour the vineyard of Christ; Mat. 24.
they thrust in themselves, like Judas amongst the Apostles; therefore the more
to be resisted; for no enemy is so dangerous as a secret enemy; It was not an
open enemy (quoth David,) that did defame me, for I could have borne it:
neither did my Adversary exalt Psalm. 55. 12, 13.
himself against me, for I would have hidden me from him: but it was thou o
man, even mine own companion and guide, and my familiar. They pray with us in
one Church, and dip their hand with us in one dish; these creepers are the most
dangerous hell hounds above all others, they have Butter in their mouths, but
Swords in their hearts: A Dog that barketh may be prevented before he bite,
and the serpent that hisseth, before he sting, and the fire Satan assaults.
sometime by cruelty; sometime by subtilty.
that smoketh, before it burn; so may a known enemy, but a secret enemy, a
creeper, is hard to prevent. Satan prevails many ways, sometime as a Lion,
sometime as a Serpent; sometime by force as a Lion, as in Nero, Domitian,
Trajane, Vulerian; sometime by fraud, as a Serpent, as in Herod, in the
Pharisees, in Julian the Apostata, who corrupted by the faith more by lenity
and rewards, than all the bloody persecutors did by the sword; whereupon one
distinguishes of Devils, and says, that some are black, and some are white;
to teach, that he hurts not one way, but many ways; he shows himself a
black Devil, when He goes about like a roaring Lion seeking to devour; a
white Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Luke 4. 41. Act. 16. 17.
when he cried, Thou art Christ the Son of God: and again, he showed
himself a white Devil, when as he cried, These men are the servants of the
living God, which show untous in the way of salvatio; meaning Paul and Silas.
But whether Devils be white or black, yet they be Devils still; yea and so
much the more vile, that they be Mat. 26. Mat. 7. 2 Cor. 11. 14.
white: For there is no kiss to the kiss of Judas; no woolfe, to him that is
clad in a Lambs skin; no tear to the tear of a Crocodile; so no Devil to
him that appears in the shape of an Angel. Satan has sore wounded the
Church every by open and tragical persecutions; as in the days of Christ,
Even among the chief John 12. 42.
rulers many believed in him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not
confess him, lest they should be excommunicate. And in the ten persecutions,
Satan raged against the Church horribly; but never so much as by inward enemies
in the bosom of the Church: For when the Officers that were sent to apprehend
Christ, told the Pharisees, saying, Never man spoke as this man; The Pharisees
answered, Are ye also deceived? Does any of the rulers or the Pharisees John
7. 48.
believe in him? Christ had no greater enemies than the Church, the Synagogue.
For who resisted him? not Atheists, but the Church, the Scribes and Pharisees,
the expounders of the Law, the friends of the Gospel: Paul had more ado with
false Apostles, than with the uncircumcised, the infidells, the Pagans; Some
would destroy the purity of majesty and the Gospel by their eloquence; some
would bring in Iudaisme: The subtle Gibeonites troubled Joshua more than the
open Canaanites: The Manichees did more hurt the Church, than all heretics,
and that under the color of not marrying, not eating of flesh, not drinking of
wine. None will weep faster than a Crocodyle; none will make a greater face of
godliness than these hedge-creepers. Ismael will Ier. 41.
weep to Gedaliah; Herod will bid the wise men seek diligently for Christ, and
when they have found him, to bring him word, Mat. 2.
that he may come and worship him; The Herodians will salute Christ Mat. 22.
with many goodly titles, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and
teach the way of God truly; for thou carest for no man; thou considerest not
the outward appearance of men, etc. Dalila will pretend all love to Sampson; O,
I love thee Sampson. The adversaries of Judah Popery prevails more by fraud
than by force.
and Benjamin will say to Zorobabel, and to the rest, We will build with you,
we will sacrifice with you: but Ismael killed Godaliah; Herod would have
butchered Christ; the Herodians tempted him; Dalila betrayed Sampson; and the
adversaries of Judah would have pulled down the Church, and not built it up.
Such trees without Judge. 15. Esder. 4.
fruit, such ears without corn, such nets without fish, such lamps without
oil, such clouds without rain shall perish: As they have lived without fear,
so shall they did without hope; as they have a body without an heart, so have
they a soul without God. They in fell nequitiae, even in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; and therefore they have neither part
nor fellowship in Gods Kingdom.

To apply this to the present state of the Church: Satan has prevailed more in
Popery, by fraud, than by force; by creeping, than by breaking in with a
skaling ladder. The first Roman Monarchy stood of unjustice, maintained by
arms; and this latter of impiety, maintained by fraud and hypocrisy: Whose
coming is by the working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying 2 Thessalonians. ^. 9, 10.
wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness: The Popes Kingdom
is not described by force and arms, but by sleights and wiles, by the names of
women, enchantments, cups, Apoc. 17. and. 19.
fornications. The beast representing the Roman Empire, had the horns of a
Lamb, and the mouth of a dragon. In all the Kingdom of Popery, in Pope,
Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, Friars, Nuns, what was there but hypocrisy? How
deceived they the world with their Prayers, Alms, Fastings, Crossings,
Greasings, Purgatory, Auricular confessions, Trentas, Dirges, Masses, Prayer
for the dead, going on Pilgrimage, etc. The Friars under a color of wilful
poverty, begged and robbed the world: The Nuns, under a show of single life,
filled the world full of bastardie: Sexcenta millia capita infantum in Gregorii
piscina reperta sunt; there were six hundred thousand Childrens heads found in
Gregory's fishpoole. The Priests by a color of Masses, made merchandise of
souls, and filled Judas satchells; The Abbeies, under a color of alms and
hospitality, robbed most parishes of their Ecclesiastical livings; they stole
a goose, and gave a feather; greater thieves than ever was Barabbas; they gave
a meals meat, and robbed a parish of their Church maintenance. The
Confessors, under pretense of auricular confession, knew the secrets of all
Kingdoms: It was the Popes fishing net, it has deposed more than two hundred
lawful Princes; it made Frederick Barbarossa the Popes Footstool at Venice;
it exiled the King Desiderius into Lions. The Pope under show of Bulls or
pardons, has robbed God of his glory, men of their money and, souls of
salvation: he has gotten thereby in America four millions yearly: they are
like their fathers the Pharisees, They devour widows houses, even under a
color of long prayers; wherefore they shall All Atheists before regeneration
and conversion.
receive the greater damnation. The whore of Babylon gives poison in a golden
cup; Beda, Venerable Beda, says, that the serpent in paradise had vultum
virgineum, a virgins face, that he might deceive Heva, a virgin: for he is a
deceiver; Yea from the beginning, Math. 23. 14. Apoc. 18. John 8. 44. Apoc. 20.
2.
and abode not in the truth, (...). The Dominicans, under the pretense of
preaching; the Franciscans, under pretense of chastity, (Nam virilia
amputarunt;) the Carmelites under show of virginity; and the Augustines, under
pretext of poverty, have erected the Papal Kingdom by hypocrisy, under
color of religion. But Babylon is fallen, even Rome, the Queen of pride, the
nurse of idolatries, the mother of whordomes, the sink of iniquity, Sentina
malorum, lacuna scelerum; yea, the Romish Iezabel is thrown down, and if the
palms of her hands and her skull, or any thing of her remain with us, let us
pray, that it may be buried also. This Dagon is fallen down twice, once in
King Edwards days, and again in our days, and let it never rise again. Let
this golden Diana be beaten down for ever; Let this whore of Apoc. ^8.
Babylon perish, and let her smoke rise up for evermore, and let all that love
the Lord Jesus say, Amen.

But to proceed in the description of the wicked. Secondly, they are here
described by their impiety, he says that they were (...), without God,
without Faith, without religion; they deny God the only Lord, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; so Paul said Ephesians. 2. 12. Phil. 3. 17, 18.
of the Ephesians before their conversion, They were without Christ; alienes
from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant and promise, and
had no hope, and were without God in the World. And such were the Philippians;
They were enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.
end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame;
which mind earthly things. Such were all the Gentiles, spiced with impiety:
For they walked in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitations
darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that
was in them. The world is full of such Atheists, they swarm like bees in
Hibla, they abound like lice in Egypt, all the dust was turned into lice; and
in England all or most men's profession is turned into Atheism, Machivelisme;
saying, that Religion is but policy, to keep men in awe. Many are of the Luke
12.
fools religion, to eat, drink, play; but to remember no God, to pluckedown,
to build up, to gather in, but not to serve God in holiness and
righteousness. Heu vivunt homines, tanquam mors nulla sequatur, Et velut
infernus fabula vanaforet: Alas, men live as if no death should follow, and as
if Hell were but a fable. There be many now like that Captain, that warred
under Adrian the Emperor, called Similus, who at his death caused this Epitaph
to be written upon his tomb, Hic jacet Similus, etc. Here lies Similus, a man
that was of many years, and lived only but Seven; many years without God, but
seven years in God; many years wickedly, but seven years religiously; many
years like an Atheist, Atheists consuted by reason and sense.
but seven years like a Christian: So a number of us may say, that we have
lived many years, and yet but few years for God; many years in sin and
wickedness, but few years in virtue and godliness.

There is a double life, of Nature. Grace.

In the one all live, but in the other, the elect only. In all ages Atheists
have abounded: in David's days, The fool said in his heart, there is no God:
In Salomons days; they cried, A quick dog is better Psalm. 14. Prove. 9.
than a dead Lion. We know what we have here, but we know not what we shall
have in another world. In Esayes days; For there were that said: We have made
a covenant with death, and with Hell are Esa. 28. 15.
we at agreement: In Christ's time; For there were Sadduces that denied the
Resurrection, and affirmed that there was neither Angel nor spirit: In Peter's
days; For there were that said, Where is the promise of his coming? and so
denied the last Judgment: In 2 Pet. 3.
Chrysostomes time they cried, (...), etc. give us that which is present; let
God alone with that, which is for to come. In Calvin's time; for then there were
such, that took away all difference between good and evil, virtue and vice,
sin and righteousness: And in our days, we have, that deny God and Christ,
and heaven and hell, Angels, Spirits, and all. David calls them fools;
Solomon calls them Epicures; Esaias notes them as blasphemers; Christ calls
them Sadduces; Chrysostom, Nullifidians; Calvin, Libertines; we call them,
Machiavels, ungodly men.

Such are worse than the Devil: For he confesses God, but these perhaps deny
that there be Devils, so did the Sdaduces: these men therefore shall feel
Devils, before they believe Devils. I would not be in their coat for the
Kingdom of England; no, not to be Monarch of the world for ten thousand
years: Devils are seen, they are felt, they are heard, yet these men deny
them: but I will remit them to Philosophy to be counseled, that Sensus non
fallitur circa proprium objectum; sense cannot be deceived about his proper
object.

The very Heathen will condemn us: Tullie says, Non temere nec fortuito sati
aut creati sumus, sed profecto fuit divina quaedam vis, quae generi consuleret
humano, nec id gigneret quod cum exantlavisset labores omnes, tum incideret in
mortis malum sempiternum; portum potius nobis paratum putemus; We are not borne
or created rashly or by chance, but verily there was a certain divine power,
which did provide for mankind, neither would it suffer them so to be borne, as
that when they had undergone all manner labor, they should be utterly lost in
the everlasting evil of Death; but rather let us think some haven of rest is
prepared for us. A divine speech of a profane man. The Epicures said, that God
was idle in heaven, quodque Deus ambulat circa cardines Coeli: and that he was
walking about Gods power and providence governe^ all things.
the poles of heaven; that nature rules all, by chance, and at adventure: On
the contrary, the Stoickes held that God is nothing but nature, and that all
things are wrought by necessity and destiny, that God can work no miracle,
nor contrary to the course of nature, But the Platonists held, that nature is,
Quicquid Deus vult; that it is subject to God, that there is neither chance nor
destiny, but all things are done by God. Some therefore compare Nature to an
horse, and God to the rider, that bridleth her and rules her as he list. Anima
mundi est virtus Dei, the power of God is the soul of the world; Mundus est
schola animarum, the Origin. Basil.
world is the school of souls, to lead us to the knowledge of God: God
therefore (quoth he) was able by his power to change the course of nature as
thus:

To divide the Sea in two parts. Exodus 14. Ios. 10. Number. 16. Ios. 3. Psalm. 114.
Dan. 3. Dan. 6. Luke 7.


To stay the Sun.

To open the Earth.

To dry up the Waters of Jordan.

To make the Mountains skippe like Rams.

To quench the Flame.

To mussell the Lions.

To raise the Dead.

In this sense Simonides the philosopher said, that Solus Deus est
metaphysicus, that God alone was supernatural. Pindarus called God (...), the
best artificer. Diogenes seeing Harpalus that great thief to be fortunate a
long time, said, that he gave a lively testimony against the Gods: So Dionysius
said, that God favored pirates, for that he had a good wind after the robbing
of the Temple: So Hermogenes reasoned, seeing so much evil in the world, Aut
voluit Deus tollere mala, and non potest, and tunc infirmus est; aut potuit and
noluit, and tunc invidus est: God either would take away evil and cannot, and
then he is impotent; or could and would not, and then he is envious: But
Tertullian retorted it thus on him, Deum velle and posse omnia mala tollere
quatenus expedit: God is Romans 8. 28.
both willing and able to take away all evil, so far as it is expedient; For
all things work for the best unto them that love God. Quaedam tollit in hac
vita, alia reservat in extremum judicium; some he takes away in this life,
some he reserves to the last judgment. Facessant ergo illi monoculi Cyclopes,
qui Deum negant; istud quatenus expedit relinquamus Deo; herewith therefore let
those one-eyed Cyclopes, which deny God, be content; let us leave to God that
same, so far forth as it is expedient. So reasons the Manichaeans against
Moses, when he said, In the beginning God made heaven and Genesis 1. 1. Aug. lib.
1. de Genes. John 1. 2.
earth; quaerentes in quo principio Deus fecit Coelum? Quibus respondit
Augustinus, Deum non fecisse in principio temporis, sed in Christo per quem
omnia facta sunt; nam antequam fecit Deus tempora, non erant tempora; nam
tempus est creatura, and dicit Paulus veritatem fuisse ante tempora aeterna:
Asking, in what beginning God made heaven? All men by the light of nature have
acknowledged a divine power.
To whom Augustine makes answer; God made it not in the beginning of time, but
in Christ by whom all things were made; for before God made time, time was not:
for time was a creature, and S. Paul says, The truth was before time eternal.
These men say much, but to little purpose; Loquacior est enim vanitas, quam
veritas, and altius clamat: for vanity prattles more than verity, and Ephesians. 3.
9.
makes a greater noise. I allege not all these profane writers for need; I
know that the darts that are taken out of the Lords armorie pierce deepest,
that the arrows that are drawn out of the Lords quiver are the sharpest, that
the sword of the spirit cutteth deepest, that proofs taken from the Scripture
are strongest. But it is not amiss to confute a natural man by natural men,
as here by Philosophers.

But to follow this point a little further: Naturally a kind of religion is
found in all men, in genere, though they err in specie. Caine and Abel did
first sacrifice to God; Enoch was the first that Genesis 4.
instituted prayer; After Noah's flood were many Laws of religion given to many
nations; Mercury, and Mena gave laws to the Egyptians; Melissus to them of
Candie; Faunus and Ianus to the Latins; Orpheus to the Greeks; Numa pompilius
to the Romans; Draco to the Athenians; Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians; Deuter.
4.
but Moses and Aaron gave laws to the Hebrews, that passed them all.
Naturally we know that there is a God; For the invisible Romans 1. 20.
things of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the
creation of the world. The very Poets spoke of Jupiter, Castor and Pollux,
Venus, Saturn, Vulcan, Mars, Mercury; yet Jupiter was an adulterer; Gastor
and Pollux, two incestuous twins; Venus an harlot in Cyprus; Saturn a
Runnagate in Italy; Vulcan a these; Mars a bastard; yet this shows, that
there is Divinum numen, a divine power, that the Heathen think so, therefore
they adore something as God: they invented Gods in hell, as Pluto and
Proserpina; the Egyptians worshipped Calves; the Ophytes, serpents; the
Persians, fire; they of Canopus, water; the Coloridians, Heva; the Philistines,
Dagon, halfe-fish and halfe-flesh; the Turks at this day worship Mahomet; the
Tartarians, grand Came; the Calecuts, the Devil.

But there be many reasons to prove, that there is a God; all the creatures of
God do it, from the Eagle, to the Fly; from the Elephant, to the Pismire;
from the great Whale, to the little Lamprey; from the Camel, to the Gnat; from
the Cedar, to the Brake-bush; from the Stars of Heaven, to the Dust of the
Earth; from Angels, to Worms. And therefore men that deny God, may be sent to
the creatures, to learn that there is a God. Esaias reasons thus: Who has
measured the waters Esa. 40. 17. 21, 22.
in his fist, and counted Heaven with the spanne, and comprehended the Dust of
the Earth in a measure, and weighs the Mountains in a weight, and the hills
in a balance? And again, Know ye nothing? Conscience in man a testimony of
the divine power.
have ye not heard it? has it not been told you from the beginning? have ye
not understood it by the foundation of the Earth? He sits upon the circle
of the Earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as Grassehoppers; he stretches
out the Heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in.
And Solomon reasons thus: Who has ascended up to Heaven and descended? who
has gathered the Wind in his Prove. 30. 4.
fist? who has bound the Waters in a garment? who has established all the
ends of the World? what is his name, or his Sons name, if thou can tell?
And God reasoning with Job says, Where wast thou when Job 38. 4, 5, 6. 8.
I laid the foundations of the Earth? declare if thou have understanding: who
has laid the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line
over it? whereupon are the foundations thereof set? or who has laid the
cornerstone thereof? or who has shut up the Sea with doors. When it issued,
and come forth out of the Womb? etc.

The world is, Schola Dei, the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work. And the Apostle affirms, Psalm. 19. 1.
that God left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us
rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness. O every shower of rain is a Preacher, and tells us there is a God.

Note this, that nothing was made of it self, nor for it self, but for
another. The Heavens (we see) do serve the Air, the Air serves the Earth,
the Earth the Beasts, the Beasts serve Man; Man therefore not made of himself,
was made to serve another, which can be no other but God; The Lord has made
all things for his own sake: If all things, therefore Man; which Pro. 16. 4.
confuteth Atheism.

Again, it is an arrow, yea a hammer against Atheism, that all men have a
conscience of sin, and are afraid of it: Conscience is a witness either
with us, or against us; either to excuse us, or accuse us. It bears witness,
of what? of secret particular actions. Against whom? against thy self. To
whom? to God; (seeing neither men nor Angels know the secrets of thy heart.)
Let all Atheists bark against the Godhead: as long as they will; Intus est
vermis qui illos mordet; within there is a worm that gnaweth them. In that men
are afraid and ashamed of sin, it argues that there is a God: we see, that
all creatures purge themselves of their corruption; The Sea her froth, the
water her skumme, the earth her vapors, the birds their feathers, the wine his
lees, the fire his smoke, the oil his some; Man therefore that would avoid his
sin, and be rid of it, has a conscience of God, and proves there is a God.

But alas, Religion beggeth in these days; Probitas laudatur and alget; our
religion is in imagination, not in faith; in opinion, not in judgment; in the
brain, not in the heart; in word, not in deed and effect: They profess they
know God, but inwardly in their works they do deny him, being abominable,
disobedient and unto every Few truly religious but many Epicures and Atheists.
good work reprobate; they have a show of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof. O vile times; the worst that have been ever since the creation
of the world; and if these days should not be shortened, no flesh should be
saved; but for the Elects sake God has shortened them. We Tit. 1. 16. 2 Timothy 3.
5. Mat. 24. 22. Esa. 58. 1. 1 Reg. 19. Mar. 3.
had need cry aloud and not spare, lift up our voices like trumpets; For
ordinary speaking has no proportion with extraordinary sinning. We cannot come
to you, as God came to Elias, in a still wind, in a soft voice; we must have
Stentors voice, be like James and John, the sons of thunder.

The Heathen said of their infidels, Plus amant bovem qua^ Iovem, they love the
ox more than Jupiter: we may say of many Christians, Plus amant coenam quam
coelum, cibum quam Christum; they love more their supper than heaven, more
their meat than Christ: they be (...), like lapwings, that delight in dung;
like Vespatian, who took a tribute of urine. Many nations have lived without
clothes, without King, without armor, but never any without God, as Tullie
said, Nulla gens tamfera, tamimmanis, etc. never nation was so wild, so
cruel, so barbarous, but have acknowledged and confessed that there was a God.
Near the river Ganges in India be men (...), without mouths, that live by the
sent of flowers; among us (...), men without hearts, that believe nothing.
Socrates said, Hoc scio, quod nihil scio; I know this that I know nothing; and
they, hoc credo, quod nihil credo, I believe this that I believe nothing: they
have set down their rest, Non esse Deum, non esse daemonem, non esse coelum,
non esse infernum; there is no God, there is no devil, there is no heaven,
there is no hell; and therefore they say, Our life is short and tedious, and in
the death of a man there is no recovery, neither was any known that have
returned Wisd. 2. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5.
from the grave; we are borne at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as
though we had never been: for the breath is as smoke in our nosthrills, and
the words as a spark raised out of the heart, which being extinguished, the
body is turned to ashes, and the spirit vanishes, as in the soft air, etc.
Come therefore, let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, etc. These wild
Bores root up the Lords vineyard, these Foxes destroy the grapes, these
Ionas's trouble the ship of England. For Christ's Psalm. 80. 13, 14.
Church is Christ's ship, tossed with waves: but let us run with the Apostles,
and awake our Savior, that he may hurl out Mat. 14.
these Ionas's.

Thirdly, the wicked are here described by their carnalitie and liberty, they
turn grace into wantonness: for ungodliness has two branches, iniquity in
life and manners, and impuritie in religion: of the first, he says, They turn
grace into wantonness: of the second it is said, that they denied God and
Christ Jesus. Of the Act. 6. Romans 8.
first sort were the Libertines that disputed with Steven: Paul had to do with
such heretics, vile men, that said, faciamus mala ut inde veniat bonum; Let us
do evil, that good may good come thereof. Gods grace ought to lead to
repentance.
Or let us be evil, that God may be good: let us commit iniquity, that Gods
glory may be revealed; let sin abound, that grace may superabound. But
their judgment is just, and their damnation sleeps not; such are all
presumptuous sinners, Romans 6. 1.
that will sin of purpose, with an high hand, an hard heart, and a whorish
forehead: such are idolaters, blasphemers, drunkards, usurers, adulterers,
robbers, which say, yet once more will I do this or that sin, once more will
I dally; one cup more will I have; for God (say they) is patient and long
suffering: thus sin touches sin; but God will whet his sword and bend his
bow, and Psalm. 7. 11, 12.
then ye know what follows, the black arrows and instruments of death.

Paul shows a better end of grace, than wantonness; he says, The grace of
God, that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
and teaches us to deny impiety, and wicked worldly desires, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. The goodness of God
leads us to repentance, honor, health, wealth; long Romans 2. 4.
life takes thee by the hand, and leads thee to repentance; as the Angel
led Ezechiel into the Sanctuary: Noli peccare spe, nam Bern.
paenam dabis re; sin not in hope, for thou shall smart for it indeed. It is
as great a sin to presume of grace and mercy, as to despair of grace and
mercy: for they that despair may be raised up, but such as presume are
seldom saved: He that hears Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20, 21.
the Words of this curse, and blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace, although I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, thus adding
drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every
curse that is written in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall
put out his name from under Heaven: Therefore Paul in all his writings, when he
handles the doctrine of grace and mercy he handles it very warily, as a man
handles gunpowder or quicke-silver, lest they should turn it into
wantonness; As 1 Timothy 4. 10. We trust in the living God, which is the Savior
of all men, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Romans 8. 1.
especially of those that believe. And Romans 8. 1. Now there is no condemnation
to them that are in Cerist Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit. And Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. And 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, Gal. 5.
24.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, that ye should show forth the virtues of
him, that has called you out of darkness into his marveilous light. God is a
Savior of all, that is, of all believers; there is no condemnation, so that we
walk in the spirit; we are Christ's, if we crucify the flesh; a royal
priesthood, if we show forth the virtues of him, that has made us Kings and
Priests. Other wisdom has no portion of the Spirit of God; we have neither
part nor fellowship in Jesus Christ, Sumus in fell nequitiae, we are in gall
of bitterness.

Let us not then turn the grace of God into wantonness, as Gods benefits and
bounty often make licentious and impious.
many do; for the better God deals with them, the worse they deal with him,
turning grace into wantonness, and Christian liberty into carnal
licentiousness; not regarding the Apostles Counsel, Brethren, ye have been
called into liberty, only use not your liberty, as an occasion unto the
flesh, but by Love serve ye one another. Gal. 5. 13.
If God give us an inch, we take an ell, and abuse his goodness; God deals
with us, as a nurse does with her Child, he nourishes and brings us up; but
we deal with him, as the Asses foale with her damme, when she has sucked her
damme, she kicketh with her heel; as the swallow does with men, she
harbors with us all summer, and in winter departs, and leaves nothing but
dirt behind her. Thus Moses complained of Israel; Do ye so reward the Lord, O
ye folish people and unwise? Is not he thy father that has bought thee, he
has made thee and proportioned thee: So Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Esau complains of Judah; I have nourished and brought up children, but they
have rebelled against me: The ox knows his owner, and the Esa. 1. 3.
Ass his masters cribbe; but Israel has not known; my people has no
understanding. Jeremy renews the same complaint a little before the
captivity; They said not, where is the Lord that brought us out of the land of
Aegpyt? that ledus thorough the wilderness, thorough a desert, Ier. 2. 6.
a wast land, thorough a dry land, and by the shadow of death, by a land that
no man passed thorough, and where no man dwelt: and again, O generation, take
heed to the word of the Lord; have I been as a wilderness unto Israel, or a
land of darkness? wherefore says my people then, we are Lords, we will come
no more unto thee? Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet
my people have forgotten me days without number. The matter is more fully
handled by Ezechiel, Jeremy his mate and companion, both before and in the
captivity, saying; Thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou
wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood. Thus all the Prophets
Ezech. 16. 22.
with open mouth cry out against iniquity: The richer we are, the vainer we
are; the higher we are, the prouder we are; the stronger we are, the
crueller, and the more quarrellous we are; the younger, the lascivier; the more
healthful, the more sinful and careless: we wound God with his own
weapon; For he that should have been upright, when he waxed fat spurned with
the Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
heel; thou are fat, thou are gross, thou art laden with fat; therefore he
forsook God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation.
We abuse every blessing of God; we are like Aesops snake, that lay still in
the frost, but stung him that warmed her in his bosom; so long as God keeps
us sick, and lame, and poor, we are in some order, our ears are full of
Sermons, our lips full of prayers, our hands full of alms, our hearts full of
holy meditations; For when the outward man perishes the inward man is renewed
daily: but if we come to health, and wealth, and strength, we rage 2 Cor. 4. 16.
like Giants, we are like bad ground, which the more sweet dewes it receives,
the more weeds it brings out; And therefore we Gods patience makes us
presumptuous.
are near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. If God give some liberty
and remission, we stretch it too far; if he permit hawking and hunting, we
spend most of our days in it, we make an Hebr. 6. 8.
occupation of play: Because God permits us to eat and drink, and wear
apparel, we eat till we surfeit, and drink till we be drunken, and attire
our selves like peacocks; like Geta the Emperor, that was served in dishes,
after the manner of an Alphabet: like Bonosus who (as one says) was borne, not
to live, but to drink: like Tiberius Nero, called Biberius Mero; like Iezabel,
that painted her face: we power out our selves in all excess of riot, and so
turn all grace to wantonness: But let us think it sufficient for us, that we
have spent the time past of this life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking
in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness, in gluttony, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.
drinkings, and in abominable Idolatry: Wherein it seems to them strange,
that ye run not with them unto the same excess of riot, etc. They be vile
creatures that are unkind to their Sires: as the Hippotamos of Nilus, that
eats his damme; as the Pelicane, that sucketh the heart-blood of the old one;
as the wild Ass, that kicketh her damme; as the Viper, that eats out the
belly of the old one; and such be we; God may say of us, as Jeremy of the Ier.
5. 7.
Jews, I have fed them to the full, yet they committed adultery, and
assembled themselves by companies in harlots houses: They rose up in the
morning like fed horses, every man neyed after his neighbors wife.

Here I have to deal with two sorts of men; the first are they that refuse
the grace, and gifts and goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Such
were the Stoickes, that would enjoy no more than they could carry with them;
they said, with Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto; All that is mine I carry with me;
that with Crates, hurled their silver into the Sea: Such were the Essenes in
Christ's time, that had a bed but a span-broad, that strawed thorns under them,
lest they should sleep too long: Such were the Hermites in the primitive
Church, as Antonie, Macarius, Paulus, Thebaeus, Hilarion: Such were the Monks
in Ieromes days, of whom he makes three kinds, Anchorites, Caenobites, and
the Enobites,, which fled all company; Oppidum illis erat carcer, the town was
their prison; solitudo autem erat Paradisus, the wilderness was their
paradise; their bread was acornes, their drink water, their meat roots,
their bed cold ground: Biberunt non e calice, sed e concha, they drank not out
of a cup, but out of a shell; Amicti erant non pannis, sed pellibus; they were
clad not with cloth, but with skins: such were our Friars that professed
wilful poverty: such were women the Anchoresses, that had no more ground, than
they scraped with their nails: but God has given the earth, and the fruits
thereof to the Sons of men: So says the Psalmist, The Heavens, even the
Heavens are the Lords, but he has given the earth to Psalm. 115. 16.
the Sons of men: It is as lawful to enjoy the creatures of God, as to live.
The wicked eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the Pleasure often ends with
sudden destruction.
drink of violence, which is unlawful; but to eat the bread of
righteousness, and to drink the wine well got is lawful.

Many are thieves both to their backs and bellies, and unthankful Prou. 4. 17.
unto God; but so must not we: Christ was present at the Jews feasts, he came
Edens and bibens, eating and drinking; therefore they said that he was Edax and
bibax, (...), as if Luke 7. 34.
he had surfeited: we are the heirs of heaven and coheires with Christ, and
have right in all the creatures of God, all is ours; heaven is ours, heaven and
earth is ours, if thy garments be silk, 1 Cor. 3.
thou may put them on; if thy table be furnished with meat, thou may
eat what thy stomach craveth; if thy Hounds will take the beasts of the land,
or thy Hawk, the fowls of the air, thou may do it.

I speak not to justify the abuse of the world, that have turned all into
riot, and usurped upon all the creatures of God; with such men, or monsters
rather, I meddle not; but in the sin wherein I found them, in that I leave
them: I speak only of the recreation that God has given unto his Saints in
this weary life; From the heavens, in the Sun, Moon, and Stars; from the
air, in fowls and birds, some made for meat, some for mirth; from the earth,
in trees, fruits and flowers, and herbs, some made for necessity, some for
pleasure, as seeing and smelling; from the Sea, in variety of fishes: Whereupon
the Prophet exclaimeth, saying; O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom
have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches; so is the great and
Psalm. 104. 24.
wide Sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small beasts and
great: If by faith thou art made a member of Christ, his right is thine in all
the creatures of the world, and in his name, and to his glory thou may use
them.

But we are not troubled with Stoikes, Essenes, Hermites, Monks, Friars,
Anchoresses, etc. but with Epicures, qui ducunt dies in bonis, and subito
descendunt ad infernum; which a learned man englisheth thus: They sleep
soundly, and drink profoundly, and go to the Devil roundly, and that is no
lie: For they live, wax fat, and grow in wealth, their seed is established in
their sight Job 21. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
with them; and their generation before their eyes: their houses are peaceable,
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them: their bullcoke gendreth and
fails not: their Cow calveth and casts not her calfe: They send forth their
children like sheep, and their sons dance: they take the tabret and the
harp, and rejoice in the sound of the organes, they spend their days in
wealth, and suddenly they go down to the grave. Their throats are sepulchers,
their stomachs sponges, their bellies graves, their hands talons, their fingers
loadstones: they eat with Ceres, and drink with Bacchus, and sport with
Venus: Apollo must tickle their ears with the Lute, the Muses must sound in
that service, the Graces must wait on their trencher; Ganimede must fill them
the cup, they are sorry that their patrimonies are Voluptuous men's practices
described.
no larger, their bellies no wider, their throats no deeper, their lives no
longer, that they might live still in all pleasure: So that the saying of S.
James may be verified in them, Ye have lived in Iam. 5. 5.
pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness, ye have nourished your hearts as
in the day of slaughter. They wish, with Philopenus, a neck as long as a
Cranes neck, that they may feel the sweetness of their meat a long time; in
their company is the tabret, harp, lute, and a pair of cards sooner than the
New Testament: and as the Prophet speaks, The harp, the vial, the timbrell,
and pipe, and wine Esa. 5. 12.
are in their feasts, they regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider
the work of his hands. God calls them to prayer, fasting, mourning, Et ecce
mactant boves and oves: They fall to killing of sheep, and Esa. 22. 12, 13.
slaying of oxen, eating flesh, and drinking wine; eating and drinking, for to
morrow we shall dye. They turn praying into playing, fasting into feasting,
mourning into mumming, almesdeeds into misdeeds: As Xerxes, being weary of all
pleasures, promised rewards to the inventers of new pleasures, which being
invented, Ipse tamen non fuit contentus, he himself was not satisfied, was not
content.

The word here is (...), which is derived from a town in Pisidia, called
Selge, built by the Lacedaemonians, where all were temperate and not one
drunkard; the contrary whereof is named (...), lasciousnesse; such men sin
with an high hand. All sin, but these men sin presumptuously: they never pray
with David, Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins. Sin in them reigns,
Psalm. 19.
not dwells; contrary to the rule of the Apostle, Let not sin Romans 6. 12. 2
Cor. 10. Ephesians. 4. 19. Esa. 5.
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof:
they walk not after the spirit, but after the flesh; they commit sin with
greediness; they draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
cartropes. But man with man will not reason so, the son with his Fathers, the
servant with his master, the subject with his Prince; will the servant be vile
and unfaithful, because his master is courteous unto him? Absit; God forbid.

Here I must answer one slander or challenge of the Papists; they call us
Libertines, as Howlet, and others; but they take upon them to judge betwixt us,
and the Libertines, as the Ass took upon him to judge between the Cuckoo and
the Nightingale: of all others, the Ass might worst do it; and of all others,
they may worst do it, seeing most of their doctrines tend to liberty, proving
all men to sin by their pardons and indulgences, saying, that holy water does
take away sin, that the sign of the Cross drives away the Devil, calling
with Alexander, whordome, adultery, incest, Peccadilla, little sins*
excusing the Popes theft as the theft of Israel, his drunkenness as that of
Exodus 11. Genesis 9. Judge. 15.
Noah, his murders as those of Samsons. All their doctrines tend to liberty,
as their doctrine of ignorance to be the mother of devotion, the doctrine of
auricular confession, which some learned call the Popes fishing net, the
doctrine of Purgatory, which Popish Doctrine tend to liberty.
others call the Popes milch Cow, or the soul or panche of the Mass: their
doctrine of satisfactions, that a man may be delivered out of hell by the
satisfaction of others, as was Traian the Pagane Emperor by the prayer and
alms of Gregory. What natural man under heaven would not sin, if he knew
that the Pope could give him pardon, that he could free him from hell and
purgatory? So that truly, if I were not a Protestant, I would be a Papist, if I
respected the pleasure of the flesh.

THE NINTH SERMON.
VERSE. IV. And deny God, the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus. God is denied many
ways.



SAint Jude having described the wicked by their hypocrisy, that They creep
into the Church, and by their Atheism: For he says, they were Ungodly men,
and by their Licenciousnesse, saying, They turn the grace of God into
wantonness; he comes now fourthly, to describe them by their Blasphemy,
That they deny God, the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now there be
many ways to deny God, as to deny his Attributes, his Power, Providence,
Justice, Mercy, Truth, Strength, Eternity, for these be the names of God, and
of the essence of God, and these are denied in the lives of most men. Some deny
his Power, as the Proud do: some his Providence, as the Infidels: some his
Justice, as the Impenitent: some his Mercy, as the Desperate: some his Truth,
as Liars and perjured men: some his Strength, as the Fearful do. Of the
first sort was Pharaoh; of the second sort were the Israelites; of the third
sort were the Libertines; of the fourth was Caine; the fifth were Zedeohia and
the house of Saul, of the last were the Jews. Pharaoh asked, Who is God, that
Exodus 5. 2. Psalm. 78. 19, 20, 21.
I should let Israel go? The Israelites distrusted God for bread, Can God
(quoth they) prepare a Table in the Wilderness? behold, he smote the Rock,
that the water gushed out, and the streams overflowed: Can he give bread
also, and prepare flesh for his people? Of the third sort Outward profession
nothing without inward integrity.
were the Libertines, Which turn the grace of God into wantonness: Of the
fourth sort was Cain, my sin is greater than can be forgiven? Upon whom
Augustine replyeth finely: Mentiris Cain, mentiris in gutture, major est Dei
misericordia, Cain, thou lie, thou lie in thy Jude 4. Genesis 4. Aug.
throat, greater is Gods Mercy than any man's Iniquity? of the fifth, was
Zedechias who forswore himself, and had therefore first, his children slain
before his Face; then his own eyes put out, and lastly, he was carried away
prisoner into Babylon: of the last sort were the Jews, who relied upon the
Egyptians. Now who offends 2 Reg. 25. Esa. 31.
not in one of these, or most of these?

But especially we deny God in our lives, in our deeds, thus the Cretians deny
him, They professed they knew God, but by works they did deny him, and were
abominable, disobedient, and unto every Tit. 1. 16. Tit. 2. 3. 5.
good work reprobate: and so are we, we have a show of Godliness, but we
have denied the Power thereof. I say of Professors, as Paul said of the Jews,
He is not a Jew, that is one outward, neither is that Circumcision, which is
outward in the Flesh, but he is a Jew, that is Romans 2. 28. 29.
one within, and the Circumcision of the heart is the true Circumcision: So he
is not a Christian, that is one outward, but he is a Christian, that is one
within; that serves God in Spirit and in Truth. And if we will serve God
truly, these Devils must be cast out of us, that are in us, and we must say
unto them, as Christ said to Peter, Come behind me Satan, videl. the Devils
of Avarice, Pride, Envy, Malice, etc. Which have filled our hearts, Mat. 16.
23*
as they filled the heart of Andnias. The profession of God is known by the
fruits of it, as fire is discerned by the smoke that comes out of the
Chimney, as life is discerned by the motion of Man. On the contrary, if a man
would persuade us, Act. 5. 3.
that there is fire where as there is no heat, or that there were life in a
carcass that never moved, we would not believe him: so believe not him, that
speaks of God, and lives not in God. This is an Axiom in Divinity, that all
Adulterers, Swearers, Thieves, Usurers deny God, whatsoever they pretend in
words, Quid dicta audiam, cum facta videam, what do I hear thee talk, when I
see thy deeds? Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven (says Christ) but he that Mat. 7. 23.
does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Those men are come to the
height of sin; For there be six degrees of sin, first Neglectus Ephesians. 4. 2
These. 2. Romans 1. Esa. 40.
notitiae Dei, the neglect of the knowledge of God; the second is, Execatio,
execation, blindness; the third is Idolatry, a fruit of execation, of
blindness; the fourth, outrageous wickedness, the effect of idolatry; the
fifth, a reprobate mind; the sixth, the fruits of a reprobate mind, that is, an
universal injustice in all their works: for they deny God in every work. The
wicked deny God, and yet all his creatues declare him; and Psalm. 19. 1.
that four ways, says Hemingius in his Enchiridion.

First, In the Variety of them. They that here feel not Gods graces shall
feel his power.


Secondly, In the Vtility of them.

Thirdly, In the Order of Creation.

And fourthly, In the End of their Creation.

The first declares his Power.

The second, his Justice.

The third, his Wisdom.

The last, his Glory.

Seeing all things are made for man, it cannot be but man is made for another,
and that is God only, but the wicked shall find God and feel God, when it is
too late, though here they do deny him. Therefore Hemingius distinguishes of
Gods presence, that it is fourefold: A presence of Power in all men, even in
the Reprobate; a presence of Grace, even in the Elect only, a presence of glory
in the Angels and Saints departed, and an hypostaticall presence of the Father,
with the Son, Quoad essentiam, as touching his essence. The wicked that deny
God here, shall feel his power one day, and say, We have erred from the way
of Truth, the light of Righteousness has not shined unto us, Wis. 5, 6. 7.
and the Sun of Understanding rose not upon us: We have wearied our selves in
the ways of wickedness and destruction, and we have gone through dangerous
ways, but we have not known the ways of the Lord, etc. Thus God complained
of Israel and Judah, saying, They have grievosly trespassed against me says the
Lord, they have denied the Lord, and said, It is not he, etc. Thus may we
complain. Therefore Ier. 5. 11. 12.
I say to England, as he said to Judah: O daughter of my people, gird thee with
Sackcloth and wallow thy self in the ashes, make lamentation and bitter
mourning, as for thine only son, for the destroyer shall suddenly come upon
us.

They deny the only God, etc. God here is called (...) the only God to note
the Trinity in Unity; there is one God, one Essence of the three persons, Deus
unus and trinus; unus Essentia, trinus Hierom.
personis, God is one and three, one in Essence, and three in persons. Thus
Moses taught Israel; The Lord our God is Lord only. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
Malachi asks the Jews, if one God has not created them? As if he should
say, ye know well enough; for the question Mal. 2. 10.
is more Emphaticall, than a simple proposition. In this point Paul notes a
great difference betwixt the Christians and the Heathen, saying, Though there
be many, that are called gods, in Heaven or in Earth (as there be many gods,
and many Lords:) yet unto us 1 Cor. 8. 6, 7.
there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Again,
he speaks of the Deity, as of the Mediatorship, Vnus Deus and unus
Mediator, etc. There is one God and one Mediator 1 Timothy 6.
between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. And a number of unities he
commends to the Ephesians: There is one Body andone Spirit, one hope of your
Vocation; there is one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
one Baptism, one God and Father over all, etc. We must neither confound Many
resemblances to illustrate the Unity and Trinity.
the persons, nor divide the Essence, but hold the plurality of persons, and
the unity of the Essence.

The Heathen thought it impossible for one God to govern this great world;
therefore they made one God for Heaven, as Jupiter, another for Hell, as Pluto;
one for Bread, as Ceres; another for Wine, as Bacchus; one for the Sea, as
Neptune; another for the Wind, as Aeolus; one for Learning, as Minerva;
another for Merchandise, as Mercury. Thus the Heathen vowed Tenths to Hercules,
that they might be rich; they killed a Cock to Aesculapius, that they might
recover their health; they sacrificed a Bull to Neptune, that they might sail
prosperously.

But what do I name the Heathen, when the Papists multiplied to themselves
many gods? they prayed to Sebastian for help from the Plague; to Anthony, for
the Gangrene; to Patronilla, for Agues; to Apolonia, for the Touth ache; to
Benedict, for the Stone; to Hubert, for the biting of a mad Dog; yea they
have made a several God for every Country, as Saint George for England, Saint
Jacques for Spain, Saint Dennis for France, Saint Patricke for Ireland, Saint
Palladius for Scotland. Yea, for every beast a several God; as Loye for
Horses, Anthony for Pigges, Wendeline for Sheep: But their madness is evident
to all 2 Timothy 3. 9.
men. If they say, they make not these Gods: I ask, why pray they unto them?
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? But we believe in
God alone, therefore must we pray to Romans 10. 14.
him alone. There is but one Sun in the Heavens, one Phaenix in Arabia, one
master-Bee in an Hyve, one Pilot in a Ship, one God in the World. The Trinity
of Persons the Fathers have shadowed forth unto us by diverse similitudes, as in
the Rainebow, in which is one substance, namely the cloud, and yet three
differences, which thou art not able to discern: In the Fountain, where there
is Scaturigo, the boiling or rising up of the water out of the Spring; Rivus,
the River; and Stagnum, and the Poole: In the Mind, where there is
Intellectus, Understanding; Voluntas, the Will; and Memoria, and the Memory: In
the Soul, where there is (...), the Soul; (...), the Mind, and (...), the
Spirit; and yet there be not three Minds, nor three Souls, but one Mind and
one Soul, but three powers in the Mind and Soul: In the Sun, where there is,
Corpus, the Body; Calor, Heat; and Splendour, Light or Brightness; and yet not
three Suns, but three distinct things in the Sun. The Orthodoxe Fathers
said truly and wisely, (...), One Godhead, and one God in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity. And God is three, not by composition of parts, but by coexistence of
persons. The Jews also note in the verb (...) Bara, the mystery of the
Trinity, by (...) Beth, the Son, by (...) Resh, Ruah, the Spirit, by (...)
Aleph, Ab, the Father. Christ is many ways divided.
But this holy mystery is more clearly taught by Moses, Genesis 3. 22.

Again, They deny Christ; of which sort there be many. The Jews deny, that
he is come; the Pagans deny, that ever he will come; the Turks confess that
he is come, but yet as a man, not as a God, inferior to their Mahomet; the
Papists confess in words that he is come, but in truth denying the person of
Christ, making his body every where, that is, no where: yea many have denied
Christ, and robbed the Creator, to give to the Creature; the Italians ascribe
all to the Pope; the Irish to Saint Patrick; the Scots to Palladius; the
Russians to Saint Nicholas; Munster in Cosmog.
and the Calicutes to the Devil.

But to speak orderly; men deny Christ many ways. Some deny his Divinity, as
the Arrians; some his Humanity, as the Vbiquetaries; some his Natures, by
renting them a sunder as the Nestorians, who make two Christ's, one the son of
God, another the son of Mary; some deny them by confounding them, as
Eutiches, Qui dixit humanitatem a divinitate absorptam esse, which said, that
his Humanity was swallowed up of his Divinity; some deny him, by concealing him
in time of persecution, as the Nichodemites do: A Sect against which we are to
lift up our voices like Trumpets, for He that denies Christ in Earth Mat. 10.
33.
before men, shall be denied in Heaven, before Angels. For this cause, they of
Ephesus are said not to have denied Christ, but to have suffered for his sake,
and to have labored without fainting. And Apoc. 2. 3.
they of Pergamos are said, not to have denied Christ: For though their
habitation was where Satan's throne is, yet they professed his name, and not
denied the faith. Remember that the fearful are placed with Vriah in the
forefront, in the vauntguard Apoc. 2. 13.
of the damned; so says Saint John, The fearful and unbeleeving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all liars, shall have their part Apoc. 21. 8.
in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone which is the second Death.

On the contrary, Righteous men are compared to Lions, which fear no colors?
so says Solomon, The wicked flee, when Prove. 28. 1. Luke 8. 1 Pet. 1.
none pursues him, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion: on the other side,
its naughty ground, that will be scorched with heat; it is dross, not gold,
that will be melted in the fire, it is counterfeit, not right Balm, that will
not abide the water: it is a bastard Eagle, that soareth not to the Sun: He
is a Coward, Exodus 19.
not a Soldier, that shrinketh in the battle, He is an Infidel, and not a
Christian that denies Christ in persecution. For one Faith is named, one
Profession: Hold fast (says the Apostle) the Profession of your hope without
wavering. And again, Heb. 10. 23. Heb. 3. 1.
Consider the Apostle, and high Priest of your Profession, Christ Jesus: Much
Profession, much Faith; no profession, no Faith. Christ is denied, when the
efficacy of his death is denied.


But chiefly we deny the Lord Jesus two ways: First, by denying the
sufficiency of his death, as the Galathians did, and as the Jews did, and as
our Papists now, who will not let Christ be a Savior alone, but they join
works with him; but all works are accursed (so says the Apostle) As many as
are of the works Gal. 2. Romans 10. Gal. 3. 10.
of the Law (that is, think to be justified by them) are under the Curse.

Secondly, we deny the Lord Jesus, by denying the efficacy or virtue of his
Death, not dying unto sin: Therefore Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from Death, that Christ may give thee Ephesians. 5. 14.
Light. For as the Sun does not warm all whom it lighteneth, as the people
under the North Pole, who have the Sun six months together, and yet freeze;
so the Spirit of God does not cause all to feel the virtue of his Death, whom
he illuminateth with the knowledge of his death. Such are our Atheists, the
former are Papists, the later are Atheists, and both deny Christ.

The profession of Christ stands not in words, but in deeds, not in tongue,
but in heart, not in opinion, but in life. The Apostle names a true Knowledge;
for many know not God truly. Saint Peter calls it an Idle knowledge,
distinguishing of knowledge, that it is Operans, and otiosa, a working and an
idle 2 Pet. 2. 8.
knowledge: for some carry Christ in their mouth and brain, as perfume in a
Pomander, without smell; as a sword in a scabbard, without cutting; as fire in
a flint, without heat. But this I will say to thee in the sight of God and his
Angels; that if thou do not dye to sin and rise again by a new life; if
thou do not kill sin in thee, as Murder, Whoredom, Malice, covetousness,
Usury, Pride, Drunkenness, etc. thou do neither believe the Death nor the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. So says Paul, Know ye not that all we which
have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his Death? And
again, If we Romans 6. 3, 5, 6.
be grafted with him to the similitude of his Death, even so shall we be to
the similitude of his Resurrection; Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth, we should
not serve sin. And Saint John the disciple whom Jesus loved, and which leaned
on his breast at supper, says, Hereby are we sure that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments; he that says, he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a 1 John 2. 4, 5.
Liar, and the Truth is not in him. This Death unto sin, and Resurrection to
newness of life, Paul calls it the virtue of his Death, The virtue of his
Resurrection? The stone Dioscorides is nothing Phil. 3. 10.
in the mouth of a dead man. And all knowledge of Christ is nothing in a
carnal man. The death of Christ truly believed, will cause thee to dye unto
sin; and the Resurrection of Christ will cause the dead body to rise unto
eternal life, and the dead mind to an holy life. So says the Apostle, If ye
The Papists deny the offices of Christ by consequence.
be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ sits
on the right hand of God, set your affections upon Heavenly things, and not
upon Earthly, for ye are dead, and your life is hid in God, etc. The Jews
know Christ, but not truly, that they know him it is evident Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.
by the testimony of the Apostle, Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in
the Law, and gloriest in God, but that they did not know him truly, the same
Apostle also testifies, saying, The name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you: yea, the Romans 2. 17. 24.
Devils knew him, and his death, but yet idly, historically only, not unto
Salvation. And many so believe historically, and no further than the very
Devils themselves do. For sin still reigns Iam. 2. 19.
in them, notwithstanding the commandment of the Apostle, Let not sin reign
in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Romans 6.
12.


But to return to our Papists, who have opened their mouth against Heaven,
whose tongue walks through the world; for pride is to them as a chain, they
are found to be notable heretics, denying, not in words, but in truth, the
Lord Jesus: First, they make him no Jesus, by ascribing purging of sin to the
blood of Martyrs, which they call, Thesaurum Ecclesiae, the treasure of the
Church; out of which they grant their Indulgences.

They make him no Christ, by denying his Offices; first, they make no Priest,
by erecting a daily unbloudy sacrifice, they rob him of his intercession, by
praying to Saints.

They make him no Prophet, by ascribing so much to their traditions, by giving
the Pope authority over the Gospel, to coin Laws as they list, by bringing
in with Cyrill the Monk, Evangelium aeternum, an everlasting Gospel, which
(say they) abolisheth the Gospel, of the Father in the time of the Law, and
the Gospel of Christ, in the time of Grace.

They make him no King, by giving all power to the Pope, to save and to
destroy, to pull out of Heaven, to pluck down to Hell: Such a Cerberus is this
of Rome, not with three heads, but with three crowns, boasting De plenitudine
potestatis, of the fullness of power, whose coming is by the working of Satan
with all power and signs and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish.

This has Satan parted his Kingdom, that the Turk in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
East should deny Christ's Natures, and the Pope in the West his Offices and
Merits. For the former Roman Empire stood on Injustice, the latter of Impiety,
the first injuring Men, the other God, yet not so much (...), against God, as
(...), against Christ. The Papists allege the words of the Apostle, Hereby
shall ye know the spirit of God, every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: but by the Spirit there is meant the
doctrine, not of men; the doctrine is of God, though not the man. They quote
also another place of John, Whosoever Christ alone paid the whole ransom of
our Redemption.
believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God; but Saint John speaks not
of a bare confession, but of a right belief, for the Devils confessed Christ.

To conclude, they hold not the foundation with us, For other 1 John 5. 1. Luke
4. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Gal. 5. 2.
foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus: For
if the Galathians, joining Circumcision with Christ, overthrew all; for so
says the Apostle, If ye circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. The
Papists joining works with faith, nature with Grace, the Law with the Gospel,
the Sacrifice with the Sacrament, Moses with Christ, must needs overthrow all:
for whole Christ or no Christ, Totus Christus, aut nullus Christus, He paid
(...), the Ransom, and either he paid all, or not a 1 Tit. 2. Act. 4.
penny: Non est aliud nomen, there is no other name given unto men, whereby
they shall be saved, save only by the name of Jesus. One compares Christ to
a man that purchases a Lease with his own money, and lets it to his
successors, to hold it by a Pepper kernel, or a Rose leaf: Christ has paid
for our Salvation, For we are redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver
and Gold, etc. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled;
all our 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
works are but as a pepper kernel; yea as nothing, For when we have done all
those things that are commanded us, we may say, that we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duties to do. Luke 17. 10.
If the fathers of these men had never sinned, yet could they not do greater
injury to the Church of God than to beget such sons, or monsters rather, as
Tully said of Catiline, Ecce ecclesiam apostaticam and (...), non Catholicam,
utinam Deus Nestorem excitaret, qui lites inter nos and illos componeret,
Behold a Church Apostolical, and strife-stirring, not Catholic: I would God
were pleased to raise some Nestor up to compose these jarres, between us and
them.

But to leave this, note that Christ here is called our Lord; which he is two
ways:

Iure creationis.

Iure redemptionis.

First, By right of Creation: for by him God made the World. Hebr. 1. 2.


Secondly, By the right of Redemption: for God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son to save the World: Hereupon John 3. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
says Paul, Ye are bought with a price. Now redeeming is either by price and
paying, or by power and force. Christ has done both; he gave a price to God,
And gave himself a ransom for all 1 Timothy 2. 6.
men, He came by water and blood, not by water only, but by water 1 John 5.
and blood. In water, is signified washing; by blood, Redemption.

Secondly, by his Power he redeemeth, and has taken us from the Devil. So
says the Author to the Hebrews, He has delivered Hebr. 2.
us from death, and him that has the Lordship of death. And Saint John says,
that He saw a great battle in Heaven, Micbael and his Diverse effusions of
Christ's blood.
Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels, but
prevailed not, neither was their place any more found in Heaven. It was a
greater matter to Christ to redeem the World, Apoc. 12. 7.
than to make the World. He made it in six days, but he was thirty and three
years in redeeming it; he made all with a word, yea, with a breath, By the
word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and the host of them by the breath of
his mouth. For the letter Psalm. 33. 6.
(^ He) in the Hebrew is but a breath: But he redeemed it with a great price,
not with silver and gold, but with blood, not with blood of Bulls and Goats, but
with his own precious Blood: 1 Pet. 1. 18.
Gold and silver are but red earth, and white earth, which the error of man
has made to be esteemed; but the blood of Christ was so precious, that as a
Father says, Tanti quid valet? what is Aug.
of equal price with it? The least drop of Christ's blood was of such value, in
regard of the person, that it was able to redeem ten thousand worlds; but
less than Christ's blood could not redeem one Soul.

And there were diverse and sundry effusions of his blood. The first blood he
shed was at his Circumcision, when he was but De passione Dom. cap. 36.
eight days old; which S. Bernard calls Maturum martyrium, a timely martyrdom:
to which end he further adds, Vix natus est Coeli gloria, Coeli divitiae,
deliciae, dulcis Jesus, and ecce recenti ortui crucis dolor copulatur; Scarce
was sweet Jesus come into the world; who was the Glory, the Riches, the Delight
of Heaven, but he underwent the painfulness of the Cross.

The second effusion of blood was in his Agony, whereof Saint Bernard speaks
thus, Ecce quam rubicundus, and quam totus rubicundus, Behold, how red, and how
wholly red he is? For Saint Luke affirms, that his sweat was like Drops of
blood trickling down to the ground.

The third effusion, was at his whipping; O cum quanta quantitate put as illum
sanctissimum sanguinem, e conscisso corpore and flagellato distillassein
terram? Oh in what abundance think ye, did the most sacred blood of his,
power down from his torn and scourged body, even to the ground?

The fourth effusion of blood was when the crown of thorns was despightfully
clapped upon his head, Nec hicputo defuisse rivos sanguinis, says Bernard, nor
can I think, that at this time there wanted rivers of blood.

The fifth and last effusion of blood was upon the Cross, where his Hands, and
Feet, and Side were pierced. Quis unqua^ tam gravia tam pudenda passus fuit?
who was ever thus cruelly, Bern.
and shamefully handled? Contendunt passio and charitas, illa ut plus ardeat;
ista ut plus rubeat, his passion and love did strive together that, that it may
be hotter; this, that it may be the redder: O suavissime universorum Domine,
etc. O blessed Jesus, the most gracious Lord and Savior of all thy chosen, how
can I render thee As Christ gave himself for us, so should we give our selves
to him.
sufficient thanks? For thy garment is dipped in blood, and the chastisement of
my peace has been upon thee, from the beginning of thy days unto thy death;
yea, and after thy death. Thus Christ's blood was often shed to redeem us:
Hear this, you that Apoc. 19. 13.
make so small account of your souls, and learn to esteem them at a greater
price: Hear this, you that are so careless of your sins, and learn to
shun them as Hell; hear we this all of us, and learn to be more thankful
to Christ for his benefits. Persius wept when he saw a Toade; and being asked
why he wept? he answered, that he bewailed his ingratitude, who served not
the Lord, that had made him a Man, and not a Toade: Christ's face was buffeted,
his eyes were blinded, his hands nailed, his feet pierced, his side launched,
that we may give our eyes, hands, feet, heart to Christ in his service, that
as we have given our members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, so Romans 6.
13.
we should give our selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and
give our members as weapons of righteousness unto God. Finely says one; O
stulti! cur Satanae in membris vestris servitis? O ye fools! Why serve ye
Satan in your members? Ille non creavit, non redemit, non sanctificat nos, non
pascit nos, he has not created us, not redeemed, not sanctified us, nor
feeds us: Quae haec insania Christum relinquere, a quo omnia bona, Diabolo
servire, qui est homicida? what madness is this, to leave Christ from whom we
receive all good, and to serve the Devil, who is a murderer? John 8. 44.
Stultum est servire Diabolo, qui nullo placatur obsequio; It is a foolish
thing to serve the Devil, whom no obedience, no service will content. But the
wicked shall one day curse these members, that have served the Devil, Vae
vobis (inquient) pedes maledicti, qui per gressus and saltus illicitos me ad
infernum traxistis; woe to you (shall Greg.
they say) cursed feet, which by unlawful leaping and dancing have drawn me
to Hell: Vae vobis manus rapaces, woe to you ravenous hands: Vae tibi cor
maledictum, woe to thee cursed heart, which seldom or never thoughtest of God:
O cursed tongue which has uttered so many obscene and filthy words; O cursed
eye, which never sheddest tear for thy sin, and therefore many thousand
years shall thou weep, and no man shall pity thee. God challenges both
heart and body; My son give me thy heart. Whereupon one descanteth very
finely; fili mi Mat. 22. 13.
per creationem, fili mi per redemptionem, da mihi cor tuum per dilectionem
Pro. 23. Holcot.
and devotionem, My Son by Creation, my Son by Redemption, give me thy
heart by Love and devotion. And the same Author compares Christ to a Falcon,
and he says thus Falconi volanticor datur pro mercede; to the flying Falcon,
the heart, of the Foul she takes is given her for her reward; this Falcon is
Christ, Ipse volavit de Coelo in uterum, he flew from Heaven into the Womb of
the Virgin; out of the Womb into the Manger, out of the Manger into the World,
from the Christ's passions ought to move us to dutifulness and thankfulness.
World unto the Cross, from the Cross into the Grave, from the Grave, to
Heaven again, Ergo cor vendicat pro praeda, therefore he challenges ^hy
heart for his prey. And Saint Chrysostom, that golden-mouthed Doctor, brings
in Christ thus speaking, Ego propter vos factus sum homo, propter vos ligatus,
propter Chrysostom.
vos in patibulo mortuus; ecce precium sanguinis, quod pro vobis dedi, ubi est
ergo servitus vestra pro tanto pretio? for your sakes I became man, for your
sakes was I bound, for your sakes dyed I upon the Cross; Behold, the price of
blood that I paid for you, where is therefore your service and duty, for such
a price? your service to him that gave himself for you, that he might redeem
you. Vide quid pro te patior, vide dolorem, cum Angelus venit de coelis ad
consolandum, vide clavos, quibus confodior, ad te clamo qui pro te morior; See
what I suffer for thy sake, see my sorrow, which was so great, that an Angel
from heaven was made to come to comfort me: See the nails wherewith I was
pierced and thrust through: I cry to thee, which died for thee, etc. A most
elegant Prosopopeia: What heart of flint will not be moved with it? O Jesus!
take away these stony hearts, and give us fleshly hearts. O duri and indurati
and obdurati filii Adae! O durate, indurate and obdurate sons of Adam! quos
non movet tanta benignitas, whom such great gentleness and courtesy cannot
move. Let us sorrow with Corinth, wash Christ's feet with Mary, let us weep
bitterly 2 Cor. 7.
with Peter, that we serve God no better. The Sun knew Christ, and therefore
against kind was eclipsed, the wind knew Luke 7. Mar. 15. Mar. 2. Mat. 14. Mat.
28. John 1. 10.
him, and therefore left blustering at his word, the Sea knew him and therefore
bare him up that he walked dry foot upon the waters, the Earth knew him and
therefore opened when he rose, the Devils knew him, only vile man knows him
not. He came among his own, and his own received him not, but let us receive
him, and serve him in holiness and righteousness, let us obey his
commandments, fear his judgments, and submit our selves 1 Samuel 3. 18.
to his blessed will and pleasure; saying with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good.

THE TENTH SERMON.
VERSE. IV. Which were of old before ordained to this condemnation, etc.
Destruction the end of the the ungodly.



HAving thus described the wicked, Which were before of old ordained to
condemnation, by their life; he comes now to describe them by their end: and
here he preventeth an objection, by a figure called Praeoccupatio, lest they
should take offense, and say, why does God suffer these wicked men, Hypocrites,
Atheists, Wantons, Libertines, Blasphemers; why do they prosper? why is pride
unto them as a chain? why do the wicked live Psalm. 73. 6. Job 21. 7, 8. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.
and wax old, and grow in wealth; their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their generation before their eyes; their houses are peaceable
and without fear? and the rod of God is not upon them; their Bullock gendreth
and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her calfe, they send forth
their Children like Sheep, and their sons dance, they take the Tabret and
Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organs, they spend their days in
wealth, and suddenly they go down to the grave. Jude answers them, That God
has ordained them to Judgment. Fret not thy self therefore because of the
ungodly, neither Psalm. 37. 1.
be envious for evil doers: For they shall soon be cut down, as the grass,
and withered like the green herb: Here they fare well, here they have cappe
and knee, and all the honor that may be; but Respice finem, they walk upon
ice, in the end they fall. For evil doers shall be cut off; yea, the arms of
the wicked shall be broken, the Psalm. 37. 9, 10. 20.
wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be consumed as the fat
of Lambs, even with the smoke shall they consume away. Look not therefore to
their lives, but to their end; their end is damnation; The enemies of Gods
Church and Children shall not long flourish.
For tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that does evil. In the
end, God will rain upon them fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this
shall be their portion to drink. Wheat and Chafe go together, till they come
to the flaile, but then the wheat is reserved, and the chafe burned: Sheep
and Goats go together, Romans 2. 9. Psalm. 11. 6, 7. Mat. 3. 12. Mal. 3. 17. 1
Pet. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 19.
till they come to the fold, but then they are separated; Gold and Dross go
together, till they come to the Furnace, but then the Gold is the purer, and
the Dross is moulten. Respice ergo finem, look not unto their lives, but unto
their end, O that they were wise, then they would understand this, they would
consider their latter end. For surely the prosperity of the wicked, shall not
continue, it shall have an end, and their hope shall be cut off. God Prove. 24.
19.
has appointed them to Judgment, they shall have no inheritance in the
Kingdom of God. Thou see Pharaoh in his Chariot, Exodus 14.
pursuing Israel; but look again, and thou shall see him in the Sea, feeding
Haddockes. Thou see Nebuchadnezzar in his Palace of Babel, vaunting and
bragging, Is not this great Babel that I have built for the use of my Kingdom,
by the might of Dan. 4. 27.
my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? but look again, and thou shall
see him in the wilderness amongst brute beasts. Thou see Herod in his
Throne, honored as an Angel; but look again, and thou shall see him on the
ground amongst Act. 12.
worms: Thou see Dionysius in his Chair of Gold in Siracusa; but look
again, and thou shall see him in Corinth teaching Boys, tossing a Scepter
inferulam. A Christian must not be like Polipheme, the one-eyed Giant: If with
one eye we see Damocles in a bed of Gold, with the other eye we shall see a
Sword hang over him in a hair, to dash that pleasure: If thou look on the
prosperity of the wicked, look on his end also, which is Damnation: Antiochus
shall not ever make havoke of the Church: the rich man shall not ever ruffle in
Silk and purple; Senacherib 2 Match. 9. Luke 16.
shall not ever rail on the daughter Sion; Sapor of Persia shall not ever be
drawn in a Chariot by four Kings; there will be an Prove. 23. 18.
end, there will be an end, and their hope shall be cut off.

They here used more the Greek word, signifies noted or written in a book,
(...), a phrase often used. The Prophet Mal. 3. 16.
Malachi uses it saying, Then spoke they that feared God, and the Lord
harkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for
them that feared God, and thought upon his name. And Christ our Savior uses
the very phrase, saying, Rejoice not that the Luke 10. 20.
spirits are subdued unto you, but rather rejoice, because your names are
written in Heaven. And Saint John uses also the same phrase; I saw the dead,
both small and great stand before the throne, and the books Apoc. 20. 12.
were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of Life. And
again, the same phrase is used in the description of the heavenly Jerusalem,
And there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or Iyes; but they which are Gods decree has two parts Election,
Reprobation not to be enquired into.
written in the Lambs book of Life. Not that God needs any Book; for this
is spoken (...), for our capacity; For he is God only wise, in him are hid
all the treasures of Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding; he knows all
from everlasting, and is the cause of all the Knowledge, that is in all, both
Cap. 21. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Col. 1. 9. Job. 14. Job. 38. 36.
Men and Angels. He calls all the stars by their names, he has put
Wisdom in the reins, and has given to the heart understanding, his Wisdom
is infinite. But let us see the certainty of his Judgments; for, as the voice
vanishes, but litera scripta manet; So the damnation of the wicked is
certain, his heart cannot endure, nor his hands be strong; that is, he shall
never be able to defend himself, he shall be as dross, as brass, Ezech. 22.
14. 18
as tin, and iron, and lead in the midst of the furnace, as God shall melt
them, that is, destroy them.

But to proceed orderly: the decree of God has two parts: Election, and
Reprobation.

That some are elected, appears by many testimonies of the Scripture: Paul
says, Whom he has predestinate, them has he also called, etc. Moses
wills Israel to Remember the days of old, when Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
the most high God divided their inheritance, when he separated the sons of
Adam, etc. And Paul says, That God has chosen us in him (that is, Christ)
before the foundation of the World: Wherefore some are Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 9. 17.
elected, some not; For he has Mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. God has made all things for his glory; yea even the wicked for the
day evil. If any will go further, and say, why will God be thus glorified?
The Apostle answers him, that he will have mercy on him to whom he will
show Mercy, and he will have Romans 9. 15. 18.
compassion on him on whom he will have compassion. And again, he has mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens: he does as pleases him; even
as the Psalmist says, Our God is in Heaven, he does whatsoever he will.
Christ gives no other reason; It is so, O Psalm. 115. 3. Mat. 11. 26. Psalm. 39.
9.
Father, because thy good pleasure was such. Obmutui (quoth David) quia tu
Domine fecisti, I became dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did
it. But if any proud man go yet further, and say, Why will God have it so? It
is a proud question for either man or Angel, and the Apostle answers him, O
man! who art thou that pleadest with God? Shall the thing formed say Romans 9.
20, 21.
to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power
of the clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor. Inscrutabilia sunt Dei judicia; and therefore the Apostle breaks
out, saying, O the deepenesse of the riches? both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God? how unsearchable are his Judgments, Romans 11. 33. 34.
and his ways past finding out; for who has known the mind of the Lord, or
who was his Counselor? I say with Augustine; Cave praecipitium; Take heed of a
breake-neck; With Job, lay thy hand Gods will most perfect, his proceedings
most just.
o^ ^y mouth; With David, meddle not with matters above thy reach, Quae supra
nos, nihil ad nos; What are above us, pertain not to us; With Paul, Sape
adsobrietatem; Presume not to understand above that which is meet to
understand but that ye understand according to sobriety. Job 39. 37. Psalm.
131. 1. Romans 12. 3.
Gods glory is above the Heavens; we may bark at it, as Dogs do against
the Moon, but we cannot pull it down.

To speak more fully: Gods will is a reason of all reasons, it is the rule of
all equity, Ideo vult, quia vult, He will, because he will, E^ ideo justum
est quia vult, and it is therefore just because he will. Tangere vis coelestes
ignes? liquesces, will thou touch these Lipsius.
Heavenly fires? thou shall melt. Scandere vis in providentiae montem? will thou climb up into the high mount of Gods Providence? Cades, thou shall fall,
Natabis in abysso Dei? will thou swim in Gods bottomless waters? Mergeris,
thou shall be drowned: Thou see a little living creature the Fly, buzzing
about the Candle till she be burned: So our mind waxes wanton about Gods
secrets, till we be overwhelmed. The will of God is Causa causarum, the cause
of causes; Cui licet quod libet, and nil libet, nisi quid licet: The Judgments
of God are August.
oftentimes secret, hid, but never unjust. Let us learn Heavenly things by
Earthly: A man has in his house vessels of Gold, and of Clay for his use and
pleasure; That a Prince pardons one malefactor, and punishes another, and
yet justly; That a Creditor exacteth ten pounds of one Debtor, and remitteth
twenty pounds to another, and yet in the one is but just, in the other is
merciful: So God damning some is just and saving other, is merciful, and in
neither cruel or unjust. David compares the judgments of God to a great
Deep, saying, Thy Judgments are like a great Deep, we cannot Psalm. 36. 6.
wade in them. Finely says Augustine, Tu homo expectas a me responsum, and ego
sum homo, itaque ambo dicentem audiamus: O homo, tu quis August. ser. 10. de
verbis Apost.
es? melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria sententia. Petrus negat;
Latro credit: O altitudo! quaeris turationem, ego expavescam; tu rationare, ego
mirabor; tu disputas, ego credam; altitudinem video and profundum non pervenio:
O altitudo! Thou O man expectest an answer from me, and I am a man as well as
thou, let us therefore both hear another speaking. O man, who art thou?
Faithful Ignorance is better than a rash unadvised Sentence. Peter denies;
the Thief believes: O height! thou demandest a reason of this, I will fear
and tremble; thou reasonest, I will wonder; thou disputest I will believe: I
see a depth, but I cannot come to the bottom; O depth!

But we, as though God had made us his fellows, as though we were of privy
Council, will rush into his Chair, and determine rashly of his Judgments.
Some grant election, but then they add, that it stands upon our works: that
godly are elected because they will be holy: but we are elected, that we God
elects us of his free Grace.
may be holy, not because we will be holy. Holiness is the (...) or effect, not
the cause of election. So says Paul, He has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him
in love, who has predestinate us to be adopted, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his
Will. As if Paul had said, that he considered nothing without himself, but
therefore chose us, because he loved us; no cause can be rendered of our
election, but the Will of God. Vocavit 2 Timothy 1. 9.
nos Deus, non secundum opera, etc. he has called us unto an holy calling; Not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us through Christ Jesus, before the World was. It is true of all men,
that Christ said of his disciples, non vos me elegistis, ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you; yea, God so preventeth us with his grace, that he
finds nothing past or to come, whereby God chose us, and be reconciled unto
us; For who has given unto him first? that is, provoked him, by his good
works? A lively example we have in these two brethren Esau and Jacob, both
twins, both enclosed in one womb, yet he rejected the one, and chose the
other; Non ex operibus, not by works, but by him that calls: Deus coronat
opera Romans 9. 11.
sua, non merita nostra; God crowns his gifts, not our merits: Cui daret
justus judex coron^^^, nisi cui dedisset pater misericors indebitam gratiam? To
whom should the just Judge give the crown, but unto whom the Father of Mercy
gives undeserved Grace? And he adds, Ne dicas ideo electus sum, quia
credebam, Aug. tract. 86. in Job.
si enim credebas, jam cum elegeras, non ipse te, and sic judicium esset penos
lutum, non penes figulum: Do not say I am elected, because I did believe; for
if thou did believe, thou had now chosen him, and not he thee, and so
the Judgment had been in the power of the clay, and not of the potter. But
hear what Christ says, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. I say
therefore with Saint Ambrose, Iustitia nostra magis constat remissione
peccatorum, quam perfectione virtutum, our righteousness consists more in
the remission of our sins, than in the perfection of our virtues. Even as
David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
sin is covered; blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes no sin.

One Father says thus, when we were not, God made us; when we were sinners,
he Justified us; when we were in prison, he freed us; when we were mortal,
he glorified us. Another Romans 5. 1. Luke 4. 18. Romans 8. 30.
Father says, God by his Wisdom has foreknowne us, by his Gospel he
calls us, by his Faith he justifies us, by his Justice he damneth us, by
his Grace he saves us: So that all is of his mere goodness, and no cause to
expostulate with God: His Judgments are just, but yet secret. Secret things
(says Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Moses) belong to the Lord our God, but the things revealed belong unto Five
signs of Election, two internal.
us. But if the Heavens declare the glory of God, let us speak to his glory:
Secreta Dei sunt adoranda, non scrutanda; Secret things are to be adored, not
searched: It is not good to eat too Prove. 25. 27.
much Honey; so to search their own glory, is not glory. It is reported of
Augustine, that being about to write his books of the Trinity, he was taught
by a child, who laded the Sea into a little spoone; to whom Augustine said,
that he labored in vain, for his little spoone could not contain the Sea.
To whom the child replied, that his little Wisdom, his shallow brain could
not contain the depth of the Trinity.

But you will say, how shall we know our election, that we may be comforted
against all the assaults of Satan, that we may say with the sweet singer of
Israel; Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil; for thou art Psalm. 23.
with me, thy rod and thy staff shall comfort me? And with Paul, I 2 Timothy 4.
6, 7. 8
have fought a good fight, I have kept the Faith, I have finished my course,
from hence forward there is laid up for me a crown of glory, which the Lord
will give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that
love his appearing.

I answer, that no man can be deceived in the state of his election, but he
that deceives himself; for we may know whether we stand in the state of
Grace, or no. Danaeus makes Danaeus in Isagog.
five signs of election; As the coming of the Swallow is a sign of the
Spring; as the putting forth of the fig tree is a sign of Summer; as the
whiteness of the region is a sign of Harvest: So there be many undoubted
signs of our election.

1 The first is the inward testimony of Gods Spirit, the seal and
earnest-penny of our Salvation. For it is God that has Sealed us, and has
given us the Earnest of his Spirit in our 2 Cor. 1. 22.
hearts. The Apostle compares the Word to a writing, the Spirit to a seal,
that ratifieth all. Clamat in nobis Abba, the same Romans 8. 16. Gal. 4. 6. Luke
11. 11.
Spirit bears witness to our Spirit, that we are the children of God. And
because we are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
which cries Abba, Father. And if God be our Father, how can we doubt of our
inheritance? If we ask Fish, he will not give us a Serpent, If Heaven, he
will not give us Hell.

2 The second sign is our faith, which is known by the effects, as the Eagle
by her feathers, as the tree of Life by the fruits of it. Thus Paul bade the
Corinths, try their faith, Prove your selves whether ye are in the Faith,
examine your selves, etc. Qui 2 Cor. 13. 5.
credit, salvabitur, he that believes shall be saved: and this faith may be
known to us, if we will search our selves. Christ asked Mar. 16. 16. John 8.
the woman taken in Adultery, where her accusers were? So ask thy heart where
thy sins are? and if thou do believe, it will say with the woman that they
are all gone: Qui enim credit transit Three external signs of Election.
a morte ad vitam, He that believes in him is passed from death to life: for
all that are borne of God overcommeth the World. And this is the victory that
overcommeth the World, even our Faith. John 3. 1 John 5. 4.
Hereupon Paul triumphs over Death, Hell, Hunger, Cold, Nakedness, Peril,
Sword, and concludes; That neither Death, nor Life nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Power, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature, Romans 8. 38, 39.
shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

3 The third sign is the conformity of our will to Gods will, to love that
which God loves, and to hate that which God hates: therefore we pray, that
Gods will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. He that does the will of
God shall abide Mat. 6.
for ever: For not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of the Father which is in Heaven.

4 The fourth sign is a strife against sin: For as the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, so does the Spirit against the Flesh. And they that are Christ's,
Have crucified the Flesh, with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5. 17. 24.
And he that is elected, will cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24.
Meaning the corruption which yet remained. The Law in our members which
rebelleth, they will tame, and give no way to the motions of the flesh.

5 The fifth and last sign is, the reformation of our whole life, a general
walking in the paths of righteousness and holiness, as our election is known
unto God from all eternity; For the foundation of God remains sure, and has
his seal: The Lord knows 2 Timothy 2. 19.
who are his, so is it known to us by our works: and therefore we are willed,
To give all diligence to make our election and calling sure, by good works, if
we can so live, that at the last; when we 2 Pet. 1. 10.
shall leave this World? we can say with Simeon, Lord now let Luke 2.
thou thy servant depart in peace. It is an undoubted sign of our election.

Our election is perfected by many degrees, Paul names three degrees of it:
Vocation, Justification, and Glorification: for so run his words, Those whom
he knew before, he predestinate; and whom he predestinate, them also he
called; and whom Romans 8. 29, 30.
he called, them also he Justified; and whom he Justified, them also he
Glorified. But others make other degrees:

The first, to be Christ's, with his gifts.

1 Cor. 3. Romans 8. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 4. 25. Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
The second degree is our Adoption.

The third, is our Vocation by the Gospel.

The fourth is Justification.

The fifth, is our Sanctification.

The sixth, is our Glorification.

These are the signs of our election, and this election is every God
reprobateth in Justice, as well as elocteth in Mercy.
way free: Never man laid hand on this work, never man brought stone to this
building, but all is from God, and his Mercy. Let us therefore throw down our
crowns with the Elders, and let us say with David, Not unto us, Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy name give the praise: And if our reason cannot comprehend this
our election, Psalm. 115. 1.
let our Faith comprehend it: Vbi ratio definit, sides incipit: where Ambr.
reason fails, faith begins. Let our reason be as Hagar, our faith as
Sara; if reason will presume, let Sara, let faith take her down a pegge.

The other part of Gods decree is Reprobation, here named of Jude, Of old
ordained to condemnation. Now whereas many grant election, but not Reprobation,
Reprobation is proved by many places of Scripture. Christ says, Every plant
which my Heavenly Mat. 15. 13.
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. And Paul speaks of Vessels of
wrath, ordained to destruction: And Esaias tells us that Romans 9. 22.
Tophet is prepared of old, it is prepared even for the King, he has made
Esa. 30. 33.
it deep and large, etc. yet many are squeamish of Reprobation, utterly
denying it: And Jerome was once of the mind; he said, that God elected some,
but reprobated none. Now if he deny all reprobation, this must be wrapped up
amongst the rest of his errors: Haec patrum pudenda tegi patior: I love to hide
these imperfections 1 Cor. 3.
of the Fathers; for they did not ever build gold upon the foundation, but
sometime hay and stubble, etc. Indeed God reprobates none but for sin: but
for sin he reprobates. And thus God is righteous, and his judgments just:
thus Christ divides the whole world into two parts, Corn and Tares, Goats and
Sheep; the Tares shall be bound up in bundels, and cast into the fire, the
Goats Mat. 13. and 25.
shall stand at Christ's left hand, and shall hear, Go ye cursed into
everlasting Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels: and mark that
he says, prepared for the Devil and his angels. If of five senses, we want
four, we cannot deny this Reprobation.

But what should I light a candle at noonday, or power water into the Sea, or
bring the breath of a man to help the blast or gale of wind? Magna est veritas
and praevalet: great is truth and prevails: for we cannot do any thing
against the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8.
Reprobation stands with the glory of God: for as his Mercy appears in
Election, so his Justice in Reprobation, and his Justice in punishing sin, is
as lawful, as holy, as glorious, as his Mercy in Christ Jesus. For in God they
are equal, and not qualities, but of the essence of God. For he is Justice
and Mercy it self: God is not made of mercy only, as a loaf is of Corn, or
wood of Trees, but of Justice also: And Gods glory shines as much in his
Justice as in his Mercy, God has made all things for his glory, and the wicked
for the day of vengeance. Shall we then reason against God, and say, Why does
he thus? Absit, God forbid.

Again, all the works of God have their contraries, wherein God not the author
of evil, but the disposer.
the infinite Wisdom of God appears. In Physic one thing binds, and
another loses; one thing comfort nature, and another thing destroys it:
In the state of the World, there is light and darkness, honey and gall, sweet
and sour, pricks and roses, fair and foul, herbs and weeds. In the
creation of the creatures, every thing has his contrary; the Woolfe to the
Sheep, the Weesell to the Cony, the Mouse to the Elephant, the Dragon to the
Unicorn, the Spider to the Fly, the Lion to the Beasts, the Eagle to the
Birds. Again, in the Church there are contraries; the Elect to the Reject,
Cain against Abel, Ismael against Isaac, Hagar against Sara, Esau against
Jacob, Pharaoh against Moses, Saul against David, the Pharisees against Christ,
the false god against the true God. Again, all virtues have their contrary
vices, Falsehood against Truth, Hatred against Love, Faith against Infidelity,
Temperancie against Riot, Prudence against Folly, Liberality against
Covetousness, Chastity against Incontinency, Fortitude against Pusillanimity.
So God has them that are elected to life, and fore-written to judgment: for
in the whole state of the world God has showed himself the Author of Justice
and Mercy. If there were no Darkness, we should not know the benefit of
Light; If no sickness, we should not know the benefit of health; If no death,
we should not know the goodness of life. So Hell makes the bliss of Heaven
seem the greater; and this destruction of the wicked, the salvation of the
godly, more happy and glorious.

But perhaps this seems hard, that God should reprobate some, ordain some to
condemnation; but I answer, No, since he reprobates none but such as
voluntarily sin, and so are the Authors of their own destruction. Obj. But
sinners cannot but sin. Answer. 1. But by grace they might be saved.
Secondly, though being left to themselves they sin necessarily, yet they
sin willingly: for necessity is to be distinguished from coaction. To clear
this point and the Lord, Deus est necessario bonus, non coacte: God is
necessarily good, not coactedly: Diabolus and mali necessario peccant, non
coacte: the Devil and the wicked sin, necessarily, not coactedly. But they
say, God will have all men to be saved: Audio Paulum loqui de 2 Timothy 2. 4.
generibus singulorum, non de singulis generum: I hear Paul speak of some of
all estates and degrees of men, not of all in general. Noble therefore and
Base, Learned and Unlearned, Rich and Poor, God will have to be saved; For
there is neither Jew, nor Grecian, there is neither Bond, nor Free, there Gal.
3. 28.
is neither Male, nor Female: For ye are all one in CHRIST JESUS.

If any man say that our sin is extenuated by predestination: I answer with
Augustine, Deus non est vitiorum nostrorum author, Man's sin and destruction
from himself.
sed ordinator: God is not the Author of our sins and vices, but the
ordinatour, the disposer. Hereupon says Solomon, The Lord has made all things
for his own sake, yea even the wicked for August. lib. de Genesi ad cap. 5.
Prove. 16. 4. Hos. 13. 9. Job 34. 10, 11, 12.
the day of evil. Blame not God, as Hosea said to Israel, One has destroyed
thee, but in me is thine help. Finely said Elihu, God forbid that wickedness
should be in God, and iniquity in the Almighty: For he will render unto man
according to his work, and cause every one to find according to his way, and
certainly God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
Judgment. Our sin is our own; if we perish, it is our own fault: many lay
2 Pet. 2. 12.
the fault in Adam, but the Wiseman says it is our own sin, therefore he
counsels us, Say not thou, It is through Eccles. 15. 11.
the Lord, that I turn back, for thou ought not to do the thing that he
hates. But Saint James answers all these cavils, saying, Let no man say,
when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man, but every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, Iam. 1. 13.
and is entised.

In this question we have to do with four kinds of Hogs, or Dogs rather:
Pelagians, Manichaeans, Anabaptists, Epicures.

All these bark as the Dogs of Corybant, who tore in sunder Neanthes the
son of Pittacus. To all which I answer, that the perdition of the wicked so
depends on predestination, as that the cause and matter of predestination is
found in themselves. Adam fell (God so ordaining it) yet he fell by his own
fault: For God made all things good, therefore Adams sin was not Genesis 1. 31.
by creation, but it was the malice and corruption of his will: it being as a
wheel flexible to either side, but the hand of the turner coming unto it, it
turned it to the left hand, not to the right: God made man right.

But say some, This doctrine destroys all care of well doing: Eccles. 7. 29.
for what need we do well, if God has elected us; or shun vice, if God
has reprobated us? But this presupposes things impossible: for God elects
none to salvation, but whom he first chooses in Christ unto an holy and
blameless life, Ephesians. 1. 4. Neither does he reprobate any but for sin, but
upon their refusal of Christ Jesus offered to them in the preaching of the
Gospel: for men are not vessels of wrath, till considered as sinners, Ephesians. 2.
3. nor ordained to destruction, but upon refusal of the means of Grace, Ezekiel.
24. 13. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. Wherefore if one man only were to be damned in
all the whole world, every man should Lament. 3. 22.
fear, lest it should be he, and walk carefully, For blessed is the man Prove.
28. 14.
that fears always. And if one man only were to be saved in the whole world,
every man should hope that it is he, and so rest on The action in sin is from
God, the prarity from man's corruption.
Gods mercy, walk carefully: Dum spiro, spero, quoth a Father, whilst I
breathe, I hope; and above all to take the shield of Faith, wherewith we may
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

To proceed orderly in this point: there be three opinions, the first, of the
Libertines: the second, of them that deny Gods Aug.
Providence, by granting a bare permission, as that he suffers all things,
but not that he wills all things: the third opinion is of them that grant
God to do all, but so, that all actions, as they proceed from God, are just,
but as they are done of us, to be unjust.

For the first; the Libertines make God the author of sin, and say of all
thefts, murders, whoredoms, that not man, but God did them, they call all
these sins, men's vocations, and that doing them, we do but walk in our
vocations; they say, Omnia licent: all things are lawful: Ergo licet scortari,
furari, occidere, therefore lawful 1 Cor. 10.
to whore, steal, kill; so reasoned Quintinus the Libertine with Calvin,
saying, Omnia munda mundis: all things are clean to the Tit. ^. 15.
clean: Stuprum ergo, furtum, homicidium esse munda: therefore whoredom,
theft, murder to be clean. But we make not God the Author of sin; For his
soul hates and abhors sin, his Law curses and condemns sin. And whereas
it is said, There is no evil in the City, but the Lord does it himself, the
words are to be understood, Non quatenus sunt mala, sed quatenus sunt malorum
poenae: not as they are evil, but as they are the punishment of evil. Again,
every action, so far forth as it is an action, is good, and of God: For in him
we live, and move, and have our being. As for example, one man Act. 17. 28.
kills another; the very moving of the body in doing this villainy, is of God,
but the evil of the action is from Man and the Devil: as one says finely,
Actio est a Deo, nequitia vero actionis ab Bez^.
homine: the action is from God, the lewdnes of the action from man. Another
uses this comparison, That as the Sun in Summer draws stench from a Carrion
which smelt not before, and yet Calvin.
the beams of the Sun pure, and no cause of the stench of the Carrion: so
Gods Providence draws evil out of men, and yet no cause of that evil.
Another uses this Simile, That as in cutting with a bad knife, the cutting is
of my self, but the evil cutting is of the knife; So the action is of God,
but the evil of the action is of our selves. Augustine affirms, Deum per
malos agere: Lipsius. August. in Enchiridion ad Laurentium.
that God works by evil men: Deus enim, inquit ille, jussit Shemei
Davidimaledicere: for God (says he) commanded Shemei to curse David. Again,
he says, In peccato peccatoris nihil esse positivum, sed privativum: In the
sin of a sinner, nothing is positive, but privative. So God is said to make
blind whom he inlightneth not, to harden whom he softeneth not, and to
reprobate whom he calls not effectually. But I will conclude this point with
the saying of two worthy men, Augustine, and Fulgentius. Augustine The causes
of Reprobation are hidden, but just.
says thus, Deus operatur in cordibus hominum, ad inclinandas voluntates eorum
quocunque vult, sive ad bona pro sua misericordia, sive ad mala pro ipsorum
meritis; God works in the hearts of men, to incline their wills to whatsoever
he will, either to good things by his mercy, or to evil by their deserts. And
Fulgentius says thus, Deus licet author non sit malarum cogitationum,
ordinator est tamen malarum voluntatum, and de malo opere cujuslibet mali, non
desinit ipse bonum operari: Although God be not the Author of evil
cogitations, yet is he the orderer of evil wills, and of the evil work of
every evil man, he cease not to work a good work.

Beza has three Aphorisms against Castellio; Primum, causas reprobationis
esse a nobis absconditas, sed tamen justas, alioquin judicium esset penes
lutum, non penes figulum: First, the causes of reprobation are hid from us, yet
they be just, otherwise the judgment were in the power of Clay, not of the
Potter.

Secondly, Deum non simpliciter creare quenquam ad exitium, that God not simply
has created any to destruction, but the causes 1 Hosca 13. 2 Pet. 2.
of destruction are of himself: Perditio tua ex te, O Israel, thy destruction
is of thy self, O Israel; and the Apostle says, that the wicked perish
through their own corruption.

Thirdly, Deum non spectare reproborum exitium, ut ultimum finem, sed gloriam
suam, quae in eorum justa condemnatione lucet, that God beholds not the
destruction of the wicked, as the last end: but his glory, which shines most
brightly in their condemnation. As Solomon says, The Lord has made all things
for his glory, even the wicked for the day of evil. So that the justice of God
shall appear to his glory, even in the destruction of the wicked.

The second opinion is of them. Qui dicunt Deum omnia permittere, sed non
velle; which say, that God permits and suffers all things, but he wills not
all things: but God says that it is his will, and that nothing is done without
his will. Our God (says Psalm. 115. 3. Psalm. 135. 6.
David) is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. No impediment can let his
work, but he uses even the impediments to serve his will. And whatsoever he
wills, that does he in Heaven, and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep
places. That appears in the affliction of Job, Satan envied Job; and the
Chaldees robbed him; Job 1. 1 Reg. 22.
yet Job said, Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit, the Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken away. In the deceiving of Achab, the Devil is sent of God to
be a lying spirit in the mouths of the four hundred Prophets, Si ista
execatio est Dei, nudum permissionis figmentum evanescit; If this execation be
the judgment of God, this bare and naked figment of permission must vanish as
smoke, and as the untimely fruit of a woman. An earthen pitcher shall drive
away the Madianites; Trumpets of Rams horns shall blow down the walls of
Jericho; a peble stone shall God works by evil men, and not in them.
overthrow the great Goliath; that is, the scripture shall overthrow the
conceit, the imagination and fiction of bare permission. As Iael with one nail
stroke Sisera to the ground, so will I with one example beat down the
paper-wals of this opinion.

Absalom defiled his fathers bed, and committed a notable villainy, yet God
calls it his work, Verba enim Dei sunt, they are Gods own words; Tufecisti
occulte, ego vero palam, and coram 2 Samuel 16.
hoc Sole, thou have done it secretly, but I openly, and before this Sun. To
strengthen this (for Vis unita fortior) The Jews, Pilate, Herod crucified
Christ; yet the Apostle said, that they did nothing but that which the hand and
counsel of God had decreed. And yet again, Act. 4.
that a threefold cable may not easily be broken, the Ier. 5
cruelty of the Chaldees in Iudaea, Jeremy calls the work of God. In which
since Nebuchadnezzar is called Servus Dei, the servant of God; and God calls
the King of Assyria, the rod of his wrath. Esa. 10.
I do but crop some few examples of millions and infinite, that might be
alleged. Nothing is clearer than these speeches, that God blinds men, that
he gives them the spirit of slumber, Esa. 29. Exodus 9. Romans 1. 28.
that he hardens their hearts, and so is he said to have hardened Pharoahs
heart, and to give men up into a reprobate sense. And of the inhabiters of
Canaan, Moses said, that God hardneth their hearts, to fight against the
Church. And Paul calls the wisdom of God (...). These be not matters of
reason, but of faith; Et ubi fides incipit, ratio desinit, where Ios. 11.
Ephesians. 3. 10. Ambr.
faith begins, reason ends? But I answer with Calvin, that though God
wills all things, yet he neither commands nor compels the wicked;
Though God would revenge the Adultery of David, by the Incest of Absalom, yet
God neither commanded nor compelled him, which freeth God.

The third opinion is of them, that say, all things come to pass by Gods
providence, that our actions as they proceed from God, are just, and as they
come of our selves unjust. Hereupon Beza distinguishes thus, Deum agere in
bonis and per bonos, that God works in good men, and by good men; Per malos
vero 1 part quaes^ionum.
agere, at non in malis; and that he works by evil men, but not in evil
men: In his enim duntaxat agit quos spiritu suoregit, He works in them only
whom he rules by his spirit, In malis igitur non agit aliquid, he works not
therefore in evil men: Ephesians. 2. 2.
for Satan not God works in them. And Master Calvin against the Libertines
produces two exceptions, Primo, sic Deum agere periniquos and Satanam, ut ipsi
etiam suas agunt parts, non per illos agit, ut per truncos, and lapides, sed
ut per creaturas rationales, qui sponte ruunt; First, God so works by the
wicked, and by Satan, as that they also play their own parts, he works not
by them, as by blocks, or stones, but as by reasonable creatures, which run
headlong of their own accord. Secundo, magnam esse differentiam inter opus Dei
and impiorum: there is great difference between God, Satan, and Men, concur
in the same action, but have different ends.
the work of God, and the work of the wicked, in respect of the end of their
work: The Sun draws stench out of a dead carkase, Non immittit, he does
not send it in: So God works by the wicked, and yet so, that his justice does
not justify them, nor their wickedness contaminate him, as it appears in
Jobs example; God, Satan, and the Chaldees concur, move, Job 1.
work, yet is God clear, and they guilty; Inspecto fine agendi, considering
the end of their work: God did it to try Job, Satan to destroy Job, and the
Chaldees, to enrich themselves. So says S. Augustine of Christ; Pater tradidit
filium, filius corpus, Judas magistrum: In hac traditione cur Deus justus and
homo injustus? nisi quod in re una quam fecerunt, non est causa una ob quam
fecerunt? The Father delivered the Son, the Son his body, Judas his master;
in this tradition or delivering, why is God just, and man unjust? because that
in that one thing, which they did, there was not one cause for the which they
did it; Deus, in dilectione, Christus, in obedientia, Judas ab avaritia, Iudaei
ob invidiam: God delivered him in love, Christ delivered himself in obedience,
Judas of covetousness, the Jews of envy. Thus they all did one action, but
not to one end.

And yet true is the saying of Fulgentius, Malos ad poenam, non culpam
praedestinari: the wicked to be predestinate to punishment, not to sin, non
ad hoc, quod male operantur, sed ad hoc, quod just patiuntur: not to this,
that they work evilly, but to this end, that they suffer justly: For God
ordaines no man to be evil, though he has ordained the evil unto punishment;
for should God ordain men unto sin, then should God be the Author of sin: he
ordaines indeed the incitements and occasions of sin, to try men withal; he
also orders sins committed, and does limit them; and in these regards is said
as before to work in them, and to will them: in which regards also they are in
Scripture attributed unto him sometimes, as 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. and 15. 16. But
yet we must not say (as some do) that God is the Author of sin, or
predestinates men unto it. Sed quia Dei mysteria non capimus, corripimus:
because we cannot conceive Gods mysteries, we will cavell and carpe at them.
Nunquid negandum quod verum est, quia comprehendi non potest, quod occultum
est? Is that to be damned which is true, because it cannot be comprehended, for
that it is secret? Eat honey, but not too much honey: so search Gods mysteries,
but not too far. I say of the proud men of this age, as Chrysostom said of the
Heretics called Anomei; Hanc arborem Anomaeorum Paulus nec plantavit, Apollo
non rigavit; this tree of the Anomaei neither has Paul planted, nor Apollo
watered, nor God increased: but curiosity planted it, pride watered it, and
ambition increased it. Lipsius Lipsius de constantia, page 36.
uses all these similitudes; A man rides upon a lame horse, and stirs him,
the rider is the cause of the motion, but the horse himself of the halting
motion; so God is the Author of every action, but not of the evil of the
action. The like is in the striking All sin from Saten or evil men, none
from God.
of a jarring and untuned Harp, the fingering is thine, the jarring or discord
is in the Harp or instrument. The earth gives fatness and juice to all kind
of plants, some of these plants yield pestilent and noisome fruits; where is
the fault, in the nourishment of the ground, or in the nature of the herb,
which by the native corruption decocteth the goodness of the ground into venime
and poison? the goodness and moisture is from the earth, the venime from the
herb; the sounding from the hand, the jarring from the instrument; So the
action is from God, the evil in the action from the impure fountain of thy
own heart. I will conclude this point with the saying of the Learned,
Impossible est Deum, Confessie.
qui est lux, justitia, veritas, sapientia, bonitas, vita, causam esse
tenebrarum, peccati and mendacii, ignorantiae, maliciae and mortis, sed horum
omnium causa Satanas and homines sunt; It is impossible that God, who is Light,
Justice, Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, Life, to be the cause of Darkness,
Sin, Dissembling, Ignorance, Malice, and Death, but the Devil and Men are
the cause of all these.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
VERSE. V. I will therefore put you in remembrance, forasmuch as ye once knew
this, etc. The often inculcating the same doctrine needful.



WE are now come unto the third part of this Epistle, which contains a
confirmation of Iudes purpose, by diverse examples.

The first, of the Israelites.

The second, of the Angels.

The third, of the Sodomites.

In the first, he notes their Infidelity.

In the second, their Apostasy.

In the third, their Adultery, and Buggery.

The first were destroyed of God in the wilderness.

The second fell from Heaven.

The third were burned: and thus much for their sins and their punishments.

Now for the first, he says that they Knew it, howbeit he will put them in
remembrance, saying they had forgotten it. We may not think much to hear that
which we have heard and known, were our knowledge never so great, like
Salomons, who had A large heart, he was filled with understanding as a flood,
his mind compassed the Earth, he filled it full of dark and grave sentences,
yet we 1 Reg. 4. Ecclus. 47. 14, 15
may be remembered of it again. Paul was not ashamed to write The memory must
be often admonished.
one thing often: For so he says to the Philippians, It grieveth me not to
write, the same thing unto you viz. that which ye have often heard of me; for
unto you it is a sure thing: and we are not ashamed to preach one thing often,
it leaves a surer print, and a deeper Phil. 3. 1.
stamp in our minds; doctrine delivered, is as a nail driven; but doctrine
repeated, is as a nail rivetted, then it sticks sure. Such a Simile Solomon
uses, saying; The words of the wise are like goods, and like nails fastened
by the masters of the assemblies, (that is, Eccles. 12. 11. Ezech. 36. Ier. 23.
John 6. 27. John 6.
the Ministers) which are given by our Pastor (that is, God:) the word of God
is the water of life, the more it is waved, the fresher it runs; it is the
fire of Gods glory, the more it is blown, the clearer it burns; it is the
bread of heaven, the more it is broken, the more remains; as it did in the
five loaves and two fishes, wherewith Christ fed five thousand men in the
wilderness; the more it is repeated, the more knowledge it breeds, the more
faith it begets, the more consolation it affords. Therefore Paul rubbeth
the memories of the Corinths in the things 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. 9. 19.
that they knew; do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? know
ye not that we shall judge the Angels? know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? know ye not that your bodies are the
temples of the holy Ghost? As if he should say, ye know these things, yet I
help your memories, otherwise ye may forget even that ye know. This order
Paul, as a careful master, prescribes to Timothy, a painful Scholar,
saying; If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be
a good minister 1 Timothy 4. 6.
of Jesus Christ, etc. The Ephesians, where Paul had preached three years, day
and night, knew much, yet Paul would have them put in remembrance; and
thereupon he charge them to Watch, and Act. 20. 31.
to remember that by the space of three years he ceased not to warn every one
of them: So said S. Peter of the Jews, seeing his race was at an end, his life
short, and his tabernacle ready to be laid down: I will not (says he) be
negligent to put you always in remembrance of 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13.
these things; though that ye have knowledge, and be established in the
present truth: For I think it meet so long as I am in this tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed
saepe cadendo; Sic homo fit fidelis, non vi, sed saepe audiendo; As the drops
of water make a hole in the stone, not by force, but by often falling; so man
becomes faithful, not by force, but by often hearing; Et idem audiendo, in
hearing the same: we are like flint or marble, that is not easily pierced; like
sieves, which in the water are full, but out of it are empty: So in the Church
our ears are full of doctrine, but it is scattered in the Churchyard, by and
by we are empty, Ne apicem tenemus, we carry not a tittle home. But as to
eat meat, and not to keep it in the stomach, is a sign of the death of the
body; so to hear, and not to remember, that argues the death of the soul;
For whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has
not God; but he Variety delights, but the same thing repeated profits.
that continues in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son. Remember then how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent.

Let no man say, I will not come to the Sermon, I know the man, I know his
gifts, I know what he will say: though we do, 2 John. 9. Apoc 3. 3.
yet may we be remembered. The incarnation of Christ was revealed to Marie by an
Angel, and yet afterward it was revealed by the shepherds; If Marie had
been curious, she would have said, Dic quod nescio, tell me that I know not,
I have heard this Luke 1. Luke 2.
already, why tell you me it again? here is Cooleworts twice sodden; Crambe
bis posita mors est; it is as bad as death, to hear a thing twice repeated: We
cannot abide to hear one doctrine twice; we surfeit of preaching, as Israel
did of Manna; Numb. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
we have itching ears: many cannot abide wholesome doctrine, but after their
own lusts, get them an heap of teachers. We come to the Church as the
Athenians did ad forum Iulium, to hear news; like Perillus, that would not
hear one sound of music Act. 17.
twice; like Heliogabalus, that fed of nightingales tongues, provided that he
might not eat twice of one meat; like Xerxes, which propounded great rewards
to them that could devise new pleasures: and therefore we cry out unjustly of
vain repetitions, idle Anaphoraes and Tautologie. We come to the preacher as
men come to a minstrell, to have our ears tickled; So says God to his
Prophet, They come unto thee, as people use to come; and my people sit before
thee, and hear thy Words, but they will not do them: Ezech. 33. 31.
For with their mouths they make jests, and their heart goes after their
covetousness. It is no Sermon, except there be some new and strange thing in
it, that we never heard before, that may bring us into a wonderment of that we
understand not: Then the preacher has with Esaias a learned tongue; with Peter,
a fiery cloven tongue, and with Apollo, a fine eloquent tongue; or else he is
Esa. 50. Act. 2. Act. 18.
but a plain man, an English Doctor, a Dunce, etc. But we say with Paul, That
we have cast from us the cloakes of shame, and walk not in craftiness,
neither handle we the word of God decetfully. The often preaching of the word
serves to put us in remembrance of all things that concern God, and our duty
to him, otherwise we soon forget all: as the Israelites did, Who made a Calfe
in Horeb, Psalm. 106. 19, 20, 21.
and worshipped the molten Image; thus they turned their glory into the
similitude of a bullock, that eats grass, and forgot God their Savior. The
Israelites in forty days forgot God; so be you forty days absent from a
Sermon, and you will forget God: Come therefore, to be put in remembrance.

A number say, Sermons are too often, we hear too many, Communia sordent,
Common things wax vile; they must come as strawberries once a year; Rara
praeclara, seldom things are excellent things. But I wonder that any
blasphemous mouth dare say that there is too much preaching! once a quarter, or
once a The preaching of the Word always necessary.
month is enough: but this is not (...), to preach in season, and out of
season: Paul did not so; He, night and day, for the space of three years,
ceased not to warn every one: Moses was but forty days absent, and the people
that had tasted 2 Timothy 4. 2. Act. 20. 31. Exodus 32.
so lately and miraculously of Gods goodness, fell to Idolatry.

To prosecute this point: If men could indent with the Devil, to tempt but
once in a month, or once in a quarter; preaching once in a Month were
sufficient; but if he tempt continually, we must preach continually, and you
must hear continually, and we all must be sober and watch, so long as our
adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom to devour.
1 Pet. 5. 8.
The dragon with his tail drew the third part of the stars out of heaven,
and cast them to the ground; and the dragon is ready to devour us, as soon as
we be brought forth: but we must resist him* Resist the Devil, and he will
fly from you. So long as Ioas 1 Pet. 4.
had Iehojada at his elbow, he did well, he walked uprightly in the sight of
the Lord. So long as Vzziah had Zechariah to teach him, he sought God, and he
understood the visions of God, and God 2 Chronicles. 24. 2. 2 Chronicles. 26. 5.
made him prosper; but they being taken away, Satan prevailed both with the
one, and with the other.

Therefore the Word is compared to showers; so says Moses, My doctrine shall
drop as the rain, and my speech shall still as does the dew, as the shower
upon the herbs, and as the great rain upon the grass. Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
The Word is compared to an hammer: Is not my Word like a fire (says the Lord)
and like an hammer that breaks a stone. And it is compared to Wind; I saw
(says S. John) an Angel standing on the Ier. 23. 29. Apoc. 7. 1. John 6. 27.
four corners of the earth holding the four winds of the earth, that the
winds should not blow on the earth. And the word is compared to Food; hereupon
says our Savior, Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which
will endure to eternal life: Grass grows not green with one shower of
reign; knottie wood is not riven with one stroke; a ship saileth not with one
blast; a Child grows not to a man with one meal; and we go not to heaven
with one sermon; but with precept upon precept, precept upon precept, Esa. 28.
10.
line unto line; line unto line; that is, with doctrine upon doctrine, and we
must have one thing often told. This meets with those preachers and auditors,
that make strawberries of the Word, to have it once in a year, or once in a
quarter; but it is Food, and every one must have his portion of meat in due
season, it is not strawberries. It is also food, for that we must hear it
often, it must be familiar unto us. There is a waste in the body by reason of
the heat in the stomach and the liver, and therefore must be repaired with a
fresh supply of meat; So there is a waste in the soul, which must be
repaired with a supply of intellectual meat, that is, the word. Sometime
there is a waste in the understanding, which is darkened; sometime in the will
and affections' Meditation and recordation means to enrich the soul.
which are unruly; sometime in the memory, which is brittle sometime in our
faith, which is weak; or in our love which is small; or in our zeal, which
may be cold; or in the mind which is earthly; or in the whole man which is
lumpish, heavy, unfit for Coll. 1. Coll. 3. Hebr. 12. Luke 17. Phil. 3. 19.
any good thing.

Come therefore still unto the Word, hear it still, hear it to learn, and
learn to remember it, and remember to follow it, and follow, to continue it;
that I may say to this town of Wallsham, as Christ said to Zacheus house; This
day is salvation come unto your town. But as Lords and Barons never put on
their Luke 19. 9.
Parliament robes, till they go to the Parliament house: So we put not on
Religion till we go to the Church, and there we leave it till the next
Sunday. We remember little and practice less, like Cambridge Scholars, that
leave their Logic in Sophisters hills till they return again. But we must
hear to be put in remembrance; and though many be soon weary, yet must not
we. Be not weary of well doing (says the Apostle) be not Gal. 6.
weary of hearing. I see many, that if they have a preacher in their town on
the Sunday, refuse to hear any other on the week day, as though they could
hear too much: Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously; not as a guest
for an hour, but as Col. 3. 16.
an owner continually, which cannot be except we be put often in remembrance, and
hear often.

But in saying, I will put you in remembrance, he insinuates that they had
forgotten these following examples: for we are like the Ostrich, that
forgets her eggs in the dust, like Partriches, Job 29. Jer. 17.
which gather the young that be not theirs; like the bird Fulica, that
forgets her nest, and hatcheth strange birds; like the Philosopher that
forgot his own name: we had need therefore be put in remembrance, and often
think, and meditate of the doctrines we have heard. Christians must be like
the cleane-beasts that parted the hoof and chewed the cud; so we must
ruminate, and chaw that at home, and concoct that which we have heard in the
Church. Marie laid up the words of the Shepherd, In her heart; we must learn
of her: For the heart is Thesaurus, the Luke 2. 17.
treasure-house to store up all doctrines of life, and of salvation; the
memory is as a chest or coffer, if we had never so great Jewels, yet if they
be not safely kept, as well as truly gotten, all is lost: not they that eat,
but they that digest most, are the most healthful; not they that get most, but
they that keep most, are richest: So, not they that hear most, but they that
remember most, are most edified. Our memories are like Bankrouts purses, and
like Danaides tun, the one can hold no money, the other no liquor, and our
memories can hold no doctrine. But let us strive to remember, and as the
Apostle speaks, Whatsoever things are Phil. 4. 8.
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things God
offers mercy before he inflicts judgment.
are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on
these things, which ye have both received and heard, etc.

But what are the things that Jude would remember them of? Three notable
examples of Gods wrath he calls to their remembrance: The first, of the
Israelites: and therein observe with me three things.

Gods mercy in delivering them, the first.

His justice in destroying them, the second.

Their sin, the Cause of Gods justice, the whetstone unto it, the third and
last.

But first, let us look upon Gods mercy in their deliverance: for God
begins with mercy, that is the first act, mercy is Alpha, Justice is Omega,
so David places it; For speaking of Gods attribute, he places mercy in the
foreward, Justice in the rereward, saying, My song shall be of mercy and
judgment. God is patient and Psalm. 110. 1. Romans 2. 4.
full of mercy. Paul calls it (...), the riches of Gods mercy; God never
uses Justice, but when his mercy is despised; like a Prince, that sends not
his army against rebels, before he has sent his pardon, and proclaimed it by
an Herald of arms: like Tamberlaine, who the first day set up his white
tents, and received all that came; the next day, black, betokening the death
of the rulers; the third day, red, betokening the bloodshed of all; So the Lord
has his white tents of mercy, his black and red of justice and judgment, if
the one be despised, the other shall be felt: hereupon says Paul, But thou
after thy hardness, Romans 2. 5.
and heart which cannot repent, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God; who will reward
every man according to his works. More particularly, God delivered this people
mercifully, yea miraculously, their shoulders from burdens, and their fingers
from making of brick, he drew them out of a fiery oven, like the three
children, he put off their sacke-cloth, and girded them with gladness, and
compassed them about with songs of deliverance; he carried them on the Wings
of Eagles: He brought a vine out of Egypt, he cast out the Heathen, and
planted them in. Thou made room for it, and did Dan. 2. Exodus 19. Psalm.
80. 9, 10, 11.
cause it to take root, and it filled the land: She stretched out her branches
unto the sea, and her boughs unto the river. God separated them from all the
Sons of Adam: For the most high God, who divided to the nations their
inheritance, kept them as the apple of his eye, And as an Eagle stirs up her
nest, fluttereth over her birds, stretches out her wings, takes them, and
bears them on her wings; So the Deuteronomy. 32. 8. 11, 12.
Lord alone led Israel. But for orders sake, I will divide the mercies of God
into three several sections or times:

Their deliverance in Egypt, the first.

Their coming out of Egypt, the second.

Their delivera^ce after they were come out, the third and the last. For First,
for their deliverance in Egypt: first, it was much, that Gods judgments upon
the Egyptians
God should love them, being come of the Amorites and Hitites, wallowing in
their blood, that he should love them, and choose them for his people; as Moses
said, The Lord your God did not set his love upon you, nor chose you, because
ye were more in number than Ezech. 16. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 7, 8, 9.
any people, for ye were the fewest of all people, but because the Lord loved
you. There was nothing in them, why God should choose them, for they were no
more righteous than others; and therefore says Moses again unto them; Speak
not thou in thy heart, saying, For my Cap. 9. 4, 5. Cap. 32. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Exodus 1.
righteousness has the Lord brought me in to possess this Land, etc. For
thou shall inherit this land, not for thy righteousness, or for thy upright
heart, but for the wickedness of those nations, etc. Israel was Gods portion,
Jacob the lot of his inheritance, he found him in the land of the wilderness,
in a wast and roaring wilderness, he led him about, he taught him, and kept
him, as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over
her birds, stretches out her wings, takes them, and bears them on her
wings; So the Lord alone led him, and there was no strange God with him. God
multiplied them, not by means, but by miracle: For from seventy souls, they
grew in few years to 600000. and which is more, the more that they were kept
down, the more they prospered, like to Camomill, the more it is trodden, the
more it grows; or to a Palm Tree, the more it is pressed, the further it
spreads, or to fire, the more it is raked, the more it burns. God gave them
Moses, and Aaron, and Miriam, Mich. 6. Psalm. 78. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50.
and God plagued the Egyptians for their sake, and did marvelous things in the
land of Egypt, even in the field of Zoan. He turned their rivers into blood,
and their floods, that they could not drink; he sent a swarm of flies among
them, which devoured them, and frogs which destroyed them; he gave also
their fruits unto the Caterpiller, and their labor unto the grasshopper, he
destroyed their vines with hail, and their wild figgetrees with the
hailestone, he gave their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks unto the
thunderbolts; he cast upon them the furiousness of his anger, indignation,
and wrath, and vexation, by the sending of evil Angels; he made a way to his
anger, he spared not their soul from death, he Act. 12. Exodus 8. 17.
gave their life to the pestilence. If it were much to eat up one man with
lice, what is it to eat up a whole land? If it was much to John 2. Exodus 7.
19. Genesis 19. 2 Reg. 6.
turn water-pots into wine, what was it to turn all the waters of Egypt into
blood? If it was a great thing to smite a few Sodomites and Aramites with
blindness, what was it to smite a whole land with darkness? that no man
could rise for three days. So much for the benefits bestowed upon them in
Egypt.

Now let us see, what he did for them in their deliverance out Exodus 10. Exodus
12. Genesis 50. 3. Ier. 31. 17.
of Egypt: In their deliverance he smote all the first borne in Egypt, the
chief of their strength and passed by Israel; And whereas there was a great cry
in Egypt, like that for Jacob, for whom was made a great and an exceeding sore
lamentation; and like that of Rachel, who weeping for her children, would not
be comforted, because they were not; there was joy in the land of Goshen; he
inclined the hearts of the Gods mercy to Israel after their deliverance out of
Egypt.
Egyptians to do them good, and they received of them Jewels of silver, and
Jewels of gold; he strengthened them so, that there was not one feeble person
among them; Egypt was glad at their departing, for the fear of them had
fallen upon them. All the Idols of Egypt fell down at their departure: even
as all the oracles Psalm. 105. 38.
of the world ceased at the coming of Christ, even that at Delphos, Dodo,
Delos. God brought them as a vine out of Egypt, God did cast out the Heathen,
and planted them, he made Psalm. 80. 8, 9.
a room for them, and caused them to take root, and they filled the land.

3. After their deliverance; when the red sea was before them, the Egyptians
behind them, the mountains on each side of them; God made a ready passage for
them, And caused the sea to run Exodus 14 21, 22.
back by a strong East wind all the night, and made the Sea dry land; for the
waters were divided, and the children of Israel went thorough the midst of
the Sea, upon the dry ground: but the Egyptians pursuing them, Psalm 105. 39.
Exodus 15. Cap. 16. Number. 20. Deuteronomy. 8. Number. 21.
were drowned. He spread a cloud to be a covering, and fire to give light in
the night; for God went before them in a cloudy pillar by day, and a fiery by
night: he made the bitter waters sweet, for their sakes, and fed them with
Angels food. He turned the rock into a river, and the flint stone into a
springing well: their foot swelled not, and their clothes waxed not old in
forty years travel, and when they were bitten with fiery serpents, he cured
them with a brazen serpent, a figure of Psalm. 136. 19, 20, 21.
Christ. He slew great Kings for their sakes; as Sehon King of the Amorites,
and Og the King of Bashan, and gave their land for an heritage, even an
heritage to Israel his servant; he dried up Jordan, that they might pass
thorough it. Whereupon the Psalmist uses a most elegant Prosopopopeia, Psalm.
114. 5, 6.
saying, What ayleth thee, o thou Sea, that thou fieddest, and thou Jordan that
thou were driven back? Ye mountains, why leaped ye like rams, and ye
hills as Lambs? God gave them Canaan, a land that flowed with milk and honey,
as Jacob prophesied of Genesis 49. 11, 12, 13.
Judah, saying, He shall bind his Ass foale to the vine, and his Asses colt
unto the best vine; He shall wash his garment in wine, and his cloak in the
blood of grapes; his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with
milk. For the land of Judah, of all lands it was the fruitfullest. Moses
calls it, A good land; and the goodness of it, afterward he describes at
large, and says? A land in which are rivers of Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10.
waters, and fountains, and depths, that spring out of valleys and mountains;
a land of wheat, and barley, of vineyards, and figge-trees, and pomegranats; a
land of oil olive and honey; a land wherein thou shlat eat bread without
scarceness, neither shall thou lack any thing therein: A land whose stones
are iron, and out of whose mountains thou shall dig brass. But especially
God gave them his Law, to convert their souls, and his testimonies, which gave
wisdom unto the simple; Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9.
his statutes that rejoice the heart, and his Commandments that give light to
the eyes, his fear which indureth for ever, and his judgments which be
righteous altogether; great in one word was their preferment; Gods bounty to
England.
For to them were committed the Oracles of God. To them also appertained, The
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the
service of God, and the promises, of whom are Romans 3. 20. Cap. 9. 4, 5, 6.
the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all
blessed for ever. What should I speak of Iosuahs trumpets, Ios. 6. Judge. 7.
Judge. 3. Cap. 15. 2 Samuel 1.
which blew down Jericho? of Gedeons pitchards that discomfited the
Madianites? Of Shamgars oxe-goad, which slew heaps upon heaps? Of Sampsons
iaw-bone, that killed a whole army of Philistines? Of Ionathans bow, and Saul's
sword, that never returned empty?

Let us apply all this to our selves, whom God has laded with blessings, so
that we have cause to say with the Israelites, Praised be the Lord, even the
God of our salvation, which ladeth us daily with benefits: For God has turned
the captivity of our English Sion as Psalm. 68. 19. Psalm. 126. 1.
the rivers of the South. As after a Nero, God gave a Vespasian, after Commodus
a Severus, after a Sisera a Debora, after a Saul a David, after an Ahaz an
Ezechias, and after a Domitian a Trajane, and a Nerva; So after a Marie, an
Elizabeth, a princely James, under whose governments we have sat safely these
many years, under our figge-trees and vine-trees from Dan to Beersheba, from
the one end of the land unto the other, his eyes have been over us, as over
the land of Chanaan, from the beginning of the year to the end of it. He has
trodden down the Northern rebels, with Parrie, Somervile, Ardington, Lopas,
Hacket, Madder, Burney, he has put their life down to the ground, and laid
their honor in the dust; he has made them a portion for the Foxes, they are
passed, as water, molten, etc. Psalm. 58.

Of late Balak of Spain had devised our destruction, Balaam of Rome had cursed
us; at his commandment subtle Achitophel had conspired abroad, unnatural
Absalom rose up at home, and aspiring Adonia would have the Shunamite to wife;
but from all these God has delivered us. We have seen France massacred,
Flanders with civil wars distressed; Germany grieved; Scotland divided;
only we stand still as an oak of Bashan. Pray, that God stretch not over us
the line of Samaria, as 2 Reg. 21. 13. God has blessed us above many others;
his wise mercy is in our Parliaments Reg. 21. 13.
and governments, as in Israel, Deuteronomy. 4. His learned mercy in our Schools and
Universities, as in Naioth, 2 Reg. 2. His strong mercies in our Castles and
bulwarks, as in Judah, Soph. 1. His peaceable mercies in our Towns and Cities,
as was said of Jerusalem; Mich. 4. 3, 4. Zaeb. 8. 4. 5.
They shall break their swords into mattockes, and their spears into scithes,
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to
fight any more: But old men and old Women shall dwell in the streets of
Jerusalem, and every man his staff in his hand for very age, and the streets
of the City shall be full of boys and girls playing in the midst thereof.
His rich mercies in our fields and granaries; for he makes our valleys so
thick with corn, that men do laugh and Contemners of Gods mercy grievously
punished.
sing; he crowns the year with his goodness, and the clouds drop fatness;
they drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the hills shall be
compassed with gladness. Would God, we were half thankful for so great
blessings, that every one of us could say with David, Psalm. 65. 11.
Praise the Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name:
Praise the Lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Psalm. 103. 1, 2.


Ye heard before of Gods mercy in delivering the people, now are we come to
Gods justice in destroying them (ye once know this, that after the Lord had
delivered the people out of Egypt, he destroyed them.) First, God shoots
paper, secondly bullet, if men yield not, primum ubera, deinde, verbera
ostendit; first, he opens his breasts, after shows us his rods: first, by his
Ministers, as by heralds, he proclaims pardon, after he sends an army to
destroy. The Lord (says the Prophet) is slow to anger, but he is great in
power, and will not surely clear the wicked; the Lord has his way in the
whirlewind, Nahum 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet: He rebukes the
Sea and dries it, and he dries up all the rivers. The mountains tremble for
him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his sight; yea the world,
and all that dwell therein: who can stand before his wrath? if his wrath be
kindled, yea, but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
God tells the Idumaeans, Though thou exalt thy self like an Eagle, and make
thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, says Obadiah verse.
4.
the Lord. Paul applies the example of Gods justice on Israel to the Church of
Corinth, and all Churches; I would not have you ignorant (quoth he) that all
our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed thorough the Sea, etc. but
with many of them God was not pleased; for 1 Cor. 10. 1. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these are examples to us, to the
intent that we should not lust after evil things as they lusted; neither be
ye idolaters, as were some of them; As it is written, the people sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as
some of them committed fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty
thousand, neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted him, and
were destroyed of serpents; neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured, and
were destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things came unto them for
examples; and were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. The continuance of Gods mercy for a long time, does not assure us of
perpetual safety, but of greater destruction if we believe not: Quanto gradus
altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher we are in dignity the more grievous our
fall and misery; as was said of the whore of Babylon, Inasmuch as she
glorified herself, and lived in pleasure, so much give ye to Apoc. 18. 7.
Mat. 11. 23. Ier. 18, 18. 21.
her torment and sorrow. And so Capernaum that was lift up to heaven, was
threatened to be thrown down to hell. The Jews thought that the dignity of
their Priesthood should have continued for ever, and therefore they said, The
law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word
from the Prophet. Therefore says God, deliver up their children to famine, and
let them drop away The higher exalted the lower dejected if impious.
by force of the sword, and let their wives be robbed of their children, and be
widows, and let their husbands be put to death, and let the young men be
slain with the sword in the battle. They bragged of Moses, that he was their
teacher, they boasted of Abraham and a succession from Abraham; but John
answers them, saying, Say not to your selves, we have Abraham to our father:
For God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham, of them came
the Fathers, of them came Luke 3. 8.
Christ, yet were they not all Israel that came of Israel, neither are they all
children because they are the seed of Abraham.

This augmented the punishment of Israel, that God had been so good unto them;
for every blessing is as good, as a bill of enditement preferred against us, at
the great Assise-day: for listen what God himself says, O my people, what
have I done unto thee, Michea 6. 3. 14, 15.
or wherein have I grieved thee? testify against me; surely I brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; I
have sent before thee, Moses, Aaron, Miriam. And thus the Lord goes on,
intimating unto them, that he never hurt them, but bestowed infinite blessings
and benefits upon them; but because they misused them, God threatens them,
That they shall eat and not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be in
the midst of thee; meaning, that they shall be consumed with inward grief
and evil; and further he threatens them, saying, Thou shall sow, but not
reap; thou shall tread the Olives, but thou shall not anoint thee with oil;
and make sweet wine, but shall not drink wine. This also augmented the
punishment of Eli's house, that whereas God did choose him out of all the tribes
of Israel to be his Priest, and to offer upon Gods Altar, and to burn
Incense, and to wear an Ephod before God, yet because he honored his children
more than God, God 1 Samuel 2. 28. 31.
threatened to cut off his arm, and the arm of his Fathers house, and that
there should not be an old man in his house for ever. Esaias and Michah
prophesied unto Judah sixty years; Hosea and Amos in Israel seventy years, yet
God sealed neither the one nor the other an obligation of perpetual mercy; The
one was carried into Assyria, a captivity irreturnable; the other into Babylon,
where they 2 Reg. 17. 6. Psalm. 137. Amos. 8. 10.
could not sing the Lords songs in a strange land; God turned their songs into
mournings, and their feasts into lamentations. The Papists speak of our
overthrowes in Ireland, as the Syrians said that God was the God of Israel in
the mountains, but not in the valleys: So they say, he is our God in England
but not in Ireland; they say, that he was a God in the beginning of the
Queens reign, but not now, Zidkia of Rome (the Jesuits) have made them
horns of iron, as 1 Reg. 22. 11. saying, that they will push England; Herod of
Rome has sent us word of our destruction; but if we repent, we may answer
him, as Christ did Herod, Go ye Luke 13. 32. Mat. 9. 15.
and tell the Fox, etc. We are the children of the wedding, and therefore
cannot mourn yet. The arrow of our deliverance is as yet in the Kings hands
against the Aramites, the Papists: If we Where God spares long he punishes
more if impenitent.
repent, all our enemies shall be but the Thistles of Lebanon; but if we bring
not forth the fruits of the Gospel, we may rather weep with Elisha, to
think what evil Hazael (the Papists) will do to the Church of God. Surely
God will do to us as to Israel; God bare long with them, but afterward he
destroyed them. 2 Reg. 14. 9. 2 Reg. 8. 11, 12.
God has hands of iron, and feere of lead, he comes slowly but when he
comes, he pays surely: Deus tardus est ad iram, sed tarditatem gravitate
poenae compensat; God is slow to anger, but he recompenseth his slownesse, with
grievousnesse of punishment. Hereupon says Paul, But thou after thy hardness,
and heart that cannot repent, heap unto thy self wrath against the day of
Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God, who will reward every man
according to his works: To them which by continuance in well-doing, seek glory
and honor and immortality, eternal life; but unto them that are contentious,
and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does
evil. Look not to the beginning of sin, but the end of it, the root of it
is a careless hard heart: and therefore we are commanded to exhort one another
daily, while it is called Hebr. 3. 13.
to day, lest we be hardened with the deceitfulness of sin: the flower of it
is sweet for a time, and therefore called by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, The pleasures of sin: the sight of it is like Heva her apple, which
was fair and pleasant to the eye; the taste of Hebr. 11. 25. Genesis 3. 6. 1 Samuel
14. 17. Luke 3. 7.
it is like Ionathans honey comb, which cleared his eyes, which before were
dim for weariness and hunger; the committing of it, is like the birth of a
viper, which eats out the belly of her damme; the sting of it as the sting of
an Aspe, pleasant at the Romans 3. Cap. 6. 21. 23.
first, and brings a man asleep, but the fruit of it, is shame in this life.
And therefore (says the Apostle) what fruit had ye of those things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? meaning their sins: and the end of it in the life to
come is hell fire, For the wages of sin is death. For sin is as a Tyrant
which reigns by force, and at last rewards his servants with death and
damnation. Thus the root, the flower, the sight, the taste, the sting, the
fruit, the end of sin, all is damnable.

Behold this monster, this Aesops snake, the ugliness of sin, in
Nabuchadenezzar, transformed from a man to a beast; The terror Dan. 4. 1 Samuel
15.
of it, in Agag the Amalekite; The folly of it, in Salomons young man; whom
Solomon derideth notably, saying, Rejoice thou young man, in thy youth, and
walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine Eccles. 11. 9.
eyes, but know, that for all these things God will will bring thee to
judgment; The bitterness of it, in the rich men named by James; Go to, ye
rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon Iam. 5. 1, 2,
3.
you, your riches are corrupt, your garments moat-heaten, your gold and silver
is canckred, and the rust of it shall be a witness against you, and it shall
eat your flesh, as it were fire; The unstablenesse of it, in the Amalekites,
now dancing, now dead; The reward of it, in the fools named God punishes not
the reprobate till sin be at the fall.
by Solomon; The end of it, in the rich glutton, who for his sin lies frying
in hell in torments. The life of the godly is as a Comedy, doleful at the
first, but joyful at the last. So says David, They that sow in tears shall
reap in joy; they went weeping, and carried precious seed, but they shall
return with 1 Samuel 30. Wisd. 5. Luke 16. Psalm. 126. 5. 6.
joy, and bring their sheaves. But the life of the wicked is clean contrary;
that is as a Tragedy, doleful at the last: so says our Savior; Woe be to
you, that laugh, for ye shall wayle and weep: and Luke 6. 25. Pro. 22. 8.
Solomon affirms, That he that sows iniquity, shall reap affliction: and
the rod of his anger shall fail: that is, his authority whereby he did
oppress others, shall be taken from him: and Paul says, That they which sow
in the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption (afterward:) this afterward
marres all; after all pleasure comes pain and destruction. So said Abraham,
to Dives; Son, remember Luke 16. 25.
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure, contrarily, Lazarus pain;
now is he comforted, and thou art punished. The pride of Adam was turned into
labor and sorrow; The stoutnesse of Nimrod into confusion; The beauty of
Absalom into hanging; The strength of Goliath into shame; The envy of Caine
into desolatition, Genesis 3. Cap. 10. 2 Samuel 16. 1 Samuel 17.
he wandered like a Rogue; Nec in caeteris est contrarium videre; and we may
behold the same in the rest, when they have added drunkenness to thirst,
afterward comes God and destroys them, he wayteth for the ripeness of our
sins, before he pluck us off the tree, or cut us off the earth, he tarieth
till we be dry, before he burns us: till we be fat, before he slay us;
till we be withered, before he hew us down. Therefore is it said, that the
earth was full of cruelty, that the sin of Sodom was Genesis 6. Genesis 18. Amos 8.
great, that the sins of Israel were as ripe apples: and when our sins be
once ripe, God will cut us down, with the scithe of his wrath, and hacke us
down with the axe of his vengeance.

And yet we see God to punish some speedily, to crop them in their beginning:
True, sometime God kills the Cockatrice in the egg, before it be a serpent;
sometime he plucketh the fruit from the tree, before it be ripe; he rooteth
out the prick, before it be a thorn; what then? differt tamen non aufert; God
does defer, but yet he does not auferre the punishment of the wicked: like
Polypheme, that would eat Ulysses last, but yet eat him, though it were long.
Vt creditor qui debitum ab uno statim exigit, alium in diem reponit, sed cum
foenore solvendum; As a Creditor, that requires his debt of one man presently,
to another he gives day and respite; yet to be paid with usury. God took
away Caligula in the beginning of his tyranny, but he suffered Nero to
tyrannize longer; but Tiberius raged, and made havocke of the Church longer
than they; yet in the end God met with him, and freed the earth of so vile a
burden. God killed Omri in two years, he suffered Manasses to wallow in blood
fifty years. Tempora mutantur, 1 Reg. 16. 2 Reg. 21.
and nos mutamur in illis; the times are changed, and we are Infidelity the
cause of Isreal's destruction.
changed in them. Dionysius having a prosperous wind, said, that God favored
Pirates: The Athenians said, that Harpalus gave a lively testimony against the
Gods, for that he escaped so long unpunished: But so long goes the pot to the
water, that at last it comes broken home. God met with these two afterward:
Look not on men as they are here in this world, here they prosper and flourish
like a green Bay Tree; but look to their end, and then they wither like trees
that cast their leaves in winter; then they wish, they had never been borne:
what good has our pride done us? what profit has the pomp of riches brought
us? Thou see Dionysius spoiling Syracusa many years; look again, Wisd. 5.
8.
and thou shall see him a poor Schoolmaster in Corinth, Asceptro adferulam
devolutum; devolved, fallen from the scepter to the ferula: Thou see Caesar
triumphing in fifty two set battles; look again, and thou shall see him to
receive fifty two wounds in the Senate, and every one of them mortal: Thou
see Sennacherib glorying at the gates of Jerusalem, that he would dry up the
rivers with his horses feet, that men should eat their ordure, and 2 Reg. 19.
drink their own piss; but look again, and thou shall see him slain in
the temple by his own Sons, Adramelech, and Sharezar: Look on Manasses, and
thou shall see him triumphing in 2 Chro. 33. 11.
blood; look again, and thou shall see him a poor distressed prisoner: Look
on Herod, and thou shall see him in his royal Act. 12.
apparel, assuming to himself the title of a God; look again, and thou
shall see him stricken of Gods Angel, and eaten up of worms. Thou see
Cardinal Woolsie, with his silver pillars, and pollaxes writing, Ego and Rex
meus, I and my King; but look again, and thou shall see him dead at Leicester
with stench and infamy. The wicked are like the coggs of a wheel, now up, now
down; like a Player, that now plays the King, and when the play is ended, he
is but a beggar; like a counter, now a pound, now a penny, now nothing: Deus,
ut apis, habet mel and aculeum; God, as a Be, has honey and a sting; As he is
unmeasurable in mercy, so is he exceeding great in justice, very ready in
pardoning, and very ready in punishing: vengeance is his, and he will reward.
Romans 12.


THE TWELFTH SERMON.
VERSE. V. Which believed not. Infidelity the root of all other sins.



BUT to come unto the sin it self that was their destruction; and that was
their infidelity; They believed not. Of this the Prophet spoke, saying, They
spoke against God, saying, Can God prepare a table in the Psalm. 78. 19, 20, 21,
22.
Wilderness? behold, he smote the rock, that the water gushed out, and the
streams overflowed. Can he give bread also? or prepare flesh for the people?
Therefore the Lord heard and was angry, and the fire was kindled in Jacob, and
also wrath came upon Israel, because they believed not in God, nor trusted in
his help. Moses reckons up their infidelity in order, and he says, Remember
Deuteronomy. 9. 7, 8. 22, 23, 24.
and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord to anger in the Wilderness,
since the day that thou did depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye
came to this place; ye have rebelled against the Lord. Also in Horeb ye
provoked the Lord to anger, so that the Lord was wroth with you to destroy you.
Also in Taberah, and in Massah, and in Kibroth-hattaavah ye provoked the Lord
to anger; likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up and
possess the Land, that I have given you, then ye rebelled against the
Commandment of the Lord your God, and believed him not, nor harkened to his
voice: ye have been rebellious ever since I knew you: you were never good,
egg nor bird, first nor last. The Apostle urges this sin in Israel, and
insisteth in it above Hebr. 3 19. Cap. 4. 2.
all others, saying, They could not enter in because of unbeleefe. And again,
The word that they heard did not profit them, because it was not mixed with
faith in those that heard it: For he that will hear and Infidelity reprooved
as the root of all other sins.
understand with profit, must temper and mix the word with faith; that is, he
must believe it. No doubt this people had many sins: For they were a
rebellious people; but the capital arch-sinne was unbeleefe, the root and
wellspring of all other their sins. Paul names five sins to have been in
Israel: 1. Lusting, 2. Idolatry, 3. Fornication, 4. Tempting of God, 5.
murmuring: 1 Cor. 10. 6.
but yet the original of them all was unbeleefe; and all these were the fruits
of this corrupt tree, unbeleefe. So Paul ascribed all his evils to this sin
of unbeleefe: I was (says he) a blasphemer, and 1 Timothy 1. 13.
a persecutour, and an oppressor; but I was received into mercy; for I did it
ignorantly through unbeleefe. Christ reproved his disciples bitterly for this
sin, his words were as thunderbolts; Be not (says he) careful for your
lives, what ye shall eat or drink, or for your bodies, Mat. 6. 25. 30.
what raiment ye shall put on: Is not the life more worth than meat? and the
body more of value than raiment? If God cloth the grass of the field, which
is to day, and to morrow is cast into the furnace, shall he not do much more
to you, o ye of little faith? and again, o fools, and slow of heart, to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken. And after his resurrection,
appearing unto the eleven, he reproved them of their Luke 24. 25.
unbeleefe and hardness of heart: and for this sin he did chide Peter;
Wherefore do thou doubt, o thou of little faith? And for this sin he made
Thomas ashamed, saying thus unto him; Put thy Mar. 16. 14. Mat. 14. 31. John
20. 27.
finger here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my
side, and be not faithless, but faithful.

And here by the way, let me answer a slander of the Papists, who rail of the
Gospel, and ask where be the fruits of it; as Osorius, Allen, Bristow. As
Christ said, show me the tribute money; Mat. 22. 19. Mar. 11. 1. Reg. 3.
so say they, show us the fruits of their profession: they call us the cursed
fig tree, that had leaves, but no fruit; and barren Rachel, which had no
child; and Salomons harlot with the dead child.

But we answer, that if there be any fault, it is in our lives, not in the
Gospel. For it works in them that believe; but all believe 1 These. 2. 13.
not, therefore all work not: whom does the Gospel save? only them that
believe; For seeing the world by wisdom knew not Ged, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. To
whom is it the power of God? surely to them that believe. The Gospel is the
power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. Romans 1. 16.


Now this faith is Gods gift, and cannot be commanded. For though Christ had
done many miracles, and preached many heavenly Sermons unto the Jews: yet they
believed not, That the saying of Esayas the Prophet might be fulfilled, that
he said, Lord, John 12. 37, 38, 39, 40.
who believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
Therefore could they not believe, because Esayas says again, He has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their
eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should
heal them. Therefore is it said, that so many received the word As believed.
Faith is an anchor, but God must Faith the gift of God.
fasten it, otherwise it will not be sure and steadfast. It is a shield, but God
must frame it, and strengthen it. So that the slander of the Papists
redoundeth to God not to us. But I may say to Act. 13. 48. Hebr. 6. 19. Ephesians,
6. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.
you, as Paul said to the Thessalonians; God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned, which believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. God has fed them with
lies, because they received not the truth, they believe not. But to leave this,
and to return again to these Israelites.

These Israelites wanted faith, and so all the parts of a Christian: as the
root gives sap to all the branches, the Sun light to all the Planets, the
earth nourishment to all plants, the water life to all fishes; So faith gives
life and allowance to all our actions: For without it, splendida opera sunt
splendida peccata, our glistering works are but glistering sins: therefore is
it said, that by faith Abel offered unto God a greater sacrifice than Caine,
etc. by faith Hebr. 11. 4, 5. 7, 8.
Enoch was taken away, that he should not see death: By faith Noah being warned
of God, and moved with reverence, prepared the Arc: By faith Abraham, when he
was called obeyed God, etc. Faith is the eye, wherewith we see God, it is the
mouth, whereby we speak to God, the hand whereby we touch him, the foot
whereby we go unto him, says Ambrose. Thus Stephen, the ring leader of
Martyrs, saw Ambros. Act. 6. Luke 18. Luk, 2. John 1.
him with the eyes of faith; The Publicane spoke to him with the mouth of
faith; Simeon embraced him with the arms of faith: Thus Andrew walked to
Christ with the foot of a lively faith; Thus all must come to Christ, not with
the legs of their body, but of faith; We must draw near with a true heart in
assurance of faith, Hebr. 10. 22.
being sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and washed in our
bodies with pure water.

But the Infidells, like Polypheme the Giant, want eyes; like the (...), at the
river Ganges, they want mouths; like the Cripple in the third of the Acts,
they want legs: For by faith Christ dwells in us, by faith we eat him, by
faith we put him on, by Ephesians. 3. John 6. Gal. 3. Gal. 2. 20.
faith we live in him: therefore wanting faith, we want all. Many therefore
want all the parts of Christianity; for few believe, but are Ciphers in the
Church of God, and shall be Ciphers in the Kingdom of God. But to cut up the
veins and arteries of this vice, and make an Anatomy of it, we can all say, I
believe in God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; yet few believe and
are persuaded of the love and power of God, but rest in the creature, not in
the Creator, if they see not means. If God give us friends, we make Idols of
them, and trust in them, as the Jews did in Esaias. 31. Psalm. 52. 7. Ier. 5. 2
Chro. 16.
the Egyptians; if money, we think never to want, as it is said of Doeg, he
trusted in the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his
malice; if armor, we trust in them, as the Jews did; if Physicians, we trust
in them as Asa did; if wisdom, we think to smooth all causes, and to wade
thorough all bad matters, Want of faith the cause of al sin and misery.
as the false Prophets. These are our treasures, and our hearts are upon them,
as Mat. 6. We make flesh our arm. Thus what for friends, money, munition,
physic, cunning, God is not regarded; the helpelesse trust in friends, the
poor in money, the soldier Ier. 18. Jer. 17.
in armor, the sick in Physicians, the cunning in their wisdom, like
Achitophel. But of all others, our infidelity appears in our running to
witches; wherein I say with Elisha, Is it not because there is no King in
England? as 2 Reg. 1. Here I could wish my voice as a trumpet, or as the voice
of Stentor, who had the voice of fifty men: Satan is a deceiver, and shall we
trust in him? A liar, and shall we believe him? an enemy, and shall we crave
aid of him? Absit; God forbid.

Most men believe not; For our faith has a triple foundation: First, that
Christ is true God, and therefore can help; 1 Timothy 2. Secondly, true Man, and
therefore will help; Hebr. 4. Thirdly, that he is one Person, not by confusion
of substance, but by the union of natures: for God and man make but one Christ,
and Mat. 11. 11. Psalm. 30.
will help us: for if a Father will help his Son in his wants, how much more
will he help us? Let us therefore put off our sackecloath, and girde us with
gladness, let us rejoice for ever; For now is salvation in Heaven and
strength, and the Kingdom of our Apoc. 12. 10.
God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is thrown
down, etc.

Hence comes all mischief, that we believe not God, which appears in our
life. If a sick man should have two Physicians, the one prescribing a present
remedy, the other a present poison, if he should follow the latter, would we
not conclude, that either he would not be healed, or else that he believed not
the other: so stands the case betwixt God and us, either we would not be
saved, or else we do not believe God.

This is manifest in two men, Adam and Abraham; the one the father of all men,
the other of the faithful: Now Adam eat of Genesis 3.
the tree which God forbad, and why? because he believed not Act. 7.
God but Satan; and so do most men: But Abraham, when God commanded him to
leave his Country and kindred, he did so; Genesis 22.
when God commanded him to offer his Son, he did it. For he Esa. 1.
believed God, and so do few men. But let us not listen to Satan and our own
flesh, but to God, promising happiness, if we obey him.

Thou have here two counselors, the flesh, and the spirit. The flesh bids thee
follow thy lusts, but the spirit says, if thou do so, thou shall perish:
For he that sows in the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he
that sows in the spirit shall of the spirit Gal. 6. 8.
reap life everlasting: now whether of these will thou believe?

Yet in all this, I do not speak of the justifying faith, but that the wicked
have not, no not so much as the Historical faith to believe the Scriptures:
Nam Faith a chief isntrumental cause of salvation.


Fidestriplex; Iustificans. Miraculosa. Historica.

For faith is threefold, There is a lively justifying Faith, a miraculous, and
an historical faith; but the former is most rare, like a black swanne, or
Phoenix in Arabia. In all the old world there were but eight believers; but two
Joshua and Caleb; and in Christ's time, we read but of an hundred and twenty
believers. As Egypt was full of lice, Nilus full of Crocodyles, Golgotha full
of dead men's skulls; so is the world full of Infidells.

He destroyed them that believed not; And hence comes it to pass that so
many are damned, even because they want faith; Perditio tua ex te, o Israel;
thy destruction comes of thy self, o Israel. Ex nobis quod damnamur; It is
of our selves that we be damned, blame not God, but thine own infidelity;
For all things Hos. 13. Man. 5.
are possible to them that do believe. And therefore Hemingius in his
Enchiridion distinguishes of the word, that There is:

Duplex verbum, -- Damnans and Salvans.

That there is a double word, a Damning, and a Saving word: The damning word is
the Law, the saving word is the Gospel. The Law offers grace to them that
do it; Ye shall keep therefore Deuteronomy. 2. 27. Genesis 3. 5. Levit. 18. 5. Romans
10. 4. 9.
my statutes and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. But
the Gospel offers grace to the believers; For Christ is the end of the Law
unto every one that believe. For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. Faith is ever a chief doer in matters of salvation: and therefore
said Hemingius in his Enchiridion, that Causa imperans salutis est pater, the
John 3. 16.
commanding cause of our salvation is God. For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son to save the world: Causa obsequens est filius, the
obedient pliant cause is the Psalm. 40. 7.
Son; In the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will, I am content to do it, thy Law is written in my heart. Causa consummans
est Spiritus Sanctus; the consummating cause is the holy Ghost: so says the
Apostle, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
but ye are justified by the grace of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God.

The isntrumental cause is double Exhibens. Recipiens. Romans 1. 18.


The exhibiting Cause is the word; the receiving cause, Faith; as therefore a
Smith works not in cold iron, so a preacher works not on an Infidel. There
is no life of God in us, till we believe: Ephesians. 4. 18.
till then our cogitation is darkened, and we are strangers from the life of
God. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned, but he that John 3. 18.
believes not is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of
the only begotten Son of God. A tree lives not without moisture, Without
faith no access to God.
nor a bird without air, nor a fish without water, nor a Salamander without
fire: So the soul lives not without faith, The just does live by his faith:
this is the spirit and soul of the inward man; we Hab. 2.
have a name to live, yet are we dead if we want faith. I live by faith in the
Son of God (says Paul) who loved me, and gave himself for Gal. 2. 20.
me. Infidels therefore are dead men.

What is the cause, that we profit no more by the word? we believe not the
preacher: that may be verified of our people, which God said to Ezechiel
concerning the Jews; They come unto Ezech. 33. 31, 32.
thee (says God) as people uses to come, and my people sit before thee, and
he are thy words, but they will not do them: For with their mouths they make
jests, and their heart goes after their covetousness, and lo thou art unto
them as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well:
for they hear thy words, but do them not: So we come to the Sermon, hear the
preacher, but we do not hear him with such zeal and affection as we should;
we believe not, but abuse the word to our own condemnation; why care we no
more for heaven, but are so worldly? truly we believe not God: what is the
cause that we live in sin, seeing it is damnable; For the ways of it is
death? we believe not the Scriptures: what is the Romans 6. 23. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
cause of all disorder? even infidelity; The God of this world has blinded
their eyes: our ears are open to hear, but not our hearts to believe, Satan
steals away the word, lest we should believe, and so be saved. But let us
make much of the word, that we may Mat. 13. 19.
have faith to believe. For faith, nay one dram of faith is of more worth
than all the treasure in the world. This that good merchant well knew, that
sold all to buy it. For he that believes shall not be condemned: for every
believers cause is removed Mat. 13. 24.
from the Court of Gods justice, into the Court of Gods mercy, where he that
believes, is not condemned: Therefore our care must be with S. Paul, that we
may be found, having the righteousness of Christ by faith: For there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Phil. 3. 9. Romans 1.
Jesus, as all believers are; and until thou be a believer, thou belongest
not to God: For as the Eagle refuses her birds till they can mount, and soar
to the Sun; and as the Raven acknowledges not her young ones, till they be
black; So God rejects the infidels, and receives none till they believe.
None are the Sons of God, but the faithful, the rest are bastards: I
confess there be degrees in faith: The first is a rudiment or entrance, Gal.
3. Mat. 12. 20. Romans 14. 1. Hebr. 10. 22. Romans 4. 18.
which Christ calls Smoking flax: The second is a weak faith; Him that is
weak in faith (says Paul) receive unto you. The third is (...), assurance of
Faith: Such a faith was in Abraham, who above hope believed, under hope. But no
faith is abominable, and may easily be discerned from a weak faith. As a sick
man is known from a dead man: So a weak faith from no faith.

Even a desire of Faith is a token of faith: For Gods spirit works God gives
grace according to the measure of Faith.
that; but no faith is accursed: For he that believes not is condemned
already. There be degrees in faith, three examples we have: The first of the
Ruler of the Synagogue, who believed that his daughter should revive, if Christ
would but touch her. But the John 3. 18. John 4.
woman with the bloody issue believed, that she should be whole if she touched
but the hemme of his vesture: But the Centurion believed, that his servant
should do well, if Christ spoke but the Luke 8. Mat. 8.
word; here is Gradus positivus, the positive degree, the comparative, and the
superlative, and all good: Accedens ad flumen, tantum haurit, quantum urna
capere potest; A man coming unto the river, or fountain, he draws as much
as his vessel will hold, the defect or want is not in the flood or fountain,
but in the vessel: so draw from Christ, from his word and Sacraments, as
Rebecca out of the well of Jacob; there is no defect in Christ, or in the word
and Sacraments, but in the vessel, the heart that does not believe. Accede
aegrotus and sanaberis, debilis and confortaberis, famelicus and satiaberis:
Come thou sick man and thou shall be healed, Esa. 55.
thou weak one and thou shall be strengthened, thou hungry one, and thou shall
be satisfied. But come, Non pedibus corporis, sed cordis, not with the feet of
thy body, but of thy heart: Non ambulando, sed credendo, not in walking, but in
believing.

Faith is Illuminatio mentis, the light of the mind: Infidells are blind, and
shall not see heaven; they are filii irae, children of Luk 15. Act. 15.
wrath, and they that believe not cannot be saved. Faith is Gods gate, whereby
God enters into our soul; the light that found the lost groate; the purifier
of our heart; the conqueror in the race; the pole-starre for the sayler; the
life of the soul* and by Faith Christ dwells in our hearts. O help us Lord,
we believe, o help our unbeleefe; he must believe that comes to God: and as is
our faith, so is our blessing; faith is the victory that overcomes the world.
O Lord increase our faith.

The second example used for Confirmation of his former proposition; That we
must strive for faith: is taken from Gods vengeance upon the Angels, who
because they kept not their estate, but left their habitation, he has reserved
in everlasting chains of darkness, to the Judgment of the great day. So
that here in these Angels, Observe;

First, Their sin.

Secondly, Their punishment.

Thy sin of these Angels I will not precisely discuss; their sin, (like
Adams sin) was not alone, but many.

First, there was pride in them, as it appears by Paul's words to Timothy;
where handling the office of a Minister, among other 2 Timothy 3. 6.
things, he would not have him to be a young scholar, Lest he being puffed
up, fall into the condemnation of the Devil; that is, lest being proud of his
degree, he be likewise condemned as the Devil was, for lifting up himself
by pride: so that it is manifest, What was the Angels sin.
that pride was the sin of the Angels.

But besides pride, there were many other sins in them, as Infidelity,
Ingratitude, Envy, and Rebellion; Denique, quid non? to conclude, what not? not
one vice, but many, even a troop, an army of sins: For sins are like
Pismires in a moll-hill, like Bees in an hive, like Motes in the Sun, there
are many ever together, not one sin alone, they grow like clusters of grapes:
sin is like the link of a chain, take hold of one link, and draw the whole
chain: so take hold of one sin, and draw a number.

Other things concerning Angels, as their names, their number, their orders, I
dare not define: (...), Let us be Romans 12. 3. Job 4. 18. 1 Timothy 3. 6. 2 Pet.
2. 4. Psalm. 78. 49. John 8. 44. Wisd. 2. 24.
wise unto sobriety: Job names folly or pravity in the Angels, as if that were
their sin: Paul names pride: Peter only calls it their sin: Asaph
calls them evil, but notes not the kinds of of their evil, what the evil
or sin was which they committed: Christ names murder to be their sin, and
says, That the Devil was a murderer from the beginning: The Wise man names
envy; Jude here names Apostasy: but the time, the manner, and the
circumstance of their fall is not plainly expressed in the Scripture: and in
that they are not, it teaches us Sapere ad sabrietatem, not to presume to
understand above that which is meet to understand, but Romans 12. 3. Pro. 25.
27. To. 11. 33. Col. 1. 18.
that we understand according to sobriety. Too much honey is not good: who has
known the mind of the Lord? Many are puffed up with a fleshly mind, as
though with Moses, God had revealed to them the Creation of the world: as
though with Stephen, they had seen Genesis 1. Act. 6. 2 Cor. 12. Apoc. 1. Ezra. 4.
the heavens open: as though with Paul, they had been lifted up to the third
Paradise: as if the Angel had talked with them, as he did with John in
Pathmos; and with Ezras in Jerusalem: Such are Holcot, Briccot, Dionysius
Areopagita, whom they call, Aquilam, seu volucrem Coeli, the Eagle, or bird of
heaven; and make nine orders of Angels: but no man has so tasted Ionathans
honey comb, but he may see, and oversee many things in this, and in all other
questions.

If any man ask, what Angels be? I say, that they be spirits of essence, but
having neither body, nor soul: For they differ from bodies, in that they have
no flesh, and from souls, in perspicuity; understanding what the soul cannot:
Indeed they sometimes take bodies unto them as the Angel that appeared to
Abraham, Mat. 22. 30. Genesis 18. Judge. 13. Mat. 26.
and to Manoahs wife, and to Marie. So that in respect of their essence, they
are called spirits: and as the Apostle speaks, Ministering spirits: but in
respect of their office, they are called Angels. Whereupon David, He shall give
his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. Angel is a name
of office, not of nature. Some make them of a fiery nature, as Hemingius in his
Enchiridion. I see no soundness in it: For sometime they have their
denomination from heat, as the Seraphins; sometime for knowledge and
brightness, The Apostasy of the Angels irrecoverable.
as the Cherubins; sometime they have appeared in a fiery nature, so they
appeared to Elisha and his servant; for the mountain was full of Chariots and
horses of fire, that is, Angels to defend them from the Syrians. And so again,
while Elias and Elisha Esaias 6. 2 Reg. 6. 17. 2 Reg. 2. 11. Psalm. 114.
went walking and talking together, Behold, there appeared a Chariot of fire,
and horses of fire, and did separate them twain. And David says, He makes
his spirits his Messengers, and a flaming fire his Ministers. And as they have
appeared in these forms, so have they appeared in other forms also, as
pleases the Creator: but to leave this.

The sin of Angels is notorious, and their punishment is as famous; they are
fallen from light to darkness, from Heaven to hell, from felicity to misery;
Valerian fell from a golden chair to a cage of iron; Dionysius fell from a
King to a Schoolmaster; Alexander the third fell from being Pope to be a
Gardener in Venice; Nabuchadnezzar fell from a man to a beast: but the
celestial Dan. 4.
spirits fell from Angels to Devils. For their sin of Apostasy was great, it
cried to God for vengeance. The Lord Jesus notes this Apostasy in them, to
show, that their sin was not by creation, but by wilful corruption. Hereupon
says our Savior to the Jews, You are of your father the devil, and the
lusts of your father do ye; he abode not in the truth. It follows then,
that John 8 44.
he was once in the truth, and that he was not created evil. This Apostasy, in
some case, joined with wilfulness and malice, is not to be prayed for. So
says Saint John, the Disciple whom Jesus loved; If any man see his brother sin
a sin, that is not unto death; let him ask, and he shall give life for them
that sin not to death: There 1 John 5. 16.
is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it. Some
Apostacies cannot be renewed: For it is impossible, that they which have been
once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and
of the powers of the world to come; If they fall away, should be renewed by
repentance, seeing they crucify again to themselves, the Son of God, and
make a mock of him. For certainly, they that are Apostataes, and sin
against the Holy Ghost, hate Christ, crucify and mock him, but to their own
destruction; and therefore fall into desperation, and cannot repent. Indeed
there is no sin but by repentance may be forgiven, but they that sin against
the Holy Ghost, which some affirm to be Apostasia aut negatio Christi,
Apostasy, or the denying of Christ, it shall not be forgiven; ^^^lla in Luc.
12. 10.
Quia direct obviant principio, per quod fit remissio peccatorum, because they
are directly and plainly opposite and contrary to that whereby remission of
sins is obtained; that is, unto repentance. And this is the cause, says
Augustine, why God has redeemed men, and not Angels; for that they sinned
(...) from within and of themselves, maliciously and rebelliously: man sinned
(...), from without and by provocation. And this is Christ's death saves only
men not Angels.
the cause (says Augustine) why Moses wrote nothing of the fall of Angels; he
named not their wound, because he would not name their medicine; Sed hominis
vulnus and medicinam narravit, but he has showed man his wound and medicine
also, for that Aug. lib. de mirab. Script. cap. 2.
God would restore him again. Humanam ergo naturam, non Angelicam, sumpsit
Christus (quoth Athanasius) therefore he took the nature of man, not the
nature of Angels; according to that of Athanasius.
the Apostle, He in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of
Abraham; Quia Angeli per se defecerunt a Deo, because the Angels of themselves
fell from God. Therefore the promise of the Messiah was made only to man, not
to Angels. The grace of GOD, that Tit. 2. 11.
brings salvation to all men, has appeared: Grace saves men, not Angels.
For these Angels that fell, have no benefit by Christ's death, he came not to
save them, for their sins are not pardonable. But the cause of mercy I leave
to God only, the father of mercies: These are but conjectures of Augustine and
Athanasius. In the mean time Dorbels reasons are too weak to prove, that men
shall be punished in hell more deeply than these Angels that fell. His first
reason is, Quia Deus nunquam pro illis passus est, ut pro nobis; that God never
suffered so much for them, as for us: His second reason is, Quia Angeli pro uno
tantum peccato puniuntur, nos saepe deliquimus; the Angels fell by one sin
only, man by many sins he offends often. His third reason is, Quia daemones
sunt spiritus tantum, nos autem corpore and anima peccamus; that the bad
Angels, the Devils, be spirits only, but men have both bodies and spirits. But
these reasons are vanishing, as the untimely dew, unsavory as the white of an
egg, brittle as the web of a spider. He spoke as Phormio spoke before
Hannibal, Rem magis delirantem nunquam legi, I never read a more doting thing.

But to proceed; my meaning is not, that all Apostasy is sin against the Holy
Ghost: for every Apostasy is not uncurable, every fall of man is not damnable,
as the fall of Angels; yet it is dangerous: for he that settetb his hand to the
plough, and looks back, Luke 9. 62.
is not fit for the Kingdom of God. And Christ said to the sick man, Behold,
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto John 5. 14.
thee. Thus all Apostasy is dangerous, though not damnable: for if damnable,
what shall become of the godly themselves? for they often fall from the Lord,
slide back, and decrease in the graces of God: They keep not their first
estate; which was the sin of the Angels. Ephesus lost her first love, but I
would our Church were like it; for Ephesus hated the evil, we hate the good;
Apoc. 2. 4.
they examined the false Apostles, we examine none; they suffered Luke 12. 45.
persecution, we persecute others; we smite our fellow servants. Julian the
Christian is become Julian the Apostata, and Simon Peter is become Simon Magus,
Joseph is become Pharaoh, grapes are turned into thorns, figs into thistles,
Lambs into Lions, and Doves There must be a perpetual growth in grace and
goodness.
into Serpents. We are fallen from our first love, every day less and less
zealous, less and less loving, less and less religious, than heretofore we
have been. Memento Anglia, memento Norfolcia unde excideris; Remember England,
remember Norfolk whence thou art fallen. Revertere, revertere, Return,
return, says the Lord, Ier. 3. 14.
for I am your Lord and will bring you to Sion. Let us follow the counsel of
the Wise man, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening Eccles. 11. 6.
let not thine hand rest: that is, increase in goodness, do good in Gal. 6. 6.
thy youth, do good in thine age, yea do good at all times; be not weary of
sowing, be not weary of working, the seed-time is nothing, the harvest is all
in all. To do good in youth is nothing, to do well in middle age is nothing,
but to continue in old age, to the last gasp, is piety indeed. When a
righteous man (says the Prophet) turns away from his righteousness, and
commits Ezech. 18. 26.
iniquity, he shall even dye for the same, he shall even die for his iniquity
that he has committed: as well may we drown in the Havens mouth, as in the
midst of the boisterous Sea; as well may we fall through the* peevishness of
age, as through the lusts and concupiscence of youth. Of many it may be said,
as Bernard said, Caput canum, and cor vanum, a gray head, and a green wit;
gray hairs and green lusts; but we must go forward, and not fall from the
state of grace: Take heed that no man fall away from the Heb. 12. 15.
state of grace, says the Apostle. Christianity, and progress in religion is
compared to a building; in a building men must go forward, and to the
foundation add the roof: And it is compared to a race; in a race men run on
till they come to the goal: Jude 20.
and it is compared to the growth of trees; Trees grow bigger and 1 Cor. 9. 24.
2 Pet. 3. 28. Ephesians. 4. 14.
taller: And it is compared to the ages of men; the ages of men grow still, and
they be elder to day than they were yesterday: And it is compared to the
morning light, and to the Sun; which Prove. 4. 18.
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to
run his course. The morning light waxes brighter and Psalm. 19.
brighter, the Sun shines more and more unto the noone day: Even so good men
must wax better and better. The Church is Gods vineyard, his people are his
plants, the plants must grow, and the Christians increase: Terra Domini est
ecclesia ejus, ipse rigat, ipsam colit ipse agricola pater; Gods ground is his
Church, he tills, dungs, Aug. in Psa. 36.
waters, himself is the Husbandman; and we must bring forth fruit, and grow in
grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus. Paul prays for the Philippians,
that they may abound in grace more and Phil. 1. 9.
more. And for the Colossians, To increase in knowledge: Let us grow up
(therefore) into full holiness in the fear of God; in grace 1 Cor. 7. 1.
there is no stand, but either a progress, or a regresse; non oportet
Chrysostom. Homil. 14.
exordia sola habere clara, sed clariorem finem; A good beginning must have a
better end. The runner must continue to the goal, and the Champion to the
victory: The Orator will shine most in the end. Vt cum plausibus discedat, that
he may depart with credit: The wicked grow worse and worse.
He that puts his hand to the plough, must not look back: he shall have the
crown of victory, that continues unto death, and he be saved, that grows
better to the end. Non progredi, est regredi, not Luke 9. Mat. 12. Bern.
to go forward, is to go backward: We must not be like Joshua his Sun,
which stood still, nor like Ezekiahs Sun, which went backward; but like
David's Sun, which always goes forward; As well was he punished, that hid his
talent, as he that spent his Mat. 25. Luke 16.
masters goods riotously.

The Divines hold two principles in divinity: That good men go forward; their
ditch becomes a flood, and their flood a Sea, they look forth as the
morning, as fair as the Moon, Eccles. 24. 35. Cant. 6. 9. John 15. 2.
pure as the Sun, terrible as an army with Banners: they bear fruit, and
Christ purges them, That they may bring forth more fruit; they flourish like a
Palm tree, and grow as a Cedar of Lebanon; they are planted in the house of
the Lord, and will flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall still bring
forth fruit in their age, they Psalm. 92. 13. 14.
shall be fat and flourishing.

Another principle in Divinity is, that bad men decrease; they grow from
Lovers, to Lechers; from Liars, to Swearers; from Quarrellers, to Killers. They
are ever learning (as Paul said of the 2 Timothy 3. 7.
Hypocrites) and never come to the knowledge of the truth: they are plants not
planted by Christ, therefore to be rooted up, for they be Ier. 9. 2. 3.
Adulterers, and an assembly of rebels: They bend their tongues like their
bows, for lies, but they have no courage for the truth upon the earth, for
they proceed from evil to worse, and they have not known me, says the
Lord. They have seven sins more, and seven Devils more enter, and their plague
shall be seven times greater. Mat. 12.
But let us Crescere de virtute in virtutem, grow from virtue to virtue: and
let our works be more at the last, than at the first; and let us try our
selves every day, whether we go forward, or Apoc.
backward in Religion. A wise occupier will at the years end, see whether he
has gained or lost, and a wise Christian will examine himself, whether he
be increased or decreasing in Religion, in Faith, in Zeal, in Knowledge, and
Godliness: For there be more Bankrupts in Religion, than in any Trade besides
in the whole World. Solomon lost his ships, Laban his sheep, Esau his lands,
and birthright, the Prodigal son his patrimony, 1 Reg. 10. Genesis 30. Heb.
12. Luke 15. Job 1 1* Tim. 1. 19.
Job his cattle; but most men lose faith, love, piety, and a good conscience,
they are poorer to God this year, than the last: For as touching Faith,
Religion, Love, Zeal, etc. they have made shipwreck. The Wicked are like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, whose head was all of gold, whose shoulders were all of
silver, whose belly was all of brass, whose legs, were all of iron, and
feet of clay, they are worst at last, they live not to amend, but to fulfill
the measure of their iniquity. The first year we are Angels, the second Mat.
23. 32.
year Men, the third year devils; like the Taxus of India, which the first
yielded fruit, the second year leaves, the Perseverance brings the Crown.
third year poison. But have thou left Sodom? Look not back again with Lots
wife, lest thou be turned into a pillar of Salt: Have thou marched toward the
heavenly Canaan? turn not Genesis 19. Act. 7. 1 Cor. 9.
back again in thine heart, like the Israelites: Have thou begun to run in
the ways of God like the Corinths? Sic curre ut comprehendas, so run that
thou may obtain: have thou begun in the spirit? make not an end in the
flesh like the Galathians: Gal. 3. 2 Cor. 12.
pray thrice, as Paul did; yea pray seven times, as Elias did; yea, pray
without ceasing, that thou may go forward in Religion. Non minor est virtus,
quam quaerere, parta tueri. Adam 1 Reg. 18.
fell from Paradise, Judas from the school of our Savior, the Angels from
Heaven; yea, the whole world falls: Scarce one of a hundred, of a thousand,
hold fast the profession of their hope Heb. 10 32.
without wavering.

But to proceed: Jude says of these Angels, That they left their habitation:
Where Gods justice is discharged of all blot and stain; for willingly,
wilfully they fell from God, that God might be just when he speaks, and pure
when he judges. The Scripture therefore distinguishes the times of their
state: The first time is their creation, in which they were made all alike, in
all fullness of light and glory, immortal spirits, glorious creatures: The
Angels being chief of all creatures, as the Sun among Planets; as the Eagle
among Fowls, and the Lion among Beasts, and the Whale among Fishes. Angels are
the first, and Men Psalm. 8. 5. Mat. 22. 30.
are next in glory; He made Man a little lower than the Angels; and Christ
says, that we shall be like them in the last day; like them, being exempted
from the infirmities of this present life.

The second time is the constancy of the good, and the fall of the bad Angels:
from this time there has been diversity among them: The good abide in their
first estate of Innocence, serving God day and night, according to that of
Daniel, A thousand Dan. 7. 10. Heb. 1. 14. Mat. 18. Psa. 34. 1 Pet. 1. 12. 2
Pet. 2. 4.
thousand minister unto him. And the Apostle calls them, ministering spirits:
They see the face of their heavenly Father. They keep good men, as David
says, The Angels of the Lord pitch their tents round about them that fear
him; they rejoice in the Church meetings. On the contrary, the evil Angels
suffer pains, they are cast down from their state, and are thrust down into
Hell, and are tied in chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation; they
are deprived of the sight of God, and of Christ, and if at any time, they Job
1. 2 Cor. 18.
stand and appear before God, they stand and appear before an angry Judge,
not a mild and merciful Father. And thirdly, they are sent about sordid and
foul works, as to hurt and destroy the Vessels of wrath. Whereupon says
David, He cast upon them the furiousness Psalm. 78. 49.
of his wrath, and vexation, by sending out of evil Angels; and his captives
he detaineth in their malice so that they cannot come out of the snare of the
Devil, but are holden of him at his will; and Diverse appellations of Angels.
they hinder the good what they can, as they hindered Paul's journey to Rome.
Fourthly, they are obdurate, so hardened as they have no hope of instauration or
repairing; and those gifts which they had 2 Timothy 2. 26. Romans 1. 13.
by nature they do abuse, to the dishonor of God; and hurt of man, seeking
continually to devour him.

The third time is of the last Judgment: For then the joy of 1 Pet. 3. 8.
the good shall be more full, for the glory of Christ unto whom all things
shall be subject; and the judgment of the evil Hos. 13. Luke 4. 34.
more grievous, and therefore the devils cried out in the Gospel, Art thou come
to torment us before our time?

These times do agree and accord to us: The first time of the Angels agrees
to Man's nativity: the second time to Man's Justification: the third to his
Glorification.

And note here, that Angels were not evil by creation, but by transgression,
and therefore there are many names given them in the Scripture, to show and
declare their depravation, their corruption: they are called (...), accusers,
for their calumnies and Ephesians. 6. Mat. 6. 1 These. 3. 1 Pet. 5. Apoc. 12.
slanders; and (...), evil ones, for their malice; Tempters, for their
suggestion; Lions for their ferity in devouring; Dragons, for their cruelty.
Some say they were called Devils, A scientia, from their knowledge and
understanding: Others say, they were so called, ob naturae excellentiam, for
the excellency of their nature. The Maniches, and Priscillianists, An. Dom.
200. and Anno 209. did very strongly maintain, that the Devils were created of
an evil God: but Christ confuteth them, when he said unto the Jews, You are
of your father the Devil; and the John 8. 44.
Works of your father will ye do; he has been a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Fuit
in veritate, sed non fletit in ea, he was in the truth, but he abode not in
it. As for their names, Jude calls them Angels: The country men call them
Satyrs: The women call them fairies: The Poets call them Dryades, and
Hamadryades: The nobles call them familiars: The Philosophers call them (...):
but all these names note but one thing. By their fall they are Devils, full of
malice.

This state, that Jude here names, is the state of Grace: by grace they stood,
from grace they fell. They kept not their first estate. By the way observe with
me, that the good Angels are not said to be justified or reconciled unto God,
because they sin not: but they are called Elect Angels; I charge thee before
God, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, says Paul to Timothy. Now
election is by grace, because that by the grace of God they are, which they
are. The place therefore in the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians, where he
says, For it pleased the father that in him, (that is, Christ) all fullness
should dwell; and by him to reconcile Col. 1. 19, 20.
all things unto himself; and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross
both the things on earth, and the things in heaven. Bona cum Christ is not the
Redeemer of Angels, but their head.
Calvini pace; by master Calvin's good leave, is not referred to the Angels, but
to the souls of the Saints, which then were in heaven: Christ is said to be
the head of the Angels, but not the Redeemer of them, nor the husband of them.
To speak properly; The marriage in the Revelation is betwixt Christ and man,
not Apoc. 19.
between CHRIST and Angels, for he took not their nature; neither can it be
said of Christ and Angels, that they are two in one flesh: Yet are they one
with Christ in another respect: for he is the head of Angels; and Christ
gives unto them life, Heb. 2. 16. Ephesians. 1. 22.
grace, and wisdom, as to all the faithful; and so are Membra Christi and
ecclesiae nobiscum. Yet Calvin thinks otherwise of the aforenamed place to
the Colossians, using these two reasons: Angeli (inquit) non erant extra
periculum lapsus; The Angels (says he) Col. 1. 20.
were not without danger of falling. And furthermore he says, that the justice
of Angels was not answerable to the justice of God to satisfy it fully. Behold
(says Job) he found no steadfastness in Job 4. 18.
his servants, and laid folly upon his angels. But to expound this place of the
devil (says he) frigidum est; it has so cold a sent, that it cannot be
perceived.

As for the time of the fall of these Angels, as I will not be curious, so it
is like, that they fell betwixt the creation of the second day, and the seventh
day; (quoth Fenner) their fall could not be long after the creation, because
Heva espied not the serpents Fenner method. in methodum Theolog. lib. 3. cap.
73.
tongue to have a further skill than of himself: howsoever it must needs be,
that their fall was before the fall of man; for otherwise, this Homicida, this
murderer could not have been so ready in the Angel to bring man to confusion.
Hereupon Genesis 3.
Christ said, Est homicida, he is a murderer. The Scripture speaks John 8.
44.
of his fall; Christ says, I saw Satan like lightning fall down Luke 10. 18.
from heaven. It is enough, that he fell, though we know not the day, the
year, the hour of his fall.

But this is ridiculous, that of the Angels that fell, some make some to be
better and truer than others: as those that fell in the air and fire, to be
purer than those that fell in the earth and water: for they make them to have
fallen at the first into all the four elements; but these be toys, for they
be all Liars. John 8. 44.


Again, they fell not by weight, as a solid substance to stick in a place;
but their fall consists in quality, that they fell from the grace, wherein
they were created, their fall was not local being Spirits.

Again, Paul speaks as hardly of them in the air, as Christ does of them in
the earth: For the Apostle says of them in the Ephesians. 2. 2.
air, That they work in the children of disobedience: As Christ says of them
in the earth, He walks (says Christ) through dry places, seeking rest, and
finds none. And then he says, I will return to my Mat. 11.
house, whence I came out, and when he comes, he finds it swept and Devils
many in number, yet one head among them.
garnished, then takes he seven other spirits worse than himself, and
enters in and dwells there, and the end of that man is worse than the
beginning.

Again, note here, that Jude names Angels plurally, where observe with me,
that the Scripture speaks sometime plurally, as here, The Angels also which
kept not their first estate. And so Paul speaks plurally, We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, Ephesians. 6. 12.
against powers, against worldly governors, princes of the darkness of this
world: And sometime singularly, for Paul speaking of these evil Angels, he
calls him, The prince that rules in the air, the spirit that works in the
children of disobedience: As if Ephesians. 2. 2.
there were but one spirit in the air. And this it does, partly because there
is a chiefty among the evil Angels, one is principal, and the rest are called
his angels. The Scripture therefore speaks singularly, as if there were but
one devil. So does Saint Peter, Your adversary the devil goes about like a
roaring Lion. The Scripture names Beelzebub, the prince of devils, and
Abaddon, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
king of locusts, the Angel of the bottomless pit, and the great red Dragon
that fought with Michael, and Asmodaeus who slew seven men in seven nights. The
Apostle names him the God of the world, and the prince that rules in the
air: and in respect of this chiefty he is said to have a kingdom: as God has
his Kingdom, so the devil has his: witness our Savior, If Satan be divided
against Satan, how can his Kingdom endure. I speak not of it, as if Mar. 2.
there were but one devil; for there are infinite; one man had both a deaf
and dumb devil; Mary had seven devils; the man Luke 7. Mat. 8.
in the Gospel had a Legion.

That which is said of Lucifer, How art thou fallen from heaven, o Lucifer,
son of the morning, etc? is utterly mistaken. For surely Esa. 14. 12.
there are infinite devils, as many as men on the earth; infinite Angels fell,
as infinite now stand. Hence comes the world Dan. 7.
to be so full of mischief: Art thou prone to any sin? thou shall not want a
devil to help thee forward: If David be proud of his people, Satan will
provoke him to number them, that he 2 Samuel 24.
may be prouder: If Ahabs Prophets be given to flatter, the devil straightway
will become a lying spirit in the mouths of four 1 Reg. 22.
hundred of them: If Mary Magdalen be whorish, and unchaste, seven devils of
lechery will enter into her, and make her become at last a mecenary drab: If
Judas will be a Traitor, Satan will Luke 7.
quickly enter into his heart, and make him sell his Master: If Ananias will be
covetous, and lie for advantage, Satan will fill John 13. 2.
his heart, and he will bend his tongue like a bow to speak lies. Acts 5.
Does Absalom want a counselor to advise him in mischief? 2 Reg. 15.
why here is Achitophel to supply his wants: Does Ahab want a comforter to rid
him of his grief, for the not possessing of Naboths 1 Reg. 21.
vineyard? here is Iezabel to comfort him, and advise him, which way to effect
his purpose: will Achitophel hang himself? Though the devils be malicious
spirits yet they agree in evil.
Go thy way (says the Devil) here is an halter. Is Judas desperate, will he
needs be his own hangman, and hang till he burst too? here is a rope (says
the Devil.) The Devil waits as a Spaniell to raise the game, to increase
sin in all men: he has an oar in every boat, a hand in every sin in the
World.

If ye ask, how the Devil is in the wicked, seeing that he has no Local
dimensions?

I answer; that he is in us, as the soul is in us; Intellectual Mar. 9. Mar.
2.
not sensible. And he is in us two ways: by his essence, as in the Child, and
in the deaf man: or by his Working and operation, not bodily, but spiritually
in the mind; by suggesting evil things to us; so he was in Ananias, he spoke
not vocally, but by Act. 5.
inspiration. For so are the words of Saint John to be expounded, when as he
says, There was given unto him a mouth that spoke great things and
blasphemies, etc. He spoke by the mouth of a greater beast than himself
(quoth John) yet he speaks not vocally, for he wants the nine instruments
of nature, Duo labia, the two lips, quatuor dentes, four teeth, and guttur,
the throat, etc. Seven Luke 7.
Devils were in Magdalen by their essence, so seven and seven are in us, though
not by essence, yet by operation and working. For as the spirit of God is not
in us by his essence, (for then we were Gods) but by his graces; So the evil
spirit is not in all the wicked by his essence, but by operation. He works
in the Children of disobedience.

Once again I say, that sometime Devils are named in the plural number,
sometime but one to note a Chiefety, and to note that they all join together
to uphold one kingdom: For though they cannot love one another in deed, yet
the hatred they bear against God is as a fagot-bond, that does tie them
together, that these all agree in one to work mischief. They have Seven heads
and ten horns: Here in the wicked his members, are Apoc. 12.
like to their Head; for howsoever they hate one another in private quarrels,
yet agree they in the maine point against God, and good men. Ephraim against
Manasses; Manasses against Ephraim, Esa. 9.
yet both against Judah: The Pharisees against the Saduces, the Saduces against
the Pharisees, and yet both against Christ: The Jews Mat. 22.
against the Gentiles, the Gentiles against the Jews, and yet both against
Paul: The Canonists against the Schoolmen, and the Acts 19 9.
Schoolmen against the Canonists for auricular Confession, yet both against
the Gospel: Parish against Parish, one against another, yet all against the
Minister.

This may be a good lesson to us, that we may learn all to join together
against the common enemy. If we will not learn of God and good men to love
one another, and to cling and cleave together as one man, for shame let us
learn of Devils, for they cleave together like burres: Howsoever we differ in
private matters, yet let us all agree together against the adversary Division
the cause of Confusion.
the Papists, and other Hell Hounds of division, that remain within and
without the Land. Division in Christendom opened a way to the Turk to get
Constantinople, Buda, Belgrade, Strigonium, and all Hungaria almost: The
division in Italy Inter Guelfos and Gibelinos, brought all into the hands of
that man of Rome. The division in England brought in the Spanish Navy hither,
Anno 1588. Sub spe vincendi, In hope to have conquered us, and that the Papists
would have revolted to them. But let not the Papists think, that the Spaniards
would have spared them; all had been fish that had come to net: All had bin
Huguenotes. So was it in the massacre of Paris by the Guise. So was it in the
conquest of Antwerpe, by Parma. Therefore, that Papist that has an English
heart left in his breast to knock upon, let him pray for our Sovereign and
State now, and God bless both the one and the other, and make Gods and our
foes, his and our footstool.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. 6. He has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness. The Angels
that fell are reserved in eternal slaverie.



HAving already spoken of the sin of the Angels, we are now come to handle
their punishment; their fall was great, so was their punishment: Quanto gradus
altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher their state and condition, the
grievouser their fall. Sin and punishment go together like Jonathan and his
harnesse-bearer; Sin goes before, and punishment follows after. If it was much
for Caine Genesis 4. Genesis 3.
to be a vagabond, and Adam to be driven out of Paradise, and Ismael out of his
Father Abraham his house? how much more for the Angels to be driven out of
heaven: and not to return like Noah's Dove to the Arc: but to live in
darkness for ever? Let the earth tremble, let the Sea make a noise, let the
Air be dark, let all hearts melt, and all faces gather blackenesse at the
hearing of this Judgment. The Lords face is burning, his lips are full of
indignation, Esa. 30. 27, 28.
and his tongue is as a devouring fire, his spirit is as a river that
over-floweth up to the neck, etc. And when he is kindled, The rivers shall
be turned to pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the Cap. 34. 9,
19. 11.
land thereof shall be burning pitch, it shall not be quenched, night nor day,
the smoke thereof shall go up ever, it shall be desolate from generation to
generation: none shall pass through it for ever: but the Pelicane and the
Hedgehog shall possess it: the great Owl and the Raven shall dwell in it, and
he shall stretch out upon it, the line of vanity, and the stones of
emptiness. The Angels now are Devils, reserved in chains. If The Devils
malice infinite, but his power iimited.
you ask me where? I say in the earth, as it appears by the words of our
Savior, When the unclean spirit is driven out of a man, he walks through
dry places, seeking rest and finds none. etc. And not in the earth only,
but in the air; For he is a Prince that rules Mat. 12. 43. Apoc. 20. 1, 2, 3.
in the air: and not in the earth and air only, but in the deep also: For
says Saint John, I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand, and he took the Dragon, that
old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and he bound him a thousand years,
and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and sealed the door
upon him, that he should deceive the people no more.

But in that God has reserved them in chains, it is a thing of singular
comfort, as was David's harp to Saul in his melancholy, and the Dove to Noah
in the deluge. Like the news brought unto the shepherds, whiles they were
watching their flocks in the Genesis 8. Luke 2.
night.

Here therefore we learn, that they cannot pass their linckes and bounds,
they are under God, Pendent exillius nutu; they depend on his beck. For God
uses Satan to serve his justice (yet Satan knows it not) he is Gods
ban-dogge let slip at wandering sheep, and lawless swine; he is Gods hangman,
or executioner to punish the reprobate; yet can he go no further, than God
will; For he has him in chains, as Clemens had Dandalus the Duke of Venice;
as Sapor had Valerian the Emperor. Hereupon says, Gregory, Diaboli semper
iniqua voluntas, nunqua^ injusta est potestas, the Greg.
will of the Devil is always wicked, but his power never unjust; and he
gives the reason: Voluntatem habet a se, potestatem vero a domino, he has his
will of himself but his power from God. The spirit therefore that vexed Saul,
is called the evil spirit of the 1 Samuel 18.
Lord: evil in regard of his will; the spirit of God, in regard of the power
given him of God. Isodore says Adversaria potestas non habet Isodore.
vim cogendi, sed perswadendi, the Devil has no power to compel but to
persuade: For then he would not leave one man alive. He is like the Libberd,
who is so hateful to man that if he see but his Luke 8.
picture, he will tear it in pieces. The Devil could not enter into the
swine, but by license. An evil spirit vexed Saul: but it is added, That God
sent him. An evil spirit deceived Ahab: but it is added, that God put him into
the mouths of the Prophets: Satan 1 Samuel 16. 1 Reg. 22. Job. 1. Exodus 11.
could not touch Job but as God permitted him: Moses was a figure of Christ,
Pharaoh of the Devil, now as Pharaoh could not hold Israel in Egypt; So Satan
cannot hold us in bondage longer than God will. Satan is the strong man, but
Christ is stronger than he. As the water-spaniell watches the shot, to fetch
the foul, that is stricken; as the Iaylors watch at the judgment seats, and
the hangman for the days of execution: So Satan; and his Angels wait on Gods
Majesty to be set aworke, but of themselves can do nothing, therefore are
they said to be delivered into chains, and reserved How Satan is said to be
loosed yet ever bound.
in everlasting chains. As in my text: For the Lord deals with Devils, as
men use to do with cursed bandogs, which will fly at the throat of every one,
whom they met; they tie and chain them up 2 Pet. 2. 4.
for fear of doing hurt: For proof whereof note what God said to the Devil
under the serpent, Thou shall bruise his heel. By which Genesis 3. 15.
phrase is implied a restraint, namely that he should not come so high as the
Saints head, to crush it, he should only snarle at the heel, and bite it:
that is, he should not be able utterly to destroy their souls.

I but Satan is now losed, and the thousand years, wherein he Apoc. 20. 7.
was chained, are expired: and therefore now he has liberty to do what he can.

But brethren, ye shall understand, that this is spoken Comparative,
comparatively, in regard of former restraint, as when a dog has been
sometime tied up very close, and afterward his chain is let further, he may be
said to be loosed.

But the Lord limiteth this his liberty, he can go no further, than God will
give him leave. For if it were not limited, the Devil should soon devour all
mankind, if he were not restrained no creature could resist him, and stand
before him: As the Sea, if it 1 Pet. 5. 8.
had not bounds, would soon overwhelme the whole world. So would the Devil
soon turn all topsi-turvy, and bring all to the very depth of Hell, where he
himself is. Therefore says the Apostle, Iam 4. Romans 16. 20.
Resist the Devil and he shall fly from you. And Paul tells the Romans,
that The God of peace shall tread Satan under their feet shortly. And in that
Christ calls him, the Strong man, Luke 11.

And the holy Ghost, the Prince of the World, John 12.

The God of the World, 2 Cor. 4.

The Spirit that rules in the Air, Ephesians. 2.

A Roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

A Flying Dragon, Apoc. 12.

The Angel of the bottomless pit, Apoc. 20.

Powers dominations, etc. Ephesians.

This is not to fear us, or to make us dread him too much, but to awake us. As
Saint Peter says, Be sober and watch, not to 1. Pet. 5. 8.
be faint hearted, not to despair: He may sorely assault us, but he shall
never prevail against us; He may winnow us as he did Peter, but he shall not
finally overthrow us. Our Faith shall Ephesians. 17.
quench all his fiery darts, though he let them fly at us, as thick as hail
stones, as he did at Job, being deprived of Goods, Cattle Children, and all
that he had; yet these darts we shall keep off by faith: Hellgates shall not
prevail against us. Saint Augustine Mat. 16. 18.
compares the Devils to Mastives, Qui latrant, non mordent, which bark, but
bite not: to Serpents which hiss, but sting not: Permitti^ illos Deus saevire,
aut ut probet fidem electorum, aut ut Aug.
corrigat mores malorum; God suffers, them to rage either to prove the faith
of his Elect, or otherwise, to correct the manners The Devil as yet punished
in part.
of the evil.

Well, God has reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness, they are
punished already, but their full punishment is not before the day of judgment.
As yet they are, but as prisoners in fetters and irons: the great Assizes, the
day of execution is yet to come. For neither are the wicked, nor yet the Devil
punished as they shall be. The wicked departed are now punished in Hell, in
soul; For it is appointed for all men once to dye, and then comes the
judgment: but they shall be more tormented, Hebr. 9. 27.
when soul and body shall be united together: For now they Eccles. 12. 7.
smarte but in one part, that is, in soul; so the full torment of the Devils
is not until the last day; For as the joys of the elect shall then be fuller,
and the pains of the damned grievouser; So the glory of the good Angels, and
the torments of the bad the fuller, rivers of brimstone shall be powered out
upon them. So the Devil said to Christ that he tormented them before their
time: For it is torment to the Devil here to want, the presence Luke 5.
of Christ; but it shall be greater after the Judgment day, when 2 Thessalonians. 1.
the hope of killing mo souls shall be frustrate: then shall be fletus and
stridor dentium, weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22.


Note these two Aphorisms; that the joys of the elect and blessed Angels shall
be greater; and that the torment of the Devils, and the damned shall be heavier,
than their double punishment shall be more grievous, than ever it was: that is
poena damni, and poena sensus their pain of loss, and pain of sense. Whereof
Divines make mention: For the elect shall be more nearely united unto God, than
now they are, and the damned shall be more further removed from him, than now
they be.

The captivity of Hell is like the captivity of Israel in Assyria? that is,
irreturnable: the joys of the elect shall be so great as no tongue can utter
them: and the pains of the damned shall be so extreme, as no ear can hear
them, no heart conceive them. Christ having reckoned up many plagues, as how
that Nation shall rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and
great earthquakes Luke 2 1. 10. 11.
shall be in diverse places, and hunger, and pestilence, and fearful things
etc. At last concludes, Initium autem dolorum haec; these are but the
beginnings of sorrow. As if he had said, All these things are but smoke in
respect of a terrible fire ensuing: As a mustering of soldiers before the said
battle: What will then the end be, if the beginning be so grievous. The
damned, quoth Gregory, suffer an end without end, a death without death, a
decay without decay. For their death ever lives, their end ever begins,
their decay never cease; they are ever healed to be new wounded, and always
repaired to be new devoured; they are ever dying and never dead; eternally
broiled, but never burnt up; ever roaring in the pangs of death, and never rid
of those pangs. For these evil Angels, with all the wicked, shall have The
wicked shall be punished in hell in those parts they sinned.
punishment without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying
without comfort, mischief without measure, torment without ease; Where the
worm dies not, and the fire is never quenched; Where the wrath of God shall
seize upon body and soul, as the flame of fire does on pitch and brimstone. Oh
who can express the pains of fire and brimstone, stinch and darkness?
Without hope of release and comfort. Men and Angels cannot do it, if that they
should summon a Parliament together, for the same end and purpose. For as S.
John said of the 1 John. 3. 2.
elect, It does not appear what we shall be, so say I of these evil Angels,
and of all the rabble of the reprobats, it does not appear what they shall be.
Judas, Herod, Pilate have been many hundred years in fire already, but yet the
greatest is to come.

Then shall thy lascivious eyes be afflicted with the sight of ghastly spirits;
thy curious ears affrighted with the hideous howling of damned Devils and
reprobates; thy dainty nose, shall be cloyed with noisome stinch of Sulphur; thy
delicate taste, pained with intolerable hunger; thy drunken throat shall be
parched with intolerable thirst; thy mind tormented to think, how foolish
thou were for earthly pleasures, to lose heavens joys and incur hellish
pains: thy conscience shall ever sting thee like an Adder and thou shall weep
more tears, than there is water in the Sea. For the water of the sea is
finite, but the weeping of a reprobate shall be infinite.

If any man will ask, how it can stand with Gods justice to punish a finite
sin, with an infinite punishment. S. Gregory Greg: lib 4. Moral. cap 12.
answers two manner of ways: First, he says Corda non facta pensat deus,
God pondereth our hearts not our deeds: peccant cum fine qui vivunt cum fine,
their sin has an end because their life has an end; but if they could have
lived without end, they would have sinned without end. Aequum ergo est, ut
nunquam careat supplicio, qui nunquam voluit carere peccato, ut nullus daretur
illi terminus ultioni, qui noluit ponere terminum crimini: It is right and just
that he should never want punishment, which never would want sin; that no end
should be given to him of revenge, which would make no end of sinning.

Secondly, he answers thus; Quanto major est persona eo major est injuria in
illum commissa. The greater the person is, so much the greater is the trespass
and injury done unto him. An injury, a trespass done to a mean man, a
common person: that person can bring but his action upon the case against him,
but a trespass done against a noble man, is scandalum magnatum; against thy
prince and Sovereigne, it is death: for it is Crimen lesae Majestatis. Seeing
then God is infinite the punishment of the trespass done against him must be
infinite also.

An other objection is made; quomodo paenae inferni perpetuae esse possunt; how
the pains of hell can be everlasting? and how bodies How the pains of hell are
eternal.
can live in those everlasting fires. Augustine answers that the Salamander
lives in the fire, and is not consumed in the fire, and we have certain
creatures called Crickets, that live in hot Aug. de Civitat. Dei lib. 21. cap.
2. 4, 5.
Ovens and Chimnies; take them out of those hot places, and they dye. And
further he says, that the ashes of Juniper being raked up in the coals of
Juniper keep fire all the year an end. And again (says he) Take me a
Peacocke, and dress it, and it will not putrify, but abide sweet all the
year an end. Take me snow and wrap it up in chafe, and it preserves it; but
take fruit and lay them in chafe, it melloweth and rotteth them: Take unslaked
lyme, and bring it into the Sun, it is cold: and throw it into the water, and
it burns: The adamant is not broken, but with the blood of a goat, and who
can give a reason of this? Apud Garamantas there is a fountain so cold in the
day, that a man cannot drink of the water thereof, and so hot in the night,
that a man cannot touch it for scalding. There is a fountain in Epirus if ye
bring torches that burn unto it, it puts them out, but if ye bring torches
that be out, it kindles them. There is a stone in Arcadia called Asbestos,
which being once kindled, can never be quenched. And there is a stone in
Thracia, that burns in the water, but put out with oil. The horses of
Cappadocia conceive with the wind. Thus God deals strangely with his
creatures, why not with the fire of hell, these evil Angels, and all the
damned besides, Semper comburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall always be
burning but never consumed.

Thirdly, it is demanded, how the evil Angels and men's bodies Aug. de Civit.
Dei lib. 21. cap. 10.
can be tormented in the same fire? Augustine answers, as the soul of the
Epulo was tormented in this fire, when his body was in hell.

Lastly, note; that the day wherein the Angels shall be judged, is called a
great day; He has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. It is called a great day, and it is so called in
three respects; Great in respect of the Judge, who is thus described by Daniel;
I beheld till the thrones were Dan. 7. 9, 10.
set up and the ancient of days did sit. Whose garments was white as snow, and
the hair of his head like the pure wool, his throne was like the fiery flame,
and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from
before him, etc. And he is described by Saint John thus; Apoc. 20. 11, 12.
And I saw a great white throne, and one sitting thereupon, from whose face
fled heaven and earth, and I saw the dead both small and great stand before the
throne, and the books were opened, and there was another book opened, which
was the book of life, and the dead were judged after those things which were
written in those books. And again the same beloved Disciple describes him
thus; I saw heaven open, and behold a Apoc. 19. 11, 12 16.
white horse, and he that sat upon him, was called faithful and true, and he
judges and fights righteously, and his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on
his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, which no man The day of
the last judgemenr why called the great day.
knew but himself, and he has upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name
written; The King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus ye see the greatness of
the Judge, and in respect of him, this day is called a great day.

Secondly, it is called great, in respect of the Assistants the Angels: Dan. 7.
10.
For Thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten thousand thousands
shall stand before him. And he shall come to judgment; Mat. 25.
In the glory of his Father, with all his holy Angels.

Thirdly, great, in respect of the prisoners that shall be arraigned For when
he shall come in the clouds of heaven; every eye shall see him, even those that
peirced him; and all the kindreds of the earth shall wayle Apoc. 1. 7.
before him: Nay then, The Kings of the earth and great men, and rich Apoc. 6.
15.
men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and
every free man shall be arraigned. And therefore it may well be called a great
day; for if the particular day of the destruction of Jerusalem was so grievous
that the Prophet cried out, The great Zeph. 1. 14, 15, 16
day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even the voice of
the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly. That day is a day
of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation,
a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blackness, a day of
I^^l 2. 10. 11.
the trumpet and alarm against the strong Cities, etc. And again, the earth
shall tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the Sun and Moon shall be
dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining; and the Lord shall utter
his voice before his host, for his host is very great: For he is strong that
does his work: For the day of the Lord is great, and very terrible, and who can
abide it. What shall be the general day of the destruction of the whole world?
when the Elements shall melt with 2 Pet. 3.
heat, the heavens shall pass away with a noise, the earth shall reele and
stagger like a drunken man, and the world shall burn. Good Lord! what a great
day will this be? when all the Saints out of heaven, all the damned out of
hell, all the dead bodies out of the earth must appear: Not an Angel spared,
not a devil respited, not a Saint or sinner rescued, but all must be summoned
to give their attendance, and to make their appearances. Once the world was
destroyed with water, but now it shall be consumed with fire: For the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels 1 These. 1. 7, 8.
in flaming fire rendering vengeance unto them which know not God, and which
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let thy heart dwell seriously in
this meditation; but a little imagine that thou saw the world on fire, the
Judge sitting, the dead standing before him, the sins of all men revealed,
the devils accusing Eccles. 7, 38.
them: it would beat down many sins in thee, Remember the end and thou shall
never do amiss. Christ speaking of that day, says, That there shall be signs
in the Sun and in the Moon and in the Stars, and Luke 21. 25, 26
upon the earth; trouble among Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the waters
shall rore, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after
those things that shall come on the world, for the powers of heaven Judgment
terrible to all but especially to the wicked:
shall be shaken. Others Sessions and assizes be fearful to malefactors, what
shall Gods assizes be, when the Ancient of days shall sit, whose garments are
white as snow, and the hair of his head is like pure wool, and his throne
like a fiery flame: Then Dan. 7. 9.
fulminabit dominus e Caelo, the Lord shall thunder from heaven, and the
highest will give his voice: And if the thunder and rattling of a cloud be so
terrible: what terror shall there be when he shall thunder that sits above
the clouds? For then Terra tremet, Mare mugiet, the earth shall quake, the Sea
rore, the air ring, the World burn: and if Tota terra, the whole pillars of
the earth must move, how should this move man, who is but a cold of earth? If
virtutes Coeli, the powers of heaven must tremble, what will befall those
minds of mudde and earth, that have never a thought of heaven? If the Angels
of God shall stand then at a gaze, how aghast will the wicked be whose portion
is with the Devil and his Angels? If the Heavens must cleave, and the Elements
be rent asunder, how will earthly hearts fail and break? If the righteous
shall scarce be saved; Vbi impius, Where shall the wicked, and the sinner
appear? If S. Ciprian is said so Ciprian.
much to fear diem Iudicii the day of Judgment, that he clean forgot diem
martyrii the day of Martyrdom and earthly torment: and no marvel, Nam timor
mortis nihil ad timorem Iudicis, the fear of temporal death is nothing to the
fear of him that has power of eternal life and death. And if they be in such
amaze, Ad quos judex; For whose glory and good the Judge shall come, how shall
they stand amazed, Contra quos Index, against Apoc. 20.
whom and for whose eternal shame and pain the Judge shall 1 Co^. 1. 25.
come? If Heaven and earth shall fly before him, Quomodo stabimus, ante
potentissimum, quem nemo potest vincere? how shall we be 1 Timothy 1. 17.
able to stand before the most mighty, whom none can vanquish? For the
weakness of God is stronger than men: Ante prudentissimum, quem nemo potest
fallere, before the most wise, whom no man can deceive: For he is God only
Wise, and in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom, knowledge and
understanding: Ante piissimum, quem nemo potest corrumpere; before the most
just, whom no man can corrupt: His judgment will be Rectum judicium, a right
and a true judgment; he cannot fail, either Ignorantia legis, as not knowing
the Law; For he gave the Law and he will judge according to the Law: nor yet
ignorantia facti, As not seeing the fact; For his eyes go through the World: Ye
may interpret them if ye will 7. thousand thousand eyes, For he is Totus
oculus, All eye. Aug.


The consideration of this should stir us up to be careful and circumspect
in all our ways, that we never tread our shoe awry, nor offend this Judge in
any thing, that at this great day we may find him a gentle and a loving Lamb,
and not a Lion of Judah. For as to the wicked the Judge is terrible, so to the
godly, friendly; and as to the wicked, this great day is a day How can the
wicked stand before the incorrupt Judge.
of redemption.

But to proceed a little further; this day is called a day, (...) by an
excellency: For never day was like unto it: In the day of Israel, when he went
out of Egypt, The Sea fled, Jordan was driven back, the mountains skipped
like Rams and the little hills like young Sheep. In the day of Joshua, the
Sun stood still in Psalm. 114.
Heaven from morning to noone, and from noone unto night. In the day Ios. 10.
of Ezechia, the Sun went ten degrees backward. In the day of Christ's
passion, the Sun waxed dark, and the Moon lost her light, the 1 Reg. 20.
earth quaked, the graves opened, the stones brake, the dead rose: but in the
day of Christ, there shall be no Sun, no Moon, no Heaven, no earth: For the
Heavens shall pass away in manner of a tempest, the Element shall melt for
fervent heat, the 2 Pet. 3.
earth and all that is thereupon shall burn, and yet this burning shall not be
a consuming of the substance, but only a purging of the creatures from the
dross of those alterable qualities, whereunto they are now subject. And
therefore finely to this purpose says venerable Bede, Per imaginem transeunt,
per essentiam subsistunt; praeterit figura hujus mundi, non substantia; their
image Beda.
fails, their essence remains, the figure of this world passes away, not
the substance: For if the day of Christ's humiliation was so glorious, what shall
be the day of his glorification? Where then will appear those that make the
world, and the things of the world their stay, when the world and all the
wealth and substance of the world must pass away? And where ewill the
penny-father and covetous person appear, who like the serpent is ever licking
up the dust of the earth, and scraping up gold and silver that red and white
earth; when silver and gold and earth shall be no more? Where will the proud
ones appear that fold themselves in silks, and load themselves with pearls
and Jewels, when Jewels and pearls shall be no more? Where then shall appear
the greedy oppressor whose throat has been an open sepulcher. When he shall
not find a man to oppress any more? Where shall the whoremonger appear, whose
body has been as the Oven of a Baker, when he shall find none to defile any
more? Where shall the slanderer appear, whose tongue has cut like a sharp
rasor when he shall not find any to slander any more? where will the drunkard
appear, that has washed his soul with wine and strong drink, when there
shall be no liquor any more. Where will these magnificent and stately builders
appear, when building and state shall fall all to the ground? Where shall the
usurer appear, who is worse than Hell, for Hell torments only the bad, but the
usurer crusheth and oppresses both good and bad: I say, where shall he
appear? seeing his house here is the bank of the Devil and his purse Os
diaboli, the mouth of the Devil. Surely he with the Devil must abide in Hell
and torments; surely all these and The fearful estate of all sinners at the
last judgment
all other that have sown in sin shall reap misery; for these that have
plowed wickedness shall reap iniquity; Vanity was their traffic and
grief will be their gain; Detestable was their life and damnable shall be
their death: For as they have sown Hos. 10. 13.
so shall they reap, they have sown in the flesh, and of the flesh they Gal.
6. 8.
shall reap corruption: Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of
every one of them, when this great day shall be. Let us pray therefore that in
this great day Christ his wisdom may answer for ourfollie, his humility for
our pride, his meekness for our cruelty, his righteousness for our sins;
that this Lamb that was without spot may answer for us, who like Jacobs
Lambs are full of spots: Ostende patri latus and vulnera, Show the father thy
side and wounds, that thy side and wounds may heal us from these sins, that
like the blood of Abel cry against us. Amen.

THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. VII. As Sodom and Gomorah; and the Cities about them, which in like
manner as they did, etc. Sodomesfinne all kind of uncleanesse.



WE are come to the third example of Sodom and Gomorah:

Wherein also he notes their Sin. punishment.

Their sin was uncleanesse, Fornication, whordome, Incest. Buggerie; their
punishment hell fire, the second death, the burning lake, fletus and stridor
dentium, the horror of conscience, torments unspeakeable. Now for their sin,
it appears how filthy it is, seeing that Paul would not have us eat with
whoremongers; If any 1. Cor. 5. 11.
(says he) that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, With such see ye eat
not. And in another place, he would have us to be so far from this sin. that
he would not have it to be once named amongst us, much less committed: For so
run his words; But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it
not be once named amongst you. Ephesians. 5. 3.
The name as it were darkeneth the Air and polluteth the earth, the Lord Jesus
condemns the very intent of the heart even lusting after a woman though the
act be not done: you have heard Mat. 5. 27. 28.
(says he) that it was said unto them of the old time, thou shall not commit
adultery, but I say unto you, whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Whordome is one of the
manifest works of the flesh: For the Apostle reckoning up the works of the
flesh, names adultery Sodoms sin all kind of uncleanesse.
first, and places is as Vrias in the forefront of the battle: The works of
the flesh (says he) are manifest; adultery, fornication, uncleanesse,
wantonness, etc. Yea, this sin brings with it horrible dishonor: If a
thief (says Solomon) steal to satisfy his soul, because Gal. 5. 9.
he is hungry, men do not so despise him: but he that commits adultery with
a woman is destitute of understanding, he shall find a wound Pro. 23. 27.
and a dishonor, that shall never be put away: for a whore is a deep ditch,
and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Yea, this sin will make a man make
shipwreck of innocence and honesty. A man may as well Pro. 6. 27.
take fire in his bosom, and not be burnt, or go upon coals, and his feet
not be burnt, as go into his neighbors wife, and be innocent. Pro. 23. 28.
The strange woman increases the transgressors among men, so that it is
impossible to be incontinent and honest. It is a sin Hos. 4. 11. Pro. 9. 18.
Pro. 18. Pro. 6. 26.
of which a man or a woman can hardly repent; For whordome and wine (as the
Prophet notes) take away the heart. The Guests of a strange woman art most of
them in Hell. For the wiseman further avoucheth, Surely her house tends to
death, and her paths unto the dead. This sin will bring Gods curse upon a
man's estate, many a man by it is brought to a morsel of bread: For fornication
is a fire that will devour to destruction, and root out all a man's increase,
and bring him quickly into our Ladies bands, and make him sink by beggerie.
The Apostle Paul uses many reasons against it, able to move an heart of flint,
if there be any drop of grace in him, if he pertain to Gods election, if he
be not vas irae, a vessel of wrarh, a reprobate, a firebrand in Hell, 1 Cor.
6. 13, 14,
a member of the Devil, His first reasons is, that The body was made for the
Lord a swell as the soul: his second, That the body shall 15, 16, 18, 19.
be raised up at the last day to an incorruptible estate: His third, That our
bodies are the members of Christ: His fourth, He that coupleth himself with an
harlot is one body with an harlot: the fifth, This is sin (in a special
sense) against our own bodies: the sixth, The body is the temple of the holy
Ghost: finally, The body is bought with a price: and therefore is not our own.
These are the reasons, that the Apostle uses against this sin, to make all
men to deny it and defye it.

But to proceed; the wrath of God against this sin of whordome is as the
fire of Aetna, not only to burn the whrne and the whoremonger, but their seed:
as one said, the bastard shall be a faggot, a firebrand in Hell to burn the
parents; For the children of adulterers shall not be partakers of the holy
things, and the seed of the wicked bed shall be rooted out; and though they
Wisd 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded, and their last age shall be
without honor, if they dye hastily, they have no hope, neither comfort in the
day of trial. For horrible is the end of the wicked generation. And again,
the bastard-plants shall Wisd. 4. 3, 4.
take no deep root nor lay any fast foundation: For though they bud forth in
the branches for a time yet, they shall be shaken with the wind, for they stand
not fast they shall be rooted out. As The devil prevails most by uncleanness.
one said of the thief on Christ's right hand, that Luke names, one thief, to
let us see, that all thieves are not damned, and yet but one thief, to let us
see, that all thieves are not saved: So say Luke 23.
I of Iephta, that God, names one bastard to let us see, that all Judge. 11. 1.
are not rejected of God, and yet but one, to let us see, that all are not
accepted of God. I exclude them not from the Covenant of life. I abridge not
the mercies of God. I clip not the wings of his compassion toward them: For it
is as great a sin to abridge the mercies of God to the penitent, as to dilate
it, and prostitute it to the reprobate; For the Lord is strong; merciful,
Exodus 34. 6, 7.
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in mercy and truth; reserving mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. And again, He is
gracious and slow to anger; and of great kindness, Joel. 2. 13.
and repents him of the evil. But this is it that I insist upon, and take in
hand to prove, that God punishes the unclean, and incontinent persons even in
their seed, as well as in their bodies, goods and name, and let all men that
take pleasure in this sin assure themselves, that the end will be bitter as
worme-wood, Prove. 5. 4.
and sharp as a two-edged sword; For he that follows a strange woman, is as
an Ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a fool that goes Prove. 7. 22.
to the stocks for correction, till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird
hastes to the snare; not knowing that she is in danger: For they that go to a
strange woman seldom return again, neither take they hold of the Prove. 2. 18.
way of life. If they reply, that David did commit adultery, and yet did
return: I answer, it is true, of many thousand adulterers, one David did
return, but thou have cause rather to fear to perish wirh the multitude, than
to return with David.

But before I prosecute this point further, note the mercy and wisdom of God
in the decalogue. In the first precept he provideth for our callings, that no
man contemn us, but honor us; in the sixth, for our bodies, that no man kill
them; in the eighth, for our goods, that no man steal them; in the seventh for
our wives, that no man abuse them, that none violate their chastity: and
therefore severely has God revenged this sin, he has punished it in the
great ones, he has set a mark, a brand of vengeance upon them, as upon
Pharaoh in Egypt, and Abimilech Genesis 12. Psalm. 160. 30.
in Gerar, and yet they touched not Sara, but only intended it: So Phinees
ran through a Lord and Lady: Moses Numb. 25.
hanged the heads and Princes of the people. And if God has not spared the
high cedars of lebanon, look not that he will spare the low shrubs; Potentes
potenter punientur, the mighty shall Wisd 6. 6. Acts 10. 34.
be mightily punished, and mean men shall be punished also. Deus non est
(...), God is no accepter of persons. Eusebius Cremonensis reports of Jerome,
that on his deathbed, he used these words unto his Disciples; Ensis diaboli
est luxuria, o quot illa romphaea inter fecit? lechery is the sword of the
devil, o how many has this sword slain? Est rete diaboli, o quot illud rete
inescavit? Many of the Saints have been overtaken by adultery.
it is the net of the devil, O how many has it deceived? Est esca diaboli, it
is the bait of the devil, O how many has this bait entrapped. There is no
sin in the second table wherein the devil has more prevailed, and gone away
a greater conqueror, than in this sin of Whoredom, and therefore it is noted,
that in Mary Magdalen there were seven devils. For this sin we read Luke 7.
Genesis 6.
that it repented God, that ever he made man: and indeed the mischiefs that
come of this sin be manifold: Nam luxuria corpus debilitat, memoriam hebitat,
cor aufert, oculos caecat, famam denigrat, marsupium evacuat, furta, homicidia
infert, iram Dei provocat: for lechery weakneth the body, infeebleth the mind,
dulleth the memory, takes away the heart, blinds the eyes, hurts the good
name, emptieth the purse; causes thefts murders, and all other sins, kndleth
Gods wrath. For this sin God brought a flood of water upon the old world; and
for this sin, the Lord reigned fire and brimstone from the Lord out of
heaven, and destroyed Genesis 6.
Sodom: Yea, for this sin, God slew four and twenty thousand. Cave vinum,
cave mulieres; take heed of wine, take heed of women, he that uses wine
carries fire in his bosom, and a woman is sagitta diaboli, the arrow of the
devil: Homo and mulier sunt ignis and palea, man and woman are as fire and
stubble: diabolus sufflare non cessat, ut accendatur, the devil never leaves
blowing, till it be kindled: For the lips of a strange woman drop as an
hony-combe, and her mouth is more soft than oil, but the end of her is as
bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged sword, her feet go down Pro.
5. 3, 4, 5.
to death, and her steps take hold of hell. All her doings lead to destruction:
Si sanctus es, non tamen securus es; if thou be sanctified yet be not secure;
For He has overcome the wisest, as Solomon; the strongest, as Sampson; the
fairest, as Absalom; the holiest, as 1 Reg 11. Judge. 15. 1 Samuel 16. 1 Samuel 16.
2 Samuel 12. Genesis 2. Job. 31 9.
David; the faithfullest, as Abraham; and surely thou art a happy man, if thou
have not fallen down at any time, under this sin; if thou can protest with
Job, If my heart has been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at the
door of my Neighbor; let my wife grind unto another man, and let other men
bow down upon, for this is a wickedness and an iniquity to be condemned.

The wrath of God has smoked against this sin, above all other sins of the
last table: David for whoredom was driven out of his Country; but what should
I name one man? the whole City of Sichem was put to the sword for it. But what
should I name one town? four Cities were consumed with fire and brimstone for
it, and the stinking lake of Asphaltes near to Sodom is left as a perpetual
monument of that plague, killing all fish that swimmeth in it, and fowls that
fly over it. But what are five Cities to twelve tribes? for the twelve Princes
of the tribes were hanged up against the Sun, and twenty four thousand
slain for it, and many wounded in Israel, and Benjamin, for the defiling of
one Levites wife: And yet behold a Many like the Corinthians think fornication
indifferent.
greater plague than that; For, for Idolatry, Oppression, and Adultry, was the
whole nation of the Jews carried to Babylon; And yet behold a greater plague;
For seven nations of the Canaanites were destroyed for it: And yet behold a
greater plague, not one Iud. 20. Ier. 229.
man as David; nor one City, as Sichem, nor many Cities as Sodom, Gomorrah,
Zeboiim, Admah; nor many kingdmes, as these of Canaan, but the whole world
destroyed for it. Will God then spare this Levit. 18. 24. Gen 6.
sinful; wanton, whorish, polluted kingdom of England? Jerusalem justified
Sodom, and we have justified Jerusalem. England is become Sodom, most towns
are full of bastardy, most men are like stoned horses, neighing after another
man's wife. So says the Prophet, They rise early in the morning, like fed
horses, every one neighed after his neighbors wife: like the oven of a baker,
so says Ezech. 16.
the Prophet, They are all Adulterers, and as a very oven heated by Ier. 5. 8,
9.
the baker. For as that is never cooled, so these men's lusts are never
satisfied. The daughters of England are like the daughters of Sion, haughty,
and Walkewith stretched out necks. Walking and minsing as they go and make a
tinckling with their feet. As Ephraim was full of Hos 7. 4. Esa. 3. 16. Esa.
26. Mich. 7. Tit. 1. Act. 17. Esa. 30. 27, 28. Nah. 13. 4, 5, 6.
drunkards; Jerusalem full of oppressors; Crete full of liars; Athens full of
idolaters; so England is full of adulterers. The Lords face is therefore
burning, his lips are full of indignation, and his toogue is as a devouring
fire, and his spirit is as a river that overfloweth up to the neck: He has
way in the whirlewind, and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet: He rebukes the Sea and it dries, and he dries up all the Rivers:
Bashan is wasted, and Carmel the flower of Lebanon is wasted; the mountains
trembled for him, and the earth is burnt at his sight; yea the world, and all
that dwell therein: who can stand before his wrath? or who can abide the
fierceness of his wrath? his wrath is powered out like fire, and the rocks are
broken by him.

We are almost of the mind of the Corinths, that it is indifferent, to whom,
Paul said, The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for
the body. Of that mind were the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 6. 13.
as it appears by the Apostles determination to the Churches, where it was
decreed that they should Abstain from filthiness of Idols, and fornication,
etc. For the Heathen thought this no vice Act. 15. 20.
but made it a common custom, and were wont to pray, Dii angeant numerum
meretricum, the Gods increase the number of Harlots. But it is a vile sin,
and God hates it extremely: note his speech. How should I spare thee for this?
thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. Though I
fed them to the Ier. 5. 7. 9.
full, yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in
harlots houses. Shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord: shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Though he winked at many of our
sins, yet will he not spare this; God will Prove. 10. Wi^d. 3.
be revenged of the whoremonger in his name; Nam nomen eius putrescet, his
name shall rot in his posterity; Non enim radices agent, they shall have no
rooting in his body; for it shall be full of The Adulterer punished many ways.
ulcers, as the Pox and the disease called Morbus Neapolitanus. In his soul;
for it shall fry in Hell: For though adulterers escape all manner of judgment
from men, yet it is certain, That the whoremongers Hebr. 13. 4. Psalm. 50. 21,
22.
and adulterers God will judge. Because God for a time holds his tongue,
therefore they think that God is like unto them, but certainly the time
hastes, when the Lord will set all their filthiness in order before them, and
if they consider it not, he will seize upon them, when no man shall deliver
them: especially they are assured to lose the Kingdom of Heaven, and to feel
the smart Apoc. 22. 8.
of Gods eternal wrath in the Lake, that burns with fire and brimestone.

Bet to strip this strumpet: Whoredom and uncleanesse, overthrow the state of
mankind, while no man knows his own wife no wife her husband; no father his
children: For whoredom confounds the World, and utterly overthrows the state
of marriage. Affinitates enim totius mundi sunt compagines, Affinities and
consanguinities are the joints and sinews of the Word; Lose these and lose
all: Totus mundus ruit, all the World goes to wrack. Now what affinities or
consanguinities can there be when there is nothing but confusion of blood? The
son knows not his father, nor the father the son; Sed promiscuus est
concubitus, there is such a promiscuous companying, Then are we as beasts; The
Turtle knows her mate, but men do not. Therefore Lady Virtue of all plants
in her garden has watered Continency: lest the World should be confounded,
says a learned man.

But because many abuse the example of Noah, David, Solomon, etc. saying, were
they not Adulteres? first, I say Vivimus praeceptis, non factis,; We live by
precepts, not by examples: For says God, Deutr. 12. 32. 2 Samuel 12. 10.
Whatsoever I command you, that shall ye do, Thou shall put nothing thereto,
nor take ought there from; Secondly, I say that God plagued it in these men,
their sweet meat had sour sauce. Thirdly, David command it never but but once,
thefore says the holy Ghost, David did that which was upright in the sight of
the Lord; and turned from 1 Reg. 15. 5.
nothing, that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the
matter of Vriah the Hittite. But our men will fall with David, but not rise
with David, they will sin with him, but not repent with him. Thus like Eeles,
they be ever in the mudde: like Dogs, they wallow in carrion; like Munkies,
they feed on venom; like Spiders, they suck poison from sweet flowers, and
abuse all examples.

If any allege the Poligamy of the Fathers: I say, that they were Mala
tolerata, abnitio non fuit sic, tolerated evils, from the beginning Mat 19. 8.
Mal. 2. 1 Timothy 3, 2.
it was not so: For as the Prophet affirms, He made one, he made man and
woman as one flesh, not many. And a man must be the husband of one wife, not of
many wives: but of one. And again, For the avoiding of fornication (says the
Apostle) let every man have Polygamie of the Fathers not lawful originaliy yet
tolerated.
his wife, and every woman her husband; one man, one wife. Into Noabs Arc
there entered Noah and his wife, his sons, and their wives, and of beasts both
clean and unclean, the male and the female. This coupling of creatures both
reasonable and unreasonable, shows, that Nature in her Seminary condemns
Poligamie; 1 Cor. 7. 2. Genesis 7. 7, 8.
furthermore, there be two Axioms or Maxims in Nature.

The first; Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri nefeceris; do not that to another
which thou would not have done unto thy self.

The second, Ne quod alterius est, invito eripiatur; let nothing which belongs
to another man, be taken from him against his will: How then can the man,
without offering manifest wrong unto his Wife, bestow his body upon another
woman. Thus by the Law of God and Nature; Poligamie is condemned.

I, but how came it to pass, that the Fathers had many wives? It is answered
diversely: First, this came to pass by Gods dispensation; for God according to
the state of those times dispensed with the Patriarks for the Law, which he
made in the beginning, and this is evident by the examples of Abraham, Jacob,
and Elc^nah, and other godly Fathers, who were not reproved by any Prophet, for
their multiplicity of wives: Nay, which is more, God gave Saul's wives (as
Nathan says) into the bosom of 1 Samuel 12. 8.
David. Now if God gave David wives, notwithstanding his first institution to
the contrary, we may conclude, that he dispenses with his own law, and gave
the Patriarchs liberty for Polygamie.

The reason of this dispensation, was this: God in those times had chosen the
seed of Abraham to be his people, in whose lineage the true worship of the Deity
was preserved; for all other people were given to idolatry, and went a whoring
after strange Gods. Now to that intent, that that people, whom God had chosen,
namely Israel, might be many in number, Poligamie was permitted.

Again, though the Fathers had many wives, yet they were not hereunto led by
lust, but by a chaste desire to augment and multiply Gods family.

From this Polygamie of the Fathers, some have concluded that Polygamie is
lawful unto us; let such Opinionists know, that a general canon cannot be
infringed by a particular example. If we can claim the same dispensation the
Patriarchs had, then I grant a man may have many wives; for now there is no
Nation more peculiarly Gods people than another; But in every Nation Act. 10.
35.
he that fears him, and works righttousnesse is accepted with him.

Furthermore, our Savior has cancelled this dispensation when he said
concerning the husband and the wife, They twain Mat. 19. 5.
shall be one flesh: Not only now the Law of God is against Polygamie,
Polygamie not lawful, dispensed with.
but it seems also, that the Law of Nature, which one calls a permanent and
firm Edict of God. And by Saint Paul, The Law written in our members, caused
the Roman Emperors, Socrates Romans
being infidels, to make decrees against Polygamie, branding such with infamy
as had more wives than one. And when as Valentinian a Christian Emperor to
cover his own filthiness having besides his legitimate wife Severa, taken to
wife also a young maid called Iustina, made a law, that every man might Cod.
lib. 3. de incestis and inutilibus nuptiis.
lawfully have two wives: but this law was rejectd and condemned as contrary to
the Law of Nature; and therefore I conclude this point with Clemens
Alexandrinus, saying, that Polygamie, which was granted to the fathers, is not
lawful unto us, and Clemens Alexan. in Str^m. lib. 4.
therefore he that has two wives, is like to wicked Lamech, and his second
wife like unto Sela; which by interpretation is, umbra ejus, his shadow;
because she is rather to be esteemed the shadow of a wife than a wife indeed.

And followed strange flesh.

The word in the original is (...), strange flesh, for uncleanness has many
branches, furnication, adultery, incest, buggery, beastiality. Fornication is
betwixt single persons, as it was betwixt Zimri and Cosbi; adultery betwixt the
married, as between David and Bathsheba; incest, is in the degrees prohibited;
Numb. 25. 2 Samuel 11. 4. Levit. 18. Romans 1. Levit. 20. 16.
buggery is in the contrary sex; beastialitie is with beasts. Solon would make
no laws for Parricide, lest he should name that which afterward might be
done: So I wish that there were no cause to name these sins, much less to
punish them. But iniquity does abound; Pietas friget, Piety waxes cold; Veni
Domine Jesus, veni cito, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Psalm. 4. 9.
And crush them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel. Yea Lord, Let thy hand find out out all thy enemies, and thy
right hand them that hate thee, make them like a fiery Oven in Psalm. 2. 8, 9.
the time of thy wrath, and let the fire consume them; if they will not repent
and turn from their filthiness.

If you ask how Sodom came to this uncleanness, the Prophet Ezechiel
answers you; for he names the sins, that as hands pulled down this
uncleanness upon them; that like Load-stones drew it violently unto them; that
like sticks kindled the fire; that is, idleness, pride, fullness of bread.
And these Ezech. 16.
being amongst us, can we doubt of the fruit, which is whoredom; idleness,
is the Anvill whereon Satan works it; Solomon notes the Harlot to be idle,
not to busy her self in any good trade of life. She sits at the door of
her house on a seat, in the Prove. 9. 14, 15.
high places of the City, to call them that pass by the way, etc. her feet
cannot abide in her house; now she is without now in the streets, and lies in
wait at every corner. Prove. 7. 10. 11.


Apelles painted Venus in a snailes shell, to note that women must stay at
home, not be gadders like Dina: she fell not till The causes of Sodomes
uncleanness many first idleness
then, and then she played the whore, and not before, when came David to
adultry, but when he gave over his wars, and was idle: O tia si tollas
periere Cupidinis arcus, Genesis 34. 2 Samuel 11. 2, 4.
says the Poet; Take away idleness, and Cupids bow will soon be broken.
Quaeritur Aegysthus quomodo sit factus adulter. Ovid.
Inpromptu causa est, de sidiosus erat; If it be demanded how Aegystus became
an adulterer, the cause may quickly be rendered, he was slothful, idle;
unchaste folly, for the most part, is begot of an idle brain, hatched in a lazy
body. Paul notes it in Ephesus, that the women there were idle, and went about
from house to house; 1 Timothy 5. 13.
and not only idle, but pratlers also, and busybodies, speaking things that
are not comely. Solomon describes a virtuous woman, and says, She seeks
Wool and Flax, and labors cheerfully with her hands; she is like the
ships of Merchants, she brings her food from far, Prove. 31. 13. etc.
and she rises while it is yet night, and gives her portion to her household,
and the ordinary to her maids; she considers a field and gets it, and
with the fruit of her hands; she planteth a Vineyard, she puts her hands
to the wherne, and her hands handle the spindle; she makes her self carpets,
fine linen and purple is her garment: Such have no leisure to be unchaste. If
therefore we will not be overtaken with uncleanness, let us abandon
idleness, and use diligence in our calling, for that is a notable help to
keep out inordinate desires, and unchaste thoughts.

Another hand to pull this sin upon us, is pride. The daughters of Sion
falling to pride, fell to adultery; they had their slippers and their calls,
and their round attires, their sweet balls, Esa. 3. 16. etc.
their bracelets and their bonnets, the tyres of their head, and their muffler
and their head-bands, and their tablets, and their eare-rings, and their rings
and nose-jewels, their costly apparel, and their veyles, and their wimples,
and their crisping pins, their glasses, and their fine linen, their hoods and
their lawnes. But God threatened them, That in stead of a sweet savor their
should be a stincke, and in stead of a girdle a rent, in stead of dressing the
hair, baldness, and in stead of a stomacher a girding of sackecloth, and
burning instead of beauty. This was one whetstone to set an edge upon them to
uncleanness. God gives a precept of apparel, saying, Thou shall not wear a
garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and linen together. Deuteronomy. 22. 11.
A precept, not ceremonial but moral; to this end, that al men and woman might
walk soberly and chastely, not beastly or heathenishly, but to abstain from
fornication and possess their vessels in holiness and honor, and not in the
lust of concupiscence, as do the heathen. Women's 1 These. 4. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 3. 3,
4.
parell must not be outward, with broided hair, and gold put about, but the
inner man must be clothed. I say of apparel, as Paul said of meat; meats are
orda^ned for the belly, and the helly for 1 Cor. 6. 13.
meats: So it is for the back, and the back for it, but the Lord Gluttony,
Drunkenness and evil company, the third and fourth causes of Sodomes
uncleanness.
shall destroy both it and them. But the inward apparel shall last for ever.
Saint Ambrose calls pride the banner of whoredom, the net of lechery and
filthiness. And pretily said Aesop to a Ruffian strangely attired, that if he
did it to pleasure men, he was but a fool, for no wise man will account the
better of him; and if he did it to please women, he was but a knave, and meant
unchastly. In one word, men now go like women, and women like men: Ambr.
Optat ephippia bos, optat arare, Caballus; the Ox wishes to carry the
saddle, the Horse to draw the Plough. We have forgotten that Adam and Heva wore
leathern Genesis 3. 1 Samuel 28. 2 Reg. 1. Mat. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 9. Mat. 26.
coats; that Samuel had a simple mantell; that Elisha wore hairecloth; that
John Baptist had on him a Cammels skin; that the women of Ephesus were arrayed
with modesty, not with silk, nor gold, nor pearl, or stolen hair; that the
Lord Jesus had a woven coat without seame. Some Thamars cover themselves Genesis
38.
with veyles and maskes; some Potiphars wife allureth Joseph; some daughters of
Sion perfume themselves with muske-balls: At mulieres been olent cum nihil
olent, women smell well when they smell nothing at all: Some Iezabels paint
their faces. But I say Ier. 4.
with a Father, that mulier quae aliter se pingit, quam Deus fingit, verendum
ne Creator in die judicii creaturam suam minime recognoscat: Hierome. 2 Reg. 9.
the woman that painteth her self otherwise than GOD has made her, it is to
be feared, that the Creator in the day of judgment, Cypr.
will not acknowledge her for his creature; and that they Qui crines fulvos,
etc. which paint their hair red and yellow, prognosticate aforehand of what
color their heads shall be in hell.

The third hand to pull this sin on Sodom, was gluttony; Lot in his
drunkenness committed incest, and begat two cursed nations Ammon and Moab:
oftentimes did Israel begin in eating Ezech. 16. Genesis 19. 1 Cor, 10. 7.
and end in whoring: Sine cerere and baccho friget Venus, without meats and
drinks lecherous lust waxes cold. Lady Venus dwells at the sign of the Ivy
bush, where there is cleanness of teeth, usually there is no filthiness of
body, but if we stuff our corpse like cloke-bags, making our mouths as tunnels,
our throats as Vid. Boys, 15. Sunday post Trin. the Crabfish, etc.
wine-pipes, our bellies as barrels, if we fill them full of strong drink and
new wine, there must follow some vent some uncleanness of filthiness.

A fourth hand to pull this sin on them, might be evil company; and
therefore the Holy Ghost gives this rule to those that would not be ensnared
with the strange woman; Walk thou in the way of good men, and keep the way of
the righteous. Prove. 3. 29.


A fifth hand to pull down this sin upon them, might be their high
estimation of earthly things, and their too great liking of them; for this love
brings in lust. This the Apostle affirms, That the love of money (and riches)
breeds noisome lusts, which in short Sodomes sins abound in England.
time drawn men in perdition. And thus ye see the means how Sodom came to
this uncleanenesse and Hell full of unclean persons, For if ye could see into
Hell, ye should find it so full of 1 Timothy 6. 9.
whoremongers, adulterers, fornicators, that scarce there is any room left for
idolaters, blasphemers, cursed Sabath breakers, damnable mocke-preachers,
biting usurers, cruel murderers, etc. Many are of the Corinthians mind, that
whordome is a thing indifferent and of the Gentiles opinion, which maintained
the same thing that the Corinthians did. But contrariewise, 1 Cor. 7. Act. 15.
the Counsel of Gangra affirmed, that the Church admired virginity, honored
marriage, praised widowe-hood, and condemned fornication. And so must we, For
every man must keep his vessel in holiness, and not in the lust of
concupiscence, as do the heathen: our bodies are The temples of the holy
Ghost; If the material temple must 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
be kept clean, much more the mystical. Finely says a Father, Quia templum
dei sumus, etc. because we are the temple of God, and the chief chaplain of
this temple is chastity, we must not Tertull.
suffer any unclean or unworthy thing to be brought thither, lest God who
dwells there, taking displeasure to see his mansion defiled should forsake it.

Well Sodom was destroyed, and the Cities about it; it was the Metropoliticall
City, and the little towns about it, learned of it: but God destroyed them
both. We see therefore those to be most vile Cities, which are most large and
great, and most subject to ruin, as Babylon, Ninive, Jerusalem, Carthage,
Constantinople, Corinth, Athens, Rome: under Tiberius the Emperor, thirteen
Cities of Asia fell down with an earthquake, and six under Trajan, and twelve
under Constantine, in Campania, Ferraria: In Italy Anno 1569. in the space of
forty hours, by reason of an earthquake, many palaces, temples, and houses
were overthrown, Fardentius in hunc locum.
with the loss of many a man, amounting to forty hundred thousand pounds.
Bordeaux, was mightily shaken with an earthquake, which reached to Spain and
marveilously shook the Pyrenean hills,

What a mighty earthquake was in the year 1171. that the City Tripolis, and a
great part of Damascus in Antiochia, and Hulcipre, the chief City in the
kingdom of Loradin, and other cities of the Saracens, either perished utterly,
or were wonderfully defaced: At Venice, Florence, and diverse other places,
there were great earthquakes in the year 1539. and did much harm: When
Arrius heresy was entertained at Antioch, God punished it with earthquakes. I
pass over with silence Paris, Antwerpe, Gant, Magline, etc. all which Cities,
and many others God has punished for their sins. Little towns of the
Country learn of the greater, and shall perish together with them: and
therefore the Prophet having denounced Gods judgments against some Countries
and Cities, he makes this demand: What is the The greatest Cities as most
sinful so most punished.
wickedness of Jacob? is not Samaria? and which are the high places of Judah?
is not Jerusalem? meaning that Samaria and Jerusalem which should have been an
example to all Israel, of true repentance, holiness, was the puddle and
stews of all idolatry Malach. 5, 6.
and corruption, Therefore will I make Samaria (says God) as an heap of the
field, and for the planting of a vineyard, and I will cause the stones thereof
to tumble down into the Vallie; and will discover the foundations thereof. And
as the Prophet says, What is the sin of Jacob? is not Samaria? and what is
the sin of Judah? is not Jerusalem? So say I, What is the sin of Norffolke?
is not Norwich? and what is the sin of England? is not London? For men are
led by example, more than by doctrines. But let not our little towns follow
our great Cities, in evil, lest God come in judgment against them as he did
against Sodom, and the Cities about it, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum, Happy is he, whom other men's harms make to beware.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. VII. Are set forth for example, and suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire. Sodomes punishment an example to all unclean persons.



THE Apostle having laid fourth the sin of Sodom, which was uncleanness;
for They followed strange flesh, and most horrible pollutions: he comes now
to the second part of this verse, which contains Sodomes punishment, and Gods
judgments upon the Cities round about. But before he comes to Sodomes
punishment, he sets down unto us the end thereof, and says, They are set
forth for an example. For howsoever every example is not our imitation, yet
every example is our instruction. It teaches whoremongers to take heed of
whoredom, and all men of turpitude and filthiness. Gods judgments Esa. 26. 9.
are in the earth, to teach the inhabitants of the world to learn
righteousness: to learn them to fear God, and to sin no more. Paul applied
every example of Israel to the Corinthians, saying, These are ensamples for us,
that we should not lust after evil things, as 1 Cor. 10, 11. etc
they lusted; neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written,
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play: Neither let us
commit fornication, as some of them have committed fornication, and fell in one
day three and twenty thousand; neither let us tempt Christ as some of them have
tempted him, and were destroyed of Serpents; neither murmr ye, as some of
them also murmured, and were destroyed of All examples are lor instructions and
cautions.
the destroyer, now all these things came upon them for ensamples, and were
written to admonish us, upon whom the latter ends of the world are come, that
he will plague us, as he punished them, if we be subject to the like vices.
Thus Daniel aggravated the sin of Balthazar, by this, that he profited not by
the example of his father. For Daniel told him, that his fathers heart was
puffed up, and his mind hardened in pride, whereupon he was deposed of his
Kingdom, and honor, and he was driven from the Sons of men, and his heart
was made like the beasts, his dwelling was with the wild Asses; he was fed
with grass like an Ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, etc. But
(says he) Thou have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew est all these
things, but have lift up thy Dan. 5. 2. 22.
self against the Lord of heaven, etc. And so a number that see the judgment
of God upon their fathers and friends, and yet they come not their own hearts,
and say with David, It is I that have sinned, and my fathers house, and what
have these sheep done? let thy 2 Samuel 24. 17.
hand be upon me, and my fathers house, and not upon this people. The fall of
Adam was the juster, in that he took no heed, by the fall of Angels. The sin
of the old world was the greater, they saw Genesis 8.
and heard both of the fall of Angels, and of the fall of Adam, and yet these
examples could not make them beware. Thus Paul reasoned with the Romans, for
that they learned not by the example of the Jews, he calls them to a second
view of it: Behold (says he) the bountifulness and the severity of God;
toward them which have fallen, severity: but toward thee, bountifulness; if
Romans 11. 22.
thou continue in this bountifulness, or else thou shall be cut off. This is
the end of all Scripture, to apply examples and doctrines to us; for the
increase of knowledge and conscience. Thus Absalom is an example to all rebels,
how they lay their hands on the Lords 2 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 15, Acts 5. 2 Pet. 2. 2
Reg. 9.
anointed; Achitophel to all bad counselors, Ananias to all liars, Herod to
all persecutors, Balaam to all greedy wretches, Iez^bel to all proud women.
Therefore Moses upbraideth Israel, that they seeing the examples of them, that
worshipped Baalpeor, yet run into the same sin, he makes them stocks,
blocks, beasts without eyes, saying, The Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Deuteronomy. 29. 4.


To apply this: Has France been plagued, so that their channels have
overflowed with blood, not with water? Has God plagued Flanders; that their
children be fatherless, their wives widows, their houses turned over unto
strangers, their lands to aliens? has Germany been grieved? Scotland
distressed, and we regard it not, we are blinder than Pharaoh, and more beasts
than Nebuchadnezzar. To tame a Lion they use to beat a little dog before him;
So to tame us of a Lion-like nature, God hathbeaten France, Flanders, Germany,
etc. Tune tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. O England look unto thy
self, end let thy neighbors fire, make Examples not regarded aggravate
punishment.
thee take heed of approaching flames. As God said of Babell, Come down, and
sit in the dust so virgin daughter Babel etc. So say I, Come down, and sit in
the duste, o virgin, daughter England. There is no throne o daughter of the
Chaldeans. For thou shall no more be Esa. 47. 1.
called tender and delicate. Take the milstones and grind meal, lose thy
locks, make bare thy feet, uncover thy legs, and pass through the floods.
Thy filthynes is discovered, and thy shame shall beseen. Thou shall no more be
called the mother of kingdoms. Lay thy hand therefore O virgin daughter England
upon thy heart repent of thy sins, and God will repent of his plagues, turn
away from thy sins and God will turn his face from thy sins, and blot out
all thy misdeeds.

And thus much being spoken as touching the end of Sodomes punishment; I come
now unto the punishment it self, and that is double.

First fire

Secondly, Eternal fire.

But first, fire: For among the judgments of God, fire ever has been a
principal. We use to say that fire and water have no mercy; and it is so:
therefore when God would punish notorious sins he plagued them with fire.
When the unclean lusts of Sodom cried up to heaven; The Lord rained, fire and
brimstone from Genesis 19.
the Lord out of Heaven upon them, and destroyed them. When Israel lusted
after flesh, God sent fire into the host, which burnt amongst Numb. 11. 1.
them, and consumed the utmost part of the Host. When the Captains of Ahaziah
came prowdly against Elisha the man of God, they, 2 Reg. 1.
and their Fifties were consumed with fire. The two notable whoremongers of
Judah were burnt with fire, in so much as it Luke 9.
grew to a proverb in Judah, The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and Genesis 6.
like Abab, whom the King of Babell burnt in the fire. The Samaritans refusing
to lodge the Lord Jesus, the Apostles would have prayed 2 Pet. 3.
for fire to come from heaven to destroy them. When Christ Jesus will come to
judgment, he will come in fire: Once the world was drowned and then it shall be
burned. For The heavens shall pass in manner of a tempest, the Elements shall
melt for servent heat the earth Mat. 25. 41.
and all that is thereupon shall burn. And when he will judge the 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
world to a certain set punishment, it is to fire; Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. This is the punishment of the damned. For when the Lord shall
show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels In flaming fire, they shall be
thrown into a burning Lake.

The pains of hell are described many ways, they are called? Vermis
conscientiae, a worm of Conscience; Tenebrae exteriores, utter Mar. 9. 4. Mat.
22. 13: Apoc. 20. Luke 6. 25. Mat. 25. 41. 2 These. 1. 8. Esa. 30. Apoc. 19.
darkness; Secunda mors, the second death; fletus and stridor dentium,
weepings and gnashing of teeth; the place of Devils, loss of Gods presence,
want of his countenance: Tophet, and the vallie of mourning; but chiefly fire,
and the burning lake. O what an horror is it ever to feel a gnawing worm,
ever to lie in darkness, to see death, ever to weep and gnash our teeth, to
be among Devils, to fry in fire. But as the Poet unable to se out the sorrows
of Niobe; Fire fearful; hell fire more fearful.
was driven to wrappe up her head in a cloud: so words fail me, you cannot
hear it, my tongue cannot express it, all our hearts cannot comprehend it,
the pains of hell are unspeakeable, as the joys of heaven are
incomprehensible. As the one cannot be 1 Cor. 2. 8.
perceived by the eye, nor received by the ear, nor conceived by the heart; no
more can the other. If a man were in the fire an hour. He would give a hundred
thousand pound to come out of it, and yet our fire is no more to hell fire,
than a painted fire is to our fire. Horresco referens, I tremble, I quake
rehearsing it. Tremble, o tremble ye blaspemers, that toss Gods name like to
a tennis balle. The flying book of Gods vengeance, which is Zach. 5. 1. 2. 3.
twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, wherein is written Ier. 5. 8. 9.
the curse, that goes forth oyer the whole earth, will seize upon them, and
cut them of, on this side and on that.

Tremble ye whoremongers, which like stoned horses neigh after your neighbors
wives; For God will visit for these things, and his soul will be avenged on
you. Tremble you greedy men, that sell the poor for shoes, and the needy for
silver; For God will not forget any of your works, he has sworn it by the
excellency Amos. 8. 6. 7.
of Jacob the land shall tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein. Tremble ye contemners of Gods 2 Po^. 3.
word, that deride his preachers as the old world did Noah: The Lord himself
will have you now in derision. And let all sinners tremble; Let them beware by
Dives that cries for a spoonefull of water to cool his tongue tormented in the
flames, with more rivers of tears, than ever Esau did for the blessing, and
yet cannot have it. But if they will not believe hell fire they shall feel it
before Luke 16. 27.
they believe it. They shall lie in Hell like sheep; death shall devour them.
There lie many jollie fellows that would give ten Psalm. 49. 14.
thousand worlds to come out, if they had them. The very Poets by some flash of
Gods spirit intimate Hell, in naming Caron, Phlegeton, Archeron, Erebus, with
Tantalus his apples, and Ixions wheel, and Titius his liver, and Sysiphus his
stone: we Christians speak of Gods judgment seat, and they name Minos,
Rhadamanthus, Aeacus, Triptoleme: we have heaven; they name Camp^s Tert. in
Apologetico adversus Gemes.
Elysios; we speak of God, they speak of Dis, Pluto, Proserpina. For as
Tertullian said, potaverunt poetae de Prophetarum font, The Poets drank of
the fountains of the Prophets, Inde Philosophi sitim ingenii sui rigaverunt:
There the Philosophers refreshed the thirst of their wits: Antiquior enim
omnibus est veritas, Truth is more ancient than all, omnia adversus veritatem
de veritate constructa sunt, All things against the truth, were heaped
together, and made of the truth.

But to return to our matter. The Schoolmen distinguish of fire; that there
is Ignis ardoris, faetoris, and terroris; Fire of heat, of stench, and of
terror. Of heat, as in Mount Aetna; of stench, they the have heaven here must
have hell hereafter.
as in mount Heda, of terror and fear, as Ignis fulguris, the fire of
lightening in America: All those fires, say they, are in Hell. But omitting the
Schoolmen, the holy Ghost notes this fire to be most terrible even to Kings;
therefore to mean men: Tophet (that is to say, Hell, where the wicked are
tormented) is prepared Esai 30. 33.
of old, it is even prepared for the King (so that their estate and degree
cannot exempt them, if they be wicked) It is made deep and large; the burning
thereof is fire, and much Wood, the breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone does kindle it. Multi in hac vita quaerunt suavia potius quam gravia,
varia quam sana, delicacia quamutilia, amara ergo gustabunt in inferno: Many in
this world seek more after sweet, than grave things; more after vain than
sound things, more after dainty, then profitable things; therefore shall they
taste of bitter things in Hell. As Abraham said to the rich man, Son, remember
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure; and Luke 16. 25.
contrariwise, Lazarus received pain, but now is be comforted, and thou
tormented. Nemo potesthic and illic voluptate frui; no man can enjoy pleasure
in this life and in the life to come also: For twice happy, men cannot be, but
the way to heaven is to sail by Hell. For by many tribulations we must enter
into the kingdom off heaven.

A Schooleman that wrote sermones disciple, makes five differents Act. 4.
between our fire and Hell fire: First, in regard of heat; For our fire being
compared to Hell fire is like a fire painted upon a wall; and therefore called,
a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast Apot. 20. 10.
and false prophet shall be tormented day and night Secondly, our fire burns
the body alone, it tormenteth not the soul; but the fire of Hell tormented and
burns body and soul: Hereupon says our Savior, Fear not him that can hurt
the body, and have no power over the soul but fear him, that is able to send
both body and soul into Mat. 13. 28.
Hell.

Thirdly, our fire where it burns, there it shines, there it lighteneth; but
the fire of Hell burns but gives no light at all: Therefore Christ calls it
utter darkness. Mat. 23. 13.


Fourthly, our fire wastes and consumes whatsoever is cast into it: but the
fire of Hell consumes nothing: For as the Salamander lives in the fire; so
shall the wicked live in the fire of Hell; they shall seek for death, but they
shall not find it: Semper cumburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall always
be burned, Aug.
but never consumed.

Fourthly, one fire may be quenched, but the fire of Hell cannot, and therefore
called unquenchable, vna scintilla ignis Gehennae Mar. 4. 44.
plus laedit impium, quam si mulier in partu mill annis perseveraret; one
spark of Hell fire does more torment the wicked, than if a woman should
continue in her travel a thousand years. Bern:


Another Schooleman names these pains in Hell first, heat; and therefore
called a Luke of fire. Apoc. 19. 20.


Secondly, stinch; and therefore called a Lake, that burns with Hell terrible
to all, but especially to the wicked.
fire and brimstone; which stinketh horribly.

3. Bands, Take and bind him hand and foot.

4. Darkness, Cast him into utter darkness.

5. Visions of devils, Go ye cursed into hell fire prepared for the devil
Mat. 22. 13. Ibidem. Mat. 25.
and his Angels.

6. The howling of the damned; and therefore it is said, that all the kindreds
of the earth shall wail before him. Apoc. 1. 7.


7. Separation from God; for they shall be punished with eternal perdition,
from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power. And 2 These. 1. 8.
this Gregory calls Paena damni, the pain of loss. Finely said Bernard,
Paveo Gehennam, and Iudicis vultum, contremisco ab ira potentis, a facie
furoris ejus, a fragore ruentis mundi, a conflagratione elementorum, Bern. Ser.
26. in Cant.
a voce Archangeli, a daemonibus rugientibus paratis ad escam; I fear Hell and
the countenance of the Judge, I tremble for the wrath of the Almighty, for the
face of his fury, for the noise of the falling world, for the burning of the
elements, for the voice of the Archangell, and for the roaring Devils prepared
to devour.

But if Bernard feared, what may the wicked do, whose hearts tell them, that
they have done little or no good in the world. The Glutton, whose faith is his
kitchen, and whose God is his belly. The Whoremonger, who has eyes full of
adult^ry. The Oppressor, Phil. 3: 17 2 Pet. 2. 14. Esa. 1. 15.
whose hands are full of blood. The Drunkard, whose body is as the swill-tub:
the irreligious person, that seldom prays, seldom gives thanks, or
hears Gods Word. Quaeres quae spes, quoad animi solatium hisce? What hope of
heaven, and happiness, can these men have? how think they to escape this fire
of hell? Scientes, prudentes, vivi, videntesque pereunt, knowing,
understanding, alive, and seeing they shall perish. GOD shall rain upon them
snares, fire, brimstone, this shall be their portion to Psalm. 11.
drink. So much for the first punishment of the reprobate; Fire.

The second punishment of the reprobate is, eternal fire; fire and eternity of
fire. All pains here have an end, but the pains of hell have no end:
Whereupon Augustine, Miseris erit mors fine morte, finis sine fine, defectus
sine defectu, etc. To these miserable Aug. lib. de Spiritu and anima cap. 56.
wretches, there shall be a death without death, an end without end, a decay
without decay, because their death shall ever live, and their end shall ever
begin, and their decay knows not how to decay; death shall press them, but
not extinguish them; sorrow shall torment them, and not drive away their fear;
the fire shall burn them, and not consume them, nor yet dispell their
darkness; for in this fire is obscurity, darkness, and in this obscurity
and darkness, fear and trembling; and in this combustion and burning,
sorrow: they shall always suffer torment, and always shall fear, because
they shall be tormented without hope of pardon. If after so many thousand
years, as Eternity of torments in hell aggravate misery.
they have hairs on their heads, they might have an end of their torment,
there were some hope, and they might endure those torments more quietly, but
because they have no hope, that ever their pains shall be either eased or
ended, desperatione deficiunt, they fail, they faint, and quail through
despair; Et ad tormenta non sufficient, and they are no way able to endure
those torments. Ibi erit tortor semper caedens, there shall be a tormentor ever
beating them; Et vermis semper corrodens, and a worm always gnawing them;
Etignis semper comburens, a fire always burning them; For their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, sins shall be detected, and
the sins shall be punished, Esa. 66. 24.
and that for ever, they shall see devils, but not God; Quod est omnium
meseriarum miserrimum, which of all miseries is most miserable. For if Absalom
took it so grievously, that he 2 Samuel 14. 32.
was banished his Fathers presence, and could not see his face? how grievously
shall the Reprobate be afflicted, to be banished Gods presence, and not to see
his face? for they shall be punished with eternal perdition, from the presence
of God, and glory 2 These. 1. 9.
of his power.

But to follow this point a little further; all men in misery comfort
themselves with hope of an end; the prisoner with hope of a gaole-delivery, the
mariner with hope of arrival, the soldier with hope of victory, the prentise
with hope of liberty the gally-slave with hope of ransom; only the poor
caitiffe in hell has no hope; he shall have end without end, death without
death, night without day, morning without mirth, sorrow without solace, bondage
without liberty.

Let fire and eternal fire move us; common fire is quenched with water, wild
fire with milk and vinegar, but hell fire is not quenched, their worm dies
not, and the fire never goes out. And Mar. 9. 44.
why should not we believe this? seeing that their is a certain stone in
Arcadia, called Asbestos, which being once kindled, never goes out, never can
be quenched. If this be in a stone, how much more in the power of God? This
earthly fire, except it be nourished with wood and other combustible matter
will out but the fire of hell never goes out, it always burns and never
cease. The reason is because our fire is not, In loco proprio, in his proper
place, sed violenta, but in a violent. The fire of hell is in his proper place,
for the breath of the Lord kindles it. We Greg in moralib^^.
see Aetna to burn always, for it has burnt from the beginning of the world,
and still does burn: why should not then hell fire burn always? and why
should not we believe that men shall always live in the fire of hell? seeing
we see and know the Salamander to live in the fire. If this may be by the
power of nature, why may not that by the power of God. The pains of hell be
such, that all the Arithmetitians in the world, cannot number them, nor all the
Geometritians measure them, The terrors of hell should deter from sin.
nor all the Rhetoritians express them, Quid hora ad diem, etc. says one,
what is an hour to a day, a day to a month, a month to a year, a year to a
thousand years, and a thousand years to eternity. Mathuselah lived almost a
thousand years, but the years that are past, are nothing, we have nothing of
time, but that which is present. The Pigmaeans lived only seven years, never
reached unto eight years: And their be certain creatures bred and borne at
the river Hispanis, that live but a day, in the morning they are bred and
brought forth, at noone they are at their full strength, at night they make
their end, and are gone: compare our years with eternity, and we are in the
same state and condition.

The reason of this endless punishment is the infinite Majesty of God, words
against common persons bear but common actions, against noble men they be
Scandala magnatum; against Princes, they be treason; so the person of God
aggravateth the sin. If any ask then how Christ's death could satisfy the
justice of God, seeing it was not eternal. I answer, that he did it through the
excellency of his Person, and the perfection of his merits.

The remembrance of these pains in hell, will drive away the remembrance of
sin, as the Adamant is contrary to the Loadstone, and suffers it to draw no
iron to it; behold the weight of hell pains in Christ: How sweat he? how cried
he, Deus meus, deus meus, quare dereliquisti me? My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? How did tears of blood trickle from him? If hell pains were so
grievous unto him? what will they be to us? Only this difference is betwixt
Christ and us, that he sustained all men's sins, we but our own sins, our
pain therefore not so great as his; but yet of greater and longer continuance,
his was but temporal, ours eternal, if we repent not, We must suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire.

The remembrance of fire, and eternal fire, swalloweth up all our cogitations:
How can our hearts endure, or how can our hands be strong in that day, When the
Lord shall have to do with us, the earth Ezech. 22. 14.
shall tremble before him, All faces shall gather blackenesse, the earth shall
tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the Sun and the Moon Joel 2. 6.
10.
shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. If a Barn
were full of Corn, having ten thousand quarters of wheat in it, and a bird
should every year carry away one kirnel in her neb, it would have an end at
last: If a Mountain were twenty miles high, and but one shovell full of earth
in a year taken from it, in time it would deminish, and come to nothing: but
hell deminisheth not, there is no end of it. When the wicked have been frying
in hell so many hundred years as there be piles of grass growing upon the
face of the earth, nay, so many thousand years, as there be sands, or drops of
water in God usually proportions punishment to sin.
the Sea, nay so many million of years, as there be creatures in heaven and in
earth; yet are they as far from being delivered out of the captivity of hell,
as they were the first day of their entrance. I say therefore of Gods
judgments, as Paul said of Gods wisdom; O alitudo; O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! O the depth of the justice
and judgments of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out. Now the very Papists make four places of torment: 1. Infernum,
Hell: 2. Purgatorium, Purgatory: 3. Limbum puerorum non baptizatorum, A place
where were children that dye without baptism; and 4. Limbum patrum, A place
where the Fathers were. Now saw they, Christ never descended into Hell, to
deliver any from thence, but he brought the Fathers, E limbo patrum, in his
passion; for in hell there is no redemption. Sermones discipuli Ser. 156.


By the way note, that as the Sodomites burned in the fire of unclean lust; so
God burned them with the fire of his vengeance. Poena saepe peccato respondet,
the punishment is oftentrmes answerable to the sin committed, and done; God
punishes men Aug.
according to the quality of their sins. The Philistines adored 1 Samuel 5.
Mice and rattes, so they were plagued with mice and rattes. And as they drew
the arc out of his bounds: so God drew their intrales out of their course:
And as Jeroboam overthrew Gods worship in one Altar erected at Jerusalem; So
God overthrew his 1 Reg. 13.
Altar at Bethel. And as he restrained the hands of Israel to offer to the true
God, but to his golden Calves; so his hand dried up. God punishes drunkards
with dropsies, and then, Woe to the Crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim.
And he punishes the Esa. 28. 1.
covetous men with thieves, who spoise them, as they have spoiled. Cap. 30.
And he punishes the adulterers with pox and such like evils. For the
Adulterer many times carries a body to the grave full of maladies and a soul
to hell, to eternal fire full of iniquities: and he punishes Tyrants by men
as bloody as themselves, and thus he punished Adonizedeck, For he had cut off
the fingers and toes of many kings, at last his own fingers and toes were
Judge. 1.
cut off: For With what measure we mete to others the same shall be measured to
us again. The house of valois having druncke blood voided blood, and of
English persecuters died many strangely: oh then let us take heed, how we
offend; For God will come in judgment he will be a swift witness, and a
sharp Judge against us, as here against the Sodomites; who were not only
destroyed with fire and brimstone from Heaven temporally, but also suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire.

And this example of Gods vengeance, is so famous that it is recorded by most
writers both profane and divine. Among profane, Solinus, Cornelius Tacitus,
Strabo, Stephanus, Pliny, Aristotle have written of it. Among divine, Moses,
Deuteronomy 29. and Esaias cap 1. Sodom not punished alone, but those that partooke
with her.
and 13. Jeremy also cap. 23. and 44. Ezekiel in like manner writes of it as
it appears cap. 16. Amos in his fourth chapter. Sophany, in his second
chapter; and the Lord Jesus in the 16. of Matthew mentions it; and so also
does S. Paul, Romans 9. and S. Peter in his second Epistle and second chapter;
and S. John in the 11. of the Apocalips. Let us therefore make profit and Cleanse
our selves 2 Cor. 7. 1.
of all filthynes of the flesh and spirit, lest we also suffer The vengeance of
eternal fire.

And further observe with me that not only Sodom was destroyed, and suffered
the vengeance of eternal fire; but many Cities besides. Moses. Deuteronomy. 29. and
the Prophet Hosea. cap 11. besides Sodom names 3. Cities more: Gomorra,
Zeboim, Admah: and unto these some other writers ad Phagor: so that five Cities
suffered the vengeance of eternal fire. Egesippus and Stephanus say that 10.
Cities were destroyed: and some say 13. Josephus, Tertullian Augustine and
others write, that the air there is so infectious, that if a bird flies over
it, it dies presently; and that no creature can live there, and the apples,
and other fruit that grow there howsoever they seem pleasant unto the eye,
yet if you do but touch them, they fall to Cinder and ashes. The sum of all
is to admonish us not to follow strange flesh, as they did. But to keep our
vessels in holiness and not in the lust of concupiscence. As Sodom and Gomor.
1 Thessalonians. 4.
And the Cities about them did, lest God destroy us with fire, as he did them,
and lest we suffer, The vengeance of eternal fire as they do.

And now brethren, you look that I should say some thing as touching the
fearful accident of fire, that since my last being in this chair of Moses
have happened among you, and has burnt up, and consumed, not an house or two,
but almost your whole town, and that no small town, but the chiefest and the
greatest in these parts, being the chiefest mart town in all the hundred, as
the Lord has come to Dereham and Aylisham, Beckles, and other neighbor
towns: so now at the last he is come to you: your sins have brought down
this judgment of God upon you therefore Wash you, make you Esa. 1. 16. 17.
clean, put away your evil intents, from before God, cease from doing evil,
learn to do well; otherwise the Lords hand will be Amo^. 3.
stretched out still against you; and do not think, that this fire came by
chance. For There is no evil done in the City, but the Lord does it himself.
And note the providence of God, that the Psalm. 118. Lament. 2. 1.
doctrine of burning of Sodom should be now handled, when this fearful
judgment of fire fell upon you: This is the Lord doing and it is marveilous in
our eyes, As David speaks in another case. As The Lord darkened the daughter
of Sion in his Wrath, (that is brought her from prosperity to adversity) so
has he darkened Northwalsham. And as The Lord cast down from Heaven Outward
afflictions make way to repentance and mercy.
unto the earth the beauty of Israel (that is, has given her a most sore fall)
so has he cast from Heaven to earth the beauty of Northewalsham. And as the
Lord destroyed the habitations of Jacob: so has he your habitations, and laid
wast your dwelling places. In the Lowe-Countryes, when, we see Cities burnt,
men slain, Churches ruinated. Corne-fields, Gardens, and Orchards destroyed;
we say then, the Spaniards have been here: So whosoever shall see Northwalsham
burnt and consumed with fire, as it is, he will say. The Lord has been here.
The Lord has done Lament. 2. 17.
that which he purposed, he has thrown down, and not spared.

But Brethren comfort your selves, God will receive you if ye will turn, For
he is gracious and merciful, longsuffering, Psalm. 103.
and of great goodness: he will not always be chiding, neither keeps he
his wrath for ever: Pray therefore with the Prophes Comfort us again, after
the time that thou have plagued, Psalm. 90. 15.
us and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity, and GOD will restore
your losses. It is as easy a matter for him to restore them, as at the first
to give them. Thus Job bare his losses patiently, The Lord (says he) gave,
Job. 1. 21.
and the Lord has taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it is come to pass;
blessed be the name of the Lord. Cyrill said of the Cyril.
Eunomians, that they had taken away his goods from him, but not Christ from
him. Augustine said, that if GOD should give him all things, that were not
enough, except GOD gave himself also to him, and then he had enough: Weep
not Agar, a well shall spring up in the wilderness: Fear not Sampson; a
jawe-bone shall slay a Aug. Genesis 21. 15. Judge. 15. 1 Reg. 12. 1 Reg. 17.
whose army of Philistines: Die not Elias. The Ravens shall bring thee flesh
and bread: Be not discomforted widow of Sarepta; the meal in the barrel,
and the oil in the cruse, shall not waste: Faint not Jews; Five loaves shall
John. 6.
feed five thousand: Fear not Daniel; Abacucke shall bring thee meat from
Iewry: Fear not ye men of wallsham, Dan. Exodus Ezra. 4.
God can incline the hearts of all the Country to do you good, as he did the
hearts of the Egyptians to lend to Israel; he can reedifye your Town, as
he did Jerusalem by Nehemiahs, He can restore your losses, as he did the
losses of Job, that you shall be richer at the last than at the first. He that
commanded the whale to cast Jonas on the dry land after three days; he that
turned the rock into a river, and the Flint stone into a springing well: Mat.
12. Nomb. 20.
he that saved Paul in the depth of the Sea; can save you, and your goods; and
will, if you rest upon him; only rely on Act. 27.
the Lord. My brethren, know, that his eye is not dim, his Esa. 39.
ear is not heavy his arm is not shortened, his heart is not diminished God
preserves them that rely on him.
if we turn to him: He is rich to all that call upon him: be not wanting to
thy self in faith, and God will not be wanting unto thee in help; believe and
throw not your selves down so Romans 10.
much, The earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compass of the
world and they that dwell therein. He made you rich when ye were Psalm. 24.
poor, and being poor, he can make you rich again. Seek his kingdom, and
the righteousness thereof, and all these earthly things shall be Mat. 6. 33.
cast unto you.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. VIII. Likewise notwithstanding these sleepers also defile the flesh and
despise government. Where reprehension does not amend, execration follows.



SAint Jude in these 8, 9, 10. and 11. Verses notes three things.

First, A description of the wicked.

Secondly, A confutation.

Thirdly, An execration.

For he arises by degrees, as the Eagle mounteth in her flight, higher and
higher: So Inde from Description to Confutation, from Confutation to
Execration. He proceeds in the zeal of God, as Iehu marched in his chariot,
valiantly, like the fire that first smoaketh, and then flameth, like the Sun
that warmeth in the morning, and burns at noone tide; so at last he
accurseth them, woe to them (quoth Jude) Let them be written among the fools,
let them be put out of the Book of life, neither let them be written with the
righteous: Let their table be made a snare before them. And their prosperity
their ruin: let their eyes be blinded, that they see not, and make their
Psalm. 69. 22, 23, 24, 25, 27.
Ioynes always tremble: power out thy anger upon them, and let thy wrathful
displeasure take them. Let their habitation be void, and none dwell in their
tents; lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and let them not Three kinds of
sleepers mentioned in Scripture.
come in thy righteousness. He prays God with Jeremy to power out his wrath
upon them; he desires God with David, to arise and scatter them, to drive them
away as smoke, and as wax melts before the fire; so they might perish, and
that God would Ier. 10. 25. Psalm. 69. 1, 2. Psalm. 74. 11.
withdraw his hand, even his right hand out of his bosom, and consume them.

Now for the description, he painteth them out, as Zeuxis did the Grapes that
deceived the birds, as Parrhasius did the sheet that deceived Zeuxis.

And first he calls them sleepers.

Secondly, defilers of the flesh.

Thirdly, despisers of Government.

Fourthly, Raylers, speaking evil of them that are in authority.

Fifthly, he notes them to be envious, like Caine.

Genesis 4.
Sixthly, Rebellious, like Corah.

Seventhly, Covetous, like Balaam. Numh. 16. Cap. 16. 9.


Thus, as the Leopard has many spots, so had they many sins; as Joseph's coat
had many colors, so had they many wickednesses Ier. 5.
A vertice ad calcem non erat sanitas, from top to toe there was no
soundness, but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruptions, Esa. 1. 4.
they were a monstrous people. A man may say of them, as Virgil spoke of
Polipheme, that one-eyed Giant, Monstrum horendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen
ademptum, An huge shapelesse horrid monster without an eye. For they had a
monstrous body, having a drowsy head, a lecherous flesh, a railing tongue, a
blasphemous ignorant mouth, an envious eye, a rebellious hand, a covetous
heart; like Virgils Alecto, ^ui nomina mill, mill no^^^di arts, that a
thousand names, a thousand ways to do mischief, a strange body compact of
vile members, the head of an Ass, the flesh of a Goat, the tongue of a
Serpent, the eye of a Basiliske, the hand of a Monkey, the heart of a Dragon,
that is, never satisfied. So that Jude might say as Jeremy said, My heretage
Ier. 12. 8, 9.
is unto me, as a Lion in the forest; it cries out against me, therefore have
I hated it. Shall my heretage be unto me as a bird of diverse colors, etc. Thus
much generally for the Text.

And now to the particular handling of the things therein contained; and first,
he calls them sleepers. He speaks not of any natural sleep, but the
sleep, that he means, is security, negligence; and in affirming them to be
sleepers, he means that they were drowsy, blockish, negligent. As Paul said
to Titus of the Cretians, That they were liars, evil beasts, slow bellies; so
Tit. 1. 12.
these were secure and sleepy.

Sleep in the Scripture has three significations, sometime it signifies
natural rest, so the Apostles slept: So the Evangelist witnesses that Christ,
Came unto his disciples, and found them asleep. Secondly, it signifies death,
and so Lazarus slept, and Mat. 26. 40.
Stephen slept, and the Corinthians slept: Brethren we shall not all sleep, The
living in sin and security like lying asleep.
that is, we shall not all dye. Thirdly, it signifies dullness of spirit, and
the Romans slept, but Paul tells them, that, Considering the season, it is
high time for them to awake from sleep; he means sin, security,
carelessness, continuance in sin. For there is a lethergie John 11. Acts 7.
Romans 13. 11.
of the mind, as there is of the body, that men dye sleeping, and many are
overtaken with it, they are as men asleep, like the mice of the Alps, that
sleep all winter; like Endimion, that could not be awaked; like Saul and Abner,
that could not be stirred with David's shouting. Many labor of the lethergy of
1 Samuel 26. 14.
the mind, they see not the glory of God, they hear not his voice they smell
not the sweet promises of God in Christ Jesus; they taste not how good God is
unto them, they handle not the Book 1 Pet. 2. 3.
of life. As a man asleep sees not, hears not, walks not, but is without
sense, or motion of life for the time (for sleep is a band and an imprisonment
of all the senses) so is a sinner without remorse; he perceives not, he
regards not the things that are of God. As Christ said to Peter, Come behind
me Satan, thou Mat. 16. 23.
savourest not the things that are of God. Many wake to the world; They rise
early, they go late to bed; they eat the bread of carefullnesse, Psalm. 127.
they are asleep in all the matters of God. A man may say to them, as the
Prophet Esaias said unto the Jews; Know ye nothing? Esa. 40. 21.
have ye not heard it? has it not been told you from the beginning? have ye
not understood it, by the foundations of the earth he sits upon the circle
of the earth, and the inhabiters thereof are as Grasshoppers; he stretches out
the Heavens as a Curtain and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in. Their
soul it asleep, if not dead; for the trumpet of Gods Word has not awaked
them this forty, fifty years: Sed tempus est surgeudi, it is high time for us
to awake out of sleep. I will therefore say unto you, as Christ said to the
Church of Sardis, Awake and strengthen the things that remain. Gods Minsters
Romans 13. 11. Apoc. 3. 2.
they are as Trumpets to awake the drowsy Soldier, and to prepare him to the
battle; and therefore they are willed to Cry aloud Esa. 58. 1.
and not to spare, to lift up their voices like trumpets, that so they may
awake men out of their sleep of sin. Gods Ministers, they are as Cocks, to
crow, and to awaken all to receive the Word; for as the body has Four powers
Appetitive the First, Retentive. the Second, Digestive. the Third, Expulsive.
the Fourth,

So has the soul, it must desire the word; and as the Heart brayeth Psalm. 42.
1.
for the rivers of waters; so must our souls pant after God and his Word, and
not only desire it, but keep it, for Blessed are they Luke 11. 28.
that hear the Word and keep it; and not only desire and keep it, but also
digest it into good manners, that so, our conversation may be such as becomes
the Gospel of Christ, and not only Phil. 1. 27.
desire it, keep it, and digest it: but also expel whatsoever is contrary
The sleep of sin most dangerous.
unto it; Laying aside all maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation and
envy, and all evil speaking: but this cannot be without crying, for all men
be in a slumber. The Apostle says, awake thou 1 Pet. 2. 1. Ephesians. 5. 14. 1
Cor. 15. 14.
that sleep, stand up from death: And he explaineth the phrase in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, Awake to live righteously; and sin not,
so that to sleep, is to live sinnefully, and securely: to awake is to live
carefully, righteously, Esaias calls it a Spirit of slumber: The Lord (says
he) has covered you with a spirit of slumber Esai. 29. 10.
and shut up your eyes. Solomon says to the drunkard, that he sleeps upon
the top of a mast: and this is true of all sins. Christ Pro. 23. 34.
at his farewell, and Vltimum vale, cried, Vigilate and orate, watch and Mat.
26.
pray: he said not Iejunate and virginitatem servate, Fast and keep virginity;
but vigilate watch. Christ said to his Apostles, Vigilate, Mar. 13.
watch. Paul bad the Thessalonians, watch; Let us not sleep, as do 1 Thessalonians.
5, 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 3. 2.
other, but let us watch and be sober. Saint Peter bad the Jews watch, Be
sober and watch: John bad the Church watch, be awake and strengthen the things
that remain. Esaias bad Jerusalem watch, Awake O Esa. 40. 1.
Jerusalem, be bright, for thy light is come. As the Turtle has but one note,
so the Godly have but one song, Vigilate, surgite a somno, watch and arise from
sleep. It is said of Martinus that he never passed hour of the day without
prayer or reading or meditation; Semper aliquid boni agebat, he did always
some good, and it is true, that Nostra bona opera sunt flagella diaboli, that
our good works are whips for the Devil, Daimonomastyx, if we be vigilant, and
diligent in them. Wherefore Saint Peter's exhortation, Give all diligence to
join virtue with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly
kindness love. Mariners, says Tertullian, are never devoured of the Syrenes
but when they are asleep. The Leopard is never taken Tertull. in Apologetico.
Cant. 5.
of the Dragon but then. When lost the Church her husband? but when she slept;
when lost Saul his pot and his spear, when came the bridegroom? but when the
virgins slept: when were tears sown? 1. Sam. 26. Mat. 25. Mat. 13. Judge. 4.
cap. 16. Ier. 1. Act. 20. Mat. 26.
but when men slept. Shall Sisera sleep then in Iaels tent? shall Sampson snort
in Dalilahs lap? shall Jonas sleep under the hatches? shall Eutichus sleep in
the midst of doctrine? shall James and John nod, when Judas is so busy about
a mischief? For shame rise, else Sysera may have a nail in the temples of his
head: Sampson may have his locks shaven; Jonas may be hurled over the
hatches, etc. and Satan may surprise us all. Nicephorus tells us of seven
boys of Bethel, that slept nine-score years, but I am sure that some of us
have slept forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, years. I think that many are
such sleepers, as they will never awake, till the last blast of the Archangell
that shall awake all: For the Lord will descend from Heaven with a showt, and
with the voice of the Archangel, and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
trumpe of God, and then they shall sleep no longer but awake; whether they
will or no. Many sleep all their life, and dye sleeping The Devil cannot hurt
if we be watchful.
too, but this trumpe will awake them, but then it will be too late.

As many are of a drousie constitution, like unto the disciples, to whom Christ
came the first, and the second time, and found them asleep: For their eyes
were heavy. So is it with many in regard of their souls, Languido sunt
ingenio, they are of a dull, and drousie disposition, and the Devil has so
besprinckled their temples Mat. 26. 43.
with spiritual Opium of evil motions and suggestions, that they are fallen
into a lethargy irrecoverable, and it may be said of them, as of Saul and his
troops, A dead sleep of God was upon them 1 Samuel 26. 12.
and they could not awake.

A man that has an enemy that watches all opportunity to do 1 Pet. 5. 8.
him hurt, will watch to prevent him. Now the Devil watching day and night to
devour our souls, we should watch to save them: Debilis est hostis Diabolus,
qui non vincit nisi volentem and torpentem; the Devil is a weak enemy, he
vanquisheth none, but Greg.
him that is willing and sleepy: Ille suggerit mala, tuum est repellere; he
suggesteth evil, but it is thy duty to repel and put back the evil: Latrare
potest, non mordere, si caveamus, He may bark, but he cannot Bern.
bite, if we be circumspect, and take heed to our selves: As a charmed Adder,
he can hiss but he cannot sting. Quoties resistimus caute, toties diabolum
superamus, Angelos laetificamus animas a salvamus, Deum honoramus, As often as
we resist warily, so often we overcome the Devil, rejoice the Angels, save our
souls, and honor God. At homo sine circumspectione, but a man without
circumspection, and diligent regard of himself, is as a City without a wall,
as an house without a door, as an host of men without a Sentinel: our danger
is great, therefore says Christ, If thou will not watch, I will come on Apoc.
3. 3.
thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.
And again, Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments; (of righteousness and holiness wherewith cap. 16. 13.
we are clad, through Jesus Christ) Lest he walk naked, and men see his
filthiness. Early and betimes we ought to awake from sleep, as the little
birds, which chirpe and sing, and praise God early. Ambr.
Indecens est, solemn invenire Christianum in lecto, It is unseemely and unfit,
that the Sun should find a Christian in his bed, Homo somno lentus est imago
mortis, a sleepy sluggish man is deaths image: Aug.
Et mors ab inferis venisse fingitur: and the Poet feineth death to come from
Hell. Let us learn from the base creatures; The Bern.
Nightingale keeps her eggs from the Serpent, and passes the night not
sleeping, but singing. Look upon the Bees, they are neither sleepy nor
sluggish, for some war, some search diligently the flowers, some make Wax,
some gather Honey, some build cells, some keep watch and ward, not a Be idle.
The little Conies watch, two keep Sentinel every night, and with a pat with
their foot give notice to the rest to return home: Let Christians learn from
all these, to be more careful and watchful, and not A Christian must always
watch.
to be of the number of these sleepers. Sin is this sleep, and sinners are
these sleepers, let us not sleep as others sleep, but Awake to righteousness
and sin not: and being awaked, let us 1 These. 5. 6.
watch; watch we cannot till we be awaked, and when we are once awaked, we must
ever watch, Nam vigilare lene est, peruigilare grave, to awake it is nothing,
but to watch; Hic labor, hoc opus Martial. lib. 9. cap. 70.
est, there is the work indeed. Vigilandum est semper, multae insidiae sunt
bonis, watch we must continually, because our enemy continually lies in wait
for us: A thing rather to be regarded, because it is not here, as in a worldly
watch, where some watch for the rest, and the rest sleep while they wake: we
cannot watch here by a Deputy, no man can watch for us, but every one must
watch for himself. Other may watch over us, as the Ministers, who in the Word
are called Watchmen; but none can watch for us, every one in person must ever
watch for himself. Let us Ezech. 3. 17.
not sleep therefore as other men, but let us watch and be sober: but we
watch not, but sleep out our lives.

Tullie tells us of men, whom he calls (...), Qui nunquam vident Solemn
orientem aut occidentem, which never saw the Sun Libro 2. de finibus.
rising nor setting; at the rising of the Sun they are in their beds, at the
Sun setting they are drunken in the Tavernes. So many of us watch no time;
but lose all time, we spend few hours in prayer, fewer in hearing and reading,
fewest in meditation and thanksgiving. The general sin of this age is
security, we are sleepers, and sleep in all good things, we are careless. I
appeal to your consciences this day, if it be not so. I call heaven and earth
to witness against you, that if ye sleep still, and will not awake and watch,
God will arise against you, like a Giant refreshed with wine, and rain upon
you snares, fire and brimstone; this shall be your portion to drink. Psalm. 11.


Secondly, he calls them defilers of the flesh, carnal, wantons, unclean,
who keep not their bodies in holiness; but in the lust of concupiscence: as
Paul said of the Gentiles. This sin of uncleanness is so much the greater,
in as much as God so carefully keeps all our members: Custodit omnia ossa, he
keeps all our bones; abstergit lachrymas ab oculis, he wipeth the tears
from our eyes; docet manus praeliari, he teaches our hands Psalm. 34. Psalm.
116. Psalm. 144. 1.
to war, and our fingers to fight; dirigit gressus nostros in via pacis, he
directs our going in the way of peace; totum denique corpus custodit, to
conclude he keeps the whole body. For the Lord (says David) is thy keeper,
the Lord is the shadow at the right hand. Ought we not then, to give our eyes,
our hands, our feet, and the Psalm. 121. 5.
whole body unto his service, that as we have given our members servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity to commit iniquity: So now to give over our
members servants unto righteousness in holiness, for being freed from sin,
and made the servants of God, our fruit must be in holiness, and our end shall
be life eternal. Again, God punishes uncleanness many ways.
our members are the members of Christ, shall we take the members of Christ,
and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. Again, they are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost; If any man defile 1 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 3.
the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. A Noble man will not lodge in a
hoggs coat, nor Gods Spirit in a filthy, unclean, unchaste body, Quid luci cum
tenebris, what communion has light 2 Cor. 6. 14.
with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? what part has the
believer with the unbeleever? or what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? Again, our members shall be glorified in heaven: Let them therefore
glorify God in this life, for as no unclean beast might tarry upon the Lords
Mountain, so no polluted person shall pass through the gates Apoc. 221
of the new Jerusalem.

God punishes this sin many ways: First, with beggary, for he that feeds
harlots shall never be rich, for indeed it is a sin Prove. 29. 3.
against nature, for whereas other men sow for an Harvest, these defilers of
the flesh, which plough with othermens heifers sow that which they dare not
reap.

Secondly, he punishes defilers of the flesh with infamy: for their reproach
shall never be done away. Prove. 6. 33.


Thirdly, with loathsome diseases, for the most righteous God has appointed,
that they which will taste of the sweet of sin, shall be filled with the gall
of punishment, it brings corruption of the blood, dissolution of the sinews,
rottenness of the marrow, aches in the joints, crudities in the stomach,
pains in the head, gowtes and palsies, heaviness in the heart, and stinging
of the conscience.

Fourthly, Yea, and after all these, it shall be punished with hell fire: For
it is written, for fornication, uncleanness, inordinate Col. 3. 6.
affection; etc. the wrath of God remains on such. And again, whoremongers
Heb. 13. 4.
and adulterers God will judge: for is stabunt moechi, without shall be dogs,
and inchanters, and whoremongers, etc. only Apoc. 22. 15.
such as be Virgins follow the Lamb. Know ye therefore, ye Apoc. 14. Gal. 4.
Numb. 5. Deuteronomy. 23. 3.
defilers of the flesh, there is no place for you in heaven, you must rest and
dwell in the tenement in hell. The Bastard Ismael has no place in Abraham's
house: the unclean Canaanite has no room in the host of Israel: The
misbegotten Ammonite has no access into Gods Tabernacle. As the whoremongers
and defilers of the flesh, have neither foot, nor furrow, nor inch of room in
Gods Kingdom. Sunt in fell nequitiae, they are in the gall of Acts 8. 21.
bitterness, as Simon Peter said of Simon Magus. The holy Ghost joyneth a
whore and a dog together: Thou shall not bring the Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
hire of an whore, nor the price of a dog into the house of God. And Jeremy
compares these adulterous beasts unto neighing horses, and Ier. 5. 8.
the Wise man likens them to an Ox going to the slaughter, and calls Prove. 7.
22.
the whore a deep ditch, and a narrow pit, And they that enter into her Prove.
2. 19.
hardly return again to take hold of the way of life. The guests and
Whoredom and all uncleanness odious.
companions of harlots are in Hell, nay in the depth of Hell. Heaven will not
receive them. O that men could-see into Hell, they should see as many defilers
of the flesh, as many whoremongers, as of any sin against the second table!

Many make little reckoning of this sin of whoredom, which the Apostle means
by defiling of the flesh: but if the punishment provided for it, already spoken
of, cannot let you see the grievousnesse of this sin, then listen to that,
which now I shall say unto you: First, it takes away the heart of a man: so
says the Prophet, Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the heart. As
Hos. 4. 11.
Nabuchadnezzar had the heart of a beast; so these defilers of the flesh have
beastly hearts. Et praestat bestiam esse, quam bestialiter Seneca.
vivere, A man had better be a beast, than live beastly.

Secondly, This sin is so much the greater, because it has a lawful remedy.
To avoid fornication, says the Apostle, let every 1 Cor. 7. 2.
man have his wife, and every wife her husband. And again, They that cannot
abstain, let them marry. A poor thief is pitied, that steals to satisfy
hunger, but he that steals, and has enough of his own, his sin is the
greater, and the more to be punished Prove. 6. 33.
so he that has a lawful remedy, and such a remedy as God has ordained, and
yet runs a whoring, his sin is the more abominable, and deserves greater
punishment. Such was David's sin, he had many wives and concubines, and yet
he 2 Samuel 11. 5. etc.
took another man's Wife; and therefore his sin was horrible.

Thirdly, by this sin of whoredom, Satan gains two souls at once; a
thief may steal alone, the drunkard may be drunken alone, the murderer,
blasphemer, idolater, usurer, etc. may sin alone, but the whoremonger kills
two souls at one clap. If the blood of Abel cried for vengeance, how much more
shall those souls cry for vengeance, whom these defilers of the flesh have
brought to destruction: yet these defilers care not how many they abuse, and
whores and harlots care not how many they lead to the devil, they open their
quiver against every arrow. Eccles. 26. 22.


Fourthly, Defilers of the flesh, whoremongers are the Devils factors; Satan is
a tempter; so are they, and therefore when they go about to defile any, they
should answer them as Christ answered Mat. 4. 1.
Peter, when he counseled him to save himself, Come behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me. I read of a certain Matron Mat. 16. 23.
that being intised by a desire of the flesh, an incontinent person, to
incontinency, she denied, but not relinquishing his suit at last she calls
for a pan of coals, and desires him for her sake, to hold his hand in that
pan of coals one hour? he answered it was an unreasonable request. She
replied, Is my request unreasonable to have you hold your hand in this pan of
coals one hour? how unreasonable is yours? which would have have me Why our
Lusts are by Saint Paul called members.
to yield to that which will burn body and soul in Hell flames for ever. And
so she sent him away packing, and so must all chaste bodies answer these
defilers.

Besides all this, this sin of whoredom is an abominable sin, because God
forbids it, and all good men abhor it. Joseph chused rather to endanger his
life, than to defile himself with his filthy Mistrisse; Susanna, before she
would suffer the filthy Judges Genesis 39. 12.
to defile her, adventured her body to the fire, and burned had she been, had
not God delivered her: but in this sinful age many will adventure their
lives to do it, and are so far from Joseph's, Dan. 13. 45.
and Susannaes affection, from flying filthiness, that like Reuben they cannot
rest day nor night till they be of the number of these defilers of the flesh.

Anger and lust are so such raging affections in man, that they can hardly be
resisted: but be they as dear unto us, as our hands and our eyes, yet they
must be plucked out and cut off. Paul compares Mat. 18. 8, 9.
lust unto a member: first, because actual sins, in relation to original
sin, are so many members, as grow from. Secondly, by a Metonymie of the
subjects, lust may be called a member, because it is brought to action, by the
help and service of the members. And thirdly, because many men delight, and
take pleasure in their turpitude, and filthiness, as in their members. But
howsoever it be a member, yet it must be mortified; so says the Apostle,
Mortify Col. 3. 5, 6. Gal. 5. 24.
your earthly members, Fornication, Uncleanness, unnatural Lust, etc. and it
must be crucified also; For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts. Qui ergo sordescit, sordescat Act. 8. 20.
ad huc: Let him that is filthy, be filthy still. Et pereat secum voluptas,
let his voluptuousnessy perish with him: as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, in
another sense, Saint Jerome cries out against Hierome.
this sin, after this manner, O ignis infernalis luxuria, cujus materia,
gula, etc. O thou infernal fire of letchery, and whoredom; whose matter and
nourishment, are gluttony and drunkenness, the flame is, Fervor
concupiscentiae; The heat of concupiscence; the sparks are corrupt speeches,
and filthy communication; the smoke, infamy and disgrace; the acts adultery,
fornication, uncleanenesse; and the end Helltorments.

But to proceed, Saint Peter speaks of men that have eyes full of Adultery,
and that cannot cease to sin, beguiling unstable souls. 2 Pet. 2. 14.
Many have ears full of slander: as Doeg, and Saules parasites. Many have
mouths full of blasphemy, as Goliath, who railed upon the host of the living
God. Many have throats full of gluttony, as the Philippians, whose God was
their belly, and glory their shame. Many have their hands full of bribery, as
the Pharisees, which made 1 Samuel 22. 1 Samuel 17. 3, 6. Phil. 3. 17. Mat. 23. 25.
Genesis 21. 47.
clean the utter side of the cup and platter, but within were full of briberie
and excess. And many have their hearts full of rancor and malice, as Esau who
(...) ^^cob because of the blessing, and purposed to slay Jacob. But most men
have eyes full of adultery: but such unclean Adultery a sin very common in
Italy.
eyes shall never see God, to their comfort. Jeremy said of that time, that
they were all adulterers, And assembled themselves by companies in harlots
houses, they rose up in the morning like fed-horses, Ier. 5. 7, 8, 9.
every man neighed after his neighbors wife, shall I not visit for these
things says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged of such a nation as this?
Hosea said of Israel that they were all as the Oven of a Baker, for as the
Bakers Oven, is seldom cooled, so their lust is seldom Hos. 7. 4.
satisfied. CHRIST called the Pharisees, An adulterous generation; as if they
all had been Whoremongers. Mat. 16. 4.
And Paul said of most men, that they be (...) potius quam (...), Lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of godliness. But take 2 Timothy 3.
away your fornication out of GODS sight, and your adulteries from between
your breasts, lest God strip you naked, and discover your filthiness Hos. 2. 2,
3.
to your confusion.

One writes of Genna in Italy, that all of them be either Lovers or Lechers:
As the Moabite walloweth in his vomit, as the dog tumbleth in carrion, as the
Eeles lie in mud, as the Beetles sing in dung, so the Italians boast of
lechery, all are either Lovers or Lechers.

Master Askam said of Venice, that whoredom was as indifferent as a shoe or a
pantofle. Bishop Jewel said of Rome, that in the year, 1564. after a
reformation there, there were found eight and twenty thousand Curtesans.
Harding justified the stews, and Iasin Pratensis has written a book, de
ratione gignendi liberos, and de mill modis concubandi: and Johannes Atlassa,
an Archbishop, has written a book in praise of Sodomitry. And most Papists
hold this with Pighius, and them of Colon: Sinon cast, tamen caute, if not
chastely, yet warily; yet condemn they marriage. For as Severus the Heretic,
held a woman to be the workmanship of the Devil, and a man also from the
Navell downward: So Innocent the eighth, and Pope Siricius condemned marriage,
alleging the words of the Apostle, that They which are in the flesh cannot
please God. Thus like the second Romans 8. 8.
Nicene Council under Irene, they rack all Scripture, perverting them to
their own destruction; like Foxes they spoil 2 Pet. 3. 16. Cant. 2. Psalm. 80.
the Lords Grapes; like Wilde-Boares they root up all the Vineyard. Whoredom
was wont to be the sin of Naples, afterward the sin of France, and now
the sin of England.

Saint Hierome says, that it is no wisdom to sleep near a Serpent, it may
be, that he biteth thee not, but it is forty to Hierome libr^ de regula
monachorum cap. 9.
one but that it stingeth thee. A vino and muliere (inquit) fuge, flee from
wine and women (says he) ne te capiat ejus oculus, lest her eye catch thee.
The lips of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is more soft
than oil, but the end of her is bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged
Sword: her geete go down Prove. 5. 3, 4.
to death, and her steps took hold of Hell. And Chrysostom says, Uncleanness
harply eschew ed, we have so many motives to it.
Quid moecharis? quid semen jaces in aquas? unde nihil es messurus, aut si
metes ad ignominiam futures est fructus, Ex adulterio enim nascitur Nothus, qui
te vivo carebit honor, and te mortuo extabit ad ignominiam monumentum: Why
do thou commit adultery? Why do thou cast thy seed upon the waters? where
nothing is to be reaped, Sermon. de non sectando concupiscentias carnis.
or if thou reapest any thing, the fruit will turn to thy ignominy and
dishonor? A Bastard is borne of Adultery; who as long as thou live will
deprive thee of honor: and being dead, he shall be as a monument erected to
thy reproach and infamy. And (as some say) it shall be a fire brand in Hell, to
burn the parents; Quot nothi, tot taedae ardentes in inferno ad comburendum
parents; How many Bastards, so many burning torches to burn the parents in
Hell. Bernard goes further, Qui scortum osculatur pulsat (inquit) inferni
januam; He that Bern.
kisseth or imbraceth an harlot rappeth and knocks at Hell gates to be let
in: For her feet go down to death, and her steps Prove. 5. 5.
take hold of Hell: Moechus, Vt Sus, plus amat lutum quam lectum Eburnium, The
Adulterer loves to wallow in the dirt and clay, more than in a bed of
Ivorie, he burns Apoc. 21. 8.
in the fire of Leachery, and he shall burn in Hell fire.

Now, because this temptation of uncleanenesse is one of the strongest in the
world, and most hardly resisted under Heaven, the enemy that we carry in our
bosom being so strong, that is, Lust, and our flesh so weak to resist it:
Mat. 26. 41. Genesis 3.
Chrysostom cries out against all Adulterous Women, and says that the
adulterous Woman is Acutum telum diaboli, the sharp dart of the Devil: Per
mulierem Adamus foelicissimus 2 Samuel 11. 1 Reg. 11. Judge. 15. Mat. 14.
perdidit Paradisum: per mulierem, David piissimus homicidium perpetravit: per
mulierem Solomon prudentissimus in idolatriam incidit: per eam fortissimus
Sampson vinctus est: and per eam mundi lucerna Johannes Baptista decollatur: By
a Woman Adam the happiest, lost Paradise: by a Woman, David the holiest,
perpetrated Murder: by a Woman, Solomon the wisest, fell to Idolatry: by a
Woman, Sampson the strongest, was fettered and bound: and by a Woman, the light
of the World John the Baptist was decollated, beheaded. I speak only against
wicked Women: For good Women, shall be Heirs with men of the grace of life
and shall see thee goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living.

To conclude this point: let us learn to keep our vessels in holiness, and
not to be of the number of the defilers of 1 Timothy 2. 15.
the flesh, as be Whoremongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Wantons, etc. and let
us shun the occasion of this sin, which is surfeiting and drunkenness. For
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, without Corn and Wine Venus starveth: and
where Ceres and Bacchus is, there Venus reigns. And take idleness Surfeting
and drunkenness, occasion of Whoredom.
away, and Cupids bow will soon decay. Let us make a Covenant with our eyes,
as Job did; Let us meditate upon the Word of God, which is a forcible mean
against this sin: It shall keep us from the bad Woman. which flattereth Job.
31. Prove. 6. 22. 24.
with her lips, forsakes the husband of her youth, and breaks the Covenant
of thy God.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. VIII. And despise government, and speak evil of them that are in
authority. The Devil the first rebel and author of all rebellion



THis is the third vice objected against the wicked, They despise government: A
vice objected to the like men by Saint Peter, who seems to have drawn his
water from this fountain, and his words from this Apostle, he says, The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment, to be punished, and
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanenesse, and
despise government, These men as they rebel against God like the old Giants
(...): So they resist man, ordained of God: Genesis 11. Luke 8.
they are like the unrighteous Judge, that neither cared for God nor man. And
no marvel; For the Devil their master-head Captain and father rose against
God, and cast off his obedience whereupon Paul calls pride, the sin of the
Devil, noting both (...) and (...) Reatum and condemnationem, The guilt and
the 1 Timothy 36.
punishment. Thus he set upon Christ: For being come unto him, he said, If
thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread. Thus he
warred with Michael and his Angels; I saw (says John) a great battle in
Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought Christ and his Apostles taught and
preached obedience to heathenish Princes.
with the Dragon, and the Dragon and his Angels fought; and prevailed not. He
is the Dragon that opened his mouth, To blaspheme against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his Tabernacle, and they that dwell in heaven: He is the beast that
shall go out, To deceive the people, which are in the four quarters of the
earth, even Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is
as the sand of the Apoc. 12. 7 Apoc. 13. 6. Cap. 28. 8. John 8. 44.
Sea. As Christ said of the Pharisees, that they were like their father the
devil in lying. So say I, of the wicked that they are like their father in
rebellion; he inspired them with the spirit of pride and rebellion: For he
works in them. It was well said of Samuel, Has the Lord as great pleasure in
burnt offerings and sacrifice as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, Ephesians. 2. 2. 1 Samuel 15. 22. 23.
and to hearken is better than the fat of rams, but rebellion is as the sin
of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry: which words may
extend as well to the civil as celestial government. I know that obedience to
God, is obedience to man, and on the contrary; disobedience to God,
disobedience to man: haec tamen conjungi magis quam confundi velim, (quoth
Calvin) I had rather conjoyne these, than confound them. Calvin.


The Lord Jesus performed all obedience to Rulers, even then when they were
heathen, and knew not God; note his precept; note his practice; note both; his
precept was, Da Caesari, give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Mat. 22. 21.
Gods: his practice was, that he paid to Caesar tribute, and to that end willed
Peter to go to the Sea, and to cast in an angle, and take the first fish that
comes up, and in his mouth he should find a piece of twenty pence, that take
and give unto them for thee and me. And Paul wills the Ephesians to pray for
them, even Mat. 17. 27.
then, when like Manasses, they powered out blood like water, and 1 Timothy 2. 1.
made Towns and Cities swim with blood, as he did Jerusalem: when like the
Chaldees they gave the dead bodies of Gods 2 Reg. 21.
servants unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of his Saints unto the
beasts of the field. When like Antiochus they burnt all Psalm. 79. 2.
Libraries, and consumed the days of the Christians like smoke Psalm. 102. 3.
6. 9.
and their bones burnt, like an hearth; when they were like Pelicans in the
wilderness, and like Owls in the deserts; when they did eat ashes like
bread, and mingled their drink with weeping. And to show the constant practice
of this, not to go back, like the shadow of Ezechias his dyall, to the time
of the Law; that the Jews are commanded to pray for Nabuchadnezzar and the
peace of Babylon; yet Babylon was as the destruction of God in Sodom and
Gomorah: the Arabian did not pitch his tent there; Ier. 29.
but Ziim lodged there, their houses were full of O him; Ostritches dwelt
there, and Iim did cry in their palaces, and Dragons in their pleasant palaces.
Esa. 13. 20, 21, 22.
As for Nabuchadnezzar, as he was a man, he deserved not the name of a man, but
of a beast; yet as he was a King, he is Dan. 4.
called Theservant of the highest God; and in his peace, they have Rebellion is
against nature.
peace.

Tertullian shows, what affection and love the former Christians carried to
the Magistrate, they were so far from despising In Apologetico.
government, that they said, Oramus pro Imperatoribus, ut det Deus illis vitam
prolixam; imperium tutum, aulam securam, exercitus fortes, orbem pacatum,
Senatum sidelem, etc. we pray for the Emperors, that God would give them a
long life, a safe government, a sure dwelling, valiant Soldiers; a peaceable
world, a faithful council, etc. And yet the Christians then were as sheep
appointed unto the slaughter; the rivers were did red with blood, the Romans 2.
hangman weary with killing, their swords were blunt, caedebantur, ligabantur,
torquebantur, they were beaten, bound, tormented, alii Aug. de Civitat. dei 22.
cap. 6.
ferro perempti, alii flammis exusti, alii flagris verberati, alii vectibus
perforati, alii cruciati patibulo, alii vivi decoriati, alii vinculis
mancipati, Rubanus.
alii linguis privati, alii lapidibus obruti, alii frigore afflicti, alii fame
cruciati, alii truncatis manibus, aliisue caesis membris spectaculum
contumeliae, nudi propter nomen Domini pottantes, etc. that is, some were
slain with the sword, some burnt with fire, some with whips scourged, some
stabbed with forkes of iron, some fastened to the cross or gibbet, some drowned
in the Sea, some their skins plucked off, some their tongues cut out, some
stoned to death, some killed with cold, some starved with hunger, some their
hands cut off, or otherwise dismembered, have been so left naked to the open
shame of the world, etc. yet still they were obedient to government. So Ambrose
and the Catholics of Millane, resisted not Valentinian, and Justinian in the
rage of the Arrians; but cried, Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus; hic, hic,
occidito, si placet, arma nostra sunt preces and lachrymae; we pray Augustus,
we fight not; here, here, kill us if thou please, our weapons are prayers and
tears. So said Hermogenes, when the Emperor would have had him to worship an
image, Da mihi veniam Imperator, minaris tucarcerem, Deus Gehennam, etc. Pardon
me, o Emperor, thou threatnest prison; but GOD, hell; thou, the confiscation
of my goods, but God the damnation of my soul; Obedirem tibi, nisi quod
obediam Domino, I would obey thee, but I must first obey GOD: our lives, our
liberty, our goods are subject to the Magistrate, we must not then Despise
Government, but obey.

Rebellion of all sins shows the corruptions of our nature yea rebellion,
and contempt of government is unnatural: for God has madea chiefty in all
things, and every thing keeps his place. Among the Angels there be Cherubins,
and Seraphins: Esa. 6.
among the Planets, the Sun is the chief, and the rest borrow their light
from him: among the fowls, the Eagle: aamong the beasts, the Lion: among the
Serpents, the Basiliske: among the Fishes, the Whale: among the VVethers there
is Job 38.
a leader, a Bell-wether; among the Cranes, there is one as a Rebellion is a
resisting of Gods ordinance.
Captain, that goes before the rest: In a flock, there is dux gregis, a
leader: in an hive of Bees, there is a master-Bee: the very Pismyres have their
Governor; and the Grashopers go forth by bands. And has not God made a
chief, a Ruler among men? Absit, God forbid, therefore that we should despise
govenment. Prove. 30. 27.
Therefore to three things that order well their going, Solomon adds a
fourth, that is, to a Lion, which is strong among beasts, and turns not at
the sight of any: to a lusty Greyhound and a Goat he adds a King, against
whom there is no rising up: Per deum Reges regnant, By God Kings reign;
Princes decree justice, by him Princes rule, and the Nobles and all the Judges
of the earth. Promotion and honor comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the North nor from the South, but it is God that lifts up
one, and pulls down another: There is no power but of God, the powers that
be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists Romans 13. 1. 2.
the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
to themselves judgment. Not only the punishment of the Governors, but also
the vengeance of God. And God has Numb. 16.
famously revenged this sin, as ever any: As upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
they lifted not up their hands, but their mouths against Moses, and the earth
opened, and swallowed them quick to Hell. Absalom rebelled against his father,
but Gods vengeance followed him, and overtooke him, for he was hanged, betwixt
heaven and ear^h, the earth vomited him out, and the heavens would not receive
him. And it was finely said of Iezabel, 2 Samuel 18. 9.
though otherwise a vile creature; Had Zimri peace that slew his master Of late
time Ralph Duke of Suevia confessed, that he had lost that 2. Reg. 9. 31.
hand in battle, that had sworn obedience to Henry the fourth, his master:
(...), Anarchy and Disorder, have ever been the bane of all Kingdoms and
Commonwealths; (...), confusion, brings (...) misery, but (...) good order
is (...) prosperity, then Kingdoms flourish. All the villainies and iniquities
of Israel are imputed to this, Non erat Rex, there was no King Judge. 19. 21.
in Israel. Magistrates have a spark of Gods Majesty in them, or rather a
reflection of a spark of Gods power, and so extensive are called Gods; I have
said that ye are Gods, and that ye all are the children Psalm. 82. 1.
of the most highest. They be Gods; 1. by Analogy: 2. By Deputation: 3. By
Participation.

First, by Analogy; for as God has his seat of judgment in Heaven, so
these, their tribunals, and judicial thrones, wherein to judge the actions of
men; Tanquam in hoc Deum imitantes, as Theodor. in Psalm. 81.
it were imitating God in this, and their authority though it be not
transcendent, yet without control of any, save of the Rex Regum, the King of
Kings.

Secondly, they be Gods by deputation; Ye judge not for men, but for the Lord,
says Iehosaphat: The judgment is Gods, says Moses. 2 Chro. 19. 8.
Magistrates are his mouths to pronounce, and his hands to Anabaptists and
Papists enemies to magistrat^y.
execute it.

Thirdly, Gods by Participation, because God deals with them as Kings and
Princes do with their children, to whom they communicate some part of their
glory. Participando sunt Aug.
dii, they be Gods, in participating with God, As Stars participate their
light from the Sun, the primum lucidum: So these their authority from the
supreme Majesty.

God has two hands, by the one he governs in the commonwealth; the other in
the Church; by the one he reaches good things unto the body, by the other, to
the souls, that is, by magistrates and ministers. By some magistrates he
reaches peace, by some wealth, by some order, by some Justice, by some Mercy:
For the magistrate is like the frog, called Borexo, which has two Livers, one
for poison, the other for treacle: So the magistrates has two hands; one for
justice, the other for mercy: his song is of mercy and judgment, habet poenam
and proemium, Vt apis habet mel and Psalm. 101. 1.
aculeum. He has punishment and reward, as the Be has both honey and a sting.

But to speak properly, magistrates are fingers of that great hand, that
rules the World, yet some think the magistracy began in Lucifer, for which
they quote, Esai. 14. Esa. 14.


And that it was seconded by the Giants in Genesis 6. and continued by Nimrod that
mighty Hunter; and enlarged by the Genesis 6. cap. 10. 11.
(...) Fighters against God, that builded the tower of Babel. But it is evident
to all the World that it came from God, who governed his own people, sometimes
by Prophets, as by Moses and Aaron; For he led his people like sheep by the
hands of Moses and Aaron: Sometime by Judges, and that four hundred and thirty
Psalm. 77. 20.
years together; sometime by Kings; sometime by Princes, Act. 13. 1 Samuel 1.
11. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Romans 13. 1.
as after the captivity. And Saint Peter says, Honor all men, love brotherly
fellowship, fear God, and honor the King: For the powers that are, are
ordered and ordained of God, and There is no power but of God, sive jubente,
sive sinente, quoth Augustine, by Aug. contra ^au^^um ma^^^haeum libro cap. 7.
Gods either commission or permission, the persons sometime are intruders, as
in case of Usurpation; sometime abusers of their authority, as when they
Tyrannize, but the powers themselves have God for their Author. Saint Peter,
indeed calls them, Humane ordinances; but he speaks of the several forms,
not of the substance of government. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
But to let all this go here I am to deal with two sorts of men, that be
enemies to magistrates, and as I may say, Despise government the one the
Anabaptist; the other the Papists; For these two hell hounds join together
against the Magistrate: like Sampsons Foxes, that were tied by the tails, and
burnt up the corn of the Philistines: Like the two shee-beares that came out
of the wood and devoured the children of Bethel like Ephraim and Manasses
against Judah: like Herod and Pilate against Christ. And no marvel. For these
two like the Edomites, The manifold benefits that come to the Church by
magistracy.
and Babylonions, shake hands in many sins. The Anabaptist despise the Word,
flying to Revelations: The Papist condemn it, as insufficient, sending us to
Tradition; For the Jews had their Thalmud, the Turks their Alcoran, the
Anabaptist Judge. 15. 2 Reg. 2. Esa 9 Mat. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Revelations, the Papist Traditions; the Protestants Scripture. The Anabaptist
rejects Baptism utterly: the Papist defiles it with Grease, Cream, Oil:
the Anabaptist, denies the whole supper of the Lord, the Papist mingleth it,
giving but the half only unto the people. The Anabaptist denies all
Magistracy: the Papist subjecteth it to the Pope. The Anabaptist object that
the Kings of Judah were figures of Christ, and therefore now ceased. Which is
true in part, for in part they were shadows and figures but yet they were more
than figures: For the Levitical Priesthood took Hebr. 9.
an end, but the Political government has no end. For the office of Kings is
established: Honor the King (says the Apostle) and Paul reckoning 1 Pet. 2.
13. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
up the gifts of God for the right ordering of the Church in the New Testament,
mentions Governmentes; that is, gifts of government. Romans 13. 4.
The title of Magistrates is to be Ministers of God, their end and use the good
of the Church, Paul's counsel is to pray for Kings and those in authority, that
they may be converted? Withal he intimates the good uses flowing from their
conversion: Peace, Honesty, Godliness to the people of God, their government
therefore is not to be despised.

To conclude this point, it is promised as a blessing to the Church of the New
Testament, that she should have Kings, her nursing fathers and Queens, her
nursing mothers. And at the conversion of Constantine to Christianity, this
promise was accomplished, and never before, except to suck the blood of the
Church, were to be nurses unto the Church. It remains then, that magistracy
has Gods ordinance to commend it, to the perpetual use of the Church, and
Commonwealth, unto the end of the World.

But to proceed still with these Anabaptists, they condemn the sword utterly,
and think Excommunication to be the last punishment that can be in a Christian
Church: Which is true in respect of God, and the soul, but not in respect of
men, and their bodies; 1 Cor. 5. 5. Esra 10.
For one man was punished both by loss of goods civilly, and by separation
from the congregation: Which was spiritual.

The Magistrate may punish him, who despises the censure of the 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Romans 13. 4.
Church; For they are appointed for the punishment of evildoers. And he is the
minister of God To take vengeance, of them that do evil. Even so they deny all
use of weapon and all war, Nam arma nostra, (inquiunt illi) sunt praeces and
lachrimae, our weapons are prayers and tears. They alleged the words of our
Savior, By your patience Luke 21. 19
possess your souls. And the words of Paul, Be not overcome of evil but
overcome evil with goodness. And again, they alleged the The Pope depose
some, rail on others, and despise all Magistrates.
words of the Prophet of God Esaias, They shall break their swords into
mattockes, and their spears into Sithes, Nation shall not lift up a sword
against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more. At Magistratus
gerit gladium, says Paul; the Magistrate bears the sword; And Saint John
bids not soldiers deponere gladios, to lay away Romans 12. 21. Esa. 2. 4.
Romans 13. 4. Luke 3. 14. Acts 10.
their swords, but to do violence to no man, neither to accuse any falsely,
and to be content with their wages. Neither did Peter bid Cornelius leave his
warring. Other vile heresies they have, they deem it to be a Church without
excommunication, they deny all use of an oath; which heresies first spread by
Coppine and Quintinus in France, and Persevallus and Pocquinus in Germany; have
infected many, as Monsieur Johannes Lidencis Kinperdoline; who raised wars
wherein perished 100000. men in Germany.

Secondly, the Papists clip the wings of all Magistracy, subjecting them to the
Italian Priest, making him the Ministerial head of the Church calling him Deum
terrenum, an earthly God; Harding.
Qui ligat Regis in catenis, which binds Kings in chains, and Nobles in
linkes of iron, as it is in the Psalm 149. 8. Who justifies the dealing of
Innocentius the third, against King John; and that of Alexander the third,
against Fredricke the second; and that of Clemens the seventh, against Henry
the eighth; and that of Pius Quintus against our Queen. Now Allen compares
the Priesthood to the Sun, the Princedome to the Moon, that receives light
from the Sun; the Priesthood to the soul, the other to the body, which is
quickened of the soul; the one to gold the other to lead, a course metal.
Pighius dat principibus potestatem facti, non juris, power to see Laws
executed, not to make them. All late Papists have railed on the Queen in the
spirit of Shemei, their tongues cut like rasors, their words are as the coals
of Juniper; for Bristowe in his sixth motive calls the Queen a Schismaticke,
her Nobles Heretics, her peo^^e Apostataes; Sanders says, that, Haeretica
princeps, non est ^^^nceps, Libro 2. cap. 4. de visibili monarchia.
an Heretical Prince, is no Prince; to which he adds ^^e Minor, that the
Queen is heretical; now then ye can ^^t to the Conclusion. Mark the feature
of this Cub, look upon the face of this Babe, and tell me who is his Sire; did
ever any Protestant hold the like? Rebellion is not a fruit of the Gospel (as
says Staphilus) but a whelpe of that popish litter, an egg of that
Cockatrices nest; the most treasons and rebellions have sprung from Papists,
upon this ground, that the Pope may depose Princes, ad placitum, at his
pleasure.

Thus Henry the second was made a private man, and restored to the Crown by
the Popes Legate Pandulphus: King John was deposed and at the last poisoned:
Cardinal Poole stirred up the Emperor and French King against Henry the
eighth: Anselme ^he Archbishop of Canturbury set himself against King William:
Thomas Arundell Archbishop set himself against Henry the second; Popish
Bishops have deposed Princes.
Richard Scroope Archbishop of York was in field against Henry the fourth;
Stephen Lancton Archbishop of Canturbury interdicted the whole Land, and made
the King become the Popes tenant. I need not to speak of Parrie, Somervile,
Ardington, Babington. No treason in this Queens days, but has issued from
Popery, as from the Trojane horse. Let the Prince of Orange speak; let Condie
speak; let Henry the third, the French King speak, murdered of a Iacobine;
let Henry the fourth speak, murdered by Raviliacke: let all the world speak,
and they will say, that all these late troubles for five hundred years past,
since the days of Hildebrand, may be ascribed to Popes and Papists. All
Graecia yet rueth it; all Africa the mother of Martyrs feels it; the Germane
Emperors with foul treading upon their necks, may not forget it, the Kings
of France felt it, till pragmatica sanctio was made; the States of Italy have
bin shaken with it; the Kings of England have been poisoned, whipped, murdered;
did Gardener Tonstall, Bonner, who forswore the Pope in Henry 8. days, show
any truth in Queen Mary's days? Remember the massacre in France, and the late
murders in Cleveland and Germany, and the Low Countries, since Gregory the 13.
days. This Axiom is holden, Da mihi cor tuum, fili, give me thy heart my son;
and the Papists reserved for a further mischief. Yet Stapleton is not ashamed
to charge Luther, that he said, That a good Prince was Rara avis, a seldom
bird, that most of them are either principal fools, or the most wicked knaves
on the earth; but this is proper to Papists to speak thus.

But it is worth your noting, that Jude says not, they deny authority and
government, as the Anabaptists do, as you have heard but they despise it, they
shall put it out of his place, and they shall (...), take away even government
it self, challenging it to themselves. And has not the man of sin, and
son of (...) done thus? Gregory the 7. excommunicated Henry the 4. ^^imated
his Subjects to rebellion, and when as by these means ^e could not prevail,
he went about secretly to murder him, and ^o that end hired one, to let a stone
fall from the top of the Church upon the Emperors head, as he was a praying;
but God prevented the practice, by punishing the murderer, who was crushed in
pieces with the same stone. Paschalis the 2. raged in the same manner, against
the said Emperor, and in the end, caused his own son to rebel against him.
Clemens the 5. excommunicated Francis Dandalus, Duke of Venice, and tied him
like a dog about the neck with a collar to gather crumbs under his table: Vrbane
the 4. dispossessed Conrade son to Conrade the Emperor of the Kingdom of
Sicilia, and gave it to Charles Earl of Anjou: Boniface the 8. (of whom it is
said, Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut Canis, that he entered
like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a dog) offered the French King
Philips Where no government is there is confusion.
kingdom to Albertus the Emperor: Zachary deposed Childerick the French King,
and placed Pipine: Celestine crowned the Emperor Henry the 6. with his foot,
and with his foot pusht it off again: Hildebrand caused Henry the 4. to stand
three days at his gates barefooted and bare-legged, before he would open his
gates unto him. Thus have they tossed government up and down, and have put
them out of their places, Chrysostom and Tertullian call them, the chief men
of the earth, and next to God, and Saint Peter (...) the most excellent. Our
latter Papists 1 Pet. 2. 13.
call civil Magistrates, carnal Lords; humane creatures; and is not this to
take away (...), sovereign and supreme authority from them that ought to have
it? which Jesus Christ denied to his Ministers and servants, saying, The Kings
of the Gentiles Luke 22. 25.
bear rule over them, and they that bear rule over them, are called gracious
Lords, but you shall not so.

Let us therefore Brethren, be subject to the higher power and never despise
government; Let us subject our selves to every ordinance of Ro^. 13. 1.
man for the Lords sake: For by them we reap much good; for governors are
appointed of God, For the punishment of evil doers, but 1 Timothy 2.
for the laud of them that do well, under them we lead, a quiet and a godly
life; and where as there is no government, there is no order; and whereas there
is no order, Ibi ruinae ostium patet, the door is open to ruin and
destruction. Hereupon says a Father, Malum quidem est, ubi est nullus
principatus, etc. It is a passing evil, whereas there is no government; for
take from the Quier the Chanter, and the Song will neither be in good tune, nor
in good order; take from the Soldiers the Captain, and the same cannot march
on, either in due number, or decent manner; take from the Ship the Pilote, and
it must needs miscarry; take from the flock the Shepherd, and they must needs
be scattered, and so take from the people Governors, and they must come to
destruction, ye see therefore the good of Government.

And to disobey, oras Jude speaks, To despise Government, it is dangerous:
Paul says, They that resist shall receive to themselves Romans 13.
damnation. And he reckons up disobedient persons among those, that shall not
come into the Kingdom of God. I will conclude Gal. 5.
with the admonition of Solomon, My son fear the Lord, and the King, and
meddle not (on any pretense) with them that are seditious; Prove. 24. 21.
and despise not government; If Governors be impious, pray for their piety; if
tyrannous, pray to God to inspire them with clemency: Pray for Kings (says
Paul,) yea though they were such as Gentiliter vixerunt, lived Heathenishly,
says Optatus Milenitanus.

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. IX. Yet Michael the Archangel, when he strove against the Devil, and
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but
said, the Lord rebuke thee. Raylers confuted by Michael the archangels example.



THese words contain the confutation of those heady and unruly spirits that
despise government; and he confuteth them two ways: first, Michaell the
Archangell would not rail in a dispute, between him and Satan, how dare then
these pesants, base and vile men, take upon them to speak evil; for there is
no comparison between men and Angels; for God has made men lower than the
Angels; indeed in the last day, our Psalm. 8. 5. Mat. 22.
honor shall be like unto them, but not till then.

Secondly, Michael and the Angels durst not rail on the Devil, that cursed
creature, how dare then these chips, and draine of the people, and skum of the
world, rail on Rulers and dignities, ordained of God.

Or, the reason may thus be contracted: An Archangell would not give judgment,
these men judge and censure all estates; an Archangell dispute, these condemn,
hearing no cause; an Archangell durst not rail, these dare speak all evil;
for Pride is a chain unto them, and cruelty covers them as a garment. They
are Ps. 73. 6. 8, 9.
licentious, and speak wickedly, they talk presumptuously. They set No
Scripture lost that is necessary for salvation.
their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walks through the earth.

This History, Totidem syllabis, is not recorded in the Bible, and yet we must
not think that Jude fained it, but rather, that there is much Scripture lost,
which we have not, seeing that Antiochus in the Law, and Dioclesian in the
Primitive Church, burned the Scriptures, and all Libraries, we want the Book
of the battles of the Lord, mentioned by Moses; the Book of the righteous,
Numb. 21. 14.
cited by Joshua; and we want much of the Chronicles of Israel Ios. 10. 13. 2
Reg. 16.
and Judah, we have not the Books of Shemaiah the Prophet, and Iddo the Seer,
the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and the Book 2 Chronicles. 12. 15.
of the Prophecy of Ahiah, we want many of Salomons Books, who wrote of
beasts, stones, herbs, trees, from the Cedar of Lebanon to the Hysope on the
wall, as you may read, 1 Reg. 4. Origin 1 Reg. 4. Origin lib. ^ de principiis.
says that this Text was taken from a Book called (...) the Ascension of
Moses, so say Clemens Alexandrinus, Didimus and Athanasius: For, so say they,
Paul alleged Epimenides, Aratus, and Menander; why might he not then quote
this saying. Others saw that it was delivered by tradition from hand to hand;
Tit. 1. 12. Act. 17. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 23. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
So Iannes and Iambres are named, and that speech uttered by the Apostle,
Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he said, It is a blessed thing
to give, rather than to receive; It is not orderly so written in any place of
Scripture, yet it is gathered by diverse places Acts. 20. 35.
in effect.

Papists here cry out that Jude alleged some profane Author or some
tradition; ergo, non solum haerendum est Scripturis, therefore we must not
only cleave unto the Scriptures. I confess, Paul cited some things from
profane Writers, but it was not to confirm any dogmaticall conclusion
concerning faith and belief; for as touching these things they cited only the
Scriptures; but when they came to entreat of manners, then they borrowed some
things of the Ethnicke and Heathen, and that to this end to shame Christians.
But Christ said, Scriptum est, it is written, non traditum est, not is it a
tradition. Thus Sadnele answered Turrianus; and so I in this cause answer
Stapleton, Staphilus, and the Jesuits.

Michael is here named, who is also named by Daniel, and by Dan. 12. 2. Apoc.
12. 7.
Saint John; this Michael is here called an Archangell; but I will first speak
concisely of Angels, then of Archangels. In the Scripture five good Angels are
only named: The first is Michael, as here in this my Text, and also by the
Prophet Daniel; the Dan. 10. 13. Dan. 8. 16. Luke 1. Esdr. 4.
second was Gabriel, named also by the Phrophet Daniel, and by the Evangelist
S. Luke, as it appears in his Gospel; the third is Raphael, of whom ye may
read in the history of Tobias; the fourth was Vriel, mentioned in Esdras 4. the
fifth was Ieremiel recorded in the 4. of Esdras 5. yet there be infinite good
Angels; For Thousand thousands minister unto him, and ten hundred thousand
stand Diverse Angels named, their office and order.
before him. These Angels pitch their tents round about us, they keep in our
ways, they rejoice at the conversion of sinners, they behold the face of our
heavenly father; they carry our souls into Abraham's bosom: they be ministering
spirits, sent forth for their Dan. 7. 10. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 91. Luke 15. Mat. 16.
22. Hebr. 1. 14.
sakes, that be heirs of salvation: though we see not these Angels, for they
be spiritual and intellectual substances, yet they attend upon us, they ride,
and journey with us.

As there be Angels, so there be Archangels; as Michaell here is called an
Archangell. How he came to be an Archangell, there be differences in opinion,
but I will pass that over with silence. Some learned men think, that by the
Archangell is meant Christ, and that there is no other Archangell but he; but
others, think that one and the same spirit may have both the name of an Angel
and an Archangell, by reason of a greater or lesser work of God committed to
him of God: so says Basil, a celestial spirit is called Basil lib. 3.
adversus Eunomium.
an Archangell, when being accompanied with other Angels in the work of the
Lord, he is a guide and Leader to them, Nam inter Angelos est ordo, there is
an order among Angels. So we read Esa. 6. Pro. 25. 27.
of Cherubins and Seraphins. But I will not be curious, where God has kept
secret; Honey is good, but too much honey is not good, Praestat dubitare de
occultis, quam litigare de incertis; It is better to doubt of secret things,
than braugle about incertaine.

As for this disputation betwixt Michael and Satan, it was not feigned but true
and real, not corporal, but spiritual, they have not Vocem articulatam an
articulate voice, they be spirits, and Genesis 18.
have neither flesh nor bones as we have, and so consequently neither tongue
nor mouth to speak, or dispute with; yet God gives them speech, and so they
spoke to Abraham.

As men fight with swords, spears, and staves, so the spirits good and bad
contend with spiritual weapons, as with will, understanding, and memory. We
read of four notable contentions, between the good and bad Angels; the first
in Heaven, for says Saint John, I saw a great battle in Heaven, Michaell and
his Angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his Angels fought
Apoc. 12. 7.
and prevailed not. The second, in the Kingdom of the Persians, when as the
Angel of the Persians resisted Gabriel one and Dan. 10. 13.
twenty days. The third, in the house of Raguel, where Asmodaeus Tob. 6.
was vanquished by Raphael. The fourth and last, in mount Nebo, upon the top of
Pisgah and of this battle speaks Jude in this present Deuteronomy. 34. 1.
place.

The matter of this strife was, that the Devil took upon him to reveal the
Sepulcher of Moses, whom God buried secretly, lest the Israelites should commit
idolatry with it, as they did with the Numb. 21*
brazen Serpent which cured the stings of the fiery Serpents. So Jerome
speaks of the grave of Hilarion how sixteen blind men received Ier:
sight there. Eusebius of Spiridions daughter, how she rose from Eusebius.
the dead, to tell of things lost. So Ambrose speaks of the tomb Satan
desire to deceive with false apparicions.
of Saint Agnes, and of Gervasius and Prothisius, how that their bodies were
full of blood, and their bones full of marrow, a hundred years after their
burial: And there is no end of this madness, Ambr.
God seeing this, hid Moses body lest the people should worship it: and Satan
labored to reveal it, that thereby he might bring the people to idolatry: For
Satan will move every stone to set up idolatry, yea even Moses body.

But concerning Moses body, we learn first, that it is said, That Deuteronomy. 34 6.
the Lord buried him: and therefore to bury the dead is no contemptible work,
it is a work fit for Gods Minister. Again, it should seem, that no man knew
the grave of Moses, yet the Devil knew where it was: and therefore because
Moses was one, whom the Jews being alive did greatly reverence. For he was a
Preacher, Mighty in word, and in deed, the Devil would have made an Idol of
his body, and have the people worship it, being dead. So then we may learn
that if God would not have Moses body worshipped, much less the image of
Moses, or any Saint.

Again, if the Devil would have had Moses body, to beguile the people, the
which he could not have, then no doubt, that which he can have, he will not
omit; that is, to take upon him Moses shape, or the shape of a Saint, or an
Angel to beguile us withal. Therefore let every good man say with Paul; We
are not ignorant of Satan's wiles: we know his fetches, his devices, he took
upon him 2 Cor. 2. 11.
the shape of Samuel, the shape of an Angel, therefore I will believe 1 Samuel
^8. 14
no apparisions no revelations: I will only rest upon the Word, wherein is
contained all things nessarie to salvation.

But in that Satan durst contend with Michael an Archangell, see his boldness
and cruelty; he labors to seduce men and Angels, For He was a murderer
from the beginning: so that he is like John 8. 44.
an old hangman flesht in blood and cruelty; Christ calls him the Envious
man, and Saint Peter calls him, a roaring Lion he roareth in Court, in
Country, in Cities, in Cloisters, in Shops, Mat. ^3. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
and Warehouses, in Schools and Universities, Vbique praedam quaerit, every
where he seeks for his prey, John calls him the red Dragon, which had
seven heads, and ten horns, and he names him Appollyon and Abaddon. So it
is said that the beast spoke by the Apoc. 12. Apoc. 9. Apoc. 13. Job 1.
mouth of a greater beast, meaning the Devil. Thus we read, that he did set
upon Job, only for that he feared God: after the return from Babylon,
presently he set upon Iehosua, but the Lord reproved him, even the Lord that
has chosen Jerusalem. But this is most strange, that he durst encounter with
Christ. He came unto him, and said, If thou be the Son of God command these
stones be made zach. 3. 1, 2. Mat. 4 3. Ephesians. 6. 12.
bread, etc. Paul says that we Wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against worldly governors, against the governors of
the darkness of this world, etc. All this I speak to arm us against Satan;
For we must enter into a battle with him, Railers are the devils agents.
he that spared not an Angel, yea an Archangell, will not spare men. Tentat
diabolus, sed aliud est intus regnare, aliud extra oppugnare; fortis hostis
munitissimam civitatem oppugnat, sed non expugnat; August. Tract. 52. in John.
omnes potest diabolus ad malum invitare, non tamen trahere delectationem
infert, non potestatem; consilium ingerit non conflictum. The Devil (says
Augustine) tempts, but it is one thing to reign within, and another to
assanlt without: this strong enemy oppugneth the most defenced City, but he
cannot expugne it, conquer it: The Devil may invite and allure all men to
evil, but not draw them; he may infer delight, not power; he may counsel
us, not enforce us. Satan may dispute, rail, curse, and blaspheme, but he
shall be answered, Debilis est hostis qui non vincit, nisi volentem, he is
but a weak enemy, he can vanquish none but such as are willing to be
vanquished. Ille suggerit, tuum est repellere, he suggesteth, but it is thy
part and duty to withstand all his suggestions. Ille disceptat, tuum est
respondere, he disputes, and thou must answer him; and Bernard Bern.
says, Diabolus est ut canis catena ligatus, latrare potest, non mordere.
Quoties illi restiteris, toties coronaberis, The Devil is like a dog tied,
he may bark, but he cannot bite; as often as thou resistest him, so often
shall thou be crowned. It is reported of Satan that he should say thus of a
learned man; Tu me semper vincis, thou do always overcome me; Cum enim te
volo exaltare, tuteipsum deprimis in humilitate, when I would exalt and promote
thee, thou keep thy self in humility, Et cum volo te de primere, and when I
would throw thee down, Tute erigis, (...): Heb. 10. 22.
thou liftest up thy self in assurance of faith.

But here note the modesty of Michaell; he would not rail, revile, nor curse
the Devil. It is probable, that the Devil raged, railed, used bad words, for
that is his nature; for he has a mouth full of blasphemies; And he opens
his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspeme his name and his tabernacle,
and them that Apoc. 13. 7.
dwell in Heaven. And in this respect, Goliath was a figure of the World, as the
host of Israel was a figure of the Church, and David that delivered it a figure
of Christ; and in this sense the Devil is called, Calumniator fratrum, the
accuser of our brethren, Apoc. 12. 10.
spiritus blasphemiae, the spirit of blasphemy, and he is called diabolus, by
reason of his foul mouth in railing, reviling, and misusing of Gods servants:
therefore it is said, that the three unclean spirits, like frogs came out of
the mouth of the Dragon, for they are ever croking, belching and railing upon
the Mat. 4. 2. Apoc. 16. 13.
Saints and Servants of the Almighty, but Michaell did not, Par pari refer,
return like for like, he gave not the Devil a railing sentence.

This teaches us moderation, patience, to lead men to God, ducere homines, non
trahere; to lead men, and not to draw them so much as we may. To this end Saint
Peter propounds Christ's We must learn meekness of Christ who taught it.
example; for Christ (says he) suffered for us, leaving us an example, that
ye should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was there guile found in
his mouth, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again: 1 Pet. 2. 21.
When he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him, that judges
righteously. Erat ut agnus coram tondente, he was as a Lamb before Esa^ 53.
the shearer, and opened not his mouth. Learn this mildness of Christ; learn
not of him to create a new world, to walk upon the Sea, to seed thousands of
men, with a few loaves and fishes, to cure creples, to cleanse leapers, to give
sight to the blind and limbs to the lame, to restore the deaf to their
hearing, and the dumb unto their speaking, to calm Seas, cease winds, expel
Devils, open graves, raise the dead, as he did Lazarus; but learn to be mild,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and Mat. 11. 29.
ye shall find rest unto your souls. The Poets propound unto themselves,
Homer, Hesiode, Demosthenes, Tully, Isocrates: The Philosophers propound Plato,
Aristotle, Porphyrie: and let Christians for mildness, propound to them Christ
Jesus.

One byword, is but a wry-word, Better a shrew than a sheep; but Christ was a
sheep, a Lamb, a Lamb that takes away the sins of the world: So we must
be Lambs, and not Lions; John. 1.
sheep, and not wolves; doves, and not dogs: For if we bark at one another,
We shall be devoured one of another. Saint Peter would have men to lay aside
all maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, Gal. 5. 15.
and envy, and all evil speaking. As a Serpent vomiteth up his poison, when he
goes to drink in a clear fountain; so should a 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Christian vomit up his malice, and all evil speaking; a railing sentence must
not come from him. Among all those dignities, that were offered Christ, none
touched him more nearly, than their raylings; his body was stretched out at
length upon the Cross, his hands and feet were peirced with nails, his head
crowned with thorns, his flesh rent and torn with whips, his side opened with
a spear, yet they that rayled on him, and bad him come down from the cross,
grieved him more than all the aforenamed tortures,

But we must not rail, but bless rather; for we are called to be heirs of
blessing, and therefore must not render evil for evil, 1 Pet. 8, 9.
or rebuke for rebuke; If any long after life, and to see good days; let him
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: though
others rail, yet must not we; nay, if we be railed upon, for the name of
Christ, blessed are we; For the spirit of God, and of 1 Pet. 4. 14.
glory rests upon you (says the Apostle.) And our Savior Christ to dissuade
us from railing, uses sundry reasons, Love your enemies (says he) bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that hurt you
and persecute you, that ye may be the Mat. 5. 44, 45.
children of your father which is in heaven; which makes his sun to arise on
the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and unjust. Let them
take heed, that use cursed speaking, railing and reviling, We must moderate
and keep our tongues from cursed speaking.
they are Satan's children, he is (...), that is, a slanderer: he was a
murderer from the beginning; a murderer in hand, a liar in tongue, if not in
himself, yet in his members; As he was against Moses, by Corah, Dathan and
Abiram; David, by Doeg, Jeremy, by the men of Anathoth; Paul, by Tertullus;
John Baptist, by Apoc. 12. 10. John 8. 44. Numb. 16. Psalm. 52.
the Scribes; yea, Christ by the Pharisees; but Dathan and his company perished
in an earthquake; Doeg was rooted out; the men of Anathoth were captivated;
the Scribes were confuted; the Pharisees put to silence. Maledicere est adeo
illicitum, ut peccatuin est maledicere diabolo, to speak evil, or to rail is
so unlawful that it is a sin to curse or banne the Devil. Michael would not
rail, no more ought we to rail or revile one another, when as difference
shall chance to arise amongst us, He that calls his brother fool
(contemptuously or opprobriously) is in danger of Hell Mat. 5. 22.
fire. And Saint Paul says, Let all sowernesse or bitterness, or wrath or
anger, and outcries, and blasphemies be quite taken from among you; with all
maliciousness; be courteous one to another, and pitiful, forgiving Ephesians. 4.
31.
one another, even as Christ forgave you. And in another place, Let your
patient mind be known to all men; The Lord is even at hand. As though he
should say, will ye be malicious, spiteful, reviling Phil. 4. 5.
your brethren, and the Lord is at hand; will ye be falling out one with
another, and his coming so near? And yet as Ephraim, was full of drunkards;
Crete full of liars; Ephesus full of Idolaters; so the world is full of
raylers: of whom it may be said, as Hierome said of Ioviman, Tacere nesciunt
quia nunquam didicerunt been loqui, they know not to be silent, because they
never learned Hierome.
to speak well. Erasmus speaking of this railing age, says, that there be
three things to keep the tongue in: First, it has many strings, these strings
should curb it in: Secondly, there is a double ditch of teeth: and thirdly,
two walls of lips; yet all will not hold in the tongue. Dimidiam partem
vitiorum in mundo sibi vendicat lingua, the tongue challenges half the vices
in the Gregor. Naziau.
world, for what vice almost flows not from the tongue, railing reviling,
lying, swearing, blasphemy, perjury, slander, etc. all these be the vices of
the tongue.

Hermophilus offending with his tongue, perpetuum silentium sibi indixit, in
joined his tongue perpetual silence. And Pambo in three months would not
speak, till he had learned the first verse of the 39. Psalm, which runs
thus, I said I will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. Et
melius est certe nil loqui, Psalm. 39. 1.
quam male loqui, It is much better to be silent, and to speak nothing, than
to speak evil: therefore says the Apostle, As elect of God, holy and
beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of Col. 3. 12, 13.
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another. Of all victories it is the greatest to forbear, being provoked.
Michael would not revile the devil, and will thou revile thy brother? yet many
pass not what they say, what speeches Mildness a means to stay a railing
tongue.
they give it, if they be offended. The Scholars of Pithagoras kept silence
for five years; it were to be wished, that these might be enjoined silence
always, except they could speak better. Epictetus reduced all virtues into two
heads, (...), abstain, sustain; and he reduces all vices into two heads,
Impatiency, and Incontinency; when injuries are not borne, nor pleasures
eschewed. Spirtus Dei neque mordax, the spirit of God, is neither a liar, nor a
biter, a rayler, let us then give courteous speeches, Not rendering evil for
evil, nor rebuke for rebuke. 1 Pet. 3. 9.


Again, hard words, railing, cursed speaking, hurt our selves and do no good
to the adversaries. Mollis sermo frangit iram, a soft answer puts down
displeasure; for as a Canon-shot is Prove, 15. 1.
repelled with wool, not with brass; as wildfire is quenched with milk, not
with water; as the Adamant is broken with the blood of a Goat, and not with an
hammer; as the wrath of an Elephant is appeased not with swords, but with
Mulberries: So malice is an adversary, in a rayler, is quenched with lenity,
not with reviling, like a Lion that is mitigated with the humbleness of a
beast unto him. Hereupon says Paul, If thine enemy Romans 12. 20.
hunger, feed him, if he thirst give him drink, for in so doing; thou shall
heap coals of fire on his head, that is, thou shall win him: Therefore says
Ambrose to Calligonus, Ego patior, and audiam, quod est Episcopi; I will suffer
and hear, which is the part of a Bishop. Tu ages and loqueris quae sunt
carnificis, thou do, and speak, which belongs to a murderer and cruel
person. Regium est audire mala, a quibus laudare esset pudor, it is a princely
thing to hear evil of them, of whom it is a shame to be commended. Leave them
to God; Dominos illos increpabit, the Lord shall rebuke them; yea, The Lord
shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud Psalm. 12.
3, 4.
things. Which have said with our tongues, we will prevail, we are they that
that ought to speak, Who is Lord over us? Shemei shall not ever 2 Samuel 16. 5.
Dan. 14. Dan. 6.
rail on David; the Judges shall not ever accuse Susanna; the idolaters shall
not ever speak evil of Daniel; Doeg shall not ever slander Abimelech; the
Arrians shall not always defame Athanasius, 2 Samuel 22.
as they did for Arsenius; God will make their innocence as Psalm. 37. 6.
the light, and their judgment as the noonday.

Here a question may be moved, whither a Christian may at any time curse, and
speak hardly to the wicked, and rebuke them. Some object, Levit. 19. Non
maledices surdo, Thou shall not curse the Levit. 19. 14.
deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind. They say that we may not
say Racha, or fool to our brother, much less may we Mat. 5.
use hard words, railing sentences: they quote Paul to the Romans; Bless them
that persecute you, bless I say, and curse not, Cum Romans 12. 14.
maledico, edere non licet, we may not eat with a rayler. They allege the
example of Christ: Who when he was reviled, reviled not 1 Cor. 5. 11.
again. And that of Paul, We are reviled, and yet we bless; We Lawful to
curse sin though not sinners.
are persecuted and suffer it, We are evil spoken of and yet we pray.

To all these I answer in two words, that in all speeches we must regard two
things: The goodness of the cause, and cleerenesse 1 Cor. 4. 12. 13.
of our mind: that we speak not of spleen, of affection, of revenge, but to
draw the party to remembrance. And so there is place left in the Church, as
well for Cursing as Blessing: for rough as for mild speech, so that Gods glory
be sought in the suppression of sin, Vt omne os obstruatur, that every mouth
may be stopped, and that all glory may be given to God. Thus we Genesis 3. cap.
9. Deuteronomy. 27.
read, that God cursed the Serpent, that Noah cursed Cham, of the twelve
tribes, six of them stood on Mount Garazim to bless, and six on mount Hebal
to curse, and all the people to say Amen. Jacob uttered a dire imprecation,
upon Simeon and Levy, saying, Curb Genesis 49. 7. Mat. 23. Mat. 13.
their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel. And lest
any should restrain this to time of the Law, Note that Christ pronounces many
woes against the Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites in one Chapter. And he
cried, woe to the impenitent, saying, Woe be to him, by whom offenses come. And
again, Woe be Mat. 11. Mat. 26.
to thee Corazim, Woe be to thee Bethsaida, etc. And again, Woe to that man
by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it were good for that man if 8 Cor. 16.
he had not been borne. And again, Woe to the World, because of offenses.
And Simon Peter cursed Simon Magus, saying, Thy money perish 2 Timothy 4. 14.
with thee. And Paul cried, Maranatha Anathema, to them that love not the Lord
Jesus? And he cursed Alexander the Coppersmith. Act. 13. 10. Genesis 49.
He has done me (says Paul) much evil; the Lord reward him according to his
works. And so he cursed Elimas the sorcerer and called him the Child of the
devil, an enemy to all righteousness. But yet we must curse the sins, not
the party. So Jacob cursed Apoc. 2*
the rage of his Sons, not themselves: So God hated the deeds of the
Nicholaitans, not the men. Yea sometimes both sins and men may be cursed, if
they give signs of reprobation; So the Church prayed against Julian, not for
him. And Saint John 1 John 5. 16.
tells us, that there is a sin unto death; I say not that thou should pray
for it.

But to leave all this: Michael striving with the Devil, durst not give him a
railing sentence, but says, The Lord rebuke thee. Let us learn this lesson of
Michael: in all reproaches and bitter speeches of our brethren, to say unto
them, The Lord reprove thee, for passion must not overmaster us: But these
railers we must answer, sometime with silence: for unto many natures, to
answer again, is to put fuel to the fire: for anger is fire, and words are
fuel: But if silence will not serve the turn then it is good to give place
unto it, I mean to go away from Rem. 12. 19.
a railing person, till his anger be over, and if that will not serve the
turn, then answer him: as Michael did here the Devil. The Lord reprove thee.
And in any wise take heed you provoke We must give account of idle, much more
of evil words.
not anger, for the forcing of Wrath brings forth strife, as the churming of
milk brings forth butter, and wringing the nose brings forth blood. Let us
therefore avoid the customary sins of passions, and not answer evil for
evil, or rebuke for rebuke, but say with Michael, The Lord rebuke thee, And
with David, Judge me o God, and Prove. 30. 33. Psalm. 43. 1.
defend my cause against the unmercifull people, (that is, the cruel company
of mine adversaries) deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man.

The Lord rebuke thee, This teaches us as to avoid all railing, so to study
carefully and diligently the government of the tongue and to beware of rotten
speeches. The mouth is the messenger of the heart, and from the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks. A filthy tongue argues a filthy heart, an
unbridled tongue a licencious heart; A poisoned tongue, that belcheth out
nothing but banning, and cursing, railing, and reviling speeches, does manifest
a cursed and corrupt heart. Our Savior says. A Mat. 12. 13*
good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth goodthings and
an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil
things: but I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. If then at the end of the
end of the world, and day of judgment, we must reckon and account for idle
words? How much more for our railing, reviling speeches? Let us therefore
hearken unto the counsel of the Apostle, Let not corrupt communion, proceed
out of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that may
Ephesians. 4. 29.
minister grace unto the hearers. We should be of a patient nature and follow
the example of Michael, who striving with the Devil, durst not give him a
railing sentence, but say, The Lord rebuke thee, If an Archangell abstain from
all railing, having to do with the Devil, the greatest enemy of God and his
people, we that have to do with bad men, must not take liberty to our selves
to use reviling speeches. We must commit revenge unto God who has said,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay.

THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
VERSE. X. But these speak evil of those things they know not, etc. Malice
turns men into dogs.



THis is the fourth note that he gives unto the wicked you shall know them by
their evil speaking: they are like unto blacke-mouthed Rabshakeh, they rail
on God and good men. He calls them first sleepers; secondly, defilers of the
flesh; thirdly, despisers of government, and here, raylers; they speak evil
of all things. As fire lies not long in the stubble or in the flax, but the
flame breaks out; so hatred lies not long in these men's hearts, but breaks
out in evil speeches, and many times, They will speak evil of things they
know not. Munster writes of men in India, Qui non loquuntur sed latrant, which
speaks not like men, but bark like dogs; so these bark like dogs against
the Moon. Gorgon turned men into stones, and Circe changed them into swine,
and malice turns these men into dogs: like Hecuba at the siege of Troy, for
their railing. David says, The wicked speak evil from their mothers womb,
even from their belly have they erred, and speak lies, their poison is even as
the poison of Psalm. 58. 3, 4.
a serpent, like the deaf Adder that stops her ear, that is, they pass in
malice and subtilty the crafty Serpent: the first thing they do, is to speak
evil; it is Alpha and Omega, first and last with them. As the serpent vomiteth
up her poison, before she drinks Malice in the heart ^he cause of railing in
the tongue.
of a clear fountain; so this is the sin that must be avoided before we
drink of the water of life, the Word of God, Lay aside (says the Apostle) all
maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation and envy, and all evil
speaking; as newborn 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

Among all the indignities that were offered unto Christ, this was not the
least, they nipped his cheeks, they buffeted his face they blinded his eyes,
they nailed his hands, they peirced his feet, they lanced his heart, but
especially they rayled on him, saying, He saved others, let him also save
himself, if he be the Christ, the Luke 23. 35, 36.
chosen of God. The Soldiers also mocked him, and came and offered him vynegar
(mixed with myrh and gal to hasten his death) and said, if thou be the King of
the Jews save thy self: Therefore we are willed to think upon him that
endured such speaking against of sinners. Heb. 12. 3.
As an image is not seen in water that is troubled, no more is truth in a mind
that is malicious, but it sends forth with violence all manner of evil
speakings. A soul mouthed, an evil tongued man, is worse than the devil; not
simply but in respect; For a man may avoid the devil; Resist the devil and
he Jam. 4. 7.
will fly from you, but we cannot resist a slanderer, a rayler. And albeit the
Apostles charge is, Speak not evil one of another, brethren; he that speaks
evil of his brother, or he that condemns his brother, Iam. 4. 11.
speaks evil of the Law, and condemns the Law. Yet the world is as full of
evil speakers, as Nilus of Crokadyles, as Sodom of Sulphur, and Egypt of
Lice. In conviviis rodunt, in circulis vellicant, maledico dente omnia carpunt.
It is salt to their meat to rail on men in feasts and bankets. A good name is
a precious ointment, and woe to them that bereave a man of it: many men's
tongues walk at random, and speak evil of the things they know not. Can the
wound be cured, so long as the iron remain in it? Can the iron be cold, so
long as it is in the Smiths forge? Can the River cease running, so long as the
Fountain flows? And can the tongue refrain from evil speaking, so long as
hatred boileth in the heart; Of the abundance of the heart, the mouth Luke 6.
45.
speaks: And as the water turns the wheel, so the heart the tongue.
Boethius says, Si ira, fremis Leo es: si fraud inniteris, Vulpes es: si
inconstans, Camaeleon es, si luxuriaris, porcus es, si convitiaris, Canis es;
if thou be greatly moved with anger, thou art a Lion; if thou delightest in
fraud, thou art a Fox; if thou be unconstant, thou art a Camaeleon; if
lecherous, a Hog; if foule-mouthed, or evill-tongued, a dog, and Beware of
dogs (says the Phil. 3. 2.
Apostle) they are always barking and biting, and snarling. One resembles a
foule-mouthed man, an evil speaker to the Basiliske; for as the Basiliske
kills the Bird that flies in the air with his breath: so does the evil
speaker kill men with his tongue. I will say of these foule-mouthed men, as
Hierom sometime said Brownists rail on our Church doctrine and Ministry.
of Iovinian; Tacere nesciunt, maledicere non cessant, nunquam enim been loqui
dedicerunt: they cannot hold their peace, they cannot cease from evil
speaking, they never yet learned to speak well. There is an art in speaking as
well as in writing; for there is (...), Right speaking, as well as (...), Right
writing, and both necessary.

Judge now of what spirit our Brownists be; as Christ said of his disciples,
that would have fire come down from Heaven and Luke 9. 35.
destroy Samaria, Ye know not of what spirit ye are: So they know not of what
spirits they be of; for all their eloquence stands in biting speeches, that
our Church is Babylon, Sodom, as Apoc. 11. 8. that our ministers, have the
mark of the beast, as Apoc. 13. 16. that our people, are swine, and dogs, as
Mat. 7. 6. that our Communion cup, is Calix diaboli, the cup of the Devil;
that Mensa Christi, is Mensa diaboli, the table of Christ is the table of the
Devil, as 1. Cor. 10. 20. our pulpits, be tubs, our Geneva Psalms, Gehenna
Psalms. But I will say to them, as one said, Hoc genus hominum ridere soleo,
non odisse: I am wont to laugh at these kind of men, not to hate them: they
think much to be touched in doctrine, but I will answer them, as Erasmus
answered, Longolius; deponant gladios, nos scuta abiiciemus; removeant venena,
nos antidoto uti cessabimus cessent maledicere, nos non regeremus; in hoc illis
consentire non possumus, ut pareamus schismaticis: Let them lay away their
swords, and we will throw away our shields, Let them remove their poison and
we will cease to use any Antidote; Let them refrain from evil speaking, and
we will not taunt again: In this we cannot consent unto them in their
schisms. I but say they, we are willed, To come out from Babylon, yea, and To
separate our selves, and to touch no unclean thing. I 2 Cor. 6. 14.
confess, Schismatikes interpret this discession locally, but the Fathers
understand it mentally and morally. The Prophets and Apostles proclaimed. Touch
no unclean thing, but how? Contactu cordis, non corporis. Does he that commit
sin, displease thee? thou touchest no unclean thing. Have thou charitably
rebuked him? thou art come out from him: yet they cry out we have no Ministers,
no Sacraments, no Church at all. What is their reason? our lives are not
answerable to the doctrine of the Gospel. Be it so, yet this is no reason, why
they should make discession from us. How corrupt was Jerusalem? so corrupt that
Esaias compares her to Sodom and Gomorah, yet he erected Esa. 1.
not new Altars, whereupon to offer sacrifice apart, but entered into the same
Temples, and celebrated the same Sacraments with them, while Moses received the
Law, in the mount the people made a Golden Calfe below in the valley, God
showed Exodus 32.
their idolatry to Moses, making an offer to destroy them, and to multiply him
to a greater and better nation. Had not Moses now a fair occasion of departing
from them, lest he should No men perfectly pure, no state totally corrupt.
touch any unclean thing, yet he leaves them not, but goes unto them,
reproves them, and makes intercession to God for them. How desperate was the
impiety of the Pharisees in the days of our Savior? Yet for all that, Christ
our Savior frequented their Temple, and would not forbear their religious
exercises. The Church of Corinth was defiled with many sins, and horrible
outrages, both in life and Doctrine, they were deriders, sectaries,
incestuous, prophaners of the Lords supper, denyers of the most essential
Article of the Resurrection; yet so long as the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments was not utterly rejected, Paul acknowledges them a glorious Church.
Certainly tares and unclean vessels are in the Church, yet let us endeavor
our selves to be good corn, and not go out of the Churh, but follow the
counsel of Augustine, Corripiat homo, quod potest, quod non potest, patienter
ferat, let a man reprove what he can (without danger of Schism) and what he
cannot, let him patiently suffer, but let him never make separation. For first,
in the Church, there be many more that fear God, and work righteousness,
than the outward eye can discern; this deceived Elias, but the foundation of
God stands firm, God knows who are his. Secondly, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
even of them that are vile and naught, some of them are touched with grief of
conscience for their sins, and hunger and thrist after righteousness.
Thirdly, a man is not to be condemned for some particular fact; for the
brightest fire has some smoke, the clearest water some mud, the face of Venus
a Molle; and the most heavenly affection, some infection of earth; In multis
peccavimus Iam. 3. 2.
omnes; In many things we offend all. But I may fitly apply that to our
Brownists and Separatists, which the religious Emperor said to one of that
humor, Si tam sanctus sis, etc. If you be so holy, that you will not
communicate in the Word and Sacraments with us, your even fellow Christians set
a ladder to the clouds, and clime up to heaven alone. In this point the
Donatists were ridiculous, who meeting in an assembly with the Catholics for
the allaying of some controversies, and being entreated by the Tribune to sit
down with the rest; answered, they stood of purpose, because it is written;
Cum sceleratis non sedebo, I will not sit down with the wicked. To whom Saint
Augustine wittily and effectually replied; Cur ergo ad nos intrare vobis non
fuit religio, etc. why then make you no conscience to enter the same place with
us; seeing it is written also in the precedent words, Ad mulignos non
ingrediar, I will not go unto the wicked, and with the ungodly I will not sit
down. But let the Brownists and all of the Separation leave their evil
speaking; let them return home to their mother the Church of England, for
doubtless The eye that mocketh his father, and despises the government Prove.
13. 17.
of his Mother, the Ravens of the Valleys shall pick it out, and the young
Eagles eat it, and so to leave our evill-speaking Separists. An evil speaker
is a murderer with his tongue.


By the way observe, that if men will do evil, they must hear evil; it is
no railing to rebuke him sharply, that does wickedly. Some finding fault with
Saint Augustine for his tartness and sharpness in reproving, answered
wittily; Emendate vitam, ego emendabo verba, mend you your ways, and I shall
mend my words. Cessate perverse agere, cease you from doing evil, and I shall
cease to reprove and rebuke. For where sin is rank and red. Boanarges the
son of thunder, is more necessary, than Barnabas the son of consolation.

They speak evil.

An evil speaker is a murderer; Et gladium portat in lingua non in vagina,
and the sword that murthereth with all, he carries in his tongue, not in his
scabbard. A man may say to these evil speakers, as Christ said to Peter, Pone
gladium in vagina, put up thy sword into thy sheath. These are like Cocks fed
with garlic that overcome others with rankness of breath, not with strength
of body; Vincunt clamore, non veritate, they overcome with clamours and
outcries, not with verity and truth. But if at the day of Judgment they must
give an account for every idle word, Mat. 12. 36.
what for their evil words? And if the wrath of God is wont to fall on the
children of unbeleefe, it must needs fall upon these evil speakers, for they
are altogether wrapped in unbeleefe. If Sodom and Gomorah were destroyed from
heaven, for sinning against nature? what vengeance remains for these evil
speakers, that offend the God of nature? If then Thou longest after life, and
would see good days, refrain thy tongue from evil, and thy Psalm. 34. 12,
13.
lips that they speak no guile. Pambo, a man utterly unlearned in the
Scriptures, on a time came to Saint Hierome to be taught some Scripture without
book, he turned him to the first verse of the 39. Psalm, I said I will take
heed unto my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. A lesson, that our evil
speakers will not learn, for they offend more in the tongue, than in hand,
foot, ear, eye, or any member besides; their tongues are like unto the sting
of Adders to a sword, yea a sharp sword, to a razor and to arrows; their
tongues are fire, yea a world of wickedness, being set on fire of Hell.

They speak evil of those things which they know not, etc.

They rail in their ignorance on things, which they know not: Scientia non
habet inimicum, praeter ignorantem, the birds have no such enemy as the Owl;
nor the Passenger no such enemy as the blind worm; nor the Mariner, no such
enemy as the Mermaid; so the learned, no such enemy as the ignorant. Saint
Peter speaking of the Epicures and Atheists of the world, says, They knew not,
and that willingly. And Paul said of the Gentiles, that they walked, In mentis
vanitate, in the vanity of their mind, having 2 Pet. 3. 5.
their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through
Diverse kinds of ignorance.
the ignorance that is in them. The like he said of the Idolaters, That they
were vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness, and when they professed themselves to be wise, they became Ephesians. 4.
17. Romans 1. 21, 22. Esa. 40. 21.
fools, etc. So Esaias said of the Jews, Know ye nothing? have ye not heard it?
has it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood it, by
the foundation of the earth. Thus Christ said of the Pharisees for denying the
resurrection; Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God.
Paul imputed all his malice Mat. 22. 29.
and his blasphemy to his ignorance; I was (says he) a blasphemer a
persecutour, an oppressor; but I was received into mercy, for that I did it
ignorantly, through unbeleefe. As there be degrees in sin, so is 1 Timothy 1. 13.
there a gradation in ignorance. It is a sin to be ignorant in that we should
know, but a greater to be ignorant in that we are bound to know.

There is Ignorantia Simplex and Affectata. Simple and affected Ignorance.
Or there is Ignorantia Ideotarum, of Idols Sophistarum, of crafty men.
Or as some Invincibilis, inconquerable. Vincibilis, conquerable.
Or as others Voluntaria, willing. Involuntaria, unwilling.
Or as others Negativa, negative. Privativa, privative.



There is an ignorance, not sinful, as in Adam, not to know his nakedness,
nor the serpents subtilty; in the Angels and Christ Genesis 3.
as man, not to know the latter day; Quia proprium est humanae naturae Mar. 13.
32.
futura ignorare, because it is the property of Humanity to be ignorant of
future things; and this is Ignorantia justa, lawful ignorance; but there is an
ignorance utterly unlawful, for it is sin, and the cause of sin, and
companion of the same. The Jews crucified Christ through ignorance, For if they
had known, Acts 3. 17.
they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. Why did the Samaritans so
rail on the Jews? Alas, they knew nothing: why John 4. 22. 1 Cor. 2. 7.
rayled the Princes on Christ? they knew him not: why did the Galathians revile
the Christians, in the point of Law? for that they knew it not: why do the
Brownists and Papists rail on us? Nesciunt Scripturas, they know not the
Scriptures. I say to them as Paul to the Galathians, Tell me ye that be under
the Law Gal. 4. 21.
do ye not hear of the Law, etc. So tell me ye that will under Antichrist,
do ye not know Popery? ye do not: why do the earth-wormes rail on us in
fayres, markets, tavernes, Nil sciunt, they know nothing. They may say with
Socrates, Hoc scio; quod nihil scio, this one thing I know, that I know
nothing. Hence came Anabaptisme from Rotman, Quintinus, Pocquinus, Persevallus,
being Ostlers, Chamberlaines, Tapsters, Cobblers, etc. Lucinus wished that his
writings might not be read, either of men too Means to come to true knowledge.
learned, or utterly unlearned; Quod alteri nihil intelligunt, alteri plus
fortasse quam ipse de se, because the one sort understood nothing, the other
understood perhaps more, than he understood of himself: So we would preach to
neither, Sed si optio daretur, If I might have my wish, we had rather preach
to the learned than to the ignorant, for we had rather be reprehended, than not
to be understood. Well is he, that preaches to an ear of understanding, and
not as Actaeon did to his dogs: Rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate thee, but
rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee; give Prove. 9. 8, 9.
admonition to the wise, and he will be the wiser, teach a righteous man, and
he will increase in learning. And indeed how should we have knowledge? we read
nothing; we search not the Scriptures; we attend not to reading, to
exhortation and doctrine: All our John 5. 29.
knowledge must come from hearing; which being so, our knowledge can be but
small, for we hear not a Sermon from one month to another, nor handle a
Book from one Sunday to another; and then our knowledge must needs be small;
for our ears are like a reedle or sieve, that can hold no water, or an
Unthrifts purse, that can hold no money. Saint Augustine commends unto us
four things, to bring us unto knowledge.

1. Reading. 2. Meditating. 3. Praying. 4. Contemplating.
Reading is an assiduous perusing of the holy Scriptures, joined with the
attentive hearing of the Word preached. The Eunuch was a diligent reader of the
Prophet Esaias: The Disciples Acts 8. 27.
of Troas heard Paul preach until midnight; The Nobles of Berea received the
Word with readiness: But these men hear little, Act. 17. 11.
read less.

Meditating is an earnest employment of the mind, a thing straightly commanded
and commended; Let not the Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but
meditate therein day and night. For Ios. 1. 8.
blessed is the man that does delight in the Law of the Lord, and in that Psalm.
1.
Law does meditate day and night. But our meditations are not settled upon the
Law and Ordinances of the Almighty.

Prayer is a lifting up of the mind to God craving his blessings, and praising
him for his mercies, reading enquireth, meditation finds, prayer requesteth,
but contemplation tastes how sweet and gracious the Lord is. Ye know, that it
is the Commandment of the Lord, Seek, and ye shall find; knock Mat. 7.
and it shall be opened unto you: If we seek by reading, we shall find by
meditating, if we knock by praying, it shall be opened unto us by
contemplating: but these neither seek by reading, nor find by meditating, nor
knock by praying; they are as horse and mule; in whom there is no
understanding: For they Motives to stir up to use the means to get knowledge.
Speak evil of things they know not. Luther said, if there be a Paradise in
this earth, it is in Churches of preaching, or schools of learning, so that
we have grace to learn in them. They were wont to say, give a man learning
and turn him loose; but that Proverb was bred in another age, when learning
was more esteemed, Quando erat rarior, and carior, when it was more rare and
dear: but this is a time of ignorance, whetein men rail on all the works of
God, for want of knowledge: but this is a desperate disease, and for me let it
grow till it be rottenness in their bones. I speak not in hope of amendment,
but to bear witness of their sin, against the day of the Lord. Is there no
Balm in Gilead? Is there no Knowledge in England? A man without Knowledge, is
as a workman without his hands, as a Ier. 8. 22.
Painter without his eyes, as a Traveller without his legs, Imago mortis,
vivi hominis sepultura, The image of death, Lazarus sepulcher, no true man.
Nemo potest jure dici homo, nisi qui sapiens est; Seneca.
only the wise man is a right man; and the man of understanding is only wise.
The Heathens took pains for natural knowledge and built Libraries by their
Temples; and the Romans, by their Capitol. In Athens, were Universities, and
the Students called Philosophers. In Persia, Magi. In India, Gymnosophistes;
and in England, Druides. Jerusalem had more than four hundred schools: Samuel
taught at Rama, Elizeus at Ierico, John at Ephesus, Mark at Alexandria, and
Paul at Rome. Charles erected universities at Paris, Tolouse, Papia, Padua, and
Prague: Pithagoras traveled many Countries for knowledge: Apollonius compassed
ninty Regions, and Plato was sold in his travailes: Simonides studied seventy
years: Anaxagoras seventy two; Thales seventy eight: Socrates eighty four:
Milesius ninty seven: Livie wrote an hundred and forty books: and Pliny
threescore* and fifteen. All men desire knowledge, and the reason is;
Cupiditas discendi optima ratio vivendi, desire of learning is the best way of
living. Philip rejoiced, that Alexander was borne in the days of Aristotle;
and bless thou God that thou live in these days of knowledge: Blessed are
the eyes which see, that ye see: For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings
have desired to see those things that ye see, and have not seen them, and to
hear those things, which ye hear, and have not heard them. Luke 10. 23, 24.


But to proceed, if it be a sin to rail in ignorance; how execrable is it,
when it is in knowledge? then it is a double sin, as in Julian the Apostata;
who said of the Scriptures, (...). He knew the Scriptures, he had read the
Scriptures, but he despised them; and therefore the Church never prayed for him,
but against him. So Chrysostom speaking of certain Heretics called Anomaies,
says, Hanc arborem haereseos, nec Paulus plantavit, nec Apollo rigavit, nec
Deus auxit, neither have Paul Chrysostom.
planted this tree of heresy, nor Apollo watered it, nor God increased it, sed
plantavit superbia, rigavit invidia, but Pride planted it, A shame for a
Christian to be ignorant of Christianity.
and Envy watered it; they sinned in knowledge, not in ignorance: they said,
that they knew God as well as God knew himself. And as these Anomaies went to
far one way, so did the Skeptics, another way; they doubted of all things,
Number Chrisippus homo esset, an formica; whether Chrisippus were a man or a
pismire, whether snow is white, or black: For Satan is ever in his contraries.
All Arrianisme came from pride in knowledge, not ignorance alone. Arrius seeing
Alexander preferred before him, denied (...) Christ; the consubstantiality,
against his own conscience; and his end was accordingly; for as he was a
disputing, being provoked to the stool, in exonerating nature, he poured out
all his bowels, and so he dyed. These men had need say, Pone ostium labiis,
set a door before my lips. The Pharisees also knew Christ, yet railed on him,
they called him Fabri filium: the Carpenters Son, a man of new learning
(...), Psalm. 141.
a drunkard, a worker by the Devil, a deceiver: therefore they were far from
mercy, and many sinned, In spiritum sauctum, against the holy Ghost. Lastly,
the Devil sinned thus: for it could not be ignorance, they being by creation
Angels of light, Mat. 13. Mar. 2. Mat. 12. John 7.
he fell upon mere envy, in knowledge,: whereupon Billius in his Anthologia
makes the comparison, between him and Christ: Ille voluit esse supra Angelum,
He would be above an Angel, Sed hic infra hominem, but Christ beneath a man,
and therefore he became a scorn of men, yea, the very outcast of all people:
Ille coelum dedignatus est, he disdained Heaven, but Christ disdained not to
walk on the earth: Ille omnibus hominibus invidit, he envied all men, and
would have them to perish, but Christ Loved 1 Timothy 2. 4.
all, and would have all to be saved: but this malice of Satan could not be in
ignorance, but in knowledge.

But to return: most men rail in ignorance; they are like unto Herpasta
Socrates she fool, that having lost her eyes, did not believe that she was
blind, but thought the house to be dark: So we are blind, and yet will not see
it: it is nothing to name the ten Commandments, the Lords prayer, the twelve
Articles of faith, the two Sacraments, but to understand them. We rail on
Catechizing, for that we understood it not. Acts 8. 30.
I say to thee, as Philip said to the Eunuch, when he heard him read the
Prophecy of Esaias, Understand thou what thou read? Even so
understandest thou what thou prayest, beleevest, receivest? Christianus sine
scientia, est sicut navis sine remis; A Christian without knowledge, is like a
ship without sails, rudder, ancker, cable, etc. or like a bird without wings;
or like a tree without John 3. 19:
roots, or a purse without money, This is the condemnation of the World, that
men love darkness more than light, (and why so?) their deeds are evil. They
shall one day cry out in Hell, We have erred from the way of truth, the light
of righteousness has not shined unto us, the Sun of understanding rose not
up upon us, We have wearied our Ignorance the cause of destruction.
selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, and we have gone through
dangerous ways, but we have not known the way of the Lord. Men are not
ignorant for want of teaching, but for want of learning; Wisd. 5. 6, 7. 13.
we will not learn, there we shall say, As Soon as we were borne, we
began to draw an end, and have showed no token of Virtue, but are consumed in
our own wickedness, If we should live so long as Methnsalah, who lived nine
hundred sixty nine years: it may be we would have more knowledge for the
World, but no more for God, we have sold our selves with Ahab to do wickedly,
the days will come that we shall say as Jacob said, Surely Genesis 5. ca. 28. 16
the Lord was in this place, and I was not aware: The Lord was here but I was
not aware of it, he spoke to me, and I heard him not, he offered his grace to
me and I regarded it not; his Sun shined, and I beheld it not. And now it is
night, and I cannot walk, death comes, and I cannot work; their bones shall
lie down in the graves full of ignorance, blindness, popery: John 12.
Qualis enim vita, finis ita, For as thy life is: so is thy death. Thy bones
are full of the sin of thy youth, and it shall lie down with thee in the
Dust. And Paul is peremptory, namely, That God will render Job 20. 11. 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8.
vengeance unto them, that do not know him. The wicked seeing the elect in
Heaven, shall say to God, as Esau said to Isaac, Have thou but one blessing my
Father? bless me, even me also my Father: But it will be too late, their
blessing, shall be turned into a cursing.

Nay Jude charge them further, that they abused themselves, in that they knew
not; like the Doctors of Ephesus, of whom Paul reports thus: They would be
Doctors of the Law, and yet understand 1 Timothy 1. 7.
not what they speak, neither whereof they affirm. And also in that they
knew, For says, Jude, Whatsoever things they know naturally, as beasts, which
are without reason, in those things, they corrupt themselves: so that every way
they are vile and miserable, as Apoc. 3. 17. Some things they knew naturally,
as beasts that know sweet, from sour; good, from evil, meat, from poison. The
wicked know (...), the formal things, but not (...) 1 Cor. 2. 7.
(...), the mysteries in Christ, Hereupon says Paul, We speak the Wisdom of
God in a mystery, even the hid Wisdom; whereof 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the wicked have no saving understanding. The natural man perceives not the
things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are not spiritually discerned: They savor not the
things that are of God, as Christ said to Peter. Come behind me Satan, thou art
on offense unto me, because thou understandest not the things that are of God,
but of Men. Where let me distinguish Mat. 16.
of knowledge, that there is a natural knowledge and a spiritual knowledge:
the first of these, the Apostle calls the Wisdom of the flesh, the second,
the Wisdom of the spirit: the Romans 8. 6.
end of the first is death, the end of the second life and peace. The reason
he sets down also; saying, The Wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against
God, for it is not subject to the law of God neither indeed The natural man
come short of beasts in use of his knowledge.
can be, etc. Many know naturally like beasts, and no more, like horses and
mules that have no understanding. The natural knowledge says, par pari
referto, offer like to like, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but
spiritual knowledge, Mat. 5. 38. Romans 12.
says, Bonum malo rependite, Recompense good for evil. So did the Apostles,
2. Cor. 4. Natural knowledge says, Enjoy the pleasures that are present; as
said the gallant of the World, Wisd. 2. the other says, fly from the lusts of
youth, as Paul 2 Timothy 2.
charged his Scholar Timothy. Natural knowledge says, give us that which is
present, let God alone with that which is to come: as the Epicures said, A
living Dog is better than a dead Lion, the other says, Give me the things
that are above, where ^^cl. 9. 4. Col. 3. 2.
Christ sits at the right hand of God. The one says, that it is good
sleeping in a whole skin, as Peter said, Master favor thy Mat. 16. Mat. 5.
10.
self, the other says, Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur, Blessed are they
that suffer persecution, etc.

Yea natural men know not oftentimes so much as beasts: Beasts know them that
give them meat, as do Oxen and Asses, but men do not. So says the Prophet,
The Ox knows his owner, Esa. 1. 3.
and the Ass his masters cribbe, but Israel has not known, my people has no
understanding. Beasts know how to provide, for themselves, as do pismyres, For
in the plenty of Summer Prove. 6. Luke 15.
they provide for the dearth of Winter. Men do not, but spend all like (...),
the prodigal Son. Beasts know the time of their trouble, as the Crane, the
Storke, and the Turtle, so says Jeremy, The Storke in the air knows her
appointed times, the Turtle Ier. 8. 7. Luke ^9. 42.
and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming. Men do not;
as is said of Jerusalem, that she knew not the time of her visitation. Beasts
fear their proper adversary, and that will hurt them; as the Sheep, the
Wolf; the Lion, the Fire; the Ambr.
Elephant, the Mouse; the serpent, the Iron; the Faulkon, the Eagle. Men do
not, but join with Satan, and will not know the truth, That they may come to
amendment, out of the snare of the Devil, which are taken of him at his will.
Beasts know their evils, and their remedies: 2 Timothy 2. 26.
the Adder being sick, seeks serpentine grass; the Dog, being sick
seekth trifolie; the Swallow, caelidine; the Heart, dictanie; the Bear,
pismyres: the Ape, moaths: But men seek for nothing that may do them good in
this life, and in the World to come. Christ said that Ninive and the Queen of
the South should rise in judgment and condemn the Jews: but I say Mat. 12.
that beasts shall condemn us, in the day of judgment; For they know more by
the instinct of nature, than we by doctrine: O miseri, O miserable men that
we are, that beasts shall condemn us, like Balaams Ass, his master. And
could they speak now as Ascanius his Popenjaie, and Augustus Parat spoke,
Numb. 22.
they would speak against us.

And yet all spiritual knowledge is not profitable: For the Beastly minded men
like beasts.
learned distinguish it into a knowledge of judgment, and knowledge of
election and choice.

A knowledge of judgment is a bare knowledge of good from evil; as in the
idolaters, Who when they knew God, glorified him not as Romans 1. 21. cap. 2. 23.
God. In the Jews, Which knew the Law, and gloried in the Law, and yet through
breaking of the Law dishonored God. In the Cretians, They did profess, they
knew God, but by their works they did deny him, being abbominable,
disobedient, and unto every good work reprovable. Tit. 1. 16.


A knowledge of choice is to do good: the one is Scientia; the other is
Conscientia. When the Gospel, the word of truth is fruitful from the day we
heard of it, and when our conversation is such, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ Jesus. It is Col. 1. 6. Mat. 23. 3.
one thing to know, another thing to know truly, Praedicant multi de virtute,
and non habent; Many preach of Virtue, and have it not; praise it, and love it
not. For with the Pharisees they say, but do not.

Lastly, he compares them to beasts: for in many things the wicked are as
beasts, if not worse, by creation little inferior to the Angels, by
convesation much inferior to bruit beasts. For the Ox does know his owner,
the Ass his masters cribbe, but Israel Psalm. 8. 4. Esa. 13. Mat. 7. 6. Luke 13.
has not known, my people (says God) has no understanding.

Christ compares careless men to Swine, he called Herod a Fox.

Paul calls false teachers, Woolves.

Peter calls adulterers, Dogs, that return to their vomit. Act. 20. 9. 2
Pet. 2. Luke 3. 7. Ier. 2. 2. Soph. 3. Psalm. 5. 8.


John calls the Pharisees, Vipers.

Jeremy compares the Jews to Dromedaries, and wild Asses.

Sophonie calls Tyrants, Lions.

David compares the contemners of his word, to Adders. Man should bear the
Image of God, therefore says the Apostle, Put on the new man, which after God
is shapen in righteousness Ephesians, 4. 24.
and true holiness. In deed we ough to put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge after the image of the Almighty, but most men do not.

Well therefore said a learned man, that the proud bear the image of a Lion,
the greedy, of a Woolfe; the subtle, of a Fox; the ignorant, of a horse and
mule; the voluptuous, of a Dromadary or wild Ass; the Apostata, of a Dog.

Esaias has a notable Prophecy, insinuating, that many men by nature are
beasts, but by grace they are cured, tamed, and made good. Where note by the
way, that there be diverse kinds Esa. 11. 6.
of wicked men, though all agree in evil, and meet in one place, that is
Hell: yet they differ in the kinds of evil, all are not alike, yet all
hurtful. Some are stout as Lions, some greedy as Woolves, some cruel as
Bears, some spightfull as Aspes, some ravenous as Leopards; some hurt by
pricking; some by stinking, Worse to be beastly, than to be a beast.
some by breathing, some by poison, some by worrowing: So is it among the
wicked, some hurt as beasts one way, some another. If he be not an usurer, yet
is he an oppressor, if not a Papist, yet a profane man; if not covetous, yet
prodigal, if not voluptuous, yet superstitious; if not a Lion, yet an Aspe.
But let us put off our beastly affections, Nam pejus est bestialiter vivere
quam bestiam esse, hoc fuit a natura illud a Diabolo. It is worser Seneca.
to live beastly, than to be a beast, the one is of nature, the other of the
Devil. Let us then no longer live beastly, lest we perish with the beast, but
live Christianly, that so we may see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living.

THE TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XI. Woe be unto them, they have followed the way of Caine. Execrable
sinners may be execrated.



FRom the description and confuration of the wicked, he comes to execration;
he rises by degrees, as the Eagle mounteth in her flight, like fire that
first smoaketh, and then flameth, he casts them out of the savor of God and
state of salvation; Woe be unto them (says he) Psalm. 69. 22, 23. etc.
let their table be made a snare before them, and their prosperity their ruin,
let their eyes be blinded, that they see not, and make their loins always to
tremble. Power out thine anger upon them, and let thy wrathful displeasure
take them; let their habitation be void, and let none dwell in their Tents. Lay
iniquity upon their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness;
let them be put out of the Book of life, and let them not be written with the
righteous. Thus with Esaias he lifts up his voice like Esa. 58. 1. Mich. 3. 2
Cor. 4. Ier. 5. 24.
a trumpet; with Micah he is full of power and judgment; he comes to them,
as Paul to the Corinthians, with a rod; with Jeremy his words are as fire, and
the people as wood and straw to be devoured of this fire. Saint Jude had
hitherto tempred his style, but now coming to their arch-metropolitan sins,
he cannot forbear, but breaks out into these words, Woe be unto them: with
James and John he is become Boanarges, the Son of thunder, he tells them of
nothing but destruction; that God Ministers must not in their own cause be
rigorous, but in Gods.
has bent his bow and made his arrows ready, that God will arise, and his
enemies shall be scattered; that God will meet them, as a she Bear robbed of
her whelps. There is no doubt but the Apostle would have spoken mildly unto
them, would have blessed them as Aaron did the tribes, if there had been any
Psalm. 7. Psalm. 68. 8. Hos. 13. 8. Numb. 6.
goodness in them; but seeing their sins execrable, he comes to
execration, and says, Woe be unto them. He deals here with them as Christ
did with Corazin and Bethsaida; Woe to thee Corazin, Woe to thee Bethsaida. And
as Christ did with the Mat. 23.
Pharisees, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites; and as Paul did
with the Corinthians, when he said, Maranatha Anathema be unto them, that love
not the Lord Jesus. Men are unwilling to 1 Cor. 16.
hear execrations and woes, they would have pillowes sown under their
elbowes; with the men of Anathoth they love to be soothed in their sins; with
Achab, they cannot abide that Micah should prophecy otherwise unto them, than
they would have him, they would not have the Lords sword drawn against them,
nor no woe denounced upon them; but woe, woe, and woe again to them, that
cause us to sharpen our style, and to cry, Woe be unto them.

And note here, that no private revenge, no sinister affection carried him to
this execration; but being moved by the Spirit of God, he was enforced to lay
the Axe of Gods vengeance to the roots of their trees, and to cry, Woe be unto
them. The Prophets and Apostles, in their own causes, are like doves, Sine
fell, without gall or bitterness; but in Gods cause they rowse themselves
like Giants: Moses prayed for Aaron and Myriam, the cause was his; Stephen
prayed for his persecutors, the cause was his; but when he comes to handle
the cause of God, he calls them Acts 7.
hard-hearted, and stiff necked Jews. So Christ in his own cause was meek
as a Lamb; but in his Fathers cause he rowsed himself like a Lion; for he that
prayed for his enemies, thundered many woes against his Fathers adversaries, as
the Scribes, Mat. 23.
Pharisees and Hypocrites.

Well, the Apostle having thus denounced Gods judgment against them, saying,
Woe be unto them, he comes to set down the cause of this execration, the
first whereof was envy, malice, First, he calls them malicious, envious, like
Caine, whose sin the Apostle notes, and dehorteth men not to be, As Caine,
which was of the wicked one, and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him?
because his own works were evil, and his brothers good. A miserable 1 John
3. 12.
thing not to hate the man, but the virtue of the man, the goodness of the
man; this is (...), to fight against God, like the old Giants; we should love
good men; Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle (says David) who shall rest
upon thy holy hill? God Psalm. 15.
answers him, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them
that fear the Lord: All David's delight was upon Envy ever ascends malign
virtue and glory.
them; for so he protests in the Psalm, All my delight is upon the Saints,
that are on the earth, and upon such as excel in virtue. We should do so,
even Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Psalm. 16. 3. A^os 5. 15.
judgment in the gate: but we have inverted that order, and good men are in
most detestation with us. As there is no Sun beam without motes, no Tree
without bark, no garment without mothes, no fruit without Catterpillers; so no
virtue, no honor without envy. There Is no Jacob, whom Esau will not perfecute;
no David, whom Saul will not malign; no Isaak, whom Ismael Genesis 27.
will not revile; and no good man upon the earth, whom the envious will not
bite, tear, and devour. For this cause one resembles envy to certain Flies,
called Cantharides; for as they light specially upon the fairest wheat, and
most blown Roses; so envy commonly opposes herself against the best men;
Invidia virtutis Comes, envy is the companion of virtue. One resembles envy
unto fire, for as fire coveteth the highest places; so envy aims at the
worthiest men. As for example, Themistocles when he had conquered the navy of
Xerxes, which in number was most infinite, through envy was forced to leave his
Country, and to live in miserable banishment. Aristides, which for his virtues
was called the just, yet through envy, as an unprofitable member, was cut from
the body of his Country. This envy is compared, in some respect, by some
learned men, unto the Sun: for as the nature of the Sun is to obscure and
darken things, which be clear and manifest, and likewise to lighten, and to
illustrate that which is obscure: so envy endeavors to obscure the glory of
those which are famous, and in the gifts and graces of the spirit excel
others: for none are more subject to envy than those which for virtue and
religion are renowned: but let them envy the good, and malign them to the
uttermost, Rumpanturilia Codro, yet let us lay aside all maliciousness, and
all guile, and dissimulation, and all envy.

The eye of envy looks ever upward, who is above, who rises, who prospers,
who is well spoken of, well thought of, or favored of God, and as much grieved
is an envious man, at the good of another, as at the harm of himself, which
Diogenes noted when he saw a known envious knave, look sad; no man can tell
(quoth he) whither harm has happened to this fellow or good unto his
neighbor, for both vex him alike.

Envy was the first venom, which the Devil powered forth against mankind: Hinc
periit primus, and perdidit, by this the first Cypr.
man perished himself and destroyed others: what was the cause that Caine slew
his brother, his only comfort in that newborn world? was it not envy, when
he saw the gift of his brother accepted of God, and his own rejected, he was
very wrath, And his countenance fell down, as not able to endure the sight of
his brother. Genesis


What was the cause, why the Patriarchs sold Joseph to the Ismalites Envy
theroot of all mischief.
and then came and told their Father, That a wicked beast had devoured him?
Surely it was because they envied him for his dreams. Genesis 37.


Because the women sang in the streets, Saul has slain his thousand, and
David his ten thousand: therefore was Saul exceeding 1 Samuel 18.
wroth, and had envy to David ever after. It was (says the King of Preachers)
a venomous mischievous eye, such as the burning eyes of Witches, or the
Basiliske, or Gorgon, that he cast toward him. The elder brother when he
understood of the entertainment, that his father gave to his prodigal
brother, and with what joy and rejoicing he was entertained, He was angry at
the matter, and would not go in, he envied it. Examine the reason, why
Innocence it self was hunted and followed unto death, with Crucisie him,
crucify him, he is not worthy to live; Was it not Mat. 27.
envy? Let Pilat be judge, He knew that for envy they had dilivered him. Do
we look that envy, should favor the honor and welfare of men, when it
favors not the life of a man? No, not the life of the Lord himself? Poison
they say, is life to the Serpent, death to a man; and that which is life to a
man, his spittle and natural humidity, is death to a Serpent. I have read it
thus applied: Virtue and Felicity, which is life to a good man, is death to the
envious: and that which the envious live by, is the misery and death of a good
man: for envy endevoreth either that men may not live at all, or that they may
live miserably. And therefore amongst other fruits of a reprobate mind, these
two are joined together, Envy and Murder; and likewise Romans 1. Gal. 5.
amongst the works of the flesh, they are in the same combination, as if they
were twins growing in one body, and could not be separated.

Envy is the root of all mischief in the World: this is that Troiane horse,
that Pandora's box, full of all deadly poison, that Hydra, not with seven
heads, but with seven hundred heads of mischief. We marvel that there is so
much evil in the world, but cease to marvel at it, seeing there is so much
envious pride in the World. For envy comes from this master sin, Pride,
which is as a master-pock, and cannot be healed. Pride, is a liking of our
selves, and envy is the hatred of another man's felicity; where the first is,
there is the second, Superbia est metropolis omnium vitiorum, Pride is the
chief or mother sin of all sins; Minores despicit, majoribus invidet, ab
aequalibus dissentit: She scorneth her inferiors, envieth her betters, and
dissenteth from all equals: as was said of Caesar and Pompey, the one could not
abide a superior, the other, an equal. Two things be in the Lord, Glory and
justice; the proud man robs God of the one, as Herod, who would not give the
glory to God: and the malicious envious of Act. 12.
the other: For he revengeth, whereas all men should give room to vengeance,
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will reward The etymology of envy
it implying to be in the eye.
says the Lord. Envy is as the dung of swallows, which put out the eyes of
Father Tobias: our pride and envy is infinite, we would be Kings, nay, we
would be Gods. The Bactrians said of Alexander, that if his body were
answerable to his heart, Romans 12. 19.
He would touch the East with one hand, and the West with another; he would
set one foot in the Land, and the other in the Sea: the same may be said of
many of us, for truly we envy the Air, Fire, Water, to others, If we could
stop the Sun, or enclose the waters into one fist, or draw up all the Air
into one mouth, we would do it to hinder others.

The Poet describes envy thus;

First, with a pale face without blood.

Secondly, with a lean body, without any juice in it.

Thirdly, with squint eyes.

Fourthly, with black teeth.

Fifthly, with an heart full of gall.

Sixthly, with a tongue tipped with poison.

And last of all, with a countenance never laughing, but when others weep;
never sleeping, because he studieth, and thinks continually upon mischief,
Invidia dicitur, quiavel non videt, Cypr.
vel nimis intuetur, It is c^lled Envy, either because it will not see at all,
that which in the blessings of God is to be seen, or because it prieth too
deep.

Envious men are like Mermaides, which never sing, but in a tempest, and mourn
in a calm; so they rejoice at the hurt of their neighbors, and sorrow at
their welfare. The householder said to his servant that murmured at his bounty
to others, is thine eye evil because I am good? enviest thou me because of my
liberality? Even so, is thy eye evil, because thy neighbor is wealthier than
thou, his wit sharper than thine, his learning more than thine, his credit
greater than thine? we would have no man fare well, but our selves: Like Nero,
who when he died, wished that all the world might dye with him, Me mortuo
Coelum and terra misceatur, Ier. 6. 10. Psalm. 120. 3. Psalm. 14. Esa. 1. 5.
Phil. 3. 17. Esa. 59. 2 Pet. 2.
said Nero. Diverse sinners have diverse properties: The contemner of the Word,
has an evil and an uncircumcised ear; the slanderer, has an evil, a
railing tongue; the covetous man, has a devouring throat, like a sepulcher;
the murderer has a bloody hand; the glutton has an evil belly; the
voluptuous man has an evil, a vain foot; like Hazael, who ran like a wild
Roe; the adulterer has an evil, a whorish unclean heart: but the envious man
has a Divellish eye. But such ears shall have no mercy, such tongues shall
burn in Hell, such throats shall be filled with gravel; such hands shall
wyther, as did Ieroboams; such eyes, shall be darkened. The Devil is the
Father of envy; he envied Gods glory at the first, and he envieth man's
felicity at the last.

Hemmingius divides all affections into Corporal, and Animal. The poison of
envy make the heart unfit for grace.


The Mother of all corporal affections is (...), the love of a man's self; now
Primogenita her first borne daughter is Superbia, pride, her second daughter is
Invidia, Envy; her third is (...), covetousness; all come from (...), which
now reigns in the world, and like another Alexander has conquered the same;
for men are lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. As
Demosthenes being asked what was the first part of an orator, what the second,
what the third: Answered, Action: so if you ask me what is the first, the
second, the third part of a vile man, I must say, Envy.

What is the cause of quarrels?

What raises slanders?

What multiplyeth suits?

Envy.

Invidia est arcus diaboli, Envy is the bow of the devil, detraction is the
arrow, she shoots out of this bow, envy is a fire raked up in the heart;
detraction is as the flame. We all complain of envy, and say, Anger is
cruel, wrath is raging, but who can stand before envy? and yet we are as
Caine, envious.

A mad dog infuseth his venom into him whom he biteth so does envy by the
tongue; it is the string and pulse of the soul we marvel, why men are so
vile; why, they are tainted with a mad dog, and what wisdom is in them? If
ye have bitter enoiing, and strife in your hearts, rejoice not, for this
wisdom does not descend Iam. 3. 14.
from above, but is earthly, sensual, and divellish, says the Apostle.

Chrysostom exclaimeth against this envy, thus; O invidia pessima fera, per te
mors intravit in mundum, tu occidisti Abelem; vendidisti Genesis 3.
Iosephum in Aegyptum, fugasti Davidem, decollasti Babtistam; crucifixisti
Christum, O envy, the worst of all wild beasts, through thee death entered into
the world, thou have killed Abel, sold Joseph into Egypt, persecuted David,
beheaded the Baptist; and crucified Christ: All mischiefs flow from envy, as
all light from the Sun, and all water from the Sea.

Envy is a work of the flesh, a note of a Reprobate; Envy blinds a man, Vt
proximi bona videre non possit, that he cannot see his neighbors Gal. 5. Romans 1.
good; for envy is like unto sore eyes, that are offended at the light.

Envy overthrows all love and charity amongst men, for love envieth not. 1
Cor. 13.


Envy is contrary to God, and all proceedings; for God is so good a God, that
he can draw good out of evil; but the envious they are so evil, and
mischievous, that they can draw evil out of good.

But you give us but the hearing of this, and God will one day give you but the
hearing also; you shall cry, but he will not regard The envious man is his own
tormentor.
you. I speak boldly, for that the cause is Gods, for the manner it may
exceed, but for the matter, I crave no pardon; I have as good right to speak
it, as the Lord Chancellor has to Zach. 7.
carry the broad Seal of England: kill this Cockatrice therefore in the egg,
before it be a serpent; kill it in the heart, before it break out into action.

For even the wicked are not to be envied; so says the Psalmist, Fret not thy
self because of the wicked, neither be thou envious for Psalm. 37. 1.
the evil doers. Leave him to God, pray for him: we must be like fishes, which
live in the salt Sea, and yet are fresh; so we in an uncharitable world, and
yet be charitable; though we be reviled, yet we bless; though persecuted, yet
we suffer; though evil 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.
spoken of, yet we pray; though envyed, and maliced, yet we love.

And yet further observe with me, that though envy is a most mischievous sin,
and is the cause of all the uprores of the world, yet it is a thing of that
nature, that it indamageth and hurts him most that has it.

For this cause envy is compared to fire, to a moth, to a Be; for as the fire
consumes the matter that nourishes it, and the moth the garment, thar
breeds it: So does envy him that envieth.

Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.
The man whom envy does possess,
Does pine at others wealth and good success.
He thinks his Neighbors Ox, fatter than his; his neighbors pasture,
greener than his; his Neighbors Corn, better than his; his Neighbors
building, stronger, and gayer than his. And as a Be stinging a man, loses her
sting, and never can make honey after. So the envious man loses his labor and
the grace of God. Envy is to him that envieth, as the rust to the iron, as the
Viper that eats out the belly of her damme. The envious man is as Sysiphus,
who rolling up a stone, it reboundeth on him with a greater force. Envy
tormenteth the mind, it wastes the body, it fretteth the heart, it shortneth
our days, and damneth our souls: it sets a man awork to backbite and
slander his Neighbor, and to deny him all duties of humanity. So then, envy,
hatred, and backbiting, always go together, as three cankers, and evil sores
that consume the body, hurt the good name, lessen the gifts, and repine at the
good of our brethren. Basil compares envious men to Ravens, that fly over
sweet Gardens, and at last seize upon a Carrion. He likeneth them to Flies, who
pass over sound flesh, and light upon a sore, a galled place; so the envious
pass over all the rare graces, that be in men; but Cain profane and grudgeth
at Gods Sacrifice.
if there be any imperfection in them, that they blaze abroad, and cover it
not: they do not with Sem and Iaphet, spread a garment over their Fathers
nakedness. I confess that there is as little good to be done on these men,
as most sinners; for as a Genesis 9.
Smith cannot work but on hot Iron; so a preacher can do but little good, but
in a charitable mind.

Plutarch, to teach men to hate envy, calls it sorcery, because that through
the poison thereof, it does not only fill the envious body, with a naughty and
hurtful disposition, but the infection disperseth it self through the eyes,
even upon them that behold it, so that they are touched therewith, as it were
by some poysonable influence.

But besides envy, there were many other sins in Cain; he walked many
ways: there was in him profaneness, contempt of God, irreligiousnesse: God
rejected his sacrifice, for it was not Hebr. 11. 4, 5.
offered in faith. It is like that he offered an evil, pinching, grudging
sacrifice, with an evil heart; So many of us offer the sacrifice of Cain. We
grudge God any thing, every little is too much in his service. We build our
own houses fair; but we think much to give any thing to Gods house and
service; we will rather take from the Temple with Balthazar, and rob it with
Dionysius, than give to it. As in the land of Israel, look what the Dan. 5.
Palmer worm left, that the Grasshopper devoured; and what the Grasshopper left,
that the Canker devoured; and what the Canker left, that the Caterpiller
devoured. So in our Church, look what Impropriations have left, that have
Patrons devoured, and what Patrons have left, that evil Customs have devoured,
and what evil Customs have left, that have contentious and covetous
parishioners, as with the teeth of a Lion, greedily gained. O that these taking
hands might one day see the hand which Balthazar saw upon the wall! they would
then bring every Tithe into the Lords barn, and rob God and his Church no
longer. Dan. ^. Mal. 3.


Again, let a man have many children, if there be but one lame, and deformed,
or simple in wit, that is given to God, and the ministry; the eldest is made
a Gentleman, the rest Lawyers, but the most silly, simple, deformed, is made a
Minister: he is good enough for God and his Church: this is the offering of
Cain.

Again, of duties appertaining to the Ministry, if there be any thing worse
than another, that we give to the Minister of God. We give not to a Prophet
in the name of a Prophet, therefore we shall not receive a Prophets reward. And
though the Apostle says, Let him that is taught in the Word, make him that
taught him, partaker of all his goods; yet by their wills they shall Mat. 10.
41. Gal. 6. 6.
have nothing, they would have us live of their alms, and of benevolence,
stand to their good wills and courtesies, and take what The Heathen observed the
gods to be severe punishers of sacrilege.
they will give. Yet says Saint Paul, Who goes on warfare at any time of his
own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit of it? Who
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of it? And again, Do ye not know,
that they which minister about holy things, eat of 1 Cor. 9. 7, 13, 14.
the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are parertakers
of the Altar? So also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. This plainly shows, that the
maintenance of the Minister, is not a voluntary and beggarly Alms; but an
honorable stipend allotted of God, according to that which Christ says,
Dignus est operarius mercede, the laborer is worthy of his reward: And Paul
says, that He is worthy of double honor; that is, reverence and maintenance:
and whosoever shall rob him of his due, the thing so taken, will ring him
such a peale to Hell, that he will wish he had never been borne. Laqueus est
hominis devorare sancta; It is a destruction to a man to Prove. 21. 20.
devour that which is sanctified. The very Heathen observed, that after such
time, as the Grecians once offered violence to the Vir^il lib. 2. Ae^eid.
Lactan. de origin. cap. 8.
Temple of Pallas, that they never prospered. And Lactantius writes of diverse,
who have been grievously punished, for offering violence unto holy things; as
namely, of Fulvius the Censor, who taking away certain Marmoreas tegulas,
tyles of Marble, out of the Temple, was within a short time after distract of
his wits, and had two of his sons slain; for grief whereof he dyed also. Of
Appius Claudius, who for alienating those things that were consecrated to
Hercules, lost his eyes. And although Dionysius made a jest of sacrilege in
taking a golden Cloak, that was upon the image of Jupiter Olympius, and
putting a linsie woolsie cloak upon it, in the stead thereof, saying, That a
golden cloak was too heavy in Summer, and too cold in Winter, but a linsie
woolsey cloak was fit for both. Also in cutting off a golden beard, that
Aesculapius did wear, saying, That it was no reason, that the son should have
a beard, when as Apollo his father had none. Furthermore in taking away
certain golden cups which they held forth in their hands, saying, That it were
folly not to take them, being so kindly offered: yet this went not without
punishment; for at the last he was driven out of his kingdom. So Xerxes
sending four hundred of his soldiers to Delphos, to spoil the Temple of
Apollo, they were every one of them destroyed with lightening and thunder. So
Marcus Crassus, for taking a great sum of money out of the Temple of
Jerusalem, viz. ten thousand Talents, within a while perished miserably with
his whole Army. But to let these pass; If you would be pleased to cast your
eyes a little upon divine Histories, and the Histories of the Church, ye shall
see this sin horribly punished. Balthazar for profaning and abusing the holy
vessels, received presently a fearful doom and sentence, by a handwriting
upon a wall. Antiochus Epiphanes for taking the vessels of Gold and Silver God
punished sacrilege in all ages.
out of the Temple; and for destroying the Inhabitants thereof without cause,
suffered most grievous pain and misery. Herod surnamed the Great, having
opened David's sepulcher to 1 Match. 6. 12.
take money out of it, as Hircanus had done before, diverse of his men were
consumed with a flash of fire, that brake from a secret place. Joseph. Ant.
lib. 26. cap. 11.


Look to the age succeeding, I mean, the time of the Gospel: and ye shall
see Ananias and Saphira, for withholding secretly a part of that which they
had voluntarily given to the use of the Church, most severely punished with
sudden death. Act. 5. 5.
After this, when the Church was endewed with great riches and possessions by
the bountiful donations of godly Emperors, and other devoute Christians,
Julian the Apostata, and Foelix his companion, for taking away the holy vessels
of the Temple, and making but a jest of sacrilege, received both of them their
just punishments; the one having his mouth, which was an instrument of
blasphemy, made a seige, or passage to avoid his filthy excrements, which are
naturally egested another way; the other having all the blood of his body,
gathered to his mouth, as to a sink, which he never left spetting and spawling
out, till all was exhausted, and so died most miserably. I will not ransacke
our own Chronicles, nor report of the judgments, that have lighted upon
diverse of our own nation for this sin; only this I say, (...) are (...), the
sufferings of others are instructions to us to take heed how we meddle with
holy and sacred things, and that we give to the Church whatsoever appertains
unto her: for certainly if we possess that which is Gods, we shall be
dispossessed of God himself.

Another sin in Caine was hypocrisy; he spoke Abel fair, till he got him in
the field: So many of us can flatter, to serve one own turn.

Mel in ore, verba lactis;
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
Honey in the mouth, fair words; Gall in the heart, deceitful Esd. 4.
deeds. The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin would build the Temple with the
Jews. Herod desired the Wise men, that when Mat. 2.
they had found Christ, to certify him of it, that he might come and worship
him. Ismael did weep to Godoliah, but the adversaries Ier. 42.
of Judah would have pulled down the Temple. Herod would have killed Christ, as
he did the children of Bethlem. Ismael slew Godoliah: So, trust not an
Hypocrite: whatsoever he says, he means it not, his heart is not with thee,
though he speak thee fair: he is a Christian only in name, a brother only in
show. Of these Hypocrites S. Bernard speaks thus; Multi suut oves habitu,
vulpes actu, crudelitate lupi, many are sheep in show, foxes in deed, and
woolves in cruelty: For an Hypocrite has vulpem in cerebro, milvum in manu,
and lupum in cord; a Fox in his brain, Desperation limits the mercy of God,
and destroys the soul, and sometime the body.
a Kyte in his hand, and a Woolfe in his heart: And therefore our Savior
Christ says, Beware of false prophets, which come to you in Sheep clothing,
but inwardly are ravening Woolves: which in painted boxes hide deadly poison;
in beautiful Sepulchers, rotten bones; and under Iezabels painted Mat. 7. 16,
17.
face, a whores behavior. And therefore our Savior calls them Serpents, and
Viperous Serpents, O ye viperous Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how shall
ye escape the damnation to come? And to show the certainty of their
damnation, Mat. 23. 33.
besides the manifold woes which Christ denounces against them, it is said,
that The wicked shall have their portion Mat. 24. 51.
with hypocrites, to show that the condemnation of hypocrites is most
certainly sealed. Let me therefore use the counsel of Gregory, Hypocrita, aut
esto quod appares, aut appare quod es; Either be as thou seem, or appear
as thou art; For Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, counterfeit piety is
double impiety; first, because it is impiety, and then because it is
counterfeit, making truth falsehood, and God a Lier.

Thirdly, there was in Cain Desperation: Maius est peccatum quam remitti potest
(quoth he:) my sin is greater than it can be Genesis 4.
forgiven. To whom Augustine answers, Mentiris Caine, mentiris in gutture:
misericordia Dei major peccato tuo, major orb: thou lie Cain, thou lie in
thy throat: Gods mercy is greater than thy Psalm. 103. 11, 12, 13.
sin, greater than the World: yea as great as himself: For as high as the
Heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him:
and as far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins
from us: and as a Father has compassion on his Children, so has the LORD
compassion on them that fear him. Desperation it is, Insanabilis plaga, a
wound that cannot be cured and healed. It is like the beast mentioned in
Daniel, that had no name. There be four beasts mentioned there, the first, is
said to be a Lion; the second, a Bear; the third, a Leopard; the fourth, is
not distinguished by any name at all; but it was a fierce and a cruel beast,
having teeth of Iron, and Claws of Brass: other sins they are as Lions,
Bears, and Leopards to spoil, and to undo the soul of Man; but the final
destruction of the soul indeed, so long as there does remain a seat of
Justice in Heaven, is Desperation. Yet Desperation is now common, and men kill
themselves; but never did any Patriarch; Prophet, or Apostle lay bloody hands
on himself: None have done it but Reprobates, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Act. 1. 2 Samuel 17.
23.
such as Saul and Judas, who burst asunder in the midst: and Achitophel, who
ended his life in an halter. Nero provided swords of Silver, to stick
himself, ropes of Silk, to hang himself, ponds of Rosewater to drown
himself in: Desperation a great sin.
but if it be damnable to murder another, what is it to murder thy self? as
the Jailer in the Acts would have done, had not Paul and Sylas stayed him in
that fury. Augustine makes desperation, Deuteronomy. 5.
the greatest sin, next to the sin against the holy Act. 16. 30.
Ghost: For he that despaireth of mercy (says he) makes God a Lier.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XI. And are cast away by the deceit of Balaams wages. Covetousnes the
root of evil, the ruin of good.



THe next sin is the Covetousness of Balaam, whose story is, Numb. 23. This
sin is the root of all evil, the spawne of all sins, a common factour for
most villainies of the World; the East Wind, that blasteth all the trees of
virtue; it hinders all goodness; when thou should give, covetousness
says it is too much; when thou should receive, covetousness says it is
too little; when thou should remit, covetousness says, it is too great;
when thou should hear, covetousness says, it is too far; when thou
should repent, covetousnes says, it is too soon. Thus as Alecto, Cui
nomina mill, mill nocendi arts* it hurts every way: They that will be
rich, fall into 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
diverse temptations, and snares of the Devil, and into noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money is the root
of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. A covetous man is like a dog in
the shambles, which will neither gnaw the bone himself, nor suffer any other
curre to gnaw it: He is worse than Many woes denounced against covetousness*
Judas, he sold his Master for thirty pence; but the covetous carle will sell
him for an halfepenny; Judas but once, the never contented covetous man
continually, and every day. He eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of his
brother; for he that hinders a poor man's living, hinders his life;
therefore these men are said, To have their handsfull of blood. There is not a
sin Esa. 1. 15.
in the second Table, against which so many woes are denounced as against
covetousness, as Esaias 5. 8. Woe be to them, that join Esa. 5. 8.
to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be
placed by their selves in the midst of the earth. And again, Esaias 30. 1. Woe
to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take council, and Esa. 30. 1.
not at me, and cover with a covering, but not by my Spirit, etc. And Habakuk
2. 9. Woe be to him, that coveteth an evil covetousness to his Hab. 2. 9.
house, that he may set his nest on high, and escape from the power of evil.
And Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, and trust in the mountain
of Samaria. And Luke 6. 24. Woe be to you that are Amos 6.
rich, for ye have received your consolation. And Saint James says, Luke 6.
24. Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3.
Plorate divites, Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that
shall come upon you, your riches are corrupt, your garments motheaten, your
gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. And no marvel though so many
woes are threatened against this sin of covetousness; for it is the original
of all sin, committed against God or man.

Against God, the covetous man makes gold his hope, and says to the wedge of
Gold, Thou art my confidence. His Oxen his wealth, his Job 31. 24.
riches is his creator, redeemer, and sanctifier, his God the Father, his God
the Son, his God the Holy Ghost.

His Creator, for when he gets abundance of riches, he thinks himself made,
but when by some accident he loses a yoke of Oxen, or some other temporal
thing; he thinks himself undone.

The Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, is not his Creator, he sings
that old song, Sol, re, me, fa; sola res me facit, only his wealth makes him.

God the Son is not his Redeemer, his money delivers him from evil. Has he
escaped any danger? He thanks not God, he thanks his gold: Is he like to fall
into any mischief? he puts his trust in his uncertain riches; Soul, thou
have much goods in store, take thy rest. Luke 12.


The Holy Ghost is none of his Sanctifier; Ille sanctior qui ditior, he is best
that has most, he is good enough, that has gold enough, goods enough.

And as covetousness is hateful to God, so is it to men; Avarus nemini bonus,
sibi vero pessimus, he is good to none, but worst to himself; for
covetousness exposes the heatt to all manner of loathsome sins; for the
devil has the covetous always upon Covetousness makes incapable of all the
eight beatitudes.
the hip, as we speak, that is, ever at such advantage, that he will be sure to
overthrow him: for whatsoever sin he will have him to commit, let him but
hollow, and cast up the lure of commodity, he stoopes presently, and falls upon
it. Would ye have him lie? promise him but profit, and he will tippe his tongue
with lies. Will ye have him forswear himself? show him but a commodity, use
silver persuasions, he will pollute the name of God with a thousand oaths.
Would ye have him murder, shead blood? the glistring show of gold will make
him wade up to the chin in a stream of blood. This mercinary soldier does
never think himself too good for any service the Devil will command him:
Covetousness is the Devils great Ordnance, wherewith he has battered the walls
of men's consciences, as it is most pitiful to consider: yea, and farther, a
man may fall into other sins, and repent for them, but this sin of
covetousness is like the harlot, a deep and a narrow ditch, and like the
wicked woman, Prove. 23. 27. Prove. 5.
that Solomon calls more bitter than death, whose heart is as nets, and snares,
and her hands as bands, to keep a man fast in the ward and prison of the
devil: For whosoever is overtaken with this sin, cannot set one step to
heaven; his covetous desires are as lead to pull him down. Ye know that our
Savior has Mat. 5. 3, 4, etc.
eight beatitudes.

The first, to be poor in spirit.

The second, to mourn inwardly.

The third, to be meek.

The fourth, to hunger and thirst after righteousness.

The fifth, to be merciful.

The sixth, to be pure in heart.

The seventh, to be a peace maker.

The eighth, to suffer persecution for righteousness sake.

These are the steps and stayres to bring men to Heaven, and and therefore so
long as men be covetous, it is impossible for them to come there.

First, poor in spirit, he cannot be; for he so fears purse-poverty, that he
feels not the misery, into which the fall of Adam, and his own sins have
cast him.

Secondly, he cannot mourn for his sins; for worldly sorrow and vexation do
turn the stream of weeping quite another way.

Thirdly, he cannot be meek in spirit; for the Spirit of God calls him a
trouble-house, saying, He that is greedy of gain, troubles Prove. 15. 27.
his own house: and it is impossible that his heart should be m^eke and
quiet, when he cannot suffer his own house so to be.

Fourthly, for hungring and thirsting after righteousness, it cannot be, that
his appetite should stand that way, for the dogs-hunger, and the dropsie-thirst
of wealth does so gnaw and torment his The covetous subject to all the curses
contrary to the eight beatitudes.
soul, that he makes no account of CHRIST'S righteousness.

Fifthly, to be merciful, stands not in any sort with his profession, to open
his heart to pity, and his purse to relieve a poor man, he thinks will undo
him: a piece of money goes from him, as a drop of blood from him heart, with
grief and sorrow enough.

Sixthly, Pure in heart, he cannot be; for he that has the root of all evil
in his heart, cannot have a pure heart.

Seventhly, he is no peacemaker: cross him in his penny, and he will trouble
all the world; for all the world can tell, that covetousness is the father,
mother, and nurse of most debates and strifes that are in the world;
covetousness will not lose a penny, he will give the Lawyer a pound first.

Eighthly, the covetous man will never suffer persecution for righteousness
sake; his goods are his god, and if he come to those terms, that he must
either leave riches or righteousness, it is righteousness that he will
forsake before riches; the world is his Mistress, he must embrace her, then
farewell righteousness.

So that now a man may very truly turn the speech of our Savior against the
covetous man, and say, Cursed be the covetous; for he is not poor in spirit,
and therefore the kingdom of Hell is his.

Cursed be the covetous, for he cannot mourn for his sins, but for his
losses only, therefore he shall never be comforted.

Cursed be the covetous, for he is not meek, but froward in heart, and
therefore he shall not inherit the earth, which he so much wishes.

Cursed be the covetous, for he does not long after righteousness, but after
riches; and therefore he shall never be satisfied.

Cursed be the covetous, for he is not merciful, but hardhearted, therefore
he shall find no mercy.

Cursed be the covetous, for he is no peacemaker, but a makebate, and
therefore he shall be called the child of the devil.

Cursed be the covetous, for he is not pure, but filthy in heart, and therefore
he shall never see God.

Cursed be the covetous, for he cannot suffer the loss of his wealth for
righteousness sake, and therefore the Kingdom of Hell is his.

And is it thus? is covetousness the occasion of so much evil? Let us take
heed and beware of covetousness; and let us have our conversation Luke 12. 15.
far from covetousness; for it is Gods own saying, I will never forsake
thee, nor leave thee: so that thou may boldly say, Heb. 13. 5, 6.
The Lord is my helper. Let us not be like Moles, which make Covetousness
excludes out of heaven.
many holes, and dig many dens in the earth, and yet are not satisfied, but
still labor and dig; Let us not build many houses, dig many cellers, fill
many barnes, and yet be unsatiable and unthankefull, and in all abundance and
plenty will not say, Blessed be the name of the Lord; which Job did in his
greatest Job 1, 21.
poverty. The covetous Cormorant, when his barnes were full, and his houses
furnished, was satisfied, saying, as it were, Soul, thou have sufficient:
Eat, drink, and take thine ease: but many having enough and more than enough,
are not satisfied: but as the Luke 12. 19.
Bear seeks after honey, and the Heart chased, for the soil, and the Eagle
for the carcass, and the Woolfe for blood; so the covetous man for gold, for
gain. Vbi hoc cadaver, ibi hae aquilae; Where this carcass is, there be these
Eagles: Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shead blood; such are the
ways of every one, that is Prove. 1. 16, 19.
greedy of gain: he would take away the life of the owners thereof.

As Vultures smell a dead carcass, a great way off: As Eagles flying aloft in
the Air, behold the little fishes swimming below in the waters, and devour
them; Sic avari lucrum long Aug.
odorantur: so the covetous smell their gain afar off, they say with
Vespatian, who took a tribute of the peoples urine, Suavis odor lucri ex re
qualibet, the savor of gain is sweet from every thing; according to that of
Solomon, The bread of deceit is sweet Prove. 20. 17.
to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Joseph's
golden cup was found in Beniamins sack; and if God rifle us, and search us,
and our sackes, I fear, that much evil gain will be found amongst us
Protestants, That as a Cage is full of birds, Ier. 5. 27, 29.
so our houses are full of deceit; whereby many are become great and waxen
rich. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? or shall not my soul
be avenged on such a people as this is?

These covetous men have no part with God, no portion in Christ, no fellowship
with the Saints. As there be no Serpents in Ireland, no Owls in Crete, no wild
beasts in Lebanon: so there be no covetous men in Heaven; For without shall be
dogs and inchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers and Idolaters; but
covetous Apoc. 22. 15.
men are Idolaters, therefore not in Heaven: Yea, and moreover they lose both
Heaven and earth, like Aesops dog, that lost both the shadow and the beef.
Therefore Salendine the Emperor of the East, dying, caused a man to carry a
sheet in Damascus, on the end of a spear, and to say, Ecce trophaea
Imperatoris; Behold, the King of the East carries nothing with him, but a
winding sheet. And surely, As we brought nothing into the world, so we may
carry nothing out. Great men have their Porters, to 1 Timothy, 6, 7.
see that men carry no more out, than they brought in; and if he chance to spy
a silver spoone, or a piece of plate in a man's bosom; Soft, sirrah (says he)
whither carry ye this plate? you brought it not in; you must not carry it out.
Now death is Gods Porter, and performs this, O terra and cinis, O dust and
ashes; Earthly minds incapable of heavenly things.
why art thou greedy? and yet men are most greedy of the world, and then too,
when they are ready to leave the world; as old men, which is monstrous in them;
Membra frigescunt, cupiditas autem calescit, their members grow cold, but their
desire still waxes warm: Caro senescit, at affectus i^venescunt, the flesh
waxes old, but their affections grow young; gray heads, but green affections:
Finis vitae non imponit finem avaritiae, the end of their life makes no end of
their covetousness, but still he loadeth himself with thick clay: for gold
is but red clay, and silver white clay. Hab. 2. 6.
These men are like the dogs snowt, that is ever cold; like Tantalus, that
stands in the water, and yet is ever dry. He has enlarged his desire as
Hell, and is as death, that cannot be satisfied. As Hab. 2. 5.
the Raven feeds not her young, till they be black; as the Eagle
acknowledges not her birds, till they can soar to the Sun: So God
acknowledges not them that are drowned in the world, and are carried away by
the deceit of Balaams wages, that is, covetousness. If ye be risen with
Christ, seek the things that are above, Col. 3: 1, 2.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God; set your affections upon
heavenly things, and not upon worldly. These bastard Eagles, they cannot mount;
like Noah's Raven they seize upon carrion. As dust cast into the eyes hinders
sight, so covetousness hinders our sight, that we look not to heaven: it is
like the Swallows dung, that put out the eyes of Tobias: We see not the
powers of the Heb. 6. 5. 2 P^^. 2. 14.
world to come. Our hearts are brawned and exercised with covetousness; they
think on nothing else from Monday to Sunday, from January to December.

The Wise man says, that there is not a viler thing than to love ^^ney. Money
does all now in the world. Give Balaam money, and Eccles. 10. 9.
he will curse the people of God, whom before he blessed: Give 2 Pet. 2.
Iehoakin money, and he will spoil the poor, rob the fatherless, undo the
widow, pervert all justice: Give Achan money, and Ier. 22. Ios. 7.
he will steal the execrable thing, the Babylonian garment, and the wedge of
gold: give Judas money, and he will sell his Master, betray Christ Jesus; give
the Soldiers money, and they will Mat. ^6. ^ap. 28.
lie, cog, swear, resweare, forswear Christ's Resurrection; and say, that he
is stolen out of his grave: give Silvester the second, money and the Popedom,
and he will give himself to the devil body and soul: give Alexander Borgia
money, and he will bid the Devil take all; Da mihi divitias, inquit, caetera
toll tibi; Take all, all. Oh money, money does all in this world: we are like
the Lawyer, that heard the poor man, but felt him not: we have golden ears,
golden fingers, we savor nothing but money; We savor not the things that are
of God. Many say, Amor vincit omnia, Love overcommeth all things; for love is
as strong as death: Mat. 16. 2^.
for as all things yield to death, so to love. But we may say, Mentiris, inquit
pecunia, thou lie (says money.)

Atalanta will stoop to golden Apples: ye know the story, The covetous mind
never satisfied*
Atalanta daughter of Caeneus, King of Scirus, contended in running with them
that came to woo her, and when she had vanquished and put many to death (for
that was the wager, or else to have her) at last a noble Yong-man, called
Hippomanes (whiles they were running) threw at sundry times three Apples of
gold from him; in taking up whereof, she was tarryed, and so overcome. O!
these golden Apples have overcome many, and hindered them in their race to
Heaven. It was a shrewd policy of Simon Magus, to offer Peter money, he thought
that this key would Acts 8. 20.
open any lock, that if the Holy Ghost might be had, he might be had for money,
or not at all. But let us answer these moneymates, as Saint Peter did Magus;
Thy money perish with thee; thou and thy money go to the devil together. This
was the third and last temptation of Satan, to offer Christ the world: he would
either Mat. 4. 10. Prove. 30.
win the horse or lose the saddle. These men are like Horseleeches, which suck
blood till they burst; so these men will never be full of money, till their
mouths be full of earth. Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit; the
love of money increases, as much as the money it self does increase. The
Parthians powered molten gold into the mouth of Crassus, saying, Satura te auro:
Satisfy thy self with gold: but men will not be satisfied; from skores they
will arise to hundreds; from hundreds, to thousands; from thousands, to
millions; from millions, to infinite; they are as hell, as the grave, and as
the barren womb of a woman, unsatiable.

It has been observed by some; that the most flourishing Commonwealths have
been those, that never received money into them, but dealt by exchange and
bartring, as did the Cretians, and the Lacedaemonians; whereupon Erasmus notes,
that Sparta no sooner received money into it, but it was overthrown by bribery,
usury, oppression, extortion, etc. The Prophet speaking of the Land of Behest;
says, That what the canker-worme left, the catterpiller Joel 1.
consumed: So, that which the greedy Lawyer leaves at the Term at London,
that does the Usurer eat up at home; he loves no man, but by whom he may
gain: As the dog loves the bone, so long as there is flesh on it; and the
Fly the pot, so long as there is broth in it; and the Swallow the chimney, so
long as there is heat. He plays with men, as the Spider does with the Fly,
first wrappeth her in her web, and then sucketh her blood; so they get men in
bonds, and then confiscate their goods. And as the Prophet speaks, He lies
in wait Psalm. 10: 9.
secretly, even as a Lion in his den. He lies in wait to spoil the poor:
he does spoil the poor, when he draws him into his net. O bone Deus (says
Augustine) quae est ista cupiditas, cum ipsae belluae modum habeant! Aug. Ser.
15. de verbis Domini.
tunc rapiunt, cum esuriunt, parcunt, cum satiantur, etc. O good God, what a
desire is this? when as the very beasts keep measure! for then they raven and
devour, when they are hungry, Riches uncertain, not to be relied upon.
but spare when they are satisfied; only covetousness is unsatiable; it
neither fears GOD, nor reverenceth men; nor spares Father, nor knows
mother, nor loves brother, nor keeps touch with friend; but oppresses the
Widow, invadeth the fatherless, and brings free men into bondage: what
madness is this, Acquirere mundum, and perdere Coelum, to gain and get the
world, and to lose Heaven? as Christ says, What shall it profit a man to win
the whole world, and to lose his own Mat. 16. 26.
soul?

And verily, if men would but consider three things: First, how uncertain.
Secondly, how unprofitable. Thirdly, how hurtful these earthly things are,
which we so covet, our desire after them will be soon quenched.

First, the things that we so much covet, are uncertain; for so the Apostle
calls them, when he willed Timothy to charge rich men that they be not
high-minded, nor put their trust in uncertain riches. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
They are like bad servants, whose shoes are made of running leather, and will
never tarry long with one master: as a bird hoppeth from Tree to Tree, so does
wealth from man to man.

Therefore the Holy Ghost has compared wealth to a wild foul, most swift in
wing, and strong in flight; saying, Riches takes her to her wings and flies
away: not like a Cock or an Hen, Prove. 23. 5.
or some tame house-bird, that a man may follow and catch again; nor like an
Hawke, that will show where she is by her Bells, and be called again by a
lure; but like an Eagle that mounts aloft past sight, and is carried away with
so much haste, as nothing will recall her.

Let Job and Nabuchadnezzer testify this truth, who fell both from great
wealth, to great want. Paulus Aemilius tells of a great man, that boasting of
his prosperity, as if nothing could shake him, was admonished by his Friend,
Solum iram Numinis procul abesse a tam secundis rebus non posse, Gods anger
could not long forbear so great prosperity; and shortly after fell into that
woeful misery, that greater has not been heard of.

The most renowned Frederick lost all, and sued to be made but Sexton of the
Church.

How many great Merchants have suddenly lost all? how many Noble men have spent
all? The wealth therefore of this world is compared to a tree that casts her
leaves, and is soon blown down; or to grass that soon withers; yea to
grass on the Psalm. 37. 35. Psalm. 129. 6.
house tops withering, that the Mower cannot take his handful; yea to nothing.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing? In the Prophecy of Jonas
we may read of a Gourd, or as some translate it, an Ivy: how that in a night
it sprang up, and was an Arbor for Jonas to sit under, and suddenly went away
again: Wealth and riches is this Ivy, the growing Riches unprofitable, if in
superfluity.
and increasing of it, the growing and increasing of wealth; the leaves of it,
your children, tenants, and followers; the shadow, your repose and contentment
that you take in your wealth; the worm that biteth this Ivy, is Death: the
fading of this Ivy, is the decay of your estate; the wind that smote Jonas his
head, is the misfortune that may blow upon you: No man can promise himself to
be wealthy till night, one coal of fire, one unadvised word, two false oaths
of two false villains, may make thee a Beggar and a Prisoner all at once: or
if not so, yet thy wealth may go from thee in a moment, as it did from that
rich man, of whom Christ speaks in the Gospel, saying, Thou fool, this night
shall they fetch thy soul from thee: For as we came naked out of our mothers
Luke 12.
Womb, so naked shall we return thither again. If Riches therefore Job 1. 2.
increase, let us not set our hearts upon them, nor be carried away by the
deceit of Balaams wages.

As riches are uncertain, so secondly are they unprofitable, if it be more
than for things necessary, and maintenance competent. And therefore the
Scripture calls gold and silver, lands and livings, riches and possessions, a
shadow; Man walks Psalm. 39. 6.
in a vain shadow, he disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches,
and cannot tell who shall gather them. Again, the Scripture calls them a
flower; All flesh is grass, and all the glory as the flower of grass.
Again, the Scripture calls them 1 Pet. 1. 24.
Liers; The chief men are Liers. And further, the Scripture calls Psalm. 62.
9.
them vanity, All is vanity. And lastly, nothing: Will thou set thine eyes
uponit, and it is not? it has no being. Indeed Eccles. 1.
wealth, if it be for more than things necessary, and maintenance competent,
is unprofitable, for it will do no good, either to soul, or body, or name, or
state. For first, what is good for the Soul, but Faith, Repentance, the Spirit
of God, Prayer, Pardon of sins, and eternal Life? But riches and wealth can
purchase none of these things: neither gold, no^ precious stones can buy
Repentance, the holy Ghost, the Spirit, Pardon of sins, and eternal Life:
therefore riches are unprofitable for the foul.

Again, riches are unprofitable for the Body: for can riches buy health,
purchase ease, or a good nights rest, or an hours sleep, or a good stomach?
No, no: and what is the body the better for it then?

Again, riches profit not a man's Name: For they can not win him any credit.
For what is credit? to have a cap or knee, or a few complements given him? to
be crowched unto, as a little curre to a mastiffe dog? to be soothed up, and
to be sprinkled with a little Court holy water? No, no, but credit is, to be
Wealth cannot preserve from temporal or spiritual evils.
well esteemed of in the hearts of men, to find reverence in their souls, and
to be placed in a good room of their affections: but wealth cannot do this,
but grace and virtue: A poor man, that lives virtuously, shall be more
respected in the souls and consciences of men, than the richest man under
Heaven, wanting these things: as for example, John had more reverence in Herod's
heart, than Herod among all his Courtiers. Mat. 14.


Lastly, wealth will not profit a man's Estate; For it cannot free us from evil,
nor procure us any good; it cannot free us from evil: For all evils are either
spiritual or temporal, ghostly or bodily. The ghostly evils are our sins,
as superstition, and idolatry, swearing, and blasphemy, profaning of the
Sabbath, and neglecting of the Word, contempt of lawful authorities, murders
and cruel hatred, chambering and wantonness, etc. And will a golden plaster
heal these diseases? No, no. A man shall not leave his sins the sooner, for
that he is rich, and has his purse full with Dives, his coffers full with
Croesus, his grounds full of cattle with Job, his barnes full of corn with
the Epulo: it is not wealth that will make him leave his sins, but weeping,
mourning, praying, and crying to God for mercy; this is the plaster that must
heal the soul.

And as wealth cannot preserve us from Ghostly, no more can it from temporal
evils, for can it drive away the gout, the stone, the collicke, the fever, the
plague, the headache, the toothache, yea a fellon or a white-loe, or any
greater, or lesser disease whatsoever? No, no, the frogs of Egypt entered
into the rich Exodus 9.
men's houses of Egypt, as well as the poor: so diseases and other evils into
rich men's bodies, as soon as into poor men's carcasses.

Nay, I will add one thing more which perhaps you will think strange, wealth
cannot keep a man from poverty; because I know ye will deny this; I will
bring in seventy Kings at a time, to take their oaths upon it. Look into the
book of the Judges, and ye shall find seventy Kings, with their fingers and
toes cut off, glad like whelps to lick up crummes under another Kings table.
And then a little while after, ye shall Judge. 1. 6.
see that the same King, that made all of them so poor, is used in the same
sort himself. What beggars brat could come to more need? Now deny if ye can,
but that a rich man may dye a beggar, as well as he that is so borne. I have
known many that from great wealth have come to a morsel of bread; whose youth
swimming in dainties, in old age were glad to snap at a crust.

Again, for inward troubles, riches cannot free us of them: Nay, as cobwebs
breed sooner in Wainescot, and fair hangings, than upon a plain wall: so
those that are rich, are more clogged Riches hurtful to the outward and inward
man.
with these things, than the poor. When a rich man lies sick of any disease,
has he one pang the less? or is he able to bear one fit more patiently,
because he can make a greater inventory than his neighbor? No, rather it
makes his cross heavyer. Ye see then, wealth connot profit a man's estate; Why
should we then gape after it, as Ravens for heat, and be carried away, with
the deceit of Balaams wages?

Last of all, wealth is hurtful and dangerous, and yet the hurt proceeds not
from the nature of wealth, but from the corruption of men: as cold drink in it
self, is good, but to him that has an Ague, hurtful, and as bad as poison.
Wealth is like an Hartichoake, a little picking meat there is, not so
wholesome as delicious, and nothing to that it shows for, more than the tenth
part is unprofitable leaves, and besides there is a coare in the midst of it
that will strangle you, if ye take not heed: such a thing is wealth, that men
so covetously desire, it is like some kind of fishes so full of bones and
unseene, that no man can eat of it without great danger, except he take great
heed. But wherein is wealth so dangerous? I answer, that it is very troublesome
to the outward man: the rich man's plenty will not suffer him to sleep: his
wealth is like a long garment, too side, that a man treads upon it often, and
catches a fall: So wealth makes him many times to fall into many maladies,
and makes him obnoxious to envy, and so subject to malice, that none are more.
But to the soul, the desire of wealth is most pernicious: For first, it makes
the soul vainly confident. The rich man's riches, is a strong tower in his
imagination; He thinks himself by them walled, Prove. 10. 5.
and moated about, though indeed, he is as open to danger, as other men. He
thinks himself safe, if he have Balaams wages, wealth; and puts his trust in
his uncertain riches. The Prophet says, they Sacrifice to their Nets, and
burn Incense to their Yarne; the meaning is, that the same 1 Timothy 6. Abac. 1.
16.
confidence, which by Sacrifice and incense we protest to God, they put in
their wealth. And it is noted, to be a passion of the covetous, to delight in
wealth: to flatter themselves in their abundance, as if gold were their Sun by
day, and silver their Moon by night. The wise man says, Gold and silver
fasten the feet, that is, the covetous man Eccles. 40. 25.
he thinks he stands firm on no ground, but on that which is paved with gold.

But there is yet more evil in wealth; it makes men proud; Charge rich men
(says the Apostle) that they be 1 Timothy 6. 17.
not high-minded: and Bernard says, that pride is the rich man's Cousin. It is
the nature of wealth, when it falls into vile men's hands, to blow up the
heart, as a bladder Pride blows up the heart.
is blown with a quill. And therefore Paul says, The rich fall into lusts and
temptations. To conclude, from wealth grows security, as a dead sleep from
drunkenness: Let us then beware of this sin, that we never be carried away
with the deceit of Balaams wages, that we be not covetous as he was.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XI. And perish in the gaine-saying of Core. After Mercy follows
Judgment.



I Am come to the third sin, which is the Rebellion of Core; whose story is
recited by Moses, in the Book of Numbers; where is registered and set down
unto us, how they rebelled Numb. 16.
against Moses in the Commonwealth, and Aaron in the Church; and how the earth
opened and swallowed them up; for as it can hardly bear any sins, so most
hardly a Rebel; the Sun would give him no light, the Air would give him no
breath, the fire no heat, the water no cleansing, the earth no place, but that
God for a time disposes of these creatures, to draw men to repentance. So
says the Apostle, The Lord is not slack, but is patient toward us, and would
have no man to perish, but 2 Pet. 3. 9.
would all men come to repentance. The Idolaters were slain with Exodus 32.
the sword, but the Rebels were swallowed up of the earth: as was Jericho and
Hierapolis in the primitive Church, and twelve Numb. 16.
Cities of Campania, in the days of Constantine, and many Cities Ios. 7.
in Greece, in the reign of Tiberius. The Minister in the 2 These. 2. 8.
Church is Gods mouth, and the Magistrate in the Commonwealth is Gods hand: If
Aarons Vrim and Thummim would have served, Moses Rod and his staff should not
have needed; but when the tongue could not persuade, the Rod and the Staff
Exodus 32.
compelled.

After a shepherds whistle comes a dog, after Doctrine God the Author of
Government.
comes justice: GOD led his people like sheep, by the hands of Moses and
Aaron: the one is to govern the souls, the other, the bodies of men in good
order. The Magistrate must kill sin Psalm. 80.
with the Sword; the Minister must destroy it with the Word. The Magistrate
must carefully protect and defend the Sacraments of grace; the Minister must
faithfully dispense and deliver the Word of truth: The Magistrate must behold
the outward person; the Minister must regard the inward man: the Magistrate
must punish sin; the Minister reprove iniquity: the Magistrate must respect
the public peace of the Commonwealth; the Minister the inward peace of the
conscience: the Magistrate must correct the body; the Minister reform the
soul: the Magistrate must prohibit outward wickedness; the Minister forbid
the inward corruption of the heart: the Magistrate must subdue with his hand;
the Minister reprove with his tongue: the Magistrate must force with violence;
the Minister teach with patience: and when Magistrate and Minister, the Sword
and the Word, go thus hand in hand together, then Kingdoms prosper like the
Apple Tree of Persia, that bears fruit monthly; for then, Are there thrones
set for judgment, even the Psalm. 122. 5.
thrones of the house of David: And therefore Jeremy lamented the overrhrow of
the Kingdom, and of the Priest, as the decay of Jerusalem, the Eclipse of all
their light. God governed his people Exodus 12. Acts 13.
of Israel first with a Prophet; then with Judges four hundred and thirty
years. Thirdly, with Kings, as 1 Samuel 8. Fourthly, with Dukes and Nobles after
the captivity: but what the superior be, Hag. 1.
it skilleth not, so there be a superior; Nam malum quidem est, ubi nullus est
principatus, it is passing evil, whereas there is no government: For when as
there was no King in Israel, every man did that which seemed good in his own
eyes.

The learned make three kinds of Government, and all to be obeyed.

As first, a Monarchy.

Secondly, an Aristocracie.

Thirdly, a Democratie.

To the which they oppose Tyrannidem, Oligarchiam, Anarchiam.

Our regiment is a Monarchy; that of the Germans and Switzers, seems to be
an Aristocracie; that of the Low Countries, a Democratie: which of these three
is the best, is not agreed upon among the learned. Some do advance the
government of many; because many are not so soon corrupted as one may be; even
as a great quantity of water will not so soon putrify, as will a small
portion. But these must on the other side consider, that it is a great deal
more hard to find many good than one: Reasons why Monarchy is the best form of
government.
and it is most likely, that such an one will prove best, whom the Nobility of
Royal blood, and Princely examples of predecessors do invite unto virtue.

Others do advance the government of one, because it is first, most agreeable
to nature: as Jerome does witness, saying, In apibus principes sunt; grues
unum sequuntur ordine literato: Imperator unus; Dux unus provinciae, in navi
unus gubernator, in domo unus dominus, etc. Bees have their chief governor;
the Cranes do follow one another in an exquisite order: there is one chief
commander, one chief Judge of a Province, one governor of all in the Ship,
one master in an house, in an army, be it never so great, the Ensign of one is
specially regarded, and attended on. In the body of Man, though the Lims, and
parts thereof be many, yet they all obey one head.

Secondly, most fit for cutting off seditions and rebellions: and therefore the
Romans in all their greatest dangers, had recourse unto this; Tanquam ad
anchoram sacram, as to their shot-anchor, as to their best and last refuge; as
Livie witnesses; for when Hannibal pressed the Romans, Ad Dictatorem
dicendum, Remedium jam diu desideratum Civitas confugit, The City went to the
pronouncing of a Dictator, which was the remedy they long expected, because (as
in another place he writes) Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper observatum
est; the proclamation of the Dictator was esteemed to be the voice of God.

Thirdly, The government of one does seem to resemble most lively the image of
Gods Power and Majesty. For as in the Firmament, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, do as it were represent some image of the glory of the eternal
Majesty: So the rule of Monarchs in their several Kingdoms upon the earth,
do call to our considerations, the government and rule of the Almighty.

But whether the government of one, or many, be best, I dare not define: but
this I say, that it is a most singular token of the mighty Power and Providence
of God, that so many several Nations over the face of the World, are upholden
and maintained by so many several sorts of government, that Quemadmodum non
nisi in aequali temperatura elementa inter se cohaerent: Ita hae Regiones sua
quadam in aequalitate optime continentur: As in bodily essences, the four
Elements do cleave together by unequal temperatures, as it were by a certain
inequality, all the several Countries are holden together: Nay, which of all
these governments is the best, Otiosum est disputare, it is a very idle thing
to dispute; but most yield to this, that a Monarchy is the most perfect, and
the blessing of God seen in that chiefly: Perme Reges regnant: By me Kings
reign, and Noble men bear rule, says Wisdom: He therefore that resists,
Resists not man, but God also. True it is, that man was made to rule, not to
serve: he was Rebellion brings destruction to Rebels themselves.
made to rule over fowls, fishes, cattle, but not men. At the first, men were
pecorum pastores, potius quam Reges hominum; feeders of cattle, than rulers
over men; that we might discern the order of creation, from the merit of
sin. So we read not of any servant Genesis 1. 20. Genesis 9. Genesis 3.
before Cham, says Augustine; For as sin brought in the first death, the
first sorrow, the first nakedness, the first flood: So it brought in the first
service. If man had not sinned, Moses had not needed in the kingdom, nor Aaron
in the Church; the one to rule the bodies, the other the souls of men.

Rebellion of all sins is unnatural: for what can be more unnatural, then the
child to rebel against the father, the wife against the husband, the servant
against the Master? and no less unnatural is it, for the subject to rebel
against his Sovereign. Rebellion God never prospered: hereupon says Solomon,
My son, fear God and the King, and keep no company with the seditious, for
their destruction shall Pro. 24. 21, 22.
arise suddenly, etc. The seditious Israelites were destroyed, sometime with
fire from Heaven, sometime with fiery serpents, sometime by Numb. 21.
the earth. For the earth has opened and swallowed them quick to Hell.
Seditious Miriam was strooken with leprosy; seditious Absalon Numb. 12.
was hanged by the hair of the head on an oak, as one spewed out of heaven,
and vomited out of the earth; seditious Achitophel, for want of an hangman, a
convenient servitour for such a Rebel, went and hanged himself; seditious
Sheba was arrested by a woman, Sam. 20. 22.
who cut off his head, and sent it to Ioab; seditious Zimri burnt himself, in
the kings house, which he had set on fire. Hereupon 1. Reg. 16. 9.
said Iezabel, Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? seditious Shallum 2 Reg.
15. 16.
perished in Samaria, being slain by Menahem, the son of Gadi. Never Rebel
went unpunished, For though God oftentimes does prosper just and lawful
enemies, (which be no subjects) against foreign enemies, yet did he never
prosper Rebels, who have taken arms against their Prince, were they never so
great in authority, or many in number. In Genesis we read, that five kings,
with their armies could not prevail against Chodorlaomer, unto whom they Genesis
14.
promised loyalty, and obedience, but they were all overthrown and taken
prisoners by him: but Abraham with his family and kinsfolks, an handful of
men in respect, owing no subjection to Chedorlaomer, overthrew him and his
host in battle. Thus God prospers in battle some few against many
thousands: but he never prospered Rebels against their own Prince, were they
never so great or noble, so stout, so politic, but always they were
overthrown, and came to most shameful ends.

And to instance but upon a few: One Brennus captain of the Gauls besieging
Ephesus, had the City betrayed into his hands by a treacherous woman, for the
greedy desire of a Jewel, that a Captain wore: but when she had played this
tteasonable part, he overwhelmed her with gold. A certain traitor offered
Fabritius the Roman, to poison his enemy Pyrrhus; but worthy Fabritius sent
God has confounded Rebels in all ages.
the traitor bound to Pyrrhus, who was enemy to the Roman Empire.

In Anno 1381. in Rich the 2. his time, sixty thousand rebelled, whose
Captains were Wat Tiler, Jack Straw: but they were overthrown and brought to
naught.

In Anno 1275. Lewellin prince of Wales rebelled against Edward the first: but
he prospered not, but was overthrown, and his head strooken off and set on
London bridge.

In the reign of Henry the 4. diverse noble men and kings rebelled, and came
every one of them to a miserable end.

The persidious and treacherous part of Bannister servant to the Duke of
Buckingham, is most odious; the Duke had brought him up of naught, but fleeing
from the face of usurping Richard, to Bannister for succor, this wicked man,
for hope of one thousand pounds, betrayed his Master, the Duke, but never had
one penny. For said usurping Richard, he that will betray so good a Master,
will betray any other: and in his old age the wretch was accused of Murder.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, were many treasons conspired, but God ever
delivered his worthy Servant, but executed his just judgments upon those
traiterous conspirators. All men know the miserable ends of the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland; the one beheaded at York; the other fled the
land, and left his house to destruction. Many of their followers were hanged,
and it were overlong to speak at large of John, and Francis Throgmorton,
Brook, Redman, Parry, Babington, Arden, with diverse others, who received
according to their deserts. Let every soul therefore learn to Romans 13. 1.
submit himself to the higher powers, and never to resist. For we must suffer
the Princes will to be done, aut a nobis, aut de nobis: either of us, or on us:
of us, when he commands for truth; on us, when he commands against truth;
either we must be patients, or agents: Agents, when he is good and godly:
Patients, when he is tyrannous and wicked: If we resist, our end will be
damnation, either temporal: for The wrath of a King is as the roaring of a
lion; he that provoke him to Pro. 20. ^.
anger, sins against his own soul: or eternal, as is manifest in Chore,
who went down quick to Hell. If murder be a crying sin, then treason may
well be called a roaring sin, and calls for speedy judgment. But for as much
as I have spoken before of this point, I will proceed no further with it.

VERSE XII. Metaphors very useful in teaching.
These are spots in your feasts of charity; when they feast with you without
all fear, feeding themselves, etc.


IN this Text are contained two things.

A detection of their sins, and

A denouncing of Judgment.

The sins here are three.

The first is Epicurisme, in that they eat and drink without fear, feeding
themselves.

The second is Pride, in that they are like the waves of the Sea, swelling on
high.

The third is Hypocrisy, in that they are as clouds promising rain, and yet
have nothing but dryness in them; empty clouds, in that they are as Trees,
which promise fruit, and yet have nothing but leaves; corrupt trees; in that
they are as stars, which promise light, and yet have nothing but darkness in
them, wandering stars.

Their Judgment is to be reserved to black darkness, that is, Hell fire hell
pains; and there he amplifieth it, by setting out Gods Judgment, how he
shall come with thousands of Angels, and that he shall judge all men, namely,
them Dan. 7.
that speak against him. Lastly, that he shall judge them for every evil
work and word, so fearful shall it be.

But first for the manner, and then for the matter. The manner of handling is
plain, he teaches them by plain things, as spots, waves, clouds, trees,
stars, things sensible, and objected to our eyes, because he had a desire to
profit them: So Christ's similitudes are fetched from light, salt, fannes,
corn, chafe, trees, Mat. 3. 5. 10. 13. 6.
sheep, wolves, seed, pearls: So Paul's Metaphors, and borrowed speeches are
taken from planting, watering, building, tilling, running, fighting, leaven,
sweet dough. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 5. and 9. c.


Who had better gifts than Paul, more learning, more Philosophy, more tongues?
he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, he was not inferior to the very
chief Apostles; for though he Act. 22.
was rude in speaking, that is, though he used no worldly eloquence, yet for
knowledge and understanding he did exceed, and spoke with tongues more than
they all: his Epistles are as the shop of an Apothecary; 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6.
a man cannot read them, but he shall carry away the smell ofexcellent
learning; yet came he not in the wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2.
for he regarded not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
We come to the Word in the pride of our heart, and have our ears tickled, not
our hearts edified; to hear some strange thing that may bring us into a
wonderment of things, Gods Word has its elegancy and eloquence.
we know not, and God in his justice suffers us to depart empty; yea worse
than we came. If the Preacher fill not the Pulpit full of fine words, trim
Phrases, Fathers, Doctors, Councels, Poetry, Philosophy; if he do not
aucupari syllabas, hunt after syllables, to please itching ears, we cry out
that he was unlearned, and a plain homely teacher, and English Doctor.

But we must desire wholesome, not tooth-some meat: For as we must teach
wholesome Doctrine, For if any man teach otherwise, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.
and consents not to the wholesome words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, he is pust up and knows nothing;
so ye must hear wholesome doctrine; and not be like unto those of whom Paul
prophesied, saying, The time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
doctrine, but having their ears 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
itching, shall after their own lusts get them an he ape of teachers, and shall
turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given to fables: to false and
unprofitable doctrine. We must speak, and you must hear, as the words of God.
All Doctors, Councels, Poets, Philosophers, are but darkness: the Word is
light only; so says David, 1 Pet. 4. 11.
Thy word is a Lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths. The Word must
sit on the Bench, when all these shall stand at the bar: Psalm. 119.
those that bom-baste their Sermons, that fill the Pulpit full of these
Authors, either they deliver little doctrine, or else unprofitable doctrine:
not as Paul did, He kept back nothing that was profitable, but showed and
taught openly, and through every house, Act. 20. 20, 21.
witnessing both to the Jews, and to the Grecians, the repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Such builders either have no mortar,
or else untempered mortar; like the false prophets. Such Cooks either have no
salt, or unsavory salt; Ezech. 13. 10. Mat. 5. 13.
such nurses either have no milk; or else corrupt milk that has taken wind;
the Word is sincere milk; and yet I deny not but Gods Spirit has his
eloquence, and no writings more eloquent 1 Pet. 2. 2.
than they.

To give you a little taste; speaking of Judah and Ierusalems punishment for
their idolatry; he says, I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria,
and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth
a dish, which he wipeth and turns upside-downe. And David speaking of the
Sunne-rising, and wherrying about the Heavens, he says, that he comes
forth, as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a mighty man to
run Psalm. 19. 5. Esa. 5.
his race. So the Prophet Esaias speaking of the sin of the people, he says,
that they did draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin with cart-ropes.
And speaking of Gods power, he sets it out with such eloquent words, as the
like have not been heard; for mark his phrases; Who has measured the Waters
in his fist? and counted Heaven with his spanne? and comprehended the dust of
the earth in a measure? and weighed the mountains in a weight, and the hills in
a Esa. ^0. 12.
balance? For Esaias was a noble Courtier, and had a courtly style; Ministers
may use all helps of humane learning.
but Amos had but an homely style, for he was but an heard-man. Paul used a
plain kind of teaching, and as he himself confessed, he was Rude in
speaking. Apollos was eloquent; Qui dedit Petrum piscatorem, dedit Cyprianum
Rhetorem; he that made Peter a Fisherman, made Cyprian a Rhetorician; yet
plain teaching if it edify, is not to be rejected. Quid prodest clavis aurea,
si non aperiat ostium? and quid obest ferrea, si modo aperiat? What good does a
golden key, if it open not the door? and what hurt does a key of iron, if it
open the same? and so, Quid prodest eloquentia non aedificans? what does
eloquence profit, if it edify not? and what does simple and plain teaching
hinder, if it edify? Let all things (says the Apostle) be done to edifying. 1
Cor. 14. 26.


Again, in that Jude here teaches us by spots, clouds, trees, etc. we have to
observe the liberty of the Ministers of the Gospel, not only nakedly to
deliver unto the people, the whole Council of God, but also to use helps of
wit, invention and art, as similitudes, allusions, applications, comparisons,
proverbs, and parables, to illustrate the Doctrine delivered. Thus did Christ
even by similitudes drawn from this and that thing, instruct the people: So
he taught the Astronomers of the East by a star; and Fishermen by a draught
of fish. The Woman of Samaria, Mat. 2. 10. Luke 5. 6. John 4. 14.
that came to draw water at Jacobs Well, he taught her by that corruptible
water, the water of Life. To Mary in the Garden, he appeared as a Gardener; to
his traveling Disciples, he appeared as a traveller: so also frequently in the
Gospel he teaches by many exemplary similitudes: the rich man, by the rich
man's Luke 24.
care and greedy gathering; the Vine-dresser, by the Vine-dressers digging and
hedging, and dressing; the Labourer, by the Laborers hire, and working; the
Builder, by the Builders laying a good foundation; the Husbandman, by the
Husbandmans sowing; the Fisherman, by the Fisher-mans casting nets and
drawing: as here Saint Jude, by spots, clouds, trees, waves, stars, etc. And
as Christ himself, so all his Prophets and Apostles have used parables,
similitudes and other helps, whereby their Doctrine might have a deeper
impression in the hearts of their hearers. Thus did profound Austen in his
questions, learned Jerome in his expositions, patheticall Chrysostom in his
amplifications, mellifluent Bernard in his meditations, pithy Cyprian in his
persuasions, sweet Ambrose in his allusions, eloquent Nazianzen in moving
affections, do make great use of these similitudes; and so may Ministers do.

Lastly, in that Jude teaches us by spots, clouds, trees, stars, etc. this
teaches us, that of all the creatures of God, there is a double use: one
natural, the other spiritual. As a spot naturally defiles the garment of the
body, so besides this natural signification, it serves to put us in mind, that
sin spiritually defiles the soul. And as a tree in nature signifies such
plants Every creature afford some profitable meditation.
of the earth, as bring forth fruit: so besides this natural signification, it
serves to put us in mind, that we ought to be fruitful Trees in the Lords
Orchard, lest that we prove fuel for the fire; for Every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, shall be hewne Mat. 3.
down and cast into the fire: and as clouds naturally power down rain: so
spiritually it teaches us to rain down righteousness, and to water and
refresh the thirsty, as the clouds do the earth: and as stars naturally
yield light, so spiritually should we, Our light must so shine before men,
that others may see our good works, and glorify our Father in Heaven. So by
sowing of corn into the ground to maintain man's life, our Savior leads us to
consider of another thing, that as the Sower Mat. 15.
casts his seed abroad into sundry sorts of ground, and they according to
their nature, bring forth fruit accordingly: Even so the Minister of the Word
scatters and sowes the Seed of Gods Word into the ground of men's hearts, and as
they be prepared, so they bring forth fruit. So by a Weavers shuttle, we see
the shortness of man's life gone in a moment. Do thou see, how Job 7.
the Wind drives the chafe, and dust of the Earth about, giving it no rest
till it be dispersed? Oh consider how the curse of Psalm. 1.
God shall dog the wicked, and never let their souls be at rest, till it
consume them. Do thou lie down in thy bed every night? O remember that ere
it be long, thou must lie down in thy grave, and be covered in dust, and
therefore prepare to dye in the Lord. Do thou see the beautiful grass and
herbs of the earth cut down and wither away? O remember, that All Esa. 40.
flesh is grass; and that it must fade and perish. Do thou put on thy
clothes to cover thy nakedness? Labor to put on the Lord Jesus, and the robes
of his righteousness, that thy filthy nakedness Romans 13. Apoc. 3. 18.
do not appear. Do thou take a Book into thy hand, and open it leaf by
leaf? O consider that the time will come, when the books of thy Conscience
shall be opened, wherein all thy sins are recorded, and thou must receive
according Apoc. 20.
to thy works. And thus we see, of all the creatures of God there is a double
use to be made of them, the one natural, the other spiritual. So much for
the manner.

Now for the matter. Their first sin is their Epicurisme, in eating,
drinking, etc. That which Solomon says of Princes, may be verified of all
private men; Woe to thee, O thou Land, when thy Eccles. 10. 16.
King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning: Blessed art thou, O
land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in time, for
strength, and not for drunkenness. So, blessed is that place, that town,
where sober-men are, as was Selge in Pisidia, void of drunkenness. This sin
never goes alone, it has many other sins to wait and attend upon it; it is
as the nave of the wheel, which turning about, all the spoakes turn with it,
there go with it, idleness, fighting, quarrelling, whoring, stealing, it is
Drunkards incorrigible, gluttons insatiable.
the anvile whereupon the other sins are wrought: Hereupon says Solomon; To
whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to
whom are wounds without cause? and to whom is the redness of the eyes? Even to
him that tarrieth long at the wine, Pro. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
to them that go, and seek mixed wine. Look not thou on the wine when it is
red, and when it shows his color in the cup, or goes down pleasantly: in
the end thereof, it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. Thine
eyes shall look upon strange Women, and thy heart shall speak lewd things,
etc. Fullness of bread, that is, Epicurisme, was one of the sins of Sodom;
and no doubt it was a hand to pull uncleanenesse the sooner upon them. Rain
engenders Ezech. 16.
Snow: so Epicurisme engenders whoredom. Paul exhorting to a Christian life,
begins with sobriety, as the first staff of the Tit. 2. 12.
ladder; for he that lives not soberly to himself, will not live righteously
with men, nor holily with God. Saint Peter speaking of the last day, begins
with sobriety, as an help to prayer, and to all Christian virtues. This he
learned of his 1 Pet. 4. 7.
Master, who gave this covenant to all; To take heed to your selves, Luke 21.
34.
lest at any time your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Paul reckons drunkenness among the works of the flesh, which
exclude us out of the Kingdom of Heaven. As no Gal. 5. 20. Numb. 5. Judge. 12.
Judge. 7. Deuteronomy. 23. Aug. 1 Timothy 5.
Leper might be in the camp of Israel; as no Gileadite might pass over
Jordan; as no fearful man might enter into the wars of Madian; as no
bastard might enter into the Sanctuary: so no Drunkard, no Epicure, shall
enter into Heaven. A Drunkard, an Epicure, is Dead being alive; (as Paul said
of the wanton Widows;) a voluntary devil, and uncurable disease, a breach
unrepairable, a common opprobrie of mankind: of all sinners, we see fewest
drunkards reformed: the Adulterer may become chaste, a thief, a true man, the
swearer, have a sanctified tongue: but these come seldom to Repentance.

We should eat, to live, and live, to praise the Lord: but we live, to eat
and drink. Sardanapalus his Epitaph might be graven on our tombs, Haec habeo
quae edi, quaeque exaturata libido hausit, etc. for our belly, is our God; our
kitchen, our Religion, Phil. 3. 18.
our altar, our dresser; our Minister, our Cook; our whole felicity in eating
and drinking: most men's bodies are as spunges to receive all liquor, their
throats open sepulchers, their bellies graves, to bury all Gods creatures:
there is not that bird that flies, that fish that swimmeth, that beast that
moves, that is not buried in their bodies; the earth is weary of such
unprofitable burdens, the creatures by them abused will be a witness against
them, as Saint James speaks in another case: from the French, the Spaniards,
and Turk we have Iam. 5. 1, 2. Soph. 1. 9.
learned strange attire; from the Italians we have learned pride, and Atheism
and wantonness; from the Dutch we have learned to drink; we never learn
from any nation any good thing. Nature teaches sobriety and temperance.
And it is a wonder, that we should be such Epicures; for among all the
creatures, God has given to none, so little a mouth as he does to man,
according to his proportion; which argues that man should be more temperate in
meat and drink, than other creatures, and not to be spots in feasts.

Well notes Augustine, that God has not given to man talons Aug.
and claws to rent and tear in pieces, as to Bears, and Leopards; nor horns
to push, as to Bulls, and Unicorns; nor a sting to prick, as to Waspes, and
Bees, and Serpents; nor a bill to strike, as to Eagles and Ostriches; nor a
wide mouth to devour, as to Dogs and Lions. Again, the mouth of man is not
bent to the earth, as the mouth of other creatures; os homini sublime dedit, to
note that he must not eat and drink, as other Ovid.
creatures. I say of meat, as Paul said of fornication, Meat for the belly,
and the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them. 1 Cor. 6. 13.
Fire is to warm us, not to burn us; water is to wash us, not to drown us;
weapons are to defend us, not to kill us: so meats and drinks are to refresh
us, not to oppress the body and vital spirits. If ever Satan has the vantage
of us, it is in our fullness; for then eyes, ears, tongue, heart, and all
members are out of frame; then we forget God, Christ, Heaven, Hell, and all.
This is the Caveat that God gave his people; When thou have eaten and filled
thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God for the good land, which Deuteronomy. 8.
10, 11, 12.
he has given thee; lest when thou have eaten and filled thy self; thou
forget the Lord, etc. Israel sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to 1
Cor. 10. 7.
play: So we at our feasts handle nothing but cards, dice, bowls, etc. The
false witnesses are noted to be Sons of Belial, such are 1 Reg. 21.
meetest for villainy: Gods Spirit and drink are set as opposite by the
Apostle; Be not drunken with wine (says he) wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18.
but be filled with the Spirit. When wine is in, wit is out: and where drink
is in, Gods Spirit is out: we cannot be full of them both at one time; and if
Gods Spirit be not in us, the unclean spirit is in us. God will have the hand
of the Father, to be first Deuteronomy. 21. 21.
on the riotous child. O that we had the Spirit of zeal! O that one Epicurish
drunkard were so served! O that the streets of this Town were sanctified, that
all England might hear it and tremble at it. It was a good argument in the
Primitive Church against drunkards, that it was but the third hour of the day,
that is, Act. 2. 15.
nine of the clock: but it is not so now; for our men begin at Sunrising,
and continue to Sunsetting, and often call for a candle, because the day is
too little for them. The Idolaters served god Bell in the day, and god Belly in
the night; we serve god Dan. 14.
Belly day and night.

The Holy Ghost makes mention of a great cup; belike great Judge. 5. 25.
men drunk in great cups; Amos reproves them for drinking in bowls: but we,
I think, shall drink in Troughes, and eat in Amos 6. 6.
Chargers, not in platters. It may be said of many, that was said God punishes
drunkenness and gluttony.
of Bonosus the Emperor, that we are borne, not to live, but to eat and
drink, to feast and banquet: we strive to match with Heliogabalus, who at one
supper was served with six hundred Ostriches: and to match Vitellius, who had
at one feast two thousand fishes, and seven thousand birds. This Epicurisme of
ours God will punish, and has, punished it with three years dearth; when did
God smite the Amalekites? he did it in the midst of 1 Samuel 30. 16, 17.
their glossing, as in a time, wherein their sin was ripe. When came God to
Balthazar? but in his cups and banquets? and when did God strike down the
chosen men of Israel, but then? for Dan. 5.
while the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God came upon
Psalm. 78. 30, 31.
them, and slew the strongest of them, and smote down the chosen men of
Israel. This made Job to offer sacrifice for his children; he Io^ 1. 4, 5.
knew how many falls are in belly-cheare. Men eat and drink away their
Christ; yea they eat and drink away their souls; nay, they eat and drink
away their salvation: the fruit of the flesh is found more among the poor than
the rich; which is a double sin.

Chrysostom in this respect prefers brute beasts before us, for they go
from belly to labor; we go from belly, to bed, if not to worse: we eat till
we surfeit, and drink till we be drunken: we eat while we sleep, and sleep
till we be hungry again: we sleep compass from eight to eight of the clock.

And note, that he says, that they fed themselves only: where observe two
things.

First, that they did not glorify GOD in their meats and drinks.

Secondly, That they relieved not others, but fed themselves.

All our eating and drinking, every morsel of bread or drop of drink that we
put into our mouths, should be to the glory of God; (so says the Apostle)
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever 1 Cor. 10. 31.
ye do, do all to the glory of God: but we like the Israelites, sit down to
eat and drink, and rise up to play; these are the effects of 1 Cor. 10. 7.
our Feasts.

Alas, we eat and drink daily, and yet not one among an hundred, nay, scarce
one among a thousand can tell, how to eat and drink, to please God in it;
namely; that we may be the stronger, and apter to walk in our general
calling of Christianity, and in our particular callings, to Gods glory, and the
good of the Church, in discharge of our duties. We read not that Dives
surfeited, yet feeding him self, not doing any good, he Luke 16. 19.
is condemned: This is that which God spoke by Zachary, When ye fasted and
mourned the fifth and seventh month, even these seventy Zach. 7. 5, 6.
years, did ye fast unto me? do I approve it? and when ye did eat, and when
ye did drink; did ye not eat for your selves, and drink for your selves.

Secondly, they fed and lived, but not to any bodies good, but We must not be
like Nabal, providing only to feed our selves.
to pamper themselves; this was the sin of Israel; not that they had the
calves of the stall, that they lay on beds of Ivorie, that they warbled to the
tune of the Vyoll, etc. but that they neglected the poor amongst them. We are
borne for others, the Heathen Amos 6. 6, 8.
could say, Ortus nostri partem patria vendicat; our Country challenges part
of our birth, our friends part, our kinsfolks part; for none of us lives to
himself; Nemo igitur sua quaerat, Let no man Romans 14. 7.
seek his own things, his own profit, health or wealth, but his Neighbors.
Ye know the life and end of churlish Nabal; at his sheepe-shearing he kept a
feast, as it had been a King, and David sending unto him for some victuals; he
answered David's servants, 1 Samuel 25.
Who is David? and who is the son of Ishai? there be many servants now
adays that break from their masters; shall I then take my bread and my water,
and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I
know not whence they be? This was the sin of the shepherds of Israel, they
fed themselves, They did eat the fat, and clothed themselves with the wool,
yea they did kill them that Ezech. 34. ^, 3.
were fed, but fed not the sheep. If we eat only to satisfy hunger, the
Horse and the Hog eat with as good a conscience as we do; for as every
creature of God is good, so it ought to be received 1 Timothy 4. 4.
of us with thanksgiving.

And observe, that Jude notes this as a great fault in the godly, that they
suffered the wicked to eat among them, to stain their meetings, these spots,
were as the menstruous cloth of a Esa. 64.
woman; as the spots of a Leopard, all the water in the Sea cannot Ier. 13.
wash them away; all Niter and Borith cannot cleanse them; they are as drops of
blood in Lawne, or Camericke; they did Ier. 2.
not only defile their feasts, but them also that feasted with them; they were
like menstrusie to stain them, and pollute them. If any that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Idolator, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat
not; if ye eat or company with them, they will defile you. Origin would not
pray with an Heretic; Martian would have saluted Polycarpe, and taken him by
the hand. No, says he, Agnosco te primogenitum diaboli, I know thou art the
first borne of the devil. John the Evangelist would not wash in the bath,
wherein Cerinthus an enemy to GODS truth bathed himself.

Every one that will avoid evil, must avoid the company of the evil; for he
shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and rest upon his holy Mountain, In whose eyes
a vile person is contemned, but he Psalm. 15. 4.
honors them that fear the Lord: therefore Jude taxes the godly, for
conversing with Epicures, for feeding with them; and tells them, that they
are spots in their feasts. With this also God charged the two Churches of
Ephesus and Pergamus, they had many good things in them, yet had God this
against Ephesus, that She had them, that maintained the doctrine of the
Nicholaitanes, which The Godly have ever abandoned the wicked.
were as spots to stain them. And against Pergamus, that She had them, that
maintained the doctrine of Balaam. These spots should be wiped out of the
Lords glass; these Lepers should be Apoc. 2, 6, 14.
banished the host of Israel; these goats should not come into the Lords
field; these tares should not come into the Lords barn.

Do thou love God, and the Gospel of God? then love the friends of God, and
hate his enemies, as David did, Do not I Psalm. 139. 21, 22
hate them that hate thee; and am not I grieved with those that rise up against
thee? I hate them right sore, as if they were my enemies. There is no man, but
he may do some thing to discountenance sin and sinners: no Fly so little,
but has his spleen; no Pismier, but has his choler; no Hare so little, but
has his shadow; and no man so mean, but he may reprove the Wicked: therefore
let thy countenance to such be as the North Wind, and never entertain Judas
with John; nor Simon Magus, with Simon Peter. As the sweet river Hippanus is
made bitter when it passes the Pole Exanthe; like the bitter water spoken of
in the book of Numbers. So are men made worse by bad company: such as are
continually in the Sun, must needs be Sunne-burnt; such as walk in the
mist, must needs be berayed; such as touch pitch, cannot be but defiled: so
such as abide in bad company, cannot be but spotted. Joseph living in the
Court of Pharaoh, had quickly learned, to swear by the life of Pharaoh; and
Peter being among liars and swearers, had quickly learned to lie and swear.
Therefore says Jerome, It is no wisdom to sleep near a Serpent, it may be
it will sting thee, it may be, it will not: so it may be that thou conversing
with a wicked man, may convert him; but it may be, he will pervert, spot,
and defile thee. David durst not meddle with these spots and spotted
companions. I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with
Psalm. 26. 4, 5.
the dissemblers, I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not
companied with the wicked: and surely he that loves the Lord, he will love
those that love him, and hate those that hate him; not his person, but his
manners: Pacem cum hominibus, bellum cum Aug.
vitiis; we must have peace with men, but war with their vices. But let men be
as blind in mind as Bartimaeus, who followed Mat. 20.
Christ by the noise; let them be as deaf, as the Adder; as filthy in soul,
as Lazarus in body; as black as the black horse Psalm. 58. Apoc. 6.
in the Apoc. yet if we gain by him, if he be for our honor, or profit, or
pleasure, we countenance him, he is an honest man, a good fellow. But he that
justifies the wicked, is as he that condemns the just; both are abomination
to the Lord. He that says Prove. 17. 25. Cap. 24. 24.
to the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the people curse, and the
multitude abhor. Let us not then give any countenance to the wicked, but be
at defiance with them; as was David, when he cried, Away from me, ye wicked,
I will keep the commandments Love Feasts abused, were after abolished.
of God.

But some will say, Is it a sin simply to eat with the wicked? No, there be
cases of necessity, and cases voluntary, wherein it is no sin to eat with
them. David partaked with the Philistines, Psalm. 119. 2 Samuel 23.
in the water of Bethlem.

The Apostles ate meat in Athens consecrated to Minerva, Act. 17. cap. 17.
with the Idolaters. Paul went in a ship dedicated to Castor and Pollux: and
we now may eat meat in a common Inn, with bad men. Again, in cases
voluntary it is not ever a sin to eat with the wicked; so that we do it to
exhort them, to reprove them, and gain them to God. Note the Antithesis, the
caution, the Apostle uses; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Ephesians. 5. 11.
darkness, but even reprove them rather. So, to reprove them, is not to have
fellowship with them.

These are Spots in your feasts. These feasts were love feasts, and these
love feasts were used before the communion, as appears 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21, etc.
by the words of the Apostle, and in Tertullians Apologeticon, to note this, as
many members make but one body; many strings make but one sound; many grains,
but one loaf; many grapes, but one cup of wine: So many Christians make but
one Church. So says the Apostle, Now ye are the body of Christ, and members
for your part: for all Churches dispersed through the World, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
are members of one body, of one Church; for albeit in the evil state there be
differences of callings, yet in the spiritual, there is Neither Jew, nor
Grecian; there is neither bond, nor free; there is neither male, nor female;
ye are all one in Christ Jesus; all as Gal. 3. 28.
one man.

But these love feasts being well begun, were afterward corrupted: for from
feasts of charity, they were turned into feasts of 1 Cor. 11.
drunkenness: for men would be drunken; and so became spots and stains to
these feasts; and therefore were these feasts after abolished, as all
ceremonies ought to be, if they edify not.

Ezeehias brake the brazen Serpent, a figure of Christ, and called 2 Reg. 18.
it, Nehushtan. Nectarius, a learned and a godly Bishop of Constantinople,
abrogated auricular confession, when it was used to hypocrisy. So that Pedum
lotio, washing of feet, fetched John 13.
from Christ's example; when it was made a part of baptism, was abolished by
Augustine. The judicial observation of Easter, raising contention between the
Latin and the Greek Church, was by Irenaeus and other Fathers removed. Paul
circumcised Timothy, not Titus. Legales Ceremoniae, ante Christum erant pars
cultus Christi, the legal ceremonies before Christ, were a part of Christ's
worship; Post Christi adventum, res erant adiaphorae, after his coming, they
were things indifferent: Post templum eversum, quum corrumpebantur, erant
sublatae, ut res impiae; after the destruction of the Temple, they were
abolished, as Ceremonies abused, are to be abolished.
things impious. But to leave this.

If any man will ask me, when and by whom these love feasts were taken away;
I answer, by the Antisiodorensian Council, then were they abolished. In these
feasts at the first was great sobriety, as Tertullian affirms; but after,
many used riot and excess, In Apologetico, 39.
they that should have been ornaments, were spots and stains; they that
should have been Lights, were scandals to these feasts: and therefore were
they abolished.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XII. Clouds they are without water, etc. Pride occasioned many ways,
ever odious to God.



THis was the second sin of this people; viz. Pride: they swelled like waves of
the sea, and lifted up them selves against God and good men. Of such swelling
proud men, spoke Peter, calling them (presumptuous) and says, That they stand
in their own 2 Pet. 2. 10, 18.
conceit, speaking swelling words of vanity: for it seems that Peter took
these words from Jude, or Jude from Peter rather: they spoke swelling words,
words of a foot and a half long; glorious words, like Thraso in the Comedy.
Such were the Quintinists and Libertines in Germany, who boasted of a
celestial perfection: such were one Henry Nicolitanes, who spoke in the clouds
highly, mystically, that we are co-deified with God, and God co-homonified with
us: such are our Papists, whose doctrine savours nothing but of pride; as their
doctrine of free will, justification by works, works of supererogation; which
they call the treasure of the Church; works of preparation, etc. thus they
speak words of the wind, and fill their belly with the East wind: For what is
pride, but wind? A wind to fill, and a wind to torment: Men may be spiritually
swelled both in life and opinion; there is a swelling for abundance of riches:
there is a swelling behavior in men's courses, there is a swelling in sin, a
swelling in opinion. Oh that we could learn to abhor pride, Pride has been
in all places, in all sorts, even in the godly.
and swelling, by considering how much the Lord abhors it, as many
Scriptures show; Solomon says, that, The fear of the Lord is to hate evil,
as Pride and arrogancy, etc. And again he says, All that are proud in
heart, are an abomination to the Lord. And Prove. 8. 13. Cap. 16. 5. 19.
again he says, He that exalts his gate, seeks destruction. And again
the Holy Ghost affirms, that the Lord beholds every one that is proud, and
abaseth him. For certainly when the Lord shall Job 40. 6.
come to judgment, that day of his coming shall burn like an Oven; and all
the proud, yea and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble, and Mal. 4. 1.
the day that comes, shall burn them up, and shall leave them neither root
nor branch: therefore let us not be high-minded, proud and swelling as many
are; for it is a thing most vain. 1 Timothy 64.


First, in respect of God, for he resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble; he puts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts Luke 1. 51.
the humble and meek.

Secondly, in respect of men, who will not regard it; When pride comes (says
the Wise man) then comes shame; for when men Prove. 11. ^.
will be exalted above their vocation, then God brings them to confusion.

Thirdly, in respect of themselves, who inherit nothing by it but folly; for
The foolish (that is, the proud) inherit folly: yet, Cap. 14. 18.
this sin of Pride has troubled all places, yea, the whole world; it troubled
Paradise, for Adam was proud, and would be like unto Genesis 3. Aug.
God; Sed dum rapere voluit Divinitatem, amisit foelicitatem, but whilst he
endeavored to snatch the Divinity, he lost his felicity. It troubled the
Israeliticall Church, they would be as good as Moses in the Kingdom, and as
Aaron in the Priesthood: it troubled the Apostles, for they strove for
superiority; yea, it Numb. 16. Mat. 18. 2. Pet. 2. 4.
troubled heaven it self; for pride was the sin of the Angels. Let all men
therefore beware of this sin: for first it is natural; for every one has
some sparks of pride in him. Again, whereas all other sins are occupied
about evil subjects, or about indifferent things, as drunkenness about wine,
whoredom about women, covetousness about wealth, gluttony about meat, only
pride is to be feared in well doing; and therefore the better that a man does,
the more jelous let him be of himself; to look to himself, that this sin of
pride overtake him not; for what have thou, that thou have not received? Nay,
Paul began to be proud through the abundance of his revelations, but lest he
should be exalted above 1 Cor. 4. 7.
measure, there was given unto him a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, because he should not be exalted above measure. Augustine
2 Cor. 12. 7.
having overcome many sins, yet overcame not the sin of pride, it did dog
him like a blood-hound. Luther strove more with this sin, than any sin; do
what he could, like a sea it came upon him. This stained all the works of the
Pharisees, they fasted, but then they disfigured their faces; they prayed, Mat.
6.
but it was in the Marketplace; they gave alms, but yet they Pride expressed
many ways in things that pertain to God and man.
blew the trumpet. Habet quisque naevos superbiae; every man has stains and
marks of pride in him; secundum plus aut minus, either more or less: the most
godly have it: but some are all pride, as Erasmus said of the Friar, that he
was all belly.

Generally, pride is expressed either in things concerning God; Jerome.
or in things appertaining to men.

In the things that concern God, there is the pride of the Atheist, whereby he
striveth to remove the sense of the being of God; and the pride of the
heretic, when he assaults the attributes of God, or his persons; and the pride
of the Papist, who will scale the high Fort of heaven by the broken ladder of
his own merits; and the pride of the curious, who will search into things not
revealed; and the pride of the persecutor, who will pursue by slanders or
violence, the power of Gods ordinances; and the pride of the impenitent; who
dare live and dye in his sins, without care of Gods threatenings. Again,
pride is expressed against God, as first when a man imagines himself to be
God, and would be so conceited of men, as Caligula, who (being an open mocker
of all religion) at length fell to think, that there was no other God but
himself.

Secondly, when men imagine, that what they have, they have it of themselves,
and so sacrifice to their nets, as the Prophet speaks.

Thirdly, when in their hearts they say, He shall not reign over us. Who shall
control us? and so contemn the ordinances of God, his Word, his Sacraments,
their work, their power.

Fourthly, when a man shall think he is perfect and breaks not the Law, and
that they can by their own strength run the way of Gods Commandments. Psalm.
119.


Fifthly, when in heart they say, We will do this and this: who shall let us?
we will go thither and thither, who shall hinder us?

Sixthly, when men will disobey the will of God; break his yoke, and burst his
bonds asunder. Thus is pride against God showed manywayes.

Pride against man discovers it self sundry ways also,

As by oppugning the fame of the best men:

By bragging and boasting.

By striving for offices and highest places.

By costly apparel, of purpose to be counted better men then they be.

By painting of the face, to be thought a beautiful creature, not being so.

By envying the good of another, as if he deemed himself either only worthy,
or else the most worthy.

The proud man will acknowledge no superior nor equal by his good will: he
uses his equals as inferiors, his inferiors, as servants, his servants, as
slaves, his slaves, as beasts: and when he is climed up on high, he pluckes up
the ladder Usually the basest are proudest.
after him (if he can) that no man shall come up after, or but such as he
pleases. Thus pride is expressed both to God and man. David was far from
this pride, Lord (says he) I am not Psalm. 113. 1.
high-minded, I have no proud looks: I do not exercise my self in matters,
that are too high for me, etc. But few are like David: many men forget
themselves to be men, they take to them the name of God, Act. 12. Esa. 14. 13.
as Herod did; they will make their nests in the stars, as Nabuchadnezer did.
The Bactrians said of Alexander, that his pride was such, that if his body had
been answerable to his heart, he would set one foot on the land, and the other
on the sea: For our pride is infinite.

But it is not so much in the rich, as in the poor; the poorest, the basest
are many times the proudest; pretty is the parable of Iotham; the best trees
refused to be the King, but the bramble affected it, and did sperare and
aspirare, hope and aspire, as did the bastard Abimelech. Judge. 9. 15.
Such a fine parable is also in the book of the Kings, of the Thistle; the
parable runs thus; The thistle that is in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that is
in Lebano^, saying, Give thy daughter to my son, to wife. The thistle, 2 Reg.
14. 9.
the beggar is proud, none worse. The Cumane Ass jetteth up and down with his
long ears in a Lions skin. Aesops Crow craketh in the feathers of other birds:
Among fowls, the Peacocke for pride challength the sovereignty. Hagar the
kitchen maid will be proud, Genesis 23. Mat. 20.
and insult over her mistrisse Sara. The poor Sons of Zebede would sit at
Christ's right hand, and at his left; and they that Job would not set over the
dogs of his sheep: yet were so proud, as they contemned him. None prouder
then the basest and the meanest: If they have but a little mucke, or a few
cloddes, to commend them, a little land, they look aloft, and a King must not
be their Cousin.

It is said of them that live under the North Pole, that no plant grows in
Summer, for the great heat there, nor none in Winter for the extreme cold: So
no virtue can grow in our Climate; not in rich, for they are proud, nor in the
poor, for they are prouder.

We all complain of the envy, the quarrelling, the strife, the suites, the
troubles of this age: but where is the root of all these, but pride? Only by
pride does man make contention: For where every man contendeth to have
preeminence, and none will give place to other, there can Pro. 13. 10.
be no peace. We have the heart of Caesar, and the stomach of Pompey, the one
could not endure an equal, nor the other a superior. Quisque gerit regnum in
pectore; every man carries a King within him. When we follow a dead corpse to be
buried, or walk among the graves, we can condemn our vanity and insolency;
every man can be a preacher against pride, and cry out, Why should men be
proud, who are but earth and ashes, a bubble, a vapor, a shadow, whose breath
is in his nostrilles; to day a man, to morrow none; to day a Prince, to morrow a
dead carrion? Quid superbis cinis and pulvis? Why art thou Psalm. 39. 5, 6.
Eccles. 10. 9. Mat. 23. 5.
proud, dust and ashes? but we forget all, and like the Pharisees love the
chief places: but it is certain, where pride is in the saddle, God hates
pride, and resists it.
shame is in the crooper, for he that exalts himself, shall be brought low:
for glory is like a shadow, if a man follow it, it goes from him, if he goes
from it, it follows him. Before destruction the heart of man is hautie,
proud; these proud men please none; not God, for Prove. 18. 12.
he resists them; nor their betters, for they envy them; nor themselves, 1
Pet. 5. 5.
for they are not so proud, as they would be. Whom do they please then?
Certainly the Devil; who of a beautiful Angel, is made an unclean ougly
spirit: humilitas autem hominem Angelo similem Aug.
facit, and superbia Angelum daemonem reddit: humility makes a man like an
Angel, and pride makes an Angel, a Devil; and therefore Paul would not have
a Bishop to be a young man, lest he 1 Timothy 3. 6.
being puffed up, fall into the condemnation of the Devil. The which words may
be taken either actively, or passively; actively, lest the Devil condemn us:
or passively, lest we by our pride be condemned of the Devil, or with the
Devil.

Many swell in pride, but let them take heed, they swell not as Aesops toade
did; who seeing the Ox feeding by her, envied him, and swelled her self so
big, that she swelled her self out of her skin, she burst withal: yea
indeed the proud man is as he that transgresses by wine: he is as a drunkard,
without reason and sense; Hab. 2. 5.
whom God will punish and make a laughing stock to all the world: for God
opposes himself against the proud; and who then can stand for them? Pride is
one of the sins that God hates; he hates 1 Pet. 5. 5.
all sins, but this (...): so says Solomon; These six things does the Lord
hate, yea his soul abhors seven: the hauty eyes, a lying Pro. 6. 16.
tongue, etc. See how he places pride in the forefront, in the vauntgarde,
like Vrias. The sin of this age, is pride, and the pride of this age is
monstrous. Christ set a little Child among his Apostles: Mat. 18.
but it had need be a sucking child, (...), an infant, not (...), a child, a
boy, for even children are proud, like the saucie boys of Bethel. 2 Reg. 2.
23. Esa. 3. 5.
Children presume against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable:
servants ride, and masters go on foot. Paul prophesied of this age, Eccles 10,
6.
Know (says he) that in the last days shall come perilous times, men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2


There is a pride in the Church, and Commonwealth; hic and ubique, here and
every where. In the Church all would be Apostles, and Prophets, and teachers,
and every man as good as his fellow, as Paul 1 Cor. 12.
said of the Corinthians; docent antequam discunt, they teach before they have
learned, quoth a father of that age; so is it now; and all Hier.
the troubles of the Church come from pride: the people think, they have as
much knowledge, as the Pastor: Arrius the heretic, who sprang up An. Dom.
358. to maintain his heresy, that no sin were it never so great, should be
reputed to him, that had faith, said, that God revealed that to him, which he
concealed from the Apostles. Montanus called himself Paracletum, the Holy
Ghost; and his two trulles, Prisca, and Maximilla, he named Prophetesses.
Arrius fell into his heresy, for that he could not be Pride the cause of heresy
in the Church, and disorder in the commonwealth.
a Bishop. The Anomaei said, that they knew God, as he knew himself: most
heresies have come from pride; Si ergo vana gloria te titillaverit, dic ei, ut
Christus, Magdalenae: Noli me tangere, nondum ascendi ad Patrem: if therefore
pride, or vain glory shall tickle thee, say unto it, as Christ did unto
Magdalen, Touch me not, I have not yet ascended to my Father. Chrysostom. Bern.


In the Commonwealth there is pride; for the foot striveth to equal the head;
the servant would be as the Master, the peasant, as the Prince: the cobbler, as
the Counselor. Corrus sequitur Curiam, the cart will follow the Court: and as
the Preacher says, Folly is set in great excellency, and the rich set in the
low place. I have seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants, on
the ground. As Eccles. 10. 6, 7.
the Academicks said, they knew nothing, and the Anomies, all things: so some
are too base, but most are too proud, like the Fly, that sitting in the
Chariot, said, Heu, quantum pulverem excitavi? What a dust have I raised? The
poor Fly was proud: and so most men swell in pride, like the Egyptian Ass,
that carried the Goddess Isis; thinking the honor done to the Goddess, to be
done to her, pricking up her cares, till he that drove her, lashed her for her
folly, saying, Non tibi, sed deae (stulte Asine) datur hie honos; O foolish
Ass, this honor is not done to thee, but to the Goddess: like Caius
Caligula, who was so proud, that he would have his horse called Velocissimus,
and to be fed with barely Dion. histo. sua.
in vessels of gold, and to drink wine in Caldrons of gold, and resolved to
make his horse, Consul of Rome: like Sapor King of Persia, who was so proud,
that he wrote himself, King of Kings, brother to the Sun and Moon, partner
with the stars: like Haman, who was so proud, that none must ride upon the
Kings horse, but he.

To most me^ pride is as a chain: they will lose their goods, yea their lives,
before they will lose their will. Let there be a proud Psalm. 73. 6.
man in a town, and he must dominiere over all, to die for it, he must rule and
have his will; but be jealous over thy soul, suspect thy self of pride, while
thou live; it creeps on us in most of our actions, chiefly when we do
best: therefore Pascentius niger was a rare man, who being praised of an Orator
for an excellent act, answered thus, Write the praises of Marius, Iugurth and
Hannibal, but praise not me, till I be dead, for that (quoth he) is but
flattery: A most grave saying, to shame us Christians. And surely, as
Demosthenes said, that the first, the second, and third virtue in an Orator,
was Action; so Augustine said well, that the first, second, and third virtue of
a Christian, is humility: for that is the Congregation of all virtues: without
which, the gathering together of all virtues is nothing else, but a scattering
of them: Give honor (says the Apostle) and go one before another. Give
honor, take it not, strive not for the highest pew in the Church, the highest
room at a Feast, be Pride brings confusion.
lowest, not highest. If Paul had said, In taking honor, go one before
another; he had had five thousand disciples. Let not these words be heard
among you, I am as good as he, I am as well borne as he; he shall not have
my neck under his gyrdle, for these speeches savor of pride, and pride of all
other sins does most discredit and disgrace a Christian, as it did Tarquinius
Superbus; who being a traitor, an whoremonger, yet was not called Tarquinius
the Traitor, or Tarquinius the Adulterer; but Tarquinius the proud; to teach
us, that pride does more disgrace a man than any other sin.

Let us not therefore swell like waves, be lifted up with pride, the end will
be shame; and therefore he says, these waves do but foam out their own
shame: For God will confound them, throw them from their Pinnaces, shake them
with his whirle-windes, strike them with his lightenings, beat them with his
thunderclaps; for pride must have a fall, and great pride a great fall. Herod
fell from a throne of gold, to a bed of dust, to be Act. 12. 23. Dan. 4. 29.
eaten of worms; and yet behold a greater fall; Nabuchodonozer fell from the
glory of a King, to the state of a beast, to eat grass like an Ox, to be
wet with the dew of Heaven, his nails to grow like the talons of an Eagle, and
yet behold a greater fall; Adam fell from innocence, to mortality, to be
exiled Genesis 3. 24.
out of Paradise, and kept out with a shaking sword, and yet to make up the
mease, the up-shot, behold a greater fall: The Angels fell from Heaven to Hell,
from felicity, to all misery, and are now reserved in everlasting chains. In
the Primitive Church, Simon Magus did abuse the Ascension of Christ our
Savior, Jude verse. 6.
and made him self wings, and pretended and offered to fly up to Heaven: but
Peter prayed, and he fell down like lead, and crushed his members grievously:
Ante pervenit justa petitio, quam iniqua praesumptio: A just prayer came up
before an unjust presumption: Eusebius.
such were the Giants in the old World, that would lay Pelion upon Ossa, and
both upon Olympus, and pull Jupiter out of Heaven; but their language was
confounded. What should I speak of Haman, who by pride brake his neck; of
Holofernes, Judith 13.
who by pride lost his head; of Sennacherib, who for his pride had killed in
one night an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his men, and not long
after, his own Sons Adramelech and Sharezer Esa. 37. 38.
slew him, as he was in the Temple worshipping Nisroch his god; Of Antiochus,
who for his pride had his head and hand cut off, and hanged up upon the gates
of Jerusalem; Of Pharao, who for his 2 Match. 1. 15. Exodus 12.
pride against God, and his people, was drowned in the red sea; of Apris a King
of Egypt, who for his pride, and glorying that neither God nor man could put
him from his Kingdom, was strangled; Of Caphaneus, who for his pride was
overthrown with lightning; For he said, he would overthrow Thebes, invito Deo,
whether God would, or no; Of Domitian, who for his pride (for Examples of the
fall of diverse proud men.
he would be called a God, and worshipped) was slain of his servants with
daggers in his privy Chamber, his body was buried without honor, his memory
cursed, and his trophies defaced; Of Queen Venda, daughter to the famous King
of Poland, who out of the pride of her heart refused to be married, she
thought none good enough for her, but at last she was drowned in the river
Vestula. And many ways does the Lord meet with proud men; sometimes giving
them up to hardness, and impenitence of heart; sometime bringing them to
disgrace, and open shame; sometime suffering them to fall into other sins,
whereby the Laws of men take hold of them, either to deprive them of their
lives or of their honors: One way or other he does usually punish them in this
life; to say nothing of those punishments prepared for them in the life to
come. Yet all these judgments cannot keep us from swelling, from pride, but
still men will be like the raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own
shame; and though there be nothing more foolish, nothing more base, nothing
more inhumane, nothing more impious then pride, yet there is no end of this
humor, men are proud in death, and life, yea, and beyond death, like
Abimelech, who bade his Page kill him, that it might not be said, that he died
by the hand of a woman; yet a Judge. 9. 55.
woman gave him his deadly wound. This made men to call their houses, and their
towns after their own names; that they might live in spite of God, if not in
themselves, yet in their posterity; but they are notably travised by the Spirit
of God, when he says, Wise men dye as well as fools, and leave their riches
for Psalm. 49. 10, 11, 12.
others, yet they think that their houses and habitations shall continue for
ever, and call their Lands after their own names: but man shall not continue
in honor, but is like the beasts that perish. Many desire to live, if it be
but in an Epitaph, in an Inscription on their grave, yet names are rotten many
times before their carkases. Sir Thomas More sent unto Erasmus, for verses to
be engraven upon his tomb: At patibulum erat illi pro sepulchro, the block
was to him for a sepulcher, quoth Calvin: who compares him to Shebna, unto
whom God said, What have thou to do here, that thou should here hew thee out
a sepulcher, as he that heweth out his sepulcher in an high place, or that
graveth an habitation for himself in a rock? for whereas Shebna thought to
make his name immortal, by his famous sepulcher, he dyed most miserably among
the Assyrians. So Sir Thomas More thought to make his name immortal by his
tomb, and epitaph there written, he perished as a traitor. Stately tombs and
epitaphs are nothing, every passenger censureth and says, Thy pomp is brought
down to the grave, the worm is spread under thee, and Esa. 14. 11:
the worms cover thee. Thou said, I will ascend up to heaven, and exalt my
throne above, besides the stars of God, but thou shall be brought down to the
grave, to the sides of the pit. So Caesar an heathen derided the pride of Cyrus
for his sepulcher, and said, Coelo tegitur, qui non habet True zeal burns out
by degrees, till it come to full flame.
urnam; superbiain coelo nata est, sed velut immemor qua via inde cecidit,
illuc ideo redire non potuit: Pride (as one prettily speaks) was bred in
heaven, but having (as it were) forgotten which way it fell from thence, it
could never afterward find the way thither again. Hugo lib. de anima.
Let us therefore abandon this sin of pride, and hate it as the Devil
himself, nay more then the Devil; For the Devil cannot hurt thee, till pride
has possessed thee.

And there be two things that make a man proud:

Scientia and Divitiae. and Knowledge and Riches.

Scientiainflat, says Paul, Knowledge puffs up: and Divitiae inflant, Riches
also puff up: therefore says Paul to Timothy, Charge 1 Cor. 8. 1. 1 Timothy 6.
17.
rich men, that they be not high-minded; As he that drinks wine, shall feel
it fume into his head, though he be never so sober: so wealth is a cup of
fuming wine, which the best man that lives shall feel fuming in his heart; and
some are made stark drunk withal: They are drunk, but not with wine: and as
worms breed Esa. 29. 9. Aug.
in the hearts of trees, so pride, the Worm of wealth (for so a Father calls
it) commonly breeds in the hearts of rich men. And this pride God hates, let
us hate it also; For it is Radix cuncti mali, and Regina omnium vitiorum: It is
the root of all evil, and the Greg. in M^.
Queen of all vice.

The third vice that he charge them with, it is hypocrisy, in that they
being in malice, like Cain, in covetousness, like Balaam; in rebellion, like
Chore; yet eat and feast with the godly, Clouds without rain, waves without
water, trees without fruit, stars without light.

And here is to be observed the greae zeal of the Apostle, which as fire
kindling by little and little, is now come to his height and heat: he cannot
forbear them any longer, but must needs paint them out in their colors. James
and John were Mar. 3.
filii tonitrui, sons of thunder. And surely we had need thunder in this
age, men are so asleep; By these degrees did the zeal of Paul grow to this
height: Ye cannot drink of the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils: ye
cannot be partaker of the Lords table, 1 Cor. 10. 21, 22.
and of the table of Devils: do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we
stronger than he? as if he should say, God will either break thee, or bend
thee, there is no striving against him. David speaking of Idols, at last
bursteth out, They that make them, are like unto Psalm. 135. 18.
them, and so are all they that put their trust in them, and God will bind
them both in one bundle, and cast them into the fire. So Debcra having spoken
of the wickedness of Sisera, concludes with an execration against all the
wicked, rising ab Hypothesi ad Thesim, saying, They fought from Heaven, even
the Searres in their courses Judge. 5. 20, 21, 26, 31.
fought against Sisera. The river Kison swept them away, the ancient river, the
river Kishon. She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the
Workmans hammer: with the hammer smote she Sisera, she God loves sincerity,
and detesteth hypocrisy.
smote off his head, after she had wounded and pierced his temples. So let all
thine enemies perish, o Lord, etc.

But to leave this, and to come to the sin here condemned, which is
hypocrisy. In speaking whereof he clappeth on all his sails, and goes with
full wind: For he compares hypocrites to clouds which promise rain, and yet
they be dry clouds: they deceive the husbandman, they bring no rain at all.
He compares them to trees, which blossom and flourish, but bring forth no
fruit; and unto stars, which promise light, and yet do but deceive the poor
traveller, for they be wandering stars. The Lord detesteth nothing more, then
for men to make his religion a cloak to their wickedness, and to think the
bare profession of his name enough. God requires truth in the inward parts.
And in another Psalm. 51. 6.
Psalm, he brings in the Lord thus reasoning against hypocrites, and
counterfets, which pretend, but not intend. Why do thou take my Covenant in
thy mouth, and hate to be reformed, etc? Psalm. 50. 16.
For this sin God destroyed Shilo, and removed his Arc from it: the Arc had
remained in Shilo about three hundred years, but after, it was taken, the
Priests slain, and the people miserably discomfited. Hereupon says God, Will
ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense
unto Baal, and Ier. 7. 7, 8, 9. 1 Samuel 4. 11. Ier. 7. 9, 10, 11, 12.
walk after other gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in this
house whereupon my name is called, and say, We are delivered, though we have
done all these abominations? Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon
my name is called before your eyes? Behold, even I see it, says the Lord. But
go ye now unto my place which is in Shilo, where I set my name at the
beginning, and behold what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people
Israel. Thus for hypocrisy was Shilo destroyed: they halted with God. Dicunt
sed non faciunt, they said, but they did not. He is not a Jew, that is one
outward, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is
a Jew that is one within, and Romans 2. 28, 29.
the Circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter: whose
praise is not of men, but of God. So we are Protestants in the Letter, not in
the Spirit; professors outward, none inward; Christians in the 1 Pet. 3. 21.
flesh, none in the heart; baptized in the body, not in the conscience.

It is said of Epicurus, that he did put on but the bare name of Cicero 5.
Tuscul.
a Philosopher, and was not a Philosopher in truth. It may as truly be spoken,
that many in this age put on but the naked shape of Christians, and are not
Christians indeed, and that many color their wickedness by outward pretense
of Religion, and by bearing Bibles in their hands, and the Word in their mouth,
though it be never settled in their hearts; being like the Carbuncle, that has
a fiery show, yet never flames, and like those that use musk, and pommanders,
to conceal their unsavory and stinking breath. But such God hates with a
dooble hatred, and will be revenged of them. It were better, that we had no
ears to hear, Hypocrisy the counterfeit of religion.
nor tongues in our head to talk of God; rather then by talking and hearing,
to cover our notorious wickedness; For we shall perish, and we shall have
neither part nor fellowship in the number of the faithful. God above all
things commended sincerity in Iehosaphat: Act. 8. 21. 2 Chro. 19. 3.
For he had prepared his heart to seek God: he had some sap, but he had the
heart of an Oak also, and was sincere: so was Eleazar, he 2 Mac. 6. 23.
could not be drawn to play the hypocrite, by no flatteries, nor allurements,
no, not to save his life thereby, and to avoid most grievous torments. And
Nazianzen could say of his Father, that he chastised pride, and loved humility:
not fainedly, or colourably, but sincerely, truly, and that he reposed humility
in his soul, and not in his garments, or bowing down of his head, or low
speech, or a thick and long beard, or colored hair, or grave pace in going:
For these things (says he) are easily devised, yet quickly reproved; for no
counterfeit thing can be durable. Such men there were once; but where are they
now to be found? and how rare are they? Most men are like the Church of Sardis,
they have a name to live, and yet are dead, they seem to live, but with God
they are dead, their faith is dead, their zeal dead: men live, when they bring
forth fruit, else they be dead. Tullies son brought from Atheus, not only
nomen, but rem, not the name of learning only; but learning it self; So we
should bring and carry away from Christ not his name only, but his virtues and
so be followers of God as dear Children; otherwise if we be Christians Ephesians.
5. 1.
in name, and not in truth; if we draw near unto God with our mouths, and
have our hearts far from him, we shall perish; for Can a rush grow without
mire? or can grass grow without water? so are Job. 8. 11, 13, 14.
the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish: his
confidence shall be cut off, and his trust shall be as in the house of a
spider. And again, it is said of the hypocrite, that his joy is but a moment,
and though his excellency mount up to Heaven, and his head reach unto Cap. 20.
5, 6.
the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, etc. Let us then, as
we love our souls, shun hypocrisy, and use sincerity; this shall comfort us
at the last, as it did Ezechias: for being upon his deathbed, this was his
comfort, that he had served God (not in show) but Esa. 38. 3:
in truth: but we are cloven-footed, and cloven-hearted with God: In animis
hominum multae sunt latebrae multique recessus, In men's hearts there be many
dens, and lurking places, and many windings and turnings. But let me say to
the hypocrite, as Chrysostom said; Hypocrita, aut esto, quod appares, aut
appare quod es, Hypocrite, either be as thou seem, or appear as thou art:
for simulata sanctitas est Aug.
duplexiniquitas, counterfeite piety is double impiety. First, because it is
impiety, and then because it is counterfeite, making truth falsehood, and God a
lier. But as it is said, Non auditores, sed factores legis, Not the hearers,
but the doers of the Law shall be justified; so of religion, Non eandem
profitentes, sed eidem obedientes, Romans 2.
not professors, but performers shall be glorified. Let us not Sincerity is by
God required, hypocrisy reproved.
then be like the Fig tree, which our Savior cursed, that had leaves in
abundance, but no fruit at all: For it is not the lifting up of our eyes, or
the knocking of our breasts, nor the holding up of our hands, which shall stand
us in stead at the last day: but Mat. 21.
the wounded soul, the sincerity of the heart, the contrite spirit, joined
with outward observance and obedience, which shall administer true joy in the
latter end. Therefore let us, as elect of God, holy and beloved, let us, I say,
profess with our mouths, and practice with our lives; let us sing in voice,
and with the spirit also; let us repent in life, and sow in tears; let us
cleanse the flesh, that we may be mortified, and cleanse our spirit, so shall
we be glorified; let us never be as clouds without water, as trees without
fruit, as the raging waves of the sea, as stars without light; I mean
hypocrites. For hypocrites are as clouds without water, as trees without fruit,
as stars without light. Thus Jude painteth them out, and that finely; and so
does our Savior: for speaking of hypocrites, he says, They bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be borne, but they themselves will Mat. 23.
not move them with one of their fingers: and he says, that They do all
their works to be seen of men: that they strain at a gnat, and swallow
down a Cammell; that they tithe Mint, Annise and Cummin, but leave the
weightier matters of the law, as judgment and mercy; that they make clean
the outside of the cup and platter, but inwardly are full of briberie and
excess. One says, that hypocrisy is the Greg. l. 8. moral.
cloaking of a secret vice under the show of virtue, and that the life of an
hypocrite is nothing else, but Quaedam visi^ phantasmatis, the show of an
imaginary matter, which appears some thing, and is nothing; and compares the
hypocrite, to Simon of Cyrene, that bare Christ's Cross, but dyed not with
Christ; so every hypocrite professes to live to Christ, but will not dye to
sin and the world: and Saint Chrysostom likens the hypocrite to Herod, Super
Mat. 12.
that promised devotion, and performed persecution; and he says, that a
sincere man is like to a fair woman, that needs no external ornaments, but
has natural beauty; but the hypocrite is like Hom. 57.
a filthy deformed harlot, which uses many meretricious colorings, that
cannot cover her filthiness, but the nearer any draws unto her, the more he
mislikes her. And again he says, that an hypocrite is like a Woolfe clothed
in a sheeps skin, Super Mat. 7.
but that he is found out by his voice and by his doing; for the sheep bleats,
and looks toward the earth, and eats grass, which is a sign of humility:
but the Woolfe howles and looks toward heaven, which is a sign of pride and
cruelty: the hypocrite has Jacobs voice, but the hands of Esau, that is, he
talks religiously and zealously, but he walks impiously and profanely; the
hypocrite is like the statues of Mercury, that were wont to be set in high
ways to direct travelers to some City or Town, but did not travel nor move
themselves: the Hypocrisy has many woes denounced against it,
hypocrite is like the Stage Player, that when he cried, O heaven! he pointed
with his finger to the earth, when he cried, O earth! he pointed with his
finger to Heaven; and therefore the wise Polemon gave him no reward, being
Judge of the Actors, saying, Hic manu Solaecismum fecit, he has spoken false
Language, and committed an error with his hand. And to conclude, the hypocrite
is like a deaf and hollow Nut, which has no kernel within, but is wasted
with the worm, and fit for nothing but the fire.

Hereupon it came to pass, that Christ dealt not so hardly with any sinners,
no not with Atheists that denied the Resurrection, and Gods power; nor with
Temporizers, that are always of the same Religion that the company is: that
can blow hot and cold with one breath, as with hypocrites: for having to deal
with Sadduces, he shakes them off, as damned creatures, as vessels of
destruction, children of wrath, whose judgment was just, and their damnation
slept not: he tells them, that they erred; Ye err (says he) not knowing
the Scriptures, neither Mat. 22. 29.
the power of God: but when he has to do with Pharisees, with Hypocrites, he
doubleth and redoubleth, and tripleth, and multiplieth woes and curses; he
thundereth like James and John; his zeal stays not with a little. O woe to
you Scribes and Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, and so the second, the third, the
fourth, the fifth, the sixth time, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, ye
Hypocrites: as though all the woes and curses in this life, and in the life to
come, were not enough for them.

And it is not to be forgotten, that God calls it blasphemy, to speak one
thing, and to do another; with man, it is hypocrisy, but to do so with God,
it is blasphemy; the sin increases, as the dignity of the person increases:
as for example; speak a word against a common person, and he has but his
action of the Case against thee, speak against a noble man, it is Scandalum
Magnatum; against the Prince, it is death; against God, it is damnation of body
and soul: double and dissemble with men, it is hypocrisy; halt with God,
counterfeit with him, it is blasphemy. Therefore says Christ to the Church of
Smyrna, I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Apoc. 2. 19.
Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.

And it is further to be observed, that Christ speaks of hypocrites, as if
Hell were only prepared for them: for entreating of the evil servant, that
said in his heart, My master will defer his Mat. 24. 51.
coming; he says, that he will cut that servant in pieces, and give him his
portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And
Christ our Savior asks them, how they shall escape Hell? O ye Serpents and
generation of Vipers, how shall ye escape Mat. 23. 33.
the damnation to come? And to show the certainty of their damnation (besides
this interrogation, how shall ye escape the damnation to come? As if he should
say, It cannot be, but ye must Hypocrites make a show of Religion, being
irreligious.
be damned: For the interrogation implies an affirmation.) He says of the
wicked, that They shall have their portion with Hypocrites: to show, that the
condemnation of hypocrites is most surely sealed. And this aggravated the sin
of Corazin, and Bethsaida, and Mat. 24. 51.
Capernaum; that they pretended Religion, but in painted boxes they did hide
deadly poisons, in beautiful sepulchers, rotten bones; and under Iezabels
painted face, a whores behavior. Woe (therefore) to thee, Corazin, woe to thee,
Bethsaida: for if so be, the miracles, Mat. 11. 21, 23.
that had been done in thee, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they bad
repented long ago in sackloth and ashes. And thou Capernaum which art lifted
up on high, shall be brought dowue to hell. And verily of all sinners, the
hypocrite is the worst; he is ovis habitis, vulpis actu, crudelitatelupus; Eern.
a sheep in show, a fox in deed, and a wolf in cruelty, for an hypocrite has
vulpem in cerebro, a Fox in his brain, milvum in manu, a kyte in his hand, and
lupum in cord, and a woolfe in his heart: a fox in his brain, subtle and
crafty to ensnare; he has a kyte in his fist, to hold fast; and when he has
caught hold, he has a wolf in his heart to devour: and therefore says our
Savior Christ, Beware of false prophets which come to Mat. 7. 16.
you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening woolves: beware of
them, they are like Swannes, that have white feathers, and black flesh; and one
thinks, the Swanne was forbidden to be eaten of the Jews, to show, that God
abhorres all hypocrisy. But in that he compares hypocrites to clouds, that
have no rain in them; to trees, that have no fruit; to stars, that have no
light: and some others do compare them to the rainbow, that has many
colors, and yet never a color; to broken glasses, that have many faces, and
yet never a face; to Copper, that resembles gold, and is nothing less. We
have to note, that none make greater shows of sanctity, and holiness, then
hypocrites: as dry clouds make shows of rain, corrupt trees, a show of
fruit, wandering stars, of light: so they of religion. They have a show of
holiness (says the Apostle) but inwardly they deny the power of it:
outwardly 2 Timothy 3. 5.
they profess to know God, but inwardly in their works they do deny him,
being abominable, disobedient, and unto every good Tit. 1. 16. Mat. 7. 21.
work reprobate: They cry, Lord, Lord, but they do not the will of the Lord;
they say, The Lord lives, yet they swear to deceive.

Herod will make a great brag of loving and worshipping of Christ; Go your
ways, and search diligently for the Child, and when ye Mat. 2.
have found him, bring me word that I may come and worship him. Iezabel will
proclaim a solemn feast; the Herodians will speak 1 Reg. 21. 9.
Christ fair, Good master, thou art true, and teach the way of God truly.
The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin will pretend to worship God: we will
build with you; we will sacrifice with you: Simon Mat. 22.
Magus will offer money to the Apostles, that on whomsoever he God will reward
the hypocrite as he is, not as he shows.
lay his hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost; and Saul will say, that he has
done all that God commands; and Judas will come to Christ with a kiss, and
say, Hail Master. But Herod's purpose was to kill Christ; Iezabels, to get away
Naboths Act. 8. 1 Samuel 13. Mat. 26.
vineyard; the Herodians drift was to tempt and intrappe Christ; the
adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, to hinder the work of God, to spy out their
liberty; Simon Magus, to make gain of the Holy Ghost; Judas to betray Christ:
for none will weep faster then the Crocodile, and as did Ismael; none will give
a fairer Ier. 41. 6. 2. Cor. 11.
kiss, then a Judas; and no Devil is so dangerous as the white Devil, as he
that changes himself into an Angel of light: but such trees without fruit,
such wells without water, such clouds without rain, such lamps without oil,
such stars without light, such ears without corn, such lamps without oil,
as they live not the life of the righteous, so shall they not dye the death of
the righteous.

Therefore, brethren, let us not be like silver, white in show, and yet makes
black strikes and lines; nor like the Vintner, that delivers good wine to his
guests, and drinks the lees himself: For though we can talk holily and
speak religiously, yet Not Mat. 7. 21.
every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the will of God which is in Heaven. It was wittily observed of
one, that God in forming man, first frames the heart, but the Painter in
portraying a man, first deciphers the face: so the hypocrite, he is all in
show, nothing in heart, his heart is with Venus or Bacchus, or Mammon; his
face, his countenance only with God. It is written of the fox, that he faines
himself dead, when he comes among birds or poultery; but when he sees them
come near unto him, he suddenly preyes on them: So the hypocrite as one dead
unto the world, and a man mortified, converseth amongst the harmless, until
he gets some occasion of calumniating, biting, and devouring: this is John
Baptists generation of Vipers, that inwardly nourish poison, Mat. 3. 7.
but outwardly hiss forth a kind of zeal. Solomon speaks of a generation
that is pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed Pro. 30. 12.
from their filthiness: these are the generation of hypocrites, they profess
well, and make a show of religion, but express it not: like the fig tree,
that bare leaves, but no fruit. The profession Mar. 11.
of many is as the travel of the mountains; we have two faces with Ianus; one
to look forward, another to look backward: we have two hands with Ioab; one
to embrace withal, another 2 Samuel 3.
to stabbe withal: we have two tongues with Judas, one to salute Christ,
another to betray Christ: we have two hearts with Israel; Mat. 25. Psalm. 78.
one for God, another for the world. The frogge Borax has two livers; one for
meat, another for poison. The Arrians had two faiths; one for the truth and
Nicene Council, another for the Many Christians in show, few in deed and truth.
time; they had fidem annuam, ac fidem menstruam, a yearly faith and a
monthly faith. The Israelites cried, Hail King Salomo^, hail King Adonia.
Apuleius Parret said, Ave Auguste Imperator; Ave Antoni; hail Augustus the
Emperor, hail Anthony. And many hypocrites 1 Reg. 1.
have said, Hail Mary, and Hail Elizabeth: and to gain the world, we would
say, Ave Papa, Hail Pope, Ave Turca, Hail Turk, hail Devil. We make
profession of any religion under heaven: In Egypt all the dust was turned into
lice, all the waters into blood; and in England not all, but most religion is
turned into Exodus 7.
hypocrisy. We can say, The Lord lives, yet we swear to deceive. Coelum
aedificamus voce, vita autem Infernum, We build heaven with our voice, but hell
with our life; we are Angels in words, but Devils in deeds: like the Peacocke,
we are Angels for our feathers, Devils for our feet, and Hell for our voice.

Augustine would not have the Churches of Africa excommunicated for
drunkenesse, for then no professor had been left in Africa: and if all
hypocrites, temporizers, and formalists in England were excommunicated, few, or
no Professors would be left in England. The good man, the sincere professor
should then have just cause to cry out with the Prophet, Woe is me, for I am
as the summer gathering, and as the grapes of the vintage, there is no cluster
to eat, Mich. 7. 1.
my soul desired the first ripe fruits. There be many stars in heaven, but
few give light as the Sun and Moon do; many many birds in the air, but few
Phoenix's as in Arabia; many stones in the earth, but few precious stones as
the Diamond; many trees in a forest, yet few Cedars as in Libanus; many
Israelites, but few true Israelites like Nathaniel, who had no guile. Rara avis
in terris, nigro que simillima Cygno, A rare bird, and comparable to a black
John 1. 47.
Swan. Hypocrisy in a Christian, is as rottenness in an apple; For as
rottenness begins at the heart of the apple, so does hypocrisy begin at
the heart of a Christian; and as rottenness corrupts the favor, the odor,
the color, the vigor of the whole apple; so does hypocrisy the soul of a
man; it takes from it the dignity of grace, the odor of a good name, and all
goodness whatsoever: For as rottenness marres the apple, so does hypocrisy
the Christian. Foris Cato, intus Nero; a Cato without, and a Nero within, is
monstrous. One says, Canis mortuus minus faetet in naribus hominum, quam anima
dissimulans coram Deo and Angelis, A dead dog sauoureth less in our noses,
then a dissembling soul, an hypocrite does in Gods; and therefore Let death
seize upon them, let them go down quick into the grave, for wickedness is
in Psalm. 55. 15.
their dwellings, even in the midst of them.

But in that he compares us to trees, it is to teach us, that God will come,
and take an account of our fruit. A grievous day it will be, when he shall say
to these hypocritical professors, Where is prayer, knowledge, godly
conference, meditation, instruction of your families, education of your
children, love of religion, The greater part of Christians hypocrites.
zeal of my glory? When he shall say, Why stand these vineyards, and yield no
grapes? why hangs this ivy-bush here, and there is no wine? why stand these
trees, and yield no fruit? what do these stars in heaven, and yield no
light? why do these husbandmen occupy my farm, and pay no rent? He will
command the clouds to rain no rain upon these vineyards; he will Esa. 5. 7.
Luke 13.
cut down these trees and burn them; he will destroy these husbandmen, and
let out his vineyard to other husbandmen; which shall deliver him the fruits
in their seasons. When God shall ask for fruits, we may say, as the woman said
of her accusers, Lord they are gone; either we never had any, or else they are
lost; Mat. 21. 41.
either our breasts never had milk, or else like dry nurses we have lost our
milk; either our candles never had light, or else are out; John. 8. 1 Pet. 2.
Hebr. 12.
either we never had any birthright, or else with Esau we have sold our
birthright; either we never had zeal, or else it is quenched, like the fire
on the Altar in the Babylonicall captivity. We hear the word, we communicate:
but where is private prayer? private conference? private meditation? private
instruction of our families? We profess Religion, we come to the Church, we
hear the Word for show only, for fashion only, of custom, not of conscience.
Dagon of the Philistines, and the Ark of God is all one to us; the temple of
Solomon, and the temple of Rimmon is all one; the service of God, and the
worship of Diana is all one. Sion and Samaria, Jerusalem, and Ierico: the
Gospeland the Mass, to us are both alike.

Satan may say to us, as he did unto the Monk who had his portise in one hand,
and his harlot in the other, Parum refert, atraque enim via ducit ad interitum;
it is no matter, both ways lead to hell, and to destruction: so it is not
matter whether we profess the Gospel, or not, so long as we profess it so
coldly, and so carnally; so hypocritically, and so dissemblingly; both are
naught, both damnable: Our carnal gospelling, first took King Edward from us;
then Queen Elizabeth from us; then King James; I pray God, at the last it take
not the Gospel from us, and our Sovereign from us.

It is monstrous for trees to stand seven and seven years, yea forty, fifty,
nay sixty years and more, and to yield no fruit. For us to live long in the
Church, and to do no good. Devide the world into an hundred parts, scarce one
is Christendom: and that one devide into ten, and scarce one is sincere,
void of hypocrisy. Oh remember that ye are washed with the water of
Baptism, that ye have God for your Father, the Church for your mother; that
ye have been fed with the milk of the Gospel, instructed in the Word of
God, fed with the bread of Angels, with sacramental bread, and will ye yet
live like Ethnicks, like Pagans, like Turks, like infidels; and like
hypocrites? yet most men so live: For what forbidden fruit will they not eat
Judgments denounced against hypocrisy.
with Adam? What Babylonish garment will they not take with Achan? What usury
with Zacheus? and what Naboths vineyard will they not covet with Ahab? what
sin is there, which they can commit, but they have committed? they be trees
indeed, but bad trees, without fruit; and therefore two things has God prepared
for them, a sharp axe, and a quick fire: For every tree Mat. 3.
that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down and cast into the
fire.

And Saint Jude tells us, that these trees be twice dead, and plucked up by the
roots: dead in work and deed, and inword; dead tam in ramis bonorum operum,
as well in the boughs of good works, quam in radicibus fidei, as in the roots
of faith, twice dead, because according to the flesh they be most corrupt, and
according to the soul most perverse, twice dead, dead to God, dead unto the
world; both in this world, and in the world to come. Augustine makes three
deaths; the death of the soul, the death of the body, the death of both body
and soul, called the second death: the first death is here meant.

But to draw unto a Conclusion: If hypocrisy be a sin so odious, and seeing
that hypocrites be as clouds without rain, as stars without light, as trees
without fruit, and shall be sharply Apoc. 20. 1.
punished, and pulled up by the roots: Let us steadfastly cleave unto the Lord
with full purpose of heart, and let us abandon hypocrisy, that we may please
the Lord, and let us reject dissimulation, that we may be blessed, and let us
not presume to carry the name of Christ without sincerity and godliness of
conversation.

THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XIII. To whom is reserved, blackness of darkness for ever. Hell
torments set out by diverse names.



YE heard before of their sins, as namely of their Epicurisme, in that they
did eat and drink without fear, feeding themselves; then of their pride, in
that they were like the waves of the sea, swelling high; lastly, of their
hypocrisy, in that they were as clouds, that promise rain, and had nothing
but dryness in them; in that they were as trees that promise fruit, and yet
they had nothing but leaves.

And now in these words he comes to their punishment, and their punishment
is, that blackness of darkness is reserved for them for evermote. Whereby
he means Hell fire, Hell pains: For there the Sun never shines, the
Moon and Stars never give light.

Hell is diversely called by the holy Ghost, who takes great pains in this
matter, and all to drive us from sin and wickedness. He calls Hell:

A place for devils. Mat. 25. Mat. 18. 8. Mark 9. 2 These. 1. 8. Psalm. 11.


Unquenchable fire.
A worm that ever gnaweth.
Flaming fire.
Fire and brimstone.
A river of hot brimstone.
All sufferings here but shadows, and beginning of sorrows.
A Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
A second death.
The wine press of Gods wrath.
Damnation of body and soul.
Esa. 30. Apoc. 19. 20. Apoc. 20. Apoc. 14. 19. Mat. 10. 2. 9. Cap. 22. 13.
Utter darkness.
And here in this my text, Blackness of darkness for evermore: yet all these
do but shadow out the matter, they cannot paint it lively: Tophte and Gehinnon
shadowed out hell, there they sacrificed their children to Moloch, in hot
brass, and had a noise of instruments to darken the cry of their children.
Christ alludeth unto it in the word, Gehenna. Ier. 19. 4, 5. Mat. 5. 2.


But as all the joys of the elect here are but earnest pennies, and
first fruits of heaven; for here is but the seed-time, there is the harvest;
There is fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore: so all Psalm. 16. 11.
the pains and torments that the wicked suffer here, they are but moll-hilles
to mountains, as a spark, to the fire, as a drop of water, to the maine
Ocean, nothing in respect of that which they shall feel there: all the pains
of Achitophel, Saul, Judas, Francis Spira, are nothing to their pains now.

Christ having reckoned up many plagues; as how that nation shall rise up
against nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, Luke 21. 10, 11, 25, 26.
and great earth quaks shall be in diverse places, and hunger, and pestilence,
and fearful things; and great signs shall there be from heaven in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth, trouble among
the nations with perplexity: For men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and
for looking after those things, that shall come on the world: at last, he
adds: Initium dolorum haec; these are but the beginnings of sorrow: as if he
should have said, All these things are but smoke in respect of the terrible
fire ensuing; as a muster of soldiers, before the terrible bloody battle. What
will the end be, if the beginning be so grievous? If his little finger be so
heavy, what will be the weight of his loins? He beats us on earth with
whips, but he will beat us in hell with Scorpions, as Rehoboam said of the ten
tribes. The torments invented by tyrants, and inflicted upon the Saints and
servants of God, have been most hideous and fearful; as the teeth of wild
beasts, hot glowing Ovens and Furnaces, caldrons of boiling oil, fiery brazen
bulls, powning to death in morters, rolling in barrelles of nails, rosting
upon spits, boaring with angers, parting the nails, and fingers ends with
Needles, nipping the flesh with pinsers, racking and rending asunder the joints
with wild horses; no pity, no remorse taken, whilst there was either flesh
or blood, or synew, or bone: but the torments of Hell are greater, the mourning
of Hannah, the grief of Job, the sorrow of David, the lamentations of Jeremy,
the bitter smart of Jerusalem were great, as much as mortality could bear, yet
all nothing to the mournings, grief, The torments of Hell opposed to the joys
of Heaven.
sorrows, and lamentations of the wicked in Hell. If all griefs and woes, and
as many besides as ever wrung and wrested the spirit and heart of man, since
the breath of life was breathed into him, were put together, to part the
torments of Hell among them part after part, as if they would empty the
storehouses, and break the stream of it, yet has the hand of Hell an
unmeasurable portion behind, to distribute to her children, an endless
patrimony of how ling and wringing and gnashing; which all the foreprized
griefs and torments of this life, have scarce been shadows and counterfeits
of: all the pains in the World are nothing to the pains of Hell: therefore
says our Savior, If thy hand and thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt and maimed, than
having two hands, and two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire, Mat. 18. 8.

Again, as two contraries set together, the one does set out the other, as
black being set by white, seems the blacker, and gall set by honey, seems
the bitterer; for contrariorum contraria est ratio; therefore whatsoever can
be said of the joys of Heaven, may be said of the pains of Hell. Well of
the one Paul says, The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, the heart
of man cannot comprehend nor contain the great joys of Heaven, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
then of the other side it may be said of the pains of Hell, that the eye has
not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart cannot conceive the pains of
Hell. O brethren, if all the trees and plants in the World were pens, all the
Earth paper, all the water of the Sea Ink, and all creatures in Heaven and
Earth, Penmen, yet are they not able to set out the pains of Hell: No, if a
man had the learning of Moses, the understanding of Esaias, the zeal of Elias,
the thundering tongue of James and John, the eloquence of Apollo, yet they
cannot give thee a shadow of the torments of Hell.

Again, as touching Heaven, it is said of the faithful, But ye Heb. 12. 22.
23.
are come to Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the colestiall
Jerusalem, to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Congregation of the
first borne, which are written in Heaven; and to God, the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just and perfect men: but the wicked come to mount Ebal, where
the six Tribes cursed; to the valley of Achor, they come not to the
celestial, but the infernal Jerusalem, etc. not to the company of innumerable
Angels, but to a company of innumerable Devils; not to the spirits of perfect
and just men, but to the damned spirits of wicked and vile men; not to Jesus
the Mediator of the New testament, but unto Beelzebub, the Prince of darkness.

Again, as touching the elect, Augustine says, they shall have joy every way;
joy within, and joy without, joy beneath, and joy above, and joy round about
them: Joy within, for they shall have The damned tormented in all parts in hell.
peace of conscience; joy without, for they shall have the fellowship of God
and Angels; joy above, from the sight of God; joy beneath, from the beauty of
the World: For there shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth wherein shall dwell
righteousness: and joy round about them, for they shall see all the delights
that may be. God shall be a glass to their eyes; music to their ears; a
Iubilee to their hearts: yea God shall be unto them all in all, as 1. Cor. 15.
Is it thus with Gods elect? then the damned shall have sorrow within, and
sorrow without, sorrow above, and sorrow benath, and sorrow round about them,
sorrow within, from the worm of their conscience; sorrow without, by means of
the accusation of the Devils; sorrow above, for the angry Judge; sorrow
beneath, for the gaping gulf of hell, fire ready to swallow them up; and
sorrow round about them, for the world burning: For a dextris erunt peccata
accusantia; a sinistris, infinita daemonia; subtus, horrendum Chaos inferni;
desuper, Iudex iratus: foris, mundus ardens; intus, conscientia urens:
Anselmus. Think thou see all this: go a little out of thy self, and
meditate a little of these sorrows: think upon Cain, Achitophel, Judas, etc.
think thou see their eyes distill like fountains, their teeth clatter like
armed men, their minds contemplating endless misery, their memories
recounting their damnable iniquities, their eyes beholding Legions of unclean
spirits, their ears hearing the roarings of fiends; their noses smelling
Sulphur and brimstone, their hands catching nothing but flames of fire; think
a little of this: nay think continually of this: For so Chrysostom would have
us, in all our meetings to speak of nothing but of hell, of this blackness of
darkness: that so by a Christian course of life, we may avoid it: for the
pain of the damned is so great, as a man would not undergo it an hour, for
ten thousand worlds, and the damned would give ten thousand worlds, if it were
in them for to give, for one hours release of these torments.

But to follow this a little further; If Christ suffering for the sins of the
world, felt such an extremity of torment, that he was like water powered out,
that all his bones were out of joint, that his heart was as melting wax, that
his strength was dried up like a potsherd, and that his tongue did cleave to
his jaws, Psalm. 22. 14, 15.

Again, if his torment was such, as that he did not sweat water only, but
water and blood, and was in such an Agony, that an Angel from heaven was sent
to comfort him, Luke 23. If his tears and sorrows were such, that there was
but one word between him and desperation, crying, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. then what are the pains of the damned? O
brethren, the pains of hell are the whole weight of Gods wrath: If the weight
of Gods finger be so great when he strikes us with collicks, with gowtes,
with plurisies, with Apoplexies, There be all torments in hell, of all sorts of
all parts.
etc. O what is the weight of his whole hand? If his wrath be kindled, yea but
a little, it takes on like the fire, and makes the hard rocks cleave asunder
at the sound of it: what will it do then, when it is kindled totally? There
be many plagues and torments in this life, which make a man to wish with Job,
that his mothers womb had been his grave, Job. 3. Now if a little grief be so
great in this life, what shall be their grief, when the streams of Gods
wrath shall fall upon them?

How fearful have Gods judgments been against sin in this life? How
grievous was the burning of Sodom? Genesis 19. how fearful the swallowing up of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram? Numb. 16. how lamentable the destruction of
Jerusalem? What a grievous sight was the burning of this town? How fearful
are those plagues, that God menaceth, Levit. 26. Deuter. 28. If Gods judgments
against sin in this life be so grievous, how grievous will his judgments be
in the life and world to come; when the wicked shall lie in hell like sheep,
and death shall devour them? Again, to see the Justice of God against Apoc. 9.
sin, gather it by this argument: as men that use to take the length of one
arm by another, look how great the mercy of God is, so is his justice, great
in pardoning, great in punishing. If in this life the punishment of God be so
grievous, what will they be in the life to come? For here, justice is mixed
with mercy; what shall it be, when there shall be judgment without mercy?
Iam. 3.

The Schoolmen affirm, that in hell there is Ignis ardoris, foetoris and
terroris: ardoris, as in mount Aetna; foetoris, as in mount Egla; terroris, as
in America, and in India: and certainly all those are in hell: Tophet is
prepared of old, it is prepared for the King, it is made large and deep, the
burning thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of Esa. 30. 33.
the Lord is a river of brimstone to kindle it.

Another Schooleman speaking of these torments, says, that there is first
bonds, Take him, (says the Gospel) bind him hand and foot, Luke 12. Secondly,
there is darkness, cast him into utter darkness, Mat. 22. Thirdly,
intolerable heat, and stinch, and therefore it is called a lake burning with
fire and brimstone, Apoc. 19. Fourthly, sequestration from Gods presence, Go
ye cursed into everlasting hell fire, Mat. 25. Fifthly, Thirst, Father
Abraham, send Lazarus, that he may dippe the tip of his finger in water to
cool, etc. Luke 16. Sixthly, vision of Devils, Mat. 25. Seventhly, the howling
of the damned. Eighthly, deprivation of all heavenly joys: and at last he
concludes, that there be all torments in hell. For as the Painter being unable
to set out the sorrows of Niobe, was enforced to wrap up her head in a cloute;
So this Schooleman being unable to set out the torments of hell; he is feign to
wrap up his speech with all torments: There be all torments in hell.

Other Schoolmen do distinguish the pains of Hell; and Pains in hell
double, Poena damni, poena sensus.
they say there is Poena sensus, and poena damni, of this pain of sense,
Gregory speaks thus; Vae illis, quibus paratus est ignis inextinguibilis,
dolor intolerabilis, foetor incomparabilis, timor horribilis; ubi nil audietur,
nisi fletus and luctus, nil videbitur, nisi animae damnatae, and daemones; nil
odorabitur, nisi sulphur and foetor, nil sentietur, nisi ardor and ignis:
habebunt damnati in oculis lachrymas; in auribus rugitus, in dentibus
stridorem, in naribus, foetorem; in ore eiulatum, in cord dolerem ineffabilem
in omnibus membris, ignis ardorem: Woe unto them for whom is prepared
unquenchable fire, pain intolerable, stinch incomparable, and horrible fear:
where nothing shall be heard but weeping and wailing: nothing shall be seen
but damned souls and Devils; nothing shall be smelt but a sulphurous stench,
nothing shall be felt but burning and fire: the damned shall have tears in
their eyes, roaring in their ears, gnashing in their teeth, stench in their
nostrils, howlings in their mouths, unspeakable grief in their hearts, in all
their members the burning of fire: this is the pain of sense, that the damned
shall feel: The pain of loss is, they shall never see the face of God; but they
shall be punished with eternal perdition, from the presence of God, and from
the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. If Absalom thought it such a grief to
want his fathers presence, and not to see his face, 2. Sam. 14. what grief
will it be to the wicked, to want the presence of God, and not to see his face,
in the sight of whom, is the knowledge of all things 1 Cor. 13. Augustine
says, Mala inferni dicere, aut cogitare, ut sint, nemo potest, priora sunt
quippt, quam cogitentur. No man can tell or imagine the miseries of hell as
they, for they are worser than may be conceived. O brethren, let us therefore
fear hell, before we feel hell: For hell is a lake without bottom; broad
without measure; deep without sounding; full of incomparable burning;
intolerable stinch, and unspeakable sorrow, quoth Hugo. If the thief fear the
Assise day, and moment any pains, how ought we to fear eternal torments, so
exactly noted by Christ? Ter uno oris halitu, thrice with one breath, saying,
If thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off; it is better Mar. 9. 43, 44, 45.
for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands, to go into Hell:
into the fire that never shall be quenched, where the worm dies not, and the
fire goes not out. Likewise if thy foot cause thee to offend, cut it off: it
is better for thee to go halt into life, than having two feet, to be cast
into hell; into the fire, that never shall be quenched, where the worm dies
not, and the fire never goes out. If thy eye cause thee to offend, pluck it
out, it is better for thee to go into the kingdom of God with one eye, than
having two eyes, to be cast into Hell fire: where the worm dies not, and the
fire goes not out. Common fire is quenched with water; wild fire with vinegar
and milk: Hell fire cannot be quenched.

Let us therefore fear hell, before we feel hell. All creatures fear that
which may hurt them, Elephas timet murem, Leo ignem, Fear of hell torments
should work repentance.
Lupus lapidem, ceruus canem; columb a accipitrem, canis baculum; ovis lupum,
avis laqueum, piscis hamum, latro patibulum; An Elephant fears the mouse, a
Lion fire, the Wolf a stone, the Heart a dog, the Pigeon an Hawke, the Dog
a cudgel, the Sheep a Wolf, a Bird the net, a Fish the hook, a thief the
Gallows: and shall not we fear hell? but many neither fear nor believe there
is a hell.

Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Et velut infernus, fabula vana foret.
Men live now as though no death should follow, and hell were but a tale. We
lie down in sin, we sleep in sin, we rest in sin, we live in sin,
and we dye in sin: for what sin is there, that we could have committed, but
we have committed? What Bethsabe have we not defiled with David? what forbidden
fruit have we not eaten with Adam? What Babylonish garment have we not stolen
with Achan? what usury have we not taken with Zachee? what vineyard have we not
coveted with Ahab? If a man were at a table of dainties, and his friend, his
dear friend should say unto him, Eat nothing, Touch nothing, Meddle with
nothing, there is poison in these delicates: he would not taste, nor touch
them, nor meddle with them; yet in sin there is poison, there is mors in
olla; and yet we will venture upon it. Hell and damnation, and blackness of
darkness, which is the reward of sin, cannot make us leave sin, and
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. And though we
hear, that the pains of hell be intolerable, and that a man may say of them,
as Aeneas said in another case; Non mihi si linguae centum sint, or aque
centum, etc. Had I an hundred tongues, and mouths to hold them, and a mouth of
iron, yet can I not uphold them. We hear this all of us, but we know not how
long we shall hear it. Many that heard this since this day twelve-moneth, yea
since this day month, are gone to give an account of their life, either to
God, or to the Devil, where their state is unchangeable. We use to say, that
he that dies this year, is excused for the next. But away with this vile
proverb; for he that dies this year, and not in the Lord, is excused never,
but dies for ever: for there is a second death. Death is fourfold; there is
a death in sin; a death unto sin; a death of the body; and a death of body
and soul. As the Judge tells the prisoner, You shall go from hence to the
place of execution, and there hang till you be dead: So God says unto the
wicked, You shall go from hence to the place from whence ye came: that is, to
the earth, and from thence to the place of execution in hell, and there thou
shall hang in torments intolerable and perpetual, prepared for the Devil and
his angels. Fear and terror shall be dealt for thy dole, and the curses of
the people shall follow thee to thy grave; and brimstone shall be scattered upon
thy habitations, thy root Nothing so hard as the impenitent heart.
shall be dried up beneath, and above, thy branch shall be cut down; thy
remembrante shall perish from the earth, and thou shall have no name in the
streets, etc. Thou shall not depart out of this place of hell; till thou have
paid the uttermost farthing, that is, thou shall never be Job 18. 14, 15. Mat.
5. 25.
delivered from thence. O brethren, mark this doctrine, and fear hell, that I
may say of this town, as Christ said to Zachees house, Salvation is happened
unto it. For hell is as the Lions den, O mnia adversum spectantia, nulla
retrorsum, there is an ingresse, but no egresse. Facilis est descensus Averni,
the descent into hell is easy; we go to hell as a boule runs down the
hill. What hearts have we then of flesh, or of flint, of folly, or of madness,
that this moves us not? O caeci ad videndum propriam miseriam! o ignari, ad
intelligendum proprium damnum! o corda Adamante duriora, quae non contremiscunt
audire haec! O blind men, that cannot see their own misery! o ignorant men,
that cannot understand their own danger! o hearts, harder then the Adamant,
that cannot tremble to hear these things!

Granatensis said, Nil tam durum, quam cor hominis, nothing so hard as a man's
heart: Omnia dura metalla igne liquescunt, all hard metals are softened with
fire; the iron is dissolved in the furnace; the Adamant broken with the blood
of a Goat; the congealed ice and snow molten with the Sun; the hard marble
pierced with drops, the hard rocks rent asunder with strokes: At cor humanum
durius petra, durius ferro; durius Adamante: but the heart of man is harder
than the rock, harder than the iron, harder than the Adamant: nec amor Deite
mollat, neither can the love of God mollify thee, nec sanguis Christi te
frangat, nor the blood of Christ break thee; nec ignis inferni te moveat, nor
the fire of hell move thee: For vile men savor nothing, either of the joys of
heaven, or pains of hell: they are as men without taste, whose palates are
corrupted with humors, that they are not able to discern between honey and
gall; they neither savor Gods threatenings of wrath, nor promises of grace;
they will still draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin like cartropes.

But to follow this matter of hell and of the torments thereof a little more
fully: As the pains of hell be unutterable: For all the tortures and torments
of the world are but flea-bitings to the torments of hell: so are they
everlasting, they abide not for a day, a week, a month, a year, but for
ever. Hell is like the stone in Arcadia, called Abestos, which being set on
fire, never goes out; facilis est descensus adinfernum, difficile revertere
gradum; It is an easy matter to descend into hell, but not easy to return
back.

To all men in misery, there is hope, that once they shall have an end; the
mariner comfort himself with arrival; the soldier, with hope of victory;
the prisoner, with a gaole-delivery; the prentice with freedom; but in hell,
nulla res, nulla spes, there is no end of that misery: the captivity of Hell is
not like the Hell torments everlasting.
captivity of Israel in Egypt, which lasted four hundred and thirty years,
Exodus 12. 40. nor like the captivity of Babylon, which continued seventy
years, but the captivity of Hell is like the captivity of Israel in Syria;
they never returned again: So in hell there is no redemption. The greatest
cross that can be laid upon man in this life, is to be cast into perpetual
prison, to lose lands and goods, and want the company of our wives and
children, and other our friends that love us; but yet in this case we always
live in hope of liberty, and release of our punishment; or if our hope be
vain, yet God will stir up the hearts of strangers to visit us, to pity
us, to comfort and releeve us, some with meat, some with money, some with
cloth, some with counsel; every man as he is able, and has compassion and
feeling of our estate: but out of hell there is no redemption, no hope of
pains to be ever ended or eased, no frineds to pity us, to see us, to speak
with us, or to comfort us. If a barn were full of corn, and a bird once every
year should carry away one kernel thereof, at last it would be all gone; If
a mountain twenty miles about had taken from it once every year a shovell
full, at last it would be all consumed; but it would be long first, yet at
last there would be an end; but in hell there is no end: those torments are
everlasting; the days of the hellish torments of the damned shall never wear
out, nor their years come to an end: the longer they continue, the less hope
they have; when as many years are expired, as there be men in the world, and
stars in the heavens; when as many thousand years are ended as there be
stones, and sands by the seashore, yet still there be ten hundred thousand
times so many more to come; the miseries of the wicked shall last as long as God
shall live, and that is ever. For he is Alpha and Omega, Apoc. 1. The covenant
of the day and night shall one day be changed, the stars shall finish their
race, the Elements melt with heat, heaven and earth be renewed, summer and
winter have an end, but the plagues of the prisoners in hell shall never be
released. For in hell, as Gregory says, there is Mors sine morte, finis sine
fine, an end not ending, a death not dying, unquenchable fire, yet a darkness
therewithal to accompany it, more palpable than the frogs of Egypt, and
blacker then blackness it self; everlasting, burning, but not consuming: For
the damned, quoth Greg. suffer an end without an end, a death without a death,
a decay without a decay: for their death ever lives, their end always
begins, their decay never cease; they are ever healed, to be new wounded;
and are always repaired, to be new devoured: they are ever dying, and never
dead, eternally broiled, and never burnt up. For the fire of Hell differs
from our fire in many properties: First, in Heat, for our fire compared to
hell fire, is but as fire painted upon a wall, yet is it a painful thing Hell
fire compared with elementary and ordinary fire.
for a man to hold his finger in the fire an hour, the smart is so grievous,
but it is more painful to hold his hand in the fire an hour, and yet more
painful to hold his whole arm; but yet more painful to hold his whole body:
O how great will it be, to have our bodies and souls tormented in the flames
of Hell fire? all the tongues of men and Angels cannot express the grief and
smart thereof.

Secondly, the fire of Hell differs from our fire, in continuance: for our
fire may be quenched, hellfire cannot: For the breath of the Lord is as a
river of brimstone to kindle it. And therefore so long as the Lord breaths,
that is, lives, so long that fire burns, and that is ever: therefore it is
called everlasting hellfire, Mat. 25. If any man ask, how that fire can be
everlasting, cum sit corruptibile elementum; ye shall understand, that this
fire is not nourished and continued with wood, and other matter, sed sola Dei
voluntate, it is the will of God, that it should ever burn: and therefore it
burns everlastingly. Aug. lib. 21. de Civitate Dei, proves it by the
examples of the mountains of Sicilia, which have ever burned since the
beginning of the world, and yet do burn, and are not consumed.

Finely says a Schooleman, Lacus inferni tali igne repletus est, ut si totum
mare in eo influeret, non extingueretur: infoelix anima, quae tanto and tam
diuturno igne cruciatur: The infernal lake is filled with such fire, that if
the whole sea should overflow it, it would not put it out: unhappy soul, the
which is tormented with such and so lasting fire.

Thirdly, the fire of hell differs from our fire in light; for our fire
yields light, hell fire nothing but darkness, and therefore hell is called
darkness; Blackness of darkness; and blackness of darkness for evermore.
Take him, says the Gospel, bind him hand and foot, Mat. 22. What? no more
but so? I lictor, liga manus, Go Sergeant, bind his hands? yes; cast him into
utter darkness; outward to those inward, wherein they delighted before,
blindness of mind and understanding; outward because the whole man, body and
soul, shall be folded and comprehended therein; outward, because in extremity
without any limits, and borders of any favor of God, to be extended; where
neither the light of Sun, Moon, and Stars, and much less the sight of
Gods glorious face shall ever shine. Isidore says, Ignis Gehennae lucebit
miseris, ad miseriae augmentum, ut videant unde doleant; non ad consolationem,
ut videant, unde gaudeant: Hell fire gives light to the damned soul, to
increase their misery, that they may see wherefore to grieve; not for their
comfort, that they might see any cause to rejoice for.

Fourthly, our fire differs from hell fire in consuming: for our fire
consumes all that is put into it, but hell fire consumes nothing. Semper
comburentur, nunquam consumentur, they shall Hell fire burn, but not consume.
always be burning, never be consumed. If any ask, How this can be, that a
man shall always burn in hell, and never be consumed? I answer, that it is the
nature of this fire always to burn the bodies and souls of the damned, and
yet never to consume or make an end of them. Augustine says, that God works
strangely in his creatures; as for example, the Salamander lives in the fire;
take him out of the fire and he dies. And there be certain creatures, that
live in hot ovens and chimneies, as the crickets. Take the coals of Juniper,
and rake them up in the ashes of it, and they will keep fire a year. Take a
Peacocke, and kill it, and the flesh thereof (as Augustine says) will remain
sweet and continue without putrefaction a year. Take Chafe, and it preserves
snow, that is wrapped up in it, and melloweth fruit. Take lime, and bring it to
the Sun, and it is cold, cast it into the water, and it burns. Again, the
Adamant is not broken, but by the blood of a Goat: and who can give a reason
for it? There is a fountain in Epyrus, which will put out a candle if it
burn, and light a candle if it be out. The horses of Cappadocia conceive with
the wind. God thus works strangely in his creatures: why not in the fire of
hell?

Last of all, our fire differs from hell fire in this; our fire but burns
and torments the body; but hell fire torments both body and soul. Hereupon
says Christ, Fear not him that is able to kill the body, and has no power
over the soul; but fear him that is able to send both body and soul into
everlasting hell fire, Mat. 10. These are the differences between our fire and
hell fire: the thought of this should make our bodies to tremble, and our
hearts to melt, and the hair of our head to stand upright, and to desire God
to deliver us from this Lions den: For when a man is once in, there is no
getting out; the gates of hell are kept from egresse, as the gates of Paradise
were warded from entrance, not by Cherubins, with the blade of a sword, but by
the angels of Satan, with all the instruments of death.

Judas and Cain, that have been so many thousand years in this torment, their
pains are as great now, as they were at the first. The accursed glutton in the
Gospel, who could speak by experience of his unspeakable discrutiations, as
Aeneas could of the troubles of Troy, he would have a warning given to all his
brethren in the flesh, to make men take heed of hell, and of the torments of
that place; the flames and fervor whereof were such, that he craved with more
streams of tears, the^ ever Esau sought his blessing, but one drop of water
to cool his tongue with, and could not obtain it, Luke 16. This made Bernard
to cry; Paveo gehennam, paveo Iudicis vultum, etc. I dread Hell, I dread the
Judges contenance. If Bernard thus trembled, what shall we do? Augustine,
libro de anima, etc. cap. 56. says, Omnino miseris erit mors, sine morte,
defectus, sine defectu, semper tolerabunt, semper timebunt. Judgment necessary
to be denounced in time of sin.
To the damned shall be always a death without death, and a decay without
decay; they shall always be in pain, and always be in fear. For they shall
always be in pain, and always be in fear. For they shall be tormented
without hope of pardon: Videbunt daemones, and Deum non videbunt, they shall
see the Devils, and not God. There shall be the hangman always tormenting, and
the worm always gnawing.

Anger not therefore, offend not this Lion of the tribe of Judah, lest he
anger you, and cast you into the Devils dungeon; Vbi progredi intolerabile,
regredi impossible: Where to go forward is intolerable, to go backward
impossible.

I have stood so much the longer upon the pains of hell, because I would awake
you from the Lethargy of your sins; For I see, the world is come unto the
stay, that it was in Esayes days, Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet will
he not learn righteousness, Esaias. 26. Preach honor, and glory, and peace, a
garland of righteousness, an uncorruptible crown, fruit of the tree of life,
sight of the face of God, following the Lamb, fellowship with Angels and
Saints, and the congregation of the first borne; new names, and white garments,
pleasures at the right hand of God, and fullness of joy in his presence for
evermore, unto the wicked; yet are they obstinately bent, and unmoveably
settled against the blessings of God, as Daniel against the hire of Balthazar,
Keep thy reward to thy self, and give thy gifts to another, Dan. 5. And
therefore because the blessing of the six Levits upon mount Gerizim, will not
moove them, I have made them to hear the cursing of six others upon mount
Ebal: they take no pleasure in the beauty of Sion, and therefore I have feared
them with the thundrings and lightnings of Sinai, and fed them with the bread
of judgment, as Ezechiel calls it. I pray God it may work effectually with
them, and make them to shake off the burden of their sins, and turn unto
God with unfeigned conversion.

One other thing can I not conceal from you, as touching the wicked in hell,
and that is, as they have sinned, so their pains shall be multiplied. Upon the
ungodly, God shall rain snares, fire, brimstone, storm and tempest, this
shall be their portion to drink, Psalm. 11. 7. The Prophet uses many words,
whereof every one seems more grievous then other, to teach us, that so much
the greater shall be the judgment of the damned, by how much the greater and
more their sins be. For as they treasure up their sins, so God does
treasure up his wrath, Romans 2. Not that there be many hells, or many fires in
hell, but that the justice of God requires, to measure out the grievousnesse
of their punishment, according to the grievousnesse of their sins. Vt and
ignem non dissimilem habeant, and tamen eosdem singulos dissimiliter exurat,
that not having a diverse fire, yet every one to be tormented diversely in the
same fire. Greg. Even as we feel in our bodies, when many stand together in
the Sun, the Sun has power of them all alike, yet do The more sin the
damned committed, the more torment in hell.
they not feel the like heat, but some feel it hotter then other some, every
man according to the complexion and constitution of his body: Even so according
to the quality of his sins, shall every man receive his punishment; therefore
abate your sins, that God may abate your punishment. Nay, cast away all your
works of darkness, that ye may never come into the place of darkness, the
Devils dungeon; where the worm dies not, where the fire goes not out, but
continual weeping and gnashing of teeth, howling; yelling, and crying without
ease of pain, or comfort of mind: that is, such endless misery, as the grief
thereof can neither be conceived of us, nor expressed of them that feel it.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XIV. XV. And Enoch, the seventh also from Adam, prophesied of such
saying, Behold, the Lord comes, etc. Antiquity with Verity bring Authority to
Doctrine.



HEre he describes the judgment of God at large* which is ready to hasten,
nay to full upon these Epicures, and Hypocrites, and all proud swelling men,
yea, and upon all ungodly persons whatsoever. For as the power of the Lord had
her day in the creation of the World, and the mercy of God, her day in
redemption of man, the little World, so the justice of God must have her day in
the just punishment of the unjust and wicked of the world.

This text of judgment devides it self into four branches.

1 That there shall be a judgment. 2 That the Lord shall be the Judge. 3 The
manner of the judgment. 4 The end of it. To condemn all the ungodly of their
evil deeds, and cruel speakings against God.
But first, he cites his Author, and says, that Enoch the seventh prophesied
of such men, that is, of such Epicures, of such proud swelling persons, and of
such hypocrites. Enoch is named the seventh Though some Scripture be lost, yet
it is supplied in others, and is perfect
from Adam: for Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared lived before him,
and dyed; only he was taken up alive into Heaven, as was Elias in a fiery
chariot, Tanquam candidati resurrectionis, as the forerunners of the
resurrection.

So that note here the antiquity of the Prophecy of Enoch, which Jude cites,
to purchase authority unto the doctrine; antiquity joined with verity is of
great force: Quod primum, illud verum, quod posterius, illud falsum, whatsoever
is first, that is true; what is later, that is false. Jeremy sends men to the
old ways, Stand in the way, says he, and behold; ask for the old way, and
walk Ier. 6. 16.
therein, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Christ debating a question,
sends them to Antiquity, saying, Ab initio non fuit sic, from Mat. 19. 8.
the beginning it was not so: Ab initio non Papae, non Cardinales, etc. from
the beginning no Popes, no Cardinals, no Patriarchs, etc. therefore shall they
not continue for ever, sed eradicabuntur, but shall be rooted out. So reasoned
the Wise man for idols, saying; Wisd. 14. 12. cap.
The inventing of Idols was the beginning of whoredom, and the finding of them,
is the corruption of life: for they were not from the beginning, neither shall
they continue for ever: Sed vetusta consuetudo sine veritate, vetustus Cypr.
error: an old custom without truth, is but an old error.

The Papists, to warrant their traditions and unwritten verities, mightily urge
the Prophecy of Enoch; but this prophecy is not counterfeit or (...),
inscriptum quiddam, but we must know, that much Scripture is lost, which we
have not; which might be when Antiochus and Maximine caused the books of the
Law to be burnt. We lack many of Salomons works, who wrote of all things,
from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hysop on the 1 Reg 4.
wall. In that God has not given us the books of Nathan, of 1 Chro. 29. 2
Chro. 9.
Gad, of Iado, of Shemaia, of Athia the Shilonite, of John the son of Hanani,
etc. It is not for that the Scriptures are unperfect, and to be supplied with
unwritten verities, but for some other causes best known to God. They say the
Scriptures are unperfect, and therefore have added their unwritten traditions,
which they call Apostolical, unto the Scriptures, to make the total rule of
Faith, the Scriptures making but one part thereof, and their traditions
another; as it appears by the late Trident Council, and of Bellarmines
exposition thereof. The Council says, Omnes libros veteris and novi
Testamenti, necnon traditiones ipsas, Sess. 4. decret. 1.
tum ad fidem, tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a
Spiritu Sancto dictatas, and continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica
conservatas, pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit, ac veneratur
Tridentina Synodus, that is, All the books of the old and new Testament, as
also the traditions themselves, pertaining both to Faith and manners, as being
either pronounced by the mouth of Christ, or delivered by the holy Ghost, and
by continual succession preserved in the Catholic Church, the Council of
Trent, receives and honoreth with like, and equal affection of piety The
Papists hold the Scriptures insufficient without traditions.
and reverence.

And Cardinal Bellarmine writes thus; Asserimus in Scripturis non contineri
express, totam doctrinam necessariam, sive de fide, sive de moribus, and
proinde praeter Verbum Dei scriptum requiri, etiam Verbum Dei non scriptum,
idest, divinas and Apostolicas traditiones; that is, Libro de verbo Dei non
Script. cap. 3.
We affirm, that in the Scripture is not contained expressly, all necessary
doctrine, whether of faith or manners, and therefore beside the written Word of
God, is required also the unwritten word of God, namely divine and Apostolical
traditions. And again he says, Scripturae sine traditionibus nec fuer unt
simpliciter necessariae, necsufficientes, The Scriptures without traditions,
were Ibid. cap. 4.
neither simply necessary, nor yet sufficient. And again, Dico Scripturam,
etsi non sit facta praecipue, ut sit regula fidei, esse tamen regulam Ibid.
cap. 12.
fidei, non totalem, sed partialem; totalis enim regula fidei est Verbum Dei,
sive revelatio Dei Ecclesiaefacta, quae dividitur in duas regulas partiales,
scripturam; and traditiones; I say, that the Scripture, though it were not made
especially, to be the rule of faith, yet it is the rule of faith, not in whole,
but in part: For the whole rule of faith, is the Word of God, or the revelatio^
of God made unto the Church; which is divided into two partie-rules, Scripture,
and traditions. Besides, they further allege that the Church was 2249. years
before the Word written; but how shall that appear that the Church then had
not the written Word? Why, Moses cites a book called The wars of the Lord;
and in Joshua, the book of the just is cited; and it may be, that Noah,
Abraham, Numb. ^. Ios. 10.
and Isaac wrote those things, that did belong to those times. Jude also in
this Epistle eiteth the book of Enoch. Papists allege that which is written
in Jeremy, I will put my Laws in their minds, and in their hearts will I
write them: And they allege the saying of Ier. 51.
Paul, Ye are our Epistle, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God. Nay, they say further, that the Apostles went beyond 2 Cor. 3.
yond their Commission, when they did write the Scriptures, for they were
commanded to preach, not to write. But the Apostle Mat. 28. 19.
to the Hebrews, while he does write the doctrine of the new Covenant,
alleges the forenamed sentence of Jeremy; and Paul had already written two
Epistles to the Thessalonians, and the former Epistle also to the Corinthians;
when as he said, Tee are our Epistle witten, not with ink, etc. But as
Carpocrates, Cerdo, Manes rejected the books of the Law, and Cerinthus all the
Gospel, except Matthew; and Severianus, and Paulinus, the Epistles and Acts of
the Apostles; so Papists do accuse the whole Scripture of imperfection and
ambiguity.

Paul being ready to finish his course, and to bid a farewell to the world, as
appears in his second Epistle to Timothy, when as already the books of the
New Testament were written, says thus unto Timothy; The whole Scripture is
given by inspiration, and is 2 Timothy 3. 16.
profitable to teach, to improve; to correct and instruct in righteousness:
All things necessary to salvation contained in Scripture.
where he brings the whole Scripture unto four heads; doctrine,
redargution, correction, instruction: doctrine is occupied about the chief
points of faith and religion; Redargution confuteth errors in faith and
religion; instruction comprehends information of manners; correction is
occupied in reproving and punishing delinquents. If the Word of God be a
twoedged sword to wound the Devil: If it be the hatchet to cut off the head
of all heretics: If the Word be mighty in operation, and enters through even
to the dividing asunder of the soul, and of the spirit, of the ioints, and of
the marrow: If it be a lantern unto our fee^* and a light unto our paths: If
Christ used no other weapon to repel the Devil, but the Word, saying; It is
written: If Apollo confuted the Jews openly, proving by the Scriptures Jesus
to be Christ: If Christ's proofs were, Scriptum est, and his demands, Quomodo
legis? How read you? and his Apologies, Scrutamini Scripturas, search the
Scriptures: certainly in the Scriptures is contained alone all things necessary
to salvation. I will therefore conclude this point with the saying of
Augustine; Neither will I allege the Council of Nice, neither shall thou
August. lib. 3. cap. 14. aduers. Maxim.
allege the Council of Arimine against me, by the authority of the
Scriptures: Let us weigh matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with
reason.

There is no cause therefore why Papists should take the wings of the morning,
and fly from the written Word unto unwritten verities; that the fathers of
Colen should call the Scriptures A nose of wax; that Pighius should term it,
The Leaden rule of the Lesbian building; that other Papists should term it, A
shipmans-hoase, A black Gospel, Inken divinity. If any will add or Apoc. 22.
detract from it, let the curse be pronounced upon him, and let all the people
say, Amen. It is false, that we have the Baptism of infants, the celebration
of the Sunday, the distinction of the persons in the Trinity, the number of the
books of the Scripture, by tradition, not by the written Word; God has kept
his law in the Arc, and all Popish Philistines could not keep the Arc 1 Samuel
5. John 20.
from us. These things are written, that ye may believe. Traditions are
gathered of an evil egg: dig the Papists never so deep, they shall not find
the mine nor spring of them in the Primitive Church; they labor to put life
into a dead carcass of them; but it will not be. Avaunt therefore, ye
Anabaptists, with your revelations: Avaunt, ye Montanists, with your new
comforter: Avaunt, ye Jews, with your Cabal and Talmud: Avaunt, Trent Council,
and Papists, with your Traditions: our salvation is Christ; for There is no
other name given unto men, whereby they shall be saved, save only by the name
of Jesus: The way to salvation, is faith, the guide Act. 4. 12.
to this way, is the Scripture. Hereupon says Paul, Ye are no longer
forenners and strangers, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and There is a
fourfold judgment.
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. So much for the
Author cited. Enoch the seventh from Adam.

Now to the thing prophesied, which is judgment, and therein, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.
first we have to observe, that there shall be a judgment. There is a
fourefold judgment.

The first judgment was that, that was accomplished, of man and Angels at
their first fall. The Angels that fell, were judged and thrown out of Heaven:
Adam that fell, was judged and thrown out of Paradise. Genesis 3.


Secondly, There is a middle judgment, and so God judges the wicked, and the
godly every day, Visiting ^^eir sins with Psalm.
the rod, and their offenses with the scourge.

There is a third, a particular judgment, in the day of every man's death; of
Lazarus, and good men to Heaven; of Dives, and bad men to Hell; and of this
particular judgment, the Author Luke 16.
of the Epistle to the Hebrews speaks thus: It is appointed for all men once
to dye, and then comes the Judgment. Hebr. 9. 27.


Fourthly, there is general judgment, of quick and of dead, whereof Enoch
prophesied here, saying, The Lord will come with thousands of his Saints, to
give judgment, etc. But some will say, Why should God judge man after death,
since he has his judgment at his death? I answer, that in death we have a
particular judgment, but God will also have his general Aug.
judgment.

Secondly, In death we have the judgment of the soul: But God will judge both
body and soul.

Thirdly, In death we have a secret Doom: But God will have an open Assise, a
public Sessions, and a manifest Judgment.

Concerning which general Judgment, I could produce a cloud of Scriptures to
avouch it, both out of the old and new Testament: Ezechiel says, An end is
come, an end is come, it is looked for: Behold it is come. Moses also
prophesied of this Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32. and David, Psalm. 50. and Solomon,
Eccles. 11. 9. and Daniel, Cap. 7. 13. and Joel, Cap. 3. and Malachy Cap. 4. So
did Christ himself, Mat. 24. and Paul the Apostle of us Gentiles, 2. These. 5.
and Peter 2. Pet. 3. and John 9. Apoc. 20. Neither is this assurance of the
judgment to come, warranted by the words of Gods servants only, but the Lord
has left many works of his own, to teach us, that he will once at length for
all, judge the whole World for sin. The drowning of the old World, the
burning of Sodom, the destruction of Jerusalem, were assured tokens that the
Lord would not put up the infinite iniquities of the World, but will judge it,
and punishit; the pleading of the Conscience foretells a judgment to come;
the sentence of of death pronounced in Paradise, and renewed with such terror
on mount The Lord Jesus Christ shall judge.
Sinai, did evidently assure us, that God meant to call men to judgment; the
lesser judgments in this life are forerunners to this great and last
judgment; the dragging of men out of the World by death, is nothing else, but
an Alarm to judgment. God has promised that there shall be a judgment: I
will contend with thee in judgment, says God. The nations shall see my
judgments, says God. I will sit and judge the people, says God. Now all the
promises of God, are Yea and Amen, so firmly ratified, that Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but his Word and promise shall not pass. The day and the
night may fail in their courses; the Sun and Moon may fail in their
motions; the Earth may fail and totter upon her props; the Sea and Rivers may
fail, and be emptied of their waters, but the promises of God shall not
fail. God promised a flood, and it came: Et qui verus erat in diluvio, cur non
in iudicio? He that performed it in the one, why should he not perform it in
the other?

The Justice of God requires that there shall be a judgment, Hic optimi
pessime agunt; Here the best men are the worst used, and most wronged: Here
Iezabel sits braving in a window, whilst Jeremy lies sticking in the mud. Here
Dives sits in his palace, clothed richly, faring daintily, while Lazarus lies
at his gates naked and hungry: Here Herod will please Herodias, though it be
with the head of John the Baptist (Nonne visitabit haec?) shall not God visit
and come to judgment for these things? Certainly judgment will come, and then
down go the wicked, and up the godly: horror, hell and death shall be the
doom of the wicked; heaven, joy and life shall be the lot of the righteous.
Thus ye see there shall be a Judgment.

I will pass on to the next, Who shall be the Judge in this Judgment? The
Lord, The Lord? says Enoch, comes with thousands of his Saints, to give
judgment, etc. And in that the Lord shall be our Judge, there will be first,
rectum iudicium, a right and true judgment: for the Lord is true, and cannot
fail either: Ignorantia legis, as not knowing the Law: For he gave the Law,
and will judge according to the Law: nor yet Ignorantia facti, as not seeing
the fact; for his seven eyes go through the World. Ye may interpret them, if
ye will, seven thousand thousand eyes. Zach. 4.


Again, if the Lord be the Judge, there will be aequum iudicium, his
Judgment will be righteous and good; for Necerrat ipse, nec sustinet errantem,
He can neither sin himself, nor yet endure a wilful sinner: we cannot
corrupt him, he has no need of our goods.

But when he says, The Lord shall be the Judge and come to judgment; ye
shall understand, that this word Lord is taken sometime essentially; and then
it signifies all the three persons in the Trinity: and so it is taken in the
Psalm, The Lord, even the most mighty has spoken, and called the round World,
etc. And indeed in Christ shall judge in his humanity.
respect of authority, the whole Trinity shall be the Judge: but sometime this
word Lord is taken personally, and then it signifies, the second person in the
Trinity, as here in this my Text, The Lord shall come to Judgment. For in
respect of the execution of this judgment, Christ alone shall judge. And why
Christ? And not the Father, and the Holy Ghost? First, because Saint John tells
us; The Father has given all judgment to the Son: John 5.
And as Saint Bernard expounds the words: non ut Filius suus, sed ut Filius
Hominis: not as he is the Son of God, but as he is the Son of the blessed
Virgin, borne in the world.

2. The Son judges, and not the Father, because it best befitteth a King to
judge his own subjects; and we are now the immediate subjects of the Son.
Indeed in our creation we were absolutely the subjects of God, but by
rebelling against God, we became the slaves and vassals of the Devil, and not
the subjects of God: yet now being redeemed from death, and from him that has
the power of death, the Devil: by the precious blood of the Son of God, we
are become the subjects of the Son, not that this is to be understood,
Exclusive, as excluding from the work of our redemption, the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, sed Appretiative^, as the Schoolmen speak, but because the price
of our redemption was paid by the Son, and not by the person of the Father,
or Holy Ghost; and in that the Son did sustinere poenas, undergo our
punishment, et procurare praemia, purchase our reward; he must dispensare
praemia and poenas, both dispose of our punishment and reward.

But forasmuch as there be two natures in Christ; the Divine, and humane; it
may be questioned in what form or Nature he shall judge? Saint Augustine
answers, Eadem forma iudicabit te, qua sub Iudice s^etit pro te; In the same
nature he shall judge thee, wherein he stood before the Judge for thee; he
shall judge us not as God, but as man; according to that in the Gospel, Ye
shall see the Son of Man (not of God, but of Man) coming in the clouds of
Heaven with power and great glory. Veniet qui Deus, non qua Deus, he that shall
judge us, is God, but he shall not judge us, as he is God. Vrsinus in his
Catechism page 451. gives three reasons of this; Quia per eum Mediatorem
glorificanda est Ecclesia, per quem iustificata est; because the Church is to
be glorified by that Mediator, by which she was justified. Secundo^, ob
consolationem nostram, dum scimus illum fore Iudicem, qui redimit nos; est enim
frater noster, and caro nostra. Secondly, for our comfort, to give us to
understand that he shall be our Judge, which redeemed us, and is our brother
and our flesh. Tertio, propter iustitiam Dei, quia filium hominis contumelia
affecerunt. Thirdly, for the Justice of God, because the Son of Man has
been much reproched with many contumelies and slanders. If any man will
object, that Christ says, That Though Christ shall come in humanity, yet with
power and great glory.
he came not to judge the World, but to save the World: I answer, that these
words are not to be understood of his second, but of his first coming into the
World: then indeed he came to save the World, but now to judge the World; and
he shall not judge it as God, because that as Esaias says, Tollatur impius; The
wicked must be taken away, that he may never see the glory of God; but John 12.
47.
as man, Vt homines videant, that men might see the Judge of men. August.
says, Quamvis non recedat pater a filio, unum enim sunt, tamen ad iudicium
veniet filius, non Pater: although the Father departs not from the Son,
(for they are one) yet the Son shall come to judgment, and not the Father:
Quia ibi nec Deitas Filij, nec Patris videbitur, for there neither the Deity of
the Father, nor of the Son shall be seen.

The third thing to be handled, is the manner of his coming to judgment; it
will be a most fearful, yet a glorious coming; he will come with thousands
of his Saints: For if other Benches be furnished with Justices of Peace, Gods
Bench shall be furnished with Angels: Thousand thousands shall minister unto
him, and ten thousand thousand shall stand before him, and when he shall
thus come in his glory, fulminabit e Coelo, the Lord will thunder from Heaven;
and the highest will give his voice. Now if the thunder and and crackling of a
cloud be so terrible; what terror shall there be, when he shall thunder, that
sits above the clouds? The thunder does but demolish Mountains, and root
up trees; but when God shall thunder out his judgments, he will crush and
cast down King, Prince, and People, that have not made him their fortress,
and their tower. The thunder does but shake the clouds, and make them to fly
up and down; as birds in the air: but when God shall thunder out his
judgments, he will shake and astonish the heart and conscience. Yet shall
there be then a great difference betwixt a good and a guilty conscience; for a
good conscience shall be moved, sed ut folium, but as a leaf, with a little
wind and breath of Gods displeasure, but the guilty shall be removed, as the
foundations of the Earth are shaken with the full rigor of Gods wrath: For
then, as Saint Jerome has it, Terra tremet, mare mugiet, the Earth shall
quake, the Sea roar, the Air ring, the World burn; And all this all
becomes as a firebrand or burning coal.

O miserable sinner, how will thou tremble; when the Lord shall come with
thousands of his Saints to judgment! and if the just and upright man Job was
afraid of this judgment, and therefore cried out and said, Quid agam? quo me
convertam, cum veniet Dominus ad iudicum? What shall I do? or whither shall I
turn Job 31. 14.
me, when the Lord comes to judgment? If Blessed Hillary, who from the
fourteenth year of his age, served the Lord in fear, and rejoiced before him
with trembling, as David did By the terror of particular judgments, we may
gather the general.
who was afraid of this day, as it appears by his speech upon his deathbed,
Egredere anima, egredere, quid dubitas? quid times? Go forth, O soul, go
forth, why art thou afraid? why doubtest thou? thou have served God these
seventy years, and art thou Psalm. 14.
afraid now to depart? If these holy men were afraid of this day, how ought
thou, O sinner, which have drunk iniquity like water, and have not served thy
God one day, as thou ought to do? I say, how ought thou to quake and to
tremble? If the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the poor wretch
appear? then thou will cry to the Mountains, Fallon us, and to the Hills,
Cover us, hide us from the presence of the Lord, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. For the great day of the Lords wrath is come, and who can abide it? but
all will be in vain.

If Zephanie spoke so tragically, of the particular judgment of God by
Nebuchadnezar, saying, The great day of the Lord, Zeph. 1. 14, 15.
is come, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction
and desolation, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and
blackenesse, a day of the trumpet and alarm. If Jeremy spoke sorrowfully, and
lamentably of the particular judgment of God upon Jerusalem, saying, How is
the gold become dim? the most fine gold is changed, and the stones of the
Sanctuary are scattered in the corner of Lament. 4. 1. 2, 4, 5, 10, 11.
every street. The noble men of Sion comparable to fine gold; how are they
esteemed as earthen pitchers? the tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the
roof of his mouth for thirst, and the young children ask bread, and no man
breaks unto them. They that did feed dilicately, perish in the streets, and
they that were brought up in scarlet, embrace the dung. The hands of the
pitiful women have sodden their Children, which were their meat in the
destruction of the daughter of my people. The Lord has accomplished his
indignation, he has powered out his fierce wrath, he has kindled a fire in
Sion, which has devoured the foundations thereof: what may be said of the
general judgment, when not one City, but all Cities shall be destroyed? The
reprobates shall see above them an angry Judge, beneath them Hell fire, on the
right hand their Sins accusing them, on the left hand the Devils tormenting
them; within them, their gnawing conscience, without them, the damned spirits
bewayling; on every side, the World burning: Vbi regredi impossible, progredi
intolerabile, where to go backward, it is impossible, and to go forward
intolerable.

The glorious manner of Christ's coming is described by the Apostle; The Lord
(says he) shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the trumpet of God: then he shall come, not with twelve
poor Apostles, but with twelve thousand thousand Angels. Well, the Lord shall
come with thousands of his Angels: where note, that his second coming shall not
be like his first; At the first he came in poverty, now shall he In Christ's
humility, his glory appeared.
come in glory; at the first he came in humility; now shall he come in
Majesty; at the first he came with the tongues of men, now shall he come with
the voice of an Archangell and trumpe of God; At the first he came in misery,
now shall he come in Mat. 24. Luke 9. 58.
Majesty; at the first he came with Glory be to God on high, now shall he come
with vae, vae, vae, with a threefold woe upon them that dwell upon the face of
the earth; At the first he came with tidings of great joy, that shall come upon
all people, now shall he come with fear and trembling upon all the nations of
the earth; At the first he came 1 Timothy 1. 17. Apoc. 1. 7. Apoc. 5.
as a servant, now shall he come as a King; At the first he came as a prisoner,
between two thieves, now shall he come as a Judge. At the first he came as a
Lamb, now shall he come as a Lion: Venit tunc salvare, nunc iudicare, he came
then to save us, now he shall come to judge us.

And yet to speak fully, his first coming was not without glory; two
contraries were conjoined, Summa humilitas, and summa sublimitas, the deepest
humility, and the highest sublimity: Aug.
he lay among the beasts, yet praised of Angels which sung, Gloria in excelsis,
Glory be to God on high. What is he; Luk 2.
that is so base, and so glorious, so little, and so great: so poor, and so
rich? poor in the flesh, poor in the manger, poor in the stable; but great,
and rich, and glorious in heaven, whom the stars obey; great and glorious in
the air, Mat. 2.
where the Angels sing; great and glorious in earth, for Herod and all
Jerusalem were moved at the tidings of him. It is the greatest baseness Luk 2.
for God to be conceived, and the greatest glory to be conceived by the Holy
Ghost; the greatest baseness to be borne Esaias 7.
of a Woman, and the greatest glory to be borne of a Virgin; the greatest
baseness to be borne in a stable, and the greatest glory to shine in the
Heavens; the greatest baseness to deplore among beasts, and the greatest glory
to be sung of Angels; the greatest baseness, to be baptized among sinners, and
the greatest glory to have the heavens open, the spirit to descend, and to
hear the Father of heaven speaking from heaven, This is my beloved Son Mat.
3. 16.
in whom I am well pleased: It is the greatest baseness to suffer death upon
the Cross, and the greatest glory to rise again from the dead: formosus erat
in Coelis, formosus erat in terra, he was fair and beautiful in heaven, fair
and beautiful in earth, fair and beautiful in his throne of glory, fair and
beautiful in the manger, fair and beautiful among the Angels, fair and
beautiful among the beasts: Quid facitis, o Magi, puerum ne adoratis? What do
ye, o ye Wisemen, do ye worship the child? Is he not therefore a King? I
but where is the Kings Court? Where is his Throne? Where the continual resort
and haunt of this Court? Is not his Court, the stable? his Throne, the Manger?
They that resort and haunt this Court, the Ox and the Ass? Yet vndique
formosus est, on every side he was fair and glorious. The Lords two Courts,
one of Mercy, the other of Justice.
For when he spoke, the sea was calm; when he commanded, the winds were
whist; when he called, the dead did rise; and when he died, the Sun was
eclipsed; when he rose, the earth trembled; when he ascended, the heavens
opened; so far Augustine. Thus his first coming was not without glory, but
his second shall be glorious indeed, He shall come in the glory of his Father,
with Mat. 24.
all the holy Angels.

One speaking of this coming of Christ to judgment, says, Posterior Christi
adventus non erit mitis, sed terribilis, Christ's latter coming shall not be
gentle, but terrible and fearful: For measure me the greatness of one arm,
by the quantity of another, the Justice of God, by the mercy of God: If he was
so merciful in his first coming, as to take our flesh, and to suffer death
upon the Cross for us; and how just? how severe will he be in his second
coming to all those, that have either contemned or abused his mercy? Quam
facilis fuit in primo adventu, Look how facile, gentle and propice he was in
his first coming; tam difficilis erit in secundo adventu, so hard, so uneasy
to be entreated will he be in his second coming: infinite in mercy, infinite in
Justice; ready to pardon, and ready to punish, God shall arise, and his enemies
shall be scattered, they also that hate him, shall fly before him. As Psalm. 88.
1, 2.
the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away, and as Wax melts before
the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God: And as the Prophet
says, God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, even the Lord of anger, the Lord
will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth Nahum 1. 1, 2.
wrath for his enemies: the Lord is slow to anger, but great in power, and will
not surely clear the wicked. As we treasure up our sins, so he treasureth
up his wrath; Indies crescunt peccata, indies crescit ira, our sins increase
daily, and his wrath daily.

Bernard says, that the Lord has two Courts, the one of mercy, the other of
justice; the one in this life, the other in the life to come: when he shall
come with thousands of his Saints to judgment. Here is forum miscricordiae,
the Court of mercy: there shall be forum Iustitiae, the Court of Justice, for
there he will reward every man according to his Works. Augustine brings in
Christ thus Romans 2. 6.
speaking at the last day; Ecce fabri Filium, quem irrisistis; Behold the
Carpenters Son whom ye have derided: Ecce eum in quem non credidistis,
Behold him, in whom ye have not believed; behold the wounds which ye have
made in my hands and feet, behold the side which ye have pierced, behold the
face which you have beraide with your spittle: Behold the glory that shall
press and overwhelme you, and the Majesty that shall break and bruise you.

For our Judge will judge righteously and justly; He will reward every man
according to his work: that is, to them, which by continuance Romans 2. 6, 7.
in well doing, seek glory and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but
unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey We must
meditate as well on the Justice of God, as on his mercy.
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish
shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil. And here note the
blindness of the World, All men prate of mercy, but few talk of Justice; like
the Benjamites, we cast stones with one hand; like Judge. 19. Mat. 26.
Polipheme, we see but with one eye; with Malchus, we hear but with one ear;
like the Unicorn we defend our selves with one horn from God; like the
Amazones, many brethren give suck to the Church, with one pap; delivering but
one doctrine, namely that of mercy. But let me speak familiarly: If a fellon
will not trust only on the mercy of the Judge, at the Assise; Let us not
deceive our selves against that great Assise day: Whatsoever Gal. 6, 7, 8.
a man sows, that shall he reap: for he that sows to the flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting: In quo statu novissimus vitae dies relinquet, in
eo resurrectionis primus dies inveniet: qualis in isto die quisque moritur,
talis in die illo iudicabitur: In what estate or condition the last day shall
leave thee, in the same, the first day of thy resurrection Augustine Hesichio
Epistola 80.
shall find thee: As every one dies this day, so shall he be judged in that
day. And again he says, Potentia Dei est insuperabilis, Aug. lib. 4. de
Symbolo. 1 Cor. 1. 25. Heb. 4.
the power of God is insuperable; For the weakness of God is stronger then
men: Eius scientia est infallibilis; his knowledge is infallible: For all
things are naked, and before him: Eius iracundia est implacabilis, his anger is
implacable; If his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, Psalm. 2. 12.
blessed are all they that put their trust in him: Ejus justitia est
inflexibilis, his Justice is inflexible; For he is a God of Gods, and Lord of
Lords; a great God, mighty and terrible, and regards no man's person: Contra
ejus potentiam nil valebit tyrannorum crudelicas, against his power, the
cruelty of tyrants shall nothing prevail: neither against his knowledge shall
the subtilty of Advocates prevail; nor against his wrath shall simplicity of
words prevail, nor against his Justice shall abundance of money prevail: Nec
gratia praeventura; nec misericordia flectetur, nec poenitentia mitigabitur;
nec pecunia corrumpetur; he will neither be prevented by grace, nor moved with
mercy, nor mitigated with repentance, nor corrupted with money.

Again, how soever men flatter themselves now in this or that thing, that
which we esteem a virtue now, will be then in Gods sight an abomination; our
ways and judgments are not Gods ^udgements: Luke 16. 15. Esaias 55. 8. Pro. 1.
31.
to follow our own hearts, is with God a kind of whoredom. The very Heathen
Orator could say, that similem lacte nutricis errorem suximus, we sucked in
with our mothers milk alike error. Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire; The
Ammonites burnt their children to Moloch; The Cananites sacrificed their
children to Idols, Baal and Astaroth; every Vzziah will play the Levite; every
Gedeon will have his Ephod; every Saul will have his sacrifice; Peter will
plead to Christ his good meaning; The Iacobites in Aethiopia circumcise their
young ones; The Indians All must come to Judgment.
worship Zemes, that are Devils: but when it comes to the judgment of God,
it is reversed: there is a writ of error sued: Nadab perished, with fire from
heaven; The Ammonites Levit. 10. cap. 20. Psalm. 106. 2 Samuel 6. Judge. 8. 1 Samuel
15. Mat. 16. 23.
were accursed; The Cananites, were destroyed; Vzziah was stricken; Gedeons
posterity was plagued; Saul was deposed; Peter was called Devil; The
Aethiopians foolish; The Indians blasphemers: we have not our Quietus est,
till God has judged us.

Again, howsoever we slander the judgments of God: yet are they just;
Iudicia Dei saepe occulta, nunquam iniusta; Gods judgments are many times
secret and hid, but never unjust: I say with Aug.
Augustine; Cave praecipitium, take heed of a break-necke; The Judgments of
God are fite, come not too near them, lest they burn thee; they are Abyssus,
a bottomless pit, swim not in them, lest they drown thee; they are as a
steep and high mountain, clime not too high, lest thou come down again
headlong: Paul durst not wade too far in the cause of Election, Vis Romans 11.
32, 33.
disputare mecum? mirare mecum, o altitudo! Petrus negat, Latro credit, o
altitudo: Will thou dispute with me? wonder with me, o depth! Peter denies,
the these believes, o depth! Secreta Dei sunt adoranda, non scrutanda; Gods
secrets are to be adored, not searched. Aug.
Do ye know these things? Happy are ye if ye do them.

The end of his coming to judgment is the next thing to be considered; and
that is, to judge all men; the mighty, the honorable, shall not escape in that
day, neither shall they be able to defend thee; that in obeying them, thou have
desobeyed God: For let me see, if any Ruler, King or Keisar, shall come forth
in that day, and say, I bad thee do this; I gave thee my warrant to do it.
No, no, he shall be judged himself. We shall all appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ, that every man may receive the 2 Cor. 5. 10.
things, that he has done in his body, according to that he has done, whether
it be good or evil. No man can redeem another man's soul. Let no Psalm. 47. 7.
man think to hide himself; ye know what counsel the wise man gives you,
Say not, I will hide my self from the Lord: for Eccles. 16. 17, 18.
who will think upon me from above? I shall not be known in so great an heap
of people: for what is my soul among such an infinite number of creatures?
Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens are for God: the depth, and the
earth, and all that therein is shall be moved when he comes to judge. Thou
shall no more hide thy self, and go away without thy judgment, than the guest
at the wedding could go Mat. 22. Soph. 1. 14.
unespied. The strong man shall then cry bitterly; many that now sit at the
Bench, shall then stand at the bar, he is the Lord-Chiefe-Iustice of Heaven.

For every work and word shall come to judgment: so says Solomon, God will
bring every work unto judgment, with every Eccles. 12. 14.
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. Nothing so secret, but shall God
knows every sin, therefore none can escape judgment.
be disclosed, neither hid, that shall not be known: for whatsoever has been
spoken in darkness, it shall be heard in light, and that which ye have spoken
in the ear, in secret places, shall be preached on the houses openly, that
all men may hear. Of every idle word we must give an account. God is greater
than our Luke 12. 2. 3. Mat. 12. 36. 1 John 3. 20.
hearts; he begins where we leave; he remembers that which we have
forgotten; his memory is as himself is, infinite; he will set down our
sins in order and say, In such and such a place, and such a time, and upon
such an occasion, have thou committed this or that sin. Unto the wicked says
God, Why do Psalm. 50. 16, 18, 19, 20, 21.
thou take my Covenant within thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? when thou
saw a thief, thou consentedst unto him, and have been partaker with the
adulterers, thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest
deceit, thou sit and speak against thy brother, and slanderest thy
mothers son. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, therefore
thou thoughtest that I was like thee, but I will reprove thee, and set before
thee the things that thou have done.

He calls all the Stars by their name.

He numbreth our steps. Job 26. 6. Job 14. 16. Mat. 10. Mat. 10. 29. Psalm. 56.
8. Psalm. 50. Psalm. 139.


He tells the Sparrowes of the Air.

He counts all the hairs of our head.

He puts all the tears of the afflicted into his bottle.

He knows the cattle upon a thousand mountains.

All our members were written in his book before we were borne.

Now if he call the stars by their names, if he number our steps, if he
tell the sparrowes, if he count the hairs of our head, if he register the
tears of the afflicted, if he know all the cattle on the mountains, if he
wrote our members in his book, long before we were borne; then surely he
has written all our sins in his book, as is said by Jeremy, The sin of
Ier. 17. 1.
Judah is written with a pen of ^ron, and with a point of a Diamond graven
upon the table of his heart.

Infinite are the sins of one year, of one month, of one week, yea of one
day; how many vain thoughts, idle words, ungodly works pass from us in one
day? David said, they passed the hairs of his head: he said, that he could
not number them. Job said, that we drink iniquity like water. Esaias said, We
draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin like cart ropes. Solomon says,
that the mouth of the wicked swalloweth iniquity. A thousand idle words, yea
oaths we utter in one day. Septi es in die cadit justus, the righteous sins
seven times a day, that is, many times in a day: what by committing of evil,
what by omitting of good: how often then in our whole life? and yet not one sin
does escape God. What is done in earth, is registered in heaven; in one moment,
it is in Gods debt-booke. And herein is Gods omniscience, herein differs the
knowledge of God, from that of Thoughts and words shall be judged as well as
works.
men and devils. Deus scit praesentia, praeterita and futura, God knows
things past, present, and future; they know not things future: God only
knows the thoughts of our hearts, they only our words and works, not our
thoughts.

Yea, every thought also shall be judged. We say, Thought is free: but God
shall arrest it, indite it, arraigne it, it shall hold up the hand at the bar
of God; for the Law is spiritual, and binds as well the spirit as the body;
so says the Apostle, We know that the Law is spiritual, (so that it can judge
the affections of Romans 7. 14. Psalm. 44. 21.
the heart:) God knows the secrets of the heart. A true hand, and a true
heart, a chaste body, and a chaste mind must go together, else all is lost. O
Jerusalem, wash thy heart from thy wickedness, Ier. 4. 14.
that thou may be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within
thee? Not deeds, but thoughts must be washed and cleansed.

As our deeds and thoughts, so our words shall be judged.

All the cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against God, shall
come to judgment, It will be said here, that none are so mad as to speak
against God. Yes, and men speak against God two ways.

First, when they speak against any ordinance of God. 1


Secondly, when we speak against the servants of God. 2


Against the ordinance of God, as thus, Stephen charged the Jews, that they
resisted the holy Ghost; yet resisted they but his Act. 7. 51. 1 Cor. 10. 21.
word. The Corinthians were said to provoke God for being present at Idols
feasts. The Apostle charged the Jews to rise up against the Lord Jesus, for
that they resisted the preaching the doctrine of Act. 4. 27.
Jesus.

Again, men speak against God, when they speak against the servants of God,
as thus, Christ codemneth Paul for persecuting Act. 9. 4.
him, yet persecuted he but the Saints of Jerusalem. The people, in contemning
Samuel, cast God away: So God told Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 7.
They have not cast thee away, but me away. And well said said Gamaleel; that
to strive against the Apostles, had been to strive Act. 5. 39.
against God. So Moses told Israel, Your murmurings are not against Exodus 16.
7, 8.
us, but against the Lord.

But among all that speak against God, our swearers are the chief: The
Prophet said, He was a man of polluted lips: but no Esaias 6.
lip more polluted than the swearers, they spue out their venim against God,
spit him in the teeth, justle with him for his chair, throw him into the
channel, trample upon him with their filthy feet, making his name a tennise
ball, a page, and waiting-man to their choler. Because of oaths the land shall
mourn: and men's mouths now are dyed red with oaths; they make no conscience
to speak against God; many men's hearts be all earth, their stomakes all water,
their brains all air, and their tongues all fire, being set on fire of hell.
Saint Ambrose tells us of a dog, that pulled Swearing and falsehood came
into the world together.
out the throat of him that murdered his master. Shall a dog do this for
him that gives him a crust of bread; and shall not our wrath kindle against
them, that have killed the Iam. 3. 6. Ambr. libr. 6. Hexam.
Lord Jesus? Men's sins, men's oaths, men's blasphemies and perjuries have
pierced him, and nailed him, and let out his heart blood: These were the nails
and spear that lanced him. Judas, Pilate, Herod, could have done nothing unto
him, if these our sins had not given them strength. One says, that three
members of the body are hardly governed; the heart, the reins, the Vinaldus
libr. de cont.
tongue. In the heart is vanity, in the reins is pleasure, in the tongue is
falsehood, perjury, blasphemy: He that can rule these three, is a persect man:
So says the Apostle, If a man sin not in Iam. 3. 2, 3, 4.
word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the body: behold, we put
bittes into the horses months, that they should obey us, and we turn about
all their body: behold also the ships, that though they be great, and are
driven of sierce winds, yet are they turned about with avery small rudeer,
wheresoever the governor lists: Even so the tongue is a little member, and
boasts of great things; Behold how great a thing, a little fire kindles: and
the tongue is a fire, yea a World of wickedness, etc. Better it is, that men
should never speak, then to swear and blaspheme, and so speak against God.
Vita and mors est in potestate linguae, life and death is in the power of the
tongue. Metalls are judged by the sound, whether they be gold or brass: A man
is judged by his speech, whether he be good or evil, if his words be brazen,
his heart cannot be golden. Chrysostom notes, that swearing came into the
world, when all untrueth entered into the World, and all villainy. In the first
age men were believed on their word, but in the ages following they were scarce
believed on their oath: lying brought swearing, swearing brought per jury into
the world; Ex multis i^ramentis perventum est ^andem in pe^iu^ia, in
multil^quio non deest, peceatum: From many oaths men Chrysostom.
came at last to perjury; and in much speaking there is sin with much water
there goes some gravel; with much fire, some smoke; and with many words, some
lies; as among many wounds, some skarres. Aquinas says, that we must use an
oath, as we use physic; which is not used, but in necessity, in diseases: So
an oath is to be used in necessity, when the truth otherwise cannot appear:
Parce utenda medicina, parce iur amentum: A medicine Aquin.
is to be used sparingly, and an oath sparingly: yet a number cannot talk, but
they must swear. As the girl said of Peter, Thou art of Galilee, for thy
speech bewrays thee: So these Mat. 26.
swearers, that thus speak against God, are of the Devil. By thy barking I
know thee to be a dog: by thy hissing, to be a serpent; and by thy swearing,
to be a vile man. Shall I call that a sweet fountain, that sends out
nothing but brine, salt water and sulphurous? Shall I call that good earth,
that yeldeth nothing, but briers and brambles? And shall I call him a
Christian, The general Judgment most certain.
that cannot speak five words, but one shall be against God; one shall be an
oath, by God, and by God? As she said; Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara: So
call not these Christians; but beasts, monsters, Devils, as Christ called
Judas. These men John 6. 70.
(as S. John said) have the horns of the Lamb, but they speak like the
dragon; they have a show of religion, but they swear like reprobates; they
speak by the mouth of a greater beast, Apoc. 13.
then themselves; These men are like belles, that hang in the steeple, but they
are not seen, but heard: so these men though they be nor seen, they may be
heard in the Ale houses and Tavernes; as men pass by, there they roar, and
swear, and speak against God, and count it a gentlemenly quality. In times
past, Gentlemen were known by three properties, Learning, Arms, and
Gentleness: but now by swearing, wantonness and taking of Tobacco. I speak
not of all, God has his number: Lord, how are men degenerated from that they
have been? What a Metamorphosis is in the world? Have men drunk of Circes
cup, or are they changed with Hecuba, for railing at the siedge of Troy into
dogs, that they bark thus against God? Well, they shall come to Judgment
one day, for this: Christ will come, and we expect it, To give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked
deeds, that they have committed, and of all their cruel speakings, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against. And Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Apoc.
22.


One thing further let me observe unto you, that he says, Behold, the Lord
comes with thousand of his Saints; to give judgment against all men, etc.
That he speaks in the present tense, not in the future tense; to note the
certainty of his coming. So Esaias Esaias 9.
said of Christ, Unto us a Child is borne, yet was he not then borne, but five
hundred years at the least after. So John spoke; Ecce, venit Apoc. 1. 7.
in nubibus, Behold, he comes in the clouds; and yet he is not come: but to
note the truth of his coming, he affirms that he comes. The Apostle
says, That Faith overcommeth the World: and yet we are striving with the
world, as yet we are in the 1 John 5. 1.
main battle; as yet the plowers plough long furrows on our backs; as yet we
strive unto blood; and yet he says, We have overcome the world; because we
shall overcome it. The Shepherds said, that the words of the Angel were come
to pass, yet had they Luk 2. 15. Romans 3. Numb. 23. 19.
not been a Bethelem: Let God be true, and all men liers: He is not a man that
he should lie, neither as the Son of man, that he should repent: has be
said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish
it? Heaven and earth shall pass, before one jot or tittle of his Luk 16, 17.
Word shall pass. As for him that thinks, that the Lord will never come to
judgment, nor that this body shall rise again: Let him remember, that he who
brings the Sun out of his Chamber daily, who renews the dead horns of
the Moon, Psalm. 19. Psalm. 104.
every month, who dried up the sea in one night, who caused None so vile but
sometime fears judgment inwardly.
Aarons withered rod in one night to bear ripe Almonds; who quickened Sara her
dead womb; who revived the dead corn in the ground, can raise again this
body; and howsoever the Exodus 14. Genesis 18. 1 Cor. 15.
wicked sear up their consciences with a hot iron, yet I am persuaded, there
is none so wicked, but sometime trembles at the judgment: That the Lord shall
come with thousand of his Saints, to give Judgment on all flesh, etc. None so
riotous but sometime he says, Esca ventri, and venture escis, Meat for the
belly, and the belly, for 1 Cor. 6. 13.
meat, but God shall destroy both it and them. None so covetous, but sometime
says, The rust of these things will be a witness against me. None so
blasphemous, but at one time, or other, Iam. 5. 3.
says, The plague departs not from the house of the swearer. None so
adulterous, but says, I may not make the Ecclus. 23. 12.
members of Christ, the members of an harlot. I may not make the 1 Cor. 6.
temple of God, the stable for the Devil. And to conclude, none so past all
fear of God, but sometimes says, This gear will not last always; what shall
become of me: when I stand before Gods judgment seat? Foelix trembled, when
he heard Paul preach of Judgment; and Adrian the Emperor said at his death,
Animula Act. 24.
vagula, blandula, quo nunc vagaris? O my little wandering, tender soul,
whither do thou now go? Thou would not have the conscience of a damned
creature, to gain ten thousand worlds, and to be the Monarch of them for so
many thousand years. Well, ye see, there shall be a Judgment, ye see the
person, that shall be our Judge; The Lord; he shall come in his own person to
judge us, and what a comfort will this be, that he shall come for us, that
went up to send the Comforter unto us?

Ye see the manner of his coming, with thousand of his Saints. The end of it,
to rebuke all the ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all
the cruel speakings that wicked sinners have spoken against.

And now to make some use of all this, that has been spoken concerning this
Judgment: The use of it is triple.

1. For terror. 2. For comfort. 3. For Instruction.
But first it serves for terror; it is a wonderful terrible doctrine to the
wicked: for how can it be, but terrible, when the Lord shall come with thousand
of his Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke, etc? their
hearts shall fail them for fear. Luk 21. Apoc. 9. 6
They shall seek death in those days; and shall not find it. This has been
their day, wherein so far as they could, they have done their will: The next
is the Lords day, wherein they must suffer his will; how can it be but
terrible, when they shall see the Son of man in the clouds above, to condemn
them? beneath, hell mouth open ready to devour them; before, the Devils haling
No way for the wicked to escape Judgment.
them; behind them, the Saints, and all their dearest friends forsaking them;
on their left hand their sins accusing them; on the right, Justice threatening
them; on all sides the world made a bone-fire, terrifying them; how can it be
but terrible, when the hills cannot hide them, nor the Mountains cover them,
from the presence of the Judge? For he is here, and there, and every where: If
they mount and soar up to heaven, he is there; if they go into hell, he is
there too: So that pati intolerabile, latere impossible, it is not possible to
endure, nor possible to avoid the judgment. How can it be but terrible, when
God shall rain upon them, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest? This shall
be their portion to drink; when God shall power even the vials of his wrath
upon them, and they shall feel the mass of his displeasure. Here the wicked
are judged, that they may be amended; but there their judgment shall be, that
they may be confounded; For there will be no place for repentance. If Foelix
trembled, to hear tell of judgment? What will poor Foelix do, when he must
feel Judgment both in the sentence and execution? If John and Daniel at the
sight of a mild Angel, fell upon the earth as dead, Dan. 4. 8. Apoc. 1. 17.
How shall thou miserable sinner endure the presence of the terrible Judge? If
Haman could not abide the angry countenance of Assuerus, Hest. 7. 9. how shall
thou, o wicked man, iudure the angry countenance of this frowning Judge? If
Adam for the commission of one sin, ran from God in great fear, and hid
himself among the trees that were in the garden, Genesis 3. 8. whither shall thou
run, o sinful Adamite, that have committed as many sins, as stars in
the sky, or sands by the sea? Imo horum numerus numero non clauditur ullo; Yea
the number of them is not to be numbered. Whither, I say, will thou run, or
where shall thou hide thy self from this terrible Judge? If the drowning of
the old World, the burning of Sodom, the opening of the earth to swallow up
Corah, etc. and such like the Judgments have such horror in them; who can
express the horror of this day? when many millions of wicked shall be turned
into hell, with all the people that forget God? If it be such a shame to do
penance for one fault in one congregation, where men will pray for the
offendour, what a shame will it be, when all our faults shall be discovered
before all the whole world, without all hope of pity and help, and all workers
of iniquity shall be cast alive into that lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone? Look therefore to your selves, ye generation of Vipers, and wash
your hands, and cleanse your hearts: For certainly the Judge of all the world
will do right.

2. This doctrine of Judgment serves for comfort to all penitent Christians,
they may lift up their heads, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious:
For the Lord shall then come, and be glorified 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
in his Saints, and made marvailous on them that believe. Hereupon The
consideration of the general judgment should instruct us.
says Augustine, Quare non gaudes, cum venerit iudicare te, qui venit iudicari
propter te? Why do thou not rejoice, when he shall come to judge thee, that
came to be judged for thee? he has been thy advocate to plead thy suites to
God his Father, and certainly when he comes to judgment, he will not go
against his own pleading? He is thy brother, and carries a most brotherly
affection unto thee: and will he condemn his own brother? He is thy head, and
has performed all the offices of an head unto thee: and can he then fail
thee, when thou have most need of him? he died for us, to redeem us, a people
peculiar unto himself; and will he fail us in the last act of our redemption?
Oh no, no, lift up your heads then, and in patience possess your souls: What
though he be terrible to the wicked? to thee he will be kind and merciful:
thou shall not be wronged by false witnesses, neither shall thou be judged by
common fame, or outward appearance. The Judge will not be transported either by
passion or spleen, nor will condemn thee, to satisfy the people, as Pilate
did Jesus: and besides, nothing shall be remembered, but what good thou have
wrought and done; thy sins shall be clean blotted out of remembrance; they
shall be buried in the heart of the earth, and drowned in the bottom of the
sea; they shall never rise up to Judgment against thee. Rejoice therefore,
poor penitent, thou shall find Christ a friend, no foe; a Jesus, no Judge; a
Savior, no confounder: thou shall find Heaven, and not Hell; Angels, not
Devils; Gods right hand, not his left hand; everlasting life, and not
everlasting death.

3. This doctrine of judgment serves for instruction: First, it should
restrain uncharitable censuring, and judging one another: Who art thou that
judge another man's servant? he stands or falls to his master. Christ is
the Lord of quick and dead: Judge therefore nothing before the time. If we
could consider, that we should every one give account to God himself, as Romans
14. 12. we should find work enough, to look to our own score, and little
leisure to forestall God in this matter of judging.

2. Are there matters of difference among us? Let the Saints judge them, and
end them. God will be contented to put his cause to them at the last day; For
we know that the Saints shall judge 1 Cor. 6. 2.
the World: and therefore why should we refuse their arbitrament?

3. It should order and moderate our sorrows for our dead friends; We should
not sorrow, as people without hope, seeing we believe, that all that sleep in
Jesus, God will bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13, 14, 17, 18. we shall meet
together again in that day, and ever live together with the Lord; and
therefore we should comfort one another with these words.

4. This summons to judgment gives a dreadful warning, and admonition to the
world, even to all men every where to repent; We should prevent judgment, by
judging our selves.
in so much as God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world with
righteousness, by that Man whom he has appointed: Act. 17. 31. Woe will be
unto us, if that day come upon us unawares, before we have made our peace, and
humbled our selves before God, and by true repentance turn from sin, to
sanctity. It is an unspeable favor, that God shows us, when he offers us this
mercy, that if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord in that
day, 1 Cor. 11. 34. And it will on the other side kindle his wrath extremely,
when having such grace offered, we neglect it, and death, and judgment find
our sins unremitted on Gods part, and unrepented of ours.

5. Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, it should stir us up to
an holy conversation: So reasons S. Peter, Seeing that all those things must
be dissolved, what manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness, looking for and hasting to the coming of the day of God, etc? 2.
Pet. 3. 11, 12. We are Gods stewards, let us arm our selves, as they that must
give accounts of their stewardship, and let us jmploy such talents, as God has
lent us, to Gods glory, and our neighbors good.

Lastly, since the day of Judgment is the day of our full and final
Redemption; and since he shall come as a thief in the night, even the hour
that we think not; Let us therefore watch and be ready, always careful and
diligent, sighing and groaning, longing and praying, hasting to, and looking for
this glorious coming of our Lord and Savior Christ to judgment.

THE SIX AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XVI. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
etc. Many discontented with Gods dealing with them.



HE proceeds to describe the wicked, and that four ways.

1 By their Impatiencie. 2 By their Lusts. 3 By their Pride. 4 By their
Flattery.
For they yield many sins, as Nilus yields many Crocodiles, and the
Scorpion, many Serpents at one birth:

This impatiencie is twofold, Against God, and against man.

And first for God, many are never content, but if they have one thing, they
would have another, like the daughter of Caleb, when we have pasture ground,
we must have arable, and when we have that, we must have wood ground for
fuel, and parkes for pleasure; like some Clergy men, that must have one
benefice for corn ground, another for glebe land; like Aesops Lion, they must
have the first, second, and third part; and except God give them the fourth
part also, they will fall out with him, they will murmur, and as the Prophet
speaks, In the evening they will Psalm. 59. 15.
go to and fro, and bark like dogs, and grinne, if they be not satisfied.
Paul notes this sin in Israel, and applies it to Corinth, and in them to
all Churches, saying, Neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer: but to see it plainly, Murmuring, the sin of the
Israelites.
read Exodus 16. and there ye shall find, that the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, in the
wilderness, and said, Oh that we had dyed by 1 Cor. 10. 10. Exodus 16. 2, 3, 4,
5.
the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots;
when we ate bread our bellies full! But Moses told them, That God heard their
grudgings against them; and further said, At even shall the Lord give you flesh
to eat, and in the morning your fill of bread; for the Lord (says he) has
heard the murmurings that ye murmr against him, etc. and so at even quails
came and covered the ground, and in the morning he rained Manna upon them.

Again, God having given them bread and flesh, no sooner wanted they water,
but they were as vile: Wherefore the people contended with Moses and said, Give
us water, that we may drink; and the people murmured against Moses, and said,
Wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt, to kill us, and our children, and
our cattle with thirst? Thus like dogs, except their mouths were filled,
they barked continually, like the Gangrene or the disease called the Woolfe,
which gnaweth ever except it be fed: For no sooner had God delivered them out
of Egypt, but except he would deliver them from Pharaoh also, they would
rail. Hereupon they said unto Moses: Have thou brought us to dye in the
Wilderness, because there were no graves in Egypt? Wherefore have thou served
us thus, to carry us out Exodus 14. 11, 12.
of Egypt? did not we tell thee this thing in Egypt, saying, Let us be at
rest, that we may serve the Egyptians? for it had bin better for us to have
served the Egyptians, then that we should dye in the wilderness.

Thus they dealt with God for water at another time: Why have ye brought the
Congregation of the Lord into this Wilderness, Numb. 20. 4. 5.
that both we and our cattle should dye there? Wherefore now have ye made us
to come up from Egypt, to bring us to this miserable place, which is no place
of seed, nor figs, nor vines, nor pomegranats? neither is there any water to
drink? Cyrill notes upon the 6. of John, Verse. 52. that this sin of
murmuring is hereditary to the Jews; it was morbus haereditarius (like the
stone) the Fathers conveyed it ever to their children, and this sin like the
heads of Hydra, drew many other sins after it, as disobedience, ingratitude,
impatience, distrust, tempting of God, blasphemy; it was never alone.

The whole course of the sacred Scriptures cries out against this sin,
specially in men professing God, Do all things (says the Apostle) Phil. 2. 14.
without murmuring or reasoning: and Saint Peter, Be ye harborous one to
another without murmuring: and Wisdom bids us, Beware 1 Pet. 4, 9. Sap. 1.
10. Genesis 4. 14.
of murmuring. Cain murmured, and the Scripture notes it as his sin.

The Israelites were grievous murmurers.

Sometimes for their Labor.

Sometimes, for Drink.

Exodus 5. 21. Cap. 16. 25. Cap. 17. 3.
Sometimes, for Flesh, as ye heard before.

Sometimes in distrust, to obtain the City so strongly The punishment of
murmurers.
walled.

Sometimes for fear to be killed of their enemies.

Sometimes for want of dainties, as figs, pomegranats, Number. 13. 3. Number. 14.
2. Cap. 16. 42. Cap. 20. 3.
vines, etc.

Sometimes for that they were over-layed with Manna.

And for other like causes, upon which the holy Ghost sets a brand of
dislike, and so by their sins admonishes us to beware. For this sin never
went unpunished.

There is murmuring for good done on the Sabbath day: For not washing before
meat, for the ointment that was powered upon Christ, and not rather sold, and
given unto the poor; that widows were neglected; that Mary did not help
Martha, but sat and heard Christ's words. But still observe, that all these
were sinful and grievous unto God.

Miriam, Moses Sister, for murmuring was punished with Leprosy; and she
became a Leper white as snow. The laborers in Number. 12. 10.
the vineyard, which came at the first hour, and bare the burden and heat of
the day, murmured at the master of the vineyard: because they received no more
wages, tha^ they that came at the last hour; but ye know his answer, Friend,
I do thee no wrong: did thou not agree Mat. 20. 13, 14, 15.
with me for a penny? take that which is thine own, and go thy way. I will
give to this last as much as to thee. Is it not lawful for me to do as I will
with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? etc. So the Pharisees
murmured against Christ, because he did eat with Publicans, but he reproved
them. And in these last times the Gnostickes, Valentinians, Menander,
Cerinthus, Elion, Marcion, and some others cease not to vomit out their poison
against the Son of God. But Ismael shall not always grudge at Isaac; the
Babylonians shall not always repine at the songs of Sion; Arrius shall not ever
bark at the Son of God; Macedonius shall not ever murmur against the holy
Ghost; Ismael shall be Genesis 21. Psalm. 137.
hurled out; the Babylonians dashed in pieces; Arrius voided his guts in
secessu, in the common Iakes; Macedonius rotted in the earth. Such a plague
John notes, saying, And the fourth Angel powered out his vial on the Sun, and
it was given unto him to torment Apoc. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.
men with heat of fire, and men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name
of God, which has power over these plagues; and they repented not, to give him
glory. And the fifth Angel powered out his vial upon the throne of the beast,
and his kingdom waxed dark, and they did gnaw their tongues for sorrow, and
blasphemed the God of Heaven for their pains, and their sores, and repented
not of their works. Finely therefore answered Job his wife, What, shall we
receive good things at the hands of God, and not receive evil? We must say
with Paul, Job 2. 10.
Novi saturari, novi esurire, I know to be full, and I know to hunger: Phil. 2.
12.
for he that cannot bear all states, can bear no state; he that cannot
hunger without fainting, can hardly be full, without surfeting; he that
cannot bear adversity without murmuring, That is best that God allots, we
ought therewith to be content.
cannot bear prosperity without pride, and arrogance; he that is ashamed of a
freese coat, will be proud of a velvet coat; he that cannot bear a private
life, if he were a ruler, would be a Tyrant; he that cannot endure sickness,
if he had health, would be a wanton. An ancient Father calls murmurers, or
a diaboli, the Devils mouth: but we must do all Irenaeus Phil.
things without murmuring: we must be like ground that can endure all weather,
rain, and drought; like ships that can sail at all times, in a storm, and
in a calm; like the stone in Thracia, that neither burns in the fire, nor
sinketh in the water. Felicity consists not in the things of this life;
therefore we should not murmr for the want of them. Job blesses the name of
God in his greatest afflictions, and murmureth not. Of the godly is often said,
That the praises of God are ever in their mouths: then not murmuring: Psalm.
135. 21.
Murmurers want David's staff so comfortable unto him, therefore we should
avoid it. Seneca says, Optimum est pati Psalm. 23. 4.
quod emendare non potes, and Deum, quo authore cuncta proveniunt, sine murmur
atione comitare; It is best to suffer what thou can not amend, and to follow
God, (from whom) as from a fountain, all things do come without murmuring.
Some will have fair weather, some foul, some wet, some dry; if they have it
not, they repine and murmr. Holcot commentarying upon the book of Wisdom,
has many pretty histories; and among many, he tells us a tale of a Hermit,
that having sown pot-hearbes in his garden, desired fair weather, and foul
weather, as he judged to be best for his herbs: and so had still granted of
God, according to his request: but not one herb came up: whereupon he
thought, that there was a general failing of herbs in all places: till on a
time walking to another Hermit, not far off, he saw with him a very
excellent crop. Then he told him, what he had begged, and obtained touching
the weather, and what effect it had. Whereunto the other Hermit answered,
Putabas tesapientiorem Deo, and ipse ostendit tibi fatuitatem tuam, etc. Thou
did think thy self wiser then God, and he has showed thee thy folly. I
for my part never asked any other weather, then God should please to send. I
would this old Hermit might teach many in these days, ever to rely upon God,
and to take all things which he sends, thankefully without murmuring.

And the only way to repress this murmuring and repining against God; is first
to consider the providence of God, ruling all things in heaven and in earth,
and overswaying all creatures, that nothing falls out without his will and
pleasure, as our Savior teaches; Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing,
and one of Mat. 10. 29, 30.
them shall not fall on the ground without your Father? Fear ye not
therefore, ye are of more value then many sparrowes. For who gives us our
bodies? who cloatheth the Lillies, that Solomon in all his glory was not like
one of them? Who feeds the young Ravens, Earthly things will not discontent,
it affection be heavenly.
that cry unto him? Who sustaineth the wicked, that are his enemies? Who
provideth all things for man in the beginning, before he was made, and created?
Is it not the Lord, whose all the beasts of the forest are, and the cattle
upon a thousand mountains? Let us then never murmr, but rest upon Gods
providence, and he will feed us, and cloth us, and care for us.

A second remedy to repress this murmuring, is to root out all distrustful
cares, and to be content with such things as we Hebr. 13.
have already, and to bear with patience, whatsoever the Lord sends. This
mind was in Jacob, in his journey he did not desire silver and gold, house, or
lands, but only a competent and a convenient living: If God will be with me,
and keep me in my journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
clothes to put on, then shall the Genesis 28. 20.
Lord be my God. So the Apostle teaches; Godliness is great gain, if a man
be content with that he has. And again, I have learned in 1 Timothy 6. 6. Phil.
4. 11.
whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content.

The last remedy to keep us from murmuring, is, to set our affections upon
Heavenly things, and not upon earthly. If we do believe that God does
forbear, and forgive us our sins, and not deal with us according to our
deservings; if he sanctify us with his spirit, and make our bodies, temples of
the Holy Ghost; if he turn us unto himself, working our conversion, which is
as great a work, as at the first to create us; we may be well assured, that
he will deliver our souls from death, and preserve us from famine: For if he
spared not his own Son, but has given him Psalm. 33. 19. Romans 8. 32. Luke
12. 32.
for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things also?
Murmr not then, for the want of outward things, which perish with their use:
For it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. This is the way to
repress murmuring; Yet men many times are murmurers; yea Gods children
themselves sometime fall into this sin: but this is to let us see our
infirmity, and Gods mercy, not to excuse this sin. True it is that Job did
pass the bounds Job 3. 3, 4, 5. 11, 12.
of patience, saying, Let the day perish, wherein I was borne, and the night
wherein it was said, that a man child is conceived; let the day be darkness:
Let not God regard it from above, (that is, let it be put out of the number of
days.) Neither let the light shine upon it, but let darkness and the shadow
of death sustain it, and let the clouds remain upon it. Let them make it
fearful as a bitter day. Why died I not in the birth? and why died I not,
when I came out of the womb? Why did the knees prevent me? and why did I suck
the breasts? And so Jeremy, Cursed be the day wherein I was borne, and let not
the day wherein my Ier. 20. 14, 15, 16.
mother bare me, be blessed. Cursed be the man that showed my father, saying, A
man child is borne unto thee, and comforted him: and let that man be as the
Cities, which the Lord has overturned, and repented not, and let them he are
the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noone day. The Ion. 4. 8.
like may be said of Jonas; who wished in his heart to die; and said, It is
better to die then to live. And the same may also be said of Elias, It God
never fails the faithful.
is enough, Lord, take away my life; I am no better then my Fathers. These are
examples to make us beware, not to be followed. In multis peccavimus omnes, in
many things we sin all, when the water is Iam. 3.
troubled, it is not clear, nor good to drink of. When men's minds are
troubled, their speeches are passionate and grievous; but God shall strengthen
them, if they pertain to him: premimur, sed non opprimimur, We are pressed,
but not oppressed: we 2 Cor. 4. 8.
fall, but we rise again. Let us chide our souls, as David did, Why art thou
so heavy, o my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me? Wait Psalm. 42. 14.
on God; relent not, murmr not, though troubles be long and great; dic
animae tuae, Quid tumultuaris? say unto thy soul, Why do thou make tumult?
why do thou fret and storm? Art thou hungry? God will feed thee, as he did
Elias by Ravens, that brought him meat morning and evening. Art thou weak?
God will strengthen thee, as he did Shamgar, with his Ox goad. Art thou shut
up close in prison? God will deliver thee, as he did Peter; the brazen gates
of their own accord shall open unto thee. Pharao may pursue Israel, but he
shall be drowned in the red Sea; Jeroboam may stretch out his hand, but it
shall wither: Abraham may lift up his hand, to smite Isaac, but Gods Angel
shall stay him, and a ram in a bush shall be present to be sacrificed in the
room and stead of him: The Arrians may lie in wait for Ambrose, but he shall
pass through the midst of them without hurt: A lion shall feed Macarius: A
Heart shall bring meat to Aegidius: A wild Ass shall carry Haebaenus over the
sea: A whale shall receive Jonas safely: The Duke of Savoy may besiege Geneva,
sed providebit Deus (quoth Beza) God shall provide. Ne desis Deo in fide, and
non deerit tibi in open, Be not wanting to God in faith, and he will not be
wanting unto thee in help. Trust thou in the Lord, and do good, dwell in the
land, and thou shall be fed assuredly, Psalm. 137. 3, 4, 5.
and delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire:
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
Sed hoc facile dictu, sed arduum factis: This is soon spoken, but not so soon
done; few will in patience possess their souls, scarce one of a thousand will
bear his Cross patiently without murmuring. Let us but want any corporal
food, by and by we break out, What, means the Lord to kill us with famine?
What greater sinners are we, then such, and such, that have the world at will?
Would God he would either amend these things, or make an end of us: who can
endure such an hard time? better to dye any way, then to dye of Famine. But
away with this murmuring; and let us rely upon God, and say with Job, Though
he killme, yet will I put my trust in him.

There is murmuring also against man, grudging either at their wealth, or at
their love and favor, or at the credit and preferment, wherein they go before
other men. So the Pharisees murmured against Jesus, and against his Disciples,
because the One man repines ordinarily against another.
people followed them: and thus the Grecians murmured against the Disciples of
Christ, because their widows were neglected in their daily ministering; a fault
whether more bad, or common Act. 6. 1.
among us, it is hard to say: For what more ordinary among men than murmuring?
If he be our superior in wealth, or in honor, or in credit, we murmr
against him, as too great to dwell so near us; and if he be our equal, we
grudge that he should thrive and prosper as well as we; if he be our
inferior, we disdain him. Thus among all sorts there is murmuring: so that
whereas all things should be done without murmuring, nothing is done without
murmuring: one man repines against another: We say, as Peter said, Lord, what
shall this man do? We grudge like the men of the vineyard: Nemo sua sort
contentus: John 21, 21. Mat. 21.
No man rests contented with his lot. It was wont to be a proverb, Homo
homini Deus, One man is a God unto another; but now, Homo homini Demon, One
man is a Devil to another; to repine, disdain and hurt another: yet are we
commanded to be patient, and to settle our hearts, not to grudge one against
another, Iam. 5. 8, 9.
lest we be condemned. The people murmr against their teachers, as Israel
did; For they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation Numb. 6. 16, 3, 13, 14, 32.
is holy, every one of them: and the Lord is among them, wherefore do ye lift
up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? Is it a small thing, that
thou have brought us out of a land that flows with milk and honey, to kill
us in the Wilderness, except thou make thy self Lord and ruler over us also?
Also thou have not brought us into a land, that flows with milk and honey,
neither given us inheritance of fields and vineyards, etc. But yet know their
end, The earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, with their families,
and all the men that were with Corah. Against these kinds of murmurers Saint
Gregory has a good saying, in his moralls, Qui contra suprapositam fibi
potestatem Murmurat, liquet, quod illum redarguit qui eandem potestatem dedit;
Who so murmureth against authority set over him; it is manifest he reproves
him, that gave him the same authority: and upon the seventh Psalm, murmurantes
dicuntur intrare in judicium cum Deo, Murmurers are said to enter into
judgment with God. They are like, says another, to a filthy swine, who
whether he wake, or sleep, is always grunting: Murmur atores similes sunt
versantibus in gyrum, donec capite and sensibus perturbati, caetera omnia
perturbari putant: Murmurers are such as turn round about, till their heads
and senses being turned, they imagine all Pythag.
things to turn round. Sed noli versus quenquam murmurare, est enim
abjectorum, be not thou a murmurer against any man, for it is a base thing, and
a quality of a base person; yet men will be murmuring against Governors, as
Corah against Moses: but let his fearful punishment make us to fly murmuring,
as a sin odious to God and man.

Many again that are Governors, repine at the people, calling Our mutual
wants should make us not repine.
them cursed men, rude men, as the Pharisees did. So Harding calls them
swine, that tread pearls under their feet. Staphilus calls them dogs,
unto whom we must not give holy things. Hosius calls them bestiam multorum
capitum, a beast of John 7. 49. Mat. 7.
many heads, who are not to meddle with sacred things.

The Subjects repine against their Rulers, and call them Tyrants, Oppressors;
as the ten Tribes did: the rulers make small account of their people, and use
them as vassals, and peasants, 1 Reg. 12. 16.
as Rehoboam did. The poor envy the rich, and say, These Churles eat up all,
they have all, no man can have an acre of 1 Reg, 12. 10.
land for them: their throats are never full. Thus began the rebellion in
Kent in the days of Richard the second, and Henry the sixth: When under Wat
Tyler, and Jack Cade, they beheaded all Lawyers, and learned men: they fired
the Savoy, they beheaded the Archbishop of Canterbury, and put the King in
great danger at Mile-end Green. Thus began the rebellion of Ket in Norff. in
casting down enclosures. The rich on the other side, call the poor, Mice,
Snakes, Vermin, unprofitable men; as Hatto Bishop of Mentz did, who burned a
barn full of poor folk, calling them Mice, and afterward was eaten of Rats
in a town built on the Sea, called to this day Rats Tower. To conclude, all
men for the most part are malecontented, as Nazianzene said, Miles dux erit,
the soldier will be a Captain, Ovis pastoris mu^^s vendicat, the sheep
challenges the sheap-heards office; Pes caput fieri contendit, the foot
striveth to be the head, Optat Ephippiam bos, optat arare Caballus, the Ox
wishes to bear the saddle, and the Horse to go to plough; the Merchant
repineth against the Lawyer, and the Lawyer against the Merchant; the Till-man
against the Soldier, and the Soldier against the Tilman. But if all were
Merchants, where were Lawyers? if all were an eye, where were the hearing? one
have need of another, the rich of the poor, and the poor of the rich; they of
the 1 Cor. 12. 19.
poor in respect of their work, and the poor have need of them, in respect
of their money: How should the rich do their work, if there were no poor?
and how should the poor be releeved, if there were no rich? Pretty is the
Fable of the Lion, delivered out of the snare by the gnawing of the Mouse: For
the greatest needs the help of the basest, and the rich of the poorest. Away
therefore with murmuring, and all evil speaking, for a man is known by his
speech, as metal is by his sound; and no glass shows more plainly the
spots of the face, than the tongue will show the spots of the heart.

Secondly, He describes the wicked by their lusts: They walk after their
own lusts: sunt carnis mancipia and servi voluptatum, they are the slaves of
the' flesh, and servants of pleasures; they walk at random, neither fearing
God, nor reverencing man, like the unrighteous Judge: they do not, as they are
enjoined The flesh must be subject to the Spirit.
by the Apostle, Put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts of it: but they are all for the flesh, nothing for the
Spirit; explent libidinem, they deny the flesh nothing that it would have. Here
begins all mischief, that we leave the Luke 18. Romans 13, 14.
ordinance of God, and are ruled by our lusts; the Word of God, not our own
will should rule us: Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? Bytaking heed
thereto, according to thy Word. We must Psalm. 119. 9.
frame our lives to Gods Word, and not walk after our own lusts. It is true
in young and old, and in all men; Verbum, ut Sara: voluntas, Genesis 21.
ut Hagar; the word must be as Sara, the will like Hagar: if Hagar be
disobedient, froward, stubborn, sullen, selfe-willed; Let Sara correct and
chastise her, that the handmaid may not be proud, and of a lofty and hawty
stomach against her mistrisse. So the flesh, if it rebel against the Spirit;
snibbe her, punish her, chastise and tame her. And for the taming of the flesh,
God has taken diverse excellent courses: first, he has laid a necessity of
mortality upon it; All flesh is grass. Secondly, he has enacted terrible
decrees against such as walk after the flesh. Thirdly, he has placed the
spirit within us, to lust against the flesh. Lastly, he has delivered us many
rules, whereby we may subdue the flesh, as when he tells us; First, that we
must be sober: sober in our diet, sober in our apparel, sober in our
recreations. Secondly, that we must mortify the flesh by godly sorrow: And
thirdly, We must put no confidence in the flesh. The flesh is one of the three
great enemies of God, and man's salvation, it is a treacherous, domestical
enemy, and not only so, but also a tyrannical enemy; it will not be pleased
except it reign; a most secret enemy, for she sits at the fountain, and poy
soneth all; she lets in the Devil, and suffers him to set up his holds and
fortifications in us, and is never quiet, till it bring the soul into actual
high treason against God; snibbe her, punish her, chastise her, tame her;
therefore lead all thy thoughts into captivity, and bring them to the obedience
of Christ. The Jews would not listen to the Prophets, but walked after their
own fleshly 2 Cor. 10.
lusts; and therefore says God unto his Prophet, Speak thou now unto the men
of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying; Ier. 18. 11, 12.
Thus says the Lord; Behold, I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a thing
against you, return you therefore every one from his evil way, and make your
ways and your works good. But they said desperately, (as men that had no
remorse, but were altogether bent to rebellion, and to walk after their
fleshly lusts) Surely we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every
man after the stubbornness of his own wicked heart. This is our case, thus we
say; Let them teach, let them preach their bellies full, it is but one Doctors
opinion. The Jews for all Ezechiel, followed their covetousness; They come
unto you (says God) as a people uses to come; and my people sit before thee,
and hear thy words; but they will not do them: for with their Bad thoughts
must be banished.
mouths they make jests, and their heart goes after their covetousness: and
lo, thou art unto them as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant voice, and
can sing well: for they hear thy words, but do them not. This English people,
in the like sort gives us the hearing, but not the doing: they are covetous
still, bribers, oppressors, usurers, and still they follow their lusts, etc.
Quid odit Deus nisi propriam voluntatem? What does God hate, but our own
proper will? What does God punish, but our will? Let thy will cease, and Hell
shall cease; Non erit tibi infernus, Thou shall feel no hell: for if thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will, refrain from
wicked works, and honor thy God, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking
thine own will, nor speaking a vain word, I will cause thee to mount upon the
high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob, etc.

The heart is warily to be kept from two things, A vanis cogitationibus, and
inordinatis affectibus, from vain cogitations and inordinate affections, or
wandr^ng lusts: From these two let thy heart be free, wherein the Spirit
dwells. As Painters use to blanch, and make white their tables, wherein they
do paint, and to draw out the shape and form of any thing: so make thou
clean, and expunge the tables of thy soul, thy understanding and will, as
touching thy desires and lusts; that is, as touching thy thoughts and
cogitations; that the finger of God, that is, the Holy Ghost may paint good
things in thy heart. The heart of the evil is as an highway continually
trampled upon, worn with their affections, by the instigation of Satan: For
what affection do the wicked repress? What lust do they resist? What did
they ever deny the flesh that it longed for, or desired? God may now complain
of us, as he did of his own people; Wherefore is this people of Jerusalem
turned back with a perpetual rebellion? they gave themselves to deceit, and
would not return: I harkened Ier. 8. 5, 6.
and heard, but none spoke aright, none repented him of his wickedness,
saying, What have I done? every one turned to his race, as the horse rusheth
into the battle, drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin like Esaias.
5. 18.
cart-ropes; they use allurements, occasions, and excuses to harden their
hearts in sin: and as the Apostle speaks, They are past feeling, and have
given themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanness Ephesians. 4. 19.
with greediness. The malicious pursue their revenge, the drunkard his cups;
the whoremonger his pleasures, the covetous their gain: Sed aequum est, ut qui
nunquam voluit carere vitio, nunquam careret supplicio; It is meet and right,
that he that would never want sin, should never want punishment, but that God
should rain upon them snares, and fire, and brimstone, storm, and tempest
evermore. To these men it shall be said, as unto Babylon, Reward her, even as
she rewarded you, and give her double, according Psalm. 11. Apoc. 18. 8.
to her works: and in the c^p that she has filled to you, fill her the
double, in as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so The
Word of God the chiefest means to restrain lusts.
much give you to her torment and sorrow. Cor vero bonorum est ut hortus
conclusus, the heart of good men, is as a garden shut up, and as a fountain
sealed, whereof no man must taste, no man must drink Cant. 3. 7.
but God; as the bed of Solomon, that had threescore strong men round about it,
of the valiant men of Israel; but the heart of the wicked is as a vessel
withour a cover, ad accipiendam omnem spurcitiem, to receave all filthiness,
all uncleanness, as Paul speaks of the Gentiles; They kept not their vessels
in holiness, but in the lust of concupiscence; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
It intertaineth any sin whatsoever. Again, Let thy heart be free and at
liberty from affections: there is nothing that troubles and disquieteth the
heart so much as our natural affections and passions; as are love, and hatred;
joy, and sorrow; hope, and fear; anger, and desire, etc. These are the winds
which vehemently toss and trouble this sea; these are the clouds which darken
this Heaven; these are the weights, which do depresse the spirit: Let us
therefore cast away every thing that presses down, Hebr. 12. 1.
and the sin that hangs on so fast. As our bodily eyes cannot behold the
Sun, and the stars in cloudy and dark weather: so our spiritual eyes, the
eyes of our soul cannot see God, nor heaven the seat of God, when they are
obscured and darkened with the clouds of lusts and passions. As in a clear and
pure water, all things are seen, even unto the least sand, which in a troubled
foul water cannot be: so the soul is blind and sees not, when passions and
lusts obscure her. Beware therefore, lest the two wings of thy soul,
understanding and will, be not defiled with the bird-lime of earthly things,
that is to say, wicked affections: Rule therefore thine affections by the Word
of God; Let this Word be a lantern unto thy feet, and a light unto thy paths:
For Psalm. 119. 105.
of our selves we are but darkness, and cannot see, except we be lightened
with Gods Word: Refraena naturam in his, quae verbo Dei prohibentur, Bridle,
and restrain nature in those things that are forbidden in the Word. O
Jerusalem (says God) wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved: how long shall thy wicked Ier. 4. 14.
thoughts remain within thee? A natural man through sin is like the man
that traveled from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, and was
robbed of his raiment, wounded, etc. So the Luke 10.
natural man is spoiled of all his goods of grace, wounded in all the goods of
nature; his understanding is blinded, his will is weak, his memory wandering,
his imagination restless, his appetite rebellious, his senses curious, his
flesh inclined to all filthiness. What good is to be expected of an Infant,
sitting upon an untamed horse, holding weak reins in his hand in an hilly way
full of breaknecks? In the same state and condition abides man, destitute of
the grace of the Spirit, and of the Word of God; his appetite is as an untamed
horse; his reason, which should rule his appetite is weak, and the world is
full of breake-necks and snares: how miserable therefore is our nature, which is
carried Lust stirs to all sins.
head long into wrath, envy, pride, covetousnes, whoredom, and all
uncleanness? Our own will does oppugn and fight against God, spoileth
Paradise, enricheth hell, evacuateth the blood of Christ, subjects the world
unto the Devil; in this part of the soul is the shop of sin, out of which
Satan draws all his sorce, and armor to wound us: this is the vineyard in
which we ought to labor; in this garden, let us always walk, having the
hook in our hand, whereby we may cut off all these noisome Mat. 20.
plants, if they happen to increase and grow: Thy will says, Vlciscere,
invide, extolle teipsum: Revenge, envy, extol thy self: noli pacem quaerere,
seek not peace, iura, periura, ede, bibe, lude, swear, forswear, eat,
drink, play. But let the Word of God rule thee: Put off the old man which is
corrupt, with his deceiuable lusts, and put Ephesians. 4. 23.
on the new man, which after God is shapen in righteousness and true
holiness. Mortify your earthly members, fornication, uncleanesse, unnatural
lusts and covetousness, which is Idolatry: crucify the flesh with the
affections Col. 3. 3. Gal. 5. 24.
and lusts; The Fowler knows with what lure to take hawks; the fisher
knows with what bait to catch the fishes; and the Devil knows to what
sins and vices we incline, and lean unto; and thither he carries us
headlong, whither our lusts carry us. Vince ergo libidinem, and vicisti
diabolum: Vanquish thy lusts, and thou have vanquished the Devil. Herupon
says John, I write unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the Word of
God 1 John 2. 14.
abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked. Such young men God send us
many; they shall be like little David to overthrow Goliath; like the three
Worthies, that brake through the host of the Philistines; like Gedeons pitcher,
that drove back the Madianites. Fraena libidinem, aliter ingratus es: Bridle
thy lusts, otherwise thou art unthankefull to God, which has given thee so
many weapons; dedit legem per quam vivis, he has given thee his Law, by which
thou live; he has given grace, to perform it; he has given Doctors to
instruct us; he has given Sacraments to increase our faith; he has given
inspirations by his Spirit. Do not therefore quench them; he has given us
himself: give then therefore thy self, and offer thy body and soul a quick,
an holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto him; and walk not after thine own
lusts; For lust is the mother of all wickedness, if it be not betimes killed
in the conception. The Apostle shows, that lust will be quickly enticed; and
being enticed, it will conceive; and being conceived, it will bring forth the
birth of some notable evil action; and when it is gone so far, like an
impudent beldame, it will egg on still to the finishing of sin, that so it
may bring us to death and destruction.

But it will be said, that the best men have their lusts, and sometimes follow
them. It is true: so the brightest fire has some smoke, the soundest oak his
sap; the purest gold, his dross; the fairest body, his fleame, choler, and
excrements: yet is Lust brings* forth sin, and sin destruction.
there difference between all smoke, and some smoke: all dross, and some
dross; all evil, and some evil: the evil are notably evil; For as they
regard not to know God, even so God delivers them up to a reprobate mind, to
do those things which are not convenient; being Romans 1. 28, 29.
full of all unrighteousnes, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, etc. but good
men, they are evil only in part, the spirit of Sanctification is sometimes
interrupted in the regenerate, but never quite abolished; while lusts bear
sway in the heart, it is hindered, but not extinguished: For the seed of God
abides in them: even as madness 1 John 3.
interrupteth reason, (sunt enim lucida intervalla) as drunkenness does not
take away the mind it self, but the use of the mind for a time: so does our
lusts; yet we return, as David 1 Samuel 12. John 21.
to his chastity, as Peter to the confession of Christ; for he which thrice
together denied him, thrice together did confess him; as he fell, he rose, he
fell thrice together, and thrice together rose again. The Iebusite did dwell
in Jerusalem, but he did not dominiere, nor rule in Ierusalme; So lust dwells
in the godly, but it reigns not in them. He that wants all affections, is
either Romans 6*
a God, or a stone; and he that obeys all, is either damned, or a Devil:
cut them off therefore: though they be as an eye, or an hand unto thee, yet
pluck out that eye, smite off that hand, Mat. 18.
that thou may enter into Heaven: come unto Christ, that he may ease thee
of the burden of thine affections. Mundus clamat, Ego deficiam te, the World
cries, I will fail thee, For the World passes away, and the lusts thereof:
Caro clamat, Ego inficiam 1 John 2. 17.
te: the flesh cries, I will infect thee: Fulfill not therefore the lusts of
the flesh: diabolus clamat, Ego decipiam te, the Devil cries, I will Gal. 5.
16. 1 Pet. 5.
deceive thee: For he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking not only to
deceive, but to devour: At Christus clamat, Ego reficiam te, but Christ
cries, I will refresh thee; Come to me, all that travel, Mat. 11. 29.
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Vtrum sequi sequi vis? Whether of
these will thou follow? the World failing, the flesh infecting, or the Devil
deceiving, or Christ refreshing? Satan requires no more of thee, but to follow
thy lusts: Sequere carnem, and ducet te adinteritum: Follow the flesh, and it
will lead thee to destruction: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye.
Now to live Romans 8. 13.
after the flesh, is to commit the works of the flesh, and the Gal. 5. 19, 20,
21.
works of the flesh are, first, Adultery; secondly, Fornication; thirdly,
Uncleanness; fourthly, Wantonness; fifthly, Idolatry; sixthly, Witchcraft;
seventhly, Hatred; eighthly, Debate; ninthly, Emulations; tenthly, Wrath;
eleventhly, Contentions; twelfthly, Seditions; thirteenthly, Here sies;
fourteenthly, Envy; fifteenthly, Murders; sixteenthly, Drunkenness; last of
all, Gluttony; and they that do these things, shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Divide the World into an hundred parts, and scarce one is Christian;
and among a hundred Lust promises pleasure, but brings damnation.
that are called Christians, scarce one can say with Paul, Miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? The flesh speaks guilefully
to the Spirit, that has left her with her lusts, as Laban did to Jacob, to
cause him to retire, and go Romans 7. 24.
home again with him; so says the flesh to the spirit, and body, I would have
filled thine eyes with goodly sights, thine ears with sweet music, thy
palate with dainty dishes, thy appetite with all lusts and pleasures. So
Augustine brings in his affections, lusts, and concupiscences thus speaking
unto him and crying, Dimittes ne nos nunc? Will thou leave us now, and shall we
not be with thee for ever? The flesh fights against the spirit; herein it
resembles Eva, alluring Adam to the forbidden fruit; like Gal. 5. 16. Genesis 3.
Genesis 39. Judge. 4. Judge. 16.
Putiphars wife, soliciting Joseph to all filthiness; like Iael, who slew
Sisera, under the show of love; like Dalila, who delivered Samson sleeping in
her lap, into the hands of the Philistians: Sed opera carnis damnabilia, the
works of the flesh are damnable. Gal. 5. ^2.
If we live after the flesh, we shall dye. Seneca, a Gentile could say, Major
sum, and ad majora natus; quam ut carnis mancipium fiam, I am greater, and
borne to greater things, than to be a slave unto the flesh. So must a
Christian say, I am borne to greater things, than to serve the flesh, which
yields nothing but corruption: For he that sows in the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption. I Gal. 6. 8. Genesis 2. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians.
4. 1 Cor. 10. 3. Phil. 3. 21.
am created after Gods image, redeemed with his Blood, sanctified by his
Spirit, instructed by his Word, fed by his Sacraments, appointed to be
glorified, that I may live to God here, and in Heaven hereafter. What man
having two servants, the one wise, the other foolish, would have the fool to
overruled the wiseman? So we let the flesh over-ruel the Spirit. Our lusts are
as fire unquenchable, as a devouring beast that is not satisfied: as the
horse-leech, which sucketh till she burst: Quod solatiu^ habere potest pater?
What comfort or joy can a Father have, that having 10 or 12 hungry sons ready
to starve for want, and hear them cry out for food and succor, and has not
wherewith to feed and still them? So what quiet can a man have, whose appetites
and desires cry out, and yet cannot satisfy nor suffice the^? Clamat luxuria.
Leachery cries; Give me women, and yet thy strength cannot perform that thou
lustest after. Clamat superbia, Pride cries, Be liberal and a good companion:
Tuae tamen facultates hoc negant: Thy wealth denies this. Clamat invidia, Envy
cries, Revenge thy self of such and such injury, and yet thy weakness will
not suffer thee to be revenged. Clamat voluptas, Pleasure cries, Ede, bibe,
Eat, drink, fish, foul, hunt, hawke, rush, ride: reclamat tamen senectus,
but old age cries again, Desunt vires: Strength is wanting to perform these
things, he must sit coughing in his chair, and grunting in his bed, his will
is good to follow these delights, but (poor man) he wants strenght: Misere
torquentur isti libidinosi, nunquam explentur: these libidinous men are
miserably tormented, but never filled: like the horseleech daughters, they are
never satiate; quot sensus, tot arma, so Lust poisons all the powers of the
soul.
many senses, so many weapons: our words blow, our works wound, our eyes and
ears open gates for the Devil, to send loads of sin into our mind, our
taste and senses, and feeling, are Prove. 30. 15. Rom: 6. 1 Cor. 6.
tinder and fuel to feed the fire of our concupiscence; our bodies, which
should have been Templum Spiritus Sancti, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a
haunt of Devils, and a sepulcher of a corrupted soul, the soul betrothed to
Christ in Baptism, a 1 Cor. 2. 14.
riotous, disloyal losell, our understanding darkened, our will, with her
affections a common Curtisan, lusting after every offer Ephesians. 2. 3.
of the flesh; in so much as one Father brings in the Devil speaking thus to
Christ, I have more right to this man than thou. Judge him to be mine. I never
loved him, and yet he served me; I never did him good, yet has he obeyed me;
what I suggested, he performed; what I proffered, he embraced: Meus est per
naturam, tuus est per gratiam, he is mine by nature, he should have been thine
by grace; mine he is by transgression, but thine he should have been by
redemption, but he gave himself to lust, and lust being conceived, brought
forth sin, and therefore he is mine, mine, mine. An elegant Prosopopeia;
without us are our affections to seduce us, within, our conscience to accuse
us, above us, Gods justice, beneath us, hell fire: Let us not therefore lust
after evil things, but crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

Where lust is, there is no mortification, and where no mortification is, there
is no rising again with Christ, and where there is no rising again with
Christ, there is no salvation: For Peter Martyr divided mortification into two
members; patience in bearing adversity, and temperancy in brideling the lusts
of the flesh. Now measure our Christianity by this, and Lord, how little would
be found in the world? as one said, Call on houses and chambers under which
thou have lived, ask the fields and gardens where thou have walked, summon
seats whereon thou have sitten; examine thy pillowes, upon which thy head has
rested, and all these will cry with one mouth, that we have walked after our
lusts, that we have lived at randon, that we have followed our pleasures, that
we have lived in gluttony, in chambring, and wantonness, that we take no
thought but for the flesh, To fulfill the lusts of it: this is not to walk
honestly, as in the day time. The Image of God is not restored in us, till our
lusts be subdued, and we cease to walk after our lusts. Imaginis Dei duae sunt
parts, sanctitas intellectus, and sanctitas voluntatis in fraenandis
libidinibus. Of the Image of God there be two parts, sancity of understanding
the one, and sanctity of will the other in brideling lusts: and this the
Apostle calls The new man, which after God (that is, the image of God) is
shapen in righteousness, and true holiness: Loosen the reins to thy lusts,
and there is no image of God in thee; but of Ephesians. 4. 24.
the Devil which seduceth thee, and therefore reserved to the The Godly man,
though lust be in, yet it reigns not over him.
day of Judgment to be punished, because thou walk after the flesh, in the
lust of uncleanness. Seneca tells us of one Sextius, qui nocte animum suum
semper interrogabat, quod malum hodie sanasti? which nightly would ask his
own soul, What evil have thou 2 Pet. 2. 10.
healed to day? What vice have thou resisted? In what part art thou better to
day then thou were yesterday? O, if thou a Christian could do this, thou
were a blessed man! O happy golden day in which thou have tamed one lust, one
sin! thou may then say with Paul, I have fought a good fight, etc.
Sapientis est animus, 2 Timothy 4. 6.
ut status mundi supra lunam; a wise man's mind, is as the state of the world
above the Moon: Nec nubes, nec fulgur, nec turbines ibi sunt, There be neither
clouds, nor lightning, nor whirlewinds, but all things bright, and shining,
calm and quiet: Sic nulla ira, nulla libido, nulla perturbatio cadit in animum
sapientis: So no anger, no Seneca.
lust, no perturbation comes into a wise man's mind: but I will not say none,
but not so much as in other men, libido inest, sed non praeest; lust is in him,
not over him: habitat, sed non regnat; Romans 6. 12.
it dwells in him, but reigns not: bellat, sed non debellat, it wars in
him, but it winnes not: we are not like the Heathen, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
which keep their vessels in the lust of concupiscence. Satanas duobus armis
nos oppugnat, voluptate and timore, Satan oppugneth us with two weapons,
voluptuousness, and fear; with voluptuousness he takes us, and with fear
he breaks us: against the one let us arm our hearts with godly affections;
and against the other with faith and confidence; let us take the shield of
faith, wherewith we may quench the fiery darts of lust, and concupiscence.

THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XVI. Whose mouth speaks proud things, having men's persons in
admiration, etc. The tongue the discoverer of the heart.



HAving formerly described the wicked by their impatiencie, and by their lusts,
he comes now thirdly, to describe them by their pride, and he says, that
their mouth speaks proud things. These words seem to be drawn from Saint
Peter, where speaking of the wicked, he says that they utter swelling words
of vanity, they beguile with wantonness thorough 2 Pet. 2. 18.
the lusts of the flesh, them that were clean escaped from them, which are
wrapped in error: For Jude wrote later than the other Apostles.

Where note first, that he proceeds from their walking, to their speaking;
from their heart, to their mouth; from the fountain, to the channel: for
commonly if the heart be humble, the speeches are lowly, but if it be proud,
the speeches are lofty: For of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks:
Lingua penna, Luke 6.
seu nuntius cordis: the tongue is the pen or messenger of the heart.
Hercules body was known by the length of his foot; and the heart is known by
the speech of his mouth: good men speak well, for their heart is good: so
says the Prophet, The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his
tongue will talk Psalm. 37. 30, 31.
of judgment: For the Law of God is in his heart, and bad men speak vilely;
for their heart is naught. For no constancy is in their mouth: within A proud
heart shows it self by proud speeches.
they are very corruptions, their throat is an open sepulcher, and they flatter
with their tongue. Ex putredine quid nisi putridum prodeat? From rottenness
and corruption, what can proceed, but that which is corruptible and rotten?
What shall a man expect from a bitter Psalm. 5. 9.
fountain, but bitter waters? What from the egg of a Cockatrice, but a
Serpent? What from a Spider, but poison? What from the lake Asphaltis, but
stinch and corruption? The Apostle tells us, That unto the pure, all things
are pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but
even their minds and Tit. 1. 15.
consciences are defiled.

It seems that Jude here alludeth unto David; For he ever brings in the
wicked on the stage, speaking presumptuously like Thraso, loquuntur ampullas,
their words are bombasted; hear them from morning till night, and all their
speech (like Goliath) is bragging, all their talk tends to the commendation
of themselves: they are in love with themselves, as Narcissus with his shadow;
their mouth as a trumpet sounds out their own praise; they reckon up all
their virtues, but they pass over all their vices; like captains, who number
their soldiers, but mark not how many are of the side of the enemy to
encounter them, and therefore lose the field oftentimes. The nature of the
wicked is to boast; so David speaks of the enemies of the Church, They are
enclosed in their own fat (that is, they are post up with pride, as the
stomach that is choked with fat) and their Psalm. 17. 10, 11.
mouth speaks proud things, they have compassed us now in our steps, they
have set their eyes to bring us down to the ground. They say, With our tongue
will we prevail, our lips are our own. Who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4.
These proud tongues are never quiet from prittle prattle, from skanning this
neighbors wealth, that neighbors wit, this man's doings, that man's sayings,
coursing over the whole Country, till all men have been within the compass
of their tongues, drawn out by them (peradventure) by the power of a pot too
much, or such like influence. For their mouth is unnaturally bigger than their
hand; what they want in doing, they supply in talking; though they cannot work
it, yet they can word it: Linguis, si non factis, praevalebunt, they will
prevail with their tongues, if not with their deeds: Os ponunt in Coelos, they
set their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walks through the Psalm. 73. 9.
Earth; they are licencious, and speak proudly, and talk presumptuously:
Portant gladium non in vagina, sed in ore, they carry a sword, not in their
sheath, but in their mouth: Their teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword. Thus boasted Psalm. 57. 5.
railing Rabshakeh, with most insolent words, and haughty pride, and said to
Hezechiah, that he would make his men eat their own dung, and drink their
own piss: and thus boasted the Kings and 2 Reg. 18. 27.
Rulers of the Earth against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us: Happy is he that can
see his own vileness.
but it follows well there; He that dwells in Heaven, shall laugh them to
scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision: Let not the wiseman glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength: Psalm. 2. 3.
but he that will glory, let him glory in the Lord, and make his boast of his
praise.

The Pharisees boasted much of their doings, they delivered their alms with the
sound of trumpets, but they muttered their sins in the ears of their
fellows: they spoke softly (quoth Epiphanius) like the peacocke that croweth
when he looks at his wings, but is mute, when he looks at his feet, which
are foul and ugly. This sin of pride is natural, or universal, and
therefore the more to be eschewed of the children of God. Habet quisque naevos
superbiae, not drops, but rivers, blottes, stains of Jerome.
pride, spotted like a Leopard; we drew it from the loins of Adam, and sucked
it out of the breasts of Heva; for they were proud, and would be like unto God;
Sed dum rapere voluerunt divinitatem, August.
amiserunt foelicitatem, whiles they would have caught the divinity, they lost
their felicity: yea the Angels that sinned before man, fell through pride,
(though not only pride.) Paul 1 Timothy 3.
calls it, The condemnation of the Devil. Not long after the destruction of
the old world, and the reparation of the new, the builders of Babel fell this
way, saying proudly, Faciamus turrim extensam in coelos, Let us build a City
and a tower whose top may reach Genesis 11.
unto the heaven. But God plagued their pride with the confusion of tongues,
and divided them into seventy three tongues, which before, spoke all but one
tongue. It is natural to us to think proudly of our selves, to speak proud
things, to deal arrogantly, and to boast outragiously. We are like the
Ciclopians, and like Poliphemus, see but with one eye; we see our virtues, not
our vices, which are ten to one, as the Leopard has ten black spots to
one white: but he is an happy man that can see his vileness, his sin, and
can accuse himself, not praise himself, as Paul did, when he said, God
forbid, that I should rejoice in anything, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus,
whereby the world is crucified Gal. 6. 14.
unto me, and I unto the world. Paul was a great Apostle, circumcised the
eighth day, of the kindred of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Phil. 3, 4,
6, 8.
Hebrew of the Hebrews, by the Law a Pharisee, concerning zeal, wonderful,
touching the righteousness which is in the Law, unrebukeable; Yet he was not
proud of any of these things; but counted all things loss, and did judge them
to be dung, that he might win Christ: and writing to the Corinthians he
says thus, Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?
If I must needs rejoice, I will 2 Cor. 11. 30, 31.
rejoice in mine infirmities, as imprisonments, beating, hunger, thirst, and
such like: which things the adversaries did condemn as infirm in him. And
again he said, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified; he
knew no oaths, no lies, no rancour, no whoredom, by himself, no Capital
sin, for the Child of Jesting base fruit of wit.
God may say, with Christ in some respect, Which of you can reprove me of
sin? yet would not he boast, for he had peccata occulta, secret John 10.
sins. There be some that apply their wit and understanding to nothing else,
but to frumpes, and jests, to disgrace others, to move laughter, if they can
nippe, or by a girding scoff, disgrace another, honester then themselves; we
call them merry Greeks, pleasant companions, good fellows: but this is the
least harvest, the least fruit of their wit. Iocis utuntur qui currum poties
quam Curiam decent, as one says, they use jests and sportes which become
rather the Cart, then the Court: Quique vomitum citius quam risum moveant, and
which will sooner move vomit than sport; and then they triumph, but in truth
without victory. These are dogs, not men: For of evil men there be two kinds,
alij sunt Canes, alij porci, some are dogs, some are hogs; Fools are hogs,
which neglect the truth, secure, and refuse the Word, but some are dogs,
which slander, and deride the professors of the truth: beware of these dogs;
these dogs shall not go to Phil. 3. 2. Apoc. 22. 14.
Heaven; as Seneca said of Sylla, that he left killing, when none were left to
be killed; so these proud tongues will leave scoffing, when there are no honest
men to be played upon.

Good men strive to debase themselves, they stop their ears at their praises,
as Mariners do at the song of the Meremaid: As Adders do at the voice of the
Charmer: they say with David, Peccatum meum semper coram me: My sin is ever
before me: they Psalm. 51.
are vile, and will be more vile: as David said to Michol; who taunted him, nay
despised him in her heart, when she saw him dancing before the Arc. O how
glorious (quoth she) was the King 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22.
of Israel this day, which was uncovered to d^y in the eyes of the maidens of
his servants, as a fool uncovereth himself! But he answered her, That which he
did, was for noworldly affection, but only for the zeal he bare to God, and to
his glory, and I will (quoth he) be yet more vile then thus, and I will be
low in mine own sight, etc. So Gods Children, they are vile, and low in their
own sight; they can say with David, Lord, I am not high-minded, I have no
proud looks, I Psalm. 131. 1, 2.
do not exercise my self in matters that are too high for me, etc. But many
are proud and hauty, boasting and bragging of their works, as of their prayers,
alms, readings, fastings, etc. But do thou glory in thy prayers? O fool,
where thou praiest one prayer, others pray a thousand: The Eutiches prayed
continually, James had his knees horne-hoofed with prayer; Christ prayed a
whole night, which thou never did. Do thou glory of thy Alms? O fool,
where thou give a penny, thou receivest a pound at the hands of God, and in
all that, thou art but a steward, and thou must reddere rationem, give an
account of thy stewardship. Zachee would give half his good to the poor:
thou, not the hundred, not the thousand part, yet he boasted not. Do thou
glory in thy reading? Where thou read a line, others read a We must so live,
that our conscience may comfort us.
volume. Alphonsus King of Naples read over the Bible forty times; thou not
twice, not once, yet boastest that thou art a Christian. Do thou glory in
thy works? O fool, es seruus invtilis, thou art an unprofitable servant. And
what deserves he, but stripes and blows? And yet obiter, by the way, to them
that insult Luke 17.
over us, as if we were Metropolitan, or Captain sinners, we say, as Paul
said, As touching me, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's
judgment, no, I judge not mine own self. And again, We give 1 Cor. 4. 3. 2
Cor. 6. 3, 4.
none occasion of offense in any thing that our ministry should not be
reprehended, but in all things, we approve our selves as the Ministers of God.
So said Ambrose; Non it a vixi, ut me vixissepudeat, nec mori timeo, quia bonum
habemus Dominum; I have not so lived, as that I am a shamed to live, neither am
I afraid to dye, because we have a good Lord. If we have to do with God, we
say, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame. O
Lord, to us appertains open shame, Dan. 9. 7, 8.
to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned
against thee. But if with men, that slander us, we say with Jeremy, Ier. 15.
10, 15.
woe is me, my mother, that thou have borne me a contentious man, and a man
that striveth with the whole earth: I have neither lent on usury, nor men have
lent to me on usury, yet every one does curse me. O Lord, thou know,
remember me and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors: take me not away in
the continuance of thy anger: know, that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.
Judges may say with Samuel, Whose ox have I taken? Or whom have I done wrong
to? Or whom have I hurt? Or of 1 Samuel 12. 3.
whose hands have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes therewith, and I
will restore it you? Ministers must say, We have cast from us the clokes of
shame, and walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the Word of God 2 Cor.
4. 2.
deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth, we approove our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God. And every Christian must say with Job, My
witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high. And again, he must say with
Paul, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of Job 16. 19. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly
Wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world,
etc.

They speak proud things.] To speak things, has been a frequent sin from
the beginning of the primitive Church, to this day; like Noah's deluge, it has
overflowed, and like another Alexander conquered: it was in the Gnostics, the
root of their heresy; For Simon Magus, their Prince, as says Irenaeus, called
himself the Son of God, the power of God, and under Claudius the Emperor
his Image was set up, and worshipped as God; after him came Menander, and spoke
proud things, affirming, that he was sent a Savior from invisible things, for
the salvation of the world. After him, Apelles, Montanus, Manes, which affirmed
that they were sent by the Holy Ghost: such in our time were Act. 8.
the Quintinists and Libertines in Germany, which call themselves mere
spiritual: such are the Henry Nicolaitans, who say, that they It is ordinary
to them that are vile, to speak ill.
are codeified with God, and God cohominified with them; such was the traitor
Hacket, Anno. 1591. who blasphemed God, and called for fire to consume the
world that believed not in him.

Thus men now swell in pride, in opinion, in words, in deeds, in all things.
Hagar waxes proud against her dame Sara. Aesops crow jetteth in the plumes and
feathers of other birds; and the Cumane Ass walks up and down with his long
ears, in a Lions skin: For commonly none are prouder, then the unworthiest:
As the Holy Ghost notes of the bramble; who would be King over the trees, when
as the fig tree, the olive tree, and the vine-tree refused it; For the
fig tree would not leave his sweetness, nor the olive tree her fatness, nor
the vine her wine, wherewith she did cheer the heart both of God and man, to
rule over the trees: only the scratching bramble, he was so proud, that he
would. Pan will compare with Apollo; Arachne, with Minerva; Silenus with
Mercury, Phaeton will manage his fathers teame; Icarus will mount up with his
wings of wax; the Fly Farsalla will sport with the candle; the Pharise will
say, there is no sinner like the Publican. The Laodicians will boast of their
wealth, knowledge, and all graces. The young man will say that he has kept all
the precepts of God; Naminania dolia acutissime resonant, the emptiest tubbes
make the greatest sound. The Apothecaries boxes, which have nothing in them,
are best painted; but the bramble was burned, Phaeton spoiled the frame of the
world; Icarus wings melted; the Fly is burnt in the flame; the Pharise went
home unjustified; the Laodicians were thrown down to hell, the young man went
away sorrowful. God will humble the proud; Let every man therefore think
better of another, then of himself. But we forget, that sequitur superbos
ultor e tergo Deus, that God follows the proud man at the heels, to plague
him and punish him; nay, we forget, that we are men, and weak men, and so our
pride grows to be infinite. Julius the second would make no water, but in
silver basins; Heliogabalus would avoid no excrements, but in vessels of gold;
Sardanapalus would eat no meat, but Nightingales tongues; Sapor, the King of
Persia, would use no footstool, but the neck of the Emperor Valerian; in
Arabia foelix, the Nobles would kindle no fire, but of Cinnamon; the grand Cham
of Tartaria will not be drawn of horses, but of Elephants: our pride is
infinite, our words, our deeds, our thoughts Majesticall. Sed quid superbis
terra and cinis? Why art thou proud, dust and ashes? And yet this proud man
catches nothing but smoke, and gains nothing but smoke. We marvel at the
Emperor, who passed all his festival days in killing of flies; but how much
more may we marvel at him, who passes all his days in catching of smoke, and
the blast of men's mouths. A certain King therefore appointed this punishment
Flatterers applaud others, to enrich themselves.
for proud men, that they should be suffocated, and choked with smoke,
saying, that it was right and meet, that they should perish in smoke, which
have spent their whole life in catching the smoke of vanity and vainglory.

The end of all this clawing, is gain: men speak for advantage, they have
sugared tongues, oyled mouths, dulced words: but suspect them, for they speak
for gain; like Aesops-Foxe, that tells the Crow, that she was the fairest
bird in the heavens, if she could sing: and therewithal she opened her mouth
to sing, but she lost her meat by it. Thus the flatterer aims at advantage,
at gain, at profit; he makes a show he is thy friend, and wishes thee well;
but he is but a verbal friend, a friend from teeth outward, a flattering
friend, a friend in show, but not in deed; like Aristotle's fallacions; and
falling stars, which seem to be, and are not, a friend only in name, one
that will give thee his hand, but not the heart; for he has a tongue to
commend thee, but yet no longer, then it is for his advantage; like Hiena, he
has a fair face, but a false heart, like Iael, to Sisera. We read in Theognis
this saying, Seem with thy tongue to flatter all, but in thy deeds love none
at all. O these flatterers, they are lucritam cupidi, so greedy of gain, that
they have animam venalem, a soul to sell: for quid non mortalia pectora cogit
auri sacra fames? What does not the cursed hunger of gold drive men to do?
This sets them aworke to flatter, lie, swear, and forswear, and what not?
Solomon says of the harlot, that she will not leave a man worth a morsel of
bread; no more will these flatterers, they will soake, and suck men, as the
Ivy does the Oak, and bring them at last into our Ladies bands, and make them
sing by beggary. Chrysostom says, Sicut finis oratoris est, dilectione
persuasisse; and medici, medicina curasse; sic adulatoris est, suavi loquio se
ditasse; As the end of an Orator is to persuade in love, and the end of a
Physician, to cure by medicine; so the end of the flatterer is, with his
sweethony-sugar-candy speeches to enrich himself and beggar thee, and the end
of his clawing is gain, advantage. I will conclude with the saying of
Augustine, Melius est a quolibet reprehendi, quam ab adulante laudari, It is
better to be blamed of any, then praised of a flatterer.

Augustine being asked, What was the first, second, and third part of a good
man, of a Christian? answered, Humility: so if I were asked, What were the
first, second, and third part of a vile man? I will answer, Pride: and he has
pride, whose mouth speaks proud things. And of all mouths, let the Popish
mouths go in the quintessence of pride and bragging: they speak of merits,
works of Justification, and supererogation, enough for themselves and their
neighbors, wherein they injure both the Justice and Mercy of God; for his
Justice cannot be perfect, if he take for satisfaction, either all, or part of
that which proceeds from a The Popes and their flatterers the proudest
vaunters.
sinner; they injure his mercies; For it is not perfect, absolute; if he
forgive not all the debt, but receives part of us; But his blood cleanses us
from all sin; original, and actual sins, secret, and open sins; sins
of omission, sins of commission; his blood cleanses all, purges all, does
away all. But to proceed; 1 John 1. 7.
the Canonists say, that Papa potest dispensare contra jus divinum, jus
naturae, contra Apostolos, contra omnia praecepta Dei: The Pope can dispense
against the Law Divine, the Law of Nature, against the Apostles, against all
the Commandments of God. Let God, men, and Angels judge, what mouth now
speaks proudly. The great Cham of Tartaria, after he has dined, sounds a
trumpet, and gives leave to all Christian Princes to go to dinner, and by
this pretty conceit makes himself head over Kings and Emperors: because Peter
said, Ecce, hic sunt duo gladij, Behold, here are two swords. Thus this Italian
Priest is not ashamed to be called, Dominus Deus noster Papa, our Lord God the
Pope; to be kneeled unto, with these words: Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata
mundi, miserere nobis: Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,
have mercy upon us. As was Martin the fifth. Harding calls us Goliath; and
themselves little David; but forasmuch as they have neither David's sling in
their hands, nor David's stones in their scrip, they must not look, that the
wise Ladies of Israel will with their lutes and timbrels, sing before them,
that David has slain his ten thousand: but he is Goliath, that 1 Samuel 18.
cries, I cannot err: Habeo omnes leges in scrinio pectoris, I have all laws
in the closet of my breast; I am above Councels, I judge all, no man judges me;
Sum rex regum, I am King of Kings, I can do whatsoever Christ could do, All
power is given unto me. But let us deal with the Papists, as Agesilaus did
with his enemies: Mat. 28.
he pulled off their bombasted coats, and showed their apish wearish bodies to
his soldiers, saying, Ecce ingentia corpora; Ecce magna illorum ossa; behold
their mighty bodies, behold their big bones. The Pope calls himself,
servum servorum, the servant of servants: but can he, that is carried on Noble
men's shoulders, that caused the French King to trotte by his bridle, as
Zachary did Childericke the Emperor to hold his stirrup, Noble men to kiss
his feet, be servus servorum? the servant of servants? I need not name
Hildebrands usage to Henry the fourth at Canusia, nor that of Clemens the fifth
to Francis Dandalus, nor that of Alexander the third, to Frederick the
Emperor: nor that of Innocentius the third, to King John of England, nor of
Pius Quintus, to the Queen.

But to leave the man of sin himself, and to come to the frogs that creep
out of his mouth; what a croking do they make? How do their mouths exceed in
pride? Staphilus calls our people, hogs, dogs; Harding calls our
Bishops and Ministers, Cumane Asses; Martin calls them; novos Oratores,
Popish Priests and Jesuits, notorious railers:
new Orators, Stultos adolescentes, Foolish young men; non tam disertos in
errore, quam desertos a veritate, not so cunning in error, as ignorant of the
truth. Bellarmine calls our writers, Pecudes, Gigantes, Monstra, Beasts,
Giants, Monsters; and says, that they give no honor to Christ, nor Angels,
nor Saints. Thus they disgrace us in words, and their mouths speak proud,
swelling things; when they cannot confute us, they rail on us, and deal with
us, as Nero dealt with the Christians, who hurled them to dogs to be devoured;
and when the mastives would not touch them, he clad the Christians in Bears
skins, to kindle the fury of the dogs, that they might take them to be
beasts, and not men: so they impute all lewdness to us, to make men think
that we are that which we are not: they are like the beast Bonosus, mentioned
by Aristotle, who having his horns reflexed, not being able to defend himself
with them, three or four furlongs off poysoneth the dogs with his dung;
which is so hot, as it burns off all their hair. So, when they cannot hurt
us with truth, they defile us with the dirt and dung of their calumnies: this
vein of railing cleaves unto them, as Naamans Ieprosie did to Gehezi, and his
seed for ever: they are of the mind of Medius, parasiteto Alexander, who willed
his Scholars ever to slander their enemies; Nam si vulnus (inquit) sanaverint,
manet tamen cicatrix; for although they have healed the wound, the scarre of
the slander abides still. So, some will believe them, they leave still a sting
behind them, they think much, that we should say thus much, and therefore call
our Apologies, railings. Thus the Guisians accused the Protestants to have
Loricas ferri, non fidei, Brest-plates of iron, not of faith; when as they
klled three thousand in one Church at Vesse in the time of doctrine. So the
thieves of Sicilia, accused the merchants and travelers, that they rode
cruelly armed, when as they had all engines to rob men. So Fimbria sued
Scevola, for that he received not his weapon deep enough. Must their mouths
be open to offend, and not ours to defend? O tempora! o mores! What a world is
this? May they say all evil on their Ale-benches, and we not defend our
innocence? The Lord cut off those lips. Psalm. 12.


That which I say of Papists, I say of Atheists also. Nam facti sumus speculum,
We are become a spectacle to men and Angels: 1 Cor. 4.
but let men and Angels, and Devils, Papists and Atheists, say what they can,
so that they say truly.

The fourth and last sin, is Flattery, in admiring men's persons: they lift
up, and throw down, praise and dispraise; they wonder at men, as if they were
Angels; Illorum enim lingua venabilis, their tongue is saleable, they will say
any thing for gain, make the Crow white, and the Snow black: but if we give
titles, our Maker will destroy us: Now to give titles, is to change Job. 22. 22.
the name, as to call a fool, a wiseman; to cloak the truth, to flatter
Flatterers worthily rewarded.
men; For woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for sour. God blesses plain speaking. He Esa. 5. 20. Pro. 28. 23.
that rebukes a man, shall find more favor at length, than he that
flattereth with his tongue: he that pertains to God, will love such. Solomon
prefers the wounds of a friend, to the kisses of an enemy; Open rebuke
(says he) is better then secret love: the wounds of a lover are Pro. 27. 5, 6.
faithful, and the kisses of an enemy are pleasant, that is, they are
flattering, and seem friendly. David prayed God to cut off all flattering
lips, saying, The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things; which have said, With our tongue will we Psalm. 12. 3. 4.
prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us: And we see this
punishment verified in two notable rare examples; the one, in the Amalekite,
who came upon Saul and slew him, and took the 2 Samuel 1. 8, 10, 15.
crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and
brought it unto David; because he would currie favor with him, and flatter
him, expecting hereby some preferment at his hands: but David commanded one of
his young men to fall upon him, who smote him that he dyed. The other in
Baanah and Rechab, who slew Isboseth, the son of Saul, and brought his head
unto David, to Hebron: and said unto the King, Behold 2 Samuel 4. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12.
the head of Isboseth, Saul's son thine enemy, who sought after thy life, and
the Lord has avenged the Lord my King this day of Saul, and of his seed. Thus
they went about to flatter him, and hoping for some preferment, for that they
did. But David said unto them, As the Lord lives, who has delivered my soul
from all adversity, when one told me, that Saul was dead (thinking that he
had brought good tidings) I took him and slew him: how much more, when wicked
men have slain a righteous person in his own house, and upon his bed; shall I
not now therefore require his blood at your hands, and take you from the Earth?
And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and hanged them up over
the poole in Hebron. Let all flatterers speed so, let all Sycophants eat the
fruit of their hands, and be filled with their own inventions. Liquescant ut
limax, let them melt away like a snaile; Let them be powered out like water,
that runs apace, and be like the untimely fruit of a woman, and let them
not see the Sun, and or ever their pots be made hot with thorns, so let
indignation vex them, as a thing that is raw. God punishes flatterers, yea
and them that hear them also, and listen to them. Thus Ahab lost the victory
at Ramoth Gilead; thus Rehoboam lost his Kingdom; thus Herod lost his life.
This should 1 Reg. 22. 2 Chro. 10. 10. Act. 12.
make all men give God the glory, lest we be proud of those things that are
not ours. Are we praised for Learning, for Wisdom, Patience, Liberality,
Housekeeping? Give God the glory: say as Paul said, who has separated thee?
(to wit, from 1 Cor. 4. 7.
other men, and preferred thee) and what have thou, that thou have not
received? and if thou have received it, why rejoycest thou as though Flattery,
a base and slavish sin.
thou had not received it? Consider that the purpose of these flatterers is
their profit: it is an old proverb, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere; he
that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to live: but change the
letter e into o and it is true: Qui nescit dissimulare, adulari, mentiri,
noscit vivere, he that knows not to dissemble, flatter, lie, he knows how
to live. Coggers, Psalm. 55. 23.
Foysters, Flatterers, shall not prosper. These Flatterers are worse than
Crows, for they prey upon the dead, these upon the living. The child of God
must speak as God speaks, God speaks to the heart, he lanceth the
conscience, and wounds the spirit: he speaks plainly, to draw men to
Repentance; but a Flatterer is a weather-cocke, his tongue is set to sale, his
heart is at the will of others; Aiunt, aijt; negant, negat: if they affirm any
thing, he affirms it too; if they deny any thing, he denies it also: Aliud
stans, aliud sedens loquitur, he speaks one thing, and another thing
sitting: as Tully said of Catiline, they study to please men, not God: they
cannot say with Paul, We speak not as they that please men, but God, which
tries our hearts: they have their reward. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
How often have we being in company, heard religion railed on, Popery extolled,
virtue condemned, vice commended, the good defamed, and yet either held our
tongues, or yielded to that, for fear to offend the great ones? But we must
not please men, for then we cannot please God. If I should please men (says
the Gal. 1. 10.
Apostle) I am not the servant of God. Now choose whether thou will serve God or
men: we must learn of the Lord Jesus. His enemies could say, though
temptingly, That he was true, and taught the way of Mat. 22. 16.
God truly, neither cared for any man, for he considered not the person of men.
As touching the outward quality, as whether a man be rich or poor, some works
of Christ are our instruction, as his miracles; some are our imitation, as his
deeds and virtues. Learn not therefore of Christ to rebuke the Wind, to still
the Sea, to turn Mar. 5. John 2. Luke 7. John 9.
Water into Wine, to raise the Dead, to open the eyes of the Blind; for these
thou can not do: all these are thy instruction: but learn to speak truly,
this thou may do, and this is thy imitation: speak truth, and that truly;
for God likes better of Adverbes, than of Nounes. Christ spoke without regard
of men; let us learn to speak so. The word flatterer in Greek signifies
servility, or slavishnesse, (...). For he is a Page, a Servant, a Slave to
other men's affections; and there is no difference between a Gally-slave and
him, but that the one is fettered in body, the other in mind; the one serves
the Turk, the other the Devil; the one chained for a time, the other for
ever: For the Flatterer is in the snare of the Devil, and is taken of him at
his will. Tot vincula habemus, quot peccata; we have so many bands, as we have
sins. I would, that there were not 2 Timothy 2. 26.
of these Flatterers amongst the Churchmen; who should rather rebuke, then
flatter. Surely the vulgar people delight to Soothing Preachers the most base
flatterers.
be flattered; and would not by their wills hear the Law of the Lord: and
hence is it, That they say to the seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophesy
not unto us right things, but speak flattering things unto us: Prophesy
errors. But such flattering prophets, the Holy Ghost Esaias 30. 10.
calls the tail, and says, The Lord will cut off from Israel, head and
tail, branch and rush in one day: the ancient, and the honorable man, he Esaias
9. 14, 15.
is the head; and the prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail. But as
touching these flattering prophets, that will sow pillowes under men's elbowes,
and sooth them up in their sins; God will punish them: He will feed them with
Wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall. The Holy Ghost compares
them to bad surgeons, Ier. 23. 15.
that bring toothsome, but not wholesome medicines: They have Ier. 8. 11.
healed the hurt of the daughter of my people with sweet words, (says God)
saying, Peace, peace; when there was no peace. Hence grew the ruin of
Jerusalem; hence is the ruin of England, that we are not plain with our
people; we monish them not; the complaint of God against the false prophets,
may be taken up against many of us; Thy prophets have looked out vain and
foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine iniquity to turn
away thy captivity, but Lament. 2. 14.
looked out for thee false prophesies, etc. Ministers are called, The salt Mat.
5. Ier. 8.
of the earth, the light of the World, Physicians, Surgeons. Salt must needs be
sharp to a rotten wound; light is painful to a sore eye; a good Physician
must trouble his patient, ere he heal him; A Surgeon must lance a festred
wound. God will have Esaias cry aloud, Esaias 58. 1.
lift up his voice, like a trumpet, show the people their offenses, and the
house of Jacob their sins. Jeremy must speak all that God commands, He
must not be afraid of men's faces. Esaias would not flatter Princes, but told
them, that they were rebellious, and companions of Ier. 1. 8. Esaias 1. 23.
thieves, that they loved gifts, and followed after rewards, that they judged
not the fatherless, and the Widows complaints came not before them. He that
shall deal so with the Nobles of England, shall have small thanks; yet are
they men, and not God; flesh, and not spirit; sinful, as well as they of
Judah. James and John were Boanarges, sons of thunder: we had need thunder and
lighten, as Pericles did Mar. 3.
in Greece; speaking will do little good: we must not sow pillowes under Ezech.
13. 10. Gal. 4. 16.
men's elbowes: We say, as Paul said to the Galatians, Am I therefore become
your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Better you hate us, then God; For
they that flatter you, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies,
and with fair speeches and flattering deceive the hearts Romans 16. 18.
of the simple.

Flattery is a sin, but we are the cause of it, the fault is in our selves.
No man can be flattered, but he first flattereth himself; no vermin breeds,
where he finds no warmth; no flies swarm, where they see no flesh; no
Eagles light, where they see no carcass; no man claweth, but where he sees
pride in the party to work upon. These men are as brasse-pots, which, be they
never so huge, yet a man can carry them by the ears, where he Reproof
profits more then flattery.
will; so may these men be carried by the ears; and yet it is to their own
hurt: For flatterers are like worms, and mothes, which eat wool and
garments; but it cannot be seen, till the knop be off; so proud men see not
their sins till it be too late. Si fueris Thraso, non deerit tibi Gnato; If
thou will be a boasting, bragging Thraso, thou shall never want a flattring
parasitical Gnato. Thus by these flatterers many Gentlemen be consumed, before
they be aware, their flattering followers undo them. There be two kinds of
persecutions; Manus persequentis, and Lingua adulantis, the hand of the Tyrant,
and the tongue of the flatterer; the latter is the worser; as it is most
pernicious to the soul, it does the soul good to be reprooved, it drives
away sin, as the Northwind does the rain. Multi culpa^t amicos, Many blame
their friends, but those accusations are but like water in a Smithes-forge to
kindle, not to quench the fire. Let us blame and rebuke men, not to make them
worse, but better; not viler, but warier. David prayed, Corripiat me justus:
Let the righteous smite me: For that is a benefit; Psalm. 41. 5.
Let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil, that shall not break my
August. ser. 59. de verbis Domini.
head. Well said Augustine, Non omnis qui parcit, est amicus, nec omnis qui
ferit, est inimicus: Not every one that spares us, is a Friend, nor every one
that strikes us, is an enemy. Melius cum sinceritate diligere, quam cum
levitate decipere, better to love with sincerity, then to deceive with levity.
Qui phreneticum ligat, and Lethargicum excitat, ambobus molestus, ambobus tamen
utilis: He that binds a frantic man, vexed with a frenzy, and he that
awaketh a drowsy man, possessed with a Lethargy; he is troublesome to them
both, and yet profitable to them both. Let charity therefore go on to bind the
one, and to awake the other, and to love both: Ama fratrem, sed noli adulari:
Love thy brother, but flatter him not: Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit:
Flattery gets friendship, and truth hatred; yet Veritas temporis filia:
Truth is the daughter of time, and in fine will save it self. Answer
flatterers, as Antigonus did his clawbacks, Mentiris, thou lie, (quoth he,
to one of them) Mentiris in gutture, thou lie in thy throat: Hae virtures
non, latent in me, These virtues that thou speak of, I have not, but I am
like a Leopard, that have ten black spots to one white.

Augustus Caesar, and Tiberius Caesar, were deadly enemies to these
oyle-mouthed flatterers, in so much that they would not endure to be called
Lords, by their own Children. If they living in darkness, did thus detest
this sweet poison, how ought we to abhor it, which are the children of
light? Finely said one: If thy friend praise thee to thy face, give no
countenance to his words, lest of a friend he become a dissembler: and if a
common parasite commend thee, reject and contemn his praises, because he is a
flatterer. If this Counsel were well followed, Satan would cease to transform
himself into an Angel of light; and Such as delight to be flattered, are
vain and unconstant.
his Orators, who (as Diogenes affirms) are worse than Crows, should in
stead of living men, be compelled to prey upon Carrion; the fittest food for
such flattering Harpies, and greedy fowls. One calls flattery, the food of
folly, and the spur of vaineglory, wherewith when the ear is infected, the
soul is soon perverted. Another calls flattery the Devils praise, who as he is
a lier from the beginning, so his praise is ever fained and adulterate.

The Athenians so grossly flattered Demetrius, that they decreed, Vt quod
Demetrius iuberet, apud deos sanctum, and apud homines iustum esset, That, that
which Demetrius commanded, should be accounted holy among the gods, and just
among men: For they thought him like the gods; as Herod took himself for a
God. Act. 12.
Men's tongues are chained to great men's affections, as Praxaspes, a Noble man
of Persia, said to Cambyses, for he having admonished the King, to drink more
sparingly; the King, to deliver himself from that suspicion, shot with an
arrow at the heart of Praxaspes his child, and left the arrow in his heart,
asking Praxaspes, whether he had shot well? To whom he answered, Apollo certius
mittere non potuit, Apollo himself could not have shot more certainly: Dij
illum hominem male perdant, animo magis quam condition Seneca.
mancipium, adulare regem, non amare didicit, The gods punish such a man, a
slave rather in mind, then in condition, that learned to flatter the King, not
to love him. We should stop our ears against these flatterers, as Ulysses did
against the Sirenes.

Bernard compares them that love praises, to wind-milles: For they are carried
with the blast of men's mouths; and to the Moon, which because it has
borrowed light, sometime she waxes, sometime she waneth, and sometime she is
not seen at all: So they that depend upon other men's lips, sometime are of
great account, sometime of little account, sometime of no account: but he that
with the Sun carries his light within him, may say as Paul said; Gloria mea
testimonium conscientiae, My glory is the testimony of my conscience. Virtue
requires no scaffold, but a good 2 Cor. 1. 12.
conscience. As for the wicked, they have a borrowed light, a borrowed fame, a
borrowed praise, and therefore it lasts not. Thus when Caesar triumphed in
other men's blood, his parasites said, that he was Semideus: when Caligula spoke
like a fool in the Senate; Domitius gave him the price of eloquence, and
Vitellus affirmed that he had been with the Meeni. The Sicilians soothed up
Dionysius his cruelty, by the name of Justice. The parasites make of
Molehilles, mountains; if thou be black, they say thou art manly; if
fair, that thou art heavenly; when thou runnest, thou art Pegasus; when thou
wrastlest, thou art Samson, or Hercules; when thou speak, thou art Mercury.
Thus the Jews told Herod, that his voice was vox Dei, The voice of God, and
not of man: but you know his end. Many will say any thing for advantage,
Flatterers sooth men in their sins, and applaud them as virtuous.
so they may gain by it; like Harpalus, who said, Quod Regi placet, mihi
placet: That which pleases the King, pleases me: when Astyages set his own
Son before him, to feed upon him. But we must say, Quod Deo placet, mihi
placet: That which pleases God, pleases me. Our tongues may not be tied to
other men's humors. For we must speak, not as they that please men, but God,
which tries the hearts. Answer these flatterers, as Alexander Magnus did, who
being hit with an arrow in the siege of an Indian City, which would not heal,
told his parasites, Vos me dixistis Iovis filium, vulnus autem istud clamat me
esse hominem; You say, that I am Jupiters son, but this wound cries, that I
am but a man. So say thou to thy flatterers, which without shame, or blushing,
heap upon us many praises; you say that I am wise; but I see, I am not so wise
as I should be; you say I excel in many virtues: but I see and know, that in
me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no goodness: away, away, I will not
believe you.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XVII. But ye beloved, remember the words, which were spoken before of
the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. The godly and the wicked opposed.



THese words contain a comparison betwixt the faithful and the unfaithful,
the sons of light and the sons of darkness, lambs and goats, Doves and
Serpents, Vessels of wrath and Vessels of Mercy; the end of the one, and the
destruction of the other: for the opposition holds in all points. The Godly
remember the words of God, they go forward in faith, a fide in fidem, from
faith to faith; they pray in the Spirit, they continue in love, they look for
mercy; lastly, their end is eternal life. On the contrary, the Wicked forget
all words of God, they flout at Religion, they live at random, they walk
after their lusts, they are natural, they are Sectaries, renting asunder
Christ's coat without seame, they keep not the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace. Ephesians. 4. 3.


First there is a dependence of these words from the former; he puts not a
narrow river, but a maine sea, betwixt the godly and the ungodly: The Emphasis
is in the conjunction (Autem) as if he had said, Thou must not be like the
wicked, they murmr, complain, speak proudly, flatter for gain, but thou
must not do so, but thou must turn over another leaf, learn Christians must
not live like Heathen Infidels.
a new lesson. But ye beloved, this teaches all Christians to love like
Christians, to walk worthy of their calling, not to be like the Pagans, the
Heathen: For what has light to do with darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17.
or righteousness with unrighteousness? What concord has Christ with Belial?
And what part has the believer with the Infidel? Come out therefore from among
them, and separate your selves, says the Lord; and touch no unclean thing,
and I will receive you. Christ will not have his Apostles be like the Heathen:
When ye pray, use no vain Mat. 6. 7, 8.
repetitions like the Heathen, be not like to them. And he would not have us to
be like the Pharisees: For all the works that they do, is Cap. 23, 6, 7, 8.
to be seen of men; they love greeting in the market, and to be called of men,
Rabbi, Rabbi, but be ye not called Rabbi: for the godly, and the ungodly have
two diverse fathers, God and the Devil; ye are of John 8. 44.
your father the Devil, and the works of the Devil do ye: two diverse
mothers, the Church and the Synagogue of Satan: two diverse Schoolemasters, the
Flesh and the Spirit: two diverse Romans 6. 8. Esa. 30.
Countries, the Heavenly Jerusalem and Tophet: therefore their life must be
diverse. So reasons Christ: Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or
what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? After all these
things seek the Gentiles: for your heavenly Father knows, that ye have need
of all these things. Thus Paul Mat. 6. 32.
makes an Antithesis between the Gentiles and the Christians: This I say
therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye hence forth walk not Ephesians. 4.
17, 18, 19, 20.
as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind, having their cogitations
darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the hardness of their heart, which being past feeling,
have given themselves to wantonness, to work all uncleanenesse with
greediness: but ye have not so learned Christ. Again, having spoken of the
enemies of the Cross: he makes the comparison between them and the Apostles,
the friends of Christ, saying, Brethren, be ye followers of me, and look on
Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20.
them which walk so, as ye have have us for an ensample: for many walk, of
whom I told you before, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of
the Cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, whose
glory is their shame, which mind earthly things. But our conversation is in
Heaven, from whence also we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus. Let
others live as they list, but we will remember the words of the Lord. So
Iosuah said, Let others serve Idols, Ios. 24. 15.
I and my household will serve the Lord: Let other perish; their life is no rule
to us: Vivimus praeceptis, non factis, We live by precepts, not by deeds:
Legibus D^i, non exemplis hominum, by the Laws of God, not by the examples of
men. Foolishly therefore said Radbode the King of Phrisia: for, coming to the
Font, to be baptized, he asked, What was become of his Ancestors? And answer
being made, that they died in a fearful state unchristned, replied, that he
would rather perish with the multitude, than go to heaven with a few. So
Constantius said, that Athanasius, Gods Word does stay from running on with the
wicked.
with his few, troubled the whole world. But he answered him again, Wide is
the gate, and broad is the way, that leads ^o destruction, and many there be,
which go in thereat: strait is the gate, and the way narrow that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. If but eight Mat. 7. 13, 14.
men in all the world should be saved, as in Noah's flood, labor thou to be of
these eight. Many reason thus; Others do it, most men do it, therefore will I
do so. These be the drunken arguments of the world, but we must not follow a
multitude; Major pars saepe vincit meliorem, the greater part often times
overcommeth Exodus 23. 2.
the better. The Nicene Council had erred, but for Paphnutius; but eight only
were saved in Noah's Arc: but two Israelites of Genesis 8. Number. 14. Act. 1. Ezech.
9. Apoc. 3. 4.
600000. entered into Canaan, but an hundred and twenty believers were found in
the primitive Church, but few in Jerusalem were marked with the letter Tau, but
few in Sardis walked with God in white.

To conclude, The whole world is set on wickedness. Good men are as black
swannes, we must shine as lights in the midst of a 1 John 5. 19. Phil. 2. 15.
crooked nation. If other be dogs, let us be Lambs; if other be crows, let
us be doves, if other be tares, let us be wheat: let others live as they
list, let us live in the Lord, let us say with the Saints, Come, let us go up
into the Mountain of the Lord, and to the Mich. 4. 2, 5.
house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths: yea let us walk in the name of our God for ever and ever. Let
others murmr, complain, walk after their own lusts, speak proudly and
flatter men, because of advantage. Let us remember the words of the Lord: Let
us build on in our most holy faith, let us pray in the spirit; and cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit; and grow up in full
holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
in the fear of God. Let not us look at the multitude, to go to hell with
them for company: Non enim minor erit gloria, si fueris foelix cum paucis; nec
minor erit poena, si miser erit cum multis: For thy glory shall not be the
lesser, if with few thou be happy; nor thy pain the lesser, if with many
thou be miserable; every man shall have pain enough in hell, not the lesser
for the multitude, but the greater: For as the Saints in heaven have joy each
one from another; so the damned in Hell have the more grief, each one from
another. Mat. 22, 13.


Now more particularly, he bids them remember the words of the Apostles, to
stay up and to comfort them in the midst of murmurers, complainers, proud
men, flatterers, sectaries, mockers; and sends them to the Scriptures, to the
words of the Apostles: But I will arise ab Hypothesi, ad Thesin: from the
supposition to the position. And here we learn to whom the Scriptures are
profitable, and comfortable, even to them that remember them. We must not be
forgetful readers, nor forgetful hearers; For, He that is not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of Iam. 1. 25.
the Word, is blessed in his deed. There be two points of husbandry, to We
hear the Word, but remember it not.
get, and to hold fast; and there be two points of Christianity, to learn,
and to remember that we have learned: many have this first, few the latter.
Christ speaking of the future state of the Church, bids them remember;
Remember the Words (says John 15. 20.
Christ) that I said unto you, The servant, is not greater then the Master,
etc. The Apostle speaking to the Hebrews, charge them with forgetfulness;
And ye have forgotten (says he) the consolation Hebr. 12. 5.
that speaks to you as children. The Lord Jesus writing to the Church of
Sardis, bids it remember; Remember how thou have Apoc. 3. 3.
received, and heard, and hold fast and repent. When Paul comes to this, his
zeal breaks out in great measure, he does not sound out words, but a trumpet
like Esaias: he does not speak, but thunder, Esa. 58. 1. Mar. 3.
like James and John: he cries out like a Giant, and as a strong man refreshed
with wine, his zeal breaks out, as the Sun through a cloud, Furthermore
brethren, whatsoever things ar true, whatsoever Phil. 3. 8.
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things pertain to Love, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, or any praise; think on these things. At the news of
Christ's birth many heard, many wondered, some mocked; but Mary kept it in her
heart, and the words of the Shepherds also she kept, and would neither forgo
them nor forget them. Many good lessons in a year do we hear, but we profit
but a little, because we remember not; if it be an evil word, that we will
remember, or a promise of debt that we look to profit by, our memory is of
brass; but Lord, how forgetful in the best things? Which of us is there, that
having a portion left us, by the will and testament of our Father, will not
remember? What hearts have we of flesh, or of flint, or folly, or of madness,
that we cannot remember a better inheritance, left to us in the Word of the
Lord? That is our Copy, or free Deed rather: for thereby we hold Heaven.
Hereupon Paul commended the elders of Ephesus; first, to God, secondly, to the
Word of his grace: which is able to build further, (that is, to increase them
with more graces) and to Act. 20. 32.
give them an inheritance, among all them that are sanctified. The Word
remembered works faith, faith apprehends Christ, Christ uniteth us to God,
and gives salvation; For salvation is of the Psalm. 3. 8.
Lord, and his blessing is upon the people; and our Savior and Redeemer is the
mighty one of Jacob: and God would have his Word so Esa. 60. 16.
remembered, that he charge his people Israel, saying, Ye shall Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
lay up these my Words in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a
sign upon your hand, that they be as a frontlet between your eyes; that ye
may ever remember them. David did it; I have hid thy Word Psalm. 119. 11.
within my heart, that I might not sin against thee: And thus he describes a
good man, The Law of his God is in his heart; and his goings shall not slide.
The Apostle cries out to the Corinthians, to receive Psalm. 37. 31.
the Word of God fruitfully; We beseech you (says he) that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain. But alas, how often have we The neglect of the Word,
will bring a famine of it.
received it in vain? How often have we come to Gods School, and have taken
out never a lesson? How often have we received the food of our souls, and
never digested it? How many Sermons have we heard in vain? How often has the
sower sowed 2 Cor. 6. 1.
his seed in vain; Either in the highway, or among stones, and thorns? If in
the time to come we profit no more than in the times past, I assure you, our
graves will meet with us in the way, and it will be too late to learn, when
we are fallen into the pit of silence, and into the land where all things are
Psalm. ^^. 12.
forgotten. Not he that eats most, but he that digesteth most, is most
healthful; not he that hears most, but he that remembers most, is most
edified, and most comforted by it: hearing is as chewing, Christus auditu
devorandus, Christ is to be devoured by hearing: and remembrance is unto the
soul, Bern.
as digestion is to the stomach: meat is nothing without digestion; the Word
is nothing without remembrance of it: by it we are saved, if we keep it in
memory; that is it, that makes or marreth all. In this plenty, but not of
bread, in this abundance, 1 Cor. 15. 2.
but not of water, we shall, I fear me, for our negligence and forgetfulness,
we shall have a famine, not of bread, a thirst, but not of water: I fear me
the days will come, that the Word of God will be rare, as in the days of
Heli, that a good Minister will be 1 Samuel 3. Amos 8. 11. 2 Chro. 15. 10.
precious in our eyes; as in the days of Amos, when m^n ran from sea to sea,
to hear, and could not hear; as in the days of Asa, who was wroth with
Hanani the Seer, and put him in prison. Except the time of the Prophets and the
Primitive Church, wherein they spoke with fiery tongues and cloven tongues,
there was never, I am Act. 2. 3.
persuaded, such a time as this is, such excellency and variety of Gods gifts;
For surely for doctrine, for exhortation, for prayer, arguing, utterance, and
persuasion, men in these days have rare gifts, and the contempt of such
precious gifts cannot but bring some rare and great plague upon this age; yea
the plague that Amos threatened; The prudenr shall keep silence in that time,
For it is an evil time; and no marvel, we regard not the Word, but sit gaping
for sleep in the Church, as Ravens upon the housetop for heat in the Summer
time. Magnes ferrum rubiginosum ad se non trahit, The Lodestone draws not to
it self rusty Iron, but iron that is pure; and Iet draws not unto it self
straw that is soul, but that which is clean: Sic Verbum reprobos non ad se
trahit, nisi fuerint Spiritu Dei sanctificati: So the Word does not draw unto
it the Reprobates, except they be sanctified by the Spirit of God; it works
not upon incredulous sluggish Auditors, which are not touched with any care of
the Word; but upon attentive and diligent hearers, such as bring with them
before they come to hear,

1. A desire to hear. Who are profitable hearers of the Word.


2. A preparation to hear.

3. A purpose to obey.

And such as in hearing bring 1. Attention. 2. Circumspection. 3. Application.

And such as when they have heard the Word, use 1. Meditation. 2. Action. 3.
Continuation.

To these the Word is a savor of life unto life; but unto those that regard
not these things, it is a savor of death unto death. I have read of many
flourishing memories; Seneca writes of himself, that he was able to recite by
heart 2000. names in the same order, wherein they were spoken: Portius Latro
had such a memory, that ye could not name that martial man, but he would
run through his acts presently; and Cyneas, the next day he came to Rome,
could salute all the Senators of Rome in order, and all the people that stood
round about him, whom he never saw, nor knew before: and Tully, for memory
commends Hortentius, and Lucullus; Lucullus for matter, the other for words.

Now the excellentest matter of all others, either for the memory to account,
or for any part of the soul to conceive, is the Word of God: therefore says
Jude, Remember the words which were spoken, etc. Memory is as the verticle of
the soul, and the habitacle of the Word; as the meat in the stomach, so the
Word in the memory. The belly is the bodies storehouse, and the memory the
souls treasury, Thesaurus and custos omnium: In this storehouse, Esdras is
reported to store up the Bible; and Mary, the sayings of our Savior: in this,
Carindes did lay up volumes, Aug. prologo in lib. 1. de doctrina Christi.
and Cyrus of Persia 300000. Soldiers: and Antony the unlearned Eremite of
Egypt by hearing remembered, and by remembering, came to understand the
Scriptures.

The beasts that chew not the cud, were hold for unclean; the mind that
remembers not the Word, is unpure, unclean: there is Memoria and
reminiscentia, the habitual and actual memory, the present and recalling
remembrance; which some resemble to a book and the reading in the book,
unseparable twins in matters of Divinity, lest our memory unpractised, be
turned like Pharoes butler, to forgetfulness, is well compared to a game at
tennise, which so long indures, quam diu pila inter eos proijciatur, as the
ball is tossing; and the Scriptures so long profit, as they are remembered.
Sicut nullum momentum est, quo homo non utetur vel fruatur Dei bonitate; Ita
nullum debet esse momentum, quo Verbum in Hugo. de anima.
memoria non habeat; The Word of God ought to be so frequent in out memories,
as Gods blessings are to our ordinary senses: the one is ever present, the
other ought never to be forgotten: but ourmemory, as touching this Word of
God, it is as an unthrifts purse, that holds no money: like a riven dish, that
holds We are dull to hear, careless to remember Gods Word.
no water; ut Danaidum dolium, which runs out so soon as it is filled; our
ears are like a riddle, or five which lets go clean water, and keeps
gravel and stones still; but they must be like a glass window, that shuts
out a tempest, and admits the light; they must be stopped at vain things,
and opened to good things: ye must not be like them of whom Paul prophesied,
Which will not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
shall after their own lusts get to themselves an heap of teachers.

Men are so dull, deaf, careless; that God sometime is enforced to speak to
the Heavens, saying, Hear ob Heavens, and harken oh Earth, for the Lord has
spoken. Sometimes to the Earth, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the
Lord: sometime to the Esa. 1. Ier. 22. 29.
Mountains, Hear O ye Mountains, the Lords quarrel, and ye mighty
foundations of the Earth, for the Lord has a controversy with his people:
sometime to the trees: so he may speak to the pillars, roof, and glass
windows, for we will not hear him, or if we hear him, we remember it not.
Aristotle says, that the Thracians do not count above five, they cannot
remember to five, but we can remember five hundred things of the World, but
not five things of Gods doctrine. Can a maid forget her ornament, or a bride
her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number: Ier. ^. 32.
we neither remember the text, nor any doctrine, nor any exhortation delivered
from it: like the Philosopher that remembered not his own name; like the
Ostrich, that remembers not her eggs left in the dust: but we must hear to
learn, and learn to remember, to follow it, and follow it to continue in that
good, that we have heard; then are we blessed: so says our Savior, Blessed
are they that hear the Word of God and keep it: that is, that keep it in his
life, and keep it in his memory, that we Luke 11. 28.
may say of our Sundays, as Titus Vespasian said of his days, wherein he gave
not an Alms: Hoc Sabbatum perdidi, I have lost the Sabbath. Yea a thousand,
yea ten thousand Sabbaths have we lost: we are no whit the better for coming
unto Church, as Peter said to Christ, Master, we have labored all night, and
have catched nothing: so may we say, We have come to the Church, and have heard
the Word of Life and Salvation, but we have learned nothing, we can remember
nothing, we are now hit the better for coming to the Church: Frustra Dei
gratiam accipimus, we have received the Word of God in vain. Memory is as a
chest. If a ^ Cor. 16. 1.
man have all the gold of Ophir, and the silver of Tharsis, and the treasures
of Ganges, it is nothing, except he has a place to keep them in: if a man
hear ten thousand sermons: it is nothing, except he remember them; they are
gotten in the Church, and forgotten and scattred in the Churchyard; like
Hannibal, that could get the victory, but could not keep it.

Tell me, O tell me; what day in the week do we give so evil The doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles the foundation of the Church.
example, of sitting and lulling in our beds as on the Sabbath? either we come
not to Church, or if we come, we hear not, or if we hear, we remember it
not. O filthy favor that arises out of this loathsome channel! I spare to
speak, I shame to see, I rue to know what I fully know against our souls in
this respect: how can we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Hebr. 2. 2.
Sins past be gone, and the Lord forgive us; some be to come, and the Lord
strengthen us: lie we may not, the Lord being judge; clear our selves, we
cannot, our consciences bearing witness of so many negligences, and our great
forgetfulness. How great might our knowledge have been? How strong our faith?
How ardent our love? How fiery our zeal? How reformed our lives, if we had
heard with any conscience? Tertullian tells of a water in Paphlagonia called
Salmacis, of the which they that drink, either fall into a frenzy, or into a
lethargy: so, are we not either mad, or fallen into a dead sleep, to hear
God so often, and remember him so little? Shame appertains unto us, and
confusion may cover us as a cloak. O deaf ears, dumb Dan. 9.
tongues, dead hearts, dull souls: How long shall Wisdom cry? How Prove. 1.
20, 21, 22.
long shall she utter her voice in the streets? she calls in the
highstreete among the prease in the entering of the gates, and utters her
words in the City, saying, O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishness,
and the scornful take their pleasure inscorning, and the fools hate
knowledge? But let us leave this sin, and learn to remember more, and keep
more, else the more shall be our judgment.

But what must we remember? we must remember the words of the Apostles, not of
the Rabbines, Fathers, Doctors of the Church: therefore it is noted of the
three thousand, that they continued in the Act. 2. 42.
Apostles doctrine: It is Basis Ecclesiae, so says Paul, Ye are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being Ephesians.
2. 20.
the chief corner stone. Peter calls it a most sure word: We have 1 Pet. 1.
19.
(says he) a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well, that
ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, etc. Esaias
sends all men to the Law, To the Law, to the testimony (says the Prophet)
If they speak not according to this Word, it is because Esa. 8. 20.
there is no light in them. Jeremy calls all men's traditions, dreams,
chafe: How long do the Prophets delight to prophecy lies? Ier. 23. 26, 27,
28, 29.
Even prophesying the deceit of their own heart. Think they to cause my
people to forget my name by their dreams, which they tell every man unto his
neighbor, as their forefathers have forgotten my Name for Baal? The Prophet
that has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my Word, let him
speak my Word faithfully: what is the Chafe to the Wheat, says the Lord? Is
not my word even like a fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks
the stone? These Saint Peter calls deceivable fables: We followed not (quoth
he) deceivable fables, when we opened 2 Pet. 1. 16.
unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. What need we to run
to the channel, when we may drink of the The Scripture the rule of faith,
the touch stone to try Scripture.
fountain? or to feed of Acornes, when we may have the pure Wheat? Or to see
with a Candle, when we may have the Sun light? All men's writings they are as
puddles and cesternes, that can hold no water, they are Labruscae, sour
grapes. I looked (says the Lord) that my vineyard should have brought forth
good grapes, Ier. 2. Esa. 5. 3.
and it brought forth wild and sour grapes. Now by these sour grapes he
means errors in doctrine, as well as in life: The Zuingsius.
Word of God must sit on the Bench: when Fathers, Councels, Doctors, Rabbines,
Poets, Philosophers must stand at the bar. Paul discussing the question of
Justification, he says not, What says reason? What say the Rabbines? The
Thalmud? The Caball? What say the Bishops? Doctors of Jerusalem? But, What
says the Scripture? So Peter proves all from the Scripture. Wherefore it is
contained in the Scripture: Behold, I put a stone in Sion, Romans 4. 3.
etc. This is to build on the Rock: but a most miserable state it is, when a
man builds on the sand: The house must needs fall, when the Church goes from
the doctrine Apostolical, to Luke 6.
the doctrines of men; then is the Sun as sackecloth, the Moon turned into
blood, the stars have lost their light; then the three Apoc. 6.
unclean Frogs be come out of the mouth of the Dragon, when Popes,
Cardinals, Schoolmen rule the Church: Removeantur Chartae Apoc. 13. 16. Aug.
Donato.
nostrae, procedat in medium Codex Dei, Let our writings be taken away, let
Gods Book be produced and brought in the place: Let us take away our
deceitful balance, and let Gods balance weigh and sway the truth of our
cause.

Martin refused Scripture, and fled to traditions, and therefore Tertullian
calls him Apostaticall, and not Apostolical. He calls the Marcionites
Owls, and Lucifrigas scripturarum: and says that Tertull. lib. 4. contra
Marcionitas.
the Waspes make nests as well as the Bees; and that the Marcionites erect
Churches as well as Christians: but in their nests is no honey, and in the
Churches of the Marcionites is no Truth, no Scripture: they teach for doctrine,
precepts of men: they are like unto Ravens, which conceive not with seed, but
with wind; their Mat. 15.
doctrine, is the doctrine of the wind, and the speech of the East Wind: We
are borne again, not of mortal, but of immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
even by the Word of God, which lives and indureth for ever, that is the true
seed. The Papists are like the Marcionites, and the Valentinians, qui prius
persuadent, quam docent, which first persuade, and after teach; but Christians
do first teach, and after persuade, and teach too, out of the Scriptures, as
Apollo did, He proved by the Scriptures Jesus to be Christ: for he was a man,
eloquent and Act. 18. 24, 28. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15.
mighty in the Scriptures. Thus Paul taught, This say we unto you by the Word
of the Lord: thus must we say, for every point of Doctrine.

Again, in that Jude bids them, Remember the Words which were spoken before of
the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; some gather from these words, that this
Epistle is not Canonical, not written by The Saints of God are meek and gentie.
Jude the Apostle. But I answer, that Jude naming other Apostles, excludes
not himself, but rather uses the authority of others, then of himself. So
John calls himself John at every word, not an Apostle; yet avoucheth his
calling against Cerinthus Apoc. 1. 4, 9.
and Ebion, saying, that the Lord Jesus commanded him to write. Apoc. 1.
So Paul modestly and humbly, having to do with God, renounceth his titles, and
says; that he was not worthy to be called an Apostle: he says that he was
among them, in much weakness, that 1 Cor. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 2. 3.
he persecuted and wasted the Church of God, that he preached in infirmity,
that he was mad in his Iudaisme: but having to do with the false apostles, and
Pharisees, he avoucheth his calling, and rowzeth himself like a Lion; I
certify you brethren, that Gal. 1. 13. Act. 26. 11. Gal. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 1. 1
Cor. 13. 10. Gal. 2. 8, 9, 11.
the Gospel, which was preached of me, was not after man, for neither received
I it of man, neither was I taught it but by the revelation of Jesus Christ: he
calls himself, an Apostle; he says that he labored more then they all,
that God was as mighty in him as in Peter, and how that James and Cephas, and
John, that were counted pillars, gave unto him the right hands of fellowship,
and that he withstood Peter to his face: he holds up his head with the best,
comparing with them; I suppose that I was not (quoth he) inferior to the very
chief 2 Cor. 11. 5, 22.
Apostles; they are Hebrews, so am I; they are Israelites, so am I; they are
of the seed of Abraham, so am I, they are the Ministers of Christ (I speak as
a fool) I am more.

Again: For the phrase of Jude, it is loving, mild; but ye beloved, Spiritus
enim Dei nec mendax, nec mordax est; the Spirit of God is neither a lier, nor a
biter: and Jude here like Paul will 1 Cor. 4. 21.
not come with a rod, but in love, and in the Spirit of meekness: Nam facilius
penetrant mollia quam aspera verba; Mild and gentle words do more pierce and
persuade, then rough and rigorous speeches. Paul entreats the Ephesians, that
they would walk worthy the vocation Ephesians. 4. 1, 2.
whereunto they are called, with all humbleness of mind, and meekness, with
long suffering, supporting one another through love: and so he taught Timothy;
The servant of God (quoth he) must be gentle toward all men, instructing them
with meekness: so S. John was mild in his 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. 1 John. 2. 12,
14, 18, 28.
doctrine, calling them sometime little children, sometime Babes; hereby
declaring his love and affection toward them: and in all the servants of God
ye shall see a mild spirit, not spirantem flammas, not breathing threatenings
as Saul did, and yet menaces and Act. 9. 1. Jude ver. 22.
roughness must be used. We must have compassion of some, and other some we
must save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, and it is the Apostles
charge; Admonish the unraly, comfort the feeble minded, bear 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
with the weak, be patient toward all men. The Samaritan had both oil to
mollify, and wine to search: He powered wine and oil into the wound. The
Surgeon has both Balm and Cauterium; Luke 10.
the shepherd both a whistle and a dog; all sinners are not to be reproved
alike, because all offend not alike* Nobilis equus umbra virgae regitur,
whereas indomitus nec calcaribus incitari potest, a rod In reprooving, due
circumstances must be observed.
will check a free-horse, and a twigge command a gentle nag; whereas the spur
cannot stiree the stubborn Jade, nor the whip skare an untamed Colt.

In reproving these circumstances, are to be considered The Persons. The
Place. The Time, and the Offense.

For the first, all sinners are to be rebuked, yet with wisdom and discretion;
Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in caput ejus, lest he deal like a man
that throws up a stone rashly in his humor, and it fall down again upon
his own head; to teach him wisdom.

Secondly, for the place; it must be done by our Savior Christ's form,
Secret, com test, coram Ecclesia, alone, between him and thee, with two or
three witnesses, before the whole Church; and if then he will not hear and
amend, let him be as an Heathen man and a Publicane.

Thirdly, the time must be, while physic may do good; Nullum medicamentum
sanat, nisi quod opportune adhibueris, No salve is saving that is ministered out
of season: it is too late for birds to build their nests in summer; for the
husbandman to sow in harvest; for the mariner to go to sea, when the ship is
under sail; for the gardener to displant trees, when they be old; for a sick
man to go to physic, when he is a dying; for the cook to season meat that
is putrified; for the vine-dresser to gather fruit when they be rotten; for a
man to cast water, when the house is burnt; and for the groom of the stable to
shut the door when the Steed is stolen: but the bird builds her nest in the
Spring, the husbandman sows his seed in Autumn, the Mariner goes to sea,
when the ship is in the Haven, a wise man ante languorem, before sickness
goes to physic, the gardinet planteth trees when they are young, the cook
seasoneth his meat before it be tainted, and a wise man casts water, when
the house begins to smoke; and reproves must be used, while the sinner is
curable.

Lastly, the offense is either public, or private; if public, then coram
omnibus arguere, to reprove openly; a practice not unpractised in the primitive
Church, as is apparent by the Excommunication of the incestuous man of Corinth;
the public confessions 1 Cor. 5. Socrates lib. 3. Cap. 13.
of Ecebolius, and many others. If private, then we must do as the physicians
does, who if he can by any means cure the wound, he will not cut the member
from the body: so the physician of the soul, that will cure his brothers
sin, if he may do it without farther danger, he must conserve his name, and
keep his credit; if not, he must proceed to his farther shame. For an
ingenious nature will be quickly sorry, because he has offended: whereas a
currish spirit will be too too angry, because he is rebuked. Malicious
reprehenders condemned.
Now the end of all our reprovings must be, to bring the party reproved to
repentance: This was S. Peter's end, in rebuking Simon Magus, and Paul's end, in
excommunicating the incestuous Act. 8. 22. 1 Cor. 5. 3.
person: S. Ambrose his end in reproving Theodosius; and this must be the end
of all reprovings, rebukings and threatenings.

And here I am to deal with three sorts of men: our covetous, ambitious and
malicious reprehenders.

Our covetous will bark with the dog, cackle with the daw, and sing with the
crow for gain; while there is hope of a prey; but deal as the Fox did with
the crow, make frustrate their covetous hope, say and do what ye will, ye
shall not have aword Aesope.
of them.

The second, are like Pierius ambitious daughters, that were turned into
Magpies, for correcting the Muses; these will reprehend Ovid Metam.
Rulers, to win applause of the Commons; propound Christ for an example, but
their end is vaineglory.

The third, with Eupoles, will correct Alcibiades through malice: 1 Samuel 16.
and with Shemei, rebuke David for envy: with the malecontent power out their
malice, and with the Satyrist satisfy their anger. The Prophet compares them
to barking dogs, their teeth are cruel, their tongues venymous, they do
breathe Psalm. 59.
out spears and lances; and have swords within their lips; their end is not
to cure the sore, but to uncover the wound; not to amend their sick brother,
but to content their own sinful humor. But so to reprehend is no way
lawful; we must deal with sinners, as Samuel did with Saul; chide them for
their sin, yet pray for their soul; as Moses did with the Israelites, who
corrected their iniquities; yet would be blotted out of Gods Book for their
safeties: as David did with Absalom; who detested his fault, and yet would have
died for his sake; then shall we show our selves true physicians, that sear
the sore, to preserve the person; and hate the sin, to preserve the soul.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XVIII. How that they told you, that there shall be mockers in the last
time, etc. Scorning and mocking, the highest degree of sin.



NOw he comes to the words, that he will have them to remember, and they be
these, That there shall come in the last days mockers: he calls the wicked,
mockers: for in mustering up their sins, he begins with their flouting,
as an arch sin, a capital sin, he places it in the forefront, as Ioab
did Vrias: it is a Metropolitan sin, as Salomons harlot 1 Reg. 3.
was among women the worst of all, as the beast in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 13.
which inspired the other with blasphemy: like Antiochus, who did more hurt
then all the Tyrants before him. Of these mockers speaks Peter, as though he
had followed Jude verbatim, word for word, but he has answered them so fully,
that we need not go any further for their confutation: There shall (says he)
come in the last days mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and say,
Where 1 Pet. 3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 8, 9.
is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers died, all things continue
alike, from the beginning of the creation: For this they willingly know not,
that the Heavens were of old, and the earth that was of the water, and by the
water, by the Word of God: wherefore the world that then was, perished,
overflowed with the water; but the Heavens and earth, which There have been
scorners in all ages.
are now, are kept by the same Word in store, and reserved unto fire, against
the day of Judgment, and of the destruction of ungodly men. Dearly beloved,
be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise (as some men count slacknesse) but is patient toward us, etc. Solomon
had to do with such. All things come alike to all, Eccles. 9. 2.
and the same condition; is to the just, and to the wicked, to the good and to
the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and him that
sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner; he that swears, and he
that fears an oath: so they said in Chrysostomes time, (...), Give me
something here, let hereafter go to others: Mat. 22.
such were in Christ's days the Sadduces, they denied the Resurrection: Paul
had to do with these beasts, which said, Let us eat, and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye. But if Peter reasoned well, 1 Cor. 15. 32. 1 Pet. 47.
saying, Now is the end of all things at hand, be ye therefore sober and
watching in prayer: The Epicures in Paul's time reasoned vilely and beastly, nam
contrariorum, contraria est ratio: for of contraries there is a contrary
reason. Such skummes have been in all ages: when Esaias spoke of sackloth, they
spoke of slaying of oxen, and Esa. 22.
drinking wine: when the Apostles spoke with new tongues, they spoke with their
old tongues and said, that they were drunken with new wine: when Paul spoke of
the true God, the Athenians Act. 2. 13.
called him (...); a babbler, a rascal, a trifler: when Christ wrought
miracles, they said, that he did them by the Devil: and Mat. 12.
now that we speak of God, and the Kingdom of God, they say that we are idle,
and must say something, and that our doctrine is good for those that have
little to do: they deride us as simple men that know nothing; with the
Corinthians they call our preaching foolishnes; with the Egyptians they call
our resort unto the Church, idleness; with the Captains, they call our Exodus
8. 2 Reg. 9. Act. 26. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Act. 26. 25.
preachers mad men; with Festus, they call our zeal, plain dotage and
madness; and with Pliny, they call our meetings, conventicles: but we will
answer them, as Paul did the Corinths, It pleases God through the foolishnes
of preaching to save them that believe. As the Apostle did Festus, We are not
mad, but we speak the Words of truth and sobernes. As the Christians did
Pliny, Trajane, and others for their night meetings, our witness is above,
our praise is not with men, but with God.

The Latins for mocking use a triple Synonyme, Irrisio, subsannatio, Romans 2.
illusio, arisu, ^^gatu, ludo, a laughing to skorne, a mocking, by snuffing up
the nose, and a scorning, by way of jesting; the first two are open, the third
more secret, when we break a jest upon our neighbor, that tends to his
disgrace.

Of these mockers there be sundry kinds:

Some that mock God.

Some that mock Gods man.

They that mock God, are of two sorts; the open that deny Diverse sorts of
mockers both of God and men.
God in word, and in deed, as Pharaoh.

And the secret, that profess in show, but deny in truth, like the Son in
the Gospel, who in word said, I go, father, but in truth went not at all:
Multi adorantes Crucem exterius, Crucem spiritualem per contemptum conculcant,
Many will bear the Cross in their bosoms, that never imprint it in their
hearts, and many fall before it in their closet, that never follow it in their
lives: Irrisor, non poenitens, qui adhuc agit, quod penitet; He is a (...),
Iside.
no repenter, whose works are not answerable to their words. These mocke-Gods
shall one day feel the hand of God. Glaucus, that scoffed at Venus, was torn
in pieces with his mares; Lycurgus despising Bacchus, chopped his own legs
asunder, as he lopt his vines; Holofernes acknowledging no God, but
Nabuchodonozer, Judith. 13.
was murdered by a woman; the people that will sacrifice to the Queen of
heaven, were consumed with the sword of famine; Nicanor, that derided the Lord
of the Sabbath, lost his head, hand, shoulder: Phericides in derision of the
Godhead, bragged Ier. 44. 17.
abroad, that himself had as much prosperity, that never did sacrifice, as
they that offered an hundred Hecatombs to the gods: but was as Herod consumed
with lice; Daphida a scoffer, in derision Act. 12. 23.
of Apollos Oracle at Delphos, enquired of it, whether he should find his horse
that he lost, when indeed he had none; the Oracle made this answer:
Inventurum quidem, sed ut co turbatus periret, that he should find an horse,
but lose his life: whereupon he returning (joyful that he deluded the
Oracle) fell into the hands of King Attalus, whom he had abused in speeches,
and was by him commanded to be thrown headlong from a Rock called the horse,
and so perished. Pope Leo, the tenth, hearing Cardinal Bembus speaking of the
Gospel, broke out into this blasphemy, Quantum nobis, ac nostro caetui
profuerit e^ de Christ fabula, satis est omnibus seculis; What profit and
commodity has redounded to us and our order, by that fable reported of Christ,
the world can bear sufficient winesse; but he died miserably among his
cups, cum nec Coelum, nec infernum post hanc vitam esse crederet, believing
neither Heaven, nor Hell after this life, but thought heaven but a mockage, and
hell but a scarecrow. So Julius the third, making his belly his God, commanded
a hot Peacocke to be kept cold for supper, and being deceaved of it, began
bitterly to blaspheme: a Cardinal sitting by, entreated his holiness, not to
be moved for a trifle* Quid, (inquit) si Deus voluit usque adeo propter unum
pomum irasci, etc? Not moved (quoth he?) shall God be so angry with our first
parents as for an apple to deprive them of Paradise; and not I, that am his
vicar, be much more angry for a Peacock, so much better the^ an apple? But God
met with him, and he died of a gowte. These are examples for mock-Gods, to
deride the Lord of hoasts no longer: for his hand will be heavy upon them one
day. Scoffing and jesting the bafest fruit of Wit.


The second sort of mocking, is Irrisio hominum, mocking of men, but the
disgrace alights on God, for as the defacing of the image is the disgrace of
the Prince: so the mocking of a Christian, is the scorning of Christ. David was
dishonored in the disgrace of his servants, and Christ derided in the derision
Mat. 24.
of a Christian; For what is done unto them, is done unto him; yet many offend
greatly in this regard, applying their wits and understanding to nothing else,
but to frumps, and mockes, and jests, to disgrace others, to move laughter, if
they can nip, or by a grudging scoff, disgrace another honester than
themselves; then we call them merry Greeks, pleasant companions, good
fellows; but this is the least harvest, the least fruit of their wit; Iocis
utuntur, qui currum potius quam curiam decent, they use jests befitting rather
the dung-cart, than the Court, and which will sooner procure vomit than
laughter, and then they triumph, but indeed, sine victoria, without victory.
These are dogs, not men: Nam malorum duo sunt genera, there be two kinds of
bad men, alii Canes, alii porci, some are dogs, some are hogs; many are
hogs, their heads be dull, their ears deaf, their eyes blind, and the
whole man so cold, as they desire not the knowledge of Gods ways; but most are
dogs, reproaching, jesting, deriding, mocking the professors of the truth:
but take heed of such dogs. Of these dogs the Apostle speaks thus,
without shall be dogs and enchanters, and whoremongers, etc. these shall
never have any right in the Tree of life, nor enter Phil. 3. 2. Apoc. 22. 15.
into the gates of the heavenly City: and he names first these Dogs,
because these dogs, these mockers are in the height of sin, and therefore
he places them foremost, as Vrias in the forefront of the battle. As Seneca
said of Scylla, that he left killing, when none were left to be killed; so
these men will leave scoffing, when there is no honest man left to be played
upon. But let us not sin with an high hand; these men are furthest from
mercy; For if we sin willingly, after that we have received Heb. 10. 26, 27.
the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful looking for judgment and violent fire, which shall drown the
adversary.

These mockers are the worst sort of men. David names three sorts of sinners,
the first are they, that walk after the counsel of the ungodly: The second
are they, that stand in the way of sinners: Phil. 1. 1.
And the third are they that sit in the seat of the scornful: these last are
the worst: they are set in cathedra pestilentiae, in the chair of pestilence;
for so the Septuagint translate it.

The Scripture discovers unto us a threefold chair or seat: First of
justice; and such a one may that Throne seem to be which Solomon erected.

The second, is of Doctrine: as our Savior Christ says of 1 Reg. 10. 18.
the Pharisees, They sit in Moses chair. Diverse notorious scoffing Atheists.


And thirdly, we read of the chair of Pestilence, where these mockers sit,
here they do ease themselves, and take their delight as sometimes Babylon did,
who vaunted so much that she Mat. 23. 2.
did sit like a Queen, and should see no mourning; as it were in a scorn of
all that God could do unto her. And this was the case of cursed Pharaoh, who
seemed to mock God to his face, when he said, I know not the Lord, neither
will I let the children of Israel go: these mockers are pestilent fellows,
their breath is Exodus 9.
as the breath of a Basiliske, it infecteth the air: David complains of
them, The proud, meaning the wicked which contemn Gods Word, and tread
Religion under their feet, have had me exceedingly in derision; and yet flout
they and mock they never so much, no sooner does God touch them, but they
shake, and quiver like a leaf: Their heart dies within them, like Nabal. 1 Samuel 2 5.
For none fear more at the last, then these proud scorners, that jest at God
and all goodness. Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, contemned, derided God,
finding Jupiter Olympus in a golden coat, pulled it off, and gave him a
linsie-woolsie coat, warm for Winter, and light for Summer, and plucked away
Aesculapius his golden beard, saying, His Father Apollo had no beard, and
therefore not meet that he should be better than his Father: he took away the
golden cups and rings from the Images, et se accipere, non auferre dicebat, he
said, he received them, not took them away; because the Images held out their
hands, as if they had offered him them: Having gotten a prey and having a
prosperous wind, he said, that God favored Pirates. Such a scorner was
Clearchus of Pontus, and Aristodemus of Troy: but no sooner did God touch
Dionysiw, but he trembled, he durst trust no Harbor, but caused his daughters
to burn his hair with hot Walnut-shels: Clearchus of Pontus slept in a Chest:
and Aristodemus of Troy had a bed in the Air: they feared their own shadow.
Thus Pashur was a terror to himself, and to all his friends: for Jeremy said
unto him, The Lord has not called thy name Pashur, but Magermissabib, that is,
fear, and terror round about. It made Ier. 20. 3, 4.
Balaam say, Moriatur anima mea, Let my soul dye the death of the righteous,
and let my last end be like unto his. Julian took his blood Numb. 23. 10.
in his hands, being strooken with an arrow from Heaven, and threw it up into
the Air; saying, Vicisti, Galilaee, O man of Galile, thou have gotten the
victory. Calvin writing upon the hundred and fifteenth Psalm, verse sixteen,
tells a notable story, how God suddenly shut up the mouth of a Blasphemer,
and made him dumb, who derided God, saying, Coeli coelorum Domini: The Heaven
of Heavens unto the Lord, and the Earth has he given to the children of men,
as though men in Earth might live at random. Thus Esaias traverseth the scorners
of Jerusalem, saying, Hear the Word of the Lord, ye scornful men, because
ye have Esa. 28. 14, 15.
said, We have made a covenant with Death, and with Hell are we at an
Scoffers and mockers punished.
agreement; though a scourge run over, and pass through, it shall not come at
us: for we have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanity are we hid. But
says God, I will lay Judgment to the rule, and Righteousness to the
balance, and your covenant with Death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with Hell shall not stand: now therefore be no mockers, lest your
bonds increase. So hear this, ye scorners of Norfolk, God will meet with
you one day, He will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie scalpe of
him that walks in Psalm. 68. 21. Psalm. 21. 8, 9.
his sins, and his right handshall find out all these mockers that hate him:
He shall make them like a fiery Oven in the time of his anger. The Lord shall
destroy them in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. These mockers shall
not always do him this dishonor: but God will draw his hand, yea his right
hand out of his bosom and consume them. Psalm. 74. 11.


Four notable scoffers I knew in my time, that held of one ging; the first
dyed mad; the second hanged himself; the third is a beggar, and yet was richly
left; the fourth, is strooken blind. Let men take heed, if God be God, they
shall not go unpunished; for they open their mouth against Heaven. David
cries out that he was a worm and not a man, a shame of men, and Psalm. 22. 6.
7.
the outcast of all people; that all that saw him, had him in derision, they
made a mow and nod the head at him: but yet he gathers heart, and insulteth
over these his enemies, saying, Let the wicked be put to confusion, and to
silence in the grave, and let these lying lips be made Psalm. 31. 17, 18.
dumb, which cruelly, proudly, and spightfully speak against the righteous.
Herod and Pilate scoffed at the Lord Jesus his simplicity, made a May Game of
him, the rascal soldiers flouted Iuke 22.
him, but he left the vengeance to his Father, who met with them all. One
says that the scoffers shall be punished in Hell, in their tongues; quoting
Luke 16. 24. for said he, In quo membro peccamus, in codem plectemur: In what
member we sin, in the same must we be punished; as the Envious in their
eyes, the Gluttons in their throats, the Lecherous in their bodies, the
Malicious in their hearts, the Covetous in their hands, the Scoffers in their
toungs: but this is but a speculation, a quiddity; for surely the damned are
tormented in all parts, but yet chiefly in that part that has offended; paena
peccato respondet, the punishment is answerable to the sin.

The World is full of these mockers; for men are come to a wonderful height of
sin, and are grown to be most notoriously wicked and ungodly: so it is said,
that cursed Cham mocked his Father Noah; I smael mocked godly Isaac, because it
is like, I smael Genesis 2. 22. Genesis 21.
seeing godly Isaac performing some duties of Religion, Prayer, Thankesgiving,
or the like, he laughed him to scorn. The Athenians mocked Paul, What will
this babbler say? So the Scribes Act. 17. Mat. 26. 68.
and Pharisees mocked our Savior, saying, Hail, King of the Jews. The Jews
mocked Saint Peter's Sermon, saying, These Scoffing a kind of persetion.
men are full of new wine, they are possessed with the spirit of the Buttery.
The children of Bethel mocked Elisha, saying, Go up, bald pate. This was the
complaint of godly Jeremy, O Lord, I am in 2 Reg. 2. 22. Ier. 20. 7.
derision daily, every one mocketh me: and as it was, so it is still, and
shall be: the World is full of such lewd and wicked men, (as Nilus of
Crocodiles;) such mockes-God, that mock and mow at all good duties, scoffing
and scorning all Religion, flowting and misusing all Gods faithful Ministers,
rail upon them, and revile them; yea, if any man fear God, and work
righteousness, attend to reading, exhortation and doctrine, pray evening and
morning, and at noonday, instruct their families with Abraham, and will not
swear with the swearer, drink with the drunkard, nor run with the profane
in all excess of riot; this man shall be derided, mocked, scorned, jested at,
and railed upon, branded with many odious names: but let these mockers take
heed, God will come in judgment, he will be a swift witness and a sharp
Judge against them. Look on that cursed Cham, and scoffing Ismael; behold Gods
vengeance upon those forty two boys that mocked Elisha. What became of them
that mocked and misused the Prophets of the Lord? What became of them that
mocked and misused Christ Jesus our Savior? and ye shall see, none of them
escaped unpunished.

This mocking is a kind of persecution; these mockers are persecutors; Ismael
did but gybe, and fleere and flout at Isaac, yet Genesis 21. Gal. 5. 29. Mat. 27.
39.
Paul calls it persecution: those that railed on Christ, despited him as
much, as they that crucified him with their hands, as those that ran him to
the heart with a spear. The wicked now persecute the Saints, and laugh, and
gybe, and fleere at them to the full: but God shall laugh at them another day:
he will, ye mockers, He will laugh at your destruction, and mock you, when
Prou. 1. 26, 27.
your fear comes like sudden desolation, and your destruction shall come
like a whirlewind, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, etc. The
rich man's tongue burned in Hell, and could not have a spoonefull of water; and
shall not these tongues fry in Hell, Luke 16.
that rail, that jest, that mock at Honesty and Religion? Who say, that they
will believe their hound, before a Preacher, for he will not hunt counter. God
will burn one day these tongues: For if that tongue, that mocketh his earthly
Father and Mother shall be pulled out; As Agur said, The eye that mocketh
Prove. 3. 17.
his Father, and despises the instruction of his Mother, let the Ravens in the
valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eateit; what shall the tongue do,
that mocketh God, his heavenly Father, the 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Church, his Mother, the Saints, his fellow brethren, and members of Christ's
Body, the holy Ghost his Schoolmasters, the Preachers, the messengers of God,
the Gospel, the Word of life, the two Sacraments, the two dugges of life, the
Food of our souls? Into their secrets, let not my soul come, says old father
Jacob. Many Scoffers and railers smite with the tongue.
condemn us of singularity, preciseness, puritanisme; they would not have us
so odd, but to be good fellows, boon companions, sport and play, drink and
swill like other men, and to Genesis 49. 6.
walk as the world does. But let us answer these men, as Alexander answered
Parmenio, counselling him to a thing undecent and unseemely, Facerem, si
Parmenio essem, at Alexandro neutiquam licet, I would do this, if I were
Parmenio, but it is no way beseeming Alexander to do it. So will we answer
Atheists, Papists, Worldlings, We would do such and such things, we would
drink with the drunkard, swear with the swaggerer, and run into all excess
of riot, if we were Atheists, Papists, profane worldlings; At Protestantibus
and Christianis non licet: But it is not lawful for Christians, and
Protestants, so to do. God be thanked, we are free now from open
persecution, the Moon is not turned into blood, the Dragon pursues not the
woman, the daughters of Sion are not Apoc. 6. Cap. 12. Lament. 2. 1. 2 Reg. 21.
darkened, the Church is not black, as Cant. 1. our blood is not powered out
like water; as in Jerusalem, the Preachers are not scattred abroad, as Moses in
Madian, Daniel in Chaldaea, Hosea in Israel, Jeremy in Judah, John in Asia,
Peter in Samaria, Philip in Alexandria, Thomas in Aethiopia, Bartholomew in
India, Andrew in Scythia, Simo^ in Persia, Judas in Mesopotamia, Marcus in
Colonia, Nathanael in France, Joseph of Aramathia in Scotland, and Paul in
England: yet are we not free from all persecution, for we are persecuted with
the tongue; the woolf cannot bite, yet can he bark; the wicked cannot smite
with the fist, yet can he smite with the tongue: these serpents cannot sting,
yet can they hiss, as they said of Jeremy, Come, let Ier. 18. 18.
us smite him with the tongue, and let ^^ not give heed to any of his Words: so
good men shall be sure to be smitten with the tongue. These voices are
oftentimes heard; Oh these holy men, oh these Bible-men, oh these precisians,
Puritans, mortified men, men of the spiritlare not others holy, and honest, and
good as well as they? Oh take heed: Dathan, Corah and Abiram went to hell for
as li^lle as Numb. 6. 16.
that; and thither shall these go, if they repent not. The first Christians
wanted not these derisions, mockings, and scoffings; Tertullian in Apologetico
says, that they in the Primitive Church were called Asinarij, Semissij,
homines Crucifixi discipuli, Galilaei, Nazareni, herds of Asses, vile
Fellows, the disciples of a man crucified, Galilaeans, Nazarites, eaters of
man's flesh, drinkers of man's blood; for that they received the Sacraments.
Libanus, scholar to Julian the Apostata, scoffed at Christ, asking what the
Son of the Carpenter did then in heaven? To whom the Schoolmasters of
Antioch answered, Concinnat loculos Iuliano: he was making coffins for Julian.
So he died within 3. days (says the Tripartite History:) The same Tripartite
History tells of one Lucius Lib. 7. cap. 12.
Samasatensis, who mocking at Christianity, said, that he got nothing by it,
but the increase of his name in one syllable: For The godly usually mocked, for
well doing.
before he was christened, he was called Lucius, but after that he was called
Lucianu^: but he mocked, and barked so long at Christ, that in fine he was
torn in pieces of dogs; one dog are another. A wicked witness mocketh
Judgment (says Solomon) but judgments Prove. 19. 28, 29. 2 Samuel 6. 21, 21.
are prepared for the scornful, that is, mockers. Finely did David answer
Michol, It was before the Lord, which chose me rather then thy Fathers house,
etc. And I will yet be more vile then thus, and will be low in my own sight,
etc. So let us answer these huswifes, dames, scoffers, mockers, God has not
chosen them, nor their Fathers house, and we will be yet more vile, seeing it is
before our God. But yet howsoever Julian flowt at Christ, Diagoras jest at
religion, Dionysius scoff at the last Judgment, Ismael the bastard 2 Reg. 2.
19.
mock Isaac, Senacherib laugh at the virgin Sion, and nod his head at
Jerusalem; yet how le they, weep they, and lament this sin in hell. Oh
brethren, he that heard our men, how in their secret meetings they deride the
Preacher, the Word, the Auditors, the Church, the assemblies, how they canvice
every professor his life, and how they censure all men, how they open their
mouth against heaven, and their tongues walk through the earth, how they talk
on their Ale-bench, sparing neither Magistrate, not Minister, nor private man,
would wonder, that such iniquity should be in the world, yet are they no
sooner in danger, but they tremble.

But the vileness of this sin of mocking shall yet more plainly appear; if
ye mark the cause of it, it is ever lightly for doing well, and refraining
evil: For this cause Cain disdained, and hated his brother Abell, because his
own works were evil, and 1 John 3. 12.
his brothers good, a vile spirit, that cannot abide virtue, but so greedily
thirsts after sin, which is of the Devil; drink not with the drunkard,
and they mock thee; swear not with the swearers, and they mock thee; be not
vain in words, in apparel, in behavior, and they mock thee. Hear the Word,
read of it, talk of it, and by and by, a young Saint, and an old Devil, you
will to Heaven, ere your bones be cold, with a number of such mockes and
divellish taunts: but Judgments are prepared for these, Prove. 19. 29.
sin seen and sorrowed for, has pardon promised, but sin jested at and
played withal, has vengeacne threatened. It is the 2 Samuel 24.
voice of a Christian to say, I have sinned: but it is the voice of a
reprobate, to say, Tush, let them preach, I will sin still: and Prove. 14. 9.
so verifieth the saying of Solomon, The fool makes a mock of sin, he does
not know the grievousnesse thereof, nor Gods judgments against the same.

It is strange that one reports, that in Collecke a town in Germany, Anno.
1505. certain vain persons hopping and dancing in the Churchyard, being
admonished by the minister to cease, and contemning it, ran round about, till
at last they fell all down dead. And note that these vile men shall be in the
It is damnable to scoff at the Saints.
last times, they have been at all times; For sin is as ancient as Satan,
who was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, but now
they abound, like Bees in Hibla, like Serpents in John 8. 44.
Sinai, like lice in Egypt. Cornelius Agrippa derided Moses, calling him a
coozener, and said, that the sea dried not up, but that he marked the tides
and course of the Moon; that he drew no water out of the rock, but marked
the haunts of the wild beasts. The Philosophers called Christ a Magician, that
he did all by Necromancie: The Libertines contemn all the Apostles, they call
Matthew an usurer, Peter an Apostata, Luke a pelting physician, Paul, vas
confractum, a broken vessel, John, adolescentem stolidum, a foolish young man.
The Novatians called Cyprianus, Caprianus; and the Arrians called Athanasius,
Sathanasius: but all this is nothing to the contempt of these dogs. We may say
now, as the Prophet said, The children shall presume against the ancient, and
the vile, against Esaias. 3. 3. 2 Reg. 2.
the honorable. The boys of Bethel scorned Elisha: and the saucy boys of
England scorn at all doctrine. Veni Domine Jesus, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. O beloved, our time is now to be wise; To kiss the Son: if we do
not, Mercy passes, and Judgment Psalm. 2.
comes, and warned men must die in their sins, and their blood be upon them.

Lastly, he notes in these mockers, that they live at randon; They walk after
their lusts: like beasts they fulfill their sensual appetites, they do what
seems good in their own eyes; They make provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it: All their care is for Romans 13. 14.
the flesh, none for the spirit; all for the body, little or none for 2 Cor.
10. 3.
the soul; all for earth, little for heaven; they walk after the flesh; and
they war after the flesh: For so does Paul distinguish Romans 16. 18.
them; these men are the slaves of the flesh, they serve not the Lord, but
their belly; they think themselves the only men of the world, and count their
life the happiest, and promise to themselves liberty, yet are they worse then
gally-slaves, and the vilest prisoners in the world: other prisoners have me^
to be their Iaylers; these have 2 Timothy 2. 26. Mat. 22. 13.
devils: For they are in the snare of the Devil, and are taken of him at his
will. Others have chains of iron, these have chains of darkness: others are
for a time, these for ever; Thou shall not come out thence, Mat. 5. 26.
till thou have paid the utmost farthing: but that will never be; now that 2
Pet. 2. 19.
they are prisoners. Note Peter's reason; Of whomsoever a man is overcome, even
unto the same is he in bondage; but their malice, their envy, their pride
overcommeth them; therefore be they in bondage to them. Pius, etsi serviat,
liber est, a godly man, though he serves, yet is he a free man. I will walk
at liberty (says David) for I seek thy precepts. Malus, etiamsi regnat,
seruus est: a bad man although he rules, yet is he a servant, et tot
dominorum, quot vitiorum, and that of so many masters, as he has vices.
Hereupo^ says our Savior, John 8. 34, 35.
Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin; and the servant abides
not in the house for ever. His leachery, envy, malice, covetousness The
Understanding and Will, the subjects of Wisdom.
mastereth him: Be not (therefore) overcome of evil: but overcome evil with
goodness: Vincimur, non vincimus: we are not overcome, we not overcome; Let
not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof: And again, Romans 6. 12. 21. Romans 12. 14.
Let not sin have dominion over you. In these men all the members of their
body are defiled, they be arma injustiviae, weapons of unrighteousness, and
all the powers of their soul are corrupted; peccati enim seeds est anima, the
soul is the seat of sin, the two powers of the soul are Understanding and
Will; either we know not that which is good, or we cannot perform it, for
the weakness of our understanding. The natural wise man, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
(whose knowledge is not cleared by Gods Spirit) perceives not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. And further the Apostle says,
that the wisdom of the Flesh is death: and the reason he renders after in
the next verse, saying, Because Romans ^. 6, 7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto
the Law of God, neither can be. Naturally our cogitations are darkened, and we
strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in Ephesians. 4. 18.
us. Thus we either know not that which is good, or we do it not, by reason
of the weakness of our understanding: Or otherwise we know Gods
Commandments and do them not, ob voluntatis defectum, because our wills are
defective; our wills are readily carried unto lusts, to fulfill them, not to the
commandments of God, to obey them, Video meliora, proboque, I see better Ovid.
things, ct I allow them, quoth Medea. We fulfill the lusts of the flesh and of
the mind, serving lusts and diverse pleasures. Understanding Ephesians. 2. Tit. 33.
and Will are the two subjects of true Wisdom, in the one Knowledge, in the
other, Affection cleaves and sticks, and both are to be helped by Grace, the
Understanding without the Will, is weak and profits not, and the Will
without it, is blind: To know God, and not to love him, is very little; and
who can love him, except he know him? Knowledge and Understanding is the gate,
by which things at pleasure enter, but we must not stand in the gate, we must
go further; for God respects not how much a man understands, but how much
he loves; and affectus subiugat, and how much he subdueth his affections. The
Understanding is to be enlightened, the Will to be moved, the Understanding to
be instructed, the Will to be defended; the Understanding to be lightened by
Faith, and the Will to be inflamed with love, to trample, and tread all lust
under the feet. He that can overcome his lusts, as Samson the Philistines,
with the jaw bone of an Ass; as David did Goliath, Judge. 13. 1 Samuel 18.
with a sling: he that can overcome this tower of Babylon, pull down these
walls of Jericho, he shall see the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 27.
in the land of the Living. We talk of Christianity, but it is true, in the
Land of the living: we talk of Christianity, but it is true Mortification a
sign of Justification.
Christianity, true manhood, to master thy lusts: For they that are Christ's,
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. This is Christianity
indeed; this is to profess to know God, both in Gad. 5. 24. Tit. 1. 15. 2 Timothy
3. Mar. 10. John 8. Judge. 3. Judge 15.
words and in works; this is both to have a show of godliness and the power
of godliness; this is to have both leaves and fruit; this is to be a true child
of Abraham. We read of the strength of Shamgar, who slew six hundred men with
an Ox goad; of Samson, who slew a whole Army of the Philistines with a jaw
bone; of David, who smote down a Giant with a pibble stone; of Hercules, 1 Samuel
17.
who overcame a Lion and a Bear, and threw down the birds of Stinphalida, and
put down an Amazon, a mighty warrior, and cut off the head of Hydra; but as
Lactantius said, Lib. 1. cap. 9. these are nothing: he is a stronger man, who
overcommeth his wrath, than he that overcommeth a Lion; he that treads under
his desires, than he that casts down Birds and ravenous fowls; he that
suppresseth his lust, than he that suppresseth the Amazons. Hercules for all
his strength, was a slave to Omphale, and sat spinning in a woman's attire at
her feet, with a Rock and a Distaffe. He that is slow to anger, is better
than a mighty man: and he that rules his own mind, is better than he that
wins a Prove. 16. 32.
City. We are desirous to know the state of our Salvation, our Election, and
Glorification: Let us then begin where God begins, at the renouncing of
our lusts; For the grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, teaches us
to deny ungodliness, and Tit. 2. 12.
worldly lusts. None can look for the blessed hope, but they that have denied
ungodliness and worldly lusts. None can say, There is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, but such as can say, I have fought a good fight, except they
have striven against 2 Timothy 4. 7.
their lusts. Election is a thing revealed by steps. As therefore it is
madness to a man, that climbeth a ladder, to labor to set his foot at the
first step, on the highest step of the Ladder, but to begin at the lowest,
and so go to the highest: Paul makes these steps, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Glorification; Romans 8.
so that if I would come to Glorification the highest step, and is in Heaven
with God, then must I begin at the lowest step.

But to prosecute this worthy point farther: If I be called of God, then am I
justified; if justified, then am I sanctified; if sanctified now, then shall I
be glorified hereafter. Paul says, There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. Yea, but who Romans 8.
are those? Which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. So then, if
I would know whether I be in Christ Jesus, or no, I must look how I walk, how
I tame the flesh, and the lusts of it. If I find that God in mercy has
wrought in me a change, a hatred of sin, a love of virtue, a zeal to his
Gospel, a care of his Glory, a quenching of my lusts and concupiscence; then
is the conclusion inferred, I am in Christ Jesus, I am elected. Thus we If no
sanctification, no assurance of glorification.
make our election sure to our selves, as the Apostle counsels us, Make your
election and calling sure by good works: it is known to God before the
foundations of the World were laid: but it is known to us, by the effect of
it: so that still our rule holds, Romans 8. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
If we will know, whether we be elected to live in Heaven with God, we must
ever look how we lead our lives in earth with men. We must give all
diligence, and join virtue (godly manners) with our Faith; and with Virtue,
Knowledge; and with Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Temperance; and with Temperance, Patience; and with Patience, Godliness; with
Godliness, Brotherly kindness; and with Brotherly kindness, Love. For if
these things be among us, and abound, they will make that we shall not be
idle, nor unfruitful in the knewledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. If these
things be, then are we happy, if God has changed us from careless, to
careful men and women, from drinking, riot, whoredom, profaneness, to
holiness of life: then are we Gods, then Heaven is ours. Now live like a
Christian among men, and ever live like a Saint among the Angels of Heaven. But
now live in sin, in lusts and pleasures, follow the flesh, and then rot in
the reward of it, go to the Devil and his angels; the end of these thing is
death. I pray you Romans 6.
therefore, as you love your life with God another day, and assurance of it to
your souls in this world, Give your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to God, and fashion not your selves according Romans 12. 1, 2.
to this World: but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind: and
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whosoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to Phil. 4. 8.
love, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue, or if
there be any praise, think on these things. This desire is the fruit of our
life, and there is not in the world a better portion. This we have chosen, and
in this we will dwell, until the fullness of time, that we shall say in our
course, Nunc dimittis, Lord: now let thy servant depart in peace. These shall
assure us, that we are the Lords, cared Luke 2.
for here, and elected elsewhere to live with him for ever.

THE THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XIX. These are makers of Sects, natural men, having not the Spirit.
Sectaries cause division in the Church.



AS before in the former verse, he called them Mockers, walk^ng after their
own ungodly lusts: so here he calls them Sectaries; not keeping the unity of
the Spirit, in the bond of peace, not remembering that there is Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
but one body, one Spirit, one faith, one God and Father over all, which is
above all, and in us all. But these Sectaries set Altar against Altar, and cut
in sunder Christ's seamelesse coat; they divide Christ: Such were the
Corinthians; one said I am Paul's, another I am Apollos, a third, I am Cephas, a
fourth, I am Christ's. Is Christ divided? This dividing of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
is a sign, that men are carnal, unregenerate; so reasons the Apostle, Ye
are carnal, for whereas there is among you envying and 1 Cor. 3. 3, 5.
strife, and divisions; are ye not carnal and walk as men? Who is Paul? And
who is Apollos? but ministers by whom ye believed? There was a rough Altar in
Jerusalem, to note the imperfection of the law, and there was but one Altar, to
note the unity of the Church. Well Exodus 27.
said Jerome; Meum propositum est, antiquos legere, singula probare, tenere
Iorome.
quae bona sunt, and a fide Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere: My purpose is,
to read the ancient Fathers, to prove, and try every thing, and Sectaries seek
novelties, and admire them.
to hold that which is good, and not to depart from the faith of the Catholic
Church; For there is but one dove, one spouse, one body of Christ. Of this
sin the Apostle gives the Church warning, saying; Let us consider one
another, and provoke unto love, Hebr. 10. 24, 25.
and unto good Works, not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our
selves, as is the manner of some. It is the manner of some, to turn with the
spiders breath, the sweet juice of flowers into poison; to seek knots in
bulrushes: to stumble at every straw, that stops the course of their eager
spirit; to break the bonds of peace; to forsake this fellowship, that we
should have among ourselves; and to single and sever themselves by themselves;
they busy their brains about Pythagoras numbers, and Plato's Idea, and
Aristotle's commonwealth; they see not at Damascus a strange 2 Reg. 16. 10, 11
Altar with Ahaz, but they strait-way get the pattern, and Vrias the Priest
must make them the like at home. But what says Paul, concerning these
Sectaries, I beseech you brethren (says he) mark them diligently, which cause
division and offenses, contrary to the Romans 16, 17, 18.
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with fair speeches and
flattering deceive the heart of the simple.

The Prophet David says, Jerusalem (a figure of the Church, is built as a
City, that is at unity in it self; and when the Holy Ghost Psalm. 122. 3. Act.
2. 1. Act. 4. 32. Judge. 20. 1.
came down in visible signs upon the Apo^stles, They were all with one accord
in one place; and it is said, that the whole multitude of them that believed in
the first times, had but one heart, and one Soul. It is said of Israel, that
they came together, as it had been one man, with the same mind and intent, not
with as many opinions, as persons. The Jews had but one kind of worship
prescribed, and 2 Chro. 30. 12.
that in one only Temple. And it is said of Judah, that the hand of the Lord was
in Judah, so that he gave them one heart, to do the commandment of the King and
of the rulers, according to the Word of the Lord: So if we will become a
spiritual building unto God, if we will receive the promise of the Holy
Ghost, if we will worship God in Spirit and truth, if we will have the hand of
the Lord upon us; we must be at unity and concord with our selves; we must
abide with one accord and one mind in an house; we must have one heart to do
the commandment of the King, and of the rulers; we must not leave the Temple,
to follow every opinion, but we must be no makers of Sects, but must keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. S. Peter prophesied and foretold of
these Sectaries, Ephesians. 4. 3.
which privily should bring in damnable heresies, even denying the 2 Pet. 2. 1,
2, 3.
Lord, that has bought them; and bring upon thmselves swift damnation: and
that many should follow their damnable ways: by whom the way of truth (says
he) shall be evil spoken of, and through covetousness shall they with fained
words make merchandise of you, etc.

There is in a natural body a quicking soul, a radical humor, and a
natural heat; and there is in the spiritual body Division sometime more
dangerous than Idolatry.
of the Church, the Holy Ghost to give life to it. Faith is the radical humor
to continue it, and charity, as the natural heat or vital Spirit carried
throughout the Arteries, or parts of the Church: For All things must be done in
love. Division and discord, 1 Cor. 10. 14.
Sects, and Schisms, are the cause of all evil, of all mischief: this is
that Pandoras box, that Trojane horse from whom all evil and mischief do
proceed. Example among many other may be the Church of Corinth; who beginning
about matters of ceremonies, and policy, proceeded first to division and
separation; some holding of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas, and some of
Christ; and so to false doctrine, denying the Resurrection; 1 Cor. 1. 12.
and therefore by the Canon of the Apostle to be avoided: and Dionysius Bishop
of Alexandria told Novatus, that it was Eusebius. de vit. Constable. 2.
more grievous to break the unity of the Church, then to commit Idolatry; For
this (says he) was punished but with the sword, but the other, with the
opening gulf of the earth, swallowing up the Authors and confederates thereof:
Et non dubitabitur sceleratius esse commissum, quod gravius erat vindicatum.
And there is no doubt, but that was more haynously committed, which was more
sharply and severely punished. If ye have bitter Iam. 3. 14, 16.
envying and strife in your hearts (says the Holy Ghost) rejoice not; for
where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil ways.

There be three Furies in Hell: Heresy. Schism. Apostasy.

Says a learned man, Haeresis errorem fundamentalem in side tuetur: Heresy
defends some fundamental error in the faith: Schisma unitatem Ecclesiae ob
minuta discindit, Schism cutteth in sunder the unity of the Church for small
and trifling things: Apostasia rectam fidem and religionem penitus abdicat,
Apostasy utterly rejects and forsakes the right Faith and Religion of God,
and turns from the holy Commandments given of God: For heresy is occupied
about dogmaticall conclusions concerning Faith and belief; Schism about rites
and ceremonies, and other things of no moment; For whosoever shall obstinately
defend any perverse, corrupt opinion, is an Heretic: whosoever shall divide
himself from the Church, for manners and rites, is a Schismaticke. Again, one
and the selfsame error in diverse men has diverse names; For a false opinion
of God, is in a Jew, Infidelity; in an Ethnike, Paganism; in a Christian,
heresy; in a Turk, Ignorancy. Heresy is only in such as are baptized, even as
Schism is. Finely said Bibliander, that one sin, according to diverse
effects, has diverse names: For to do any thing against the Scriptures (says
he) it is sin, or rebellion rather; to think any thing contrary to the
Scriptures, it is foolishness; to contradict them, is error; to forsake them,
Apostasy. Pride the cause of heresy and schism.
All these are pardonable, if they be not wilful: we must therefore be very
watchful, that Satan possesses not our mind, heart, or life; our mind with
perverse doctrine, our heart with wicked affections, our life with evil
manners. Study therefore day and night to keep the mind in purity, and in the
knowledge Hemming.
of the truth, the heart with pious and holy cogitations, and thy life with
chaste manners, and good examples. Cyprian says, Vnum tentat diabolus, tentat
ut lupus ovem agrege: The Devil tempts Cypri.
and assaieth one thing, as a Woolfe; he tempts the sheep from the flock, as
an hawke; he tempts to sever the flying Dove from her company: as a
sword-player, he proves to divide and cut the member from the body. And so
the Devil tempts to sever and divide a Christian from the Church, than which
nothing is more dangerous. Hilary says, Periculosum est, atque etiam maxim
miserabile, tot nunc fides existere, quot volunt ates, Hill. lib. ad Constan.
tot nobis doctrinas esse, quot mores: and tot causas blasphemiarum pullulare,
quot vitia sunt: dum aut fides scribuntur, ut volumus, aut ita ut volumus
intelliguntur: It is most dangerous and very miserable, that there are so many
faiths, as wills; and so many doctrines, as manners of men; and thereby so many
causes of blasphemy should spring up, as there are private faults and vices in
men: whilst either we set down and pen our faith as we will, or else expound
and understand it, as we lust and like of. And indeed for Sects and Schisms
we abound, Omnes volunt esse Apostolos; Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 1.
All would be Apostles, all Prophets, all Doctors: Pastoris officium oves
vendicant; The sheep do vendicate and challenge the office of the shepherd;
the foot contendeth to be the head; the soldier striveth to be the Captain;
every member would usurp another office, and be in others place: hinc
Schismata; hence spring Schisms and Sects; et radix eorum superbia; and the
Nazianz.
root of them is pride. The Sects in Christ's time among the Mat. 22. 1 Cor. 1.
10. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, the Sects that sprung up in Corinth; those in
Rome: where of ye may read, Romans 16. and the Sects and Schisms that are this
day in our Church, rose either of pride, or of covetousnes.

As a member cut from the body dies; as a branch cut from the vine,
whithereth; as a river cut and divided into many parts, dries up: so if we be
cut and divided from the Church, we perish utterly: For what concord has
Christ with Belial? or what part has the believer with the Infidel? or what
agreement has the Temple of 2 Cor. 6. 15.
God with Idols? Yet this I note withal, that these Sects hinder not the
Church forever; God by them reveals his truth. Si hosts Ecclesiam gladio
persequuntur, exercent ejus patientiam; If enemies August. de civit. Dei, lib.
18. cap. 51.
persecute the Church with the sword, they do exercise her patience: sin male
sentiunt, exercent ejus sapientiam; but if they imagine evil against the
Church, they do exercise her wisdom There must needs be offenses, as well in
doctrine, as in manners: God turns the malice of heretics to the good of his
Church.
oportet esse haereses; there must be heresies, That they which are approved
among you, might be known. For Gods Church, is not only subject to dissension,
as touching orders and manners; but also to heresies, as touching doctrine: Per
haec otium and torporem Ecclesiae discutit Deus; By these things, God shakes
off the idleness Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 11. 19.
or slothful heaviness, or dullness of his Church, and wipeth away the rust
thereof, and makes the Church and people of God careful and diligent to
search the Scriptures; whereby all heresy and schisms might be destroyed, and
so avoided.

But you will say, that these heretics and Sectaries quote Scriptures; and
what shall the simple do? I answer, that we must deal with them, as Christ
did with Satan, return Scripture upon them: For the Devil having taken Christ
into the holy City, and set him on the pinnacle of the Temple, said unto him, If
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down; For it is written, He will give
his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall Mat. 4, 5, 6, 7.
lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against a stone.
But Christ our Savior retorted Scripture upon him again; and said, It is
written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. The Pelagians, to prove Gods
grace is not sufficient without our will, allege these words of the Almighty,
If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land. The
Anabaptists, to overthrow Esaias 1. 19.
Magistracy, quote the words of Paul; Standfast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again, with the yoke Gal. 5. 1.
of bondage. The Donatists, to prove a perfection, quote the saying of the
Apostle, Now the God of peace sanctifio you throughout, and I Gal. 5.
pray God, that your whole Spirit, soul and body may be kept blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Anthropomorphites, to prove God like
a man, quote the saying of the Psalmist, The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers. Psalm. 34. 15.
The Familists, to prove that we are co-deified with God: and God
co-hominified with us, allege the saying of the Apostle; Whosoever is borne of
God, sins not, the seed of God abides in him; neither 1 John 3. 9.
can he sin, for he is borne of God. The Papists, to prove the primacy of the
Pope, allege, God made two lights, the greater Light to Genesis 1. 16.
rule the Day, and the lesser, the Night: meaning, say they, the Pope, and the
Emperor; the Pope, to rule the Clergy, and the Emperor the Laity. To prove
Purgatory, they quote the 8. Psalm, Thou have put all things under his feet;
all sheep and oxen, yea, Psalm. 8. 8.
and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the
sea: per pisces animas in Purgatorio intelligunt; by fishes, they understand
the souls in Purgatory; as by the birds, the Angels, and by beasts, men. The
Brownists, to prove that no good can be done by a Parliament, quote these words
of the Holy Ghost; Neither by an army Zacha, 4. 6.
or strength, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. To prove that Kings have no
authority in the Church, they allege this text, To bind their Kings in
chains, and their Nobles with linkes of iron. To prove, that we have in our
Church no Word preached, no Sacraments The Papists charging us with Sects, have
more themselves.
rightly ministered, no Minister lawfully called of God, they allege this
Scripture; How shall they preach, except they be sent? To all which we must be
able to say, Rursus scriptum est, as Christ did: we must have judgment: We
must abound in knowledge Psalm. 149. Romans 10. 15. Mat. 4. 7. Phil. 1. 9. Hebr.
13. 9. 1 Cor. 14. 20.
and in judgment; The heart must be established with grace; we must not be
children in understanding; as concerning maliciousness, we must be children,
but in understanding, we must be adulti, of ripe age. But alas, our English
people want judgment, therefore all Sects bud in our age.

The Papists charge us with Sects, and variety of opinions; that we have
Brownists, Barrowists, Separatists; that some will wear Cap and Surplesse,
some will not; they derive twenty Sects from Luther, as Anabaptists,
Adiaphorists, Sacramentaries, Zwinglians, Calvinists, etc. But we may retort it
upon them: For they swarm in Staphilus.
Sects, and multitude of opinions; as Nominals, Reals, Augustins, Dominicans,
Franciscans, Benedictins; as Th^mists against Scotists, and Canonists against
Schoolmen, and one against another, and God against them all. I might speak
of Pope against Pope; as Stephanus against Formosus; one digging up the grave
of another, cutting off of their fingers, thrusting them into a sack, and
throwing them into Tyber: Council against Council, as that of Arimine against
the Council of Nice; and the two Nicene Councels under Irene, against that of
Frankford; the whole University of Paris against John 22. Denying the
immortality of the soul; an opinion condemned there with the blast of
trumpets. I might name Sir Thomas Moore, and Fisher of Rochester, striving
about Purgatory, the one to prove no water in it, alleging the place of
Zachary; I have loosed the prisoners out of the pit where is no water: the
other, Zach. 9. 11.
to prove both fire and water in it, allege the saying of the Psalm, We went
through fire, and water, but thou broughtest us out, into a wealthy Psalm. 66. 12.
place. I might name Howlet lately condemning all our English Papists for
coming to the Church; of which mind is Dowanus, a late Papist: I pass over
the stirs between Cardinal Caietane, and Cardinal Turrecremata: so that if
we differ in the shell, they in the kernel; if we in the bone, they in the
marrow; if we in ceremonies, they in matters of substance; if our contentions
be motes, theirs be beams; if ours mole-hils, theirs be mountains. Turpe
est doctori, cum culpa red arguit ipsum: it is a shame to rebuke, being guilty
of the same fault. They name us Sectaries, for leaving Rome, commended so by
the Apostle: Their faith was published thorowout the world: But we have not
left old Rome, but Romans 1. 8.
this new Rome, the mother of whoredoms, as the Spirit of God calls her; the
den of thieves, as the Prophet speaks: Non Apoc. 18. 2, 3. Esaias 1. 21.
a civitate, sed a peste: we are departed not from the City, but from the
plague in the City; not from Rome, but from the heresy of Rome; Daemonum
paschua, quoth Bernard. Satan's chief enemis to overthrow the Church, division
and dissentiori.


But to leave this: Let not us be of the number of these wicked ones, which are
makers of Sects: For a Christian must be careful to keep three things: His
heart, His mind, and conversation.

His heart from infidelity, His mind from false opinions, and his conversation
from Schism and scandal.

By Sects and divisions, the Communion of Saints, the society of Christians,
the fellowship and unity that we should have among our selves, is quite
overthrown. When God would confound their proud attempt in building Babel, He
divided their language, Genesis 11. 8.
and so scattered them abroad into all places of the earth. So the Devil
knowing unity to be the overthrow of his Kingdom, sows the tares of Sects,
of Schisms, and Heresies amongst us; that so he may scatter the workmen, that
should pull down his kingdom, and set up the kingdom of Christ. When King
Cyrus would pass over to conquer Scythia (as says Herodotus) coming to a
great and broad River which hindered his journey; his policy was this, to cut
it, and divide it in many arms and sluices, and so made it passable for all his
Army. This policy is most ready and common with the Devil also, who bringing
his power of darkness, to invade us, and overrunne us, and finding his
passage stopped by the flowing streams of Love and concord, has put in
execution his wonted mean and practice, to separate us, and divide us into
many parts and factions: For as S. August. says, Co^cordes nos scit, and quod
sic possidere non potest, he knows August. ser. 16. de util. Iei^nij.
that being at concord, and unity together, he cannot possess us: he cannot now
divide one true God among us; he can no more enforce false gods upon us. Well,
he has yet another way, sentit vitam nostram esse charitatem, mortem
dissentionem; he sees that love and charity is our life, and discord and
diffention our death and destruction; and therefore lites immisit inter
Christian^s; he has sent strife and debate among Christians; and because he
cannot frame us to many gods, he labors to multiply and distract our
opinions, and sows tares of Sects and errors in the Lords field. Solomon
inhibiteth us to meddle with these men; Prove. 24. ^1.
Keep no company with the seditious. Sedition is moved either for matters
Ecclesiastical or Temporal.

When for matters Ecclesiastical, it is called Schism; which signifies a
rent, a division, or a cutting asunder, and thereupon comes the word
Schismatics or Sectaries, dividers, hewers, cutters asunder; For they divide
the body of Christ, break the unity of the Church, which is an heinous sin.
Hemingius says, Qui violat Ecclesiastic ampolitiam, multis modis peccat, he
that violateth Ecclesiastical policy, offends many ways: yet some like
Natural men n either relish grace, nor discern spiritual things.
Diotrephes, because they cannot have the chief place in the Church, Ideirco
illam scindunt, vel ab eo deficiunt, either they will cut the Church in pieces,
or forsake it. These Sects, and Schisms among us, have done much hurt, as they
of Athens said of their dissentions, Auximus Phillippum nostris dissentionibus:
We have augmented, and strengthened Philip by our dissentions: so we the Pope
and his favorites. Remember that it is a man's honor to cease from strife, but
every fool will be meddling. Remember Prove. 20. 3.
that there is but one body and one spirit, one hope of your calling, one
faith, one baptism, one God and Father over all, for his Ephesians. 4. 4.
blood that died for us. Let all these ones make us one, endeavoring to our
dying day to avoid these makers of sects, and to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.

Thirdly, he calls them natural men. No marvel though they jest and mock
at all Religion with Michol; flout and fleere with the adversaries of Jude and
Benjamin; deride and rail with the 2 Samuel 6. Esdr. 4. Esa. 28.
scorners of Jerusalem: for why? they are mere natural men, and such savor
not the things of God, as Christ said to Peter, Come behind me, Satan: thou
savourest not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men: for
their understanding is as the Mat. 16. 23.
Sun under a cloud, not lightened, and their will not rectified; Deest enim
intellectus, voluntatis consiliari^s, for understanding is wanting, which is
the Counselor of the soul. The natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness 1 Cor. 2. 14.
unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned:
at spiritus non natura, sed gratia, the spirit is not of nature, but of grace.
So said Christ of the whole world, O righteous Father, John 17. 25.
the World has not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known,
etc. therefore he prayed for his Apostles, and in them for us all; I pray not,
that thou should take them out of the World, but that thou keep them from
evil. And again, Sanctify them John 17. 15, 17.
with thy truth; by nature we are the children of wrath, by grace we are Gods
adopted Sons. Hereupon says the Apostle, In times past we walked according
to the course of the World, and after the spirit that rules in the Air, and
that now works in the children of disobedience, among whom also we had our
conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, and fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2. 3, 4, 5.
and were by nature the children of Wrath, nor by creation, but by Adams
transgression, and so by birth, as well as others. But God which is rich in
mercy, through the great love wherewith he loved us, when we were dead by
sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace we are saved. There
are but two things in us, either nature or grace, either flesh or spirit. Now
in the state of nature al are accursed, in the state of grace we are blessed;
For by grace we believe, and faith Act. 18. 27. John 1. 12, 13.
makes us the sons of God: for as many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name, which are
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the No true good in us
by nature, till regenerate.
will of man, but of God. Where he distinguishes of two births, the one
natural, and the other spiritual; a birth from men, a birth from God; a
generation by nature, a regeneration by the Spirit, as he does again to
Nicodemus, Except a man be borne of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
the Kingdom of God: and again, Ye Cap. 3. 5, 6. Psalm. 2. 7.
must be borne again, there is no natural Son of God, but the Lord Jesus;
we are all the adopted Sons of God in Christ and by Christ: by his means we
are raised up together, and made to sit together Ephesians. 2. 6. Romans 8. 17.
in Heavenly places: For says the Apostle, If we be children, we are also
heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, etc. we bring
nothing from our mothers womb, but death and damnation; every one must say
with David, I was shapen in wickedness, Psalm. 51. 5.
and in sin has my mother conceived me. Quis dabit mundum de immundo? Who
can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? What Job 14. 4.
can be had from the egg of a Cockatrice, but a Serpent? From a spider but
venom? from the Taxus tree in India, but poison? from the bitter poole
Exanthus, but bitter water? We have not Math. 7.
Lambs from Woolves, no grapes from thorns, nor figs from thistles. Well
said the Schooleman, Quod dona naturalia in Adamo sunt corrupta, supernaturalia
ablata, ille ut radix, nos ut rami; radix est venenata, ergo and rami; Our
natural gifts in Adam were corrupt, our supernatural taken away, he as the
root, we as the boughs; the root is poisoned, therefore the boughs like the
waters of Mara, until Moses put in the sweet wood, until God Exodus 17.
infuse grace; for by grace we are saved, and where sin abounded, there grace
abounded much more, that as sin had reigned unto death, so Ephesians. 2. 8. Romans
5. 20, 21.
might grace also reign by righteousness unto eternal life. The Pelagians
held, that sin came by imitation, not by propagation; but Paul confuteth
them, saying, As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin:
and so death went over all men, forasmuch as Romans 5. 12.
all men have sinned, etc.

These men (quoth Jude) walk as Natural men, that is, in all sin and
vanity: as is said of the Gentiles, That they walked in the vanity of their
mind, having their cogitations darkened, being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their
hearts. So Paul reasoned with the Corinths, Are ye not carnal? For whereas
there is among you, envying, and strife, and divisions, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
are ye not carnal, and walk as men? even so reason we with you: When
malice, envy, rancour, whoredom, covetousness, pride reigns among us, are
we not natural men? For God would cut down these sins as a sickle: If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye through the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13.
ye shall live: Yea many natural men go before us in brideling their lusts
and affections. Aristides being by the unjust Law of Ostracisme in Athens
banished: and being asked, what he would to Athens? answered; Se nihil velle,
quin tantam rerum prosperitatem, ut illis nunquam in mentem veniat Aristides;
he desired nothing, We should strive to exceed natural men.
but so much prosperity to Athens, as that they might never remember Aristides.
The like is said of Phocion condemned to drink hemlocke, the juce whereof
through extreme cold is poison. Being asked what he would unto his Sons, said,
Nothing, sed ne hujus unquam iniuriae velint meminisse; but that they should
never remember this injury. Socrates, by Philosophy brideled whoredom in
himself; and Telamon by it bare the death of his son patiently, saying;
Sciebam me genuisse mortalem; I did know, that I begat a mortal man. I take no
pleasure in these profane examples, save only to ashame us, as Paul did the
Athenians by Aratus, and the Cretians by Epimenides, and the Corinths by
Menander. Let our righteousness exceed theirs, else there is no room for us
in Gods Kingdom; our life must have all virtues in it: such a life led the
Christians, they could be touched with no open crime, or notorious fault, but
that they sung Psalms to Jesus before day, as Plinius secundus writes of them
to the Emperor: our Savior Christ told his disciples, that their justice must
exceed the justice Mat. 5. 20.
of the Scribes and Pharisees; and so must we tell all Christians, that they
must exceed Turks and Pagans, or else they shall never see the goodness of
the Lord in the Land of the living: yet it is reported, that their truth in
their dealings, their religion in swearing, their zeal in serving their false
gods, far exceeds ours: But let us shake off every thing that presses down,
and the sin that hangs on so fast, and strive to exceed them. I must confess
that the best men have their faults, they have their lusts; the best oak has
sap, the best gold has his dross, the best oil his some, and the best tree
his bark; but yet there is a difference between an Oak that has some sap,
and some heart withal, and that which is all sap; betwixt smoking flax, that
never flameth, and Juniper coals which smoke, and yet burn also; betwixt men
that are sick, and men that are dead; betwixt them that have some faults, and
them that yield to all faults: The wicked man mocketh at judgment, and the
mouth of the wicked swalloweth up iniquity. There is difference between eating
and swallowing: Prove. 19. 28.
such a distinction the Apostle makes, Nevertheless though we walk in the
flesh, yet we war not after the flesh; though we 2 Cor. 10. 3.
fall, we do not lie by it, like the Elephant: habitat peccatum, sed non
regnat, sin dwells in us, but it reigns not; bellat, sed non Romans 6. 12.
debellat, it wars, but it winnes not; all are sick in sin, but all are
not dead in sin; all live in the flesh, but sow not to the Ephesians. 2. 1. Gal.
6. 8.
flesh; we all hold out our profession in many infirmities. Who can say, My
heart is clean? There is a difference between blasted trees, Prove. 20.
and barren trees. And yet S. Jude condemns not nature utterly, as though
there were no goodness in it, for many excellent things are done by the light
and instinct of nature, though not availeable to salvation: For as the heat of
the Sun is not ever there, where the light is (as under the North pole) so
the sanctification Natural men were generally illuminated, though not
sanctified.
of the Spirit is not ever where the illumination is. Natural men are
illuminated, but not sanctified by the Spirit. Hence it comes, that they have
found out many arts and sciences, and have spoken rarely, yea above Christians.
Emere and vendere instituit Bacchus: Bacchus taught men to buy and sell; Ceres
to sow Corn, when as before, men were fed with acornes: the Assyrians found
out letters, for before that time, men could neither write nor read: Eurialus
and Hiperbius taught men to build houses, whereas before, they lodged in the
dens and caves of the earth; Socrates called philosophy from heaven, and
placed it in Cities: for before that time men wandered up and down in the
wilderness, after the manner of beasts: Cecrops taught men to build towns;
for before, men lived disjoined and severed one from another; the Egyptians
found out weaving, for before, men went naked; Ericthonius of Athens found out
silver; for before, there was nothing but chopping and changing; Aesculapius
invented physic; for before, men died suddenly of many diseases: yea the very
beasts by nature excel many men: the Elephant seems to understand the mother
tongue, and to have a kind of religion, to adore the Sunne-rising; a kind of
humanity, as to reduce the wanderer; a kind of obedience, as to know the
Prince; the very Lion is gentle to that beast that humbles himself, he is
gentler to women, then men, and prays not on an infant, except in great
extremity of hunger; he kills the Lioness having had copulation with the
Leopard: Sabinus his dog held up the dead corpse of his Master in Tyber; and
Bucephalus ate no meat after the death of Alexander. These things are not
found in all men. Oh brethren, we walk as natural men, as carnal, worldly,
fleshly men, void of Gods Spirit: therefore the Scripture compares good men,
spiritual men, to pearls and precious stones; to signify, tantam esse horum
raritatem, quanta est gemmarum, that there is as great a rarity and scarceness
of them, as of precious stones; and that as common stones exceed in number
precious stones, so natural men exceed spiritual men. Solomon says,
Stultorum numerum Eccles. 1. 4.
esse infinitum, The number of fools to be numberless: and Paul faith, All
seek their own, and not that which appertains to the Lord Jesus; none
understands, from the least of them to the Phil. 3. 11.
greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet
even unto the Priest, all deal falsely, and as the Prophet speaks, Men's
hands are defiled with blood, and their fingers Ier. 6. 12. Esaias 59. 3, 4, 5.
with iniquity, their lips speak lies, and their tongues murmr forth
iniquity: no man calls for Justice, no man contendeth for truth, they trust
in vanity, and speak vain things, they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, they hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web; he that
eats of their eggs, dies, and that which is trodden upon, breaks out into
a Serpent. The Law of God is called Deuteronomy. 5. 33.
the way of our life, and men are willed to walk in all the ways that Love
makes al things easy.
God has commanded them, that they may live; habet haec via duo in sese,
difficultatem and suavitate^, says one, in this way there be two things,
hardness, and sweetness; hardness, by reason of our nature, and sweetness,
by reason of grace: that which is hard by nature, is sweetened by grace:
hereupon Christ says, that his yoke Mat. 11.
is sweet, eo quod jugum est, grave est, in that it is a yoke, it is grievous,
but sweet by reason of grace: for as the bush burned with fire, and was not
consumed with fire, because God was in the bush: so our heavy yoke is made
light, because the Lord is in it, who helps Exodus 30.
us with his grace to bear it: For grace stirs up the love of God in our
hearts, which makes the yoke of his commandments easy: For nothing is
grievous unto love, love swalloweth all difficulties. Why do hunters, fowlers,
fishers take such intolerable pains? It is because they love the sport:
pernoctant venatores in nive, hunters do watch all the night in the snow; such
is their love to their game. What makes the mother to watch many nights, to
give the child suck, with great pain, to take such toil in the washing,
keeping, attending, and in the education of it, but love? Can a mother forget
her child? She cannot. The Esaias 49. 15.
interrogation implies a negation. What mean the beasts and fowls to spare
meat from their own mouths, and to put it into the mouth of their young?
What makes the Pelicane to feed her young birds with her blood, but love? So
the love of God makes the precepts of God seem easy to us: Non est arduum
orare, legere, meditare, jejunare, It is no hard matter for us to pray, to
read, to meditate, to fast, because the Love of God is shed abroad Romans 5. 5.
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. The spies of Canaan
said, that it was nothing to overcome it: and the godly Numb. 13.
say, it is nothing to walk in the ways of God, to do the precepts of God,
to read, to pray, to meditate, to fast is nothing: For says the Apostle, I am
able to do all things through the help of Phil. 4. 13.
Christ which strengthens me. As for a natural man, all good things are
grievous unto him; it is death to him to fast, to pray, to hear, read,
meditate, etc. as they of Israel said, When will the Amos 8. 5.
new month be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat? So say a number of natural men, When shall these prayers cease,
and the Sermon be at an end, that we may go about our business? For indeed
they sit in the Church, as Joseph in the Iayle; they think every minute a
month, till they be gone.

All sins are pleasant to a natural man: to hunt, to hawke, to eat, to
drink, to swear, to whore, to lie, to revenge, to follow his pleasures;
whereof we have two notable examples; the one in Cyprian, who confesses what
he was by nature: the other in Augustine, who tells Alipius how hardly his
natural sins left him, how they cried unto him, Dimittesne nos nunc? What,
will thou leave us now? Et non erimus tecum vltra in aeternum? None boast more
of the Spirit, then they that are led by the spirit of error.
And shall we not be with thee any more for ever? What uncleanness, and what
dishonesty did they put into my mind? Avertat Dominus has sordes ab animo meo,
the Lord turn these filthy thoughts out of my mind (says he;) clamavit,
Vsquequo Domine, usque quo ^rasceris, How long, Lord, how long will thou be
angry? in finem, for ever? Quamdiu cras, cras and cras? How long to morrow, to
morrow? Why not now do thou not put an end unto my turpitude? And being
converted by Gods Spirit, infinite thanks he gave unto God, saying, Dirupisti
vincula mea Domine, Thou have burst my bands in sunder, o Lord, to thee will I
sacrifice a sacrifice of praise, my heart shall praise thee, my tongue shall
bless thee, and all my bones shall say, Who is like unto thee? Praise the
Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me, praise Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3.
his holy name: praise the Lord, o my soul, forget not all his benefits, which
forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thy infirmities, which saves thy
soul from death, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. Sometime
God leaves us to mere nature; sometime he sustaineth us with his grace,
which is as the Sunne-beames: quando adest Sol, omnia illustrat, cum removetur,
omnia sunt tenebrae: when the Sun is present, it lighteneth every thing; but
when it is removed, there is nothing but darkness: So God sometime removes
the beams of his grace, which when he does, there is nothing in us but
darkness; his grace is sufficient for us. Nature is not sufficient for us,
but grace: For that is the fountain from 2 Cor. 12. 9.
whence flow all blessings.

Lastly, he says of these men, that they have not the Spirit; yet none will
boast more of the Spirit then they: so did the Gnostics, so did the
Montanists; as Montanus, who carried his two trulles with him, Prisca and
Maximilla: so did the Manichaeans: so did Mahomet, who teaching a Dove to pick
corn at his ear, called it the Holy Ghost, and being subject to the falling
sickness, called it a trance, wherein he had conference with the Angel
Gabriel; and so did the late Libertines, of whom Jude here seems to prophesy,
that is, Coppinus in Flanders, Quintinus and Claudius, Persenallus and Pocquius
in France, and some few others, who of late have troubled a great part of
Christendom: Quintinus being an hostler, Anthonius Pocquius a Chamberlain: the
other two being utterly unlearned, led four thousand men at the first into
this error; so strong are the delusions of Satan, to them that love not the
truth of God, that they might be saved: So unconstant 2 These. 2. 9.
are the multitude, that whereas they should not be as children wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the Ephesians. 4. 14.
deceit of men, yet are they wavering, and are of as many religions as the
Rainbow is of colors. The Apostles privative precept can take no place with
them; Be not carried away with diverse and strange doctrines, for it is a good
thing, that the heart be stablished Hebr. 13. 9.
shed with grace, and not with meats, etc. These late Libertines Loose
Libertines count all sins lawful.
took away all difference of good, and evil, they gave the bridle-reine loose
to all licentiousness, prophesied of by Saint Peter, They speak high and
swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
and their words are delivered in a strange manner; as the Henry Nicolitans, to
astonish the simple, put two beginnings, God and the world: if any be of their
Sect, they say, that he was made God, and all wickedness they did ascribe to
God, under the name of vocation, or calling, they did cover all impiety, they
justified thieves, murderers, adulterers, and all licentious livers: for say
they, it is their calling, and let every man abide in the same vocation wherein
he is called. Thus do they wrest and pervert Scripture, to their destruction:
they allege further, 1 Cor. 7. 20.
Omnia munda mundis esse, That all things are clean to the Tit. 1. 15.
clean; when as Paul speaks there de adiaphoris, of things indifferent, not
of sins: to these things they further feign and affirm, that Regeneration is
a restitution of that innocence, which was in Adam, and they interpret the
state of innocence to be this, not to be able to discern between white and
black, good and evil: and they say, that they are continually guided and
governed by the Spirit; besides, they reject all Scripture; For the letter
kills, etc. But these men be either fanatici, mad and beside themselves,
which 2 Cor. 3.
move such foolish questions and genealogies, or else they are profane, which
having cast off the yoke of Christ, wax wanton.

But to leave these men (they have not the Spirit.) Note here the Antithesis
between natural and spiritual men: these two are opposite, where by the way,
note how fondly the Papists speak, in calling their Clergy spiritual, and
the people temporal, whereas these two are not opposite, but spiritual, and
carnal or natural: so the Apostle distinguishes them, Natural and
Spiritual; The Natural man perceives not the things of God, but 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the Spiritual discerns all things: and fondly do they call their Priests
spiritual, as though the people were all damned, for so must they be, if they
savor not of Gods Spirit: For the Wisdom of the flesh is death, the Wisdom
of the Spirit, is life and Romans 8. 6, 8, 13.
peace: and again, They that are in the flesh, cannot please God; and again,
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye mortify the deeds of the
body by the Spirit, ye shall live: and again, Whatsoever a man sows; that
shall he reap: he that sows Gal. 6. 7, 8.
to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, and he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Now temporal and eternal
are opposite, The things that are seen, are temporal, but the things which
are not seen, are eternal: But not 2 Cor. 4. 18.
Temporal and Spiritual. But this was the policy of the Papists, to name
themselves spiritual, that they might withdraw themselves from the Magistrate,
as though they pertained to God only, not to Caesar. Secondly, they called
their The regenerate only have the Spirit of God in them.
lands and livings spiritual, to exempt them also from the Magistrate; and yet
Paul calls all these earthly commodities, carnal; as in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing
if we reap 1 Cor. 9. 11.
your carnal things? And again, If the Gentiles be made partakers Romans 15.
27.
of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in
carnal things. And to the end to defeat Caesar, they set the Image of the
Church upon their Coin, not Caesar's Image. Thirdly, to make the more gain,
they took to the punishment of Adultery, Incest, Drunkenness, Usury, Perjury,
Simony, Sorcery, under the color of spiritual things, and so they caught
Testaments, Legacies, Marriages, Dowries. Jerome calls the people, Secular
men; but Temporal, no man calls them, as though their hope reached but unto
this life only, whereas they are to be saved, as well as Churchmen. To whom
wrote Paul, but unto the people? For whom else prayed he? His words are
plain, Brethren, my hearts desire for Israel is, that they might be saved.

Well, They have not the Spirit; not the Spirit of Regeneration and
sanctification, but they have the Spirit of illumination, but Gods children
they have Gods Spirit of regeneration, they are led by Gods Spirit: and the
Spirit of God certifieth Romans 8. 16.
their Spirits, that they are the sons of God; and he that has not the
Spirit of God, is none of Gods: it is the Spirit of God, that works in us all
in all: The bath of regeneration, and the renovation of the Spirit saves us:
We are justified, sanctified, and Tit. 3. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. 22.
washed by the Spirit: All good works are the fruits of the Spirit: until Gods
Spirit has renewed us, we are stables for the Devil: Si durus sit hic sermo,
as the Disciples said, John 6. Luk 11. 21.
blame him that spoke it. O there is No medium betwixt these two; either Gods
Spirit dwells in us, or Satan; Know ye 1 Cor. 6. 16.
not that ye are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you? The
Spirit is the same in the Church, as the soul in the body, it is it that
quickneth us, he leads us into all John 16. 3.
truth; he seals up all graces in our hearts; he applies all the mercies
of God, all the merits of Christ Jesus unto us: he works all graces, and
gives all spiritual gifts unto us. The Apostle making the comparison between
the 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 13. 3. 8. Gal. 5. 2.
flesh and the Spirit, resembles it to a tree that yields all manner of good
fruits, like the apple tree of Persia, or like the Tree of life. Let us then
intertaine Gods Spirit, make much of him, nourish every good motion that is
wrought in us by him, and every spark will be a fire flaming out of us, every
drop will be a river issuing out of us, to eternal life, if we nourish it:
but let us not quench the Spirit, All grace and goodness flows from Gods
Spirit.
nor grieve the Spirit, lest Saint Jude his Prophesy be verified of us, that
we are natural men, fleshly, not having the Spirit: but let us stir up the
gift of God in us, blow at the coal, and put spurs to this horse. 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19.


THE ONE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XX. But ye beloved, edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying
in the holy Ghost. The godly and the wicked every way opposite.



STill he proceeds in the comparison betwixt the godly and ungodly, the
elect and the reprobate, the lambs on the right hand, and the goats on the
left hand of the Lord Jesus, noting that the godly remember the words of the
Lord, they are peaceable, without sects, spiritual, they increase in faith,
they pray in the Holy Ghost, they keep themselves in the love of God, they
look for eternal life: but on the contrary, the wicked remember nothing, they
scoff at Religion, they be scorners, they be unquiet, they be mere natural
men, they decrease in goodness, they pray not, they love not God; they cannot
look for life, but death and destruction: Tribulation and anguish shall be
upon the souls of them. Upon Romans 9. Psalm. 11. 6, 7.
them God will rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall
be their portion to drink. A Lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a
Woolfe in the wilderness shall destroy them: a Ier. 1. 5, 6.
Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every one that goes out, shall be
torn in pieces, because their trespasses are many, and The Church and Saints,
as houses, must be edified or builded daily.
their rebellions are increased.

Sed, but ye beloved, (but) this Conjunction discretive here, is emphaticall;
Sed vos autem dilecti, but you beloved; as if he should have said, You must
not be like the wicked, they be mockers, they walk after their ungodly lusts,
they are makers of sects, fleshly, having not the Spirit: but you must not do
so, but you must turn over another leaf, learn a new lesson. This teaches
all Christians, to live like Christians, not as miscreants; the true Christian
turns away his eyes from vanity, as Job; the miscreant applies his senses to
folly, as Holofernes. The Job. Judith 10.
true Christian sets a watch before his mouth, and keeps the door of his
lips; the miscreant gives liberty to his tongue, to speak evil and rail like
Rabshakeh: the true Christian is always doing good, as Abraham; the miscreant,
always doing 2 Reg. 18.
evil, as Achab: the one loves goodness, the other badnesse; the one sets
Gods judgments before his face, the other puts them from his sight; the one
kills sin in the thought, the other suffers it to reign in the heart; the one
knows, the end of his sin will be tristitia and pudor, confusion and
punishment, but the other thinks of nothing but his present joy and merriment.

Let others therefore live as they list; we must edify our selves and build up
our selves in our most holy Faith; let other serve Mammon, or Bacchus, or
Venus; we must serve none of them, but the Lord Jesus. But of this I have
spoken before in the seventeenth Verse.

But ye beloved, edify your selves. This word (edify) signifies to build;
the metaphor is taken from Carpenters, from builders, who by little and little
rear up their work, until it come to a certain height and perfection: this
metaphor is not improperly applied to the Saints: for building and edification
is proper to houses. Now the Church and Saints of God are as houses, and
therefore may be said to be builded and edified. Saint Peter calls the
Saints, an house, saying, The time is come that judgment must begin at the
house of God. And again, And ye as lively stones are 1 Pet. 4. 17. 1 Pet. 2.
5.
made a spiritual house. So spoke Paul, Now therefore ye are no more
strangers, and forreners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household
Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.
of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone. And again, writing to the
Hebrews, he says, Christ is as the Son over his own Hebr. 3. 6:
house, whose house we are. For in obeying the Son, we are made the house
of God. But most plainly in his Epistle unto the the Saints at Corinth, Ye
are Gods husbandry, and Gods building. 1 Cor. 3. 9.


This teaches us two things, first, that all Christians should be edifiers,
builders, that is, should make themselves a seemly house for God to dwell in.
We read what care David had to build a Temple; but God would not suffer him:
but now every man must build a Temple for God, even his own soul. We read The
Word of God must be the square wherewith we must build.
what cost Solomon bestowed upon the Temple: but now God cares not for such
Temples made of stone, he will have a Temple made of lively stones: For
howsoever Heaven is his seat, and the Earth his foot-stole, yet his most
principal and princely palace of 1 Chro. 17. 1, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
pleasure is man's heart: hereupon says a father, Quam excelsus es, Domine, and
humiles cord sunt domus tuae! O how high and how Sovereign art thou, O Lord!
yet the humble-hearted are the houses wherein thou dwell: For as the Lord
loved the gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, so he loves a
faithful heart, a devout soul, more than all the pavillions of Princes.

All true Christians must be builders; therefore says Paul, Let all be to
edification, 1. Cor. 14. 27. but before they build, they 1 Cor. 14 27.
must know how to build; and the way to come to this knowledge is the
Scripture. No Carpenter will build an house without rule and square, and the
rule and square of Christian building is the Word of God; by it our hearts and
souls are squared, and made fit for Gods house: and therefore Saint Paul
taking his leave of the Church of Ephesus, commends them to God and to the
Act. 20. 32.
Word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give them an
inheritance, with all them that are sanctified. Where withal (says David)
Psalm. 1 19.
shall a young man cleanse his way? Even by ruling himself after thy Word.
Timothy knew the Scriptures from a child, his grandmother 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Lois, and his mother Eunica taught him them. Without the knowledge of the
Scripture, we can no more edify and build, than a Carpenter can build without
tools, or a Mariner sail without his compass, or a bird fly without his
feathers: it is the Word of God that is able to make the man of God perfect: it
is that that will make him become a fit house, and Temple for the Lord: Of this
building Saint Peter speaks thus: Ye are come to the Lord Jesus, as a living
stone, rejected of men, but precious and chosen of God: wherefore you your
selves be built as lively 1 Pet. 2. 4.
stones, a spiritual house. And Saint Paul, Let all things be done to
edification, 1 Cor. 14. 27.
that is, Let this be the end of all thy works, the building of Gods
spiritual Temple; be more careful to build it, than Solomon was for his
Temple. If Salomons workmen were one month in Libanus, about the work of the
Temple, and 1 Reg. 5. 14.
two months at home about their own business; Let us exceed them, let us
employ two months about the Lords building, and but one about our own
business. Let us first seek the Kingdom of God: for as Elias said unto the
widow of Sarepta, Bake me a cake Mat. 6. 33. 1 Reg. 17. 13.
first, and after provide for thee and thine: so says Almighty God to us,
Build me an house first, and after for thee and thine.

And as we must edify and build houses for ourselves, so for our brethren
also: so says the Apostle, Exhort one another, and edify one another, but
especially we must edify our children: a 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.
son in Hebrew is called Ben, that is, a building, because the father should
especially build his son in Religion and Virtue. Parents must edif^e their
children by godly inst^uction.
Nature teaches all men this; the Savage Bear fashioneth her whelps being
deformed, with her tongue: so should all Christians with gentle admonitions,
frame the deformed manners of their children. That commandment which injoyneth
fathers to teach their children, what the Passe-over meant, teaches them Deuteronomy.
6. 10.
this building; and all Parents, if they will have their Children lead a pure
life; if they will have them strong in the Lord, and through the power of his
might; if they will have them to overcome the Devil; if they will have them
true Saints, Sons of Abraham; they must edify them with instruction, and see
that the Word of God dwell plentifully in them in all Wisdom. Papists were
great builders, they built Churches, Religious houses, as Col. 3. 16.
Abbeyes, Nunneries, etc. but they left the principal work undone, they did
not build themselves by the Word of God, in their most holy faith, neither
would they suffer others to build, but their guides and leaders took away from
the people the level and square of the Word, without which men cannot build:
but God be blessed, the Word is restored, we have the level to build by; let
us not be idle, but build up an holy house for God, that he may dwell with
us, and that we may dwell with him hereafter for ever.

Secondly, this teaches us, that it is not enough to begin to build in faith
and good works, but we must go on, go forward, increase in it. Hereupon the
Apostles prayed unto the Lord, Increase our faith: habent enim omnes virtutes
suas conceptiones, nativitates, incunabula, aetatis incrementa: all virtues
have Luke 17. 5.
their conceptions, births, infancies, increasings. Hereupon Paul exhorts the
Jews of Thessalonica, To increase more and more: Our progress in Religion is
compared to building in this Verse, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 24.
and to a race, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Ephesians. 4. 14. Pro. 4. 18. Cant. 6. 9.
To the growth of trees.
To the ages of men.
To the morning light.
To the Moon which waxes.


All which note a progress in Christianity: houses are edified from the
foundation to the walls; from the walls to the roof; in a race, men run on to
the goal; trees grow bigger and bigger; men wax taller and higher; the
morning light, is brighter and brighter until the noone day; the Moon waxes,
so must Christians, we must neither stand still in Religion, nor go backward;
we must not stand still in Religion like the Sun in Gibeon, nor go back
like Ahaz his Dial, but we must go forward; it is not enough to keep one
talent, but we must gain by Mat. 25. 28.
it, like good land that gives not his own seed, but much more: as well was
he punished, that hid his talent, as he that spent his Luke 16.
masters goods riotously: to stand still in Religion, is all one as Good men
grow better daily.
to go backward; Non progredi, est regredi, not to go forward, is to go
backward; but truly the man who hid his talent, is better than we: For we
cannot show that love, and that zeal, that knowledge that has been in us in
times past. The Church of Ephesus lost her first love, but I would that our
Churches were like it: they hated the evil, we hate the good; they examined
the Apoc. 2. 4. Luk 12. 45.
false apostles, we examine none; they suffered persecution, we persecute
others, we smite our fellow servants. Julian the Christian, is become Julian
the Apostata; Simon Peter, is become Simon Magus; Joseph is become Pharao,
Lambs are turned into dogs, and doves, into serpents: We have been idle in
the Lords vineyard Mat. 20.
not one hour, but eleven hours, as the Master and Owner of the vineyard said
unto the men, whom he found standing doing nothing in the market stead, Why
stand ye here idle? So may God say to us, Quare statis otiosi in Ecclesia? Why
stand ye here idle in the Church? We have stood still with the fig tree,
not three years, but threescore years: I fear me God will say to us, as of
the fig tree, Never fruit grow on thee hereafter: so to Mat. 11. 14.
us, Never Faith, never love, never knowledge be in thee hereafter.

It is a principle in Divinity, a Maxim in that art, that good men go
forward, wax better: For such as be planted in the house of Psalm. 92, 13, 14.
the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God, they shall
bring forth more fruit in their age; they shall be fat and well liking: They
are like the Cypres-tree, that brings most fruit when it is an hundred year
old; like the Eagle that renews her age; like the Heart that renews his
strength, by snuffing up a snake into his nosthrils: Every branche (says our
Savior) that bears John 13. 2.
not fruit in me, he takes away, and every one that bears fruit, he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. We must be as the Sun, when
he rises in his might, we must increase, and grow in goodness, and so daily
more and more in Gods favor; we must Judge. 5. 31. Cant. 6. 9.
look forth as the morning, we must be fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun,
terrible as an army with banners; For though our gifts and graces be small at
the first, yet we must grow up and increase more and more; our ditch must
become a flood, and our flood a sea: For as Solomon says, A wiseman will
hear and increase Ecclesiast. 24. 35.
in learning, and a man of understanding will attain to wise counsels; yea,
and further he affirms, Give admonition to the Wise, and he will be the
wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning. Examples Pro.
1. 5.
we have in the Church of Thiatyra, of whom Christ speaks Pro. 9. 9.
thus, I know thy works, thy love and thy service, and thy faith, and thy
patience, and thy works, and that they are more at the last then at the Apoc.
21. 19.
first.

Another principle is, that the evil decease, they are ever learning and never
come unto the knowledge of the truth; like the Almond-tree, 2 Timothy 3. 7.
that is soonest blossomed and soonest blasted: they We are most of us
non-proficients in plenty of means.
go backward, Yea and they proceed from evil to worse. We grow in years,
but do we grow in grace, and knowledge, as S. Peter exhorts, saying, Grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? We draw near
unto our graves, but do we Esa. 1. 4. Ier. 9. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 18.
draw nearer God and heaven? Alas, there be more dunses and non-proficients,
and bankerupts in religion, then in all trades and arts of the world besides:
we creep like snailes, we glide like worms, we go like the messenger of
ill news, slowly: We learn little, we know little, we do little: if in
forty years to come, we learn no more then in forty years past, our graves
will meet with us in the way, and it will be too late to learn, when we are
come into the land of darkness, and place where all things are forgotten.
Will God show a miracle to the dead, or shall the Psalm. 88. 10, 11. 12.
deadrise, and praise God? Shall his loving kindness be declared in the
grave, or his faithfulness in destruction? Shall his wondrous works be
known in the dark, and his righteousness in the land of oblivion? We may say
with the Apostle, that whereas concerning the time we Hebr. 12. 5.
ought to be teachers, we our selves had need to be taught the first
principles of the Word of God, for we are such as have need of milk, not of
strong meat. Alas, we are still children; still at our milk, still in our A.
B. C. still in the Crosse-row of Divinity; for what know we now, that we knew
not ten, twenty, thirty, forty years ago? We are like the women that Paul
speaks of, Always learning, and never coming to the knowledge 2 Timothy 3. 7.
of the truth: like Tantalus, that perished for thirst in the midst of the
waters; and we in the midst of doctrine: as yet we are in the doctrine of
beginnings of Christ; nay, we have not begun yet: for of Faith, Repentance,
Baptism, Imposition of Hebr. 6.
hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment, we can
say nothing.

Here I am to speak to two sorts of men; the one is proud, and say they have
enough, they eede not to learn, as Laodicia said, I am rich and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing: the Apoc. 3. 17.
other is dull and says he cannot learn. The first is confuted by the
Apostle, If any man thinks he knows any thing, he knows 1 Cor. 8. 2. 1
Cor. 13. 9.
nothing yet as he ought to know: We see here in a glass, in a dark
speaking, Letus (...). Let us not presume Romans 12. 3.
to understand above that which is meet for us to understand, but that we
understand according to sobriety. Plura nescio quam scio, I am ignorant of many
more things, than I know. Ignorantiam meam non ignoro, Aug. Origin. Call.
I am not ignorant of my ignorance. Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio, this one
thing I know, that I know nothing as I should know.

The other, the dull man, he belyeth God, he belyeth not man, but God; for
God has said we may learn: If thou call Pro. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
for knowledge, and cryest for understanding, if thou seek her as silver,
and searchest for her as for treasures, then shall thou understand the fear We
must be diligent and constant in seeking Knowledge.
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: for the Lord gives Wisdom, out
of his mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding. And again, the Wise man
says, That all the ways of God are plain to them that will understand;
meaning, that the Word of God is Pro. 8. 9.
easy to all that have a will and a desire unto it: so be thou willing to
understand the Lords Word and Way, and thou shall understand it: there is no
want but Will. Ask (says our Savior) and it shall be given you; seek and
ye shall find; knock and Mat. 7. 7.
it shall be opened unto you: so that if so be we would but take a little
pains, our knowledge would not be at the ebb, as it is. Ephorus and
Theopompus were two Scholars; the one needed a bridle, the other a spur; the
one went on too fast, the other too slow: it is not the bridle, but the spur
that we need. Our faith, I must confess, is a little stronger, our knowledge
a little greater, our lives a little better than in the time of Popery: for
the^ we were blind indeed, not as whelps that see after nine days, not as the
man in the Gospel, that saw men walk like trees; but blind as Beetles,
blind as the men of Sodom, that groped for Lots door: but alas, how weak is
our Faith, how small is our Knowledge, how cold is our Zeal, in respect of
that which we might have had, if we had applied our hearts to Wisdom? What
know we at fourscore years old, that a child knows not at eight years old?
If a child should never grow in height nor Wisdom, it were prodigious; even
so we are children still, nay monsters: But be not (says the Apostle)
children in 2 Cor. 14. 20.
understanding, but as concerning maliciousness be children, but in
understanding be of ripe age. But we have inverted the order: Let us follow
the counsel of the Wise man, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
let not thy hand rest: that is, do good in thy Eccles. 11. 6.
youth, do good in thy age, yea at all times be not weary of sowing, and be
not weary of working, Of well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not: the seed time is nothing, Gal. 6. 9.
the growth is nothing, the harvest is all in all; to do well in youth, is
nothing; to do well in age, is nothing; but to continue till death, to the
last gasp, is piety in deed. If the righteous turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, and do Ezech. 18. 24, 26
according to all the abominations, that the wicked man does, shall he live?
All his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned, but in the
transgresston that he has committed, in his sin that he has sinned; in
them he shall dye: for when a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall even dye for the same, he
shall even dye for his iniquity that he has done. As well may we drown in
the Havens mouth, as in the midst of the boisterous sea; and as well fall
through the peevishness of age, as through the lusts and concupiscences of
youth: but of many it may be said, Caput canum, and cor vanum, a gray head, and
a green wit: Anni multi, and acta stulta; dies vberes, and fructus steriles
facies rugosa^at We must build here against the time to come.
lingua nugosa; many years, but foolish acts; plentiful days, but barren
fruits; a wrinckled face, but a trifling toyish tongue.

The wicked is like the Vintner in the Gospel, who broached his best wine
first, and after, that which is worse; like Nebuchadnezers John 2. 10.
Image, whose head was all of gold, whose shoulders were of silver, whose belly
was all of brass, whose legs were all of iron, and feet of clay; still
worse and worse. O brethren, we build apace, but it is with blood, as the
Prophet said, They build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, but
Sion shall be Mich. 3. 10, 12.
plowed up as a field, and Jerusalem shall be an heap, etc. And Woe unto Hab.
2. 12.
to him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a City with iniquity.
But if we build not in zeal, faith, knowledge, our houses here shall fall or
be desolate; even great and fair without inhabitant; the foundation is not
good: but if we do good, and Esa. 59.
be rich in good works; if we be ready to distribute and communicate, Then
shall we lay up for our selves in store a good foundation against the time to
come. We have no houses in Heaven, we 1 Timothy 6. 19.
cannot say with Paul, We know that if the Earthly house of this Tabernacle 2
Cor. 5. 1.
be destroyed, we have an house, that is to say, a building, not made with
hands, but eternal in Heaven. We have fair houses here, but what have we in
Heaven? Are we built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the head corner Ephesians. 2. 20.
stone? Can a man go a long journey with standing still? Did the Istaelites
go into Canaan? Or the wise men to Bethlem, with never moving? Heaven is a
long journey: we must not stand still, but run wtih patience the race that
is set before us. Heb. 12. 1.


And can we go to heaven with doing nothing? With learning nothing? Believing
nothing? We weave Penelopes web: Ipsa texuit, and retexuit, what she woave in
the day, she did undo in the night: so we learn and unlearne; whatsoever
we learn on the Sunday, we forget in the week day: we may say of our
coming to Church, as Peter said of his fishing, Master, we have Luke 5. 5.
traveled all night, and have taken nothing. So we have come to the Church
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty years, and some more, and have gotten
nothing, have learned nothing, got no Faith, no Zeal, no Knowledge.

But to proceed: As they must edify themselves, increase and go forward: so
the thing that they must increase and go forward in, is Faith, for that is the
foundation of all Christian Virtues; it is Alpha and O mega, and absque ea nemo
potest placere Deo, Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23.
Without it no man can please God, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
Omnia ergo splendida opera Paganorum, and Infidelium, sant splendida peccata,
all the glistering works of Pagans and Infidels, be glistering sins, their
prayers, alms, fastings, the patience of Socrates, the justice of Aristides,
the piety of Epaminondas, Faith the original of all good works.
the constancy of Phocion; they were but bastard-workes, not right works;
they are begotten of Hagar, not of Sara the freewoman; they spring from the
waters of Marah, not of Siloh; from the bitter poole Exanthe, not the sweet
flood of Hispanis; they proceed from fear or vaineglory, not from faith; For
as unto the Tit. 1. 15.
pure all things are pure, so unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is
nothing pure, but their minds and consciences are defiled. It is true in all
works, that Paul said of prayer, How shall they call on him, in whom Romans 10.
14.
they have not believed? Even so, how can they glorify God, or love God, or
serve God, in whom they never believed? Paul making a Catalogue of good men,
begins with Faith, and says:

By faith, Abel offered to God a greater sacrifice than Cain. Heb. 11. 4, 5, 7.
8, 20, 21, 33-34.


By faith, Enoch was taken away that he should not see death, etc.

By Faith, Noah being warned of God, of the things which were not yet seen,
moved with reverence, prepared the Arc, etc.

By Faith, Abraham when he was called, obeyed God, offered Isaac, etc.

By Faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau.

By Faith, Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed the sons of Joseph: and thus
he goes on, and at the last concludes, that by faith, they subdued
Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths
of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of
weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies
of the Aliants, etc.

In every good work three things are to be considered.

Origo, Finis, Vsus, The beginning. The end, and Use.

The original or beginning of every good work is faith: faith is as the
Mother, and the holy Ghost the Father of all good works: Faith begets Love,
and Love blossometh forth in Virtue, and Virtue buddeth forth in good Works:
whereupon Saint Peter infers this exhortation, Join moreover Virtue with
your Faith, and with Virtue, Knowledge, and with Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7, 8.
Temperance, and with Temperance, Patience, and with Patience, Godliness, and
with Godliness, Brotherly-kindnesse, and with Brotherly-kindnesse, Love.

Secondly, the end is the glory of God; Hereupon says the Apostle, Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 1,
3^.


Thirdly, the use is manifold: First, they are unto us signs of our election;
and therefore Saint Peter would have us to make our election and calling sure
by them. Indeed our election is sure in it self, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
for God cannot change; yet we must confirm it in our selves by the fruits of
the Spirit. Secondly, they edify others: Hereupon says our Savior, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see No life of grace without Faith.
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Thirdly, that
they may stop the mouth of the Adversary: For which cause we are willed to have
honest conversation among the Gentiles, that whereas they do backbite us as
evil doers, they may see our good works, and glorify Mat. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
our Father which is in Heaven. Here is the trial of a Christian; that proves
us either sons or bastards; this proves us dead, or alive; by Faith we
live: this is the spirit and soul of the inner man; we have a name to live,
yet are we dead, if we want John 1. 12.
Faith.

There is a double life; of grace, and of nature; Infidels, Unbelievers are
strangers from the life of grace. As a tree lives not without Ephesians. 4. 18.
moisture, nor a bird without air; nor the fish without water, nor a body
without a soul, so neither the soul without faith: For in that we live now
in the flesh, we live by the Faith of the Son of God, who has loved us; and
gave himself for us. Ye see Infidels eating, Gal. 2. 20.
drinking, sporting, playing, yet are they dead; they are alive to the world,
but dead unto God: but the faithful, they are dead (with Christ) unto the
world; but their life is hid with Christ, with God, and when Christ which is
their life, shall appear, then shall they Col. 2, 3, 4.
also appear with him in glory. Pandora carried deadly poison in a painted
box, and Lusimachus the cutter, a leaden sword in a golden sheath; and many
men, a dead soul in a living body: the body is alive, but the soul is dead,
as Paul said of the voluptuous widow; But she that lives in pleasure, is dead
while she lives. To conclude, faith joyneth us to Christ: For Christ dwells
in 1 Timothy 5. 6.
our hearts by Faith; Christ uniteth us to God, 1 John 5. God assures Ephesians.
3. 17.
us of life: For in him we live, and move, and have our being. So that no
faith, no Christ; no Christ, no God; no God, no life: God Act. 17. 28.
so loved the world, that he gave his only be gotten Son, that whosoever
John 3. 16, 18.
believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting: he that
believes in him, shall not be condemned, but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten
Son of God. Knowledge is the fountain of all virtue, and Faith is the sea in
which they all run, and where they jointly end their course.

But it is to be observed, that he calls it not simply Faith, but holy
Faith; yea most holy Faith; he rises to the superlative degree, as David
extolled Bashan above all mountains, saying, The mountain of God, is like the
mountain of Bashan; it is a high mountain, Psalm. 68. 15.
as the mount Bashan. As Solomon extolled his huswife above all women, saying,
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou Pro. 31. 29.
surmountest them all: As Christ commended John Baptist above all Nazarites,
saying, There is no greater Prophet than John among them Luke 7. 28.
that are begotten of women: And the Lord, Moses above all Prophets: So Jude
commends Faith above al virtues. All precious stones Deuteronomy. 34.
are good, yet none like the Topaze; all flowers are fair, yet none Job 28.
like the Lily; most trees bring fruit, but none like the Apple Tree Faith
purifies our hearts, and makes our actions and persons holy.
of Persia; or the Tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and gave
fruit every month. Many virtues are excellent, and further our salvation, yet
none like faith. Justice gives every man his own, temperancy restrains
lusts, fortitude bears Apoc. 22. 2. 1 John 5. 4.
all labor and toil, prudence guides our actions, but faith overcommeth the
world; so do not other virtues: faith is like the three 2 Samuel 23.
worthies of David, who brake through the whole host, and drew water of the Well
of Bethlem. Jonathan and his armor-bearer 1 Samuel 19.
slew twenty men. Shamgar, with an Ox goade, slew six hundred Judge. 3. 31.
Judge. 15.
Philistines; Samson with the jaw bone of an Ass, slew a thousand men: thus
these men brake through an whole host; and faith overcommeth the whole world. In
this faith Paul insulted over heaven and earth, men and Angels, I am persuaded
(says Paul) that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor Romans 8. 38.
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate me from the Love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. And again, he says, I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that, which I have committed unto him
(meaning himself) against that day. It is called Holy, yea most Holy, for all
our works are polluted, and receive their holiness from faith, and faith from
Christ, who is the object of it. As the Sun gives light to all Planets; as
salt seasoneth all meats; so Faith seasoneth all works: for in themselves they
are polluted; For who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am clean from
sin? For as the holy man of god says, He found no steadfastness Pro. 20. 9.
Job 4. 18, 19.
in his servants, and laid folly upon his Angels; how much more in them that
dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is the dust, which shall be
destroyed before the moth? And again, he makes this demand, and says, What
is man, that he should be clean? And he that is borne of a Woman, that he
should be just? We are all as a menstruous cloth, Cap. 15. 14.
as an unclean thing: we all do fade like a leaf, and our iniquities like
the wind, have taken us away: only Faith purifieth our hearts. To come nearer,
fidem sanctissimam vocat, ratione objecti: he Act. 15. 9.
calls it most holy Faith, by reason of the object: Deum enim trinum and unum
respicit, it respects three and one, three in Persons, one in Essence. Moral
virtues, they are occupied about humane objects, and things created; as
liberality about giving of good things; temperance, about meat, drink,
fleshly lusts, leachery, etc. Fortitude in suffering adversity: therefore they
cannot be called most holy virtues.

Again, it is called most holy Faith, in respect of the efficient cause
thereof, that is to say, the Holy Ghost; For the Holy Ghost bestows upon us
all good things, love, joy, peace, long 1 Cor. 12: Gal. 5. 22.
suffering, gentleness, goodness, Faith, meekness, temperance: all these,
and all the rest are the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost. Now because the
Author is holy, his Works, his gifts, and graces be holy, Nil nisi sanctum a,
sancto spiritu prodire potest, If no holiness, no Faith.
Nothing can come from the holy Spirit, but that which is holy. Aug.


Learn here to judge of the works of the elder World, their alms, their
prayer, their love: what love could there be without faith? and what faith
could there be among them without the doctrine of God? Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. But did they fast often? We seldom
or never. Did they Romans 10. 14.
give alms, and do we live unto our selves? are our right hands dried up with
Ieroboams? Did they pray in the night, we scarce in the day? Did they love one
another, agree together? and do we sue and sting one another, like the
Serpents of Sinai? O brethren, they shall rise in judgment against us, as
Christ said of the Ninivites, Except our righteousness, our prayers, our love
exceed theirs, we shall not enter into Heaven: our faith is Mat. 11.
not most holy, no, nor holy, nay, no faith at all.

And by the way note that he calls faith holy, not unholy, unjust, unchaste
drunken faith, such as the world braggeth of in these days; the dead faith
that Saint James inveigheth against so earnestly. All lewd men boast of faith:
but I will say to them as James said, O stende mihi fidem per opera: Show me
thy faith by thy works; show me it by thy zeal, thy piety, thy truth, thy
chastity, thy mercy; with our faith let us join virtue. The Israelites cried
Templum Domini, templum Domini, the Temple of 2 Pet. 1. 5.
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; the Pharisees cried, The Baptism of John,
the Baptism of John; the Jews cried, We have Abraham to our Father; the
Scribes cried, We have Moses to our Doctor; the Ephesians cried, Great is Diana
of the Ephesians: but Jeremy bade the Israelites amend their ways and their
works: Ier. 7. 4.
John bade the Pharisees bring forth fruits of Repentance: Christ bade the
Jews do the Works of Abraham: He told the Scribes, Luke 3. 8. John. 8. John.
5. Ephesians. 4. 20.
that Moses would condemn them; and Paul told the Ephesians, that they had not
so learned Christ; and so say we to these men that boast of faith: I will
reason with them as Jeremy did with the people, Will ye steal, murder, and
commit adultery, and swear falsely, Ier. 7. 9, 10.
and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods, whom ye know not,
and come and stand before me in this house, whereupon my Name is called? even
so, will we swear, lie, rail, slander, and say that we believe? Was Gods
house a den for thieves? is faith become a cloak for thieves, whoremongers,
liars, swearers, usurers, Idolaters, blasphemers, drunkards, pot-companions,
etc? I say of this faith, as Saint James said of Wisdom, This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and divelish: so Iam. 3. 5.
this faith is not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and divelish: For
faith shows it self in good works, and can no more be separated from it,
than light can be from the Sun, or heat from the fire, or moisture from
water.

Lastly, note that he says, that this faith is edified and increased If we
had never such measure of faith, yet we must hear daily.
by hearing (there understood, not expressed of Saint Jude) for the Word is the
foundation. Paul in naming the Christian armor, coupleth Faith and the Word
together, Above all, take the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench the fiery
darts of the wicked; and take the helmet of Salvation, and the swrd of the
Ephesians. 2. 20. Ephesians. 6. 17, 18. Romans 10. 14.
Spirit, which is the Word of God. Fides ex auditu, Faith, comes by hearing:
As possible for a man to see without eyes, or a tree to grow without moisture,
or a bird to live without meat, or a house to stand without a foundation, as
Faith to be without the Word. Esaias cries out, Hear and your souls shall
live. Ita Esaias. 55. 3. Ephesians. 4. 20. 1 Cor. 1. 21.
didicistis Christum? Have ye so learned Christ, says the Apostle? It
pleases God through the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

We think that we are wise enough, that the Preacher can tell us nothing
that we know not, and this is the cause of all contempt: but if thy knowledge
were as great as Salomons, to 1 Reg. 4. 29, 30, 32, 33.
whom God gave Wisdom and Understanding exceeding much, and a large heart,
even as the sand which is by the sea shore: and Salomons Wisdom excelled the
Wisdom of all the children of the East, and all the Wisdom of Egypt: and
Solomon spoke three thousand Proverbs: and his Songs were one thousand and
five, and he spoke of trees from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssope that
grows out of the wall: he spoke also of Beasts and of Fowls, and of
creeping things, and of Fishes: I say, were thy wisdom as much as Salomons,
yet must it be helped with doctrine; we must still be remembered of that which
we know, and still know more: Yea the Preacher, though he be learned, teaches
himself as well as thee, and his own faith as well thine, and speaks to his
own heart as well as to others: such a secret power has God put into his
Word, and such is his Ordinance: He has given some to be Apostles, and some
Ephesians. 4. 11.
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. By these are
the Saints gathered, thus is Christ's body edified, thus are the godly repaired,
thus we meet in unity of faith. Paul bidding the Jailer believe, preached unto
him the Word. Never Act. 16. 31.
think to go to Heaven without faith, or to have faith without preaching (I
speak of ordinary faith.) For God can work miraculously as in children and
deaf men, as in Medaelde, mentioned by Danaeus, and in captives; A man may
live without meat, but all the world cannot assure thee of it; thou may have
faith by miracle, but neither men nor Angels can assure thee of it; where
means are, we must use means. Will thou fast forty days, because Moses and
Elias did so? or go through the red Sea, because the Israelites did so? Or go
into an hot Exodus 32. Exodus 14.
oven, because the three children did so? Thou may perhaps starve then, or
be drowned, or burned. Where God gives means, he gives no miracles. So
long as Israel was in the desert, God gave Manna, but when they came into
Canaan, where God works not by miracle when he affords means.
they might plowe and sow, Manna ceased: the Star appeared to the Wisemen in
the way, but in Jerusalem it vanished, for there they might inquire. Let us
therefore use the means; and seeing the means of the edifying and increasing
of our most holy Exodus 16. Josh. 5.
faith, is doctrine, let us attend unto it, even so long as God shall give us a
body as an house, hands as keepers, legs as strong men, Eccles. 12.
eyes as windows, ears as doors, and an heart as a Treasure-house.

THE TWO AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XX. Praying in the Holy Ghost. Faith and Prayer inseparable.



FRom faith he comes to prayer: for increase of faith, and all graces must
be had by prayer: where, by the way note, that the original of faith is
immediately from God, it is his work; so says our Savior, This John 6. 25.
is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent: And for this
cause the Apostle calls Christ Jesus, The Author and finisher of our Luke 17.
5.
faith. But the increase of faith is by prayer, and prayer mediate from God by
faith, is the gift of God, and prayer is ever a companion, nay the daughter of
faith; faith the mother, and it the daughter; for how can we pray without
faith? How shall they call upon him, in Romans 10. 14.
whom they have not believed?

A question grew between Musculus, Bullinger, and other Churches of
Mensbelgarde, Number fides sit a Deo petenda? Whether faith is to be begged of
God? Calvin being to decide the question, said, that Musculus and Bullinger
spoke duriuscule, somewhat hard: Nam nulla oration, nisi fide fundata, probatur:
God allows of no prayer, except it be founded on faith; For whatsoever is
not of Romans 14. 29.
faith, is sin.

Faith is the mother of prayer; and the mother goes before the daughter.
Augustine proves, that Cornelius believed, because his Prayer the conduit
whereby all good things are conveyed to us.
prayers were heard. Infideli dat Deus fidem, at non per orationem, sed
immediate, God gives the Infidel faith, not by prayer, but immediately.

A strong faith begets many prayers; a weak faith, weak, and few prayers.
No faith, no prayer. Paul coupleth them together, Act. 10. Aug. Ephesians. 6. 16,
18.
as an armor of proof; Above all take the shield of Faith: and by and by in
the next subsequent verse save one, and pray always with all manner of
supplication in the Spirit, etc. Faith begets prayer, and prayer increases
faith: For as fire kindles the wood, and the same wood increases the flame;
so faith begets prayer. Rejoice evermore (says the Apostle) and pray
continually: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17.
Faith works joy: for being justified by faith, we have peace with God; and
yet the same joy is augmented by prayer. Romans 5. 1.


But now more generally to handle this doctrine, because increase of faith and
all graces must be had by prayer: for by that hand God reaches them, and in
that conduit he conveigheth them unto us: therefore Saint Jude says, Orate
per Spiritum. Ask, seek, knock, and promises us that we shall have, find,
and Mat. 7. 7.
that it shall be opened unto us. We have not, because we ask not. Iam. 4.
Solomon names prayer, as the Indian stone that remedieth all diseases; For
mark his prayer, which he powered forth to God in the Temple, When a man shall
trespass against his neighbor, and he lay upon him an oath to cause him to
swear, and the swearer shall come before 1 Reg. 8. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38.
thy Altar in this house; then hear thou in Heaven, and do, and judge thy
servants, that thou condemn the wicked, to bring his way upon his head, and
justify the righteous, and give him according to his righteousness. When thy
people Israel shall be overthrown before the enemy, because they have sinned
against thee, and turn again unto thee, confess thy name, and pray, and make
supplication unto thee in this House; Then hear thou in Heaven, and be
merciful unto the sin of thy people Israel. And when Heaven shall be shut,
and there shall be no rain, because they have sinned against thee, and shall
pray, etc. Then hear thou in Heaven, and pardon the sin of thy servants.
When there shall be famine in the land, when there shall be pestilence, when
there shall be blasting, mildew, grasshopper, or caterpiller: when their enemy
shall besiege them in the Cities of their land, or any plague, or any
sickness, and they make their prayers before thee, hear them, and be
merciful unto them, etc. Thus prayer is a remedy against all mischief.
Physicians for diverse diseases, have diverse remedies; but a Christian for all
and every disease, has but one only remedy, and that is prayer: For Whosoever
calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: fides est janua ad
misericordiam, Joel. 2. 32.
and oration est clavis quae januam reserat. Faith is the gate to mercy, and
Prayer is the key to unlocke this gate. Hereupon says Saint James, Is any man
among you sick? Let him pray, and the prayer Jam. 5. 13, 15.
of faith shall save the sick. Prayer is profitable, powerful, and pleasant:
it is every way profitable, first, to obtain every good thing: Verily, verily
(says Christ) I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask Prayer prevalent with not
only the creature, but Creator.
the Father in my name, he will give it you. Secondly, to prevent judgments,
present or future: Note for this purpose the prayer of Solomon before
mentioned. Thirdly, to confirm and strengthen us in all spiritual graces: By
Christ's prayer was Peter's faith kept John. 16. 23. 1 Reg. 8. 33. Luke 22. 32.
Col. 1. 9. Act. 8. 22.
from sailing: and the Apostle prayed for the Colossians, That they might be
filled with knowledge, etc. increasing therein and strengthened. Fourthly, to
obtain remission of sins: For which cause Saint Peter said to Simon Magus,
Pray God, that if it be possible, the thought of thy heart may be forgiven
thee. Whereby he gives us to understand, that if remission of sins may be
obtained by any means, prayer is the means; And this also Christ has taught
us, when he willed us to pray thus, Forgive us our trespasses, as we Mat. 6.
forgive them that trespass against us. Fifthly, prayer sanctifies all Gods
creatures unto us; so says the Apostle, The creature is sanctified by the Word
of God and prayer. To conclude, prayer is profitable 1 Timothy 4. 5.
unto all things; it is like unto Jacobs ladder; by which Gods blessings
descended down upon us; or as Catena aurea, a golden Isidor. de f^uctu Orandi.
chain, by which we ascend up to God. And as prayer is profitable, so is it
powerful; For it prevails over all creatures, whether reasonable or
unreasonable, and of reasonable, both visible, as man, and invisible, as
Angels, whether evil or good; yea, it prevails with the Creator himself;
Daniel by prayer stopped the Dan. 6. 12.
mouths of Lions, among whom he was cast; by David's prayer 2 Samuel 15. 31.
Genesis 32.
was Achitophels wisdom turned into foolishnes; by Jacobs prayer was Esaus
wrath alayed; by Mardochaeus and Esters prayer was Hamans malice, like Saul's
sword, turned into his own bowels; by Est. 4. 6. cap. 7. 10. 2 Reg. 19. 15.
Ezechias prayer, was the whole host of Senacherib overthrown: one faithful
man's prayer, is more forcible than the power of an whole army. Witness the
example of Moses, who lift up his hands, Exodus 17. 11.
while Israel fought against Amalech, and prevailed. When Marcus Aurelius had
almost lost his army in Germany for want of water, the Christians in his camp
prayed, and God sent rain in great Eusib.
abundance. And Theodoret affirms, that Theodosius in a battle Theodo.
that he fought, being in danger to be overthrown, and his men ready to fly,
prays, and God gives him the victory. For as Origin says, One man
prevails more in prayer, then innumerable sinners do with fighting. Orig.


By prayer the Devils are cast out: for there is a kind of Devils that go not
out but by fasting and prayer. Mat. 17. 11.


If Christ would have prayed, he might have had more then Mat. 26. 53.
twelve legions of Angels to guard him and defend him. At Elishaes prayer, the
mountains were full of charrets and horses of 2 Reg. 6. 17.
fire round about.

Many admirable and extraordinary things have Gods children in all ages
effected by prayer. By prayer, Abraham obtained favor for Ismael; by prayer,
Moses divided the red sea; by prayer, Joshua made the Sun to stand still in
the midst of heaven; by Prayer pleasant to God and man.
prayer, Anna became fertile; by prayer, Ezechias procured a longer life; by
prayer, Judith destroyed Holofernes; and Ester saves the Jews; by prayer,
Susanna is saved from the unjust Judges; Daniel from the Lions, and Peter from
Herod; by prayer, the Leper is cured, the Publican justified, the Devils
scared, Heaven gates opened, the fetters loosed, and iniquity vanquished; by
prayer, we have access unto the throne of grace; It is a great blessing, that
God in his Word vouchsafes to speak to man, but not comparable to this, that
man should talk with God. Ye see the power of prayer.

Thirdly, prayer is a pleasant thing, to God and man.

To God, and therefore resembled to the incense, Let my prayer come forth as
the incense, and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening Psalm. 141.
sacrifice. For as the sent of incense is pleasant to the nosthrils of man, so
are the prayers of the Saints unto God: for when they Chrysostom.
ascend to heaven, God seems to smell a sweet savor like the incense.

Prayer also is pleasant, and delightful unto man; For if it were a pleasure
to Jacob, for to speak to Rachel, and to Jonathan, with David; what a pleasure
is it for a devour soul to speak unto God? Oration locutio est ad Deum, quando
legis, Deus tibi loquitur: quando oras, cum Deo loqueris: Prayer is a speaking
to God; when Aug.
thou read, God speaks to thee; when thou prayest, thou talkest with God.
The child is never better, then when it is in the fathers or mothers lap: so
we shall never be better, then when by prayer we creep (as it were) into our
Heavenly Fathers bosom.

And thus we see the profit, power, and pleasure of prayer: the experience of
this has made good men to spend their days in prayer. David rose at midnight
to pray; Daniel prayed three Psalm. 119. Dan. 6. Hist. tripart.
times a day: It is reported of Saint James, that his knees were horne-hoofed
with prayer; and Nazianzene writes of his sister Gorgonia, that she was so
given to prayer, that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth, by reason of her
continual kneeling at prayer; and Gregory in his dialogues writes of his Aunt
Trasilla, being dead, that she was found to have her elbowes as hard as
horns, which hardness she got by leaning to a deske, at which she used to
pray: and Saint Jerome writing of Paul the Hermit, affirms, that he was
found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, and lifting up his
eyes; so that the very dead corpse seemed yet to live, and by a kind of
religious gesture to pray still to God. The Jews began the day, and ended it
with Levit. 1.
prayer. It is said of Anthony the Hermit, that having spent the whole night
in prayer, he chid the Sun at the rising of it, saying, O Sol, mimis propere
nobis redijsti; O Sun, thou have returned to us over-soone; I am troubled
with thy light, the greatness of Diverse kinds of prayer, in respect of matter.
thy light hinders me from contemplation, and the light of my God; and of
Bessarion, that he passed twelve days and nights in contemplation; pavimentum
erat lectus, the pavement was his bed, water his drink, barley his bread, and
roots his dainties. If we compare with these men, we shall be found like the
Pigmaei, in respect of the great Giants. We be not men of prayer, we rise in
the morning, as the wild Ass to his prey, and we lie down at night, as dogs
do in their kennell: The Euchites pray too much, we too little, or not at all;
the Papists prayed in the night, but we neither day nor night.

But of prayer in respect of the matter there be diverse kinds: Petition.
Deprecation. Intercession. Expostulation.

Petition, is for good things.

Deprecation, to remove evil things.

Intercession, for others.

Expostulation, against others.

The Apostle Paul devideth prayer into Supplications. Prayers. Intercessions. 1 Timothy 2. 2.
Thankesgiving.

Supplications, are for the removing of evil, whether it be malum culpae, or
Malum poenae; the evil of sin, or the evil of punishment.

Prayers, are for the obtaining of good, for God will give good Mat. 7. 11.
things to them that ask of him.

Intercessions, are in the behalf of others; so Moses made intercession for
the people, saying, Forgive them, or else race me out of Exodus 32.
the book of life, which thou have written. So Christ made intercession for
his crucifiers, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Thankesgivings, are for benefits received. Mat. 27.


And these four, the Apostle refers in another place to two heads. 1.
Requests, 2. Thankesgiving. Phil. 4. 6.


Under request, he comprehends supplication, prayer, and intercession.

But the most usual distinction is grounded on 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. which is,
Petition, and Thankesgiving.

And in all these kinds of prayer, a Christian must be conversant and use them
as occasion serves: and thus ye see the distinct kinds of prayer in respect
of the matter.

There are other distinctions in regard of the manner, the first Mental and
Vocal.

Mental, is an inward lifting up of the heart to God, without any outward
manifestation of the same by word; such as Moses was, when God said unto him,
Why cryest thou to me? yet he spoke Prayer diverse in respect of the manner.
never a word with his tongue, only he sighed and groned.

Vocal is that which is uttered with words, as was the Publicans, Exodus 14. 15.
Luke 18.
when he cried, God be merciful unto me a sinner.

Secondly, A prayer in regard of the manner of it, is Sudden, or Composed.

Sudden, when as upon some occasion the heart is lifted up to God either by
sighing or speaking; such as was Nehemiahs prayer; Nehe. 2. 4.
and these are called the ejaculations of the heart, which (as one says) are
to be used as salt with meat; with every bit of meat we commonly take a
little salt to season it; so when we do any thing, we must lift up our hearts
to God, and season our business by prayer.

Composed prayer, is the pouring forth of some solemn prayer to God, privately
by our selves: and such were the prayers that Daniel used to make three times a
day. Dan. 6. 10.


Thirdly, prayer is either Conceived or Prescribed.

Conceived prayer is that, which he who utters the prayer, inventeth and
conceives of himself; and such are most of the prayers recorded in the
Scripture.

Prescribed is, when a set constant form of prayer is laid down beforehand;
a thing very frequent in the Scriptures: in Numbers God prescribed a set form
of blessing for the Priests continually Numb. 6. 23, 24.
to use: and the 92. Psalm was prescribed, A song for the Sabbath Mat. 6.
day; and Christ himself prescribed an excellent form of prayer; and S. Paul
observes a set form of blessing in the beginning and end of his Epistles.

Fourthly, prayer is either Public or Private.

Public, when a whole Congregation with one joint consent call upon God.

Private is that, which is made by some few together, as Elisha, 2 Reg. 4. 33.
and his servant were alone in a chamber praying for the Shunamites child; or
when a man prays by himself alone, as did Cornelius: and of this kind of
prayer Christ speaks thus, When thou Act. 10. 30.
prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut the door, and pray to thy Father in
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

All these prayers must we send up to God in the mediation of Christ: Nam quid
dulcius quam Genitorem in nomine Vnigeniti invocare? Aug.
What is sweeter, then to call upon the Father in the name of his only
begotten Son? And they must be powered out with fear and reverence: Our
hearts must be raised from the dunghill of the earth, to the glorious Throne
of Heaven, as the Prophet says, Let our hearts be lifted up. Our gestures must
be reverent and humble, and kneeling is the fittest gesture in prayer: Lament.
3. 41.
and they must be delivered with fervency, For the prayer of Iam. 5.
the righteous avayleth much, if it be fervent. Prayer is for all times and
all things.


Yea in prayer we must be diligent; Paul would have the Thessalonians to pray
always, nay indesinenter orare, to pray without ceasing: but if any man say,
they cannot spend so much time 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
in prayer, they have other things to attend: I answer, that prayer hinders
no labor, it is opus animi, non corporis, a work of the mind, not of the
body: for why, the husbandman at the plough, the pilot at the helm, the
mariner at the oars, the coblar at his Last, the weaver at his Loomes, the
woman at her rock may pray, and yet lose no time; the heart may be occupied as
was Moses heart at the red Sea. Epiphanius calls Christians Bees, that have
Exodus 14.
wax in their hands, their claws: to note their work, and honey in their
mouths, that is Hymns, Psalms, prayers to glorify God; as is said of the
Primitive Church, These all continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication, etc.

One calls prayers, Gods Grasshoppers, Gods Nightingales, Onuphrius.
who praise him in the day, and pray in the night: and good men will pray always
with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
and watch thereunto with all perseverancy, etc. O stir up thy heart that is
dull, rowze it up to God, blow the coal, but spit not upon it. Benajah is said
to kill a Lion in the snow. It is a great glory to kill a Lion, greater to kill
him in the snow, when the hands are 2 Samuel 23. 20.
cold, and the body frozen, that a man cannot draw his sword: so the soul is
cold, congealed, the spirit is dull, the mind languishing in good things: but
if thou can, then put heat unto it, to wrestle with the Devil that roaring
Lion, in prayer and meditation: 1 Pet. 5. 8.
it is thy glory with God, and men, and Angels. In other virtues thou
overcommest another, in this thou overcommest thy self. This world is a sea,
our souls are as vessels tossed on it; our virtues, Apoc. 15.
as wares to be transported to the Haven, prayer is as a prosperous wind to
carry them forward. Now as in the straites of Magellane, of three ships
scarce one is saved; so in the sea of this world, of an hundred, scarce one is
saved; for why? Men pray not. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the
children of men, to see Psalm. 14. 2, 3, 4.
if there were any that would understand and seek after God: all are gone out
of the way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one: do
not all the workers of iniquity know, that they eat up my people as they eat
bread? they call not upon the Lord. On these God powers out wrath: For so the
Prophet prayed, saying; Power out thy wrath upon the Heathen, that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not Ier. 10. 25.
upon thy name. Prayer is as a spiritual chair, wherein the soul sits
down at the feet of the Lord to receive the influences of his graces: est
porta regalis, per quam Dominus in cor intrat: prayer is the regal gate by
which the Lord enters into the heart, the first fruits of future glory: Manna,
that had in it Omne delectamentum, the delicacy and taste of every sweet; the
Ladder of Jacob, by which we must ascend into heaven.

By this note, God distinguishes his house from all houses, My house shall be
called an house of prayer; and his people, from all Prayer comfort in all
estates.
the people of the world: they are a people that delight in prayer, and the
praises of God are ever in their mouth: others are houses Mat. 21. 12.
of banqueting, as the houses of Jobs sons; or houses of sporting, as the
houses of the Philistines, where Samson played; or Job. 1. 1 Reg. 16. Judge. 16.
Mich 3. Luke 12.
houses of cruelty, as were the houses of the Jews; or houses of receipt, as
the barnes of the fool; or houses of destruction, as those of Ieroboams and
Baasha: but Gods house is an house of prayer, all other came to naught: the
houses of Jobs sons were blown down with the wind; the houses of the
Philistines fell upon their heads and slew them; the houses of the Jews were
turned into a field; the barnes of the fool came to a strange heir; the
Palaces of Jeroboam and Baasha, became a proverb.

Prayer is a conjoyning of God and man together; in doctrine God speaks unto
us, and therefore the Word is called, The Spirit 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
of Gods mouth: and in prayer we speak to God, and power out our griefs into
his lap: Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou
shall glorify me. Oration est Deo sacrificium: Psalm. 50. 15.
Prayer is a sacrifice to God, music unto the Angels, a banquet to the Saints,
an help to them that pray, a remedy for the penitent, a weapon against their
enemies. Te orante fugit demon: When thou prayest, the Devil takes him to his
heels and is gone, Resist the Devil (by prayer) and he will fly from you.
Vis omnia patienter far? sis homo precum: Will thou carry all things
patiently? Iam. 4. 7.
be a man of prayers. Pray continually, in all things give thanks. Will thou
root up vices, and be enriched with virtues? Be a 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18
man of prayers; Cease not to pray to be filled with the knowledge of Gods will
in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding. Will thou overcome Col. 1. 9.
troubles? be a man of prayer: for Saint James will have thee troubled and
afflicted to pray. Will thou know the subtilty of Iam 5. 13.
Satan, and vanquish his temptations? Be a man of prayers. Pray with all
manner of prayer and supplications, and then neither rule nor power, nor
worldly rulers, nor the governors of the darkness of this world shall cause
thee to fall. Will thou trample under-feet thy corrupt and evil affections?
Be a man of prayers: Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. I
never knew a man of much praying, a man of much sin, no, not of the
superstitious Mat. 26. 41.
sort, touching the gross sins of the world: Per preces charitas pascitur,
fides augetur, spes corroboratur, spiritus exhilaratur, cor pacatur, detegitur
veritas, vincitur tentotio, renovantur sensus, totus homo immutatur and fit
melior; by prayer Charity is fed, Faith increased, Hop strengthened, the Spirit
exhilarated, the Heart pacified, Verity discovered, temptation vanquished, the
Senses renewed, and the whole man is altered and bettered.

Paul prayed, and God answered him, My grace is sufficient for Prayer the food
of the soul.
thee. The Philosophers affirm, God to be the perfection of all creatures:
the creature then is so much the more perfect, by how much he is nearer unto
God: in prayers and supplications, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
we draw nearer unto God then at other times, therefore the perfecter; for we
draw near unto God, not in walking, but in loving; not with the feet of our
bodies, but with the affections of our hearts. Let us draw near (says the
Apostle) with a true Heb. 10. 22.
heart in assurance, being sprinkled in our heatts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water. All living creatures have their
nourishment, every one in their kind; some live of the Earth as Molles, other
some of the Water as Fishes, some of the Air, as the Camelion, some of the
fire, as the Salamander: other creatures more noble than they, live by meat, as
the natural man: but others more noble than he, as the Angels, by meditations
and contemplations. The Soul therefore being a spiritual substance, as the
Angels, is nourished and fed with the same meat that they be: Here is the
difference, their vision of God is Col. 3. 3. Ephesians. 4. 18.
clear and manifest, ours obscure and dark; their life perfect, ours
imperfect; their life is a life of glory, ours is called the life of grace. As
the sea follows the moving of the Moon: for as she increases, that waxes;
so the perfection of a Christian life depends on prayer; as our prayers
increase, so does our perfection in Christianity increase also. For seeing the
heart is the beginning of life, and of works, Et quale cor, talia opera: and
as our heart is, such be our works: if the heart therefore be devout, and well
ordered, our works will be devout and good also: if otherwise, our works
will be vile and naught; For unto Tit. 1. 15.
the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving,
is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled. To
conclude, it is no little proof of the virtue of prayer, to behold the two
principal glories and testimonies, which the Father gave to Christ Jesus in
prayer; for in his transfiguration while he prayed, His face did shine as the
Sun, and his clothes were as Mat. 17. 2.
white as the light: and in his Baptism, while he prayed, The Heavens were
opened unto him, and the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, lighted Mat. 3.
15.
upon him. This should encourage us to pray, and to pray always, to pray, and
to pray continually, even every moment, as the least occasion is offered:
prayer should be the key to open the day, and the lock to shut in the night;
when we rise in the morning, we should pray with Abraham's servant, and say, O
Lord God, Genesis 14. 12.
I beseech thee, send me good speed this day: and when we lay us down at
night, to pray with the sweet Singer of Israel, Lighten mine eyes, that I
sleep not in death: and whatsoever we take in hand Psalm. 13. 3.
either by day or night, to prevent it with the blessing of the Psalm, Prosper
the work of our hands, O prosper thou our handy work. Egredientes de hospitio
armet oration; regredientibus de platea, occurrat Psalm. Ier. Ep.
intercessio: when thou go out of the house, let prayer arm thee; Prayer
the means whereby we receive all good things.
when thou returnest into thy house, let prayer meet with thee: prayer is
vinculum invincibile: would thou bind the Almighty that he may not hurt
thee? Prayer is the band by which he is tied; and would thou untie him to
do thee good? Prayer must do it. Prayer is Clavis Scripturae, it is our
Oedipus to resolve our doubts; it is our Commentary to understand Gods Word;
Oration est Deo sacrificium, Diabolo flagellum, oranti subsidium: Prayer is a
sacrifice to God, a scourge to the Devil, and a help to our Aug.
selves in all our troubles. And again, Orationis purae magna est virtus, and
velut fidelis nuntius mandatum peragit and penetrat, quo caro non pervenit:
Great is the power of pure prayer, for it is a faithful Aug. in Psalm. 36.
messenger, she delivers her errand, and pierces thither whither flesh cannot
come. And this was it which made Bernard to say, Nemo nostrum parvipendeat
orationem suam; dico enim vobis, quodipse ad quem oramus, non parvipendet eam;
postquam egressa est ab ore nostrum, ipse scribit eam in libro suo, and unum in
duobus indubitanter sperare possumus, quoniam aut dabit quod petimus, aut quod
novit utilius: Let none of us lightly esteem his prayer; I tell you that he
to whom we pray, does not lightly esteem it; after it is out of our mouth, he
writes it in his book, and one of these two we may doubtless expect, either
that he will grant our petition, or that which he knows to be better for
us. Call upon me, and I will hear thee (says God.) Ask, and you shall have
(says Christ.) Before they cry, I will hear them, says Jehovah. The Lord is
nigh to all that call upon him, says David. O then let us call and cry unto
him by earnest and hearty prayer night and day: but let us pray in knowledge
with understanding; in faith by believing; in remorse, with seeking, in zeal;
without cooling; in attention without wandering; in reverence, without
contemning; in constancy without revolting; and in love, without revenging. Let
our eyes be fastened, hearts fixed, knees bowed, mouths opened, and our hands
lifted up as to the King of Kings; and as Jacob would not let the Angel go,
till he were blessed, so let not God go, till we be heard. Finely said one,
Orat misericordia, and non orat miseria? orat innocentia, and non orat
nequitia? orat judex, and desiderat parcere? and non orat reus, ut indulgentiam
mereatur accipere? Does mercy pray? and shall not misery? piety entreat, and
shall not iniquity? the Physician request, and shall not the sick? the rich
beg, and not the poor? the innocent pray, and not the guilty? the just and
he that never sinned, fall down, and the sinful sinner stand upright? the
Son of righteousness be humbled, and the son of wickedness wax proud?
shall the judge entreat and desire to pardon, and the traitor not beg to be
forgiven?

Is not Christi actio Christiani institutio? Christ's practice our president?
But he prays, and shall not we pray? We must pray for our bodies, that they
may be preserved; for our souls, The Holy Ghost, the Author of prayer.
that they may be saved; for our estates, that they may be maintained; for
our thoughts, that they may be sanctified; for our words, that they may be
seasoned; for our actions, that they may be ordered by Gods Spirit.

But Saint Jude does not only exhort to prayer, but also shows how we must
pray; In the Spirit: the which words may be understood two manner of ways,
either of the Author of prayer, or of the Manner of praying.

If we understand it of the Author, the sense is good, for Gods Spirit causes
prayer and every good work; For we know not how to pray as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes requests for us, Romans 8. 26, 27.
with sighs that cannot be expressed: for he that searches the heart,
knows what is the meaning of the Spirit, for he makes requests for the
Saints according to the Will of God. The fire which God would have continually
to burn upon his Altar, came out from the Lord. Levit. 9. 24.
If sacrifices were offered up with any other fire, the fire was counted
strange, and the sacrifices no whit acceptable, but abominable Cap. 10. 1, etc.
to the Lord. The Heavenly fire, whereby our spiritual sacrifices of prayer
must be offered up, is that holy Spirit which comes out from God; we must
therefore pray in the Spirit; yea all good gifts proceed from the Spirit; so
says the Apostle, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit 1 Cor. 12: 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
withal: for to one is given by the Spirit, the word of Wisdom; to another,
the word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another is given Faith by the same
Spirit; to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit; to another,
operations of great works; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of
spirits; and to another diversity of tongues; to another interpretation of
tongues: and all these works even the selfsame Spirit, distributing to
every man severally, as he will. So Christ told his Apostles, that they spoke
not, but the Spirit of his Father; It is not you (says he) that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. Paul compares the Spirit of
God to a tree, that like the Tree of life yields all graces; The fruit of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 18.
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance, against such there is no Law; for they are under the Spirit of
grace. The Antithesis is between the flesh and the Spirit: Paul calls it,
the Spirit of Wisdom, And Esaias names it, The Spirit of Wisdom, Counsel,
Power, Strength; Because all these are the effects of it; for Bezaliel Esaias.
11. 2. Exodus 31. 3.
and Aholiab had their knowledge from Gods Spirit, in the works of brass and
silver: how much more have we in heavenly things? There is no Art, no cunning,
no science, but from the Spirit, even in the most wicked. If you say, Quid
Spiritui Sancto impys? What have the wicked to do with the Spirit? I can
answer it thus: The wicked have the spirit of illumination, as had Achitophel,
2 Samuel 16. Mat. 18. Act. 23.
and Judas, and Tertullus; but not the Spirit of Sanctification and adoption.
It is said of all the Judges and Kings, The Holy Ghost the Author of all
excellent gifts in any.
that the Spirit of God came upon them: so it is said, that, the Spirit of God
came upon Gedeon: so it is said of Saul, that the Spirit of the Lord should
come upon him, and he should prophesy: and of David, that the Spirit of the
Lord came upon him, from that day forward. Judge. 6. 34. 1 Samuel 10. 6. 1 Samuel
10. 13.
All the rare excellent things of God, are judged by the Spirit. The natural
wise man perceives not the things that are of the Spirit of God: But he that
is spiritual, judges all things. It is Gods Spirit that frames all our
actions and works, and all good things 1 Cor. 14. 15.
in us. Hitherto tends the ceremony used in the Law, that in the sacrifices,
things without life were consecrated with oil; which thing had a double
reference; first, to Christ, to note, that he was anointed with the gifts of
the Spirit, to perform his three offices: for so we read, The Spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me, and a. And again,
Thou have loved Esaias. 61. 1. Heb. 1. 9.
righteousness, and hated iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Secondly, it had reference
unto us, to note, that all our duties are accepted of God, as they are wrought
in us by the Spirit; but nothing, no not prayer, is accepted otherwise then it
is a work of the Spirit, and comes from his motion. For this purpose, note
what the Prophet says in the person of God to Jerusalem, I will power upon
them the Spirit of supplications. He calls the gift of prayer, the Spirit
Zach. 12. 10.
of supplications, because it is Gods Spirit which works in us this gift, and
makes us to call upon God: but more directly is this point proved by that
phrase, which Saint Jude here uses, praying in the Holy Ghost. And this yet
farther confirmed, in that it is said; The Spirit in our hearts cries, Abba
Father. And Paul lays down this point first, Affirmatively, saying, The
Spirit helps Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 16, 27.
our infirmities, and makes intercession for us: then Negatively, We know not
what to pray: yet must we not think, that the Holy Ghost does indeed pray for
us, as Christ does, or as one of us does for another: For then should the Holy
Ghost be our Mediator, (which was one of Arrius his heresies;) but the meaning
is, that the Holy Ghost stirs us up to pray, and puts life into our dead
and dull spirits, to make our prayers fervent. Well then, prayer is a gift of
the Spirit; not common to all, but proper and peculiar to Gods elect, who have
the Spirit of God: if no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost: Surely, no 1 Cor. 12. 3.
man can pray and call upon God, but by the Spirit of God. Let us then labor
for Gods sanctifying Spirit, and having it, Let us go along with him, and
follow his motions, pouring forth those prayers which he suggesteth unto us:
and let us take heed, that we grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, which is done
by quenching the good motions thereof through our carelesnes; or by Ephesians. 4.
36. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
resisting the Spirit through our rebellion.

But yet note further, that howsoever prayer is attributed to the Spirit: yet
it is a work of the whole Trinity, and the Holy Trinity has a hand in this
holy exercise of prayer. The holy Ghost The whole Trinity concurres in prayer.
frames our requests, the Son offreth them to his Father, the Father accepts
them thus framed, and offered up; For the works of the Trinity are invisible,
yet distinguished so, that unto the Father is ascribed the original and
beginning of all actions. Ille agit Hebr. 11.
a se per Filium and Spiritum; he works of himself by the Son and the
Spirit; to the Son, is ascribed the disposing of the action, Job. 26. 7, 8, 9.
from the Father, by the Spirit: to the Holy Ghost, is attributed the
consummating, and as it were perfecting of things, seeing he works from the
Father and the Son: Pater agit ase, Filius per se, Spiritus Sanctus, a Patre
and Filio: The Father works by himself, 1 Cor. 12. 11.
the Son by him, the Holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son: so that
prayer is a work of the Trinity, as are all good works. O noble work, ad quod
tanti artifices concurrunt! to Visinu^.
the performing whereof so many Artisans do concur and meet! the Omnipotency
of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, and goodness of the Holy Ghost; where
goodness wills, wisdom disposes, Omnipotency performs; potens est,
sapiens est, bonus est, and tamen unus Deus est, qui omnia in omnibus operatur:
he is mighty, he is wise, he is good, and yet but one God that works all
in all.

Or these words, Orate in spiritu: Pray in the spirit, may be meant of the
quality of prayer, that it must be spiritual, not carnal; proceed from the
heart, not from the lips; from the soul, 1 Samuel 1. 15.
not the mouth only. Hence is it, that they which pray in the Spirit, are said
to power out their souls and their heart unto God: The Virgin Mary (who
without all question praised God in the Spirit) says, My soul magnifieth the
Lord, my Spirit rejoiceth in God: Luke 1. 46. Romans 8. 26.
And Paul tells us, that the Spirit makes intercession, with groans. Now
groans proceed from the heart and Spirit; not from the tongue and lips. And
the Apostle tells us, that the Spirit which cries Abba Father, is sent into
our hearts. The Jews prayed with their lips; but not with their hearts:
therefore God complains of them, saying, This people draw near unto me
Esaias. 29. 13.
with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: Our prayers must be
fervent like the spirit: Be fervent in spirit (says the Apostle;) our hearts
in prayer must be lifted up to God; the heart of man, is as it were Gods chair
of estate, whereunto no creature can come; it is proper to God alone, it is his
Palace wherein he most delights, wherefore Gods Spirit makes his abode
there, and stirs it up to pray. The prayer that comes not from the heart
and spirit, it is a key cold prayer: it is frozen before it comes halfway to
heaven. David, to note his earnestnes in prayer, said, that he rored, he spoke
not, but rored, cried out; and indeed Psalm. 38.
the Spirit of God is a crying Spirit, not a cold spirit.

Hereby then may we judge, whether the Spirit of God be Romans 8. 15.
in us, and move us to pray, or no: If thy prayer come but from Fervent prayer
prevails with God.
the teeth, though it be never so well framed in regard of words, and though
thy gestures be never so reverent and humble, yet all is nothing, the Spirit
of God has no part in this work: if thy spirit pray not, thou do but
babble; a kind of praying condemned by our Savior: Paul would have us to pray
in the Spirit, Mat. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 14.
and to pray with the understanding; that is, earnestly from the heart, and yet
intelligibly of the Church and congregation; he had reference to this, when
writing to the Saints of Ephesus, he bids them, to be filled with the
Spirit, speaking unto your selves, (says he) in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
to God in your hearts. Hearty singing, hearty praying, hearty speaking unto
God, is the thing that God accepts; My Son (says Prove. 23.
he) give me thy heart. It is of the essence of prayer to be hearty,
spiritual, and servent. As a painted fire, is no fire, a dead man, no man; so
a cold lip-labor prayer, no prayer; in a painted fire there is no heat, in a
dead man, no life, in a cold prayer, no devotion, no blessing: The prayer of
the righteous avails much, if it be Iam. 5. 16, 17, 18.
fervent; it is that, that makes and marres all. And he exemplifieth this, by
the prayer of Elias, he prayed, that it might not rain, and it rained not on
the earth for three years and six months: and he prayed again, and Heaven
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. A cold prayer could not have
locked up heaven three years, nor opened heaven; such a prayer made Hanna, 1.
Sam. 2. her lips went: yet spoke nothing; Loquebatur non voce, sed cord,
prece occulta, sed manifesta fide; She spoke not with the mouth, but with the
heart, Aug.
her prayer was hid, her faith made manifest: such a prayer made Moses, yet
spoke not a word with his mouth, his heart spoke, but his tongue was silent:
such must our prayers be, or else they rebound Exodus 14.
back again, as a tennis ball; yea they turn to be sin Psalm. 109. 7.
unto us. What? Is honey turned into gall? And balm into wormwood? Is treakle
become poison? is prayer become sin? Yea a plain sin, a notable sin, if
we do it not rightly: quot preces, tot peccata. As physic kills the body,
if it work not in the body: so prayer kills the soul, if it proceed not
aright from the soul: For we have two Axioms in Divinity.

1. That God regards not only the matter, but the manner. 2. Quod non
actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia; That duties are esteemed not by their
acts, but by their ends.
The manner must be good, and the end good. The Church of Rome says, that
virtualis intentio nonex necessitate requiritur in precibus, sed actualis
intentio: a virtuous intent is not of necessity required in prayer, but an
actual. But better said the Papist Criton, who said, that God loved better
Adverbes, then Nownes, not to pray only, but to praywell: Non bonum, sed been
agere: Not to do good, but to do it well: for we may do bona, good things,
and yet go to hell: as did the Pharisees, Oration nec timida, nec temeraria,
Mat. 23.
nec tepida sit: Prayer must be neither false-hearted, nor They that call upon
God, must depart from iniquity.
foole-hardy, nor lukewarm: Oration timida coelos non penetrat: A
false-hearted prayer cannot pierce the Heavens; temeraria resilet ut pila
palmaria: a foole-hardy, a rash prayer reboundeth back again like an
hand-ball; tepida frigescit, conglaciatur, priusquam coelos ascendit: the
lukewarm prayer is cooled and frozen up, before it can get heaven.

In prayer, two things are required, Tempus, and cor: time, and the heart: much
business steals away the time, and a multitude of cogitations, the heart: so
that we cannot confer quietly with God.

Here therefore the prayers of the wicked are rejected. I will (says Paul)
that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands to God, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
without wrath or doubting; but the hands which they lift up in prayer, are
impure hands, and so are the hearts also.

Pretily said Bias to the Grecians in a naufrage, in a ship-wracke, when they
prayed, and cried out to their gods, Silete, ne orate, ne dij, vos nebulones,
hic navigantes sentiant: Be silent, pray not, that the gods may not understand,
that you like roguish robbing rascals are here sailing. Alas, we tumble out
our prayers, as a Bears whelpe; they are like arrows without heads, that
cannot pierce; like swords without edge, that cannot cut; they be too blunt to
obtain any thing of God: they have no wings to mount up to heaven; We ask and
receive not, because we ask amiss. We do either postulare non postulanda: we
ask things that Iam. 4. 3. Bern.
are not to be asked; or else, when we ask them, we pray not in the holy
Ghost.

Oh that all men knew this, that all England had learned, that not all prayers,
but spiritual prayers are accepted of God! but we are ignorant, and will be
ignorant still; filthy and will be Apoc. 22. 11.
filthy still.

But let us amend this fault, and learn at last to pray: for prayer is good,
so that it be a true reflection of the soul, from the feeling of Gods mercies,
and our own wants: God has promised us all good things under his hand and
seal; but yet with a condition, so that we pray truly, and ask them as we
should: The Lord is near to all them that call upon him, yea unto all such as
call upon Psalm. 145. 18.
him faithfully: For many carry prayer in their mouths, as me^ carry fire in a
flint, and perfume in a pomander; the one without heat, the other without
smell; so they carry prayer without all devotion; verbal, vocal prayers can
obtain nothing of God. When ye stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you (says God) and though ye make many prayers, I will not hear.

THE THREE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXI. And keep your selves in the Love of God, etc. Faith, prayer, and
love, have mutual relation.



FRom faith he came unto prayer; from prayer he comes now to love: bie est
enim aurea catena: for this is a golden chain, every link is one within
another; these three go together, like the three Angels that came to Lot; like
the three graces that are Genesis 19.
inseparable; or like the three Worthies who brake through the host of the
Philistines. Faith begets 2 Samuel 23.
prayer, and prayer strengthens the faith; and neither of these can stand
without love: prayer and love be as the two mighty rivers, named in Genesis,
Pishon and Gihon; and faith as the garden of Eden, out of which they flow, or
the sea, into which they run, and where all of them jointly do end their
course. Love is a chief, a principal virtue; Faith and Love, the one with
God, the other with men be as the root and the branch; as the mother and the
daughter; as the foundation and pillars of all Christian buildings* the end of
all is Love; the end of the first table, the Love of God; the end of the
second, the love of man; so says the Holy Ghost, The end of the Commandment
is Love out of a pure heart, out 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of a good conscience, and out of a faith not fained. Whatsoever precept or
commandment is in the Scripture, it has relation to Love; For be that loves
another, fulfilleth the Law. Christianity is where the Romans 13.
Spirit is, and where the Spirit is, there is Love; For, God is Love, Love the
most excellent of all virtues.
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Austen says;
that a man may have baptism, and yet be wicked; prophecy, and yet be wicked;
take the Sacrament of the body and Aug. Hom. 15.
blood of the Lord, and yet be wicked; be named a Christian, and yet be
wicked: Habere Sacramenta ista omnia, and malus esse potest; habere autem
charitatem, and malus esse non potest; He may have all these Sacraments, and
yet be wicked; but if he have Love, he cannot be wicked. Paul reckoning up the
fruits of the Spirit, he names Love, first, as the Gentleman-usher to go
before them all: The fruits of the Spirit (says he) is Love, joy, peace,
etc. For as Manna Gal. 5. 22. Exodus 16. Exodus 3. Judge.
excelled all bread; as Aarons rod did eat up the rods of the sorcerers; as
Gedeons sword passed all the swords of the Madianites; so Love passes all
other virtues. All our bebts should stand in Love; so says the Apostle, Owe
nothing to any man but this, Romans 13. 8.
that ye love one another. Our debts were soon paid, and our Executors should
be soon discharged, if this were: of this debt we can never be discharged, so
long as we live. The journey of Israel was ended in forty years; Herod's temple
was built and finished in six and forty years, Noah's Arc was perfited in an
120. years; but this debt is never ended. Beloved (says S. John) let us love
one another; for Love comes of God, and every one that loves, is borne of
God, and knowith God: but he that loves not, knows not God, for God is
Love. S. Peter naming many virtues, makes up the measure, and ends in love;
Join (says he) virtue with your faith; and with vert^e, knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.
5, 6, 7.
and with knowledge, temperance; and with temperance, patience; and with
patience, godliness; and with godliness, brotherly kindness; and with
brotherly kindness, Love. This virtue above all others, is as the hoope or
fagot-band that keeps all close; therefore says the Apostle, Above all
things put on Love, which is the bond of perfection. Col. 3. 14.
As the Sun gives light to all Planets; as salt seasoneth all meats; as the
Moon rules over the Sea, and all moist bodies; as the rod of the Tribe of
Levi passed in honor all other tribes: so Love passes all qualities among
men. Though I spoke 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
with the tongues of men and Angels, and have no love, I am as sounding brass
or a tinckling Cymball: and though I bad the gift of Prophecy, and knew all
secrets, and all knowledge; yea if I had all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and had no love, it profits me nothing: and though I feed the
poor with all my goods, and though I give my body, that I be burned, and have
not Love; it profits me nothing. For this cause he wills the Ephesians to
follow the truth in Love. Moses did wish that Ephesians. 4. 13. Numb. 11. 29.
all the Lords people could prophecy, and That the Lord would put his Spirit
upon them. Saint Paul did wish, that all men were like himself in purity, and
that all did speak strange languages, but rather that 1 Cor. 7. 7. 1 Cor. 14.
5. Aug.
they prophesied. Saint Augustine wished, that all would remember Love; and
brings this reason, Sola est enim quae and vincit omnia, and sine qua, nil
valent omnia, and ubique fuerit, trahit ad se omnia; For only Love overcommeth
all things, and without Love, all things Love is every where very cold.
are nothing worth, and wheresoever love is, it draws all things unto it. And
surely, if I might have my wish, and desire, as Solomon had; it should be this,
that Saint Jude here exhorts unto; 1 Reg. 3.
namely, so to love, that we may keep our selves in the Love of God evermore;
that if any of us Christians, be at any time asked what we worship? we may
answer with Gregory Nazianzen, Charitatem veneramur, we worship charity. We
had need cry out, and write no longer against false Catholics; sola fides,
faith only; but against false Protestants, Sola charitas, Love only; for malice
and mischief abounds, and Love abateth. Let faith only justify, and Love
only rectify.

David compares Love to the Ointment on Aarons head, and unto the dew of
Hermon: I can compare it to the Oil in the cruze, Psalm. 133. 2. 1 Reg. 17.
to the meal in the barrel that wasted not, and unto the apple tree of
Persia, which buddeth, blossometh, and bears fruit every month: Now abides
faith, hope, and love; but the chief of these is love: It lasts longer, like
a pillar of Salt, it reaches 1 Cor. 13.
further, it profits more among men: faith flies up to Heaven; Charity is
occupied here below on Earth; Faith wrastleth above with the promises of God;
Love is busied in good works, as Faith is with God. Paul prays that Love may
abound more and more: and this he does in respect of the scantinesse and
excellency; Charitas laudatur, and alget: Iniquity abounds, Charity Mat.
24. 12.
waxes cold. This is the Iron age that Paul prophesied of, Know (says Paul)
that in the last days shall come perilous times: for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, proud, boasters, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. 4.
cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankifull, unholy, without
natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce,
despisers of them which are good, traitors, heady-minded, lovers of pleasures,
more than lovers of God. Invenietue Christus fidem? Shall Christ, Luke 18. 8.
Gal. 5. 6.
when he comes, find Faith upon the Earth? But Love follows Faith;
therefore shall he find any Love at his coming? Surely, but a little: England
is as the land of Canaan; we have corn and cattle, we have fish and flesh,
cloth and wool; our valleys stand thick with corn, that makes us to laugh
and sing; God Psalm. 65. 11.
crowns the year with his goodness, and the clouds drop fatness: they drop
upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the hills are compassed with
gladness. Our sons grow up as the young plants, our daughters are as the
polished corners of the Temple, Psalm 144. 12, 13, 14.
our Garners are full, and abounding with store, our Sheep bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in our streets; our Oxen are strong to labor;
there is no invasion, nor going out, nor crying in our streets. The Mountains
drop Wine, and we wash our paths in butter. We have plenty Joel 3. 28. Job 29.
Judge. 5. 1 Samuel 13. 1 Reg. 8.
of all things, but of Love. As in the days of Debora, there was neither
spear nor shield; as in the days of Saul, there was no Smith in Israel; as in
the days of Solomon, there was no Manna to be found; and as in Gilboa, there
is no Rain; in Gilead Few united in Love.
no Balm; in Bashan, no flowers; in Sichem, no Corn, being sown with salt;
in Tyrus no Ships; in Cimmeria no Light: Ier. 8. Judge. 9. 45. Ezech. 28.
so in England, no Love, or but a little. If there be an hundred men in one
town, scarce two love together, and agree together as they should; wherein
they be worse then Devils, for seven of them could agree in Marie Magdaiene; a
legion in another man, that is, twelve thousand five hundred Devils, or as
other Mat. 26.
affirm, six thousand seven hundred twenty two Devils: for so Varro and
Vegetius affirm, that a legion contains so many: but scarce seven men of
seven score, love as brethren, and so keep themselves in the love of God.

We are now divided into three companies, like Labans sheep, some white, some
black, some speckled; some Protestants, some Papists, some Newters; Nay, even
among Protestants, there is little love, and less agreement; but God, I hope,
will make us friends in Heaven, where all injuries shall be forgotten. Where
are these noble pair of lovers become, David and Jonathan, who had but one
soul? Eusebius and Pamphilus martyr, 1 Samuel 18.
who had but one name? Pilades and Orestes, who had but one life? the one being
dead, the other died also? Ruth, and Naomi, who could not be parted, but where
the one would go, the other Ruth. 1.
would go, where the one would dwell, the other would dwell, where the one
would dye, the other would dye, and where one would be buried, the other would
be buried also? Basil and Nazianzene, of whom it is said, that anima una erat
inclusa in duobus corporibus, that there was one soul shut in two bodies?
Marriage makes two bodies one (so says our Savior:) For this Mat. 19. 5.
cause a man shall leave Father and Mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they
twain shall be one: but love makes two souls one, yea many bodies, many
souls but one. If an hundred men love together, there is but one heart, as in
the Acts, The multitude of them 1 Samuel 18. 1. Act. 4. 32.
that believed, were of one heart and of one soul, of one mind, will and
consent. If a man has an hundred friends, that man is become as an hundred
men; Nam amicus est alter idem: a friend is another the same: Charitas est res
augmentativa; Charity is an Chrysostom.
increasing thing. There was a day when Herod and Pilat were made friends, but
that day (I fear) with many of us will never be, if any are implacable, like
the stone Arbestos, which being once kindled, is never quenched; once angered,
never pleased. A sign of a reprobate mind: for Paul describing the reprobates,
says, that they are full of unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, Romans
1. 29, 30.
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of
deceit, taking all things in the evil part, whisperers, backe-biters, haters
of God, doers of wrong, etc. The Romans were wont to say of the men of the
Primitive Church, Ecce ut invicem se diligunt! See how they love one another!
They knew Christians by that badge, as Christ said, By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples indeed, The love of God above all love.
if ye love one another, as I have loved you. But we may say, quoth a modern
Father; Ecce ut invicem se oderunt! Behold, how they hate one another, oppress
one another! It was wont to be said, John 13. Za^che.
Homo homini Deus: One man is a God to another; but now homo homini Leo, one
man is a Lion to another; Nay, one man is a Woolfe unto another; Nay, one man
is a Devil unto another: we are not now Christians, but Woolves, Leopards,
Lions, Devils: Nay, worse: for one Lion eats not another, and the devils
strive not among themselves, but maintain one another kingdom. Let Tigers
and Bears, and Leopards tear one another; Let Scythians and Canibals eat one
another, who know not God, nor good humanity, but are without all natural
affection: But let us love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, not
rendering evil for evil, nor rebuke for rebuke; but contrariwise bless,
knowing that we are thereunto called, that we should be heirs of blessing:
and if enemies will not be pacified, recommend the cause to God, till we meet
in Heaven, where all injury shall be forgotten: and in the mean while I
beseech you (as Saint Paul did the Saints of Corinth) I beseech you (I say) by
the name of our Lord 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no discension
among you, but that ye be knit together in one mind and in one judgment:
and whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever Phil. 4. 8.
things pertain to love, etc. think on these things, and the God of Love and
Peace shall be with you, and the Lord increase your love, and make 1 Thessalonians. 3.
12.
it abound more and more one toward another. Christ's commandment is all love;
his Spouse is all loving: and John will preach nothing but love, and we must
follow after love, and above all have fervent love among our selves, for that
shall cover a multitude of sins.

But mark, that the love whereunto Saint Jude exhorts, is called the love of
God; and keep your selves in the love of God: so that not all love is
commended, but such love only,

As is Holy, Just, True, Constant.

For first, our love must be Holy love: it is for God, and not against God,
under God, and not above God: for he loves not God, that loves not his
neighbor with God, whom he loves not for God: and he that loves his
neighbor more than God, is unworthy of God, and makes his neighbor to be his
God.

Secondly, Our love must be just: we must not love one another in evil, but
in good, and for good, Pacem cum hominibus, bellum cum vitijs: we must have
peace with men, war with their vices. We must love their persons, but hate
their manners if they Four properties of the Love of God.
be evil.

Thirdly, our love must be true Love: We (...) and in tongue, but in work
and in truth. Nemo potest (...) ^ ^^hn 3. 18.
hominis, nist primitus fuerit amicus ipsius veritatis (...) August.
be a true lover of man, unless first he be a lover of the (...) must love one
another, not for their riches, honors, greatness, but for themselves; their
good must be sought, not their goods: We^ must not love one another as dogs
do bones, for the flesh that is on them, or as men do trees for their fruit;
but we must love them for themselves, for this, that they are men, but
especially, for that they are virtuous and good men.

Lastly, our love one toward another must be constant; with some, friends are
like flowers, no longer regarded then whiles they are fresh. Many men's love is
like the harlots love, who love while there is lucre; and when gifts go hence,
their love goes hence: they are like the puttocks in the fable, that followed
the old wife bearing tripes to the market, but forsook her home-ward when her
tripes were sold. En ego non paucis quondam munitus amicis, etc. A man shall be
loved in prosperity, but in adversity, as rats forsake an house, when it is
ready to fall, and as lice forsake a man's head, when he is dying; so his lovers
and his friends will forsake him. Thus our love should be holy, just, true,
constant: this is true Christian love, wherein men should keep themselves; For
among murderers, thieves, and drunkards, there is a kind of love, but not the
Love that Jude would here to be among us. First therefore the love of Atheists
is condemned, which comes from profit or from pleasure. It is not Charitas ex
cord puro, Love out of a pure heart. Love and good works must go together: 1 Timothy 1. 5.
to gloze, eat, play, drink, game, be no good works; therefore this is not
love; we call it good fellowship, but such good fellows will go to the
good fellow the Devil, if they repent not: For if we sin willingly, after
that we have received the Hebr. 10. 26, 27.
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
fearful looking for judgment. There is a carnal love: but ours must be a
spiritual love, such as was among the Colossians, of whose Col. 1. 8.
love Paul speaks, Who has also certified us, of your love which ye have by
the Spirit. There is a worldly love, and there is an heavenly Love, and
knowledge gives life to this love; without it, Love is as a dead picture,
Lovers glorious, the name is honorable, the praise of it, is from the rising of
the Sun unto the going down of the Sun. One says, that love is like honey
in bitter broth, and sugar in sour wine; it is like unto the Sun unto the
world, a candle unto the house, a light for our journey, a line for our life,
and a rule for our reprehensions. Si diligis, fac quicquid vis: If Calvin in
John. Aug.
thou be in love, do what thou will; speak or be silent, exhort or
rebuke, call or cry, so it be in love, all is well.

Yet it must be a godly love, an holy charity, but it is impossible to have it
with all, some are so wicked. If thou can have Most love for lucre sake.
the favor and love of men, with the favor and Love of God, take it, it is
precious, but if thou can not have the favor and Psalm. 133. 1.
love of men, but with the disfavour and dislike of God, let it go: For
certainly, The amity of the World is enmity with God: We must Iam. 4. 4.
love men in the Lord; God for himself, man for God: Diligendus est Deus
propter se, homo propter Deum.

I may compare the love of Atheists to the agreement that is among a kennell of
hounds, who sleep together, play together, hunt merrily together, but if a man
hurl a bone, they grinne, snatch, and bite one another: So Atheists agree
together, till some matter come of private gain, but then there is grinning,
biting, fighting one with another; for the best of them is as a brier, and
Mich. 7. 4.
the most righteous of them is sharper then a thorn hedge; for from the least
of them, to the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness: and Ier.
6. 13.
their love is nothing else but a money love, Come with us (say they) we will
lay wait for blood, and lie privily for the innocent without a Prove. 1. 11, 12,
13, 14.
cause. We will swallow them up alive, like the grave, even whole, as those
that go down into the pit; we shall find all precious riches, and fill our
houses with spoil: cast in thy lot amongst us, we will have all one purse.
Atheists love their brethren, as Flies love the pot; as Dionysius loved his
bottles: so long as there is any meat in the pot, the Fly loves: and
Dionysius loved his bottles when they were full, but hurled them away when they
were empty: so we play with our friends. Job said, when I washed my paths
with butter, and when the rock Job 29. 6, 8.
powered me out rivers of oil, the young men saw me, and hid themselves, and
the aged arose and stood up: but now they that are younger than I, mock Job 30.
1.
me, yea and they whose Fathers I have refused to set with the dogs of my
flocks. But let us no longer love from the teeth outward, but from the heart
inward: we speak fair, as Cain did to Abel; we give good words, as Jacobs
Sons did to the Sichemites; we salute Genesis 4. Genesis 35.
men as Ioab did Abner; we shead Crocodiles tears, as Ismael did to Godoliah;
we kiss one another with Judas, but with no true 2 Samuel 3. Ier. 41. Mat. 26.
love, all is but Court-holy water. This made David to complain, saying;
Surely mine enemy did not defame me, for I could have borne it, neither did my
adversary exalt himself against me, for I would have hid Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14.
me from him: but it was thou, o man, my companion, and my familiar, we
delighted in consulting together, and went into the house of God, as
companions: and again, If he come to see me, he speaks lies: for pretending
love and good will unto me, he desires my destruction Psalm. 41. 6.
in his heart. We love men for profit: Voluntatis duo sunt calcaria, There be
two spurs of the will, honesty and utility; but utility, profit is the
stronger spur; we should carry holy Love, religious love toward our parents,
delectable love toward our neighbors.

The love of Papists is also condemned; In cathedra unitatis Deus posuit
doctrinam veritatis: God has placed the doctrine of verity Unity without
verity, is nothing but conspiracy.
in the chair of unity: unity without verity, is but conspiracy: for so it is
called, their brotherhood is in evil, as Jacob said of Simeon and Levi; they
consent against the Gospel, as the high Priests did against Christ; they have
neither unity, nor verity; they agree Esaias 8. 12. Genesis 49. 5. Act. 4. 27.
as the false prophets did, not in the Lord, but against the Lord; they make
ado of their Council of Trident, and how they agree in all meetings. Alas, a
few buckeram Bishops of Italy conspired together, but thirty eight Bishops in
all, not like the Council of Nice, wherein were 318. Bishops, or that of
Arimine, where were 600. Bishops, nor like the Council of Constance, where
were 4. Patriarchs. 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishops, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbots
and Doctors, at the deposing of Benedict the third. But to leave all this.

Keep your selves in the Love of God. And first, of Gods Love toward us; next,
of our love toward God: but in speaking of the Love of God to us, I shall
enter into a labyrinth without end, into a sea without bottom: For his Love is
so much, as there is no affection in nature, no proportion in the whole world
has been found fit to express it; the height of heaven above the earth, the
distance of the East from the West, the affection of Fathers toward their
children; of mothers toward the fruit of their womb; of nurses toward their
sucklings; of Eagles toward their young ones, of hens toward their chickens;
all these are but the shadows of Gods Love. Love in God is in the abstract, it
is not in him as in us, by accident and participation, but by essence only.

And God has an immanent Love in him, whereby he loves himself, by the
necessity of his own nature; and has a transient love flowing from him,
whereby he loves his creatures, some more and some less: according to the
liberty of his own will.

He has a general Love to all. For all are his creatures and the workmanship
of his hands: but he has a special Love to some, as unto his Elect and
chosen, and his Love toward them is both Temporary, and Sempiternall.

Temporary, Sustentando, Regendo, Conservando. By Sustaining, Ruling,
Preserving.

Sempiternall; gloriam dando: in giving them eternal glory; and the more holy
men are, the more he loves them: whereupon Saint Augustine does excellently
observe, that God loved the humanity of Christ more than any man, because he
was full of August. Tract. in John. Job. 1. 14.
grace and truth: Yea, Gods Love has all the dimensions, Thy mercy o God
reaches unto the Heavens: there is the height of his Love. Great is thy
goodness, and thou have delivered my soul from the Psalm. 36. 5. Psalm. 86. 13.
Psalm. 104. 24.
nethermost Hell: There is the depth of his love. The earth is full of thy
goodness, says David; there is the breadth of his Love. All the No love to be
compared to Gods love.
ends of the world have seen the salvation of God; There is the length of his
Love. Yea, Gods Love is transcendent, it can no more be measured, then ye can
measure the water with your fist: For Psalm. 104. 24. Psalm. 98. 4. Esa. 40.
what love shall I compare unto his Love? The love of a woman? It is great
indeed: but yet the love of Jonathan to David, was greater than it, Thy love to
me was wonderful, yea passing the love of 2 Samuel 1. 26.
women. The love of a mother? Here is a greater degree than in the former; but
yet this love is not so certain, and infallible, as Gods Love. Can a woman
forget her child, and not have compassion of Esa. 49. 15.
the son of her womb? If they should forget (as some may be, and some have
been so unnatural) yet will not I forget thee, says God to his disconsolate
and afflicted Sion. For as none can be compared to God: so no love can be
compared to his Love; as Jeremy spoke literally of his own grief, but
typically of Christ: Was there ever grief as my grief? So may I say of Gods
Love, Was there Lament. 1. 12.
ever love like his Love? No, no; his Love passes all understanding. Let us
then labor to obtain, and retain this Love of God, and keep our selves in
his Love: which we shall do, if we conform our wills to his will, and labor
to be like him; to be holy, as he is holy; merciful, as he is merciful;
righteous, as he is righteous: yea perfect, as he is perfect: For we must
be followers of God, as dear children, and walk in Love, as he loved Ephesians.
6.
us. So much for Gods Love toward us.

And now to speak of our love to God; and that the love whereby we love God,
is a work of Gods Love, whereby he loves man. Causa diligendi Deum, Deus est,
modus sine modo: The Bern*
cause that we love God, is God himself, the measure without measure. And
Saint John says, We loved him, because he loved us first: For our love
springs out of his; as the rivers from the Sea, 1 John. 4. 19.
his Love drawing our hearts to him, as the Loadstone does iron to it; or as
the Sardius does wood, our love answering to his Love, as an Echo to a man's
voice: and as one candle does light another, so the consideration of his Love
to us, does cause a reflection of our love to him.

And there be many reasons to move us to keep our selves in the Love of God:
The first is his Commandment, Thou shall Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
love the Lord thy God; And again, What does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear and love him? This our Savior calls, The great Commandment.
The Commander is great, the Object is great, the use of the duty is great, and
their reward is great, that take care to do it: and though there were no other
reason to move us to love God, but his bare Commandment, yet were that reason
strong enough to bind us; the power of a King, the authority of a Father, the
place of a master, requires obedience of a subject, child, and servant; but
God is our King, our Father, and Master, and therefore his bare command is
sufficient to bind us to love We must love God, because he commands it, and
equity requires it.
him.

A second reason, to move us to keep our selves in the Love of God, is in
regard of equity: For seeing Almighty God does love us, it is a matter of
equity, that we should requite love with love again. For though we cannot
love him as we ought, and as he loves us; yet must we love, for ours is an
ascending, his a descending love; and love descending, is more natural, more
fervent and vehement, than love ascending; as we see in parents, who love
their children better, then their children love them: besides, God loved us,
when we were his enemies: Ephesians. 2. Aug.
Durus est animus, qui si dilectionem nolebat impendere, nolet rependere; His
heart is oak, not flesh, but flint, that though he will not begin to love,
yet finding love, will show no love. God does love us; out of his Love he sent
his Son, his only Son, the Son of his Love, into the world, to save us:
he gives for us the early and latter rain, and reserveth Ier. 5.
for us, the appointed weeks of harvest yearly; He anointeth our head with
oil, and our cup runs over* we should be Psalm. 23. 5.
very unjust and injurious unto our selves, if we will not love him: For all
things work for the best to them that love God. Romans 8. 28.


Thirdly, Commodity should move us to keep our selves in the Love of God: For
first, by this Love, our faith produces those good duties, which we owe unto
God. For faith is as one hand receiving love, as the other giving. For Faith
works by Gal. 5. 6.
Love. And as Augustine says, Our life, and all our conversation is named of
our love. Nec faciunt bonos, vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores; which
being good or bad, make our manners to be thereafter: such as our love is,
such is our life; an holy Love, an holy life; an earthly love, an earthly life;
if a man's love be set on God, his life must needs be good; and though this
be certain, That a man is justified by Faith, yet this is as certain, that
the life of a man is justified by love. Romans 3.


Again, by the Love of God, we may know in what estate we are in. Saint
Augustine says, Duas Civitates duo faciunt amores: Aug. in Psalm. 64.
Jerusalem facit amor Dei, Babyloniam amor saeculi; Interroget ergo se quisque
quid amat, and inveniet unde sit Civis: Two loves make two Cities: the Love of
God makes Jerusalem, the love of the world Babylon; therefore let every man
but examine himself, what he loves, and he shall see in what estate he is,
and to what City he belongs. As a man by looking upon a dial, may know the
motion of the Sun in heaven; so by looking upon the thing he loves, he may
know in what estate he stands; whether he belong to Babylon, or Jerusalem,
to Hell, or Heaven, to God or the Devil.

Again, the Love of God ingenders in us the love of the We must love God,
because duty requires it.
godly for God: for as he that loves the Father, cannot but love his children,
and as he that loves his friend, will not misuse his picture; so he that
truly loves God, will love Gods children which are the lively pictures of God:
and this love is comfortable, because it assures us, that we are Christ's
disciples, and by this we know that we are translated from death to Ioh. 13.
1 John. 3. 14.
life.

Again, from the Love of God arises much grace and goodness, as much water
from one spring. Non habet viriditatem ramus boni operis, nisi manserit in
radice charitatis: Good works wither, except they be nourished by this Love.
As the love of money is the root, and nourisher of all evil; so the Love of God
is the mother, and nurse of all good, of all pious offices to God, and
Christian duties to man.

To conclude this point: the Love of God is as strong as death; for as death
does kill the body, so our love to God does mortify our love to the world, and
dispels rancour, wrath, malice; and as the rising of the Sun does chase away
the darkness of the night: so the Love of God does drive away the inordinate
love of worldly vanities: and thus ye see the utility of the Love of God.

4. We ought to keep our selves in the Love of God, because he is our
gtacious Father, and of his own good will begat he us, through the Word of
truth. Now, if a child must love his father, Iam. 1. 18.
of whom he has received a part of his body, how much more ought we to love
God, qui animam suam infundendo creavit, and creando infudit: of whom he has
received his soul, and unto whose goodness, he stands obliged both for soul
and body? Hereupon says Job, Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me Job
10. 8, 11, 11.
wholly round about: thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and joined
me with bones and sinews. Thou have given me life and grace, and thy
visitation has preserved my spirit. For these causes ought we to keep our
selves in the Love of God.

These among many, are reasons most sorcible, to keep our selves in the Love of
God. How our God is to be loved, our Savior shows, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. But
first, we must love Mat. 22 37.
him with all our heart, that is, with all our affections, joying and
delighting in none but in him; For he loves not God, that delights in any thing
more than God, as Augustine says truly, Minus te amat, qui aliquid tecum amat,
quod non propter te amat: He loves thee not, who loves any thing with thee,
which he loves Aug.
not for thee.

2. We must love him with all our soul, enduring rather a separation of the
soul from the body, than that our soul should be separated from God, who is
the Soul of the soul, and the comsort both of soul and body. How we are to
love God.


3. We must love him with all our mind, so that our cogitations must be fixed
upon him, and ruled by him; his Word should direct our reason, our reason rule
our wills, that so we may say with the Apostle, we live not, but God does
live within us. Our chiefest care should be how to perform this duty to God,
how to love him, as the Church said; I am full of love, I am sick of love. All
owe this duty to God, but few pay it, or if they Cant. 5. 8.
do, it is with cracked money, not current in Gods Exchequer: for our love to
God is cold, yea plain dead; and that appears in the breach of the first
Table; we are bankrupts both in piety toward God, and charity toward men: we
love the world and our pleasures more than God; we worship not God in Spirit
and in truth; we swear and blaspheme the name of God; we profane and
pollute the Sabbaths of God, we come seldom to the house of God; how can we
say, that we love God? The Love of God stands in the keeping of his
Commandments: So says our Savior; He that has my Commandments, John 14.
21, 23, 24.
and keeps them, is he that loves me: And again, If any man love me, he
will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
dwell with him: And again, He that loves me not, keeps not my words, etc.
He speaks positively and privatively; The blessed and undivided Trinity will
dwell with that man, who loves God truly; but till we serve God in
holiness, and righteousness, till we pray diligently, hear his Word
attentively, receive the Sacraments penitently, keep the Sabbaths religiously,
use his name reverently* let us be ashamed to say, that we love God: Nam
Regnum Dei, non est in verbis, 1 Cor. 4. 20.
sed in virtute: The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Many
Christians are mutilated and lame, either they want an ear, and cannot hear
God, or they want a tongue, and cannot praise God, or they want an heart, and
cannot love God. These Atheists are a disgrace to Religion, a Moth in the
garment of the Church, Monsters in nature, Devils in shape of men, as Christ
said of Judas; hollow trees, not holy trees; these men are reprived till the
last Sessions; a gibbet is built in hell for them, and all the gold in the
world cannot purchase their pardon: this is durus sermo, sed verus sermo: an
hard saying, but a true saying.

We talk of the love of men, and say, Charity is waxed cold; but as touching
the Love of God, there is altum silentium: not a word: we are like unslaked
lime, hot in the water, cold in the Sun; as the stone of Thracia, which
burns in the river, but is quenched with hot oil: we are pennie-wise, and
pound-foolish; like the Pharisees, which did tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner
Luke 11. 42.
of herbs, and passed over judgment and the Love of God: And yet if we loved
God an ell, where we love him an inch, it were but due debt. O, it is a most
honorable thing to be a lover of God! it was one of Abraham's greatest titles
of honor, to be called the friend The hope of eternal life, makes Gods
precepts seem easy.
of God; it is a most blessed thing, to be a lover of God; They that love the
Lord, shall be as the Sun that rises in his strength. And it is a most
miserable thing not to love God: for Maranatha, Anathema to them that love not
the Lord Jesus. Therefore as Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, that God would
guide their hearts in his Love; and this Judge. 5. 31. 1 Cor. 16.
ought to be thy prayer, and my prayer, and all our prayers; that God would
guide our hearts in his Love. And God guide our hearts in his Love evermore.

THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXI. Looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life.
The hope of eternal life makes Gods precepts seem easy.



YE have heard before, that Jude gave the Saints many precepts: now, to
mitigate the rigor of those precepts, he bids them look for eternal
life: as if he should say, If it be grievous to remember the words of the
Lord, to hear it, to get faith to pray, to keep themselves in the Love of God;
if nature, if flesh and blood will hardly take out these lessons, yet comfort
your selves with the hope of eternal life, there will be an end of all
troubles. Solomon has told you this long ago, saying, Surely there is an end,
and thy hope shall not be cut off: Prove. 23. 18.
all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, and ye shall be filled with
perfect joy: after this iron world, there is a golden world, Esa. 25. 8.
there is a better life prepared for them in Gods house; there are many
dwellings, as Christ said, In my Fathers house, there be many mansions: the
time of refreshing will come, as Peter said, Act. John. 14. 1.
3. 19.

And this is all joy, and there is no joy but this: I will give you Luke 10.
19, 20.
power (says our Savior to his disciples) to tread on serpents, and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you.
Nevertheless, in this rejoice not, but rather rejoice, because your names are
written in Heaven. Let not the rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the Hope of
reward makes all labors light.
wiseman in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, as Jeremy speaks;
but let us rejoice, that our names are written in heaven. Shall the soldier in
the wars, the mariner in the boistrous Ier. 9.
waves, the husbandman in the cloddy lands, the prentice in a hard service,
undergo great pains in hope, and shall not we? For what sustaineth the
soldier but hope of victory? and the mariner, but hope of arrival? and the
husbandman, but hope of harvest? and the prentise, but hope of freedom? And
shall not the hope of eternal life sustain us? Dum spiro, spero: whilst I
breathe, I hope: this is the poesy of a Christian; the hope of salvation, we
must put it on as a helmet; though we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy.
Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Psalm. 126. 5.
setting down the parts of a Christian life, to sweeten the actions of it;
they being hard to flesh and blood, propounds the blessed hope, saying, The
grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.
appeared, and teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World; looking for
the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. It is a blessed hope, a blessed place that we look for, it is
mount Garisim, not mount Hebal. He is a blessed God, Deuteronomy. 27. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Romans 9. 5. John 16. Mat. 25. Apoc. 21. Deuteronomy. 27. Exodus 19. Numb. 21. Exodus 10.
Genesis 3. cap. 13. Zach. 14.
Christ is a blessed Savior, the holy Ghost a blessed Comforter; we are
blessed Children, Heaven is a blessed Kingdom.

There is mount Garisim without any curse, mount Horeb without any thunder, the
wilderness of Sinai without any serpent, the land of Goshen without any
darkness, a Paradise without any serpent, Eden without any weeds, Jerusalem
without any Canaanite; there is day without night, Summer without Winter,
riches without measure, fullness without hunger, pleasure without loathing,
life without death.

The faith and love of the Colossians, sprang from the hope of Heaven:
therefore Paul tells them, that he thanked God for them, and prayed for them,
ever since he heard of their faith in Christ, and of Col. 1. 4, 5.
their love toward the Saints, for the hopes sake which is laid up for them in
Heaven. This stayed Job in all his extremities; when his cattle were stolen,
his houses blown down, his children slain, his friends grieved, his body
wounded, his wife alienated from him; I am sure (says he) my Redeemer lives,
and Job 19. 25.
I hope to find him my deliverer, and Savior: yea the Lord Jesus, for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross. God will put a Hebr. 12. 2.
difference one day between his children and bastards, between them that say,
that it is but vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Commandments, and that we walked humbly, Mal. 3. 14, 15.
before Lord of Hoasts? and those that fear God; the Corn shall be gathered
into the Garner, the Chafe shall be burnt, the Mat. 3.
Goats shall be separated from the Lambs, the vessels of Clay shall be
broken. Here is a mixture of sons, and of bastards; Man. 25.
of Corn, and Chafe; of Goats and Lambs; vessels Apoc. 2.
of Clay and of Gold: but in Heaven shall be a difference; and Body and soul
shall be glorified in all parts and powers.
if that were not, we were the most miserable: even Tully would not be rocked
again in his Cradle.

Amas vivere (quoth Aug.) in vita aeterna? Do thou love to live
everlastingly? Hope (with David) to see the goodness of the 1 Cor. 15. 19. Aug.
Lord in the land of the living. In this life (quoth Bern.) erit mira
serenitas, plena securitas, aeterna foelicitas: wonderful serenity, full
security, eternal felicity; then the whole man shall be renewed, our souls
shall be fully reformed to the Image of God, as touching the two powers
thereof. From our understanding shall be dispelled all darkness, and it shall
be filled with new light, and that of her self, she shall know God, and the
will of God, without preaching, without praying, without Sacraments, without
books and writings to instruct her: for preaching shall have an end, prayer an
end, Sacraments an end; we shall be as the Angels of God, understanding all
things: Now we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
but then shall we know, even as we are known. Our will also shall want all
wicked lusts, and shall be filled with all true Love, both toward God and
man, and this love shall never be interrupted. To conclude, all the faculties
of the soul shall be filled with God and with his power; so as the soul
shall nourish the body without meat, drink, sleep, because he shall be
replenished with God, and God shall be all in all. Erimus cives Coeli, socij
Angelorum, Ephesians. 2. 3.
cohaeredes Christi: we shall be Citizens of Heaven, fellows of Angels,
coheires with Christ, Citizens with Saints, and of the household of God.

As touching the body, the other part of man, it shall also be glorified:
nulla illius erit senectus, nulla mors, nullus morbus, nullum peccatum: No old
age shall molest it, nor death, nor disease, nor sin, our bodies shall be
like the glorious body of the Lord Jesus. Nemo ibi irascitur, nemo invidet,
nemo laeditur: there is no man angry, no man envieth, no man is any way hurt or
harmed; No lust does annoy, no devil does terrify: there is a Sun without
setting, life without dying, labor without weariness, pleasures without
tediousness* there we shall see God as he is, in the sight 1 John 2. 3. Aug.
of whom, we shall do four things; we shall know, we shall love, we shall
rejoice, and we shall praise: we shall know the secrets of God, which is a
depth without bottom: we shall love God above all, and our neighbor, as we
should; we shall rejoice, for in Heaven there is fullness of joy, and at the
right Psalm. 16. 11.
hand of God, there is pleasure for evermore: and we shall praise God without
ceasing. For says David, Blessed are they that dwell in thy Psalm. 84. 1.
house, they shall always be praising of thee; there our joy shall be full;
all joy here is at an ebb, but there is the flood of joy, perfection, Job 15.
11.
fullness of joy.

Again, here all joy is mixed with pain; Health, with Sickness; Life, with
Death; Summer, with Winter; the Spring with the Autumn; Liberty, with
bondage; there is all solace, no sorrow; The joys of of heaven unspeakable
inco^prehensible.
the first sorrow cast out into shame.

But as touching this eternal Life, whereof Saint Jude here speaks, a man
may well think of it, and talk of it, but he Apoc. 21. 4.
can never think nor talk of it as it is; Paul says, The eye has not seen,
the ear has not heard, the heart of man cannot conceive the 1 Cor. 2. 9.
joys of this life. The eye of man, What can it not see? How little a sound
will the ear hear? What great matters can the tongue utter? What wonderful
things can the heart of man conceive? Even for thousands, and thousand years.
What Arts and Sciences have been found out by man? yet cannot the eye see, nor
the ear hear, nor the tongue utter, nor the heart conceive of Life eternal.
The Apostle makes a glorious comparison, and yet speaks but of an earthly
building, and of earthly and corruptible things. So the Prophet Esaias describes
the Church militant and triumphant, but yet by earthly things; For it passes
his skill and cunning, to set out the perfect beauty and glory of it; God is
infinite; so the reward laid up for the just, is infinite: like unto himself;
the infinite God gives infinite pains to sinners, and infinite joys unto the
just.

Peter having but a glimmering of Heaven, was ravished, and cried out, Master,
here is good being let us build Tabernacles, one for thee, another for Moses,
and another for Elias. How great then is Mat. 17. 4.
the full sight of Heaven? There be (...), such joys as are not possible for
a man to utter. Mount Thabor was a goodly 2 Cor. 12. 4.
Mount: but in the celestial Mount in Heaven you shall see that, that eye
never saw, riches without measure, glory without comparison, life without
death, day without night, solace without ceasing, joy without ending, a land
that flows with milk and honey; there we shall see the City of the living
God. the celestial Jerusalem, a company of innumerable Angels, the
congregation of the Hebr. 12. 22.
first borne, which are written in Heaven, the Spirits of just and perfect men,
Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and the blood of sprinkling, speaking
better things than the blood of Abel.

But to reason from the less to the greater: If here in an Inn be so many
pleasures, what are in our own home? For whiles we are strangers in the body,
we are absent from the Lord, but when we 2 Cor. 5. 6.
shall remove out of the body, we shall ever dwell with the Lord, and abide in
Heaven, which is our home. If in a prison our senses are filled with so many
delights, what shall be in a Palace? There shall be fullness of joy and
pleasures for evermore. If here in a Iayle there be so many pleasures to
entertain us, such variety Psalm. 16. 11.
of colors for the eye, such melody and sweet sounds for the ear, such
fragrant odors for the nose, such multitude of dishes for the taste; if in
Mount Horeb are so many things, What are in Mount Sion, in our own Country?
For here we are but strangers and pilgrims, but we seek another Country,
and we desire a Hebr. 11, 13, 16.
better, that is to say, an Heavenly. If a corruptible body feel Our glorified
bo^y shall have Spiritual, and Heavenly qualities.
such great sweetness, what shall a glorified body feel? For our bodies shall
one day be glorified; Though they be sown in dishonor, they shall be raised
in glory; though sown in weakness, they shall be raised in power; though
sown a natural body, it shall be raised a spiritual body: There is no
comparison between Light and Hebr. 11. 13, 16. 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.
Darkness, Gold and Lead, Glass and Pearl, Men and Angels, Heaven and
Earth, Corruption and Glory, Weakness and Power, Honor and Dishonor; Our
life is hid with Christ in Col. 3. 3.
God, and when Christ which is our life, shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in Glory: For life is threefold, Of Nature, Grace, and Glory.

The life of Nature is sweet, the life of Grace sweeter, and the life of Glory
sweetest of all; and this life of Glory is hid with Christ in God; and in this
life of Glory, there shall be in our bodies, first, Claritas, beauty and
cleerenesse, in so much that as Saint Chrysostom says, that the bodies of the
Saints shall be septies clariora Sole: seven times brighter than the Sun.
Secondly, in this life of Glory, there shall be in our bodies spiritual
agility: and hence is it, that some ascribe the activity and quickness of our
soul and spirit, to a glorified body, saying, that such bodies are not
spirits, but spiritualized bodies. Thirdly, in this life of Glory, there shall
be in our bodies Impassibility; For though here we suffer of every thing, yet
there we shall be subject to no corruptible passion, or suffering. Lastly, in
this life of Glory, there shall be in our bodies Immortality; here indeed
orimur and morimur, at our birth, we begin to dye, accedimus, we enter into
the world, succedimus, we succeed one another in the world; and last of all
decedimus, we depart all out of the world; but in this life of Glory, we
shall have immortal bodies.

And as the body, so the soul in this life of Glory shall be glorified: and
this her glory consists of two things; in her union with God, and in our
vision of God: both of these may be gathered out of that of Saint John, When
he shall appear, we shall be like him, and see him as he is: we shall be
like unto him, there 1 John. 3.
is our union; we shall see him as he is, there is our vision. Others add to
the beatitude of the soul, two other actions: one, the fruition, the other,
the eternal retention of God: and it is a question among the Learned, in which
of these four, the felicity of the soul does consist: some, in her vision of
God; some, in her fruition of God; some, in her retention of God. I will not
determine, only I say, that in this life of Glory, both souls and bodies
shall have triumphum and gaudium, triumph, and joy, they shall triumph over
Death; for Death shall be no more over him, that has the Lordship of Death,
the Devil; for he shall never be able to hurt him. Again, they shall have
joy, God all in all to the glorified Saints.
first, in the Majesty of God: secondly, in the humanity of Christ: thirdly,
in the society of Angels and Saints: Vide intus, and extra, supra and infra,
circumcirca, and ubique gaudium: Look Aug.
within thee, and without thee; above thee, and beneath thee; about thee, and
everywhere there is joy: Nay, Gaudium super gaudium: joy, above joy; joy
surmounting all joy, and without the which there can be no joy; within thee
shall be joy in the glorification of body and soul; without thee, in the
company of the blessed Saints and Angels; above thee, in the sight of God;
beneath thee, in the beauty of the Heaven and Earth: For there shall be a new
Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells 2 Pet. 3.
righteousness, round about us, in the delight of all our senses; for God
himself shall be the object of all our senses: Erit enim speculum visui: He
shall be a glass to our eyes, music to our ears, honey to our mouths, a
flower to our hands, balm to our nose: Ibi erit candor Aestatis, amaenitas
Veris, abundantia Autumni, Bern.
requies Hiemalis: There shall be the fairness of Summer, the sweetness of
the Spring, the pienty of the Autumn, and the Winters rest: Nay, God shall be
all in all unto us. Heaven is described in the Apocalypse, that the walls are of
precious stones, 1 Cor. 13.
the gates pearls, the porters Angels, the streets paid with gold, the City
Interlaced with crystal rivers, the banks set with trees of life, which bear
fruit monthly, and the leaves cure the Nations: Their Sun is the countenance
of God, their day never ends, their felicity never decays, their state
never alters. You have been in mount Horeb, where you saw thunderings and
lightenings; now are ye called to mount Thabor, where ye shall enjoy the
glory of Christ Jesus, and say with Peter, Bonum est hic esse, It is good to
be here. Let them make account of this life, who make their Lusts their
guides, their Belly their god, their Kitchen their faith, the World their
Friend, and are not only in it, but of it. But our Country is Heaven, our
friends Angels, our companions the Saints, our Father God, our mother the
Church, our brother Christ, our guide the holy Ghost, our inheritance
Jerusalem, that is from above. The Saint, by loving another as himself, has
as many joys as fellows, and for that they all love God more than themselves,
they take more pleasure of his bliss, than all their joys besides: the
damnation of their friends grieveth them not, because it stands with the
glory of God, which is more to them, than all their bliss.

And thus ye see the joys of life: and yet all that I have said of Heaven,
where we shall lead a life eternal, and possess a Paradise of infinite
pleasure, is nothing; it is but stilla mari, a drop of water to the whole sea,
scintilla igni comparata, as a spark compared to the great fire of Aetna, it
is nothing: there In Heaven no decay or damping of joy.
needs no Sun to shine, no Moon to give light, no porters; the gates of it
are open continually, there is food better than the Mann, that fell from
Heaven, apparel finer than Aarons Ephod, Ecclus. 18. 9. Exodus 16. Exodus 30.
Psalm. 133. 2. Mat. 24. Apoc. 2. Hebr. 12. 22. Mat. 17. Esa. 11.
perfume sweeter than the perfume of the Tabernacle, a building more stately
than Salomons Temple; there is Paradise, without any Serpent to tempt us: Mount
Horeb, without any Thunder to fear us; Mount Thabor, without any change to
greeve us, Libanon, without any Wilderness to rent us: there is mirth without
mourning, and such joys and delights, that if all the plants of the Earth were
Pens, if all the Earth were Paper, if all the Sea were Ink, if every Man,
Woman, and Child were a good Penman, yet they were not able to express the
thousandth part of these joys: Hic in terris, omnium rerum est vicissitudo;
here in earth, all things alter and change: after Day comes Night; after
Winter, Summer; after Sickness, Health; after Life, Death; after Youth, old
Age; after Pleasure, Pain; but there is Day without Night, Summer without any
Winter; Health without any Sickness, or Sorrow; Life without Death, Youth
without old Age, Pleasure without any Pain: there is the Beauty of Absolon,
without Deformity, the Strength of Samson, without any Debility, the Wisdom
of Solomon, without any Folly: We shall come from Faith to Sight; Aug. Epist.
121. Pro^e Viduae.
from the Glass to the Face; from Aenigma to a plain Truth; Hic enim
ambulamus per fidem, non per aspectum: here we walk by Faith, and not by
Sight; Nunc in spe, ^unc in re; Now in Hope, then in Deed; Nuncforis, tunc
domi; Now abroad, then at home; For when this earthly house of this Tabernacle
shall be destroyed, we shall have an house not made with hands, but eternal
in Heaven. For 2 Cor. 5. 1.
as the Father said, Quid ibi deesse potest ubi Deus est, cui nihil deest? What
can there be wanting where God is, to whom nothing is wantings? O beati
visio, videre Regem Angelorum, Sanctum sanctorum, Deum Coeli, Rectorem terrae,
Patrem viventium! O blessed sight, to behold Aug. lib. despir. etc. cap. 57.
the King of Angels, the Holy of holies, the God of Heaven, the Ruler of the
Earth, the Father of the Living! Woe to me miserable creature (quoth August.)
which am not where the holy Saints be; for your life is without all gunne-shot
and danger of death, your knowledge without error, your love without offense,
your joy without any annoy; I (alas) am in the region of the shadow of death, I
know not my end, I would depart hence, but I know not when; I would dye, and
this happily shall be my last day.

But many have no regard at all of this life, they look too much to the
pleasures of the world, which makes them not to look into the powers of the
life to come, not to look to eternity. It is said of Moses, that he chose
rather to suffer afflictions, with the Hebr. 11. 25.
people of God in Egypt, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
The wicked, the Infidels have made a Covenant with death, and are Diverse errors
concerning eternal life.
with Hell at an agreement: they believe not eternal life, they hold with the
Sadduces, that there is no resurrection; nothing makes us loath to dye, but
unbelief. Withipoll wished to live five hundred Esa. 28. 15. Mat. 22.
years, though but in the shape of a toade; Paulus tertius said at his death,
Nunc tria experiar: Now shall I try three things, Number sit Deus, whether there
be a God, number anima sit immortalis, whether the soul be immortal, number sit
vita post mortem, and whether there be a life after death. The Borussians and
the Irish cry to their dead, Quare mortuus es? Why did thou dye? Thou had
wife, children, corn, cattle, oh why did thou dye? They have no hope. But,
brethren, things present will be past, and things future will 1 Thessalonians. 4.
be present, and last for ever: this life is no life. It were long to rehearse
all the errors, that Satan has troubled the Church withal in this point: I
will name but some, of many: first, the Libertines err, who say, that all men
shall be saved, all shall go to Heaven, contrary to that which our Savior
says, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven:
And Mat. 7. 14.
again, Many shall come in that day, and shall say, Lord, Lord, have not we
prophesied in thy name, cast out Devils in thy name, and done many miracles in
thy name? But he shall answer them, Depart from me, for verily I know you not.
And the Prophet tells us, That though the Esa. 10. 21.
number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet shall but a
remnant be saved. The Atheists err also, who say, Non est Deuteronomy: There is no
God, no Devil, no heaven, no hell, contrary to that of our Savior, Go ye
cursed, into everlasting Hell fire.

The Lucianists and Epicures err, who place all happiness in Mat. 25. 34. 41.
the pleasures of this life contrary to that of the Apostle; If in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.
19.
The Philosophers, and Pagans err, who define felicity to be the abundance of
riches, joined with virtue, and not the fruition of God in Christ Jesus,
contrary to that of our Savior, This is life John 17. 3.
eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent; this indeed is felicity, this is happiness. The Pep^sians err, who say,
that the heavenly Jerusalem is in this earth, contrary to that of Paul, who
says, Jerusalem, which is above, is free, which is the Gal. 4. 26.
mother of us all. The Origenists err, who say, that the Devils shall be
saved, contrary to Math. 15. The Chiliasts or Millinaries err, who say, that
Gods Kingdom shall last but a thousand years; contrary to that of the
Apostle, which says, That we shall be ever 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
with the Lord: and indeed, there shall never be end of this life, it shall be
eternal; eternal, not in respect of beginning, but in respect of ending, it
shall continue for ever: and unto this end Paul says, That Christ has
abolished death, and brought life of immortality 2 Timothy 1. 10.
unto light by the Gospel: they that have an entrance into this life, shall
never see end of it. Suppose that the whole world were a Sea, and every hundred
years expired, a bird must drink up one drop of it, in process of time, it
would come to Heaven set out by comparison of the Womb and World.
pass, that this huge Sea shall be dried up, but yet many millions of years
must be passed before this were done. Now if a man should enjoy this happy
life, but for the space of time in which the Sea is drying up, he would think
his case most happy and blessed: but behold, the Saints shall enjoy this happy
life, not only for that time, but for ever; it is an everlasting life, we
shall never see end thereof.

And as for the glory and happiness of this life, the quantity and quality may
be gathered from the situation of the place, for Coelum Empyreum is higher
than all the Heavens: for Paul names it the third Heaven; and it is called,
The Land of the living, as if 2 Cor. 12. Psalm. 27.
the Land which we now inhabit, were a Land of dead men; and indeed, We be
dead, but our life is hid with Christ in God. Now, if in this Col. 3. 3.
Region of dead men the creatures be so noble, and precious, what are they in
Heaven, in terra viventium, in the land of the living? In this land of the
dead, behold the greatness of the Heavens, the brightness of the Stars, the
beauty of the Earth, the plainness of the fields, the highness of the
Mountains, the greatness of the Valleys, the Floods and Rivers running like,
the veins in a man's body; Si omnia haec in terra mortuorum, if all these
things be in the land of the dead, what shall be in the Land of the living?

Again, we know that there be three places in this life; the first is the
Womb, the second, the World, the third, Heaven: between these places there is
a proportion: For Heaven is so much greater than the World, as the World is
greater than the Womb, and the more excellent, as well for continuance of
time, as greatness of place. As touching continuance of time, the first life
is no longer than nine months, the second life is fourscore years, the third
is infinite and eternal. Furthermore the diversity of dwellers in Heaven, and
Earth, do notably set forth unto us the difference of these two places: Haec
terra plena peccatorum: this Earth is full of sinners; 2 Pet. 3. 13.
illa justorum, that of just and righteous men: for there dwells
righteousness: this of Men, that of Angels, for there are a company of
innumerable Angels: here penitents inhabit, there such as have their sins
forgiven them do dwell; Here men Hebr. 12. 22.
militant, there men triumphant; here friends and enemies, there friends only,
and the elect. If the inhabitants do so differ, how much do the places
differ? There God shall be fullness of light to the understanding, abundance of
Peace to the Will, Bern.
continuance of eternity to the Memory; there the wisdom of Solomon shall
be ignorance, the beauty of Absolon deformity, the strength of Samson
debility; the treasure and wealth of Princes, poverty; Cur ergo in Aegypto
haeremus? Why do we still stick, and stay in Egypt? Why do we not go the
direct way to Canaan? Why feed we of acornes, and not of the Tree of Eternal
life the gift of God through Christ.
Life? Why drink we of broken Cysternes, and not of the waters of life? If
we had but a little sight of this Heavenly Jerusalem; we would despise
Babylon, for in Heaven we shall see God, and be equal with the Angels; there
we shall partake of so great joys, as no Geometrician can measure; so many,
as no Arithmetician can number; and so wonderful, as no Rhetorician can utter,
had he the tongue both of Men and Angels. O ineffabilis delectatio! O
unspeakeble delight! where God is their object, a looking glass for their
eyes, music for their ears, honey for their taste, sweet balsome for their
smell, a posie of all delights for their Heavenly hands. Seeing then that there
be such, and we look for such things, Let us be diligent to be found of
him in peace, without spot and blameless. 2 Pet. 3. 4.


But to proceed. As he would have them to look for eternal life, so here he
tells them, how they shall come by it, namely by Christ: for eternal life is
the gift of God, and comes of mere mercy, not of any desert of ours: we
never brought stone to this building; The builder and worker is God: we never
brought one dish to this ba^ket: Omnia parata sunt, all things are ready: we
never spun 2 Cor. 5. 1. Mat. 22.
one thread of this garment; the garment is Christ alone, and therefore we are
willed to put on the Lord Jesus: we never deserved Romans 13. 14.
the least drop of the joys of Heaven: we be servi inutiles, unprofitable Luke
17. 10.
servants: Et quid possunt inutiles servi mereri nisi flagellum? And what can
unprofitable servants deserve but the whip? Quaeris merita? (quoth Aug.) non
invenies nisi poenam: Do thou seek Merit? thou shall find nothing but
punishment; if we stand at Aug.
the staves end of God, for wages, it is Death, not Life; Hell, not Heaven;
Pains, not joys; For the wages of sin is death: that Romans 6. 23.
which God does for us, is a gift, not a stipend, It is he that must give us
an inheritance among them that are sanctified. So Christ said, Act. 20. 32.
It is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom: Gift is free, gift and
Luke 12. 32.
desert they are as opposite as the Tropickes, and cannot stand together: we
have not chosen Christ, but he has chosen us; he John 15. 18.
gave the occasion, not we; it is mercy, not merit; grace, not nature; favor,
not debt, that we must challenge: For by grace are we saved through faith,
and that not of our selves, it is the gift of Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
God, not of Works, lest any man should boast himself: so said Marie, His
mercy is on them that fear him; yet our fear is defective, we can Luk 1. 50.
claim nothing, but mercy; the Canaanite craved but mercy; O Lord, thou son
of David, have mercy on me. Cui daret justus Iudex coronam, Mat. 15. 22. Aug.
nisi cui dedisset Pater misericors gratiam? To whom should the just Judge give
the Crown, but unto whom the merciful Father has given grace? Gratia non
invenit, sed fecit nos eligendos: Grace has not found us, but has made us to
be chosen. Cum Deus coronat merita tua, nihil aliud coronat, nisi munera sua:
When God crowns our merits, he crowns nothing else, but his own gifts.

Blasphemous therefore is the saying of Dorbel; Quod Deus Coelum care vendit
Three sorts of merits, Congrui, Digni, Condigni.
amicis; and quod ipsi care emunt: That God sells heaven dear to his
friends, and they buy it dear; some travel thither by the foote-path of
righteousness, as the Prophets; some by the foote-path of cleanness, as
virgins; some by the foote-path of repentance, as the Confessors; some by the
foote-path of affliction, as the Martyrs; some by the foote-path of poverty, as
the Apostles; some by the foote-path of hospitality, as the Patriarchs. But
God sells not heaven, he gives it freely: We are Romans 3. 24.
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Lex data est, ut gratia quaereretur, the Law was given, that grace should be
sought; gratia data est, ut lex impleretur, and grace is given, that the Law
might be fulfilled: for All is of grace. Abraham in his faith, David, in his
godliness, Job in his patience, Romans 11.
Solomon in his wisdom, Elias in his zeal, cannot stand before God: If thou,
o Lord, markest iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Where Psalm. 130. 3.
the Prophet shows, that we cannot be just before God by merit, but by mercy
in the forgivenes of our sins: therefore says S. Jude, Look for the mercies
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

But to face out this mercy of God, the Papists have found out three sorts of
merits; Meritum congrui, digni, and condigni. Merit of congruity, they call
those preparations that are before grace, and to this end they allege
Cornelius, who was a devout man, and Act. 10. 2.
one that feared God with all his household, and gave much alms to the people,
and prayed God continually; And yet his prayer, and alms did proceed from that
spark of faith that he had in Christ, not from any work of nature.

Meritu^ digni, as when a just man prays for an unjust; as Job, and Daniel
for the Jews, of whose prayer God says thus, When the land sins against me
by committing a trespass, then will I stretch out my hand Ezech. 14. 13, 14.
upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof; and I will send
famine upon it, etc. And though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were
among them, they shoul deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
says the Lord God. Whereas it is spoken but by way of supposition.

Meritum condigni, be works of supererogation; Loud words of Lewd blasphemy!
too proud words for either men or Angels: For no work of it self is pure, and
can stand before God. Quis dabit mundum de immundo? Who can bring a clean
thing out of Job 14. 4.
filthiness? The Heavens are not clean in his sight, much less men. He found
folly in his Angels, how much more in us, that dwell in Job 15. Job 4. 18, 19.
houses of clay? This Moses often inculcated to Israel, lest they should
presume of their righteousness, and think themselves exalted by it: Speak not
thou in thy heart (says Moses) For my righteousness, the Lord has brought me
in to possess the land: for thou entrest not Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5.
to inherit their land, for thy righteousness, or for thy upright heart, but for
the wickedness of those nations, etc. The Lord gives not thee this good land
to possess, for thy righteousness: for thou art a stiffenecked people. And
he makes a Catalogue of their vices, how in the wilderness, in Horeb, and in
many other places, they provoked the No merit of condignity but in Christ.
Lord to anger: you were never good, neither egg, nor bird, quoth Moses. Merit
of condignity, is an action belonging to such a nature, as is both God and man,
not to a bare creature; for the Angels themselves cannot merit any thing at
Gods hand, for they are said to be elected; now, election is by grace,
otherwise salvation 1 Timothy 6. Romans 11. 5.
is in the power of the clay, not of the potter. Yea, Adam also, if he had
stood, could have merited nothing of God, seeing it is the bounden duty of
every creature to obey the Creator: For we are his workmanship, created unto
Christ Jesus, unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. If we do good works,
yet do we but our duty: the merit therefore of condignity does only agree
to Christ, God and man, whom each nature does to the effecting of this merit,
that which belongs unto it: for the humanity does minister matter to the
merit by suffering, and performing obedience; and the Deity of Christ, unto
which the humanity is hypostatically united, does confer full and sufficient
worthiness to the work; Hereupon came the voice; This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; For God was never pleased in any but in Christ: For we
are all by nature the Mat. 3. 17. Ephesians. 2. 3, 4, 5.
children of wrath, but God which is rich in mercy, through the great love,
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us
together in Christ, by whose grace ye are saved.

Again, that a work may be meritorious, there must be a proportion betwixt
that and eternal life; but eternal life is infinite, and our merits are
finite. Now, a finite work cannot equal infinite joy: Inter finitum and
infinitum nulla est comparatio: There is no comparison between a thing finite
and a thing infinite, therefore we merit not. The afflictions of this world are
not worthy of the Romans 8. 18.
glory that shall be showed unto us.

Again, all our works are imperfect, Ergo, do not condignly merit; for all
our work comes immediately from the Natural faculties of the soul, that is,
understanding and will: but these are imperfect, being regenerated but in part;
therefore our works are imperfect. For the understanding, it is said: that ex
part tantum videmus: we see but in part, know but in part. For the will it is
said, Est Lex in membris: There is a Law in my members, rebelling against the
Law of God: for I know (says the Apostle) that in me (that Romans 7. 18, 24.
is, in my flesh,) dwells no good thing. And again he cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of death? Bern.
says, Cantabo non justitiam meam, sedtuam, Domine; I will not Bern.
sing my own righteousness, but thine, O Lord. Should I fear whether that
one Justice will suffice two, or no? It is not a short cloak, that is able to
cover a couple; thy Justice is just for evermore, and will cover both thee and
me: it is largely large, and covers all my sins. And again, Meritum meum
est misericordia Bern. sermon. 62. in Cant.
Domini, My merit is Gods mercy; I am not void of merit, so Our works merit
not jointly with Christ's merits.
long as he is not void of mercy.

The Papists join their works with Christ, in case of justifying; for they
say, that we are Coo^perarij; fellow-workers, and coadjutors, and
fellow-helpers with God, abusing the words of Paul; So we therefore as workers
together beseech you, that ye recejve 2 Cor. 6. 1.
not the grace of God in vain: as Melchior Canus, in his common places
confesses, that God alone works salvation, and by and by he adds, Et nos
agere sub Deo, and cum Deo, That we work under God, and with God: to which
end he quoteth 1 Cor. 15. Not I, but the grace of God with me: as if God could
not do it, without us. But we need not answer these dogs, which can bark,
but not bite; neither can they take away the truth of God, though they can
obscure it. But I reason thus with them, Such as the wound is, such is the
salve: but the wound came by one only, therefore the salve is by one only: the
Major and Minor are justified by Paul; If through the offense of one, many be
dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man
Jesus Christ, has abounded Romans 5. 15, 17, 18, 19.
to many: For if by the offense of one, death reigned through one, much more
shall they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness,
reign in life, through one, that is, Jesus Christ: Likewise then as by the
offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation; so by the justifying
of one man, the benefit abounded toward all men (that believe) to the
justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous. The conclusion
follows of the premises. This doctrine of merits is to Christ, as the Moon
to the Sun, or the earth to the Moon, in her eclipse, it eclipseth the death
and merits of Christ; For if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died
for Gal. 2. 21. Fulgent. admoni.
nothing. Deus salvandos praevenit, damnandos invenit, praeveniente
misericordia, velle incipimus, and subsequente misericordia, bonum quod
volumus, facere valemus, etc. God preventeth such as are to be saved, and
finds such as are to be damned, his mercy preventing us, we begin to will,
and his mercy following us, we are able to do that good we will; grace in
preventing begins, and in following keeps; grace preventeth the wicked,
that he may be just, and grace follows the just, that he may not be
wicked: the beginnings of our vocations, the increasings of our justification,
the rewards of our glorification, all these are laid up with God in
predestination. And again, Deus est qui gratis vocat, and vocatos justificat,
etc. It is God, that freely calls us, and justifies them that are called,
and glorifieth them that are justified; Romans 8. 30. Romans 9.
and Paul calls good men, Vasa misericordiae, Vessels of mercy, not of
righteousness: if he had called them, vessels of righteousness, peradventure
they might have thought, that they had righteousness of themselves, Quoth
Fulgentius, A Deo est initium bonae voluntatis, ab eo facultas est been agendi,
and ab eo perseverantia bonae conversationis: From God is the beginning of a
good will, from him is Many Papists have renounced their own merits.
the power, and ability of well-doing, and from him the perseverancy of a good
life and conversation; he gives in this life humility, and in the future,
felicity, that they may be happy without end, that were humble without end:
Vtrumque tamen a Deo (quoth Fulgentius:) Yet notwithstanding both from God: we
claim no Fulgent. Epistola. 14. ad.
works, but Christ's works: Yea the Papists at a dead lift say so with us;
Pighius has given them all the slip in this point. One at his death cried,
Solus Christus, solus ille Salvator, Only Christ, he alone is a Savior: and
Sherwin at his death cried, O Jesus, Iesa, esto mihi Jesus: O Jesus, Jesus, be
to me a Jesus, a Savior, he knew no other Savior; and Bellarmine having
tired himself about the question of Justification, at the last he concludes,
that Bellar.
it is our safest course to rely upon the mercies of God, and merits of Christ
Jesus, propter propriae justitiae incertitudinem, and periculum inanis gloriae:
for the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and danger of vaineglory. And
Bernard upon his Sermon of the Annunciation Bern.
said, that the merits of men are not such, as eternal life by right is owing
for them; his reason is this; Omnia merita Dei dona sunt, and ita homo magis
propter ipsa, Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini; for (says he) all our merits
are the gifts of God; and so man is rather a debtour to God for them, then God
to man: and Friar Ferus affirms, that whatsoever God gives us, is of grace,
not of debt: and Gregorius Ariminensis, upon Peter Lombard defends at large,
That no work done by man, though coming from the greatest charity, merits, of
condignity, either eternal life, or any other reward temporal, because every
such work is the gift of God; For these are his words, Ex hoc infero, quod
nedum vita aeterna, nec alius alterius praemij aeterni, vel temporalis aliquis
actus hominis, ex quantacunque charitate elicitus est, de condigno meritorius
apud Deum, quia quilibet talis est donum Dei: From this I infer, that neither
life everlasting, nor any other, either of another eternal reward or temporal
act of man, proceeding from never so great charity, is meritorious of
condignity with God, because every such action is the gift of God. And
Lodovicus Granatensis Lodo. Gran.
said, Salva me, o Jesus, o vita, sine qua morior; o veritas, sine qua fallor; o
via sine qua err^; o lumen, sine quo in tenebris ambulo! Save me, o Jesus, o
life, without which I dye; o truth, without which I am deceived; o way,
without which I wander; o light, without which I walk in darkness! in te
aliquid sum, sine te nihil sum: in thee I am something, without thee, nothing:
There is not a wise Papist, but will say this at a dead lift; so said Luther,
when he was a Minorite, Triplex est benedictio, praeveniens, adjuvans,
consummans: There is a threefold blessing, a preventing blessing, an helping
Luther.
blessing, and a consummating; prima est misericordiae, the first is of mercy;
the second, of grace, the third, of glory: Mercy preventeth our conversion,
grace helps our conversation, glory perfecteth our consummation. We can
neither think any Election, Vocation and Justification, are of Gods free grace.
good thing, till we be prevented of mercy; neither can we do any good thing,
till we be helped of grace, nor discharged, till we be filled with glory.
Wherein now differ we from him in the doctrine of Mercy?

The cause of our salvation is Gods mercy alone, his good will and pleasure,
not our works: Concerning election; If the question be asked, why Abraham was
chosen, and not Nachor, why Jacob Genesis 11. Mal. 1. Romans 9. 1 Samuel 16.
was loved, and Esau hated; why Moses was elected, and Pharaoh hardened, why
David was accepted, and Saul refused; why few be chosen, and the most forsaken?
It cannot otherwise be answered, but thus, it was the good will of God to have
it so: Non est volentis, Mat. 22. Romans 9.
neque currentis, sed miserentis Dei: It is not of the willer, nor of the
runner, but of God showing mercy. Secondly, concerning vocation: If the
question be, why Cornelius the Gentile was called, and not Act. 10. Mat. 11.
Tertullus the Jew? Why the babes and little ones of the world, and not the
great men? Why the poor, the base, the vile, not the rich, the noble, the
honorable? Why the sinners, and not the just? 1 Cor. 1. 26. Mat. 9. Luke 14.
Mat. 11. 26.
Why the beggars by the high way were called, and the bidden guests excluded?
we can render no other reason, but this: It was the good pleasure of God.
Thirdly, concerning Justification: If the question be asked, why the Publican
went home more justified Luke 18.
then the Pharise? Why Mary the sinner, and not Simon the Leper? Luke 11.
Why harlots and Publicans go before Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 21. Genesis 21.
into heaven? Why the son of the Freewoman was received, and the Son of
the bondwoman rejected, being the elder? Why Israel, which so long sought for
righteousness, found it Romans 9.
not, and the Gentiles which sought it not, found it? We can render no cause,
but this, they sought for it by the works of the Romans 10.
Law, not by faith: our Justification is perfect, because we are counted just,
Iustitia Christi, through the righteousness of 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Christ: but our sanctification is unperfect, Vt mera gratia servati, in
Domino, non in nobis gloriemur: That being saved by mere 1 Cor. 1. 3.
grace, we may glory, not in our selves, but in the Lord. Finely and truly
says one, Proprijs meritis non obtineo regnum coelorum: I cannot Bern.
come to heaven by mine own merits; but Christ in a double right obtaining,
First, by the inheritance of his Father; And secondly, by the merit of his
Passion: Altero ipse contentus, alterum mihi resignavit, he being contented
with the one, has resigned the other to me; it is our worthiness to know our
unworthiness; Say, thou art an unprofitable servant; say with Viualdus, Non
abscondo Luke 17.
peccata, sed oste^do: I hide not my sins, but I show them; non abspergo, sed
aspergo: I wipe them not away, but I sprinkle them; non excuso, sed accuso: I
do not excuse them, but accuse them: peccata enim non nocent, si non placent:
my sins hurt me not, if they like me not; Initium salutis, cognitio peccati:
the beginning of salvation, is the knowledge of my transgression: in this flesh
dwells no goodness. M. Knoxe said at his death, Satan tempted him to
Confession the way to salvation.
desperation: but he alleged 1 Timothy 1. 15. that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners: after, he tempted him to presumption, and his merits;
and he alleged 1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou, that thou have not received? and
if thou have received it, why rejoycest thou, as though thou had not
received it? And so drove Satan away. Let us renounce our own merits, and fly
to Christ's, so shall we be partakers of eternal life.

THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VIRS. XXII. And have compassion of some, putting difference, etc. We must use
discretion, putting difference betwixt sinners.



THis is the last exhortation; the pith and marrow whereof is, to teach us to
use discretion, to put difference of sinners; to pity some, to reprove others;
and lastly, so to walk betwixt both, as that they may hate all sin, even the
garment of a sinner, for the sinners sake; the thieves coat, the Adulterers
coat, for the hatred they bear to theft and adultery: for we must hate the
evil, love the Amos 5. 15.
good, that we may be like our elder Brother Christ Jesus; who loved
righteousness, and hated Hebr. 1. 9.
iniquity.

First, generally we must use discretion, and make difference of men; we must
be like Surgeons, and expert Physicians, who do not lay one plaster to all
sores, nor minister one potion to all patients: this is that serpentine
Wisdom, that Christ requires of his Apostles; Be wise as Serpents, be
innocent as Doves; Mat. 10. 16.
Wisdom mixed with Innocence, and Innocence with it; Wisdom without
Innocence, is but craft and subtilty: and Innocence without Wisdom, is
dotage and folly; the one makes us Foxes, the other Asses; join them
together, and we are perfect Christians: we must have the Word of Knowledge,
to know what to speak, and the Word of Wisdom, to Ministers must be
discreet.
know when, and where, and how, and to whom to speak; to some mildely, to
others roughly, as occasion requires: this is the precept given to
Thessalonica; We desire you, Brethren, admonish 1 Cor. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded: bear with the weak, be
patient toward all men. Some are wild heifers, and must have a yoke; some
are rude horses, and must have a snaffle; some are dull asses, and must have a
whip and a spur; some are unruly, and must be admonished; some feeble, and
must be comforted; some weak, and must be tolerated, and toward all we must
use patience.

This doctrine concerns all, but chiefly Ministers, they must know, who be
woolves, and who be sheep; who be serpents, and who be doves; whom to draw,
and whom to lead; when to pipe, and when to mourn; when to power in oil, when
to power vinegar, when to use the menaces of the Law, when to use the promises
of the Gospel. All ground is not alike, some must have a share, some a
clotting: All wood is not to be used aliee, some will be plained and is soft,
some must have a wedge and a beetle: All sores are not to be handled alike,
some must have searing iron, some a seare-cloth: So all Christians are not
alike to be handled; and it is a notable work of Gods Spirit, to discern
spirits; thus Philip discerned not Simon Magus, as Peter did; Philip 1 Cor. 12.
Act. 8.
admitted him to Baptism, but Peter spied him, in fell nequitiae, in the gall
of bitterness.

In Rome the Magistrate had carried before him, Secures and fasces, hatchets
and rods; the first, for the great, the second, for the less offenders:
Alterius vitia emendandae, alterius frangenda. Paul Aug. in. Gal. 2. Act. 5.
Seneca.
reprehended Peter to his amendment, and Peter corrected Ananias to his
condemnment: Nobilis equus umbra virgae regitur, at indomitus, nec calcaribus
incitari potest. A rod will check a free-horse, and a twigge command a gentle
nagge, whereas the spur cannot stir a stubborn jade, nor the whippe scare
the untamed colt. The Nurse, when the Child has a fall, will first help it
up, after chide it, and if it fall again, correct it; so must the Nurse of
souls, first help a brother out of the mire of sin, then chide him for
falling into the ditch; and if this will not serve, apply a sharper corrasive
to his sore: yet let all this be done with wisdom and discretion, Qui mittit
in altum lapidem, recidet in caput ejus, lest he deal like a man that throws
up a stone rashly in his humor, and it falls down again upon his own head,
Hierom. ad Ru^t. Monac^.
to teach him wisdom.

Well, we must have compassion of some; for some sins are to be pitied: we
must be so far from hating, and rejoicing at their falls, that we ought rather
to sorrow and to be greeved. Hereupon says Paul, Brethren, if any of you be
overtaken with any fault, you that are spiritual, help to restore him in the
spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 12.
insult not over him, but restore him, know that thou may fall, We must be
compassionate to such as sin of infirmity.
thou art of the same mould, he is fallen by his own infirmity, thou stand by
the grace of God. Noli superbire: be not proud: thou stand not of thy self,
Noli superbire; but be strong in the Lord, and through the power of his might:
pity thy brother, and restore him with Ephesians. 6. 10.
meekness. The Word in the original signifies, to set a thing in joint, as
we do a leg or an arm dislocated; not breaking it, but putting it into the
place again, when it is out: and this is done four ways, quoth Master
Perkins; first, by reprehending Perkins in his Treatise of the Tongue. 2 Samuel
12.
generally and covertly, as Nathan did David in a parable, which entered further
into him, than if it had been done roughly. Secondly, in the place of a
reprehension, to put an exhortation, as are pills in Sugar; so Paul
prescribed, saying, Rebuke 1 Timothy 5. 1.
not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger men, as brethren,
etc. Thirdly, to propound the reproof in a man's own person: so Paul did,
saying, Now these things, Brethren, I have figuratively applied to my self,
and to Apollos, for your sake, that ye may 1 Cor. 4. 6.
learn by us, that no man presume above that which is written; that one swell
not against another for any man's cause. Fourthly, to reprove, but with prefaces
and insinuations, as that we do it of love, that we do it of good will: so
Naamans servant said to his Master, saying, 2 Reg. 5. 13.
Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing, ought thou not
to have done it? If we be believers of Christ, we cannot but lament the fall of
a brother: and among the members there is such sympathy, that if one suffer,
all the rest suffer with it; We are the 1 Cor. 12. 26.
members of Christ, and the members one of another. Paul told the Corinthians,
that in stead of laughing, they should have sorrowed. What 1 Cor. 5. 2.
father is not greeved with the hurt of his children? What friend is not
greeved at the loss of his friend? What shepherd delights in the wronging
and scattering of his flock, and not in gathering it together? How did it
greeve Abraham to lose Genesis 17. 1 Samuel 19.
Ismael? How did Jonathan vex himself for David? And how did David rescue a
poor sheep or a Lamb, out of the mouth of the Lion? And shall not we rescue
a soul out of the mouth 1 Samuel 16.
of the Devil? If men be of a contrary mind to us, oh do not hate them, but
pity them, and instruct them with meekness, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
praying God to give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that
they may come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, which is taken of
him, at his will. Monicha wept so long for Augustine a Manichaean, that a
Bishop said unto her, Filius jot lachrymarum perire non potest: A son of so
many tears cannot perish. This affection should be in us toward a sinner.

This was in Abraham, when he prayed for Sodom, saying, Genesis 18.
What if there be but ten righteous men, will you not spare the City? And
this was also in Moses, when he cried to God, saying, Forgive them, O Lord, or
else raze me out of the Book of life, that thou Exodus 32.
have written. And in Esaias, when he cried, TurneTurne away from me, labor
M^n more compassionate toward beasts, and beasts to men, than men to men.
not to comfort me, I will weep bitterly, because my people perish. And in
Jeremy, when he wished, That his head were a well of water, and his eyes
fountains of tears, that he might weep day and night for the people. And
this affection was also in Christ, when he wept over Jerusalem, saying, Oh if
thou had known at the least in this Esa. 22. 4. Ier. 9. 1. Luke 19. Romans 9.
thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! The like we read in Paul,
who wished himself, to be separate from Christ for his brethren the
Israelites. And it is all our parts to greeve at sin in another man, and to
take pity upon him, according to the words of my Text, Have compassion on
some: but where shall we single out one among the sons of Adam, that is so
compassionate, as that he will sorrow for sin in another man? When he sees
his brother to be a vicious liver, one wedded to wickedness, and sunk in
sin, he will salve it up with humanum est? Cato is said, never to laugh
except once, and that was, when he saw an Ass eat thistles, that the
senseless beast should take pleasure in pricks, which should have been spurs
to him to take pains: so we seeing our brethren eating up sin as bread, and
drinking iniquity like water, rather laugh with Democritus, at their follies,
than with Heraclitus lament their faults. And what compassion is in this? Cadit
asinus, and est qui sublevet; perit anima, and non est qui curat: men will
pity the poor Ass, for when he falls, they will help him up again, but
they will show no compassion on men's souls; for though they perish, they care
not: herein they are like the base-minded Gergesites, who had more care of
their swine than of their souls. Mat. ^. 25.


The Elephant, if he meet a wounded person in the Wilderness, he brings
him into his way again; and the like is fathered on the Dolphin, who when
Arion was cast into the Sea, speedily conveyed him unto the shore. I could
wish that men were Elephants, or Dolphins in spark of good nature one to
another. To sorrow one for another sin, it is not our custom. The
compassionate Samaritane to the poor passinger* may teach us to show mercy
unto sinners: his wounds resemble afflicted sinners; Mat. 18.
his descension from Jerusalem to Jericho; his falling from the service of God;
his spoiling by thieves; sinners overthrow by Satan; the Priest and Levite
which went aloof, Sunt mali ecclesiae ministri: bad ministers. Now, the
stranger, that infused Oleum misericordiae and vinum justitiae: the oil of
mercy, Lir^.
and the wine of Justice, is any good man moved with mercy and compassion at a
sinners wretched estate, and uses all good means to reclaim him. To this
purpose tends the counsel of the Apostle, Bear ye one another burden; and
as Christ stretched out his hand to take fast hold on Peter, when he was ready
Gal. 6. 2.
to sink into the Sea, so ought we toward our faithful brethren, overwhelmed
with the waves of wickedness, to have compassion on them, and by counsel and
comfort out of the Word of God, We should not envy the sinner, but pity him.
to save their souls? and this is compassion indeed.

Augustine speaking of the drunkenness and other sins in Africa, said,
Tollantur ista, sed tamen cum commisseratione, non aspere, non duriter: Let
these sins (quoth August.) be taken away; yet with compassion, with mercy,
not sharply, not bitterly; Docendo potius quam jubendo, monendo, non minando:
by teaching rather than by commanding, by monishing rather than by menacing:
for those Jews, whom the thunders of Sinai could not terrify, Saint John,
with the sweet song of Sion did Mat. 3.
persuade.

Again, the same Father aforenamed, says thus, Qui phreneticum ligat, and
lethargicum excitat: he that binds a phranticke man, and awaketh a man sick
of a Lethargy, ambobus molestus, ambobus tamen utilis: he is troublesome to
both, yet profitable for them both; Rogat charitas hunc ligare, illum excitare,
ambos tamen amare: Charity obliges a man to bind the one, and to awake the
other, yet to love both: Let all be done in love, and pity, and as the
Apostle counsels us, Let us follow the truth in Ephesians. 4. 15.
love. The Drunkards, Usurers, Swearers rail on us, in all places, in all
Faires and Markets. What then? O pity them; Have compassion on them: alas,
poor souls, their state is pitiful, Luke 23.
not odious; Nesciunt, quid faciunt: they know not what they do: Nec
deludendi, nec minandi, sed plangendi: these men are not to be Aug.
mocked, nor menaced, but mourned for. I say to them, as Christ said to the
woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God, and John 4. 10.
who it is, that says unto thee, etc. so if these men knew the gift of God,
the power of the Word, they would not do, as they do: fret not then at these
men, as David counsels thee, saying, Fret not thy self because of the
ungodly, neither be thou envious for the evil doer, for they shall soon be
cut down as the grass, and wither Psalm. 37. 1, 2.
like a green herb. And as Christ commands thee, Break not a Mat. 12. 20.
bruised Reed, quench not the smoking flax. Paul, that so hated sin, and
sharply reproved it in Elymas the Sorcerer, saying, O full of Acts. 13. 10.
all subtilty, and all mischief, the Child of the Devil, and enemy to all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord?
Yet writing to the Corinthians, he says, I fear lest when 2 Cor. 12. 21.
I come again, my God abase me among you, and I shall bewail many of them
which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanenes, and
fornication, and wantonness, which they have committed: For as there was
nothing that did so much rejoice his heart, as when his preaching profited, so
nothing did more cast down his heart, then when his labor did no good: and
again he says, We are fools for Christ's sake, and ye are wise in Christ;
we are weak, and ye 1 Cor. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 21.
are strong; ye are honorable, and we are despised; unto this hour we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling place, and labor, working with our own hands; we are reviled, and
yet we bless. We are persecuted, and suffer it; we are evil spoken of, and
we pray: we are made as the filth of the world, the off scouring The godly
bewail the fearful estate of the wicked.
of all things, unto this day. He came not with a rod, but in love, and in the
Spirit of meeknes: he wept over the Philippians. Jeremy cries out against the
sins of the Jews, saying, I harkened and heard, but no man spoke aright, no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned
to their race, as the horse Phil. 3. 18. Ier. 8. 6, 7.
into the battle: even the Stork in the air knows her appointed time, and
the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming,
but my people knows not the judgment of the Lord: Yet did he it with great
compassion, as appears by his own words, saying, Oh that my head were full of
water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night
for the slain of the daughter of Ier. 9. 1.
my people! How greeved it Samuel, after that God had cast away Saul! The text
does say, that Samuel mourned for Saul, and God did chide him for it, saying,
How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing 1 Samuel 15. 25. Cap. 16. 1.
I have cast him away, for reigning over Israel? Samuel did not say, as many
do, Let him perish, Let him die, He is a reprobate, Let him go; but mourned
and sorrowed for him. Yea the Lord Jesus wept over Jerusalem, so says the
Evangelist, When he came near and beheld the City, he wept over it, saying, Oh
if thou had Luke 19.
known at the least in this thy day the things that do belong unto thy peace!
etc. As if he should have said, Alas poor town, alas poor people, ye are
now merry and jocund: but oh poor souls, you know not your state, how near
your fall is: whereupon one notes, We read that Christ was hungry, weary,
sorry, angry, how he wept often; but we read not that he laughed: for even
this Mat. 21. John 4. John 11. Mat. 3. Mat. 12. 25.
laughter proceeds from vanity; Ea sola ridentur, quae notant turpitudinem
aliquam non turpiter. As Christ was God, he said: I give thee thanks, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have opened them to children: But as he was man, he sorrowed
for the wicked; and here, by the way note, for the weak and penitent, that
when we speak roughly, and denounce menaces, we do it not to them, but to
the impenitent: For as a Father sometimes lays Rats-bane, to kill mice, and
the children ignorantly fall upon it: so the weak apply the menaces done to
the reprobate, to themselves; but yet they pertain not to them, but to the
bastards, to the impenitent. The Lord will try the righteous, but the wicked,
and him that loves Psalm. 11. 5. 6.
iniquity, does his soul abhor; upon the wicked he shall rain snares,
fire, and brimstone, and stormy tempest, this is the portion of their cup.
Wherefore hear the Word of the Lord, ye scornful men: You say, that you made
a Covenant with death, and are with Hell at agreement, but your Covenant with
death shall be dissolved, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand, but
the scourge shall run over you, and pass through you, etc.

Again, though we must have compassion of some, and pity them; yet this
compassion and pity must chiefly extend to the We must imitate Christ in
mercy and compassion.
soul of a sinner (as partly was touched before;) for Saint Jude speaks here
of the soul, this is the highest and greatest point of compassion in the
world, to pity the soul, to help it: Learn this of the Schoolmaster of the
world, of the wisdom of the Col 2. Hebr. 2. Apoc. 1.
Father, of the brightness of glory, the Ancient of days: for he had pity on
the ignorance of the people: says the Evangelist. When he saw the multitude,
he had compassion upon them, because he saw Mat. 9. 36.
them destitute, as sheep wanting a shepherd. He weepeth now over many a
congregation in England, that is without a pastor; he pittieth all sinners,
He is a merciful and faithful high Priest, and he Hebr. 2. 17. cap. 4. 15.
is touched with the feeling of our infirmities. We are all to learn of
Christ, to have pity on our ignorant brethren, to instruct them, to teach
them, to exhort the^, to do them good; blessed are such: so says Solomon, He
that wins souls, (that is, that brings the^ to the knowledge of God) is
wise; the tongue of such a one is as fined Prove. 11. 30. Prove. 10. 20.
silver: those pastors feed best, that are pitiful and compassionate.
Papists pretend to follow Christ in those things that are impossible; as in
fasting forty days; in giving the Holy Ghost to their shavelings; in opening
the eyes of the blind, in doing miracles; but in teaching and preaching, and
showing mercy to the peoples souls, they never come near him: they seek not
the rest of their souls, as Christ did. I am commanded to have compassion on
the body of my brother, as, To deal bread to the hungry, to bring the poor
that wandreth, into my Mat. 11. 29. Esaias 58. 7.
house, to cover the naked, and never to hide my face from mine own flesh; but
specially I must have compassion on the soul of my brother, for the more
precious that a thing is, the more care is ever to be had of it; herein
stands the love of a father to his children, of the Prince to his subjects,
of the minister to his flock, of one friend to another; for you know the
Commandment, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall
Levit. 19. 17.
plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. It is strange to
see how we pity an Ox, or an Ass fallen into a ditch, but not a brother
drowned in sin; it is vile to set an house on fire, but it is vile also to
pass by it, and not to quench it, when it is in our power: it is vile to wound
a man, but it is vile also to pass by him, as the Levite did, and as the
Priest did, and not to help him, as the Samaritane did: it is vile to sin,
it Luke 10.
is vile also not to reprove a sinner, and in time of need, not to comfort him,
to save a soul: He that has converted a sinner from going Iam. 5. 20.
astray out of the way, shall save a soul from death, and he shall hide a
multitude of sins. We think it a great matter to give a penny or two to a
poor man: but what though I help his need, fill his belly, cloth his
nakedness, and yet pity not his ignorance, blasphemy, and to increase
knowledge, zeal, and the fear of the Lord in him; our liberality is maimed,
we pity, but the worst and weakest part, that is, the body: follow therefore
the Obstinate sinners must be terrified.
counsel of the Apostle, Instruct with meekness them that are contrary
minded, (meaning such as are not come to the knowledge of the truth, but fall
through ignorance) proving that God at any 2 Timothy 2. 25.
time will give them repentance, that they may know the truth.

Again, as some men are to be pitied, so other some are to be reproved, and
must have the judgments of God denounced against them, and must be terrified
with menaces, for that they sin of malice, not of weakness; in knowledge,
not in ignorance; they be pertinaces: stubborn, obstinate opinionative, and so
to be handled; For as we must not be too sharp against a weak brother, lest
we deprive him of hope: so we may not be too soft with an obstinate man, lest
we increase his pride; the one may be driven to desperation, the other to
presumption; we may not incidere in Scyllam, evitare Charybdim: We must not
fall into Scylla, to avoid Charibdis, but draw out Gods sword, and lay Gods axe
to the root of their trees: so S. Paul in one of his Epistles to Mat. 3.
the Corynthians, used oil to mollify, in the other, wine to search 1 Cor. 5.
the wounds; he brought not a search-cloth, but a searing iron. For there be
four uses of the Scripture, to teach 2 Timothy 3. 16.
truth; to confute error; to instruct in manners; to reprove viciousness of
life: this aggravated the sin of Ananias, that he Act. 5. 4.
sinned willingly, and this extenuated the sin of the Jews, that they did it
ignorantly: Ignorantia enim liberat non a toto, sed a tanto. If Elymas had
been a weak brother, Paul would not have used the Act. 3. 17.
roughness that he did: but because he was an inveterate enemy, steeped in his
Lees, frozen in his dregs, he rattleth him up, and says, O full of all
subtilty, and mischief, the child of the Devil, and Act. 13. 10.
enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways
of the Lord? So Saint Peter dealt with Simon Magus, Thy money Act. 8. 20.
perish with thee, because thou think that the gift of God may be obtained
with money. James and John were filij tonitrui: sons of thunder; we had need
now not speak, but thunder, not use tongues, but trumpets, men are so asleep,
that they will not awake, except we thunder. It is said of the three Ministers
of Geneva, Vireto nemo fatur dulcius, Farrello nemo tonuit fortius, Calvino
nemo docuit doctius: None ever spoke more sweetly then Viret, none thundered
more strongly than Farrell, none taught more learnedly than Calvin. He that
could do all these three, were a perfect Minister. A Christian must not be
afraid to reprove sin; Noah reproved the old world; Lot, Sodom, and Gomorah;
Samuel, Saul; Nathan, David the King; Iaddi and Ahias, Jeroboam the Idolater;
Hanani, 1 Reg. 13. 1 Reg. 14.
Asa; Elias, Ahab; Jeremy -- but what, should I rip up all the Prophets,
Christ, John the Baptist, and the Apostles? Ignatius reproved Trajane; Ambrose,
Theodocian; Polycarpe, Martion; Chrysostom the Clergy; Gelasius, Anastasius.
All these reproved sin, and are presidents to us to do the same. If Herod
will marry his brothers wife. Let John tell him, Non licet, it may not be; if
Ahab will go The Prophets of God have terrified the wicked.
to Ramoth in Gilead, Michea must tell him, he shall never return; if Amazia
forbid Amos to preach, he may tell him, Thy wife shall be an harlot in the
City, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land
shall be divided by line, and thou shall dye in a Mat. 14. 1 Reg. 22. Amos 7.
17.
polluted Land, and Israel shall surely go into captivity. If the men of
Jerusalem will scorn us and our doctrine, Let us say unto them, Hear the Word
of the Lord, ye scornful men* Thus says the Esa. 23. 14, 17.
Lord, Judgment will I lay to the rule, and righteousness to the balance,
and the hail shall sweep away your vain confidence, etc. This teaches
Ministers to deal plainly and roundly, not to blanch, not to bring honey in
stead of wormwood; not to do as the false prophets did, of whom God speaks
thus, They have healed the hurt of Ier. 6. 14.
the daughter of my people, with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, when there
was no peace. This was their sin, the prophets looked out Lamen^ 2. 14.
vain and foolish things for you, they have not discovered your iniquities,
but have looked out false prophesies and causes of banishment. Esaias said of the
prophets of that time, Qui ducunt te, Esaias. 9. 15.
seducunt te: The leaders of the people cause you to err, and they that are
led by them, are devoured; they should have mourned, not piped. Jeremy cried
out against these prophets, I have seen in the prophets of Jerusalem,
filthiness, they commit adultery, and walk in Ier. 23. 14.
lies, they strengthen also the hands of the wicked, that none can return from
his wickedness, they are all unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as
Gomorah: therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold, I will feed them with
wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall; for from the Prophets of
Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into all the land: Hear not the words of
these prophets (says the Lord of Hosts) that prophecy unto you, and teach you
vanity, and speak the vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of
the Lord: they say still unto them that despise me, The Lord has said, ye
shall have peace, and they say to every one that walks in the stubbornnes of
his own heart, No evil shall come upon you. So did Ezechiel at Gods own
commandment cry out against these prophets, saying, Woe unto the foolish
prophets that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing. O Israel, thy
prophets are Ezech. 13. 3, 4.
like the Foxes in waste places, they have seen vanity, and lying divinations,
etc. And of these prophets Almighty God co^plaineth sore, Ezeth. 22. 25, 26, 28.
saying; The prophets are like roaring Lions, ravening for the prey, they have
devoured souls, they have taken the riches, and precious things, they have
made her many widows, her priests have broken my Law, and have defiled mine
holy things: They have put no difference between the holy and profane;
neither discerned between the clean and unclean, they have hid their eyes
from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them, they dawbe with untempered
mortar; seeing vanities and divining lies, etc. Ministers must not be of the
number of these prophets, but they must cry alowd, and not spare, they must
lift up their voices like trumpets, they must show the people their offenses,
and the house of Esaias. 58. 1.
Jacob her sins. Christ, who brake not a bruised reed, yet thundered against
the Pharisees, and denounces many woes against They that reproove, profit more
tha^ they that sooth.
them.

This also teaches the people to suffer the Word of Exhortation: but
flatterers are most esteemed of them, such as can sow Mat. 12. 20. cap. 25.
Esaias. 30. 10. 1 Reg. 22. 8.
pillowes under their elbowes, and can preach placentia, pleasing things unto
them. Ahab cannot abide Michea, if he prophesy otherwise, than he would have
him. This is the difference between a wise man, and a fool; the wise will
hear rebukes, but the foolish will not: so says Solomon, Rebuke not a
scorner, (meaning them that are incorrigible, such as Christ calls dogs
Prove. 9. 8.
and hogs: or he speaks this by way of comparison, not that the wicked
should be rebuked, but he shows their malice, and the small hope of their
amendment.) Well, Rebuke not a scorner (says Solomon) lest he hate thee; but
rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. And the Prophet speaking of the
wicked, says, They hate him that speaks in the gate (meaning the Prophet,
that openly Am^^. 5. 10.
reproves them) and they abhor him that speaks uprightly. But if a
Physician give a sharp potion, or a Surgeon, a sharp corrasive, it is not to
kill the patient, but to recover him. If a shepherd, after his whistle, settes
his dog on his sheep, it is not to woorry them, but to return them home;
therefore let men suffer the Word of exhortation, as the Apostle entreats
them, saying, I beseech you, brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation: You are
Hebr. 13. 22.
sheep, we shepherds, and no difference but this, that they in the field
have to do with unreasonable sheep; we in the Church with reasonable: yet some
are woolves, not sheep; some are unreasonable and evil men, yet rebuke them.
Dilexit Theodosius arguentem: non adulantem: Theodosius loved a reprover, not a
flatterer, for better are the wounds of a lover, than the kisses of an hater.
David wished to be rebuked: Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit,
and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil. Better Psalm. 141. 5.
we chide, then God chide.

And other save with fear.] The fear here named, is not only the denouncing
of judgment, by way of doctrine against impenitent sinners, but also the holy
discipline of the Church, the fearful sentence of Excommunication, whereby
men are delivered up to Satan, as was the incestuous Corinthian, of whom Paul
writes thus, When ye are gathered together, and my spirit with you, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that such one, I say, by the power 1 Cor. 5. 4,
5:
of our Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto Satar for the destruction of the
flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. So Hymeneus
and Alexander were excommunicate and delivered up to Satan 1 Timothy 1. 20.
for their blasphemy. For can there be a greater fear, then to think, that
we are estranged from the company of the Saints, put out of the Church,
delivered into the power of Satan, wholly committed and commended to the
Devil? Thus Babilas Bishop of Antioch, excommunicated Philip the Emperor for
the executing Diverse kind^ of excommunication.
of an hostage committed unto him: thus Ambrose Bishop of Millane
excommunicated Theodosius for a murder done at Thessalonica; thus Symonachus
excommunicated Anastasius the Emperor for blasphemy, and Paganism: thus
Innocentius excommunicated Arcadius and Eudoxia, for persecuting Chrysostom.
Thus are vile men to be handled, they are to be excommunicate and delivered up
to Satan: We must have no fellowship with them. Finely says one, Triplex est
Communio: there is a threefold Hemingius.
Communion, Spiritualis, Moralis, Sacramentales. Spiritual, Moral,
Sacramental.

The first with God in a spiritual life, the second with men in our daily
conversing, the third, with the Pastor and the Church in partaking of the holy
mysteries.

And again, Triplex est excommunicatio; Spiritualis, Moralis, Sacramentalis.
Spiritual, Moral, Sacramental.

Spiritual, whereby a man is shut out of Heaven, and shall never be partaker
of the price of our high calling, which is in Christ Jesus.

Moral, whereby a man is excluded from the company of men. Sacramental;
whereby he is excluded from prayer, the Word and Sacraments. And this
excommunication is a fearful thing; it is to be cut or divided from the body
of Christ, and to be delivered up to Satan.

There is a two fold use of Excommunication:

First, Vt excommunicatus pudore victus, ad poenitentiam excitetur, and
deflectat a malo: That the excommunicate may be ashamed of 2 Cor. 2. 7.
his sin, and be brought to repentance, and so to eschew evil. Secondly, Ne
contagio ad reliquos serpat: Lest the contagion should creep and infect
others; For a little leaven sowreth a whole lump of 2 Cor. 5. 6.
dowe: And excommunication is sometime just, sometime unjust: but howsoever it
passes against us, justly, or unjustly, it is to be Greg.
feared. Sententia excommunicationis sive justa, sive injusta, metuenda est.

THE SIX AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXIII. Pulling them out of the fire. The sinner, in a dangerous estate.



BEfore ye heard, that we must use discretion, and put difference of sinners,
to pity some, and to reprove some; To save them with fear, that is, by sharp
reproves to draw them out of danger. Now here in these words he shows the
great danger men are in; when they sin, they are in the fire, ready to be
consumed, and therefore he says, Pluck them out of the fire. And who can
pluck them out of the fire, but with violence? This is the state of the wicked,
they are as dry trees and rotten wood; and two things are prepared for them, a
sharp hatchet, and a quick fire: for, every tree, that brings Luke 3. 9.
not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down, and cast into the fire. This is
that which the Apostle calls, the deceitfulnes of sin. Exhort one Hebr. 3.
13.
another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin; It promises safety, and brings destruction; so
the Apostle affirms, Sin (says he) took occasion by the Commandment,
and thereby slew me. We think we are well Romans 7. 11.
enough when we sin, and yet indeed we are at the very pits mouth, For when
the wicked grow as grass, and all workers of iniquity Psalm. 92. verse. 7.
flourish, then shall they be destroyed for ever: And Job speaking of the
wicked: says, One dies in his full strength, being in all ease and Job. 21.
23, 24.
prosperity, his breasts are full of milk, and his bones full of marrow.

And as the sudden ruin of the wicked is set out by fire, they are The fickle
estate of the wicked.
ready to be burned; so again, their state is described by ye, they are as
men, that walking on an ye, suddenly fall. So says the Psalmist, Thou do
set them in slippery places, and castest them Psalm. 73. 17, 18.
down into desolation; how suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly
consumed? Their estate also is set out by grass and herbs, which grow to
day, and are cut down to morrow; so says David: They shall soon be cut
down like grass, and shall wither Psalm. 37. 2.
as the green herb: their estate also is compared to Chafe, which now lies
in the floor, and by and by is blown away with the wind. The Prophet says,
They are as Chafe which the wind drives away. Alas, all their felicity, and
great pomp, it Psalm. 1. 4.
is but a dream, it is but as Chafe, the least blast of Gods wrath will
overthrow all their happiness and felicity, which at the best is most
uncertain and mutable. Job says, They spend their days in pleasure; and
suddenly go down to Hell. And he says, The Lord Job 21. 18.
does make them as stubble before the wind, and as chafe shall they be
dispersed: for in a moment they are gone, and like chafe scattered abroad: the
godly are as trees; the wicked are as chafe; there is difference between
chafe and trees.

Jeremy lays out the estate of the wicked, by comparing them to sheep; Let
us talk with thee of thy judgments (says Jeremy Ier. 12. 1, 2, 3.
to God) Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all they in
wealth, that rebelliously transgress? Thou have planted them, and they have
taken root, they grow, and bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth,
but far from their reins: and at last he says, Pull them out like sheep
for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter. Now they live,
and within an hour are led to the shambles. Job compares them to a dream or
vision in the night, and says, That the rejoicing of the wicked is but Job 20.
5, 8, 9.
short, and the joy of hypocrites is but for a moment: he shall flee away as a
dream, and they shall not find him, and shall pass away as a vision in the
night, so that the eye which had seen him, shall see him no more, and his
place shall see him no more. Moses compares them to a tale that is told, and
he says, that they bring their years to an Psalm. 90.
end as a tale that is told: and Saint James to a vapor, that continues but a
little season. How soon is the ye moulten? How soon Iam. 4.
is the flower withered? How soon is a vapor consumed of the Sun? How soon
is a dream vanished? How soon is a tale told? How soon is a ship past? How
swift is the flight of an Job 4. 25.
Eagle? And such is our life: so elegantly David sets out their fall, I have
seen (says he) the wicked strong, spreading himself like a green Bay tree,
yet he passed away, and he was gone; I sought him, but he could not be found:
they are gone, they shall no more return Psalm. 37. 35, 36.
to their fair houses, and their places shall know them no more where they
dwelt; and how they lived we know, but where they dyed, and where they are, God
knows; they were here, but they are gone; Ederunt, biberunt, riserunt,
luserunt: they have eaten, drunken, laughed, sported, and made themselves
merry; but suddenly No man's estate permanent.
they are gone. Fear dwells in their houses, and brimstone is scattered in
their habitations: their roots are dried up beneath, and above is his branch
cut down, his remembrance shall perish from the earth, and Job 18, 15, 16, 17.
he shall have no name in the street.

David in his Epitaph cries out, Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? How are the
mighty overthrown? So how are these wicked ones overthrown? So Saint Ambrose
made it the foot of his song, speaking of the death of the three noble
Emperors, Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius; Omnibus, O Valentiniane and
Gratiane, speciosi fuistis; O Valentinian and Gratian, that have been Oratione
funebride Theodosi^ obitu and Gratiani.
beautiful to all, and admired of all, conjoined in life, not divided in
death, one grave did not separate them, whom one affection joined together,
meeker than Doves, swifter than Eagles, stouter than Lions, gentler than
Lambs; the bow of Gratian never turned back, neither did the sword of
Valentinian return empty. Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? How are the mighty
fallen? O quomodo? O how? how? Again speaking of Theodosius, he says, Obitum
ejus omnia elementa moerebant: All the Elements mourned for his death; the
Sun was eclipsed, the Moon did not shine, the Air was darkened, the Earth
trembled, the Waters roared, and the whole World bewailed the loss of such a
man: Quomodo ceciderunt potentes? O quomodo corruerunt? How are the mighty
fallen? How are the mighty overthrown? etc. No man's state is permanent: let no
man trust his present state: for how soon are rich men impoverished? How
suddenly are wise men infatuated? How soon are the honorable abased? How
suddenly are the strong weakened? How suddenly are the fair blemished? Laban
has lost his sheep, Achitophel his wisdom, Haman Genesis 30. 2 Samuel 16. Ester.
his honor, Samson his strength, Absolon his beauty, Dionysius his kingdom?
How suddenly do the wicked perish? The wicked are as men in the fire, ready to
be burned, as prisoners adjudged ready to be executed, as sheep for the
shambles; For behold, Pharaoh now sitting in his chariot, now drowned in the
Sea, Exodus 14.
and meat for Haddockes! Behold Balthazar, now tossing the pots, and by and by
quaking like a beast; behold Herod, now sitting in a chair of gold, and the
people crying, The voice of a God, and not of a man, and presently stricken of
an Angel, and eaten of Worms; behold Dionysius, to day a King in Syracuse, to
morrow a Schoolmasters in Corinth. Lastly, behold Cardinal Woolsey with
silver pillars, pollaxes, and golden crosses, writing, I and my King, and
within a while dead at Leicester of an Italian Fig, with his stinch putting
out the torch. To these examples of Balthazar, Pharaoh, Dionysius and others,
^erome adds many more. Nam feriunt sums fulmine montes, subito: The
Lightnings strike the high mountains suddenly. Constantins Death comes not
sudden to the godly.
dyed suddenly in a Village called Mopsi; Iulianus was suddenly hit with an
arrow from Heaven; Iovinianus stifled with stinch in a vomit of blood, Valius
perished in the wars against the Goths; Gratian was slain suddenly at Lions;
Valentinianus the younger was hanged; Procopius Maximinus, Eugenius (quoth he)
dyed suddenly on the sword; they say that Gregory the thirteenth died suddenly
of a Rheum, of whom Beza wrote, Nec panifex, nec potifex, sed carnifex, Papa
pater pontifex. This is the case of all men. But what wicked man will believe
this, till he feel it? Every man flatters himself, till the plague come, and
then he cries out that it came too suddenly, it came ere he looked for it;
For certainly, when a man shall hear the words of the curse, and Deuteronomy. 29.
19, 20.
bless himself in his heart, and says, I shall have peace, although I walk
after the stubbornness of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst:
the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but the wrath of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in
this book, shall light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from
under Heaven. Solomon notes three things in the wicked; their plague comes
shortly, suddenly, and without recovery; for mark his words, His destruction
(says he) comes Prove. 6. 15.
speedily, he shall be destroyed suddenly, without hope of recovery: all
these three be fearful. The wages of sin is death, yea sudden death. We
pray in the Letany to be delivered from sudden death: Romans 6. 23.
but our prayer is nothing, except our life be godly; that shall give a rest to
Gods children. No sickness, no death comes suddenly Esa. 28. 12.
to the child of God, for he prepares himself ever, he is a child of
light, and of the day, therefore he will not sleep as other men do, but he
will watch and be sober. Gods children have oil in their Lamps, that is,
Faith and Repentance; 1 Thessalonians. 5 5, 6. Mat. 25.
they have made their reckonings, their loins be girt, and their lights
burning; and let us be like unto these servants, that wait Luke 14. 28.
for their master, when he comes from the marriage, that when he comes and
koncketh, we may open unto him immediately. Luke 12.
The troubles that came upon Job were not sudden, he looked for them long
before they came; Multa cadunt inter calicem, supremaque labra: many things
happen between the cup and the upper Job 1. 25.
lip, but not to the godly, for they stand always in awe of God, and are afraid
to offend him: for which cause Solomon counts them blessed, saying, Blessed
is the man that fears always: And again, he says, A prudent man sees the
plague, and hides himself, Pro. 28. 14. Prove. 22. 3.
that is, the punishment that is prepared for the wicked, and flies to God for
succor; he sees his wants, he suspecteth himself, he daily asks God
mercy; whereas the wicked fears nothing, like the Amalekites, who eating,
drinking, 1 Samuel 30. 16.
playing, dansing, and even in the midst of all their sport and pastime were
suddenly slain: For the wicked say, Come, I will bring wine, and we will fill
our selves with strong drink, and to morrow Repentance and godly life must not
be deserted till death.
shall be as this day, and much more abundant: but God says, Hac nocte
repetent animam tuam: This night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee;
when some are eating, some drinking, some stealing, some whoring, some
building, buying, selling, Esaias 56. 12. Luke 12. 45. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3.
then shall God come: For the day of the Lord shall come even as a thief in
the night: for when they shall say, Peace, peace, sudden destruction shall come
upon them, as sorrow comes upon a Woman traveling with child, and they
shall not escape: and therefore the counsel of Augustine is good, Vitam
emendare, dum tempus habenius, to amend our lives, while we have time: Operari
dum dies est, to work, Aug. Ser. 4. de sanctis.
while it is day: Pulsare dum aperitur ostium; to knock while the door is
opened; falcem mittere, dum messis durat; to thrust in the sickle, while the
harvest lasts; Negotiari tempore nundinarum; to buy and sell while the Fair
or Market lasts; Misericordiam implorare, ante diem justitiae; to crave
mercy, before the day 2 Cor. 5. 2.
of justice approaches: For now is the accepted time, now is the day of
Salvation. Beg mercy then to day, thou know not whether God will give thee
time and grace to do it to morrow. To this saying of Augustine, I might add
the saying of Jerome upon his deathbed, as says Eusebius Cremonensis, Cur
moraris, miser, de die in die^ converti ad Deum? O miserable and wretched man,
why do thou defer from day to day to be converted unto God? Cur te jam
malorum nonpoenitet? Why do thou not now repent thee of thy sins and
wickedness? Ecce mors properat, ut te conterat: Behold, death approaches to
tear thee, and kill thee; the Devil plyeth him to receive thee; the worms
expect thee daily to devour thee; wit and strength and all begin to fail
thee. But thou will say, I will repent in articulo mortis; at the very point of
death. O vana suspitio, oh falsa meditatio! O vain suspicion, oh false
meditation! Look and see, if thou can find one of an hundred, nay, one of a
thousand, that have obtained this grace, and mercy of God, that his end should
be happy, whose life was unhappy; his death good, whose conversation has
been bad. Ignis est ira Dei: Gods wrath is fire: Nos sumus stipula: we are as
stubble and straw devoured of the fire: wherefore let us work while it is day,
the night comes when as no John 9.
man can work. And as Noah built the Arc in fair weather, and Joseph laid up
grain and corn in the seven plentiful years; and Genesis 6.
as the Ant that has neither Master, Ruler, nor Guide, provideth in the
plenty of Summer for the dearth of Winter; so let us Prove. 6.
like good Noah's build the Arc of a good Conscience, before the judgment
overflow; like provident Joseph's, let us lay up the grain of godliness in the
barnes of our hearts, before the dearth of Mercy come, and like painful Ants,
provide food for our souls, before the Winter of justice does approach. And
whatsoever Eccles. 11.
we put our hands unto, let us do it quickly; For there is neither work, nor
invention, nor wisdom, nor understanding in Ministers save the souls.
the grave that we go unto.

Save them with fear, in plucking them out of the fire.] he says, Save them
with fear. Christians are said to save men, when God uses their speech and
exhortation to do good on men; they are said to win souls, which is the
greatest gain in the world: For all the gold in the world laid in one
balance, and the soul of a man in another, will not countervaile one soul;
they cost more then so, for We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without
spotte. Solomon gained gold and silver, and had it in abundance: Alexander
gained men, for he subdued whole hosts: Augustus gained 1 Reg. 10. Luke 2.
Countries, for he taxed the world; but good men gain souls: this is most
of all; For he that wins souls, is happy; happy indeed: For they that turn
many to righteousness, shall shine as the Prove. 11. 30. Dan. 12. 3.
stars for ever and ever. We are said to convert a sinner, because God uses
our ministry in it: and this should be our chief care, to convert one another
from sin, to sanctity; from Sodom to Sion; from Babylon to Jerusalem; from
the power of Satan, unto God; For he which has converted a sinner from going
astray out of the Iam. 5. 20.
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins: And
our Savior says, If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell Mat. 18.
15.
him his fault between him and thee; if he hear thee, thou have won thy
brother. If parents were as careful to win the souls of their children, as
they are to save their bodies; and masters to do the same to their servants, by
instructing their family; God should have more glory, and they more comfort:
but to complain of this, Vbi incipiam, aut ubi desinaem? Where should I
begin, and where should I make an end? All the foundations of the earth are
out of course, most men have no conscience of them that be under them, and an
heavy judgment remains for them: their judgment is just, and their
damnation sleeps not. Paul would not 2 Pet. 2.
have the husband to leave the wife, nor the wife the husband, for that the one
may save the soul of the other; for mark his words, For what know thou, o
wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? 1 Cor. 7. 16.
or what know thou, o man, whether thou shall save thy wife? Even so what
know thou, o Father, whether thou shall save thy child? And what know
thou, o master, whether thou shall save thy servant? do thou thy duty: leave
the success to God. For neither is he that planteth, any thing, nor he that
waters, but God 1 Cor. 3. 7.
that gives the increase: So the Minister is said to save men; Take heed
(says Paul to Timothy) to thy self, and to thy doctrine, and continue 1 Timothy
4. 16.
therein, for in so doing, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee:
And yet to speak strictly and properly, there is no Savior but God; for,
there is salvation in no other, neither is there any Act. 4. 12.
other name given unto men, whereby they shall be saved: that is, no other
cause or mean. Yet it is said that grace saves, The grace Tit. 2. 11.
of God brings salvation to all men; And that the Word saves: For it
pleases God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them Many co^curre in
the work of Salvation.
that believe: And that faith saves; By grace are ye saved through faith; And
that the Sacraments save us: so says Saint P^ter, The figure, that now saves
us, even Baptism, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Ephesians. 2. 8. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
And that Ministers save us; so said Paul before Agrippa, that God had appeared
unto him, for this purpose, To open the eyes of the Gentiles, that they may
return from darkness to light, from the power Act. 26. 18.
of Satan, unto God; meaning, that they might be saved: and that God saves
us, Ego sum, ego sum, and praeter me non est Salvator: I am, Esa. 42.
I am, and besides me there is no Savior; that Christ saves us, for the
Apostle says, That he is the Savior of all men, but especially 1 Timothy 4. 10.
of them that believe: That the Holy Ghost saves us: and all this is true in a
godly sense: grace saves as the origin, the root of all; 1 John. 5.
the Word as a means under God, faith as the instrument, Sacraments as helps
and leaders to Heaven; Ministers as Legates from God; God as the efficient
cause, Christ as the material, John 3. 16. 1 John. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Holy Ghost as the applying cause.

And by the way note, that if the Minister under God saves men, how then dare
some say, that they do no good? Do they no good, that save men's souls? Yes,
their lips feed many, The Prove. 10, 11, 20, 21.
mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, the tongue of a just man is as
fined silver; the lips of the righteous do feed many: But many think that
the Preacher does no good, they think, that they can go to heaven without a
guide, they think themselves wise, and to see into all duties, as far as the
Minister. Well it may be, that they are wise in some respect; yet as the little
eye of the Eagle can see from the height of Heaven, and the great eye of an
Owl cannot see the Sun; so great men, and old men may oversee that which
base men, and poor men may see, being learned in the Word. Hereupon said
Elihu, Surely there is a spirit in man, but Job 32. 8, 9.
the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding; Great men are not always
wise, neither do the Ancient always understand judgment. David said, I have had
more understanding than all my teachers: Psalm. 119. 99, 100.
for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than the ancient,
because I keep thy precepts. As Polypheme had but one eye; so these Cyclopeans
see but with one eye; they see but the world, they see not Heaven? Oh how long
shall we charm these Psalm. 55. Mat. 7.
deaf Adders? How long shall we give holy things to dogs, and cast pearls
to swine? How long shall we play on Orpheus harp to these Asses? How long
shall we sow seed in this barraine ground? We pray to be delivered from these
unreasonable 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
and evil men. Shall Titius Sabinus his dog bring meat to the mouth of his
dead Master, and hold up his head in Tyber from sinking, because sometime he
gave him a crust of bread? And shall not the people love the Pastor that
gives the^ the Bread of Heaven, and saves their souls? Shall dogs be kinder
than men? Or is there no good to be done to a Parish, but bodily The saving
use should be made of the Word.
good? Christ fed four or five thousand with five barley loaves, and two
fishes, but we read not, that he did it above twice, and that in necessity:
But he bestowed three whole years in preaching to them; the greatest good
that he did in his life, was in John 6. Mat. 14. Mat. 5. Mat. 13. Luke 24.
Luke 10. Mat. 12. Act. 10. 38.
teaching them.

In the Mount,

In the Ship,

In the Temple,

In their Houses,

In the Fields. Yea in all places; for he went about doing good, and healing
all that were oppressed of the Devil. These men therefore that say, that we
do no good, have lost their senses and their souls also: For the living
soul, as touching the natural life, has four powers, and four touching the
spiritual life, that is,

Appetitive.

Retentive.

Digestive.

Expulsive.

It must desire the Word. Hereupon says S. Peter, As newborn babes, desire
the sincere milk of the Word; so did David, I will (says 1 Pet. 2. 2.
he) go to the Altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and gladness, etc.

2. It must keep; for, Blessed are they that hear the Word and Luke 11. 28.
keep it: So did the Corinths, for which cause, Paul did much praise them,
saying, Now I commend you, brethren, that ye remember all my 1 Cor. 11. 2.
things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you.

3. It must digest it into good manners; and to this purpose tends the
exhortation of Saint James, See that ye be doors of the Word, not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves. So did the Thessalonians, Iam. 1. 22.
they received the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1.
indeed, the Word of God.

4. It must expel dishonest things; as namely, all maliciousnes, and all
guile* all dissimulation and envy, and all evil speaking: So did 1 Pet. 2. 1.
the Antiochians: for the hand of the Lord was with them, so that a great Act.
11. 21.
number believed, and turned unto the Lord. All these benefits come by the
teacher under God; For as the nurse has two breasts to give milk to the
Infant: so the Minister has two also, doctrine and life; the one for example,
the other for instruction: touching both, we will say as Paul said, Ye are
witnesses, and God also, how 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among them that
believe. We appeal not to the Infidels, but to the believers: For if an
inquest of Infidels be impannelled on us, certainly we go down. Elias shall
be said to trouble Israel, the Apostles shall be seditious, John Baptist shall
have the Devil, 1 Reg. 18.
Christ is an enemy to Caesar; we appeal therefore from Infidels to
believers, and we hope, they will acquit us: for we may labi in domo: fall
in the house, but not a domo: from the house; they shall find us sine crimine,
without offensive fault, though not sine peccato, without fault. Ministry the
means of salvation.


Well said the women of Rome to Constantius the Emperor, when he would have
deposed Foelix, the Bishop, or have joined with him Liberius the heretic,
V^us Deus, unus Christus* una fides, unus Episcopus; One God, one Christ, one
faith, one Bishop, (quoth he.) Pretty is the fable of Demostenes, how the
woolves made league of peace with the sheep, so that the dogs might be
removed: but when the dogs were removed, the sheep were woorried: so the
Devil makes league with worldlings, so that they will put away their
Ministers: but when they are removed, be sure, the Devil will woorry and
devour the souls of the people, as the woolves did the sheep: For the great
red Dragon, that has seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads, and who with his tail draws down the third part of the stars of
Heaven, and casts them to the earth, stands before the woman traveling with
Child, to devour the Child as soon as it is brought forth: For when the
shepherd is smitten, the flock will be scattered, and your adversary Mat. 26.
1 Pet. 5. 8.
the Devil, as a roaring Lion, goes about seeking to devour. Well, of all
the indignities offered to us, we will say as Mauritus said to Phocas,
murdering his children, Videat Dominus, and judicet: So let God judge betwixt
you and us: we labor to save you, and you are like the dog in the water,
who biteth him by the hands, who would save him from drowning.

When Fulvius coquered over the French, and Scipio over Numantia, the people
cried, (...), A Savior, A Savior: and the earth rebounded, and the birds of
the air fell down dead, with the resound of the earth, and yet these saved but
men's bodies: Ministers save men's souls. As we cannot have trees without
planting, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
nor corn without sowing, nor houses without building: so we cannot come to
heaven without teaching: the clouds power down rain and make the earth
fruitful, Ministers are the Ephesians. 4. 20. Deuter. 32.
clouds, and their doctrines as the dew to make our hearts fruitful. Can a
bird live without air, or a fish without water, or a body without a soul? No
more can the soul without the Word; It is Verbum vitae, the Word of life:
Triplex est vita: there is a threefold life: Vitanaturae brutis peculiaris, a
life of nature peculiar Iobn 6. Eccles. 2. Col 3. 3. Ephesians. 4. 18.
to beasts; Vita gloriae, Angelis: A life of glory proper to the Angels; Vita
gratia, elect is: and life of grace to the elect; and this life is had by the
Word of God. Pregnant are the similitudes, that the Holy Ghost uses in the
Scriptures, where he compares Ministers to Fathers, to mothers, nurses,
watchmen, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal. 4. Ezeeb. 3. 1 Reg. 13. Hebr. 13. 7. Apoc. 12. 2.
and soldiers, overseers, stars. Children cannot be without fathers, nor
brought up without mothers, nor tended without nurses. Cities in war cannot
be kept without watchmen, nor kingdoms without soldiers, nor men walk in the
dark without sta-light. Solemn? mundo tollunt, qui Verbum Dei tollunt: They take
the Sun out of world, that take away the Word: they are the Without the light
of the Ministry, all in darkness.
light of the world, the salt of the earth, all would wander and ranckle in
their affections, if they were not: they should be as the men of Cimmeria, who
never saw the Sun; men should sit in the Church, as the Egyptians did in
their houses, not able to Exodus 10. Wisd. 5. 6.
arise in three days. Men might say, We have erred from the light of truth,
the light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the Sun of
Understanding rose not up uponus. Philip rejoiced, that Alexander was borne in
the days of Arislotle; Socrates rejoiced that he was borne an Atheuian; and
rejoice thou, that thou art a Christian, that thou live in the days of a
learned Ministry. The Queen of Sheba pronounced Salomons servants happy for
hearing him; 1 Reg. 10.
how happy then shall we think our selves, that hear God speak to us by a
Minister! O blessed men, that may hear God speak to us every Sunday, and
every Thursday, for the increase of faith and repentance in every one of us!
Blessed be that day, and happy be that hour, wherein God speaks unto thee
by a man. How happy was Galatia then? How did all the Churches count that a
blessed Church? Philip thought Alexander happy, that he was borne in the days
of Aristotle: and we think our selves unhappy, that we are borne in the time
of Light and doctrine: We wish a change, we wish Mariana tempora; we say, that
it was a good world then, men loved one another: yet then they knew no love, no
faith, no hope, no God, no Christ; they believed as the Church believed, and
the Church believed, as they believe, and neither could tell what they
believed. O blind times! o vile days! If a Prince should send an Ambassador
to Rebels, to proclaim pardon, and they should take and abuse him; would it
not kindle the ire of the Prince? So stands the case betwixt God and his
people; Ministers being Gods Legates, Gods Harolds; men having run all the
days of their life the broad way, when death comes, then they call for a
Guide, but then it is too late, if Gods mercy be not the more.

THE SEVEN AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXIII. And hate even the garment spotted in the flesh. We^ ^^ust
abstain from all appearance of evil.



THis is the last exhortation that Saint Jude uses, to hate even the garment
spotted in the flesh; that is, to hate not only the wicked works of the
flesh, but also all things which are nigh unto it, all provocations, and
inticements thereunto: and so Paul would have men not only to abstain from
evil, but also from all show of evil: Abstain (says he) from all
appearance of ^ Th^ss. 5. ^^.
evil.

Oh the great zeal of Jude here, which ought to be a mirror to us all! And
surely if we love God, we cannot but love virtue which he loves, and hate
sin, even the garment spotted in the flesh, which he hates. Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil, (says the Prophet) he preserves the souls of his
Saints, and will deliver Psalm. 97. 10.
them from the hand of the wicked. Note the condition; If men will have their
souls preserved; if they will be freed and delivered from the wicked, they
must hate evil; otherwise, no preservation of souls, no deliverance of them
out of the hands of the wicked: they that sport and laugh at sin, are fools,
and damned fools, reprobate fools, fools in folio, fools in print. The
fool makes a mock of sin (says Solomon) and does not know the
greevousnesse thereof, nor Gods judgments against the Prove. 14. 9.
same. Do we laugh at Christ's death? at that which made We must have no
communion with the wicked.
him sweat water and blood? at that for which an Angel came from Heaven, to
comfort him? At that which cost him his heart blood? Sumus in fell nequitiae:
We are in the gall of bitterness: What hearts have we, of flesh or of flint?
of folly Act. 8. 23.
or of madness, that we can laugh at sin? We feed of ashes (as Esa. 44. 20.
Psalm. 11. Apoc. 2. 2.
the proverb speaks.) Upon these men, God will rain snares, fire and
brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Oh how
it pleased God, that the Ephesians hated the Nicolaitans! If that had not been,
it is like, that Gods plague had fallen upon them, seeing they were fallen from
their first love: but this made amends for all. David would not suffer a vile
man in his house, There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, he that
tells Mat. 10. 1, 7, 8.
lies, shall not remain in my sight: betimes will I destroy all the wicked of
the Land, that I may cut off all workers of iniquity from the City of God.
David would not sit in the chair of vile men; he hated the enemies of God. Do
not I hate them, oh Lord, that hate thee? Do not I earnestly contend with
those that rise up against thee? I hate them with an Psalm. 1. 1. Psalm. 139. 20.
unfeigned hatred as they were mine utter enemies. Let all that speak wickedly
against God, and take his Name in vain, observe here, that they are no better
than haters of God, and such as rise up against him. And further the Prophet,
to work in us an hatred of the wicked, he says, I have not sit with vain
persons, neither will Psalm. 26. 4, 5.
I go with dessemblers: I have hated the company of evil doers, and will not
sit with the wicked. Now, if all that is written, is written for Romans 15. 4.
our learning, this teaches us to have no communion with the wicked. Hereupon,
when the Apostle had inveighed bitterly against fornication and all
uncleanenesse, filthiness, foolish talking and jesting; he gives immediately
the Ephesians this charge, not to be so deceived with vain words, as to be
companions with Ephesians. 5. 6, 7.
any defiled with the said evils. That which Solomon says against making
friendship with an angry man, and against going with Pro. 22. 24.
a furious man, is likewise to be practiced touching all other wicked and
ungodly men. Jacob would not have his bones buried among Genesis 44. 29.
the Idolaters, he would then have shaken to have linked, and joined, and
eaten, and drunken with them. Paul would not have the Corinths eat with bad
men, lest they should seem to countenance them, If any (says he) that is
called a brother, be a Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer,
or a Drunkard, or an 1 Cor. 5. 11.
Extortioner, with such a one eat not. If that Christianity were amongst ^^
that ought to be, an open profane evil man should be unto us as a Viper, or a
serpent, the smell of him should be so greevous, as the air or smell of the
plague. For sin is the same to the soul, that the plague is to the body,
rottenness to the apple, saving that the plague hurts but for a time, sin
for ever. For the worm dies not, and the fire never goes Mar. 9. 44.
out, that destroys the body, this destroys body and soul. For tribulation
and anguish shall be upon every soul that does Sin is as contagious to the
soul, as the plague to the body.
evil.

Wicked men must be avoided in respect Of God: Of our selves.

In respect of God, because they are Gods enemies, for so the Romans 2. 9.
Psalmist calls them, saying, The wicked shall perish, and the enemies Psalm.
37. 20.
of the Lord shall consume as the fat of Lambs, even as the smoke shall they
consume away. And again, God will arise, and his enemies shall be scattered
(meaning the wicked.) If they be Gods enemies, it is Psalm. 68. 1.
fit that all good men should shun and avoid them. A subject will not have
familiarity with a Traitor and Rebel against his Sovereign: the wicked are
Traitors and Rebels against God; we ought therefore to have no familiarity
with them.

Again wicked men must be avoided in respect of our selves, for they draw us
into great danger; and the danger they draw us unto, is twofold.

The one concerning our outward, The other concerning our inward Estate.

Concerning our outward estate: how dangerous a thing it is to converse with
the wicked; Let these two examples show, and let them be instar mill, in
stead of a thousand: Iehoshaphat was in so great danger by joining in wars
with Achab, against the Aramites, that all the Aramites bent themselves against
him (as supposing him to be Achab) and that if he had not in his extremity
cried out unto the Lord, he had been slain in the battle.

A second example we have in Ahaziah King of Judah (himself being wicked) who
went but to visit Ioram King of Israel (more wicked than himself) lying sick
of the wounds which the Syrians had given him, and it cost him his life: For
the sword of Iehu smote him, and wounded him to death.

Concerning our inward danger, the Apostle says thus, Evil 1 Cor. 15. 33.
words, or evil communications (that is, often conversation with the wicked,
noted by the plural number) corrupt good manners: yea the Apostle is so severe
in this point, that he will not have a wicked person suffered in the
Congregation, and therefore he commands the incestuous Corinthian to be
cast out, that is, excommunicated; and he gives the reason, Know ye not that
a 1 Cor. 5. 5.
little leaven sowreth a whole lump? Intimating thereby, that one evil person
might corrupt the whole Church; and a little Colloquintida marreth a whole
mess of pottage; one scabbed sheep 1 Reg. 4. 39.
infecteth a flock; one spark of fire may burn an house; and one infected
house may spoil a City; one root of bitterness Hebr. 12. 15.
suffered to spring up, may trouble and defile many: sin is as contagious as
any disease, and we are as apt to take the contagion of sin, as of the
plague. This knew David well enough, and We must hate sin, because God hates
it in all.
therefore he cries out, Depart from me, ye wicked; keep aloof, come not
near me to infect my Royal person: For I tell you plainly, I will keep the
Commandments of my God. Even so, we Psalm. 16.
should not brook the society of them that be vile and wicked, and hate to
be reformed, and cast Gods Words behind them. Psalm. 50. 17.


But some will say, This is a doctrine of preciseness; they say we need not
be so severe against sinners; peccata eorum sunt parva and pauca: their sins
be but small and few. But small sins may wound the conscience, and damn us,
if we look not to them, to strive against them. A mouse is but little, yet
kills he an Elephant, if he get into his truncke; a Scorpion is little, yet
able to sting a Lion unto death; the Leopard being great, is poisoned with an
head of garlic; a little spittle of a man fasting, will kill a serpent: and
the Devil by little sins will wound us to death. The sin, and the coat of
the sin is to be hated, quoth Ambrose. Lib. 6. Hexameron.
A reason may be drawn from the blessed Trinity. God the Father hates sin,
The foolish shall not stand in his sight, and he hates them that work
iniquity; Therefore we his children must hate Psalm. 5. 5.
it. God the Son hates sin, says the Apostle, Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore we his fellow brethren, Hebr. 1.
9.
fellow heirs must hate it, that we may be like our elder brother. God the
Holy Ghost hates it, therefore it is said, Greeve not the Spirit, by whom we
are sealed unto the day of Redemption: Ephesians. 4. Genesis 3. 15.
Therefore we the temples of him must hate it: we must hate the serpent, and
the seed of the serpent. By the hatred of God against the sin of Achan, judge
of all sin. As great as the Eagle is, yet one may see her virtue in a
feather: for it consumes all feathers; as mighty as the fire of Aetna is, yet
one may feel the heat of it in a spark; as huge as the sea is, yet one may
taste the saltness of it in a drop; as great as the Whale is, yet we may
feel the power of him in one breath. Hercules body was known by the length of
his foot, and we by this sin of Achan, may know Gods hatred against all
sins. For the theft of Achan buried close under the ground, brake forth such
a stinch in the nostrils of God, as that his garment brought the plague to the
whole host; and God no less hates it in all men. Finely says Augustine, Deus
in non renatis odit and peccata and personas: God hates in the not regenerate
both their sins, and also their persons; in renatis vero odit peccata, non
personas: in the regenerate he truly hates their sins, but not their
persons, as the physician hates the disease of the sick man, not his person,
or body of the sick.

Again, From whence comes sin, but from the Devil? What mean we then to
join with Satan our enemy, and the enemy of God? He that commits sin, is
of the Devil; for, the Devil sins from the beginning: Resist the Devil
therefore, give 1 John 3. 8.
no place to him: He is an adversary, and shall we love him? He Sin must be
hated, as it tends to Gods dishonor.
is a serpent, and shall we trust him? He is a murderer, and shall we
intertaine him? Sin is furthered by him: therefore let us hate it. I grant,
that some enemies are to be loved, because they are our enemies only:
whereupon says our Savior, Love your Iam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 10. ^ohn
8. 44. Mat. 5. 44.
enemies, do good to them that hate you; pray for them that persecute you. And
some are to be hated, because they are Gods enemies, and the friends of Satan;
so John the son of Hanani the Seer went out to meet Iehosaphat, and said
unto him, Would thou help the 2 Chro. 19. 2.
wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore for this thing the wrath
of the Lord is upon thee. And so the wrath and judgment of God is over all
those that support the wicked, and will not show themselves enemies to all such
as hate the Lord.

Wicked men must be hated, but yet for their evil, not as the evil concerns
any way us, but as the evil tends to the dishonor of God. Simeon and Levi
hated the Sychemites for the Genesis 34. 25.
sin of their sister Dinah: but this hatred sprang not, in that God was
dishonored by this sin, but from a regard of themselves, because that hereby
they might receive some disgrace. So Absalon is said to have hated his brother
Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar, and two years after, he
murdered his 2 Samuel 23. 22.
brother for this fact; this hatred of Absalon against Amnon, though it were
for Amnons wickedness, yet it was not good, but wicked, for the original of
this his hatred was not simply the sin of Amnon, as committed against God,
but because Absalon had some special disgrace hereby; For Tamar was borne to
David of the same woman that was mother also to Absalon. But we must hate the
wicked, for their dishonoring of God, and not suffer them to go unreproved nor
unpunished. Immmunity and impunity cause much iniquity. I would learn this;
Are Papists the friends of God, or his enemies? If they be friends; Why have
we professed otherwise these many years? If they be enemies, then do we
well not to suffer them. You know what Christ said to the Church of Pergamus, I
have a few things against Apoc. 2. 14.
thee, because thou have there, them that maintain the doctrine of Balaam,
which taught Balac to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel,
Verse. 15.
that they should eat of things sacrificed unto Idols, and commit fornication:
even so have thou them that maintain the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate. So we have some among us that maintain the doctrine of Balaam,
and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and therefore do well to reprove them, and
punish them. The posterity of Saul being rooted out, the famine ceased. Baal
Prophets 1 Samuel 15. 2 Samuel 21. 1. 1 Reg. 18. 1 Reg. 20. 42.
being put to death, rain and blessing came from God. Remember Gods speech to
Ahab, Because thou have let go a man out of thy hands, whom I appointed to
dye, thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. This was
the sin of the false prophets: They did strengthen the hands of the wicked. I
would it were not the sin of Ier. 23. 14.
some in this time. I would this sentence were written in the foreheads We
must not suffer our selves to be defiled in body or soul.
of our Rulers, or on the hemmes of their garments, as had the Pharisees; trust
not a Jesuit, a Romish priest, bear not with him, flatter him not, he
waits but his opportunity. If Cain may get Abel in the field, he will murder
him; if Ismael may get Godeliah fitly, he dies for it; Designant oculis ad
caedem unumquemque nostrum, Genesis 4. Ier. 42.
de vrbis and orbis exitu cogitant: They have appointed to the slaughter every
one of us, and they think of nothing, but of the ruin, destruction of City,
Country and of the whole world. The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin,
notwithstanding their fair speeches to Zorobabel, and the rest of the Fathers,
We will build with you: We will sacrifice with you; yet their Ezra. 4.
drift was to hinder the building. The Herodians fair speech to our Savior,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way Mat. 22.
of God truly, etc. was, but to intrappe Christ our Savior: So all their
shows of love and kindness toward us, is but to deceive, they wait but for a
day, and then our bodies shall be made faggots for their fires. What though the
fals-horned Lambs whom they serve, call themselves, Pius, Clemens, Innocent,
Bonifacius, yet I may resemble them to the two thieves of Naples; the one
called himself Pater noster, the other Ave Maria, and yet under that color
they robbed an 116. men: so these rob many poor souls, not of their
substance only, but of their lives. But to leave this, we must hate the garment
spotted in the flesh. We must be like unto them of the Church of Sardis, which
defiled not their garments; Apoc. 3. 4.
we must by no means defile our selves through sin, which by the Metaphor
of a garment spotted in the flesh is understood. The Babylonians, whom God sent
to destroy the men Lament. 4. 14.
of Sion, would not touch their garments, lest they should be defiled. If a
man bear holy things in the skirt of his garment, and with Hag. 2. 13.
the skirt does touch the bread, oil, wine, or meat, shall it be holy? the
Prophet said, No. If a polluted man or person touch any thing of these, shall
it be unclean? And the Priest answered, it should be unclean. For the thing
which of it self is good, cannot make another thing so; but contrarily, the
unclean and not pure in heart, do defile and spot those things, and make them
odious unto God, which else are good and godly. Well, as Jacob exhorted his
household to Genesis 35. 2.
cleanse themselves, and change their garments: so must we cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and put on our wedding garment of holiness and righteousness: So shall we
hate the garment spotted in the flesh. We must not be like the wicked, which
love the garment spotted in the flesh, and therefore drink in iniquity like
water; but we must fly from sin, as a serpent: the wicked are like Storks,
who feed on venomous things, and make their neast in dung, and are full of
sin, as the Leopard is of spots: but we must hate sin, as Amnon hated
Thamar, with a double hatred. Why does God hate the Devil, but for sin? by
creation he is an Angel of light, by Sin only hated of God, and should be
of the godly.
substance a spirit intellectual, in understanding more profound then any man;
yet God hates him for no other cause but sin, of which if he were rid,
he were a more glorious and lovely creature, then any man, yet sin makes us
like the Devil, and Psalm. 8.
no difference, but that he has much sin; and he is all John. 8. 44.
sin, we are sinful, and he is sin it self, malice, envy it self; so
vile is sin, that nothing could purge it, but Christ's blood, yea so vile it
is, that hell and everlasting torments 1 Pet. 1. 18.
are prepared for it, transit voluptas ejus, non mansura, manet poena non
terminatura: the pleasure of sin passes, and abides not, the punishment
remains, and ends not. It was a divine voice of a heathen, that if there
were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him, no hell to burn him, no
man to see him, yet Seneca.
would he not sin, for the ugliness of sin, and the grief of his own
conscience. Hate sin therefore, and hate the Devil, hate death, hate
damnation. Si scirem Deos mihi condonaturos, and homines ignoraturos, non
peccarem tamen, ob solam peccati turpitudinem: If I knew certainly, that the
Gods would pardon me, and that men were ignorant, and knew nothing of my
transgression, yet would I not sin, because of the only turpitude of sin.

We marvel, that things are so out of frame, that sin does so abound; but
what is the cause? Even our bearing with sin: for how can the ship be qniet,
so long as Jonas is in it? Moses Exodus 10. 26.
would not leave an hoof in Egypt; and we must not suffer sin to go
unreproved. All the vessels of Baal must be burnt without the City; the very
gold that was upon the Idols, was abomination; 2 Reg. 23. 4.
and so sin is an abomination to God.

And here by the way learn to kill sin in thy self, that God may spare
thee; Mactemus porcum gulae, jugulemus hircum luxuriae, occid^mus Leonem
iracundiae, extinguamus serpent^m hypocresio's, conteramus c^lubrum invidiae,
suffocemus Canem concupiscentiae: Let us slay the hog of gluttony, kill the
goat of Leachery, murder the Lion of wrath, extinguish the serpent of
hypocrisy, tear in pieces the Adder of envy, strangle the dog of
concupiscence; yea Mortify all our earthly members, as fornication,
uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence, and Covetousness, which
is idolatry. Yea and Let us crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts:
Col. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 1 Cor. 9.
Ye and Let us chasten our bodies, and bring them in subjection. Yea and Let
us deny our selves, and take up our cross, and follow Christ.

Again, Jude here names vestem maculatam, the spotted garment; so the sin
must be ha^ed, not the person that sins; the person must be loved, the
sin hated: For the person is made after the Image of God, and Gods Image must
not be hated: the person is redeemed with Christ's blood; and seeing he Genesis 9.
loves them, we must love them. Again, he can make of Woolves, Lambs,
Exvasisirae, vasa misericordiae: of vessels of Reprobates, not to be loved or
prayed for.
wrath, vessels of mercy: therefore seek thou to save him, and instruct them
with meekness, proving, if God at any time will give them repentance. Quis
potest odisse hominem, cujus naturam and similitudinem videt in humanitate
Christi? Who can hate a man, whose nature 1 Timothy 1. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 25. August.
and similitude he may behold in the humanity of Christ? Deum odit, qui hominem
odit: he hates God, that hates man: therefore amorem cum hominibus, odium cum
vitijs: have love with men, hatred with their vices: so it is said of Ephesus;
that they hated the deeds of Apoc. 2. Genesis 49.
the Nicolaitans, not their persons, but their errors: so Jacob cursed the
wrath of his sons, but blessed their persons: so Paul having bitterly
enveighed against the Corinths, yet loved the men, and spoke it, not to shame
them; for so he himself says, I write not these things to shame you, but as
my beloved children to admonish you: 1 Cor. 4. 15.
thus would he have us deal with a bad man, with an excommunicate man, not to
account him an enemy, but admonish 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. 1 Cor. 5.
him as a brother; he would have his body punished, that his soul may be
saved.

But yet in some cases the wicked may be hated and cursed, when they show open
signs of a reprobate mind; such God hates: so says the Prophet, Thou art not
a God that loves wickedness, Psalm. 5. 4, 5.
neither shall evil dwell with thee; the foolish shall not stand in thy sight,
thou hate all them that work iniquity. Such must not be prayed for. The
Church therefore prayed not for Julian, but against him; they knew him to be a
reprobate. For there are two Judgments; the judgment of Faith, and Love.

The first is in God, the second is left to us: Multi enim lupi sunt intus:
there be many woolves within, if we respect the first; Et multaeoves foris;
many sheep without, if we respect the latter: and yet we may judge, when men
give signs of reprobation, and hate such persons: thus David hated the wicked,
and bade them be packing; Away from me, ye wicked, I will keep the
Commandments Psalm. 119. 115.
of my God. And again, I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept
company with the dissemblers: I have hated the assembly of the evil, Psalm. 26.
4, 5.
and have not companied with the wicked. But to leave this.

Again, it is not enough to leave sin, but we must leave it with a
conscience, with a hatred of it; many leave it to get credit: and some, lest
they suffer loss by it, but not of conscience to God: and of many it may be
said, they leave not sin, but sin leaves them: the drunkard leaves
drinking, because his stomach is decayed; the Adulterer whoredom, for that
the strength of nature fails him; the quarreller leaves sighting, for that
he is crooked and lame, he cannot bestirre him, as in times heretofore; the
covetour leaves oppressing, because he can oppress no longer: but all this is
nothing; For the body must not only leave the act of sin, but the heart must
leave the desire of sin: Abhor that which is evil, and cleave unto that
Sin must be hated for conscience.
which is good. And again, we must cast away the works of darkness, and put
on the armor of light: Thus must we leave sin of conscience with an hatred
of it, else it is nothing. But many hold Romans 12. 9. Romans 13. 12.
sin, as Cinegerus the Athenian held the ships of his enemies, laden with the
rich spoils of his Country, and now ready to hoise sail, and to be gone:
First, he held them with his hands, till his hands were cut off, then with his
stumpes, till his arms were cut off; then with his teeth, till his head was
cut off; and when all was done, still he held them in desire: So many, when God
has cut off all occasions of sin, yet they hold it in heart; the old man is
sorry, that he cannot be young, to play the wanton; the prisoner, that he
cannot be abroad, to steal and rob; the sick man, that he cannot revell
nor rowte among his companions; the disgraced man, that he has not authority
to oppress; the envious man, that he cannot revenge: if they might live ever,
they would sin ever; they are sorry they cannot offend God any more; like
Julian, who sorrowed at his death, because he could not be revenged of the
Galilaean: but we must leave our sins, and be angry, greeved, and displeased
with our selves, for our sins. Thus Paul was angry with himself, with his
flesh, with his spirit, and calls himself Wretch: Yea miserable, miserable
wretch: for thus he says, Miserable wretch that I am, who Romans 7. 24.
shall deliver me from this body of sin? He speaks in the excess, he calls
himself the first, the greatest sinner: but when he names 1 Timothy 1. 15. 1
Cor. 15.
his virtue, he speaks in the defect, that he is the least Apostle, the
first and greatest sinner, but the last and least Apostle. Note his zeal
against sin! If men could weep tears of blood for their sin, if they
could die a thousand times in one day for very grief, yet could they not be
greeved enough; if thou knew sin, and the reward of sin, in the damned,
thou would not sin willingly for ten thousand worlds, for the wages of
sin is death: not only the death of the body, temporal Romans 6. 23.
death, but also the death of body and soul, everlasting death; when men shall
always be a dying and never dead; For there men shall seek for death, and
shall not find it. We hate Judas, Herod, Pilate. Apoc. 9.
But hate thine own manners: thy sins with theirs, were the nails, the
spears, the thorns that pierced the Lord Jesus. All Hebr. 10.
say that Christ died for sin, that he was wounded for our sins, and
smitten for our transgressions; yet all make him a Esaias 53.
patron of their sins: the thief makes him the receivour; the murderer, his
sanctuary; the whoremonger, his bawd; they live in sin, and yet they say
Christ died for sin; kill sin, Calui^ in Gal. 6. 1.
and kill the Devil; kill sin and kill death, the first and second death.
He that will encounter with Samson, must cut off his locks; he that will
encounter with a serpent, must pull out his sting: Now death is a serpent, and
his sting is sin: one may put a serpent in his bosom, when his sting is out:
and we may Earthquakes upon extraordinary occasions.
let death into our bosom, when sin is gone, the venim and poison gone.

But to draw us to a greater hatred of sin, let me apply this late judgment
of the earthquake unto you. These judgments Anno Domini. 1601. Decembr. 24.
have never been, but upon great and rare occasions, and for horrible and
notorious sins, to note the wonderful power of God, and to presage some rare
events, some strange plagues to fall upon the world. When God gave the Law, the
earth shook. God did it in fearful manner, to teach Israel, that if the
earth shook, when God spoke; much more should their hearts shake. The like
earth quake was at the restoring of the Law, in the days of Elias. And indeed
to whom is the Word of God powerful and 1 Reg. 19. Esaias. 66. 25.
profitable, but to him that tre^bleth at it? Of these former judgments David
speaks, O God, when thou wentest forth before the Psalm. 68* 7. 8.
people, when thou wentest through the wilderness, the earth shook, and the
Heavens dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai was moved at the presence of
God, even the God of Israel.

Again, in the horrible rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; Numb. 16.
the one in the Church, the other in the Commonwealth; the one against the
Lords Priest, the other against the Lords Magistrate; there was an earthquake,
to teach that hell shall swallow us, as it did them, if we rebel so. Of all
judgments, these most manifest the power of God, and foreshew his great anger:
so David spoke, The earth trembled and quaked, the foundations also of the
mountains moved and shook, because he was angry: smoke went out of Psalm. 28.
7, 8, 9.
his nostrils, and a consuming fire out of his mouth; coals were kindled
thereat, he bowed the Heavens, and came down, and darkness was under his
feet, etc. When Vzziah would usurp the Priests office, and Zach. 14. ^.
confound Church and Commonwealth, and make a Chaos of all religion and
goodness, God shook the earth; and when Jericho fell, it is thought by the
learned, to have been by an earth quake. Josh. 6.
And when the wicked Jews crucified the Lord of glory, all creatures Mat. 27.
showed their disliking; the Sun was eclypsed, the Heavens lost their light,
the stars were moved, the veil of the Temple rent asunder, the graves
opened, the dead rose, the earth quaked: O dura, and obdurata, and indurata
corda hominum, quae non contremiscunt! O durate and obdurate, and indurate
hearts of men, that cannot tremble! David speaks of the rare Judgment of God
in this case, and thereby stirs up all men to fear God. Shall the wilderness
quake, and shall not our hearts quake? Absit. The voice of the Lord makes the
wilderness to tremble: and shall not Psalm. 26. 5.
we tremble? In the great persecution of the Church, S. John speaks of an
earthquake. Let us not think, that these judgments Apoc. 6. 12.
be ordinary, and rise altogether of natural causes, for great hurt has
ensued. The three famous Cities of Asia, Laodicea for wealth, Hierapolis for
learning, and Colossos for strength, were all overthrown with earthquakes.
Constantinople was tormented with shaking a whole year together. In the days
of Boniface Earthquakes, forerunners of fearful Judgments.
there happened an Earthquake, and after followed such a plague of scabbes and
botches, as a man could hardly tell his own dead from other men's. Burdeam: was
mightily shaken with Anno. 741.
an earthquake. And in the year of our Lord, 1171. the City Tripolis, a great
part of Damascus in Antiochia, and Halapre, the chief City of Loradin, and
other Cities of the Saracens, either perished utterly, or were wonderfully
defaced. And An. 1539. in diverse places, as at Venice and Florence, there were
great earthquakes which did much hurt. In Anno 1579. April the 6. an
earthquake tolled the great bell at Westminster, and threw down a piece of
Dover Castle: and part of Sutten Church in Kent; to note unto us, that our
sins overburden the earth, the earth groans, and would be eased: God shakes
his hand, the earth trembles, man is careless: beware it gapes not, and
swallow thee up quick. When Arrius heresy was entertained in Antioch, God
punished it with earthquakes, to give a Caveat how we admit of heresy: and
six great Cities in Greece, in the days of Tiberius; and twelve Cities of
Campania in the days of Constantine. And we all now might have been
swallowed up, if Gods mercy had not been the Anno. 1601.
greater. Blessed be God who kept us; and he keep us evermore. But surely
this earthquake prognosticateth that God is coming to Judgment. As the City
of Rome was never shaken, but it presaged some strange event. The year before
the Carthaginian war, there were 57. earthquakes at Rome, but there presently
followed a lamentable war. After an earthquake in Venice, there followed a
famine; and upon the neck of that, a plague, which beginning far North,
spread over the whole earth, but so raged at Venice, as scarcely one lived of an
hundred: but as a wonder lasts but nine days, so this earthquake will be
forgotten of many. When Ananias fell down dead suddenly Act. 5.
at the feet of Peter, all the Church trembled: and this should make us all
tremble; For in my judgment it is a forerunner of Christ's coming, or else of
some fearful judgment of war, Mat. 26. 7. Pliny.
or famine, or of pestilence. For an heathen man could say, that earthquakes
portend and foretell fearful matters ensuing. And note that God sent it at
this time, to begin our Christmas with it so misspent of all men. The Heathen
had their Floralia, Bacchanalia, Cerealia; they went naked, surfeted and were
drunken, and they light torches to Proserpina, going naked; and what else do
we? We eat and drink, and rise up to play, and go up and down showting and
revelling. Has the grace of God appeared to Tit. 2. 11.
this end? Brethren, has the Lord Jesus gotten twelve days of his Father, for
profaneness, swearing, revelling, etc? I am ashamed that the Turk, the Jew,
the Persian should know this: Propter nos male audit nomen Christi: The name of
God is blasphemed Romans 2. 24.
among the Gentiles through us. The heathen had their Cerealia, Fearful
earthquakes and comets warn to repent.
(as I said before) wherein they surfeted to Ceres; and their Bacchanalia,
wherein they were drunken to the honor of Bacchus; they had their Floralia,
wherein they were idle, and gave themselves to lust and Venerie. Wherein differ
our Christmas feasts from theirs; it being spent only in eating, drinking, nay
gluttony, and drunkenness, riot, cards, dice, swearing, swaggering, toying,
fooling and what not? Is this to celebrate the Nativity of the Lord Jesus?
Erubescat Sol, and confundatur Luna: Let the Sun blush, and let the Moon be
ashamed; Did the Heavenly soldiers thus? did the shepherds thus? did Mary
thus? We make melody, Luke 2. Ephesians. 5. 19.
but not to the Lord, our rejoicing is not good, God will turn our feasts into
mournings. 1 Cor. 5. 6. Amos. 8.


To this riotous time God fitted this earthquake; a rare work of God, the
earth being seventeen hundred miles thick, and odd; it being 800. miles and
odd, to the Center, as says Munster, what a work of God is it to shake the
whole Globe, the whole womb of the earth, being so mighty? A great earthquake
there was in the reign of King Henry the sixth, through the world in the even
of S. Michael, which continued two hours with thunder and lightning; so that
the beasts rored, and the fowls of the air cried out: but in this Queens
time there have been two earthquakes, a thing not observed in the reign of
one Prince of this Land this five hundred years. A new star appeared in
Heaven in this Queens reign, Anno. 15. that was never seen before: 26. acres
of ground removed in Hartfordshire; and three acres at another time, in
Devonshire; strange monsters have appeared; strange Comets have been seen.
Hate your sins, the Judge is at the door.

THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXIIII. Now unto him, that is able to keep you, that ye fall not, etc.
We can neither stand nor rise being fallen, without Christ.



THis is the Epilogue, the conclusion, the last part of this Epistle; and it
contains two things.

First, A commending them to God and his Grace.

And secondly, A celebration of the name and praises of God.

The first is double, for he commends them two ways to God: for this life,
and the life to come.

Again, for this life two ways, first, that they fall not, but persist and
stand in the grace begun.

Secondly, that they may be pure, perfect, absolute until the day of Christ.

Lastly, for the other life, that they may be glorious lambs, and not goats;
sons, and not bastards; citizens, and not strangers; built on the foundation
of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ Ephesians. 2. 20.
himself being the chief corner stone: that they may follow the Lamb on
mount Sion, and there sing the songs of their joy, Apoc. 14. 3.
which none can understand, save the hundred forty and four thousand, which
were bought from the earth.

Now in the first part of this prayer, Saint Jude notes two things.

First, the weakness of man ready to fall. All our sufficiency is of God.


Secondly, the power of God able to keep us.

Touching our weakness, we neither rise when we are fallen, nor stand when
we are risen, of our selves; all is of God: for we are not sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5.
is of God. Cum Christo nil nobis deficit: With Christ nothing is wanting unto
us, for as Paul says, I am able to do al things, through the Phil. 4. 13.
help of Christ, which strengthens me. Sine Christo, nil nobis sufficit: and
without Christ nothing is sufficient for us; For as the branch cannot John 15.
4, 5.
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except
ye abide in me: I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. In eo omnia possumus, absque
eo nil possumus: in him we can do all things, without him we can do nothing.
And therefore Paul wills us to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, for all our sufficiency Ephesians. 6. 10. John 15. 5. Psalm. 18. 1, 2.
is of God. Hence is it, that David says unto God, I love thee dearly, oh
Lord my Strength; the Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, etc.

We can neither begin, nor continue, nor make an end, of our selves, but by
God: therefore Paul commends the Churches to God ever, as he only that
keeps them, that the whole work of our salvation may be ascribed unto him:
Initium, incrementum, and finis: the beginning, the increase, and the end. We
are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30,
31.
and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, that according as it
is written, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. Wherein he notes
three things; What we are of our selves; what in God; and the end of all, that
God may have the glory. Thus Paul commends the Church of Thessalonica to God,
saying: Now the very God of Peace sanctify you throughout, and I 1 Thessalonians. 5.
23.
pray God, that your whole spirit, and soul and body may be kept blameless,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: and thus he commended the Church of
Ephesus at Miletum to God, saying, Now brethren, I commend you to God, and the
Word of his Grace, which is Act. 20. 32.
able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. And thus he commended the Church of Rome to God, To him now that
is of power to stablish you according to Romans 16. 25.
my Gospel, and preaching of Jesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery,
which was kept secret since the world began, etc. And thus did the Apostle
commend the Church of the Jews to God, whether it was Paul, or Luke, or
Barnabas, it skilleth not: The God of peace (says he) which brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Heb. 13. 20, 21.
Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in all good works, to do his Will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ.

Here by the way, let me answer one cavil in Popery: they urge, that we are
bidden to stand fast, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus,
to go forward, to We cannot but fall, except we be preserved.
continue.

I answer, that all those places are meant conditionally, if God does assist
us with his Spirit: Sit unus contextus instar mill: Let one context be in
stead of a thousand; as namely, that of Paul's to the Thessalonians, where he
tells them, that it is God which works in us both the will and the deed,
even of his good pleasure. 2 These. 1. Psalm. 4. 1.
He bids them work, yet he explaneth it by and by, that it is God that
works. Agimus passive, quatenus e coelis suggeritur facultas; Calvin.
agis and ageris, and tunc been agis, cum a bono ageris Spiritu; We work
passively, because we are helped from Heaven, power is ministered unto thee;
thou workest, and art wrought, and then thou workest well, when thou art
wrought of the good Spirit: so Paul ascribed the rising and the standing of the
Philippians to God, I am persuaded (says Paul) that he, that has begun this
good Phil. 1. 6.
work in you, will perform it, until the day of Christ Jesus: And writing to
the Corinthians, he says, That God shall confirm them to the end, that they
may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 8.
To that end, Christ prayed for the Apostles, saying, Holy Father, John 17. 11,
12, 15.
keep them in thy name, even them whom thou have given me, that they may be
one, as we are: while I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name:
those that thou gave me, have I kept: I pray not that thou should take
them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil. If then the Papists
should use these words ten thousand times (Stand fast) and again, Continue;
ten thousand times would I retort upon them, that we cannot stand fast, we
cannot continue, but by God: We fly not with our own wings, we swim not in
our own bark; not nature, but grace: not man, but God, does all in the work
of salvation. We stand not of our selves, in our own strength, but in God.
Leviores sumus vanitate: We Psalm. 62.
are lighter then vanity it self. If God kept us not, we should fall every
day, every hour, every moment; so great are our temptations. Quomodo stabit
debilis inter tot fortes homines? How can a weak man stand between so many
strong men? homuncio inter tot fortes Gigantes? a little dwarf, between so many
strong Giants? ^ndus, inter tot armatos? a naked man, between so many armed
men? Caecus inter tot laqueos? a blind man between so many snares? Viator,
inter tot fures? a traveller, between so many thieves? Mortalis, inter tot
immortales and immundos spiritus? a mortal man, between so many immortal and
unclean spirits? For we wrestle Ephesians. 6. 12.
not against flesh and blood, that is, principally and chiefly: for our most
mortal enemies are more than flesh and blood, more in number, greater in
power, craftier in their wiles, or longer continuance; more envious, malicious,
cruel, as namely, against principalities, against powers, and against the
worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places. He calls them
Principalities, because they have great rule and dominion, not so much over
other Our enemies many and powerful.
Devils, as over wicked men; and calls them Powers, to show, that their
principality is not a mere titular matter, but is armed with power, so as they
are able to do great matters.

He calls them worldly governors, to show over whom the Devil has government;
not over the elect, but over the world, the reprobates of the world.

He calls them spiritual wickedness, to declare their nature, that they are
spirits, and that they be evil, and malicious: the words in the original
signify, spirituals of wickedness, or spirits of wickedness, that is, most
monstrous wicked spirits: these are they against whom we war and fight, how
can we stand against them of our selves? Nam illi sunt astuti, nos fatui: they
are crafty, we are foolish; illi fortes, nos debiles: they strong, we weak:
illi experti, nos inexperti: they expert, we unexpert: illi vigilantes, nos
somnolenti: they watching, we sleepy: illi spiritus, nos caro: they Ephesians. 6.
14. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Apoc. 12. cap. 10. Luke 11. John. 12. 1 Cor. 4.
spirit, we flesh: the armor therefore is called the Armor of God, not our
armor, but his. The Devil is ever described mighty, and we weak: to this
end he is called, Leo rugiens: a roaring Lion; Draco volans: a flying Dragon:
(...): that old serpent: homo fortis: a strong man: princeps mundi: the prince
of the world: Deus mundi: the God of the world: it is therefore the miraculous
grace of God, that he kills not our souls every hour: for God would have
us to live both lives, the natural and supernatural: As concerning the
natural life; from the soul, the natural powers of understanding, will, and
perceiving flow: as touching the supernatural, from grace, prayer,
thankesgiving, zeal, love, repentance, mortification do proceed; and this is
called, The life of God: if God withdraw his grace, we fall presently, even
the best men. Peter a notable Apostle, yet fell Ephesians. 4. 18. Mat. 26. Ier. 2.
14.
for all his brags, at the voice of a girl. Jeremy a worthy Prophet, yet grew
desperate: he that foiled our first parents standing Genesis 3.
upon legs of brass, would soon foil us, standing upon legs of clay: it
is as great a matter to resist temptations, being moved unto it, as for dry
wood and flax to resist fire being put to it, it is supernatural in the one,
so is it in the other, for us to resist sin: therefore pray as Christ said:
Watch and pray, Mat. 26. 41.
that ye enter not into temptation: The fish is not more taken in the net,
nor the bird in the snare, than we of the Devil; soon he John 13. 2.
entered into the heart of Judas; soon he filled Ananias his heart; quickly he
tempted David, to number the people; and quickly Act. 5.
will he overthrow us, unless God keep us, that we fall not.

But to make further use of this doctrine; S. Jude here intimates unto us,
that of our selves we are ready to fall; our building by nature is upon the
sand, not upon the rock, our shields and swords are of blotting paper, not of
steel; our wings like Icarus, are of wax: All which I speak to humble the
pride of None can presume of his own strength, but must fly to Prayer.
flesh, and blood, that no flesh rejoice in Gods presence. To which end Paul
applies his speech; Let him that thinks he stands, take heed, that he
fall not. Adam fell in Paradise, Judas in the school of our Savior; the
Angels from heaven; and do we think to stand of our selves? No, no. Do
thou trust in 1 Cor. 10. 12. Genesis 3. Mat. 27. 2 Pet. 2. 4. 1 Reg. 11. Judge. 15.
thy wisdom? None was ever wiser than Solomon, yet was he deceived. Do thou
trust in thy strength? None was ever stronger than Samson, yet was he
vanquished, do thou trust in thy stablenesse and constancy? None more
stable, more constant than Peter, yet he fell; For he that said unto Christ,
I will dye with Mat. 26.
thee, before I deny thee; denied him thrice, and every time more fearfully
than other. Do thou trust in thy riches? None richer than the Epulo, and yet
he is in hell in torments. God says unto Luke 16.
all, Let not the rich man glory in his riches, nor the wiseman in his wisdom,
nor the strong man in his strength. O pray to God for perseverance, trust not
to thy self, be not proud of thy continuance in the faith; thou may fall:
when thou see so many fall, suspect thy self, insult not over them; but
follow the advice of the Apostle, Brethren, if any of you be overtaken with
any fault, you that Gal. 6. 1.
are spiritual, help to restore him in the spirit of meekness; considering
thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Noli superbire, sed time: Be not Romans
11. Phil. 12.
proud, but fear: as he said unto the Romans; yea: Let us work out our
salvation with trembling and with fear. O tremble, tremble, tremble, thou
may fall. O double and redouble, and triple, and multiply thy prayers unto
God, for his assistance; when thou see the dragons tail cast down so many
stars, so many learned Apoc. 12. 5.
teachers, rare men in Church and commonwealth, say to thy self, Am I better
than all these? am I wiser than Solomon? meeker than Moses; patienter than Job?
zealouser than Elias? godlier than David? humbler than Paul? yet Solomon was
deceived, Moses spoke unadvisedly, Job cursed the day wherein he was borne, 1
Reg. 11. Psalm. 106. Job 3.
and the night, wherein it was said, A man child is conceived; Elias was almost
desperate; It is enough, Lord, take away my life; Paul was proud of his
revelations, and besought God thrice; David fell by 1 Reg. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 2 Samuel 12.
Bathsheba. Have all these fallen? and shall I stand for ever? Has God made me
a lease, a grant of his grace, without impeachment of waste? No, I am weak,
like a broken hedge, like a tortering wall, Immo in hac carne non habitat
bonum: Yea in this flesh of mine Romans 7. 18.
there dwells no good thing. Beda, Venerable Beda makes mention of four
effects of sin, that is, of our original fall in Adam.

Infirmity. Ignorance. Malice. Concupiscence.

Infirmity, or weakness, is in the body.

Ignorance, in the mind.

Malice, in the will.

Concupiscence in the liver, or in the affections of the sensitive Our pronenes
to fall, comes from our original corruption.
soul. Vndique ergo labimur, nusquam tuti sumus: we fall therefore every way,
and we are safe no way.

Augustine said of himself, and the rest of the godly, Quid sum ego, sine te,
Domine? What am I without thee, o Lord? And again Aug. lib. 4. confess.
in his Soliloquies: Quod cecidi, fuit in me: That I fell, it was of my self;
quod surrexi and steti, ex te fuit, Domine: That I rose and stood, this came
from thee, o Lord; thou have opened mine eyes, and I see, that a temptation and
a warfare is the life of man upon the earth: no man living is justified in thy
sight, for if there be any good thing in us, great or small, it is of thee,
and it is thy gift, none of ours; if any evil, it is of our selves: For no
evil dwells with thee: Psalm. 5.
he therefore that seeks glory to him of that which is thine, fur est and
latro, he is a thief and a robber, and similis diabolo, qui invidit gloriae
tuae: and like unto the Devil, which envied thy glory: If at any time I have
stood, I have stood by thee; if at any time I have fallen, I have fallen of my
self; and always should have been in the dirt and mire, had thou not
raised me; always thy grace prevented me, delivering me from all evils,
saving me from evils past, raising me from evils present, defending me from
evils to come, cutting off before me all the snares of sin, which if thou
had not done, I had been a thief, a murderer, an adulterer, a drunkard,
an usurer, and there is no sin, or kind of sin, that ever mand idd, but I
might have done it: so far Augustine: for the seeds of the same sins that
be in others, be in us, and would grow, if grace cut them not down: For
there is an infusing grace, and a restraining grace. Granatensis, in his
meditations confesses, that God working in us by grace, does as a man that
kindles green wood, he blows often, but it burns not: so God sends many
good inspirations into the heart, but we stifle them; For, the flesh lusts
against Gal. 5. 16. Mat. 26. Romans 7. 24.
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; the flesh is weak, and there is
a Law in our members rebelling against the Law of our mind, and leading us
captive into the law of sin: This Popish Friar disableth nature, and yet
ascribes unto it, a power, an ability to receive grace, and to stand in it.

Herein we and the Romanists differ, in that they say, grace helps nature;
we say, that it wholly frames nature, that there is no more goodness in our
nature, then there is water in a flint stone. Hereupon says God, I will put a
new spirit within their Ezech. 11. 19.
bowels, and I will take the stony heart out of their bodies, and will give
them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes. And the same thing
he promises afterward, that is, to give them a Ezech. 37. 26, 27.
new heart, and a new spirit, to take away their stony heart out of their
bodies, and to give them an heart of flesh, and to put his spirit within them,
to cause them to walk in his statutes, and to keep his judgments to do
them: and Paul says, I know, that Romans 7. 18.
in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing. Non dicit exiguum, sed No
goodness in us, but that which is infused by grace.
nullum bonum in nobis: he does not say, a little good, but there dwells no
good thing in us; the allurements of the world, the temptations of the flesh,
the suggestions of Satan, are so many, that if the grace of God did not keep
us, we should fall every hour, yea if it were possible, the very elect of God
should not Mat. 24.
be saved. Laquei sunt in senectute, juuentute, divitijs, honoribus, cibo,
somno: there be snares in old age, in youth, in riches, in honors, meat,
drink, sleep. Saint Anthony saw the air full of snares; of ten ships,
which sail in the sea, scarce one is drowned, and of ten souls, that flote
in the seas of this world, scarce one is saved: Ablata gratia Dei, the grace of
God being taken away, what can a weak man do among so many strong? a dwarf
Bern.
among so many Giants? a traveller among so many thieves, and robbers? a naked
man among so many armed enemies, not men, but devils? God would have us to live
both lives, the natural, and supernatural; from the soul, which is the
natural form, the powers and senses do proceed; from grace, which is the
supernatural form, the virtues and the gifts of the spirit do proceed: Let us
not despair therefore: There be more with us, than against 2 Reg. 2.
us, as Elisha said unto his servant; Nam naturae gratia se apponit, daemoni
Deus, malae cons^^tudini bonus usus, multitudini malorum spirituum, exercitus
Angelorum: Grace opposes it self to nature, God opposes himself against the
Devil, good custom against evil, an host of heavenly Angels against a
multitude of evil spirits: For the Angels of the Lord do pitch their tents
about them Psalm. 34.
that fear him. God tells us, that his grace is sufficient for us, and that
his power is made perfect, is known and evidently seen through our 2 Cor. 12.
9.
weakness.

A question here may be asked; If God be able to keep us from falling, why
then does he suffer us to fall? Why did he let Adam fall by the subtilty of
the serpent? why did he let Lot Genesis 3. Genesis 19. Numb. 21. 1 Reg. 11.
fall in Zoar, by wine and strong drink? Why did he suffer Moses in the
desert by infidelity? Why did he let Solomon, King Solomon, wise King Solomon,
fall by women? Why did he let Peter fall through fear, into lying, perjurie,
banning and cursing? Mat. 26.
Why does he suffer most of his Saints to fall, some into one sin, some into
another; and all into some sin? So that it may be said of the best of them,
Septies in die cadit justus; the Prove. 24. Iam. 3. 2.
righteous man sins seven times a day: Et in multis peccavimus omnes: in
many things we offend all.

Hereto I answer, Adams fall was permitted of God, to bring to pass this
eternal counsel decreed before the foundation of the world, concerning the
incarnation of his Son, and the redemption of mankind through him: Nam tu
quis es, qui litigas cum Deo? Who art thou that strivest with God? Secondly,
concerning Romans 9.
the fall of other Saints, God permits them for two causes: either that his
mercy might be made manifest in their God permitted Adam, and the Saints, to
fall for diverse reasons.
pardon, and reclaiming; or else that they may see the frailty of their nature,
that they stand not by themselves but by God; For the way of man is not in
himself, neither is it in man to direct his paths: that thus God may humble
us, and that he that stands, may take heed he fall not. Saint Jude says
not, that God ever keeps us Ier. 10. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
from falling, but that he is able to keep us, and will so far forth do
it, as shall stand with his glory, and our consolation.

And this withal I note, that God never suffers his to fall for ever: Qui ex
Deo est, non peccat: He that is of God, sins not, that is, non peccat in
aeternum: he sins not for ever: their 1 John. 3.
light is eclypsed sometime like the Sun, but never quenched, like the fire
on the Altar in the Babylonicall captivity; they sleep, but they wake again
to righteousness, they be not in a lethargy, in a dead sleep, like Coranus
and Plato, who slept, and never waked again; ^hey fall sometime, but they rise
again, like the Dromedary; they lie not by it, like the Elephant that wants
jointes: they have weeds and faults, but they have corn and virtues also like
the fields of Sharon, whereas the wicked are as Sichem sown with salt, where
never fruit grew: they have leaves, Cant. 4.
but they have fruit also, like the vine of Megeddo; but the wicked Judge. 9.
Mar. 11.
are like the fig tree that Christ cursed, they are all leaves, all sin,
being full of unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, Romans
1. 29.
full of envy, of murder, of debate, taking all things in evil part; they lie
down in sin, they sleep in sin, they rise up in sin in the morning,
they live in it, they dye in it; it is Alpha and Omega, Aleph, and Tau, first
and last, for the wicked are strangers from the Psalm. 58. 3.
womb, even from the belly, thy have erred and spoke lies. They fall and never
rise again, they sin and repent not of the uncleanness, and fornication,
and wantonness which they have committed. 2 Cor. 12. 21.


In one word, God is able to keep us, and does keep us, else should we fall
as often as we are tempted; For we are as dry stubble apt to receive fire,
but there is a plurality of mercies with God, He is rich in mercy, he has
mercy for thousands, he has Ephesians. 2. Exodus 20. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 126. ^. Ephesians.
1. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 8.
a multitude of mercies; he has lesser mercies and greater mercies; He
fills our mouths with laughter, and our tongues with joy; he has corporal
blessings, and spiritual blessings, temporal joys in earth, and everlasting
joys in heaven; he has a preventing grace in delivering from sin, and a
following grace in pardoning sin: he has an infusing grace, and a
restraining grace, and John. 17. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
his grace is sufficient for us.

But here a question may be moved, whether the Church may fall from God, in
doctrine and in manners? number errare potest tam fide quam vita? whether it may
err as well in faith, as in life? To this some answer, Ecclesia non cadit, non
errat universaliter, totaliter, fundamentaliter, finaliter; that the Church
does not fall, does not err universally, totally, fundamentally, finally: non
universaliter The best have erred.
in omnibus membris: not universally in all the members: non totaliter in
singulis fidei capitibus: not totally in every article of faith; non
fundamentaliter in praecipuis capitibus: not fundamentally in the chief heads;
non finaliter in aeternum: not finally for ever unto perdition. But admit this,
yet it may fall, it may err.

The question is not, what it does, but what it may do: Ecclesia potest
errare: the Church may err; whether ye respect it as universal in Councels,
or the singular members thereof severally, quoth Danaeus; for it is manifest
that I may err, and you may Danaeus.
err, and he may err, and sic de singulis: and so of every one; For we set
but in part: the which words are meant of every one; we 1 Cor. 13. 9.
proceed and go forward daily, we are not yet come unto perfection, we see
the most excellent men have erred, as Thomas in Phil. 3. John 20. Act. 10. Number
9. Exodus 32. Act. 1.
the resurrection, Peter in circumcision, Moses in the Passover, Aaron in the
golden Calfe, in Idolatry; All the Apostles in the Kingdom of Christ.
Lactantius, Eusebius, Apollinaris, Arnobius were tainted errore Chiliastarum:
with the error of the Chiliasts, which held that Christ should come personally,
and reign as a King in this world, a thousand years; yea, all men are liars,
and all pray, Forgive us our trespasses; yea look into the Apocalypse, and Mat.
5. Apos. 12. 2 Reg. 11.
ye shall find, that the woman fled into the wilderness; the whole visible
Church under Ioram fell to idolatry; Hilary did believe the Church rather
hid, for he could not see it flourishing, and he said, that the mountains,
the woods, the prisons, and the whirlepooles were safer than the temples; for
these are his own words; Montes, and lucus, and carceres, and voragines sunt
tutiores quam templa: Arrianisme so prevailed at that time, Hierome said,
Ingemuit totus mundus, and Arrianum se esse miratus est: That (...).
the whole world wept and wondered, that it was become an Arrian. Peter's little
ship was now endangered, the winds tossed her, the waves beat her on the sides,
little hope, but was at the point of sinking, but at the last the Lord did
arise, commanded the winds, and the tempest ceased, and a calm succeeded, and
all the Bishops which were exiled, were called home again; then Egypt
received his Athanasius triumphing; then France embraced Hilary returning from
war; then was Antioch glad at the return of Chrysostom, and Italy threw
off her mourning garments at the return of Eusebius. I know that Canus calls
these speeches hyperbolicall of Hilary and Hierome: but that is but his
hyperbolicall lie. This is the common Inn wherein the Papists lodge most of
our objections: but I reason thus, Eadem est ratio totius, quae est singulornus
membrorum;

At singula membra possunt cadere.

Ergo totum corpus.

The same reason is of the whole, which is of every particular member.

But every particular member may fall. The Pope may err.


Therefore the whole body.

The epistles of the Bishops were corrected by Councels provincial; and the
Provincial Councels, by the general; and the former general Councels, by
those that came afterward, says Augustine. Ecclesiam Dei finaliter errare
nego: that the Church of Aug. lib. 2. de Baptism. 1. John 3.
God can finally err, I deny: for he that is of God, sins not; and Christ
tells us, that there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive
the very elect; if it were possible, but unpossible, that they should finally
be deceived.

Here the great question is decided, Number Papa potest in fide deficere? whether
the Pope can fail in faith? because he is the whole Church, Virtualiter. To
this we object Pope John the 22. That he erred, because he affirmed and
held, that the souls of the righteous did not see God till the day of
judgment; which heresy of his was condemned at Paris with the blast of
trumpers: and we say that C^lestine erred, when he held, that marriage was
dissolved, if either of them, meaning the man or wife fell into heresy: and
Gregory, when writing to Augustine of Canterbury, he said, that the husband
might marry another wife, Si mulier non possit debitum ma^i^o reddere. Saint
Ambrose in a certain Sermon of his, dicit Petrum fidem sum perdidisse: says,
Ambr. ser. 47.
that Saint Peter lost his faith. If Peter failed, certainly his successors may
fail. To these Canus answers, that John the 22. and the rest, erred
personally, not judicially: to Ambrose his speech, he says, Fides capitur pro
fidelitate: that faith is there taken for fidelity; illam ergo, non fidem
amisit: it was that he lost, namely his fidelity, not his faith: and he
further adds, Papam haeredem esse Petri privilegiorum, non culparum: that the
Pope was the heir of Peter's privileges, not of his offenses.

To conclude with Canus: all come to this point, Bishops, Fathers, Councels,
The Popes Legates in Councels may err; for Christ prayed not for Peter's
Legates, but for Peter himself, quoth the Cardinal of Ture: Immo Papam errare
posse, sed moribus: yea the Pope may err, but yet in manners, not in faith:
yea the Pope may err in faith personaliter, non judicialiter: personally, not
judicially, quoad factum, non quoad fidem: as touching facts, not as touching
faith, as Sixtus 4. which taught Catherinam Senensem stigmata non habuisse,
where he erred as touching the history, not as touching faith: and they all
affirm, that the Pope may err in his gallery, not in his Consistory: which is
a monstrous answer; as though Christ had prayed for the place, the walls, not
for the person: as if faith were in the walls, not in the heart. But if the
Pope dye in an heresy, though never holden in his Consistory, as John the two
and twentieth did, let them tell me in what state he dies: Cord creditur ad
justitiam: With Romans 10.
the heart man believes unto righteousness: shall they give The Papists
distinctions, how the Pope may err, and not err: nice and frivolous.
us such dross for gold, such chafe for corn, suth lees for wine? Shall they
build such stubble upon the foundation? Ignis probabit: the fire shall try it.
Let God and man judge of this answer. 1 Cor. 3.


THE NINE AND THIRTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXIIII. And to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory
with joy. We must be presented blameless before God.



THis is the second thing he prays for, as touching this life, that God
shall present them faultlesse. We shall be pure and perfect, without fault,
without spot, or wrinkle, Nam nil Apot. 21. 27.
immundum intrabit, etc. No unclean thing shall pass through the gates of the
new Jerusalem. To this end God has elected us before the foundation of the
World, That we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4.
and without blame before him in love. Hitherto tends Paul's prayer, Now the
very God of Peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your whole
spirit, soul and body 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
may be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are
said to be faultlesse, blameless, and without spot; not that we are without
sin, but because God imputes not our sins unto us. So Saint Paul would have
a Bishop, sine crimine, without fault, non dicit, sine peccate, he does not
say, without sin, for no man is sine peccato, without fault, though many be
sine crimine, without offensive fault, and yet sine peccate sumus, we are
without sin, without fault, quia non imputatur nothis because it is not
imputed to us: Whereupon David, Blessed is Psalm. 32. 2.
the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. If therefore the Papists should
cry all the day long, and all their life long, Beatus qui We are righteous by
imputation of Christ's righteousness.
timet Deum: Blessed is he that fears God: Beatus qui miseretur pauperibus:
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy: Beatus qui operatur
justitiam: Blessed is he that works righteousness: Beatus qui loquitur vere:
Blessed is he that speaks truly, for Psalm. 112. 1. Psalm. 42. 1. Psalm. 119.
Esa. 33. 15.
he shall dwell on high, his defense shall be the munitions of the rocks, bread
shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure. I will expound all these
blessednesses, by this one, Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes no
sin. In this sense Zacharias and Elizabeth are Romans 4. 6. Luke 1. 6.
called just, non quia non potuit, sed quia noluit Deus illis imputare peccata:
not because God could not, but because he would not impute unto them their
sin; for otherwise, if God should be extreme, To mark what is done amiss,
who can abide it? For Psalm. 130. 3.
we cannot be just before God, but by forgiveness of sins: in which
respect, the Prophet prays thus, Enter not into judgment Psalm. 143. 2.
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man that lives be justified. Let
us then learn to expound the Scripture by the Scripture: for that which the
holy Ghost says, obscurely in one place, that he says more plainly in
another place; and surely, if the Papists had conferred Scriptures, and weighed
things by the Word of God, as they have done in the lying Schools of their
own reason, and traditions, they might easily have reconciled these two, that
no man is righteous, and yet that men are righteous and faultlesse, when God
imputes not their faults unto them. For this cause Paul judged all things as
dung, that he might win Christ, and might be found in him, that is, (says
Paul) Phil. 3. 8, 9.
not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
Faith. He makes two kinds of righteousness:

The one of the Law,

The other of Faith,

Contenting himself with the latter; thus,

August. said, Iustitiam nostram magis constare remissione peccatorum, A^g.
quam perfectione virtutum, Our righteousness to consist more in remission of
our sins, then in the perfection of our virtues: and thus Ambrose said, Non
gloriabor, quia justus sum, sed quia redemptus Ambr.
sum, non quod vacuus sum peccati, sed quod remissa sunt mihi peccata; I will
not glory because I am just, but because I am redeemed, not because I am void
of sin, but because my sins are pardoned me and forgiven me. We must all
say with Daniel, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us shame:
And again, O Lord, unto us appertains open shame, to our Kings, to our De^.
9. 7, 8, 9.
Princes, to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee, yet compassion
and forgiveness is in thee, o Lord our God, although we have rebelled against
thee. For though a man seem never so pure in his own eyes, yet all is
corruption before God, and therefore faith holy Job, Though I wash my self in
snow water, and purge my self Job 9. 30, 31.
most clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes All
knowledge and virtue in us imperfect in this life.
shall make me filthy. Paul said, that we are perfect, and yet eodem oris
halitu, dixit nos imperfectos esse: and with the same breath he said, that we
are unperfect. If any man should urge the former words, to prove that our
knowledge, our will, our righteousness is perfect, Paul confuteth it in the
twelfth verse of the same Chapter: so he said, I know to be full, and to be
hungry: he can do Phil. 4. 13.
this, and he can do that, but how? of himself? No: Sed per Iesum Christum.
I am able to do all things thorough the help of Christ, which strengthens
me: not of his own power or free will. This answers the common slander of
the world, that we are Puritans, Precisians, etc. But surely if there be any
Puritans among us, either they be Papists, or Familists: for the one say that
they are saved by their works, and the other, that they have paid a price for
their sins, as well as Christ, saving that he has paid his money before
them; he died first. As for us, we know no purity, but the purity of Christ
Jesus, we know that we are washed in his blood, and that his blood does
cleanse us 1 John 1. 7.
from all sin.

But they object the words of our Savior to the young man, If thou will be
perfect, go sell that thou have, and give it to the poor, etc. And again,
Ye shall be perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect: Mat. 19. 21. Mat. 5.
48.
And again, they allege the saying of Paul, how? that Christ gave himself,
that he might make it to himself a glorious Ephesians. 5. 27.
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blame. The two former places deceived the Monks, and the
third deceived Augustine: for it is not meant of this life, but of the life to
come: the Church shall be without blot, not here, but elsewhere in Heaven: For
when Christ which is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear with him
in glory. Augustine Col. 3. 4. Aug.
reasons thus, Amor sequitur notitiam, at notitia nostra est imperfecta, ergo
amor, justicia, obedientia nostra imperfecta sunt: Love follows knowledge,
but our knowledge is imperfect, therefore our Love, righteousness and
obedience are imperfect. Sumus 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. Luke 17. 10.
servi inutiles: we are unprofitable servants, yea even when we have done all
that we can.

To answer therefore that which they allege out of Matthew, Ye shall be
perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect: And again, Mat. 5. 48. cap 19. 21.
If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have. Christ shows rather
what we should strive for, than what we have attained to. Pij vocantur
perfecti imputative and inchoative: The godly are called perfect, imputatively
and inchoatively, for who can say, quoth Chemnisius, My heart is clean? Et
tamen omnia munda mundis, yet Chemnisius versus Andra.
to the clean, all things are clean, because we are accounted clean, and
esteemed as worthy. Mark, what Christ says, Watch Pro. 20. Tit. 1. 15.
and pray continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these
things. The phrase therefore warranted of Christ, our cleanenesse, Luke 21. 36.
our worthiness, our perfection, is by imputation: the Catharists, the
Donatists, the Pelagians, the Celestines, the Anabaptists, the No Saint without
sin.
Familists, the Papists, abuse this doctrine of perfection, to derogate from
God, and to arrogate unto themselves: and for Canisius in his Catechism, he
sets down in his Chapter of satisfactions, that I never read in any Papist
before: he makes three sorts of men:

One that never sinned.

A second sort, indifferent.

A third, extremely evil.

For the first, he quoteth the place in the prayer of Manasses, that Abraham
sinned not; which is spoken comparatively, by way of comparison: such a phrase
is used by the elect and chosen vessel of God, Saint Paul, where he says
thus, Adam was not deceived, 1 Timothy 2. 14. Genesis 3. Cap. 12. 13.
but the woman was deceived, and was in the transgression; yet Adam sinned, and
God condemned him, but he sinned not as Eve sinned; so Abraham sinned, in
willing Sara his wife to say, that she was his sister, and not only so; but
he himself said that she was his sister; Abraham had now twice fallen into
one fault, into one Cap. 20. 2.
sin: except Canisius will now say, that lying is no fault, no sin, and
excuse in Abraham, as they do theft, murder and whoredom in the Pope, by the
example of Israel, who spoiled the Egyptians of their Jewels of silver, and
Jewels of gold, and raiment, and by the example of Samson, Who with the jaw
bone of an Ass killed Exodus 12. 35. Judge. 15. 25.
a thousand men: And by the example of Jacobs polygamie, it is said: Qui ex Deo
est, non peccat: He that is of God, sins not; 1 John 3. 9. ^ John 1. 10.
and yet the same beloved disciple says, If we say we have not sinned, we
make God a lier, and his word is not in us. Canisius therefore has frontem
meretric^^m: an harlots forhead, and a brow of brass, and carries his face in
his fist. These last Papists have exceeded all their fathers in impudency.
Jerusalem justified Sodom; and Canisius, Andradius, Ganus, Genebrard,
Bellarmine, Ezech. 16.
Turrian, Stapleton have justified Thomas Aquinas, Holcot, Briccot, Dorbell,
Duns, etc. The Locusts be crept out of the bottomless pit; Apoc. 9. 3. Apoc.
16. cap. 20.
these croking frogs are crept out of the mouth of the dragon; Satan is let
loose to deceive the world, spirits of error are gone abroad, which speak lies
through Hypocrisy, and have their 1 Timothy 4. 2.
consciences burned with an hot iron: and the last error in popery is worse
than the first, as the Pharisees said to Pilate concerning Mat. 27. 64.
Christ. Sadeele calls the Jesuits now, postremum Satanae anhelantis
crepitum; as Munster said of the men of India: Habent capita canina: they have
heads like dogs: non loquuntur, sed latrant: they speak not, but bark
against all truth, like the dogs of the Capital, who left barking at
thieves, and barked at true men: but God shall confound them spiritu oris sui,
with the breath of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
his mouth.

Quod nominamur perfecti, inculpati, immaculati, in that we are called
perfect, blameless; immaculate, and without spotte, this The Church unperfect
in it self, perfect in Christ.
comes to pass, non (...), sed (...): we are called, perfect, blameless,
immaculate, not in respect of God, but of man; and comparatione quadam, by a
certain comparison, for not the Angels are like unto Gods righteousness; for
he found folly in his Angels: our righteousness is in part, not absolute, For
he Job 4. 18. Iam. 2. 10.
that fails in one point, is guilty of all: Et in uno omnes labimur: but in
one point we fail all. You can now put to the conclusion easily, Fortasse
vivimus sine crimine coram hominibus; Peradventure we live without crime
before men: Non sine peccato coram Deo: not without sin before God: which is
Paul's distinction. The Church sometimes is called pure, perfect, blameless.
But it is one thing to consider the Church in it self, another thing to
consider it in Christ; the Church in it self, whether we consider each member
of it severally, or all the members of it jointly, has many spots or
wrinkles, or else how should it be said; to be saved by the grace of our Lord
Jesus? The Church considered Act. 15. 11.
in Christ may be said; to be without spotte, because it is washed in the
blood of Christ; and it may be said to be without wrinkle, because Apoc. 1. 5.
it is clad with the righteousness of Christ, for Christ is the white raiment,
wherewith we being clothed, our filthy nakedness Apoc. 13. 18.
shall not appear. The Church militant is holy in affection: for she
fulfilleth not the lusts of the flesh; the Church Gal. 6. 16.
triumphant, is holier in perfection; for long white robes are given to every
one of them; both the militant and triumphant Church is most holy by the grace
of redemption, in the fruition of glory: but the militant spe, in hope; the
triumphant, re, indeed; For unto her was granted that she should be arrayed
with pure, fine linen, Apoc. 19. 8.
and shining; for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints: for our
blessedness is perfected in three degrees; Per spem and fidem 2 Thessalonians. 1.
quotidie crescentem in hac vita: by hope and faith continually growing, and
increasing in this life; after this life, while the spirit injoyes Eccles. 12.
7.
the presence of God; after the resurrection, when we shall be glorified in
body and in spirit, when the Lord Jesus shall change Phil. 3. 20. 1 Cor. 13.
our vile body, and make it like his glorious body, when God shall be unto us
all in all things. Gods will is done two ways: sincerely and perfectly;
again, sincerely only: but imperfectly: the former is natural to the Son
of God, for God gives not him the spirit by John 3. 34.
measure: the latter to the adopted Sons of God, for in many Iam. 3.
things we offend all; we have the spirit by measure, and that a little
measure; In the old Testament who were more holy among all the people, then the
Priests? and yet God commanded them to offer sacrifice, first for their own
sins, then for the Levit. 4.
peoples: and in the new Testament among all the people under grace, who more
holy than the Apostles themselves? yet Christ commanded them to pray daily, and
to say, Dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us our trespasses; this therefore
is the hope of the Mat. 6.
penitent sinners, that they have an Advocate with the Father. I conclude Our
righteousness is in the remission of sins.
therefore with Aug. Multum eum profecisse, qui se parum profecisse sentit, and
perfectum esse, qui se imperfectum esse novit, and tamen aspirare ad
perfectionem; that he has profited much, which thinks that he has
profited but a little, and that he is perfect, 1 John 2. 2.
which knows himself to be unperfect, and yet aspireth to perfection. For
God measures us by our will, not by our power: For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to 2 Cor. 8. 12.
that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

This doctrine will give light, and open a window to the doctrine now in
controversy, Whether faith or works justify? Bellarmine says, the word
Imputation is the opinion of a thing done in deed, not in show only: and this
is true in a godly sense, for they are truly righteous, to whom God imputes
righteousness; but yet in the righteousness of Christ, not in an inherent
righteousness of our own: as he is said to have paid the money to his
creditour, who paid it by another, though himself was not able. And unto this
end the Apostle says, that we are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption Romans 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
that is in Christ Jesus.

To the place in the Romans, where Paul says, But to him that works not,
but believes in him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness; even as David declared the blessedness of that man, unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed is the man, whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is the man, to
whom the Lord imputes not the sin. Bellarmine answers, that Paul sets not
down a full definition of justification: For sin is not remitted (says he)
except righteousness be infused, but yet inchoated only, not perfected: and
yet the comparison holds not, betwixt the infusion of light into the air,
and the infusion of righteousness into a man; similia illustrant, non probant:
similies do illustrate a thing, but prove not.

Bellarmine argues from the comparison, betwixt Adam, and Christ, Per Adae
peccatum inhaerens, peccatores sumus: By Romans 5.
the inhaerent sin of Adam, we are sinners; therefore per infusionem
inhaerentis justitiae justi sumus, by infusion of inhaerent righteousness we
are righteous. I answer, that the argument follows not, the comparison
holds not in the inherence of sin or righteousness, but in the adoption,
or getting: From Adam, we have gotten sin naturally, but from Christ,
supernaturally by faith; by which the righteousness of Christ is imputed unto
us. Bellarmine reckons up many things which be necessary to salvation, out of
the second Epistle of S. Peter, the first Chapter; as how we must join Virtue
2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
with Faith, and with virtue, knowledge; and with knowledge, temperance; and
with temperance, patience, and with patience, godliness; and with godliness,
brotherly kindness; and with brotherly kindness, Good works the way, not the
cause of the Kingdom of Heaven.
love: But he does detorquere, writhe and bow the question another way, and to
another end: For we do not exclude good works simply from the obtaining of
salvation, (sunt enim via regni, non causa regnandi: they are the way to Gods
Kingdom, not the cause of our ruling and reigning in Gods Bern.
Kingdom,) but from the obtaining of righteousness: For it is only Christ's
righteousness, that makes us righteous before God, for, he is our wisdom,
and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption; wisdom to instruct us,
righteousness to justify us, holiness to sanctify us, and redemption to free us.
He reasons thus.

Faith without Love does not justify, Therefore faith alone does not justify,
for faith works by love. Gal. 5.
I deny the Confequence; For though faith be not alone, without other virtues,
yet it justifies alone; as the hand of the writer is not alone, but has other
members adjoined unto it, yet it writes alone; as the eye is not alone, and
yet it sees alone; and the ear is not alone, and yet it hears alone; and
yet to speak properly, faith does not justify: it is a Metonymicall speech;
for to speak properly, the righteousness of Christ, apprehended by faith,
justifies us; faith as the principal cause does not justify us, sed ut causa
instrumentalis: but as the isntrumental cause: non per modum dispositionis,
sed per modum apprehensionis: not by the manner of disposition, but by the
manner of apprehension; For although it does dispose unto good works, yet it
does not justify in respect of that, but in respect of the object which is
Christ; For the blood of Jesus 1 John 1. 7.
Christ, Gods Son, cleanses us from all sin.

But Justification (says he) is motus a peccato ad justitiam: a moving from
sin to righteousness; as illumination is a moving from darkness, to light.

I grant, sed non adjustitiam inhaerentem: not unto inherent or infused
righteousness, but imputative. He argues, that things are denominated from
the internal, not the external form; as we call an Ethiopian black, though
he have a white garment on him, quia nigredo est illi insita: because blacknes
is naturally graffed in him. Ergo nos justos dici a justitia intra nos, non
extra nos; Therefore we are said to be righteous, of the righteousness that
is within us, not without us. I answer, This is true in Philosophy, but false
in Divinity. Here we may say with Paul, Beware lest there be any man that
spoil you through Col. 2. ^.
philosophy. Philosophy may be used, so as she be content to be a servant,
not a mistress: but when men measure all doctrine by humane reason, and
philosophical positions, as Bellarmine here does, then Philosophy is to be
taken heed of.

Howlet, in the fifth part of his resolution confesses, that works are not the
causes of salvation, but the path that leads Papists at death fly to Gods
mercy in Christ, and not to merit.
to salvation, the fruits and effects of faith: as Christ says, Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven: That Paul speaking of the cause of Justification,
saying, we conclude, that Mat. 5. 16. Romans 3. 18.
a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law, is not contrary to
James speaking of the notes and signs of Justification, saying, Ye see then,
how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. This truth, God
extorted from him, as also Iam. 2. 24.
from Stephen Gardener, who confessed this at his death, but would not have it
preached to the people; Open that door (quoth he) and then farewell all. He
would be wiser than God. Mounser also granted it, and cried, Solus Christus,
solus Christus: Christ alone, Christ alone. And so Sherwin a seminary Priest,
executed for treason with Campian, and others at Tiborne, when he was in the
cart, ready to dye, though he held himself a martyr for the Catholic faith,
acknowledged nowithstanding ingenuously, the miseries, imperfections, and
corruptions of his own vile nature, relying wholly upon Christ, cried out at
his death: O Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, be to me a Jesus. And Bellarmine cites
often in his works out of Augustine, Domus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando
exigitur, diligendo perficitur: the foundation of Gods house in our souls is
faith, the walls hope, the roof, charity. If faith be the foundation of all
other virtues, as himself affirms, and if it be our safest Lib. 1. de Romans
Pont. cap. 10. De Iustificatione. lib. 5. Cap. 7.
course to repose our whole trust in the only mercy of God, Propter
incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimu^ est
fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere; For the
uncertainty of our own righteousness and danger of vain glory, it is the
safest way to repose all our confidence in Gods only mercy and bounty. Then is
it not as he disputes, Lib. 1. de justificatione, cap. 4. wrought by charity:
but contrariwise charity does arise from faith. I will conclude with Bernard,
Omnia merita Dei dona sunt, ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est, quam
Deus homini; all our merits are the gifts of God, so man is rather a debtour to
God for them, then God to man. So much as touching this life.

Touching the other life, he commends them to God, that they may behold the
presence of his glory with joy: for in the life to come we shall have
plenitudinem gaudy: fulness of joy. Here all Psalm. 16.
joy is at an ebb, it is mixed with some sorrow; light with darkness, heat,
with cold; health, with sickness: life, with death; glory, with ignominy: but
there is joy, and nothing but joy; no change, no alteration; day, without
night: light, without darkness; summer, without winter: youth, without age:
life, without death: there we shall have all tears wiped away from our eyes;
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
Apoc. 21. 4.
there be any more pain; but they shall have perpetual joy: death The joys
of Heaven fill all powers of soul and body.
and Hell shall be cast into the lake of fire, and shall be destroyed for
ever; The second death shall have no power upon them that be in heaven, but
they shall be the Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years; That is, for ever. We look too much to Apoc. 20. 6, 5, 14.
Hebr. 6.
the pleasures of this world, which makes us care less for Heaven; but look
into the powers of the world to come, vide intus, and extra, supra and infra,
circumcirca, and ubique erit gaudium: Look within and without, above and
beneath, and round about, and ye shall find joy every where; within shall be
joy for the glorification of the body and soul: for our Savior, even The Lord
Jesus, shall change our vile body, and make it like his glorious body,
according Phil. 3. 21.
to the working, whereby he is able to sub due all things unto himself. It is
much to have our bodies changed, more, to have our vile bodies changed, but to
have our vile bodies so changed, that they shall be facioned like the glorious
body of the Lord Jesus, is most of all, and must needs fill us with joy. We
shall have joy without, by reason of the company of the blessed Angels; for we
shall enjoy not only the celestial Jerusalem, but also the company of
innumerable Angels, which shall glad us, and rejoice us exceedingly. We shall
have joy above, in the sight of God, for we shall be like God, and see him as
he is. We shall have joy beneath, of the beauty of Heaven and of the world;
for 1 John 3. 2.
We look for new Heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. 2
Pet. 3. 13.
We shall have joy round about of the delight of all our senses, when God
shall be the object of them all: for he shall be a glass unto our eyes,
music unto our ear, honey to our taste, a flower to our hands, and sweet
Balsamum to our smell; there shall be the fairenes of the Summer, the sweetness
of the Spring, the plenty of the Autumn, the rest of the Winter, yea God shall
1 Cor. 13.
be all in all unto us. This life is as a seed-time in tears, as the travel
of a woman, as a weary prentice-hood, as a tedious journey, but the harvest is
in the life to come, there shall we reap joy, there Psalm. 126. 5.
are we delivered of our child birth, and forget our sorrow, for joy that
salvation is come, our sorrow shall be turned into joy. A John 16. 21, 22.
woman when she travaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come, but as
soon as she is delivered of her Child, she remembers no more the anguish,
for joy that a man is borne into the world. In this world we have sorrow, but
in Heaven joy, there we shall rejoice, and our joy shall no man take from us.

Look to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; and let the same animate
us, that did him, he for the joy that was set before Hebr. 12. 2.
him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand
of the Throne of God. Let us so do, and we shall follow the Lamb, and be
partakers of the price of our high calling, which is in Christ Jesus: tantum
gaudebunt, quantum amabunt; tantum amabunt, quantum cognoscunt Deum; sic
cognoscunt, ut cogniti Romans 8.
sunt; so much shall they rejoice, by how much they love, and so The land of
the living, compared with the land of the dead.
much shall they love, by how much they know God; and they so know, as they are
known.

The situation and height of Heaven, may teach us the quantity and quality of
the glory of heaven; Coelum Empyraeum is 1 Cor. 13.
higher, greater, and more excellent than all Heavens; the Scripture calls
it, The land of the living; as if the earth which we inhabit, were the land of
dead men: and indeed, We are dead, and Psalm. 116. 9.
our life is hid with Christ in God, and when Christ, which is our life, Col.
3. 3.
shall appear, then shall we also appear in glory. Now if in this land of
dead men, the creatures be so precious, what shall they be hereafter, in the
land of the living? In this dead land see the greatness of the heavens, the
brightness of the Sun, and Moon, and stars: the beauty of the earth; how
pleasant is it to see the height of the mountains, the plains of the fields,
the greenenesse of the valleys, the fountains of waters, the current of the
streams and rivers; which like veins run through the earth; the mines of
gold and silver, pearl, the mines of metals. If all these be in the land of
the dead: what is in the land of the living? There shall be a new Heaven and a
new earth, and new creatures. 2 Pet. 3. 15.


Again, there be three places in this life:

The first, is in the womb from our corruption.

The second, is in the world from our birth.

The third, is in Heaven after death.

Betwixt these three, there is a proportion; look how much the world is bigger
and pleasanter than the womb; so much is Heaven bigger, and fairer than the
world, as well in length of time, as in beauty; Touching durance, the first
life in the 2 Mathab. 7.
womb, is not above nine months; the second life, is four score years, at
the most; the third is infinite and eternal: the Psalm. 90. 1 Cor. 13.
womb of the mother, is nothing to the world, and the world, is nothing to
heaven, seeing one star is bigger than the earth. Job 38.


Again, the difference of the inhabitants makes a difference betwixt Heaven
and earth; that is full of living men; this of dead Luke 9. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Romans
3.
men; that of just men, this of sinners; this of men, Romans 3. 24. that of
Angels, Dan. 7. here dwell the penitent, there the perfect; here dwell the
militant, there the triumphant; here dwell friends, and enemies, there friends
only, and the elect; there Hebr. 12. 23. Job 7. Apoc. 14.
God shall be plenitudo lucis nostro intellectui: fullness of light to our
understanding; Multitudo pacis voluntati: multitude of peace, to our will, Et
continuatio aeternitatis: memoriae, and continuance of eternity to our memory.

It is said of the Swannes, that they sing dying,

Cantator Cignus, funeris ipse sui.

And we like Swans in the assurance of the glory that shall be revealed to us,
should live and die rejoicing: For we shall be made, an eternal joy and glory,
from generation, to generation; salvation shall The happiness of Heaven, set out
by comparison.
be our walls, and praise our gate: we shall have no more Sun to shine by
day, neither shall the brightness of the Moon shine unto us, for the Lord shall
be our everlasting light, and our God our glory; our Sun shall never go
down, neither shall our Moon be hid, for the Lord shall be our Esaias. 60.
15, 18, 19, 20, 21.
everlasting light, and the days of our sorrow shall be ended: we shall be
all righteous, and possess the land for ever. We shall come with Israel, from
Mount Horeb, where was nothing but thunder, lightning, and clouds; to mount
Thabor, where we shall enjoy the glory of Christ Jesus, and say with Peter,
Bonum est hic esse: It is Mat. 17.
good for us to be here. Let them make account of this life, who make the
world their friend, and are not only in it, but of it, whose eyes the God of
this world has blinded, that they look 2 Cor. 4. 3.
not for future things: we are here pilgrims, our Country is Heaven, our
friends the Angels, our companions Apoc. 21.
the Saints, our City the new Jerusalem: how can we sit among the rivers of
Babylon, and not weep to remember the heavenly Sion? O curvae in terris
animae, and coelestium inanes! O crooked souls on earth, and devoid of
heavenly things! We marvel at the Pigmaeans, that are but a cub it high, and
live but seven years; and yet our life to eternity is not seven years, nor
seven days, nor seven hours, nor one hour, it is but a moment; 2 Cor. 4. 17.
so S. Paul calls it. Saturn, one star, is thirty years in motion, in
circuit, and we may go round about the world in three years and odd days;
so little a space is it. What is a drop of water to the whole Sea? An acre of
land to the map of the world? the light of a candle, to the brightness of the
Sun? the life of a child, to the years of Methusalah? the conceit of a
fool, to the experience of Noah, who saw two Worlds? or one drop of rain to
all the waters in the Clouds, which drowned a whole world? Such is our life to
eternity, and the glory of this world to the glory of Heaven: a thousand years
are but a day: nay, S. John calls 2 Pet. 3.
all the time since Christ's coming, but an hour; he makes sixteen hundred
years but an hour to eternity, to the days 1 John. 3.
everlasting! Oh think oftener of heaven, and the glory of it! Oh, seek the
things that be above, where Christ sits at the right hand of Col. 3. 1.
God: set your affections upon Heavenly things, and not upon earthly. Paul
prayed for the Ephesians, that they might see the hope of their calling, and
Ephesians. 1 17.
the riches of the glorious inheritance. And pray you for it; for as yet these
things are hid from our eyes; videmus tantum terrena: we behold only earthly
things.

If in a golden game some should step aside, and run after flies and
feathers, would we not count them mad? so is it in Christianity; our life is a
race, we all are runners, heaven is the goal, eternal life the prize, but
many step aside after flies and 1 Cor. 9.
vanity; We tire our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, and Wisd.
5. 7, 8, 9.
we have gone through dangerous ways, but we have not known the way of the
Lord: what has pride profited us? Or what profit has the pomp One day in
Heaven more joyous, than many in the greatest honor.
of riches brought us? All these things are passed away as a shadow, and as a
poast that passes by. If a man knew the thoughts of Alexander Magnus, when he
died of the poison of Styx, after all his victories, or the thoughts of Julius
Caesar, receiving in the Senate 52. wounds, and all deadly, after that he had
conquered the world: he shall see that they took little pleasure in their
former honors and victories. Philip Mornay says of Carolus quintus, whom of
all men the world judged most happy, that he cursed all his honors in his old
age, his victories, trophies, riches, saying; Abite hinc, abite long, Get ye
hence: get ye away a sarre off; he found more joy in one days contemplation
of Heaven, than in all his Imperial life. Then, then was his mourning turned
into joy, and his sack loosed, and he girded with gladness. He that knew
the Psa. 30: 11.
thoughts of the soul of the rich man in hell, he shall see, that he cries,
Woe, woe to all the wealth, honor, pomp, and glory of the world; and had
rather be one day in Paradise, than ten thousand years in this world: he
curses gold, house, land, credit, and says! Vae domni lut^ae, ob quam perdidi
auream in coelis: Woe to this house of clay, that has made me lose an house 2
Cor. 5. 1.
of gold in Heaven!

In Saint Lukes Gospel we do read, that when some spoke of the temple how
it was garnished with goodly stones, and consecrate things; O (says our
Savior) are these the things that ye look upon? The days will come, when a
stone shall not be left upon a Luke 21. 6.
stone. So say I, O then look up higher.

Again, in Heaven is the presence of glory: As there is no light but that
which is derived from the Sun, so there is no glory but that which is derived
from the glory of God, that is, true everlasting glory. As there is no right
Balm but in Gilead, no right incense but in Sheba: so there is no true glory,
but the Heavenly glory: Gloria mundi ut fumus: The glory of the world is but
smoke, and as chafe that vanishes, as a dream and vision in the night, that
tarrieth not; as if an hungry man dreameth, and Esaias 29. 8, 9.
thinks that he eats; and when he awaketh, his soul is empty; and like a
thirsty man, which thinks de drinks, and behold, when he is awaked, his
soul is faint: so in the world to come men shall say, O what has pride
profited us? Or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? Or what good
has the glory of the world done us? Where is the glory of Solomon, the power
of Alexander, the edifices and buildings of Nabuchadnezar? The nine hundred
chariots of Sisera? The authority of Augustus, which commanded the whole world
to be taxed? What did vain glory, the multitude of servants, the power of the
world, the hugeness of their armies, their abundance of wealth, and troops of
flatterers profit these? All was as a shadow, all was as smoke, All are passed
away as a shadow, and as a poast that passes by, as a ship that Wisd. 5. 9,
10.
passes over the waves of the waters, which when it is gone, the trace This
world fraudulent, turbulent, momentany.
thereof cannot be found, neither the path of it in the floods. In mundi
foelicitate videbis plus fellis quam mellis: in the felicity of this world ye
shall see more gall, than honey; more wormwood, than sugar: the world is full
of thorns, not of roses, it promises a man that which he shall never have,
and leaves a man in the chief of his pleasures: this world is a coffer of
sorrows, a school of vanity, a market of frauds, a labyrinth of errors, a
flood of tears, a sweet poison; the joy of this world has sorrow; his
security is without foundation; his labors, without fruit; his tears, without
purpose; and his purposes, without success; his hope is vain, sorrow
certain, and joy fained. An heathen man could say, that he would not be
wrapped again in his swaddling clothes to gain much. The Apostle calls it a
sea of glass, a sea for the troubles of it, or glass for the bitterness of
it, or because Apoc. 15.
God sees into it, as we see into a glass. Now rich, now poor; now full,
now empty; now honorable, now despised; now alive, and now dead, and never
certain; the pomp therefore of it, Saint John compares to the Moon, crescit
and decrescit: it increases Apoc. 12. 1. Job 14. 10, 11, 12.
and decreaseth. Man is sick and dies, and man perishes, and where is he?
As waters pass from the Sea, and as the flood decays, and dries up; so man
sleeps, and rises not; for he shall not wake again, nor be raised from
his sleep, till the Heaven be no more. And as it is written in another place;
Our days are more swift than a poast, they Job 9. 25.
have fled and seen no good thing. Xerxes, that great Emperor, was weary of
all pleasure, and offered rewards to the inventers of new pleasures, and yet
when these new pleasures were found, he was not contented.

As Elkanah said to Hannah, Why weepest thou? am not I better to 1 Samuel 1. 8.
thee, then ten sons? So says God to us, Why weep ye, and sorrow ye,
why do ye thus vex and torment your selves? am not I better unto you, than
ten worlds? Is not heavenly glory better than all earthly? Why do ye leave
the fountain of Paradise; Ier. 2. 10.
and drink of the broken and troublesome cysternes of this world? Why in this
golden race do ye step aside after flies and feathers. O taste and see how
sweet the glory of God is! look, o look into the powers of the world to come!
As the inhabitants 1 Pet. 2. 3.
of Nylus are deaf by the noise of the water, so many are deaf, when they
should hear of Heaven; the world makes such a noise in their ears, they
savor not the things which are of God: Mat. 16.
These Ravens feed of nothing but garbage, like Noah's Raven; Genesis 8.
these Lapwings make their nests in the ordure; these Betles never sing but in
a bed of dung; these Eagles never seize, but upon a Mat. 24. 28.
carcass; Vbi cadaver, ibi Aquilae; Where the dead carcass is, thither the
Eagles resort. Where there is buying, selling, bargaining, profit, gain,
thither fly these Eagles, their hearts are exercised with Covetousnes, they are
brawned in it, they think of 2 Pet. 2. 14, 16.
nothing but the world, and the glory of it; but these men shall see one day
the glory of Christ to their shame and confusion: but Christ, comfort both in
this life, and that to come.
the elect shall see Christ's humanity more glorious than ever the Apostle saw
it on Mount Thabor; apparebit Christus in similitudine carnis: Christ shall
appear in the similitude of flesh, that both Mat. 17. August. in Man. 1. cap.
26.
the eyes of man might be blessed in him, that the eye of the heart might be
refreshed in his divinity; and the eye of the body in his humanity; that going
in or out, our humane nature might find in him food and delight. Christ has
made to his Mat. 10.
Church a double promise: the one of his spiritual presence by grace, the
other of his Heavenly presence in glory; the first is performed; the second,
not yet. The Saints therefore pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And if we
pertain to God, we will Apoc. 22.
look for his coming, and desire it: we will look for the appearance of the
glory of our great God, and of our Savior Christ Jesus: but if we love the
world, the Love of God is not in us. Tit. 2. 3. 1 John 2. 15.


THE FORTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXV. That is, to God only Wise, and our Savior, be Glory and Majesty,
etc. The six Atributes of God.



WE are now come to the last thing contained in this Epistle, which is a
thankesgiving to God, with a description of his Attributes.

For he ascribes to God Wisdom, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and
Power.

For I divided this Epistle into the Salvation, Precation, The general
Proposition, The Confirmation by diverse examples, The Confutation, and Lastly,
the Conclusion.

And the conclusion into two; Prayer and Thankesgiving: this is a Thankesgiving
to God, he began with Prayer, and ends with thankesgiving; for the worship
of God does consist and stand upon two parts:

Precatio, We cannot think on Christ without thankfulness.
Gratiarum actio. Prayer, and Thanksgiving.

And these both the Apostle (...) included ^^ one verse, saying, Let both your
requests ^ee showed unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving of
thanks* ^ut to leave this.

Saint Jude cannot speak of God without thankfulness; thus Paul concluded
the Epistle to Rome, saying, To him now that Romans 16. 25, 27.
is of power to establish you according to my Gospel, etc. to God, I say,
only wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. So concluded the
other Apostles: The God of peace that brought again from the dead, the Lord
Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the Heb. 13. 20, 21.
blood of his everlasting covenant, make you perfect in all good works to do
his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ to whom, be praise for ever and ever. Amen. And thus concluded Saint
Peter, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: to him be glory both now and evermore, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Amen. Augustine said, Tu Domine sic excitas ut laudare te delectet, fecisti
nos pro te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te: thou August.
lib. 1. confess. cap. 1.
Lord do so excite me, that to praise thee it delights me, thou have
made us for thee, and our heart cannot be quiet, till it rest in thee. Vae
tacentibus de te, taceat lands tuas, qui miserationes tuas non novit: Woe be
to them which speak not of thee, he sets not forth thy praise, who is
ignorant of thy mercies. Again says the father, Si omnia membra nostra
verteventur in linguas, si tot haberemus, quot Argus oculos, nequaquam
sufficerent: If all our August. lib. Meditationum.
members were converted into tongues, if we had as many tongues as Argus had
eyes, they were not sufficient to set forth thy praises: thou art a Lord
exceeding great and infinite, without measure and end, and ought to be
praised and beloved of all. Paul could not name Christ, but abruptly, but
breaks out into thankesgiving, having often other matters inhand, yet cannot
he stay, but sounds out his gratitude, as with a trumpet, as writing to
Timothy, and handling other matters, on a sudden he leaves the thing in hand,
and cries out, Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God
only wise, be honor and glory for 1 Timothy 16. 17.
ever and ever, Amen. So writing to the Romans, and handling the privileges of
the Jews, on a sudden he leaves off, and breaks out into thankesgiving,
saying, Of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all blessed
for ever, Amen. So writing Romans 9. 5.
to the Corinthians, and handling the resurrection from the dead, on a sudden
he breaks out to gratitude, saying, Thanks be to God which has given us
victory, through Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 15. 57.
our Lord.

Jude here uses a figure called Ple^nasmus, to express his zeal, he
doubleth and redoubleth, tripleth, and multiplieth his words, till they be many
in number; he is full as the Moon, he Job 32.
flows as the Sea, he is as the new vessels which have no vent, for if the
fountain be full, the channels cannot be empty; if The Saints plentiful in
thanksgiving.
there be moisture in the root, the branches cannot wither; if there be
heat in the chimney, the house cannot be cold; if the heart abound, the mouth
will be full of Gods praises; Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: out of the
abundance of the heart Luke 6.
the mouth speaks.

Note this in all the Saints of God, how plentifully does David describe his
thankfulness, My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his
benefits: And again, Praise the Lord, o my Psalm. 103. 1, 2. Psalm. 146. 1.
soul; I will praise the Lord during my life, as long as I have any being, I
will sing unto my God. With how many words commends he the Law? What variety
he uses? What cornucopia he has? Mark his words; The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives
wisdom Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9.
unto the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoce the heart; the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of
the Lord is clean, and indureth for ever: the judgments of the Lord are
truth, and righteous altogether. Mark I pray you, how he calls it the Law,
the Testimonies, the Statutes, the Commandments, the Fear, the Judgments of
the Lord: then what Epithites he gives it; the Law Perfect, the Testimonies
sure, the Statutes Right, the fear Clean, the judgments Truth; then, what
fruits he ascribes to it; that it converteth the soul, gives wisdom,
rejoices the heart, endures for ever. Thus let us learn to measure our
selves, and to know the goodness of our hearts by the mouth; if we can speak
scantly of God and good things, and plentifully of the world and the vanities
of it, our heart is naught, it is withered like grass, all the dewes of Gods
grace are dried up in it: but we must rowze up both our hearts and tongues,
and say with David, My heart is prepared, O my Psalm. 57. 7, 8, 9.
God, my heart is prepared, I will sing and give praise: Awake, my tongue,
awake, viole and harp: I will awake right early, I will praise thee, O Lord,
among the people, and I will sing unto thee among the nations.

But to come to a more particular description of Gods attributes; and the
attributes wherewith he is described, are

Wisdom, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Dominion* and Power.

And yet this description is but in part, not a full description; for who can
describe him perfectly? he is shadowed out unto us by the holy Ghost after
this manner: The Lord, the Lord, strong, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin:
not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon their
Children, unto the third and fourth generation. And again, Solomon, King
Solomon, wise King Solomon shadoweth him out after this manner: Who has
ascended up to Heaven, and Prove. 30. 4.
descended? Who has gathered the Wind in his fist? Who has bound All men
ignorant, till enlightened.
the Waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the World? What
is his name, or what is his Sons name, if thou can tell? Oh who can tell
his name, or his Sons name? Est bonus sine qualitate, magnus sine quantitate,
praesens sine situ, sempiternus sine tempore, sine initio, sine fine: He is
good without quality, great without quantity, present without situation,
everlasting without time, without beginning, and without end. Seditut aequitas,
dominatur ut majestas, novit ut veritas, amat ut charitas: he sits as
equity, rules as majesty, knows as verity, and loves as charity. For these
be not qualities, but of the essence of God; Of Romans 11.
him, and for him, and through him are all things. He calls him only wise,
wherein he bestrippeth all men, and bereaveth them of wisdom, as the Cumane
Ass of the Lions skin: as Aesops Crow of her feathers, except they have it
of God: Hereupon says the Apostle, If any man want Wisdom, let him ask of
God, Iam. 1. 5.
who gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given
him. Jeremy speaks generally, Every man is a beast in his own Ier. 10. 14.
knowledge, not some, but all; not a few men, but every man. So says David,
The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of Psalm. 14. 2.
men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seek after God, but
all are gone out of the way, all are corrupt, etc. Paul calls the Ephesians
darkness, not dark, but darkness, night it self: Ye Ephesians. 5. 8.
were sometime darkness (quoth he) and he prays God to lighten them, The
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Father of Glory, give unto yo^ the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation through the knowledge Ephesians. 1. 17.
of him. And let this be our prayer, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
Father of Glory, would give us the Spirit of Wisdom, and he give us all the
Spirit of Wisdom, that we may be wise unto Salvation: for that which Christ
said of Laodicea, is true of all, Thou say, thou art rich, and increased in
Apoc. 13. 17, 18.
goodness, and have need of nothing, and know not, that thou art wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be made rich, and white raiment, that
thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness do not appear; and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see: that is, suffer the
eyes of thy understanding to be opened. We are blind, not as whelps that see
after nine days, not as the man in the Gospel, who saw men walk like trees,
but we be as blind as beetles, as blind as the men of Sodom, who groped for
Lots door: for what see we, that the Gentiles saw not? And Genesis 19.
yet saw they nothing: for the Apostle affirms, that they walked Ephesians. 4.
17, 18.
in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitation darkened, and being
strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them; and
because of the hardness of their hearts. God by the Gospel opens our eyes,
that we may turn from darkness to light, and from Act. 26. 18. Col. 2. 3.
the power of Satan unto God. All the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are
in Christ. Wisdom and Knowledge are in Angels and in No true wisdom in man,
till God infuse it.
men as well as in Christ; how can then all Wisdom and Knowledge be hid in
him? Yes, they have it from Christ* for Wisdom and Knowledge is in Angels by
Vision, in Men by Revelation, Col. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 22. Prove. 9. 1.
but in Christ by union, for he is the Power and Wisdom of his Father; he is
Wisdom and the Church and House Wisdom, wherein all must learn Wisdom:
we know not all things that appertain to God, nor are we ignorant of all
things which are proper to beasts, but we know some things, and are ignorant of
others, which are peculiar to men: and so far we see, as God has illuminated
us, and no further; for as all fountains come from the Sea, and all lights
from the Sun: so all Wisdom from God; there may be Science in the wicked,
but not Sapience. Scientia est rerum humanarum, Sapientia rerum divinarum: Aug,
Science is of humane and earthly things, Sapience of divine and heavenly
things: there is in the wicked Wit, but not Wisdom; or if there be any
Wisdom, it is the wisdom of the world, and of the flesh, but the Wisdom
of the Spirit they have it not. They that are of the flesh (says the Apostle)
savor Romans 8. 5, 6, 7.
the things of the flesh, but they that are of the Spirit, savor the things of
the Spirit: for the Wisdom of the flesh is Death, but the Wisdom of the
Spirit is Life and Peace, because the Wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God.
Achitophel was wise, but not in God, nor for God; the Grecians were wise, but
not spiritually; the Philosophers 2 Samuel 17. 1 Cor. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
were wise, but yet in part, and in the least part, for from whence comes
(...)? from whence came this division of the gods into majores and minores,
into greater and lesser gods? from whence came the furies of Epicures with
their Attomies: which cannot be divided? from whence the fate of Stoickes,
bending fast and tying straight Iehova himself? from the doting of Aristotle,
dreaming of the Worlds eternity? which of these knew the World to be made of
nothing; the Word to be made flesh, Christ to be borne of a virgin, the
righteousness of one man, to be conferred to another to make him righteous, in
three substa^ces or parts to be but one God? For all Wisdom and Religion flow
from one fountain, that is, God. Quem qui nescit, licet videat, caecus
Lactantius.
est, licet audiat, surdus est, licet loquitur, mutus est, licet vivat, mortuus
est, Whom, whosoever knows not, though he sees, yet is he blind; though he
hears, yet he is deaf; though he speaks, yet is he dumb; though he
lives, yet is he dead; for this is life, nay, life eternal, To know God to be
the only very God, and Jesus Christ whom he has John 17. 3, 25.
sent. The World knows not God, says our Savior, But I have known you, and
these have known me. Seneca and the Philosophers said, Fortunam a Deo petendum,
sapientia a nobis, Fortune is to be begged and craved of God, Wisdom of our
selves, Nemo (inquit) Deo ob sapientiam gratias egit: No man has thanked God
for Wisdom. But there was no grace in these lips, they spoke proudly. The
Philosophers affirm, reason to be seated in the head, as in a Tower, and from
thence as a lamp to shine unto our counsels, God saves by Christ.
and as a Queen to moderate the will.

Well, it is God that is only Wise, and his Wisdom appears in the
creation, in disposing so orderly, and placing so seemly, all things in their
place and degree, as is most wonderful to behold, with such beauty and
proportion in every creature, that unless we be too too blockish, we may
cry out with David, O Lord, how wonderful are thy works! in Wisdom have
Psalm. 8.
thou made them all. And again, Great is our Lord, and great is his power, yea
his Wisdom is infinite. To see the goodly order of Heaven, it will make a man
to be astonished at the Wisdom of God, more than the Queen of Saba was at the
wisdom of Solomon; to see how God preserves his Church by his power, and
knows ways and means by his Wisdom to deliver it, might ravish us with the
consideration of his wisdom, and to cry out with Paul, O the depth Romans 11.
of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God, how unsearcheable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding ^ut! Yea so wise a God is he, that
deprehendit astutos in astutia: that he takes the wily and subtle in their
craft and subtlety; nay, there is no Wisdom, there is no understanding,
there is no Counsel against the Lord. Let us Prove. 21.
always then submit our selves to this only wise God, who knows how to
deliver us out of temptation and trouble, and to 2 Pet. 2.
punish the wicked; for with him is wisdom and strength, he has counsel
and understanding. Job 21. 22.


I am come unto the second title, and that title is, that he calls him a
Savior, yea our Savior, a title of great comfort; he is able to save us, he
is willing to save us: what now is wanting to our full consolation? There is
power, there is will in him to save us: upon these two pillars rests our
faith. So Saint Peter comforted the dispersed Church: for having showed how
that through the abundant mercy of our God, we are elect, and regenerate to a
lively hope, and how faith must be tried, he comes at last to this
salvation here spoken of, and tells them, that they shall one day receive the
end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls. The which salvation in
Christ is no new thing, but a thing prophesied of old: salvation is the thing
that we all long for: for there is none so wicked, but he would be saved, and
no salvation but in Christ: There is no other name given unto men by which they
shall be saved, save only by the name of Act. 4. 12.
Jesus: he is (...), a Savior; so called at his birth. This day is Luke 2. 11.
borne a Savior, which is Christ the Lord; so named before his birth, Thou
shall call his name Jesus: for be shall save his people from their Mat. 1. 21.
sins. And thus called after his birth, and Joseph called his name Jesus, a
title known in Heaven, honored in Earth, and feared in Hell. He is a Savior;
a powerful Savior, when he Mat. 1. 25.
was weakest, then did he the greatest works, that ever were done: he was
powerful in his life in doing miracles, in giving sight Christ is properly
called the Savior.
to the blind, ears to the deaf, tongues to the dumb, legs to the ame,
life to the dead. O but more powerful at his death, in saving the world. For
then the Sun was darkened, the earth trembled, the stones clave in pieces,
the graves opened, the dead raised; his death reached to Heaven, to earth, to
Hell; the Angels rejoiced, the Devils trembled, and all men were comforted. Let
Satan boast like Rabsache, that God cannot deliver Jerusalem out of his hands,
that God cannot deliver the elect from his power, he is a lier; and the God of
peace, shall tread him under our feet shortly; our Michael has cast down the
Dragon, we may sing the ^o Paean, the joyful triumph with the Saints; Now is
salvation in Heaven, and strength, and the Kingdom of God, and the power of
his Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is thrown down, which accused
them day and night before God, and they overcame him with the blood of the
Lamb.

For indeed Christ's death was our life; his sacrifice our satisfaction; Lact.
his labor has eased our burdens; his wounds, our curing; his stripes, our
healing; his curse, our blessing; his damnation, our absolution.

Finely says one, Thou art sick, he is the Physician of thy soul; yea dead
in sin, he is thy Savior and reviver; thou art starved through sin, he
is the bread of life, thou art thirsty, he is the water; nay dead with thirst,
he is the ever-springing well, the River of Paradise, one drop whereof is more
than all the Ocean.

The Graecians for an earthly deliverance by Flaminius, cried so loud, (...),
that the earth gave an Echo, and a rebound, that their cry made the Fowls of
the air to fall down dead, their voice and shoute was as the sound of a
thunder; how much more cause have we to rejoice in the Lord Jesus, who saves
both body and soul, and delivers from dangers of this life, and the life to
come. The Angels sung at his birth: Glory be to God on bigh, Luke 2.
in earth peace, good will toward men. No tongues of men or Angels are able to
express this benefit, it is a greater my stery than so, for so the Apostle
confesses, saying, Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness,
which is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received up in glory. Moses saved Israel from Pharao; Christ saves
us from the Devil; he from Egypt, Christ from hell; he brought them into
the land of Chanaan, Christ will bring us Exodus 12. Col. 1.
into heaven; he sprinkled the door posts with the blood of the Lamb, Christ
our hearts with his own blood.

The Papists are injurious to Christ, and break in upon his titles and
offices, making him either no Savior, or else but a little Savior, in
ascribing salvation to Agnus Dei, to the blood of Martyrs, to Crosses, Masses.
Papists do as much incroch upon Christ, as the Turks do: they will not
acknowledge election, justification to come from grace, as a right Popish
doctrine tends to the disgracing of Grace.
Father, but from works, a stepmother: all their doctrine savours of pride,
blaspheming grace, and the work of grace. Note their doctrines: de igniculis
virtutum insitis a natura: of sparks of virtue grafted in us by nature; de
gratia operante and coo^perante: of operating and coo^perating grace; de puris
naturalibus: of pure naturals: they will not suffer any body to call God
Father, and yet is he the Father of Mercies, and God of all 2 Cor. 1. 3.
comfort. The Church of Rome says, That all the actions of men unregenerate
be not sin; that original sin needs no repentance; that a man by mere
naturals may love God, fear God, and believe in Christ; that a regenerate man
may fulfill the whole Law; as said the Trident Council, that we may do works
of supererogation. Et quid nunc relinquitar Christ Jesus? And what is now left
for Christ Jesus? The Jesuits ask, Why is it not as honorable for God, and as
great glory to power in an inherent righteousness into us, as to give us, a
reputed or imputed righteousness? But so they may ask, Why God kept not Adam
from falling? Had it not been as honorable to have kept him from falling? No,
no, for then we had not known the sweetness of the Messiah. So it may seem
as honorable Genesis 3. 15.
for God to have kept us from sickness; but then we had not known the
goodness of the Physician; so God might have given us continual light; but
then we had not felt the comfort of it, as now we do by darkness: one
contrary opens another, so that still the reason of the Apostle is good, By
grace are Ephesians. 2. 8.
ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God:
And again, We are justified freely by his grace through the redemption, Romans
3. 24.
which is in Christ Jesus. As poverty causes wealth to seem Lact. lib. 2. c.
8. de orig. erroris.
good; as darkness commends light; and sickness, health, and death, life: so
our imputed righteousness, the glory of God. We are as passengers on the sea,
we have many waves to overturne our ship. God bids us undo our Cables,
cast out our anchors, Hebr. 6.
and fasten them in Christ: but a sister of ours, that saileth with us,
unlooseth our Cables, and casts out our anchors on the sand, on our works,
not on Christ's works.

But still to prosecute this point: base miserable men will not be beholding
to God, but they will barter or cope with God, as our men do in Ice-land, and
give him so many pilgrimages, fast so many days, hear so many Masses, and do
so many works, till God be satisfied; but our sins are infinite, and Gods
Majesty is infinite, and our works are finite: how therefore can they answer
that which is infinite? In finitum ac infinitum, nulla est comparatio: There is
no comparison between that which is finite, and that which is infinite. The
Papists are like the mad man Thraselaus, who coming to the haven Piraeum,
imagined all the ships to be his; but being cured of that madness, saw If
we see our sins, we will extol Gods grace.
his poverty: so they imagine all their works to be good, Heaven to be this
earth, Purgatory to be theirs, all to be theirs: but when they shall see
their sins truly, they will be of another mind, as was Cardinal Poole,
who said that Gods grace cannot be extolled too high, nor man's righteousness
cast down too low: so said Luther, so said Staphilus, so said Turrian, wishing
that he had never written against Sadele.

The third title is glory: For shutting up his Epistle with thankesgiving, he
ascribes to God, glory: glory is the commendation of our lips from the
bottom of our hearts for benefits received. The Apostle calls it the cabves
of our lips: they in Hebr. 13.
the Law offered unreasonable calves, we the calves of our lips; they offered
strange flesh, we our own flesh; they beasts, we our selves. Whereupon Paul,
I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of Romans 12. 1.
God, that ye offer your bodies a quick, an holy and lively acceptable
sacrifice to God. God himself prescribes this order in trouble; first, to
call upon him; secondly, a promise of hearing us; thirdly, a precept to give
thanks; Call upon me in time of trouble, I will hear Psalm. 50. 15.
thee, and thou shall glorify me. We perform the first, God the second, but
we perform not the last: we pray in misery, but we give not God glory,
after that we be delivered from that misery. Thus the Israelites, when God
slew them, they sought him, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36.
and they returned, and sought God early, and they remembered, that God was
their strength, and the most high God their Redeemer, but they would not
glority and praise him for their deliverance: but flattered him with their
mouth, and dissembled with him with their tongue. Ten lepers prayed loud in
their trouble, for they lifted up their voices and said; Jesus, Master, have
mercy on us: but they were mute as fishes Luk 17. 13. 17.
after their deliverance, but one glorified God for his clensing; witness our
Savior himself, Are there not ten cleansed? where are those nine? they have
not returned to give God praise, save only this stranger. The tenth man with
them returned to give thanks and glory to God, but not the twentieth, not the
hundred man with us will glorify God; Many pray loud in their misery, like the
prisoners in the castle. The sick man in his grief with Ezechiah Esa. 38.
turns his face to the wall, and prays earnestly unto the Lord; like a
Crane and a Swallow, so do they chatter and mourn, as Doves with their eyes
lifted up on high. So the Mariner in a storm prays; as the mariners in
Assyria, who cried every man Jonas 1. 5.
to his God, and cast the wares that were in the ship, into the Sea, for the
safety of themselves; so the soldier in the battle prays earnestly to God,
as the Soldiers of Asa; the husbandmen in a drought pray for rain, like the
Ten Tribes: but when health comes, when it is calm with the mariner, when
the victory is obtained of the soldier, when a gracious rain is fallen to the
husbandman; they forget thankfulness, and rob God of his glory. Many in
their sicknesses Thankesgiving the chiefest duty of a Christian.
promise great zeal and goodness, and thankfulness, but they are like the
man in Erasmus his Naufragium, who in a storm promised the virgin a picture of
wax, as big as Saint Christopher, but when he came to shore, would not give
a tallow candle. We promise mountains, but yield mole-hils. Paul says, As
Ephesians. 5 3, 4.
for fornication and all uncleannes, or covetousness, let it not be once named
among you, as it becomes saints, neither filthiness, neither foolish talking,
neither jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of thanks. As
though the life of a Christian should be spent only in praising God; as if
our tongues were given us only to that end, as if he had said, Jest not,
Rail not, Speak not ribauldrie, but rather give thanks, use thy tongue to
Gods glory, and whether 1 Cor. 10. 31.
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. They
that have not glorified God here, shall not be glorified in the life to come;
those tongues shall burn in Hell: this is to lay a good foundation. Paul
wills Timothy to charge rich men that that they do good, that they be rich
in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
that they be ready to distribute and communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain
eternal life. Now there is not a better work than to glorify God, therefore
give thanks and sing with the heavenly soldiers, Gloria in excelsis; Glory
be to God on high. Those tongues shall not sing the New song, nor follow the
Apot. 14.
Lamb, that here have given God no glory. Let thy heart meditate of Gods
goodness, and let thy tongue utter it, it is that which God requires, Let
them confess before the Lord his Loving kindness, and his wonderful works
before the sons of men. Nicephorus Psalm. 107. 15.
reports of Nestorius the Heretic, that after his condemnation, in the
second Council of Ephesus, his members consumed, and his tongue rotted in his
mouth. The like, the tripartite History reports of Nicasius the Donatist and
the Eumenians, who eat up Cyrillus liver or heart with salt. The toungs of the
wicked shall rot in this life or burn in hell fire, that give God no glory.
It Is not enough to meditate of Gods goodness in thy heart, but thou must also
proclaim it with thy tongue. Noli nimis vultum seu oculos meditationis
intueri, nam meliora sunt ubera gratiarum actionis; Do not behold the
countenance or eyes of meditation too much, better are the breasts of praises
and thankesgivings. David said, I will always give thanks unto the Lord:
Psalm. 34. 1, 2.
his praise shall be in my mouth continually, my soul shall glory in the
Lord, etc. So let us always praise our God; and never rob him of his glory.

There be two sorts of thieves that rob God; the proud man and the envious:
the proud man robbes him of his glory; the envious of his Justice: these be
greater robbers than the Sabeans, Job 1. 14, 17.
who carried away Jobs Oxen and Asses; then the Caldeans, who carried away his
Camels; then Achan, who stole the wedge We should exercise our selves to this
duty of thankfulness.
of gold, then Barrabas: for all these robbed but from men, but these from God,
and that not the least thing, but the greatest, his glory. When we should sound
our praises and glory to God, we are silent like Pythagoras Scholars, who
spoke not in five years; like the dumb man in the Gospel, who spoke not at
all. Ios. 7. Mat. 27.
I appeal to your consciences, whether for forty requests made to God, we
have given him one thanks? No, no, shame may cover our faces, we may hang
down our heads with the Publican, and say, Lord, be merciful unto us,
ungrateful, unkind, forgetful Luke 38.
and vile men. The Father of all mercies, and the God of all consolation give
us eyes to see, and hearts to feel so great unkindnes. Let us awake our
tongues, our hearts, as David did, and let us say, My heart is fixed, o God, my
heart is fixed, I will sing Psalm. 57. 7, 8, 9.
and give praise: awake, my tongue, awake, viole and harp. I will awake
early, I will praise thee, o Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee
among the nations. There is a spiritual palsy in our tongue, that we cannot
praise God; a veil is over our eyes, that we see not Gods glory; an
impostumation is in our ears, that we hear not his Word; a Cardiaca passio
has covered over our hearts, that we think not of his blessings; a lethargy
in the whole man, that we give him not glory: say therefore with David, Awake,
o my tongue, awake, viole, and harp; I will awake early: Psalm. 103. 1, 2.
I will praise thee, o Lord, among the people, and I will sing unto thee among
the nations. Speak unto thy soul, chide it, and say, My soul, praise thou
the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy name: My soul praise thou
the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Vow to God, as the Prophet did, that
thou will praise the Lord during thy life: Yea, as long as thou have any being,
to sing unto God, and fulfill his desire: I mean David's, o sing praises, sing
praises unto Psalm. 146. 1.
our God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King; for God is the King of the
whole earth, sing ye praises with understanding. Mark how he doubleth, and
redoubleth his words, as Roscius did his gestures; as the Nightingale does her
notes; as the Camelion does her colors. When the people would not praise and
glorify God, he spoke to the Heavens; Hear, o Heavens, and harken, o earth:
And Esa. 1. 3. Ier. 9. 22.
he spoke unto the earth, O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord.
And he spoke unto the mountains, Hear, o mountains, the Mich. 6.
Lord his quarrel, and ye mighty foundations of the earth. He may do so now,
this English people will give him no glory* yet all that we have, our wit, our
wisdom, our riches our honor, our authority, we should use these to his
glory; this is the right end, why God has given them; we must not seek our
own glory in them, but Gods: when Herod was magnified of the people for his
eloquence, and honored as a God, Immediately the Angel of Act. 12. 23.
the Lord smote him, because he gave not the glory to God; and so he was eaten
of worms, and gave up the Ghost. O brethren, it is wonderful, that the
Heavens rain not down fire and brimstone upon us, Our unthankfulnes deserves
Gods vengeance.
as upon Sodom, that the air infect us not, as it did Judah, that the earth
opens not, and swallow us quick to hell, as it did Corah and his company,
that the fire burn us not as it did Sodom. For that which Christ objecteth to
the Jews, may be verified of Genesis 19. 2 Samuel 24. Numb. 6. 16.
us. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God alone? In all things that we do, we must seek
to set forth the glory of God: If any man Minister (says Saint Peter) let him
do it as of the ability, which God ministers, that God in all things may be
glorified John 5. 44. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
through Jesus Christ. Say to God as Aeschines said to Socrates: when others
gave him gold, silver, Jewels, Aeschines gave himself, like the poor widow,
who cast into the treasury, two mites even all her substance. So give God all;
thine eyes to see his glory; thine ears to hear his Word, thine heart to
believe in him, thy tongue to praise him, thy foot to follow him, and thy hand
to serve him: and let the saying of the Apostle be never forgotten, Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in 1 Cor. 6. 20.
your bodies and in your spirits which are Gods: stir up thy tongue therefore
to speak of God, and his works plentifully; shall thy bow, and thine arrows,
thy hawke, and thy hound, thy cart, and thy plough have thy tongue tied to
them, to delight in their talk? And shall not the Minister in Christ Jesus?
Has thy tongue no portion in such heavenly things? Or if it it be in thy
heart, will it not fill thy mouth with praise? Sermo index animi: thy speech is
a messenger of thy mind; an Heavenly heart will use Heavenly talk, and an
earthly heart sends out vain and earthly words: deceive not thy self; such
as thy speeches are, such is thy heart, if thou can eat, drink, ride, play,
journey with men, and seldom or never talk of God, it argues a barren heart.
If there be no meat in the dresser, there is little in the kitchen: the mouth
is as the dresser, the heart is as the kitchen, wherein things are prepared for
God; the vessel is at tilt, when dregs and lees, wanton and filthy speeches,
be drawn from the heart; the quiver is empty, when never an arrow can be
drawn out, never a word that savoureth of goodness, but all our speeches are
for our profit or our pleasure; we are men of polluted lips: CHRIST is the
fountain of the water of life, and Esa. 6. Esa. 35.
faith in the heart is as the leads or pipes that receive it, and hold the
water, and confession is as the cock of the conduite, Romans 10.
the spowte that lets out the water to all comers. Earthly men seldom talk
of CHRIST: but we have not so unfruitfully learned CHRIST, nor so unhappily
given witness of his truth, but better things belong to us, in better ways
we will run our course, in a better hope lay down our bodies: Let them
talk of the world that make it their portion; we look for a City, whose
builder and maker is God. Let the Egyptians talk of their walled The godly
talk of God, and praise him.
Cities; Nabuchaduezzar of his buildings, the fool of his barnes, the
voluptuous of his hawks, and hounds; we will speak of God, and our care shall
be to glorify him: he is a God of glory, and his is glory: to him will we
give glory, and honor and thanks for evermore.

THE ONE AND FORTIETH SERMON.
VERSE. XXV. To God only Wise, and our Savior be Glory, Majesty, Power, and
Dominion. How Majesty is ascribed to God.



THere be six Attributes here in this verse, of God: Wisdom, Salvation,
Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and Power.

We have handled and heard of three of them, that is, of his Wisdom,
Salvation, and Glory; and I am to speak of the other three, Majesty, Dominion,
and Power.

Majesty is his incomprehensible greatness, which works wonders, and
brings forth most excellent and rare works: to ascribe therefore unto God, a
power and an incomprehensible might, whereby he does the works of wonder, is
to render majesty to God. Hereupon said David, Blessed be the Lord God, even
the Psalm. 72. 18, 19.
God of Israel, which only does wondrous things: and blessed be his glorious
name for ever, and let all the earth be filled with his glory: so be it:
Therefore is David so earnest with the tyrants and great men of the world, to
give this Majesty to God, and adds often, Vno oris halitu, that the voice of
the Lord does all, Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory
and strength, give unto Psalm. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10.
the Lord glory due unto his name: worship the Lord in his glorious Sanctuary.
Miracles admired for the the rareness.
The voice of the Lord is upon the Waters. The God of glory makes it to
thunder: the Lord is upon the great Waters, the voice of the Lord is mighty,
the voice of the Lord is glorious, etc. The Lord sits upon the flood, and
the Lord does remain King for ever. He repeateth one thing often over: for
we pass over all the works of God without consideration, like horse and mule
that have no understanding, and they are buried in the grave of oblivion. We
Psalm. 22.
will not confess before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful
works before the sons of men. They that dwell in darkness and in the shadow
of death, being bound in misery Psalm. 107. 8, 10, 14, 15.
and iron, he brought out of darkness and shadow of death, and brake their
bands asunder: Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving
kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men. The like he
says of the sick, whose soul abhors all manner of meat, and they are
hard at deaths door; and of the mariners which go down to the Sea in ships,
and fee the wondrous works of God; and to all these, one and the same
conclusion is repeated, Let them confess before the Lord his loving kindness,
and his wonderful works before the sons of men. We see many wonders, but
we give not God praise in them; a wonder lasts but nine days. Vilescunt
omnia Dei miracu^^* all Gods miracles are vile and are not regarded. Augustine
said, God does not now miracles, ob duas causas, for two causes: First, Ne
vilescant miracula, as I said before: Secondly, Ne terrena semper Aug. lib. 9.
de civitate Dei.
quaeramus: that we should not always seek after earthly things: it is as
great a miracle to govern the World, as to feed John 6.
five thousand men with five loaves and two Fishes; Et tamen illud ownes
mirantur, hoc nemo: yet all men wonder at that, none at this: Non quia majus,
sed quia rarum: not because it is the greater, but because it is rare: it is as
great a miracle to raise a barley kernel, as to raise a dead body out of the
grave, Vilescit tamen 1 Cor. 15.
ob assiduitate^: yet this is not respected, because of assiduity; whereas the
other is thought impossible. The Israelites saw the light of Egypt turned into
darkness, the waters into blood, the dust into lyce, the bitter waters of
March into sweet, the Psalm. 105.
Heaven open to give them Manna, the rock open to give them drink, the flint
stone turned into a well, yet doubted of Gods Psalm. 78.
Majesty in giving them bread. The Pharisees saw, and perceived the blind to
see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to walk, the dead to
live, yet blasphemed God. The Luke 7.
Jews saw the fiery and cloven tongues, yet railed on the Apostles, as men not
full of the Spirit, but full of new wine. We Act. 2.
in England have seen wonders in Heaven, as strange stars never seen
before, blazing Comets at other times; and wonders in Anno 16. Eliz.
the Sea, as fishes at the I Will of Tennet, two and twenty yards long; and
wonders in the Earth, as trees to remove in Dorset-shire, and Hereford-shire;
yet have we ascribed to God no Majesty. Nay, God reveals himself six ways.
greater wonders than these have we seen: for God did restore to us the light
of the Gospel in the greatest darkness of the world; he did unhorse the Pope
in the time of King Henry the eighth, and increased the light of it, as the
noonday, in the days of Edward the sixth; and after it was eclipsed, he
restored the light of it in the days of Queen Elizabeth: he has put down the
Northern tumults, has drowned the Spanish Navy: Oh that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for
the sons of men!

But alas, we have eyes, but we see not; ears and hear not, we have hearts
like mules, and understand not, we see no more than beasts, we are as stocks
and blocks: what folly has Ier. 5. 21, 23.
wrapped up all our understanding? What blindness has possessed our brain?
And how has a covering of brawne covered our hearts, that we give no Majesty
to God? That which Paul said of the Gospel, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
are lost, in whom the God of this World has blinded their minds. So say I of
Gods wonders, This sin of England is written with an Iron pen, and with a
point of a Diamond. God reveals himself Ier. 17. 1.
to the World six ways.

1 By his Word, 2 By Visions, Act. 26. 18. Esa. 1. 1.
3 By Dreams, 4 By Wonders, or Miracles, Numb. 12. John 5. Mat. 28. 19.
5 By Sacraments, 6 By Types and figures.
By four or five of these means God has made himself known to us,
especially by wonders, yet we know him not: we are greater fools than Nabal,
and verier beasts than ever was Nabuchadnezzar: 1 Samuel 25. Dan. 4. Ier. 8. 5,
6, 7.
God must end us, before he mend us; we are turned back to a perpetual
rebellion. We give our selves to deceit, and will not return; no man repents
him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one turns to his
race, as the horse to the battle. Even the Storke in the air (says God)
knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow
observe the time of their coming, but my people knows not the judgment of
the Lord. This is a nation that hears not the voice of the Lord, nor
receives Discipline; shall not these two great earthquakes this year, the
one in the day, the other in the night, work in us a fear of Gods majesty?
It is a token Am^^ 1602.
that God is angry, and so applied by the Prophet: The earth trembled and
shoke, the very foundations of the Earth were seen at thy chyding, at the
blasting of the breath of thy displeasure. Psalm. 18.


When God would take revenge of the people in the days of Tiberius, he
overthrew with an earthquake twelve Cities of Asia; and in Constantines days,
ten or eleven towns in Campania; Lipisius.
when the Jews under Julian had tools of silver to reedify Gods dominion is
in all creatures, especially in man.
Jerusalem, the earthquake in the night destroyed their work in the day, and
fire from heaven burnt up their tools. The righteous will see this and
rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth; and who is wise, that he may
observe these things? that God is a God of Majesty, and magnificence, for it is
he alone that does wondrous things.

The fifth thing here attributed to God, is Dominion, which is the authority of
commanding and making Laws unto all men in the world: by which means God
rules, and has a dominion or Kingdom in every one of us, whereof the Lord
Jesus speaks in the knitting up of his prayer to God, For thine is the
Kingdom, etc. Of this David speaks, The Lord has prepared his Mat 6. 13.
Psalm. ^03. 19, 22.
Throne in Heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all: And again, Praise the
Lord, all works of his in all places of his dominion: And again, Thy Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures Psalm. 145. 13.
throughout all ages. And here learn a profitable lesson, that when we obey
the Word of the Lord, and suffer it to rule, and overrule our passions, then
has God a Kingdom, and we ascribe Dominion to him: hereof the Lord Jesus
spoke, For when Luke 17. 20, 21.
he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of God should come? He
answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with observation,
neither shall men say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold, the Kingdom of
Heaven is within you: he meant not the Kingdom of glory, but of grace:

For this dominion or Kingdom is threefold; of Power, Grace, Glory.

The Kingdom of Power is, whereby God subdueth his enemies, and Tyrants of his
Church, and crusheth them in pieces like a potters vessel: and of this
Kingdom the Prophet thus Psalm. 2. 9. Psalm. 93. 1. Psalm. 97. 1, 2.
speaks, The Lord reigns, and is clothed with Majesty, the Lord is clothed
and girded with power, etc. And again, the Lord reigns, let the people
tremble, he sits between the Cherubins, let the earth be moved: the Lord
is great in Zion, and high above all people.

His Kingdom of Grace is that, whereby God rules in his elect, through his
Spirit inwardly, as his Word outwardly: whereof the Prophet speaks thus, With
righteousness shall he judge the poor, Esa. 11. 4, 5, 6.
and with equity shall he reprove, etc. Justice shall be the girdle of his
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins: the Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the kidde, and the calfe, and the
Lion, and the fat beast together, and a little Child shall lead them. When
the corruption of our nature begins to be like the house of Saul, weaker
and weaker, and faith, repentance, zeal, knowledge, and other graces of the
Spirit stronger and stronger in us, and we now begin to love, fear, trust,
and serve and obey God, then is the Kingdom of grace in us.

The Kingdom of Glory is that wherein the Angels and Saints We count our
selves subjects of Christ's Kingdom of grace, but are rebellious.
departed now are, and we shall be hereafter, when mortality shall be
swallowed up of life, when we shall sing the songs of our triumph; O death
where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? The songs of our joy, such as
none can understand, save the hundred forty and four thousand, which are
received up from 1 Cor. 15.
the earth.

But here he means chiefly the Kingdom of grace; for God is a King
everlasting, immortal, invisible, and only wise. We 1 Timothy 1. 17.
are then his subjects.

The Laws are the Word. Psalm. 2. 8. Psalm. 119. 105. Ephesians. 6. 12.


The enemies of this Kingdom are Satan, sin, and death, Hell, domination,
the flesh, and the wicked.

The time of it, is to the worlds end. Mat. 28. 20.


The place, is this world and the world to come. Apot. 5. 10.


But o foolish men, how do we pray for this dominion and Kingdom of the
Lord, when in our works we destroy it? When we rebel against the Word, like
a rebellious nation? Ezech. 2. 3, 4.
and like impudent children, and stiffe-hearted? As the horse rusheth into the
battle, so we rush into our sins; we sin Ier. 8. 6. Ephesians. 4. 19.
with greedines, we draw it with cords of vanity; we love the wicked, we
loath the godly; we freeze in love, we boil in malice; Esa. 5.
we sell virtue, we buy vice; we refuse Christ, we choose Barrabas; we lay away
life, and embrace death: we overthwart the will of God in all things, we
follow our own wills and desires; we are traitors to God in the highest
degree, as God complains; I have nourished, and brought up Children, but they
have rebelled against me. The Ox does know his owner, the Ass his masters
crib, but Israel Esa. 1. 2, 3, 4.
has not known, my people has not understood. We are a sinful nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: We have
forsaken the Lord, and provoked the Holy one of Israel to anger. We profess to
serve God, but in works we deny God; we have a show of godliness, but inwardly
we deny the power of it; our profession Tit. 1. 16. 2 Timothy 3.
is like the apples, and grapes of Sodom, fair to the sight, but if you touch
them, they vanish to smoke; so all our profession stands in words, not in
works, as James said, Ostende mihi fidem per opera: Show me thy faith by thy
works; so Ostende Iam. 2.
mihi regnum Dei per subjectionem tuam: Show me the Kingdom of God by thy
subjection, by thy obedience which is due to his Word: apply thy heart to keep
his statutes always unto the end.

Be not deceived, God will not thus be mocked, in fine we shall receive the
reward of Rebels. Quid dicta audiam, cum facta videam? What should I hear
words, when I should see deeds, as Moses said to Israeel, laying out their
several rebellions. So might I lay out the rebellions of England; (...), egg,
and bird, all naught; our Fathers naught, and we also; our Fathers have
forsaken God, and kept not his Law, and we have Notorious sinners, Satan's
subjects.
done worse than our Fathers, and walk every one after the stubbornness of his
heart. As well may we spit on Christ Jesus, buffet and beat him with a reed,
and cry with the mockers, Hail King of the Jews, as kneel in the Church, and
say, Thy Kingdom come, Lord, and yet in our deeds promote the kingdom of
Satan, disobey and not receive the Word, which is the power of God Romans 1. 16.
to salvation to every one that believes. Therefore he so highly extolleth
it, saying, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God
to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. We pray to
be like the Angels; we must strive then to come near Mat. 6.
them in obedience.

Three properties are noted in the Angels:

Obediunt Libentissime, Citissime, Fidelissime.
most Willingly, Speedily, Faithfully.



They are willing to obey: and so we read, that one Angel with speed killed
an hundred, fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians in one night. We must
be like Angels, if we look Esa. 37.
to live with Angels: they praise God day and night, so must we. Esa. 6.
But it may be said of most of us, that which Vivaldus said of Corasius, Erat
foris Cato, intus Noro: he was a Cato without, a Nero within: foris Angelus,
intus Diabolus: an Angel without, a Devil within; foris Agnus, intus Lupus: a
Lamb without, a Wolf within; Deum ore laudabat, cord and factis negabat: he
praised God with his mouth, but denied him in heart, in deeds: tales sunt
mancipia Diaboli: such are the slaves of Satan. God does not reign as a King
in them, his grace has no dominion over them; they are in the snare of the
Devil, and are taken of him at his will. In this sense, Christ called the
Jews, the sons of the Devil: Ye are of your father the Devil, and the
lusts of your father will ye do: so 2 Timothy 2. 26. John 8. 44. 1 John 2. 14.
John says in the contrary, I write unto you babes, because ye have known
the father. Impij servi sunt tot daemoniorum, quot vitiorum: the wicked are the
servants of so many devils, as they have sins and transgressions: it is the
devil that has dominion over them, not God by his grace.

As there is in the body a palsy, that strikes the one half, and an Apoplexy,
that strikes the whole body; so there is in our souls a spiritual palsy, if
not an Apoplexy; our understanding is not lightened with the doctrine of God,
and our will is not enflamed with the Love of God to do his will, as it
becomes us. Hereupon Saint Augustine cries out, Augusta and foeda est domus
Aug.
animae meae: Straight and filthy is the house of my soul, but when thou
come unto it, o Lord, it shall be enlarged and mundified of thee; it is
ruinous, Lord; repair and amend it; it is filthy, Lord, cleanse it and wash it;
there be many things in this Christ will dwell and reign in a pure soul.
house of my soul, which may offend thy sacred eyes, but who shall purge it
and purify it? or unto whom shall I cry, but unto thee; Ab ocultis meis purga
me; Cleanse me from my secret sins? Let this be our prayer, and pray with
that spirit wherewith Augustine prayed it, and no doubt God will hear thee,
and have a Kingdom in thy soul. This testimony is true, the Heavens have
sealed unto it, and the living God has spoken it of the children of men; and
blessed are we, if we believe it; there is more happiness in one day of Gods
service, and under his Dominion, then in ten thousand days of vanity, in which
Satan has dominion, and we fall from the Lord of life.

The sixth and last attribute is Power, wherein the excellent praise of God
consists, which is the ability in God to do what he lists; like unto the
former attributes, but not all one with them: haec enim magis conjungi, quam
confundi velim: I had rather conjoine these things, than confound them, as
Calvin said in another case. Of this power speaks David, O Lord my God, thou
art Psalm. 104. 1.
exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory, and Majesty. And of this power
speaks Esaias, Who has measured the waters in his fist, and counted Heaven
with a spanne? and comprehended the dust of the earth in Esa. 40. 12.
a measure? and weighted the mountains in a weight, and the hills in a
balance? And of this power of God speaks Solomon, Who has Prove. 30. 4.
ascended up to Heaven, or descended? Who has gathered the Wind in his fist?
Who has bound the Waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of
the world? What is his Name, or his Sons Name, if thou can tell? And in
respect of this power, Christ said, Ecce, vobiscum sum, Behold, I am with you,
to the end of the world; whereupon Mat. 28. 20. Aug.
Augustine finely; Iturus erat Christus ad dextram Patris, per mortem
praesentia Corporali, In regard of his Corporal presence, he was by death to
go to the right hand of his Father, and in regard of his Spiritual presence,
he is with his Church unto the end of the world; secundum ineffabilem and
invisibilem gratiam impletur illud, Ecce vobiscum sum: according to his
unspeakable and invisible grace that is fulfilled, I am with you always to the
end of the world: but according to the flesh, which the Word did take, and as
he was borne of a Virgin, and apprehended of the Jews, and fastened to the
Cross, and as he was taken from the Cross, and wrapped in linen clothes, and
laid in the grave, that is fulfilled which is said, Me ye shall not have
always: for forty days after John 20.
his resurrection he ascended; Et non est hic: and he is not here: for he
sits at the right hand of his Father in Heaven, and est hic, and yet he is
here: for he departed not from them in regard of his Majesty and power, but is
still with them: Magna quidem sententia, and tali viro digna. A worthy saying
fitting so worthy a Father. As the soul is whole in the whole body, and whole
in every part of the body; so Christ, secundum potentiam, by his power and
might is all whole in Heaven, all whole in earth, and all The Christian is
strong in Christ, who is all sufficient.
whole in every part of the earth: and this is our comfort, for in his passion
love is kindled, in his resurrection faith is confirmed, in his resurrection
hope is strengthened: for while our Head by his power ascended into Heaven, we
also with him shall together ascend: For all power is given unto him. If Jacob
understanding that Mat. 28.
Joseph was alive, could say, Sufficit mihi, quod filius meus vivit: It
suffiseth me, that my son lives? much more ought every faithful Genesis 45.
soul to say, It suffices me, that Christ lives and sits at the right
hand of his Father, who is unto me in mourning, mirth; in hunger, meat; in
sickness, health; in poverty, wealth, in darkness, light; in weakness, power; in
death, life: and this is to give power to God, always to depend and hang on
his power: not to say as the Aramites, to make him weak in one place and at
one time, and strong in another place, and at another time; but strong 1 Reg.
20. 28.
for ever: in his strength we are strong, in his victory, we overcome. In all
things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved Romans 8. 37.
us. Conquerers, and more than conquerers? What is this, more than Conquerors?
O noble Apostle, thou want words to express thy meaning: what men or Angels
can express it fitly, what we shall call this more? Rest in him, trust in
him, though your bodies be weak, your beauty frail, your health uncerten,
your life short, your honors vain, your pleasures brittle, your troubles
great, your wisdom little, your virtues few, your affections many and
turbulent, and one day ye shall be conquerours, and more then conquerours:
for his power is made perfect through weakness; he can bring strength out of
weakness, light 1 Cor. 12. 9.
out of darkness, life out of death, (...); and make the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty. 1 Cor. 1. 27.


Thomas Aquinas does set out unto us the power of God, by the Aquin.
order of natural things: Nam majora sunt, quae semper nobiliora: for they be
the greater, which are always the most noble (says he.) As in the Elements the
Water is ten times more then the earth in greatness, the air is greater than
the water, the fire, (which we call the air) is greater than the air, and
the Heavens are greater than the fire, and the highest Heaven greater than the
rest; because it contains, and is not contained. God therefore which made
all, is more noble, more great than all, and is infinite in his essence and
power: Sum qui sum: I am that I am, is his name: he is of himself, as Kings
are of themselves in their own Kingdoms; we of him, as the authority of
Magistrates depends on the King. I am, that I am, is his name. As the eye,
Exodus 3.
which is ordained to see all colors, wants all color, otherwise all things
should seem to be of the same color: so the first Mover is subject to no
body, and yet can rule all bodies by his power, and to be ruled of none; his
power is incomprehensible.

The meditation of Christ's power, is sweet and comfortable, who can despair,
knowing that in him is fulness of power? Thus the Christ is all in all unto us.
Apostles solaced themselves among the midst of their persecutions; thus let
us solace our selves; for who can do, as Christ Act. 4.
has done? Aesculapius among the Heathen is adored as God in physic: but
Christ has cured all diseases, he has given sight to the blind, and tongues
to the dumb, and legs to the lame, Mat. 9. Luke 7.
and life to the dead: Aesculapius did it by herbs, but Christ by his Word.
Hercules is adored for his strength, for killing men, beasts and monsters; but
Christ has overcome Devils, and death it self. Bacchus is worshipped for
wine, and Ceres for bread: but Christ Hebr. 2.
turned water into wine, and fed five thousand men, with five 1 Cor. 15. John
2. cap. 6.
loaves and two fishes. Minerva is famous for learning, but Christ by twelve
unlearned men subdued the world. Alexander with the sword, and the Apostles
with the Word, one of the greatest miracles in the world. Athanasius libro de
incarnatione Christi, lays out the power of Christ four ways; that at his
first coming the miralces of Boetia, Licia, Lybia, Egypt, Cabirus ceased; and
secondly, all the oracles of the Devils in Delphos, Dido, Delos, and all
Greece: thirdly, their magic of Chaldaea and India vanished then away; and
lastly, that the wisdom and eloquence of Philosophers was silenced and
suppressed by the doctrine of the Apostles. Whereupon libro de Passione Dei, he
thus cries out, O Christ, tu lumen nobis in tenebris illuminasti: thou o
Christ, our light, did John 3. 19.
lighten us in darkness; thou at the right hand of thy Father have Act. 2.
loosed our sorrows; thou being life, have quickened us being dead; Col. 2.
thou being poor, have enriched us with thy poverty; thou being 2 Cor. 8. Romans
8. 38.
our Mediator, have reconciled us to thy Father: thou art to us all in all.

If any object, that he cannot do some things, for he cannot lie. I answer,
that Gods power does not fight with Gods truth. Dicitur omnipotens faciendo
quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult: he is called Omnipotent in doing what
he will, not in suffering what Aug. lib. 5. de Civitate Dei.
he will not. Nil Deo difficile: There is nothing hard for God. Potest Deus
omnia, sed non vult: God can do all things, but he will not: Non tamen pugnat
ejus potentia cum voluntate: his power fights Tart. adversus Prax.
not with his will. Lay thy hand on thy mouth with Job, reason not against God;
Quis es qui litigas cum Deo? Who art thou that strivest with God? so much for
the attributes, Wisdom, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Dominion, and Power.

But it is further to be noted, that in naming God, To God only wise, etc. He
comprehends the three persons; for these attributes are due to all the whole
Trinity, Wisdom, Salvation, Glory, Majesty, Power, and Dominion. The Scripture
speaks diversely of the Trinity; sometime ascribing things to one person,
sometime to another, sometimes to all jointly; as power to the Father, wisdom
to the Son, goodness to the Holy Ghost. Psalm. 104. 1. Prove. 14.
Greeve not the good Spirit of God, says the Apostle. Yet power, wisdom
goodness, are due to all the persons of the whole Trinity, in a Gods glory,
dominion, and power, is eternal.
more strict sense and signification. Again, ye shall see the creation of all
things ascribed to the omnipotency of the Father; the administration of all
ascribed to the Son; the sanctification Ephesians. 4. 30. Genesis 1. Prove. 9. 1. 1
Cor. 6. ^1.
of all ascribed to the Holy Ghost: yet all three create, preserve, and
sanctify the Church; Pater a se, Filius per se, Sanctus Spiritus a Patre and
Filio: The Father of himself, the Son by him, and the Holy Ghost from the
Father and the Son. Augustine speaks Aug.
thus, Sicut ex intellectu generatur voluntas, and ex his ambobus procedit
memoria in anima ipsa; As the will springing from the understanding, and from
them both the memory in the soul it self: so the Son is begotten of the
Father, and from both these proceeds the Holy Ghost. This causes the
Scriptures to speak so diversely of the Trinity: Power is attributed to the
Father, but not exclusive, exclusively (quoth Vrsinus) in his Catechism, sed
inclusive, but inclusively, for all three are of equal power; sed Patri
potentia tribuitur, Vrsinus.
quia est fons and origo: but power is given to the Father, because he is the
fountain, the original; the rest of the persons are from him, but not as
touching their essence, but person and manner of existing. To conclude, the
works of the Trinity, quoad extra, are indivisible, but quoad intus, they be
singular, as the Father begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy Ghost
proceeds from them both: hold this Axiom in divinity, and learn to speak
wisely and soberly of the Trinity.

Well, this glory, Majesty, dominion and power must be yielded now and ever:
for the glory of God ends not with the end of the world, it is for ever,
here, and in heaven; the continuance of this world before God, is but as a day;
the Morning of this day was the creation of the Heaven, and of Adam, until the
flood; the Noone of this day was the coming of Christ, the Evening, is the end
of the world; a thousand and six hundred years, S. John calls but one year. A
thousand and six hundred years are past as 1 John 2.
an hour, but the glory of the Lord is from eternity to eternity; from
everlasting to everlasting; from eternity, as touching election, quae est sine
principio, to eternity, quoad reprobationem, as touching reprobation; for it
shall abide without end: but in that he says, both now and for ever; this
teaches us, that there must be no end of praising God: his praises must be
ever in our mouth, First, for spiritual blessings bestowed here in earth, and
in Heaven; as Election, Redemption, Adoption, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Psalm. 86.
Glorification, for every one of these comes from God, therefore he is to be
praised both now and for ever. Now, in this life we must sing Hosanna to the
Son of David, and hereafter we shall sing Allelujah in Heaven, with all the
Saints. For all spiritual blessings we must say with the Apostle, Blessed be
God, which has blessed us with all spiritual blessings; For temporal
blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3.
glory and praise is to be given to God: Christ gave thanks for God is to be
prayed to, and praised for all things.
food; Anna, for a child; Jacob, for riches; Abraham's servant, for prospering
his journey; and in a word for all other temporal blessings, as health,
wealth, peace, prosperity, God is to be praised now and ever. As there is no
end of his benefits toward us, John 6. 12. 2 Samuel 2. 1. Genesis 32. 10. Genesis 24.
48.
so there should be no end of our praises toward him; but we must praise him
both now and ever.

To conclude this point: here is a secret comparison between the glory of man,
and the glory, dominion, and power of God: man's glory is as a flower, All flesh
is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of grass: for so Esaias was
willed to cry: but though he Esa. 40. 6.
cry it, few will believe it, we trust not the Lord: one speaks of an
Epitaph graven in the tomb of a great man.

Hic fuit, hic fecit, pugnavit, vicit, amauit,
Composuis libros, gentes, populosque subegit:
Quid mihi cum fuit, aut erit? est valet vnum.
He was, he did, he fought, he conquered, loved,
Wrote books, nations and people he subdued;
But what have I to do with was or Shall*
With me the Present only, is worth all.
Things past be gone, things to come are uncerten, that which is, and is for
ever, goes for all: glory present will be past, and glory future will be for
ever: haec vita, haec gloria, non est vita, non est gloria: this life, this
glory, is neither life nor glory; for we are dead, and our life is hid with
Christ in God, and when Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then shall we
appear with him in glory.

AMEN.

This word is an Hebrew word, and it is taken in the Scriptures three manner of
ways, sometime as a Nowne, signifying Christ himself; sometime as an Adverbe:
so Christ uses the word, saying, Amen, Amen, that is, Verily, Verily I say
unto you: and sometime as a Verb, as in this place signifying, So be it, or be
it so. So that this word Amen contains more than the prayer it Apoc. 1. John
3.
self; For in the prayer, we testify our desire, how that we desire Glory,
Majesty, Dominion, and Power, to be given unto God: but in this word Amen, we
witness our faith, that we believe, Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, to
be his. So that from hence we have to observe, to pray with faith, to believe
we shall receive those things we have prayed for. This appears in the
Prophet, Praised be the Lord for evermore: so be it, even so be it. And
Christ has taught us thus to shut up our prayers: Psalm. 89. 52. Mat. 6. 13.
and the Apostle closes and concludes his Epistle with it, Grace be with
you, Amen; for we must not doubt of Gods promises, but believe steadfastly,
That all the promises of God are in Amen, diversely used in Scripture.
Christ, yea, and are in him, AMEN.

Again, this word Amen, teaches us to desire earnestly, 2 Timothy 4. 22.
and fervently the thing we pray for: For the prayer of the righteous avails
much, if it be fervent. David was fervent in his Iam. 9. 16. Psalm. 106. 48.
prayer, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever, and let all the
people say, Amen. And verily this word, Amen, notes our desire, our earnest
fervent desire to be heard, and to obtain; it is in effect thus much; O Lord,
thus be it unto me, what my tongue or soul have begged, give it me, grant it
me. Amen, Amen. So Lord, even so, Lord.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE Sermons upon Saint IVDE.
Points handled. Sermon. 1.
THe holy Ghost the Author of all Scripture, Fol. 1. Two Iudases, 1 Iscariot, 2
Brother of James, 1 Some Scriptures doubted of, 2 A threefold office of the
Church concerning Scripture, 3 Honorable titles given the wicked, why, 4
Storms should not discourage the godly, ibid. Three sorts of servants, ibid.
Gods service most happy, 5 Gods service perfect freedom, ibid. Brings all good
to us, 6 All other service vile or dangerous, 7 Man's dignity in three things, 8
Privileges of Gods servants, ibid. Pope abuses the title of servant, 9
Servants must imitate their Master, obey him, 10 Gods servants rewarded, ibid.
Servants may not Lord it over the rest of the Family, 11 Godly profession
brings more glory, than honorable alliance, 12, 13.


Sermon 2.
VOcation the first step to Salvation, 15 Before calling, we are children of
wrath, not capable of Christ, 16 The happiness of having the Gospel, 17
Vocation External, Internal, Invitation, Admission. 17, 18 External calling
unprofitable without internal, 18 The efficacy of Gods Word in the ministry
thereof, 19 Vocation diverse in respect of time and place, 20 None called for
desert, ibid. Sanctification follows vocation, 21 God, as he begin, will
finish, till he glorify, ibid. Sanctification threefold: Imputed unto us,
Wrought in us, Wrought by us, 22 Difference of righteousness, of Justification
and Sanctification, 23 Papisticall doctrine tends to licentiousnes, ours to
holiness, ibid. Faith and Works joined in the person justified in the act of
justification, 24


Sermon. 3.
Christ's Priesthood, two parts, Redemption, Intercession, 26 Redemption has
two parts, Reconciliation and Sanctification, ibid. Reconciliation consists in
two points, Remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness, 27
Justification what it is, ibid. Adoption what it is, ibid. Benefits of Adoption
and Justification, 27 Sanctification consists in mortification and
vivification, 28 (...) has his beginning godly sorrow, his companion the
Spiritual combat, ibid. Sanctification but in part, as our knowledge, ibid.
Diverse acceptions of holiness, 29 We must be holy, because God is holy, 30
We must be holy, because it is the end of our Redemption, 31 Without
holiness, no salvation, ibid. We must be holy, because called Saints, ibid.
All our holiness is from God, 32 The persons of the Trinity distinguished, 33
Preservation in the state of Grace, the chiefest blessing, 34 Gods providence
preserves in all accidents of life, 35 God frees from all afflictions, 36 God
preserves his Scriptures and Saints, 37 Gods preservation of soul and
spiritual estate most gracious, 38, 39


Sermon. 4.
Mercy, Peace, and Love, three most excellent gifts, 40 How these three flow
from the Trinity, ibid. How mercy in God, 41 A rule for Christian salutations,
ibid. Mercy fourefold, ibid. General mercies bestowed on all, ibid. Special
mercies on the elect, ibid. The long suffering of God, 42 The greatest mercy
concerns salvation, ibid. Our election is of Mercy, ibid. Gods abundant mercy
in Christ, 43 Mercy sevenfold, ibid. All that we have is of mercy, ibid.
Misericordia communis peccantium portus, ibid. Peace threefold, 44 Peace the
ornament of the Church, and sign of Christ's Kingdom, ibid. God the Author of
Peace, 45 A commendation of peace. ibid. Contention, cause of destruction, 46
Union makes powerful, ibid. True peace to be sought and embraced, 47
Righteousness cause of peace, ibid. Peace of Conscience passes all
understanding, 48 Prosperity profits not, without peace of Conscience, ibid.
The wicked have no peace, 49 Christ dyed, rose, ascended to perfect our peace,
ibid. Peace is used for outward prosperity, 50 All privileges spiritual and
temporal belong to the godly, ibid. Yet sometime God withholds outward
blessings, 51


Sermon. 5.
God loves the fountain of mercy, peace, and all good things, 52 Gods love is
most abundant, immeasurable, immutable, unspeakeable, 53 How God is said to be
love, ibid. Love of man to man, the most excellent virtue, 54 No Love to man,
without the love of God, 55 True love rare among men, 56 That love which is
truly Christian, must be embraced, all other abandoned, 57 Not sufficient to
have grace, but there must be a desire of increase, till we come to glory, 58


Sermon. 6.
FAith the most necessary and excellent virtue, 61 Sons threefold, by
Nature, by Doctrine, by Adoption or Inspiration, 62 Faith set out by it is
attributes, that we might labor for it, 63 Many careless to get Faith or
maintain it, ibid. Faith must be maintained to the death, 64 A fourfold
fight and flight of Ministers, ibid. The zeal of Idolaters and Heretics, for
false religion, should make us to be zealous for Gods truth, 65 Diverse degrees
of zeal, ibid. God looks to the truth of our zeal, not the heat, 66 God
accepts according to that a man has, if in truth, ibid. Love ought to be
showed in all our instructions and reprehensions, 67 What love required in
Ministers to their people, ibid. We must be zealous in the matter of Religion,
and industrious for our souls, 68 Salvation ought to be our only aim, to
have it assured to our selves, and propagated to others, 69 Many more regard
humane writings, yea vain pamphlets than Scriptures, 70 All men ought to
labor to get assurance of salvation, 71 Salvation common in three respects,
ibid. As salvation is common; so the Church Catholic, 72 Writing, the most
safe means to perform God truth, ibid. Traditions bring errors to the Church,
73 Exhortation powerful; urged in meekness, 74 The Minister must exhort, and
the people suffer the Word of exhortation, 75


Sermon. 7.
GOds truth must be maintained, 76 Faith the gift of God, a fruit of the
Spirit, ibid. Diverse acceptions of Faith, 77 Diverse excellent attributes of
saving Faith, ibid. Faith a work of the Trinity, 78 The means to beget Faith
outwardly, the Ministry of the Word, inwardly, the operation of the Spirit, 79
True Faith in few in all ages, ibid. True Religion most ancient, and Scriptures
before all other writings, 80 As God is immutable, so his truth and Religion,
ibid. Though types and shadows vanish, truth and substance remain ever, 81
The Scriptures immutable, tradition uncertain, 82 Diverse acceptions of Saints,
ibid. The Saints only the subjects of true Faith, 83 The wicked usurpers of
Gods gifts, ibid. Whatsoever they have, is for the Saints sake, 84


Sermon. 8.
THe Church and Religion has many adversaries, 85 Every thing has its
contrary, ibid. Religion cause of division, 86 Religion must be maintained to
death, ibid. Secret enemies most dangerous, especially such as in a show of
Religion, seek to undermine Religion, ibid. The Devil opposes the Church,
sometime as a Lion, by cruelty, sometime as a Serpent, by subtilty, but he
hurts most by subtilty, 87 Popery prevails most by policy and fraud, 88 All
Atheists without God, before regeneration and conversion, 89 There is a
twofold life, the one of Nature, the other of Grace, 90 Most men live as
Naturalists, ibid. Atheists worse than Devils, ibid. Nature teaches that there
is a divine Power, 91 Gods power rules in all things, and does often change
the course of Nature, ibid. Reasons to prove the divine Power, 92 Religion is
more in profession than practice, 94 Many by their lives seem Atheists, ibid.
Ungodliness has two branches, iniquity in life and manners, and impurity in
Religion, ibid. Many turn the grace of God into wantonness, ibid. Gods grace
and bounty ought to lead to Repentance, not to make men presumptuous, 95
Afflictions make us seek God, 96 Prosperity makes us forget him and grow
rebellious, 97 We may not despise or renounce the creatures or blessings of
God, as the Stoics, Anachorites, Hermites, etc. have done, ibid. Epicures,
their practice described and their end, 98 vnde, 99 Popish Doctrine tends to
licenciousnesse, ibid.


Sermon. 9.
GOd is denied many ways, 101 They that profess God, and live ungodly, deny
him, ibid. Six degrees in sin, ibid. Gods creatures declare him four ways,
103 God is present four ways, ibid. The wicked that deny God here, shall
hereafter feel and acknowledge him, ibid. God is one in substance, three in
person, ibid. The Heathen worshipped many gods, and the Papists invocate many
as Gods, yet there is but one only true God, ibid. The unity and trinity in
the Godhead, illustrated by diverse resemblances, 104 Christ is denied many
ways, 105 Faith is most eminent and confident in persecution, ibid. Christ is
denied, when either the sufficiency or efficacy of his death is denied, 106
Knowledge and profession of Christ, without practice, nothing worth, ibid. The
Papists deny the offices of Christ consequently, 107 Christ only paid the full
ransom for our Redemption, 108 Christ our Lord jure Creationis, Redemptionis,
ibid. Diverse effusions of Christ's blood, especially five, 109 Christ's passions
for us, require that we should consecrate our whole selves, and all the
service of our souls and bodies him, 110


Sermon. 10.
DEstruction the end of the ungodly, 112 Look not on the present estate, but
the end of the wicked, 113 God is said to write in a book, for the certenty of
his decree. 114 Gods decree has two parts Election, Reprobation, ibid. The
causes of either not to be inquired after, 115 Gods judgments often secret,
always just, ibid. We must not pry into Gods secrets, ibid. Gods will the
cause of our election, not faith or works, 116 Five signs of election, 117 Our
election perfected by many degrees, 118 Reprobation a second part of Gods
decree, 119 And as he electeth some, so he reprobates others, ibid. As all
things else have their contraries, so the elect theirs, namely the reprobate,
120 God orders sin, but urges not to it, ibid. Man's sin and destruction
come from himself, 121 Three opinions concerning Gods dealing in sin, 122
How God is said to cause evil, ibid. How God deals in reprobation, 122 More
then Gods bare permission in sin, ibid. How God is said to harden and to
blind, 124 God works by evil men, not in them, ibid. God, Satan, and Men,
concur in the same action, yet have different ends, 125


Sermon. 11.
THough we know much, yet we had need be put in remembrance, 527 Continual
instruction, like the continual dropping of rain, ibid. Itching ears listen
after novelties, rather then wholesome doctrine, 129 Preaching always
necessary, otherwise the soul decays in grace, 130 If instruction fail,
Satan prevails, ibid. Meditation and recordation, chief means to enrich the
soul, 131 God first offers mercy before he inflict judgment, 132 Gods
abundant mercies and miraculous deliverances of the Israelites, 133 Gods wrath
upon the Egyptians. ibid. Gods abundant mercies to England, 135 God allures by
mercyes before he punishes, 136 Contemners of Gods mercies, severely
punished, ibid. Sin pleasant in the committing, in the end damnable, 137 God
suffers the wicked till their sin be at the full, 139 God punishes some
sooner, some later, ibid. Look not on their present estate, but their end, 140


Sermon 12.
INfidelity the cause of Isreal's destruction, 140 And of their sin the root,
141 Faith the gift of God, 143 And the original of all virtues, ibid. True
faith is in few, 144 Most men led by the flesh rather than by the Spirit, ibid.
Faith has a triple foundation, ibid. Faith threefold, justifying, of miracles,
hystoricall, 145 The causes of Salvation, ibid. The just live by Faith, if no
Faith, no access to God, no interest in him, 146 Degrees of Faith, ibid. God
gives grace according to the measure of Faith, 147 Faith all in all, in
applying and assuring Salvation, ibid. The Angels that fell, committed many
sins in one, ibid. We must be wise according to sobriety, 148 Angels,
though Spirits in essence, yet appeared in diverse forms, ibid. The sin of
Angels in general was Apostasy, 149 Some Apostasy is unpardonable, ibid. Why
the Angels that fell were not restored, 150 Three reasons of Dorbell, why the
wicked shall be punished in Hell, more than the Devils, recited, rejected,
ibid. All apostasy dangerous, though some not damnable, ibid. It is the end
that crowns all our actions, 151 The Christian must be always increasing,
ibid. The wicked grow worse and worse, 152 There is a decay in most, ibid. The
estate of Angels considered, in regard of three several times, namely, of
Creation, Confirmation, last Judgment, 153 Diverse names of Angels, 154 Whence
the Angels fell, ibid. God the head, but not the Redeemer of the good Angels,
155 The time of the fall of Angels, uncertain, as also the places whither,
ibid. The Devils, though many in number, yet there is one chief, 156 How the
Devil is said to work, and to be in the wicked, ibid. The Devils, though
malicious Spirits, yet agree in mischief, 157 Division the cause of confusion.
158


Sermon. 13.
THe case of the Angels, most fearful to be cast out of Heaven, 159 Their
abode is not certain, but some in the Air, some in the Earth, some in the
Sea, 160 The Devils malice infinite, but his power by God limited, ibid. Satan
is said to be loosed, Apoc. 20. 7. not simply, but comparatively, 161 The
Devils and wicked shall have their torments increased after the day of
Judgment, 162 The pains of Hell are eternal, irremissible, ibid. The wicked
shall be tormented in those parts they abused, 163 God punishes the finite act
of sin, with infinite torments, and why, ibid. How the bodies of the damned
can endure eternally in fire, illustrated, 164 The last judgment called a
great day in three respects, 165 Judgment terrible to all, but specially to
the wicked, 166 The fire at the day of Judgment shall not consume utterly, but
purify, ibid. The fearful estate of all sorts of sinners at the day of
Judgment, 167


Sermon. 14.
FOrnication and all uncleanness most odious, 169 Reasons to dissuade from
adultery, ibid. Gods wrath not only against adulterers, but their seed, 170
The end of Whoredom destruction, ibid. God provides as well for the
preservation of wife, as of life, goods, or good name, ibid. No sin that
Satan prevails more in, than adultery, 171 Gods vengeance showed upon
adulterers, ibid. Many Saints have been overtaken by adultery, 172 Many
persons, cities, countries, kingdoms destroyed for adultery, ibid. Though many
think adultery indifferent or a petty sin, yet to God it is most odious,
173 Adultery cause of confusion in affinity and consanguinity, 174 The adultery
of the Saints not to be imitated, ibid. Polygamy originally not lawful,
though tolerated in the Fathers, 175 Polygamy not lawful to us, ibid.
Uncleanness has many branches, 176 The causes of Sodoms uncleanenesse, 177
Idleness and Pride causes of adultery, ibid. Perfuming and painting in women
odious, ibid. Gluttony cause of adultery, 178 Bad company cause of sin, ibid.
Too much love of Earthly things, cause of adultery, ibid. Great cities usually
sinful. 179 God destroys the places, for the persons inhabiting them, 180


Sermon. 15.
GOds punishments upon some sinners, should make others leave sin, 181 Fire
the instrument of Gods wrath, 183 The horror of Hell fire set out, to terrify
sinners, ibid. Poets and Philosophers apprehended some things concerning Hell
and Heaven, 184 Hell fire the most horrible of all fears, ibid. We cannot
have a Heaven here, and hereafter, 185 Five differences between elementary
fire, ^d that of Hell, ibid. Seven several pains in Hell, 186 Hell fire
terrible to all, but specially to the wicked, ibid. Eternity of Hell torments
aggravate the misery of the damned, 187 How the torments of Hell are eternal,
and why, ibid. The torments of Hell are eternal, and irremissible, 188 Gods
punishments often squared according to sin, 189 Sodoms destruction related by
heathen Historiographers, ibid. Those cities that partake with Sodom in sin,
are destroyed with her, 190 Though sin bring down punishment, yet God has a
hand in it, ibid. God in judgment remembers mercy, 191


Sermon. 16.
When reprehension amends not, execration follows, 193 One sin goes
seldom alone, 194 Sleep threefold, ibid. Sin and security like sleep, 195
Ministers trumpets to rowze the sleepers in sin, ibid. Waking and
watchfulness, necessary for a Christian, ibid. The sleep in sin dangerous,
196 The enemy cannot hurt, if we be watchful, 197 Uncleanness beseemes not a
Christian, whose members are Christ's, and his body the temple of the holy
Ghost, 198 God punishes uncleanenesse many ways, 199 Whoredom and adultery
odious, 200 The heynousnesse of adultery, aggravated by many arguments, ibid.
Why lusts called of Paul, our members, 201 Adultery a sin too-too common in
Italy, and slighted by the papists, 202 Many arguments to deter from
adultery, 203 A wicked woman a dangerous motive to draw to adultery, ibid.


Sermon. 17.
SAtan the author of rebellion being the first Rebel, 205 Christ and his
Apostles taught and preached obedience to Magistrates though persecutors, 206
The Christians in the primative Church, though cruelly tortured, yet rebelled
not, ibid. Rebellion against nature seeing subordination in all creatures, 207
God the author of government, etc. they that resist, rebel against God, 208
God has showed his vengeance upon rebels ibid. The Magistrates, gods in three
respects, ibid. Like God in executing justice, and showing mercy, 209
Anabaptists and Papists enemies to Magistracy, the one deny, the other abuse
it, ibid. Many benefits both to Church and Commonwealth from magistracy, 210
The Anabaptists deny that Christians should be subject to magistrates, or make
war, ibid. The Papists debase magistracy, 211 Popish Bishops causers of
distractions, and rebellions, 212 The usurpation of Popes over Emperors and
Kings, with their treacheries, ibid. Where no government, nothing but
confusion, 213


Sermon. 18
WE must learn meekness from Michael the Archangell, that would not rail
on the Devil, 214 Though many parts of Scripture are lost, yet so much as is
necessary for faith and manners, is and has been preserved, 215 The names of
some Angels, the office and distinction of all, ibid. How Angels speak and
contend, 216 Four contentions of Angels, ibid. Satan seeks by all means to
draw to Idolatry, 217 The Devil never cease tempting all estates, in all
places, ibid. Though Satan tempt, yet he prevails not with Gods children,
ibid. Satan a railer and cursed speaker, as employed in his names, 218 Reasons
why we should abstain from railing and cursed speaking, ibid. Motives to
moderate and rule the tongue, 219 Railers imitate the Devil, 220 Mildness
represseth wrath and railing, 221 God will confound railers, ibid. It is
lawful sometime to curse and to use harsh speeches, so it be in Gods cause,
and a mind free from wrath and malice, and that it be to reclaim sin, 222
How to carry our selves toward railers, ibid. Corrupt speeches a sign of a
corrupt heart, 223


Sermon. 19.
RAiling a sign of a malicious and wicked man, 224 Malice in the heart causes
railing of the tongue, ibid. The Brownists, of railing and censuring
dispositions. 226 Separation may not be made from the true Church, for
corruption in manners, ibid. No man absolutely perfect, no state totally
corrupt, 227 A railers tongue a sword, himself a murderer, 228 Ignorance the
cause of railing and other sins, ibid. Diverse ^inds of ignorance, 229 Four
means to get true knowledge, 230 Knowledge the chief ornament to a man, and
has been in all ages, reverenced and desired, 231 They that rail or sin
against a known truth, are desperate, ibid. Satan's sin was upon ^nowledge,
232 Want of knowledge, cause of error and destruction, 233 Natural men make
not that profitable uso of their knowledge that beasts do, 234 Wicked men
called by names of beasts, as they resemble them in quality, 235


Sermon. 20.
MInisters may denounce execution to execrable sinners, 237 The godly
Ministers, Magistrates and others, must be zealous and severe in Gods cause,
but mild in their own, 238 Envy always ascends and maligneth virtue and
honor, 239 Envy set out by many resemblances and fearful effects, 240 Envy
described by her properties, 241 Envies etymology implies the vice to proceed
from the eye, ibid. Envy the cause of much evil, and makes the soul incapable
of Wisdom and Grace, 242 Envy does most torment him in whom it is, 243 The
envious is fretted at good, and glad at the evil betides any, ibid. Cain was
profane and grudged at Gods sacrifice, 244 Many like Cain grudge to give that
is good, to God, ibid. Gods Ministers are to have honorable maintenance, 245
Sacrilege odious among the Heathen, they have observed the vengeance of their
gods, have followed such as have been sacrilegious, ibid. God himself has
punished sacrilege in all ages, 246 Hypocrites and dissemblers, pretend good,
intend evil, ibid. God detesteth hypcrisie and falsehood 247 Desperation the
bane of the soul excluding Gods mercy. ibid.


Sermon. 21.
Covetousness, the root of evil, and ruin of good, 249 Many woes against
covetousness, 250 The covetous man trusts more in his riches, than in the
blessed Trinity, ibid. Covetousnes deprives the covetous of the 8. beatitudes,
and makes them subject to the contrary curses, 251 Covetousness insatiable,
253 Covetousnes excludes out of Heaven, ibid. Riches unprofitable to soul and
body, credit and estate, 254 A covetous mind never satisfied, 255 Usurers more
cruel than wild beasts, ibid. Riches uncertain not to be relied on, 256
Riches unprofitable, if in superfluity, 257 Riches preserve not, neither from
temporal, nor spiritual evils, 258 Riches not hurtful by nature, but by
corruption, ibid. Riches hurtful to the outward and inward man. 259


Sermon. 22.
GOds mercy contemned, draws on judgment, 261 The utility and necessity of
both Magistracy and Ministry in Church and Commonwealth, 262 Government
necessary for preservation of states, ibid. Three forms of Government, viz.
Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democratie, ibid. Reasons why Monarchy the best, 263 All
lawful government of God, ibid. Rebellion pernicious not only to states, but
to the Rebels themselves, 264 Resemblances being ordinary teach best, 266
Preachers may use humane learning, but the Word must be his ground, to give
light, 268 The creatures afford a double consideration, one natural, another
moral or spiritual, 269 Epicurisme has many sins accompanying it, ibid.
Drunkenness and glutonny odious and pernicious, 270 Nature teaches temperance
and sobriety, 271 We are most prone to sin in our drunkenness, ibid.
Drunkenness makes incapable of Gods spirit, and spiritual graces, 272
Gluttonous Epicures neither glorify God, nor releeve the poor, ibid.
Dangerous to converse with Epicures, lest stained by them, 273 How one may
converse with the wicked, 274 Love Feasts, how used, abused, abolished, 275


Sermon. 23.
PRide many ways occasioned, every way odious to God, 277 Pride vain in three
respects, 278 Pride has been in all places, and all sorts ibid. The godly
sometime overtaken by it, ibid. Pride is expressed in the things that pertain
to God, six ways, 279 Pride shows it self many ways, ibid. The proud man
insulteth over all, 280 Though all prone to pride, yet usually the basest
proudest, ibid. Pride the cause of contention, ibid. Pride makes us forget our
mortality, ibid. The proud odious to all, God, Angels, Men, only please the
Devil, 281 God detesteth pride, ibid. Pride is both in Church and
Commonwealth, and causes heresy in the one, and disorder in the other, 282
Pride so puffes up men, as they become not only foolish, but phrentike, ibid.
Pride brings shame and destruction, 283 Pride will show it self after the
death of the proud, 284 Knowledge and riches the cause of pride, ibid. True
zeal like fire that kindles and burns by degrees, till it come to a full
flame, 285 Hypocrisy most odious to God, and severely punished by him. ibid.
Sincerity most pleasing to God. 286 Christ pronounced against no sin so many
woes, as against hypocrisy, 289 Hypocrisy, blasphemy, ibid. Hypocrites make
fair shows without truth inwardly, pretend religion, when they intend the
subversion of it, 290 Sincerity very rare, hypocrisy has banished, 292 Men
often compared to trees, to show that God looks for fruits, or we must look
for the axe, ibid. Many carnal gospellers, few true professors, 293 Most like
trees twice dead, both in words and deeds, 294 We must take heed of the sin
of hypocrisy, lest we endure the punishment, ibid.


Sermon. 24.
HEll set out by diverse names, yet none sets it out sufficiently, but are as
shadows, or the beginning of sorrows, 213 Hell torments amplified, being
opposed to the joys of Heaven, 297 The damned every way tormented. 298 The
effects of Gods wrath in afflicting Christ, bearing our sins, and punishing
others temporally, may serve to set out the torments of the damned whom he
punishes eternally, 299 The damned suffer all punishments both of loss and
sense, 300 The horror of hell should make us abhor sin, 301 Nothing more
hard then the impenitent heart, 302 Hell torments as unspeakable, so
everlasting and irremissible. 303 Hell fire compared with our elementary fire
in five respects, 304 Judgment and damnation necessary to be preached in time
of sin and security, 306 The wicked shall be tormented according to their
sins; the greater sins, the greater punishment, 307


Sermon. 25.
THere must be a time of manifesting Gods Justice, as well as his power and
mercy, 301 Antiquity with verity, most authentike, 308 Traditions equalled with
Scriptures by Bellarmine and the Papists, ibid. The Scriptures all sufficient
for faith and manners, 311 Though some scriptures are lost, yet so much as is
necessary to salvation, is preserved, ibid. Judgment fourefold, 312 Judgment
general must needs be, as prooved by Scripture, ibid. The second person of the
Trinity shall judge, 313 Christ shall judge as man, and why? 314 Though Christ
shall come in his humanity to judge, yet with power and great glory, 315
Judgment fearful to all, much more to the wicked, ibid. Christ's second
coming to judgment compared with his first, 316 Christ's glory appeared in his
humility, at his first coming, 317 The greatness of Gods mercy at first,
aggravates the severity of his justice at the last, 318 God has two Courts,
Forum misericordiae, Forum justitiae, Ibid. Gods judgment impartial. 319
Judgment shall be general of all men and of every, Work, Word, Thought. 320
Swearers, blasphemers most abominable, 322 Gods judgment most certain, 324
The conscience of the wicked tell him there will be a judgment, 325 The
consideration of Christ's coming to judgment, ought to terrify the wicked,
comfort the godly, instruct all. 326


Sermon. 26.
MVrmuring twofold against God and against men, 329 Murmuring and discontent
in most, ibid. Murmuring the sin of the Israelites, 330 Murmurers never
content, ibid. Murmurers severely punished, 331 We must patiently subject our
wills to Gods, 332 The remedies against murmuring, ibid. The Saints have been
discountenanced, yet subjected their wills to Gods, will and have been pacified
and comforted, 334 Man murmures against man for diverse causes, 335 All estates
are discontent, and murmr against others, 336 Murmuring the property of base
and envious persons, ibid. The lusts of the flesh must be tamed, 337 God uses
many means to teach us to tame our lusts, ibid. Most men rather follow their
lusts, than obey Gods Word, 338 Evil thoughts and inordinate affections must
be vanquished, ibid. Gods Word the chief means to restrain lust, 339 Lust
tempts to all sin, 340 The best assaulted by lusts, but not led by them,
ibid. All the works of the flesh are from the lusts of the flesh, 341 Lusts
bring damnation, ibid. Lust insatiable, 342 Lust defiles body and soul, and
gives Satan interest in the whole man, 343 Lust defaces Gods Image, ibid. Lust
is in the godly, but gains not in them, 344


Sermon. 27.
THe corruption of the heart, is showed by corrupt speaking, 345 The wicked
have been always great boasters with their tongues, but perform little with
their hands, 346 Pride is natural to us, we have it from our first parents,
347 Pride the ruin of angels and men, ibid. The godly humble in regard of
their sins, not proud of their virtues, ibid. Scoffers and slanderers like
dogs, 348 Good men despise the applause of flatterers and debase themselves,
ibid. Though we must not endure vain applause, yet we must free our selves
from slanders, 349 The most vile, usually the most proud, and greatest
boasters, 350 Pride ends with vanity, ibid. Flatterers applaud others for
their own gain, 351 The Popes great boasters, 352 Flattery described with the
properties and punishment thereof, 353 We must not listen to flatterers, but
give God the glory, 354 Flattery servile and base, 355 Flattering preachers
most pernicious, ibid. Ministers must reprove the greatest, 356 Such as desire
to be flattered, are occasion of flattery, ibid. He that reprooveth, does
profit more, than he that applauds, 357 Flattery to be rejected and despised,
ibid. Flattery and flatterers compared to diverse things, 358 Flattery gives to
vices the names of virtues, 359


Sermon. 28.
CHristians must not live like Heathen infidels, 360 The godly and wicked
opposite in diverse respects, 361 We must not be led by the multitude, for the
greater part are the worser, 362 The more glorified, the greater joy, the more
damned, the greater torment, ibid. Not sufficient to have the Word, unless we
remember it, 363 How we may hear the Word profitably, that we may find it
the savor of life unto life, 365 The memory the souls treasury, ibid.
Whatsoever doctrine is not remembered, is lost, 366 Our forgetfulness and
negligence in divine doctrine most gross, ibid. The Word of God the most sure
foundation to build upon, 367 The Saints modest in their own praise, but
zealous for Gods glory, 369 Circumstances to be observed in reproving, 370
Three sorts of malicious reprehenders condemned, 371


Sermon 29.
THere have been scoffers and mockers in all ages, 372 Mocking what in Latin,
whence derived, 373 Diverse sorts of mockers, 374 Mockers of God and religion
most odious, ibid. Mocking, scoffing, and jesting, the basest fruit of wit, 375
Some sinners like Dogs, some Hogs, ibid. Scoffers punished, 376 Mocking a
kind of persecution, 378 The tongues of scoffers instruments of persecution,
379 Many scoffing Atheists, at Christ and Religion, 380 Scoffers as the Devils
band-dogges: so bondslaves, ibid. He is strongest that overcomes his lusts,
381 Mortification a sign of justification, 383 If no sanctification; no
glorification, 384


Sermon. 30.
SEctaries cause division in the Church, 385 The Church and members thereof
love Unity, 386 Dissension, the cause of all mischief in the Church, ibid.
Three causes of division in the Church, Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, 387 The
difference of these, ibid. Pride the cause of Schism, 388 No salvation out of
the Church, ibid. Heresies though hurtful in themselves yet God maks them
profitable to the Church, 389 Heretics pervert Scriptures to maintain their
errors, ibid. The Papists charging us with Sects, have more among themselves,
390 Satan's chiefest engine to hurt the Church is dissension, 391 Schism a
grievous sin, ibid. Natural men perceive not the things of God nor any good,
392 By regeneration we are adopted the Sons of God, 393 Many natural men
exceed Christians in bridling their affections and in some mortal actions, 394
Natural men inventers of Arts and trades, 395 Beasts exceed many natural men,
ibid. Love makes all things easy, 396 A sinner hardly drawn from sin, ibid.
Gods grace is to our hearts as the Sunne-beames to the earth, ibid. None boast
more of the spirit, then they that are led by the spirit of error, 397 The
Popes pride reproved, that call only their Clergy spiritual, all other
temporal, ibid. Natural men, though they have not the spirit of
sanctification, yet illuminated, 398 All grace and true goodness flows from
Gods Spirit, 400


Sermon. 31.
THe godly and the wicked every way opposite, 403 Edification being a building,
the Saints be the houses, 404 We must build in our selves temples for the Holy
Ghost, ibid. Gods Word the rule and square whereby we must build, 405 We must
endeavor to edify others especially our children, 406 We must daily increase
in knowledge, grace and goodness, 407 Good men grow daily in grace and goodness,
ibid. The wicked grow daily worse and worse, 408 We are none proficients in
plenty of means, ibid. Pride and negligence cause of none proficiciency, ibid.
We be diligent in seaking knowledge we shall attain to it, 409 We should
not build our hope on earth, but in Heaven, 410 Faith is the original of all
good works, 411 No life of grace here or glory hereafter without faith, 412
Faith the most excellent of all virtues, ibid. Faith is called holy in respect
of the effect in the subject; secondly, of the object, thirdly, the efficient
cause thereof, 413 All good works without faith vain, 414 If no holiness in
life, no true faith in heart, ibid. Faith is begotten by hearing and increased
also, 415 God works not by miracles when he affords means, 416


Sermon. 32.
FAith and prayer may not be disjoined, 417 Faith the mother of prayer, and
prayer the means to confirm faith, ibid. Prayer the means whereby we
receive all good things, 418 Prayer prevalent over all creatures, 419 Prayer
pleasant to God and man, 420 The Saints have delighted to spend much time in
prayer, ibid. Diverse divisions of prayer into diverse kinds in diverse respects,
421 All prayer must be offered in the mediation of Christ, 422 Prayer necessary
for all estates, for all times, 423 Gods wrath powered out upon them that do
not pray, ibid. Gods house a house of prayer, 424 Prayer comfort in all
estates, ibid. Prayer the food and nourishmert of the soul, 405 Prayer
sanctifyeth all our actions, ibid. Prayer admirable in the effects, if in due
manner, 406 We must pray continually, ibid. We must pray in the spirit and
how, 407 The Holy Ghost the Author of prayer, yet so as the whole Trinity has
a hand, ibid. Prayers must be spiritual and fervent, 409 God regards both the
manner and end in all holy duties, 410 Our prayers must be neither tepidae,
timidae, nec temerariae, ibid. God hears not the prayers of sinners, except
for vengeance, 411 God has promised all good things to prayer, ibid.


Sermon. 33.
FAith, Prayer, and Love, have mutual relation, 412 Love the most excellent of
all virtues, 413 All virtues vain without love, ibid. Many excellent
properties of Love, 414 Little love in this age, ibid. Love makes men of one
heart, 415 Many men implacable, cruel, like Wolves or Devils, ibid. An
exhortation to love. 416 Four properties of love that it be holy, just, true,
constant, ibid. The love amongst Atheists, and impious condemned, 417 The
excellency of Love, ibid. Atheists agree like a kennell of dogs, 418 Most love
for lucre, ibid. Gods love to us infinite, 419 Gods love to us diversely
distinguished, ibid. Gods love set out by all the dimensions, yet transcendent
and unmeasurable, ibid. No love comparable to Gods Love, 420 Gods love to us,
the cause of our love to him and the godly, ibid. Four reasons or motives to
incite us to love God, 1. a mandato. 2. ab aequo and justo, 3. a commodo, 4. ab
officio, 421 The manner how God is to be loved, 422 Love a debt, that all owe
to God, and man, but few poy it, ibid We must show our love to God, by keeping
his commandments, and serving him, 423 An honorable and happy thing to love
God, ibid.


Sermon. 34.
THe hope of eternal life allays the hardness of Gods Commandments, 425 Hope
of reward makes men endure labors and dangers, 426 The blessed estate of the
Saints in Heaven, 427 Christ, and the Saints, in their sufferings had an eye to
the reward, ibid. The joys of Heaven unspeakable, incomprehensible, 428 The
glorified bodies shall have spiritual and heavenly qualities, namely, clarity,
agility, subtility, unpassibility, and immortality, 429 The principal points
wherein the glory and joy of the glorified soul, and whole Saint consist, 430
Earthly minds regard not Heavenly joys, 431 Diverse errors concerning
eternal life, 432 The joys of Heaven eternal and infinite, ibid. Heaven
compared with the womb of the world, 433 An exhortation to seek after
eternal joys, ibid. Eternal life only the free gift of God, 434 Merit end
mercy, gift and desert opposite, ibid. Papists works, many of them merit death,
435 Merit threefold Congrui, Digni, Condigni, ibid. None can merit ex
condigno, but Christ, 436 Our works cannot merit because finite and unperfect,
ibid. Christ's righteousness ours, 437 Our works merit not jointly with Christ's,
ibid. Grace threefold Praeveniens, Subsequens, Consummans, ibid. Many Papists
renounce their merits and fly to Gods mercy, 438 Our election, vocation,
justification, sanctification, all from grace, 439 We must not trust in our
works, but confess our sins, ibid.


Sermon. 35.
DIscretion necessary for distinguishing sins and sinners, 441 Ministers must
use discretion and not deal alike with all sins and sinners, ibid. How to
restore with m^ekenes them that are fallen, 442 We should pity and pray for
sinners and not despise them, ibid. Many men more compassionate toward their
beasts nhan brethren 444 We must tak away sins with mildness and mercy if
possible, ibid. Reproof though not pleasing yet profitable, 446 Compassion
must be showed especially to the soul, 447 The Saints bewail the estate of
the wicked, ibid. Threats of judgment belong to the wicked, 448 The obstinate
must be terrified, not soothed, ibid. Judgments denounced against soothing
false prophets, 449 Reproves more profitable than soothing flattery, 450
Excommunication a grievous censure, ibid. Excommunication threefold, 451 Two
uses of Excommunication, ibid.


Sermon. 36.
THe sinner always in danger, 452 The fickle estate of the wicked set out by
diverse resemblances, 453 No estate permanent, 454 Sudden destruction wait on
the wicked, ibid. Death comes not sudden to the Godly, 455 The Godly prepare by
repentance, and godly life for death, while they have time, 456 Repentance must
not be deferred, ibid. The saving of souls, a most blessed work, 457 Though
God save, yet both Grace, and Faith, and Ministry concur, 458 Tho Ministry
being Gods ordinance to save souls, is not to be slighted, though the World
despise them. ibid. Four faculties in the soul, whereby it converts the food
of the Word and Sacraments, to nourishment of the spiritual life, 459 The
necessity and excellent fruits of the Ministry set out by diverse
resemblances, 460 The happy estate of them that have means of knowledge, 461
Salvation and the misery of them that want it, ibid.


Sermon. 37.
NOt only evil, but all appearance of evil is to be avoided. 462 Sin must
be hated, not sported, at if if we love our own souls, ibid. No communion
to be holden or society with the wicked, 463 Wicked men must be avoided in
respect of God and ourselves, ibid. Sin as contagious as the plague, and more
dangerous, 464 We must hate sin because the whole Trinity detest it, 465 We
must hate sin, because Satan is the author, being enemy to God and our
souls, ibid. Sin must be hated, because it dishonours God, not our selves,
466 We may not hold amity with the wicked boing Gods enemies, 467 The amity of
the wicked, treachery, ibid. Sin only is hated of God and man, and not the
person, except reprobate, 468 Two judgments, the one of Faith, the other of
Charity, 469 We must leave sin of conscience, not for other respects, 470
The punishment of sin ought to deter from sin, ibid. Earthquakes, an
evident sign of Gods anger, and a forerunner of judgment, 471 Many
earthquakes in many places and much hurt, 472 Christians not to be profaned.
473


Sermon. 38
WE are not sufficient to do any good of our selves without grace, 476
Exhortations do not show what we can, but what we should do, 477 Grace both
preserves from falling, and raises us being fallen, 478 Our enemies many and
powerful, 479 Prayer the best means to repel Satan and his temptations, 480
All sorts of men have fallen, even the Saints, ibid. All have the Seminary of
all sins in them, 481 Grace works all in all, ibid. We walk in the
midst of snares, 482 God suffered Adam, and does still suffer the Saints to
fall for diverse reasons, 483 Difference between the sins of Saints and
Reprobates, ibid. Whether and how the Church may err, 484 The best have erred,
ibid. The Pope may err, and many of them have erred. 485 The distinctions
about the erring of the Pope, nice and frivolous, 486


Sermon. 39.
HOw we are said to be blameless, notwithstanding we are full of sin, 487
Two kinds of righteousness, 488 Our righteousness consists rather, in the
remission of sin, than perfection of virtue, ibid. How we are said to be
perfect, and yet imperfect, 489 The Jesuits and latter Popish writers the
worst, 490 The Church and members of it impure in it self, but perfect and
pure in Christ, 491 Our service may be sincere, not perfect, 492 Justification
by works confuted, how justified by faith explained, 493 Papists fly to the
mercy of God, and merit of Christ, 494 No true joys and pleasures in this
world, but all in Heaven, ibid. The Saints in Heaven shall have fullness of
joy, undique, 495 Heaven the land of the living, and Earth land of dead men,
496 God shall be all in all to the Saints in Heaven, ibid. Worldly minded men,
desire not Heaven, 497 Our life nothing to eternal life, ibid. All honors and
pleasures on earth, nothing to them in Heaven 498 The World fraudulent,
turbulent, momentary, 499 Christ the only comfort to the elect, both in this
life and that to come, ibid. Many hindered from Heaven by pleasure,


Sermon. 40.
PRayer and praise the two chiefest parts of Gods worship must follow one
another, 501 The glory of God has been celebrated by all Saints, 502 We
slauld not think of the mercies of God in Christ, without praising him, 503
God described by many attributes, yet none can sufficiently set him out, ibid.
God only wise, all men ignorant and foolish, 504 We have no true wisdom
till infused by God, ibid. All wisdom and Knowledge hid in Christ 505
Destinction between Science and Sapience, ibid. Worldly wisdom folly, ibid.
Gods Wisdom seen in creation and disposing of all creatures, and governing
the Church, 506 Christ a merciful and powerful Savior in life and death,
ibid. No Saviors comparable to Christ, 507 The Papists derogate from the power
and merit of Christ, ibid. The imputative righteousness of the Saints more set
out Gods glory than the inherent, 508 Man's work cannot merit, ibid. What it is
to glorify God, 509 Thankfulness the only sacrifice that God requires,
ibid. We pray in our wants, and do not praise God when we are releeved, 510
Thankesgiving and the praise of God, the end of our creation. ibid. They thrt
do not glorify God here, shall not be glorified of him hereafter, ibid. Two
thieves that rob God of his glory and justice, 511 A powerful exhortation to
praise God, and give up our selves in thankfulness, ibid. If no praise of God
in the mouth, no thankfulness or grace in the heart, 512.


Sermon 29.
What it is to ascribe majesty to God, 514 Miracles are admired for the
rareness, 515 All Gods ordinary works wonderful, 516 Our dullness in
ascribing to God majesty in regard of his works, ibid. God re^eales himself
six ways, ibid. Gods judgment do not work Repentance, ibid. Wherein Gods
dominion stands, 517 Gods threefold kingdom, of power, grace, glory, ibid.
We ackowledge our selves subjects, of Christ's kingdom of grace, and yet are
rebellious. 518 Three properties in the Angels Obedience, Libentissime,
Citissime, Fidelissime, Obediunt, 519 Notorious sinners Satan's bondslaves,
ibid. We must be pure in soul and body, that Christ may dwell and rule in us,
520 Gods power omnipotent, ibid. Christ every where present by his power,
though not corporally, ibid. Christ's omnipotenty gives comfort to the
Christian, 521 Gods incomprehensiblenesse set out by comparison, ibid. Christ
all in all to us, 522 God cannot do those things that imply contradiction or
defect, ibid. How attributes are ascribed some time to the whole Trinity,
sometime to particular persons, 523 All Gods attributes are eternal, ibid. God
must be prayed, and praised for all things temporal and eternal, 524 Amen.
the diverse significations thereof, and the efficacy thereof in the conclusion
of our prayers, ibid.


Note that the folio's are mistaken at fol. 425. where you shall find this
mark (...)

FINIS.

