TO THE ENGLISH GENTRY, and all others studious of the MATHEMATICS, which
shall be Readers hereof.
The just Apology of WILL: OVGHTRED, against the slanderous insimulations of
RICHARD DELAMAIN, in a Pamphlet called Grammelogia, or the Mathematical Ring,
or Mirifica logarithmorum projectio circularis.
Honorable, and much honored Gentlemen, I was of late at my coming up to
London, for the performance of mine ordinary service in the house of my most
Honorable Lord the Earl of Arundell and Surrey, and Earl Marshall of
England, by many of my loving friends presented with a most idle and scandalous
Pamphlet written against me by Richard Delamaine, who professes himself a
Teacher of the Mathematickes about the City: Wherein I am brought before you
upon the Scaffold, and with all the petulancies of a vexed mind and distempered
passion, insimulated and charged with, I know not what, injuries he pretends
I should have done unto him (your noble selves also by him engaged therein, and
incensed against me) and at last, as if quite cast, I am schooled by him with a
long Lecture or Common place against Slander and Detraction. I did much wonder
at it, to see my self so basely and impudently abused by one whom I never had
wronged, but had done very many courtesies for, giving him access to my
chamber in Arundell House day by day, teaching and instructing him in that
faculty he professes: not only satisfying his scruples in those things he
partly knew: but even laying the very foundation of diverse parts, whereof he
was utterly ignorant. And I did not so much marvel to see him so bold with me
a poor man, but dust and ashes; as I was amazed to see him so fearfully (yet
without fear) to play with Almighty God, hypocritically and against his own
conscience in things apparently false, invoking and challenging his all-knowing
testimony: and in the midst of his most unmannerly raylings, in his book;
and his slanderous backbiting and depraving me, by audacious intruding
himself upon my most honorable favors with false complaints, utterly to
overthrow and discredit me; in a personated admonition against such
uncharitable calumniations, to pronounce judgment against him self. But of
these things we shall, God willing, see more in good time. I borrowed and
perused that worthlesle Pamphlet, and in reading it (I beshrew him for making
me cast away so much of that little time is remaining to my declined years) I
met with such a patchery and confusion of disjoynted stuff, that I was stricken
with a new wonder, that any man should be so simple, as to shame himself to
the world with such a hotch-potch.

In the two first pages, (for so he afterward calls them) are two Schemes of
his Instrument. In the fourth page is his Epistle to the Kings Majesty. In the
5, 6, 7, are verses to his great commendation. In the 8 to the end of 21, he
has an Epistle opprobrious against me, most plainly still pointing me out,
that he needs not to name me: and therein most learnedly disputes with me
his jealous opposite and the supposed, and assumed author, and divulg^r, and
what not, in six whole leaves, a question about the asses shadow, I should
have said, whether the ring, or the Index at the center, be the better? that
word BETTER cruelly wrings him. What, such a comparison of BETTER? such a
comparative aspersion of BETTER? Too great, and too loose an aspersion: An
unsavory report indeed: which savours of too high a conceit of the one, and
too great a detraction from the other: Endeavoring, what in him lies, to
annihilate and beat down the way, which I write upon, and to glory in the
raising up of his supposed own: thereby not only possessing men with an
untruth, but making ME also ignorant in MY choice, that I should leave unto the
world the weakest and imperfectest part of the projection of the Logarithmes,
and leave the best for another to write upon. I never thought, when I first
writ upon this my invention or my name so to come to the worlds rumor: which
may teach ME and others carfulness hereafter (yea and fit it should) how and
what WE publish to the world: seeing there are such carpers and maligners, such
busy-bodies, who mar what others make: such who have stings like Bees, and
arrows to shoot: sharp-witted Critickes, Diogenes like snarling, who while
they will needs have many callings, neglect their own. Good Sir be pacifyed:
who troubles your patience? I, whom you make your adversary (a better friend
then you deserve) never, I assure you, delivered that comparative attribution:
I disclaim it utterly: I never made comparisons with you: you must seek you
some other antagonist. And now what is become of your angry question of BETTER?
it had been much better, and more for your honesty, to have held your peace.

But we will go on in your Pamphlet. Next follows a second Epistle to the
Reader, Page: 22, 23, Then the projecting and dividing the circles of the Ring,
from page: 24, till the end of 43. Wherein you please your self much with a
portentuous invention of your great Cylinder, for a study (he that will be at
the charge (subaudi) were a great fool) of a yard diameter: which brave
conceit does so elate, or rather esterate you, that in the very next leaf you
must needs give me a lash: very wisely unveyling a great secret about the
circle of equal parts. After this, twenty two whole leafes being already past,
you begin in page: 1, with your Pamphlet printed 1630; worthy indeed for the
learnednesse of it to be enrolled in this disorderly band. And then in token of
triumph, page: 24, you set up a banner of other encomiasticall verses.

Let me now see whither we are come: and we had need look about us: for here
is a vast hiatus, a huge Gulf. And upon an instant from page: 24 we are hurryed
to page: 53: Where tenthly we have a third Epistle to the Reader, that promises
him wonders in Astronomy, Horolography, in plain triangles, applied to
dimensions, Navigation, Fortification, etc. marry this etc. was well put in:
but it had done passing well two lines before. Yet you have provided well
enough for all that: you have left a great lacuna, that what you have no skill
in now, peradventure you may hereafter pick out of the labors of some other:
and then challenge it as coming within your intentions: and thence supply your
vacuum.

After all this he rambleth back again, by way of introduction: of the
examination of the graduation of the circles of the ring: which may serve as an
inducement and furtherance to the learner, to fit and acquaint him. What, are
we no farther yet? we have fairly rolled Sysiphus stone: but to make amends,
we have a few scrambling uses in Astronomy, in Dyalling in plain triangles,
from page: 56 to 67. And then the Flag of encomiastical verses, of p. 24, is
again gloriously displayed in page: 68. Fie upon foolery! Fie upon vainglory! Fie
upon such miserable penury of matter! Now make room: Here comes a new
projection of circles enlarged, either by a moveable and fixed circle, or by a
single projection with an Index at the peripheria, or center: for here is
plenty and variety. A wondrous secret it is, that a man may divide either one
circle, or else four, or ten circles, or as many as one will, into 1000 equal
parts. But here our Vnvayler has a worse rub in his way. As spite would have
it, this was first hit upon by one Thomas Brown a Ioyner: yet not one word of
Brown: only I am a beam in his eye. And herein lies a mystery of his skill:
He holds it no mastery to join forces with a Ioyner: but by setting on a
bold face, if with petulant insolences he shall dare me; he thinks the
attempt will be more glorious. Wherein I thank him for putting a little
difference in his estimation for matter of art between me and a Ioyner. And
yet there is another matter in it too. Brown has done it in a Serpentine
line; and he in just circles: the very names of circle and Serpentine (though
the things themselves are the same: the serpentine revolution being but two
true semicircles described on several centers) may to the ignorant (for such
they are that Delamaine must persuade) seem to intimate things different in
nature: and so make good his claim against Brown. This part he cuts off short
in two leafes only; reserving all the rest, that ought to be spoken thereof
(which he will find harder then he conceives) to his large intentions.

But now (vvoe is me therefore) my punishment is at hand. All the rest of this
worthy Pamphlet, which is thirteen leafes (except the last page only, which
is also an Epistle to the Reader, the very same promising one, which was before
in page: 22, the former) is a most vile, unmannerly, and barbarous invective
against me: full of untruths, full of malice, full of scandal, full of
hypocrisy. In page: 73 I am argued of spreading unsavory rumors: who (God
knows) have scarce so much as thought upon him, till this scandalous Pamphlet
came to my hands: and of ignorance of his intentions; whereas it partly has,
and shall better appear, that I know his intentions well enough. Then
follows page: 74, a fourth Epistle to the Reader, short, but very quick: that
the world has bin abused, as well as himself, with a false rumor raised by
some rude and ignorant tongue: by their malicious fantasy: and that he (good
soul) did not intend to take this course, but sought peace, and his right by a
private and friendly way: but failing of it, his good intentions scorned and
slighted, makes the ensuing discourse his plea.

Noble Gentlemen, excuse I pray you my most just indignation. While he was
ridiculous and vain in his opprobries, I dallyed with him: now this so deep
taxing me of want of charity, in refusing peace sought, and prosecuting
contention and discord, contrary to my Christian duty, pierces to the quick:
which only scandal-full calummation had it not been, I had scarce vouchsafed an
answer to all the rest. Impudent and impure mouth, for ever be thou stopped,
that delightest in slander, and with lies cuttest like a sharp razor! When
did thou ever seek peace of me, and I refused it? when did I not but most
mildly and modestly behave my self unto thee? returning thee good words for
ill: which my Christian humility thou have, it seems in thy price interpreted
abjectnesse, and grown thereby more importunate and unreasonable. What have I
done? what have I spoken at all, with which thou can justly charge me of
wrong? how many ways have thou most intollerably provoked me; by raylings to
my face, and threatening thou would overtop me, by letters into the country;
and all to urge me to impatient speeches, that thou might get occasion of a
suit at law, as thy self acknowledgedst, to have a personal action at the
Kings bench Bar against me? When I was from London, thou made enquiry after
me and my coming up, in a distempered and threatening manner. When I came to
London, thou soughtest me out, and openly in the audience of diverse witnesses
reviledst me about my book and instrument called The circles of proportion
(which yet I set not out, nor ever sought to make one penny benefit by) while I
only stood silent and amazed to see thy audaciousnesse and desperate
conscience: till at last extremely provoked with thy braving reproaches I
only said, what strange impudence is this? You know that I know what is in
you, and that you have no skill in diverse arts, which in your table you
profess: or if you have any, you may thank me for it: and that you have and
might have made better use and benefit of my friendship, then by these
challenges you are ever like to get. And you answered, then belike I have all I
shall have. And I said, unless you can better deserve it. Afterward when I was
in the country above a quarter of a year together, in derision of my calling
you sent some Porter dressed up like a wandering Minister, with a scandalous
letter, full of injurious expostulations of wronging you in print, which I
never did: of stealing your invention, which is as false: of traducing the
dead: of intruding my self into your calling: and neglecting mine own: and
such like peaceable stuff, which letter I would not keep, lest by it I might
hereafter be provoked against you: but closing it up again, delivered it to
the Porter, willing him to return it back into your hands, and bid you peruse
it with a better mind. And when afterward I sent up to you a Canon of sines,
tangents, and secants, which I had borrowed, you asked if I had not also sent
some scornful answer to your letter. After this (dispairing to get any
advantage out of my words) you shamelessely exclaimed upon me to my Lord
Marshall, and to my Lord of London, and to as many of the Nobility, Gentry,
and Clergy, as you thought I was known to; that so by depriving me of my
friends and hopes, you might procure my utter undoing. Is this your
Christianity? Is this a private and a friendly way? is this to seek peace? are
these your good intentions? which because you had not your wicked purpose in,
you hold as slighted and scorned: and God grant that they may be ever so
slighted and scorned, that is frustrated of their divellish intentions and
designs, as many as have evil will against the innocent. Thus have you seen
in him (honored Gentlemen) the lively character of a querulous, clamorous,
injurious, ill natured man: that like an angry curre can together bite and
whine: crying out upon wrong, when he himself is the only wrong-doer.

But reason is we should hear his plea: in which he still plays his own
part, that is of scurrility, calumniation, out-facing, and hypocrisy. A
pitiful case it was indeed that the world should spy out his vanity in
assuming to himself the first discovery of the Horizontall projection and
circles of proportion: It was a malevolous disposition of envious detractours:
famousing some, and infaming others: which did not a little disturb the quiet
and peace, which formerly he enjoyed: when in his greedy hopes he had
swallowed down the golden bait of vainglory, and of a large fee out of
every Instrument the workman should sell. But also slacked his intentions: or
else there had been yet greater help for such as affect Mathematical (he
would have said Manual or Isntrumental) practices: Not out of mercenary
respect, nor interlaced (O stay there: tell the very plain truth: and say, Not
without mercenary respect: interlaced) with delusions and humbast stuff by way
of illustration, if not confusion: Had he not bin prevented by some others,
whose callings might have invited them to spend their hours better: and which
have work enough at home: whose ambition to be somebody has incited him
forward to deliver some supposed new stuff, or scrambling pieces, if not
confused fragments of his own, or some others to a public view, in obscure
and various phrases: a thing supposed to be forged of sundry heads, rather then
one alone: seeing there is such roving from the text: only so far to be
trusted, as is agreeable to the text and doctrinall method: amongst whom to
blow some smoke thereto, there was some gross one, seeing the matter is so
common; for to a finer element perhaps his capacity could not assent, or
ascend: Yet there was some honesty shown not to take the crop, but the
gleanings, holding it easyer to follow a beaten path, then to hazard a
discovery. A blind guide, and a Parats speech are not much different: the one
walks he knows not whither, and the other speaks he knows not what: and
such are all precepts in arts, which lead, and make men speak without
demonstration: which do not only protract the studious, and frustrate the
affectionate, but makes an ingenious spirit (who is ever more rational then
practical) to contemn such circumlocutions, and laugh in private, if not in
public, at the learned style of some Authors making themselves by their
obscure kind of writing seemingly famous, stick not to calumniate othe^s to
make them infamous: It is an ancient Proverb among us, Good wine needs no
bush: But the wine must not be fast locked up then, that none can come by it, if
so it wants both bush and key. Excellently scolded: even so I have sometimes at
a public Conduit heard a Tankard-woman in her furious and railing fit; till
she has run her self quite out of breath, and sense. But Richard Delamain,
are you so mad upon the frustrated prey of your vainglory and lucre, that
neither the sacredness of my function, nor the reverence of mine age, nor my
many good deserts, nor my innocence of any ill demerite, nor your knowledge of
some skill I have in those sciences, can escape the derision of your
sardonicall laughter, nor the wound of your virulent tongue? You are not in
this fell passion to be reasoned with. Only I will soberly tell you that
William Forster, whom you call a Parrat speaking he cannot tell what, is a
far more grounded Artist in all parts of the Mathematics then is R. D: and
better knows what belongs to demonstration then R. D. does: as may soon
be tried And as for my Clavis Mathematica, at which you make your self so
merry, though I doat not, as you do, upon mine own (for I suppose you will
not lay claim to that too) yet I confess I like it the better, because it
pleases not your palate, to which nothing can savor, that is learned and
Analyticall: but only the superficial scumme and froth of Isntrumental
tricks and practices. It is you say hard and short: Did any man, I pray you,
ever make a key, but of hard matter, and portable for the smallness? and yet
it opens an entrance into the most magnificent structures. I see you, and
such as you are, looked for an Epitome: you were deceived: It is the way of
rational Scientiallists, not of ground-creeping Methodicks. He that desires
therein any resolution, to him I have in the Epistle, for the honor of my most
illustrious Lord, in whose service and family I penned it, most freely proffered
my self gentle and courteous. He that likes it not, may let it alone. But to
him that can rightly use that key, it will unlocke the hardest mysteries of
those Sciences, and of the writers thereof; as is not unknown to many, who to
their great contentment have been and are versed therein.

My calling ministers to R. D. a diverse and contrary matter, both of mirth
and scandal. His mirth I willingly leave unto him, as not unbefitting the rest
of his good manners: for hypocrisy and profaneness may well symbolize
together. His scandal, being taken at the good gifts of God, cannot also but
be most unjust. For it is not without impiety to be affirmed, that any part of
good literature is alien and abhorrent from the calling of a Divine: but that
in all ages many of the most eminent in the sublimity of Theology, have been
also conversant in the study of the Mathematics; most profitably making them
to serve and ancillate to their highest contemplations: and they that have
wanted such help, have heartily wished for it, and found in themselves the
defect. And that in no other thing, after his sacred word, Almighty God (who
creating all things in number, weight, and measure, does most exactly
Geometrize) has left more express p^ints of his heavenly and infallible
truth, then in these Sciences: in which only the mind and understanding of a
man can find secure rest and sure footing; all other knowledges being involved
with a thick mist of ignorance and obscurity. Besides, that the exercise of
these Arts accustomed to the certainty of demonstration, quickens the
understanding, rousing it up from a lasie and drowsy indormition and servile
assent to dialecticall and conjecturall probabilities and spurring it forward,
and supplying it with means, unto the accurate investigation of true and
undeceivable principles. Now tell me R. D. are these studies worthy of a
Divine, or no? Indeed to know no more thereof then you know, that is to play
with Instruments as a child does with babies, or a Juggler (though the word
trouble you) with his trinkets, is unworthy of a Divine, yea of a rational
man: worthy only of some rude and reasonlesse dulman.

But he upb^^ideth me for taking liberty enough to the less of time: and
neglecting my calling. I must confess this scandal cutteth deep: and has
with the^, to whom I am not known, wrought me much prejudice and dis^dvant^ge
in answering whereof I must crave your patience in all humble modesty, to make
a brief recital of the course of my poor laborious and painful life.

Next after E^ton school, I was bred up in Cambridge in Kings College: of
which society I was a member about eleven or twelve ye^res: wherein how I
behaved my self, going hand in hand with the rest of my r^nke in the ordinary
Academicall studies and exercises, and with what approbation, is well known
and remembered by many: the time which over and above those usual studies I
employed upon the Mathematical sciences, I redeemed night by night from my
natural sleep, defrauding my body, and inuring it to watching, cold, and
labor, while most others took their rest. Neither did I therein seek only my
private content, but the benefit of many: and by inciting, assisting, and
instructing others, brought many into the love and study of those Arts, not
only in our own, but in some other Colleges also: which some at this time (men
far better then my self in learning, degree, and preferment) will most
lovingly acknowledge. Ever since my departure from the University, which is
about thirty years, I have lived near to the Town of Guildford in Surrey:
where, whether I have taken so much liberty to the l^sse of time, and the
neglect of my calling, the whole Country thereabout, both Gentry and others,
to whom I am full well known, will quickly inform him; my house being not
past three and twenty miles from London: and yet I so hid my self at home,
that I seldomly traveled so far as London once in a year. Indeed the life
and mind of man cannot endure without some interchangeablenesse of recreation,
and pawses from the intensive actions of our several callings: and every man
is drawn with his own delight. My recreations have been diversity of studies:
and as often as I was toyled with the labor of my own profession, I have
allayed that tediousness by walking in the pleasant and more then Elysian
fields of the diverse and various parts of humane learning, and not of the
Mathematics only. In all which knowledges if I have attained to no more
ripeness and perfection, then to be reputed, and dared out by Richard Delamain
with such contemptuous challenges, as a match scarce equal for him, it is
surely a great meandness and defect of natural gifts in me (wherein I have
just cause to be, and indeed am, humbled) and not altogether so much my loss
of time.

About five years since, the Earl of Arundell my most honorable Lord in a
time of his private retiring to his house in the country, then at West
Horsley, four small miles from me (though since he has a house in Aldebury
the paris^ where I live) hearing of me (by what means I know not) was pleased
to send for me: and afterward at London to appoint me a Chamber in his own
house: where, at such times, and in such manner as it seemed him good to employ
me, and when I might not inconveniently be spared from my charge, I have been
most ready to present my self in all humble and affectionate service: I hope
also without the offense of God, the transgression of the good Laws of this
Land, neglect of my calling, or the deserved scandal of any good man. And R.
D. too, (if he had so much grace or wit) may tax himself of malapert
sawsinesse to call in question the privileges and wills of Noblemen, the
dispensations of the Laws, and the consciences of others, by such uncharitable
and scandalous censures. But he and his like must be suffered to prescribe
laws for others, and not so much as keep good manners themselves.

And although I am no mercenary man, nor make profession to teach any one in
these arts for gain and recompense, but as I serve at the Altar, so I live
only of the Altar: yet in those interims that I am at London in my Lords
service, I have been still much freque^ted both by Natives and Strangers, for
my resolution and instruction in many difficult points of Art; and have most
freely and lovingly imparted my self and my skill, such as I had, to their
contentments, and much honorable acknowledgement of their obligation to my
Lord for bringing me to London, has been testified by many. Of which my
liberallity and unwearyed readiness to do good to all, scarce any one can
give more ample testimony then R D. himself can: would he be but pleased to
allay the flame of this his hot and eager contention, blown up only with the
full bellows of intended glory and gain; and to speak the truth. Yea neither
is he so unkind: but some furtherance from me in trivial matters he does
and shall acknowledge freely. This were an honest profession if it were with
gratitude, and for love of the truth, and not to assert a greater untruth: See
his cunning: thus he argues: I had not in the Horizontall Instrument the least
touch of furtherance from him or any man breathing, either by transcript or
verbal direction: for if I had, it may be presumed, I should as ingenuously
have confessed it, as I do freely acknowledge his furtherance in some other
things. A fine piece of Sophistry that Aristotle never taught; by confessing a
truth to aver^e a lie. And mark how caut^lous and subterfugious (though he
jest at the words) his acknowledgement is: other trivial matters. What do you
here acknowledge, when you reserve power to deny every particular thing? Well,
we will take what you please to bestow. they were trivial matters. Such a
learned Author as you are, to be furthered in trivial matters? If you need
such furtherance in trivial, we shall suspect you in greater. Because you
scorn to mention such trivial things, I will help you out with them: they
were the first elements of Astronomy concerning the second motions of the
fixed stars, and of the Sun and Moon: they were the first elements of
Conics, to delineate those sections: they were the first elements of Optics,
Catoptrics, and Dioptrics: of all which you knew nothing at all. And diverse
things also which you profess, whereof you knew very little. I recite not
these things for exprobration: but that you may a little remember your self.

I have, I hope, even now cleared my calling, and claim that I may make to
these arts of Mathematics, so far forth as I use them I may therefore with
better manners ask you, how you obtained that calling and profession: for you
challenge both names to your self. What University, what degree, what court of
faculties, what other lawful way, conferred it upon you? I believe you can
answer me never a word: but will be horribly to seek in your plea. Well, I
will stand your friend once more, and help you out, and derive you a fair
title to the inheritance of a vulgar Teacher. When you had learned to read,
you went to the Writing school: and can in deed if you list write a fair
hand. Then you learned over your accidence: Afterward, I heard you say, you
went into France (it may be to the Isle Iernsey) where your name got the French
garb: but little or nothing of the tongue brought you home with you. Next you
took the degree of a Justices Clearke, or a Doctors of Physic, or both: to
make Warrants or Mittimus, or it may be Recipe's, provided they were not in
Latin, or in French. From thence you were advanced to keep a Writing school
in Drury lane: and so had opportunity to hear the Lectures at Gresham
College: and to have the benefit of conference with learned men. When you now
thought you could cant in the Instrumentary idiome, you requested John Thomson
the maker of Mathematic Instruments in Hosier lane, to help you to some
Scholars. And is not this a fair pretense to the Mathematics: which you doubt
not to call Our noble profession, and our profession of so noble a Science?

But lest I may seem to make good that crime of Detraction wherewith he does
charge me, by detracting from him both French and Latin, contrary to the
fashion of his name, and the many shreds and thrummes of Latin he does so
artificially weave into the web of his Pamphlet, I will without any slander
tell you a true story. Between four and five years ago, a young Dutch
Gentleman whose name was Dunheft coming into this Land, so journed in a
friends house of mine in London: and because the Gentleman addicted himself to
the wars, he was desirous to have the help of some learned Teacher of the
Mathematics. My friend thinking Richard Delamain to be such an one, sent for
him; to whom the Gentleman spoke (I cannot say signified) his desire in Latin:
but our learned Professor stared him in the face as if he wondered, but answered
him not: which the Gentleman perceiving spoke in French: but that was more
strange: the Gentleman therefore making use of such little English as he had
gotten, asked him, cannot you speak Latin? No. Can you not speak French? No.
How shall I then that understand not English learn of you? And so our grand
Master went away as wise as he came without his Scholar. which great
misfortune of that poor young man to lose such learned fundamental
Mathematical Doctrine may be a fair warning for all Gentlemen strangers to
get them an English tongue in their heads, and that quickly: or else they are
not like to have their sight helped by this our great oculist and unvayler of
the subject Richard Delamain. But here by the way some malevolous Detractor may
spightfully collect, that if our Professors Latin, and French, and Greek be
but mere contrefaict, which yet he does so ventilate for his glory: his
Mathematics may well be suspected to be of the same stuff.

God knows how unwillingly and with how grieved a mind I write these things,
or so much as put pen to paper against him: But most indignous and insufferable
are the abuses offered by him to me, his scandalls, calumniations, bravings,
and outfacings, and all mixed with more then Thrasonicall arrogance, throughout
his whole Pamphlet: which that he may be sure to scatter every where, he
sends up and down to his acquaintance by half dosens: and therewith all a
letter, wherein he both requesteth to have them dispersed, and names to whom:
and also bitterly inveigheth against me, and threatens me. some of which
letters have bin showed to me: and it may be I shall prevail to have them
produced. Besides in his daily talk to every man he basely traduceth me, and
gloryeth in reading unto them his Pamphlet, and his letter which he sent me
into the Country, marveilously pleasing himself at the sport he makes with
his scoffs and jests, acting them with his hands and the gesture of his body,
and saying here I come over him finely, here I give him a lash, here I scourge
him, with other such like contemptuous speeches. And also sends to me
sometimes threatening, sometimes scornful messages: challenging, and even
daring me to make him an answer. What should I, what can I do in this case? If
I let him alone in all these his despightfull and in humane injuries; all men
may scorn me, and the very boys in the street point at me; and he (as
hitherto he has done) by my patience and meekness grow into a higher degree
of pride and insolency, and be more obfirmed. I speak unfeignedly, that in my
heart I pity him: and wish him not the least hurt: for he needs it not: but
this he needs, to repent, and be humbled, that he may know himself, and his
friends. I could have written much more, and more sharply: but less then I
have done, and with greater mildness (considering the haynousnesse of his
injuries, not only in print reviling and disgracing me publicly, but also by
secret slanders and malicious clamourings laboring utterly to discredit and
undo me) I could not write.

The Instruments I do not value or weigh one single penny. If I had been
ambitious of praise, or had thought them (or better then they) worthy, at which
to have taken my rise, out of my secure and quiet obscurity, to mount up into
glory, and the knowledge of men: I could have done it many years before this
pretender knew any thing at all in these faculties. And when at William
Forsters request I was contented to give way that he might publish them, I had
not the least thought to be seen or acknowleded by them: but only to gratify
and do some good to Elias Allen, whom he very spitefully, yet more foolishly
(contrary to the general repute had of him in this and other lands) terms an
unexpert Workman. Now judge, I beseech you, had it not been extreme
simpleness in me, to stand by, and hold the candle; while a vaineglorious
braggard, who had by mine, and Elias Allens means gotten the overture of those
Instruments, should so perk up himself in stolen feathers, and audaciously out
face me in mine own: and make Elias Allen his farmer for my free gift, not to
work, but at his devotion, and for his profit? Might not I then justly have
been laughed at, and styled the Bawd and Pandar of the vainglory, and
shameful lucre of Delamain?

But he pleads hard for them, you will say: and I have not yet answered his
allegations. Neither indeed will I at all: there is in them no show of
argument; but only presumptions, braggings, bravings, outfacings, beggings of
credit, scoffings at me, and reproachings. Will any Reader but an affectionate
one (and affectionate he had need to be and partial) be persuaded with such
pitiful stuff? Honored, and most worthy Gentlemen, I will lay down those
two Instruments, the Horizontall, and the circles of proportion at your feet:
and only in the plain word of an honest Christian man, without any one
braving lie, open to you the very truth of both, which I doubt not but you will
acknowledge together with me: and when I have spoken, if you shall be pleased
to adjudge, and bestow them upon him; let him take them with all my heart, and
make his best of them.

Of the Horizontall Instrument.
LOng ago, when I was a young student of the Mathematical Sciences, I tried
many ways and devices to fit my self with some good Dial or Instrument
portable for my pocket, to find the hour, and try other conclusions by. and
accordingly framed for that my purpose both Quadrants, and Rings, and
Cylinders, and many other composures. Yet not to my full content and
satisfaction: for either they performed but little, or else were patched up with
a diversity of lines by an unnatural and forced contexture. At last I
considering that all manner of questions concerning the first motions were
performed most properly by the Globe it self rectifyed to the present
elevation, by the help of a moveable Azumith: I projected the Globe upon the
plain of the Horizon, and applied to it at the center, which was therein the
Zenith, an Index with projected degrees, for the moveable Azumith. in which
projection I first found what I had before with much study and pains in vain
sought for. And because I seldomely came to London, where I might have the
help of large Compasses, and other Instruments, for drawing the arches of very
big circles: I was forced to betake my self to such shift, as Art would afford
me: and invented many Theoremes, problemes, and practices (such as no man
before, that ever I could find, had delivered) for the finding out of the
intersections, and all and every points of all those circles, by which I might
draw the same, and divide them being drawn. Which rules I have yet in my paper
book, carrying their antiquity in their very show: and are acknowledged by
this challenger to have been seen by him. And though I invented them being
young, yet they will pass the skill of his gloriosity, but even fitly to apply
them to use, much more to demonstrate them.

About thirty years since I presented one of them drawn with min^ own hand
to the truly reverend Prelate Doctor Bylson Bishop of Winchester, by whom I
was made presbyter.

About five and twenty years ago I bestowed one upon a noble Lady, the wife
of a worthy and learned Knight, then abiding near the place where I live, but
since dwelling in Worcestershire; which Lady with ingeniousnesse and solertie
more then foeminine took delight in the speculation and use of the Globe. And
for her I writ many notes upon my Instrument, the very same almost word for
word, which many years after I sent in a letter to Elias Allen; and are they
which Delamain acknowledges to have seen, but slighteth. I remember I did
upon that Instrument trick out in colors and metal, the coat arms of both
those families joined in pale, the draught of which arms I yet have together
with those rules. And I doubt not but that noble Lady does as yet keep that
little Instrument; and will be pleased for the vindication of my credit to
produce the same.

In the Spring 1618 I being at London went to see my honored friend Master
Henry Briggs at Gresham College: who then brought me acquainted with Master
Gunter lately chosen Astronomy reader there, and was at that time in Doctor
Brooks his chamber. With whom falling into speech about his quadrant, I showed
him my Horizontall Instrument: He viewed it very heedfully: and questioned
about the projecture and use thereof, often saying these words, it is a very
good one. And not long after he delivered to Master Briggs to be sent to me
mine own Instrument printed off from one cut in brass: which afterward I
understood he presented to the right Honorable the Earl of Bridgewater, and
in his book of the Sector printed six years after, among other projections
sets down this: herein ingenuous that he did not challenge it to himself
(as our challenger does) but not ingenuously enough acknowledging from whom he
had it. But such is the providence of God, I kept that very letter of Master
Briggs wherein he sent me that print from Master Gunter, dated from Gresham
College 2 Iun. 1618: and the postscript 4 June: and which came to my hands
June 10. In which letter are these words Master Gunter does here send you the
print of a Horizontall Dial of his drawing after your Instrument. This very
letter has been left by me in the hands of Elias Allen above these two years
to be seen of any one that will require it. Yea and our challenger himself in
his Epistle to the Reader before his book of the Horizontall quadrant does
acknowledge the sight of this letter, and sets down the very words. Which
makes me wonder at the stupidity of his audaciousnesse, so without all shame
and sense contradicting himself. Unless he think to have this evasion, that
I devised the projection, but knew not the use of it when I had done. I
preethee R. D. why did I show it to Master Gunter then? was it only for the
pictures sake? And what did he like it for? because it was so fairly lineated?
Or was it not for the excellent and copious use it has above any other
Instrument of that nature? But hear his plea, or rather his play and juggling
with God and man, and his own conscience: The extendure of Gods hand in his
donations is manifold, and where his spirit pleases to breath there is a door
opened: they possess the world with a contrary opinion, thereby wronging God
in his dispensation, and man in his reputation. Gentlemen, does not your hair
stand an end with horror at such profane hypocrisy? for shame repent. but why
do I call for shame where is none?

About two years after I had showed that my Instrument to Master Gunter, I
bestowed the very same individual one upon a young Gentleman, now a Baron, my
very honorable and most entire friend, a man full of virtue, full of learning,
full of all goodness, and true nobility, whose only defect and fault is an
unquenchable thirst after knowledge and good literature; who has yet the very
same in his custody: and is at this present in London: whose honorable word
and testimony will confirm that he him self so many years ago knew the uses
of that Instrument: and yet our chalenger never unvayled it to him: nor dares
prescribe for so long time.

In Michaelmas Term 1627 I came to London, and Elias Allen having been sworn
his Majesty's servant, had a purpose to present his Majesty with some
New-yeares gift: and requested me to devise some pretty Instrument for him. I
answered, that I have heard his Majesty delighted much in the great concave
Dyall at White Hall: and what fitter Instrument could he have then my
Horizontall, which was the very same represented in flat? and that I would upon
the backeside set the theorics of the Sun and Moon. And so by help of both
sides Eclipses might be calculated with great facility. He liked it well. The
Horizontall side was begun by my direction. I was not long at home, but
Master Allen being at a stand in his work, sent to me for help. I writ him a
large letter two sheets of paper long: wherein I taught him the uses of the
Instrument especially the Horizontall: and afteward the fabric or delineation
of it: and how to find the semidiameters and centers of the several circles
both great and lesser, and the way to divide them. Which letter Master Allen
yet keeps: and is the same I spoke of before: and which Delamain confesses
he saw.

Observe here I pray you, the subject even by his own confession was unvayled
before he meddled with it. And I would to God Master Allen had in good time
finished up that Instrument: I wish it for the challengers sake: it might have
saved him from a great deal of sin and shame. But hereby we may discover his
worthy intentions, whereof he braggeth so much: He seeing Master Allen to
neglect it, and my self not to make any great account of it, took it up as a
wayft or stray: and had a purpose long ago to have famoused himself thereby:
first calling it the Grammelogia: And then had he been pitifully to seek of a
new name for the Circles of Proportion, an Instrument not yet in retum natura
with him: for now his Greek Nomenclator, and oracle the Schoolmasters of Saint
Clements was defected by death. Yet the name Grammelogia would serve as well
for the other Instrument, as soon as he had heard of it, although by a
spightfull accident he (being not yet ascended to the height of a profligated
shamelessness) was hindered in the production of that his first plagiarious
birth.

For some good tract of time after this, when I was now in my Lords service,
and Delamain frequented my chamber: One day after he was gone down: another
man came up and told me, that Delamain was in Master Allens shop showing unto
diverse a little Instrument in brass of a triangular or rather harpe-like
form, with which he could perform all the questions of the Globe for any part
of the world, and make Dialls, and describe Countries, and carry Mines under
the earth as far as between Temple bar and Westminster, and such like
wonders, which I knew impossible for and such Instrument to perform. I said
surely he mistook: for bu^ now he went hence: and had neither then, nor at any
other time, ever spoken of any such matter: which I was sure he would have
done, had he any such thing in his mind: But he still affirming it I had a
great desire my self to be a witness of that wonder. I came to Elias Allens
shop; but he was gone. I told Elias Allen what I had heard: and said I would
go to his house, and see it. I came to his house pretending some other
occasion. He showed me a great quadrant of Gemma Frisius he had begun: and
after that a quarter of the Analemma: which I viewing told him that the
Meridians were falsely drawn. Indeed said he I cannot make them answer to any
Center. Whereat I smiling said, it is no marvel, for they are not arches of
Circles: and showed him the reason why they could not be. What are they then
said he? They are Ellipses said I. Ellipses said he, what is that? I told him:
and discoursed of the kinds of Conic sections, the first news that ever he had
heard of any such thing. Well, at last I asked him for the strange Instrument
he had showed: and would not be answered but he must needs show it me: which
with much tergiversation he did. Tush said I, this is nothing but half my
Horizontall which he also acknowledging: I asked who drew it? my self said he.
Is it possible said I that you that cannot make the Analemma, should draw this
projection? Do you know the use of it? Yes said he: I have written some notes
of the uses of it: and showed me some papers: which I looking upon saw the very
notes I had declared in my letter to Master Allen: but here and there the words
disguised after his own apprehension. I went homeward: and seeing Master Allen
in his shop, said to him, I pray answer me a question, but answer me truly* he
perceiving what I meant to ask, prevented me with these words, indeed I did:
he had the letter of me a whole fortnight, almost as soon as you sent it: and
I believe he writ it out: for the summer following, unknown to me, he got my
servant to make it for him: for which I was angry. The rest of this business
let Master Allen himself tell you.

Well: this might have been all spared, you will say: the sight of that letter
and of those uses is confessed: but they were ordinary, mean, and trivial:
and he slighted them. That my very letter is yet extant at Master Allens making
appearance to answer to the disgraceful taxations of Richard Delamain. In
which letter dated December 3. 1627. you shall find these uses following.

1 To find the declination of the Sun every day. 2 To find the course of the
Sun; or the parallel which the Sun runs, or describes every day. 3 To find
the rising of the Sun, and his setting; and the diurnall arch or length of
the day, or of the night. 4 To find the distance of the Suns rising and
setting from the East and West points, Northward in summer or Southward in
winter, called the Amplitude Ortive. 5 To find the true place of the Sun on
the Instrument at any time of the day. 6 To find the hour of the day. 7 To
find the Azumith or vertical circle in which the Sun is: or the Horizontall
distance of the Sun from the Meridian. 8 Again the Azumith of the Sun being
given, to find the altitude of the Sun, and the hour. 9 To find at what
hour the Sun comes to be full East or West every day in summer 10 To find
the height of the Sun at high noone every day, and likewise at every hour.
Whereby is made Master Gunters Quadrant, and all other Quadrants of that sort,
described by Gemma Frisius, Munster, Clavius, and others: also all manner of
Rings; Cylinders, and innumerable other Topicall Instruments, for the finding
out of the hour, and other like conclusions. And likewise the reason of
finding out the hour of the day by a man's shadow: or by the shadow of any
gnomon set up perpendicular to the Horizon, or else parallel to it. 11 To find
out the Meridian line, and the points of the Compass without a needle: yea
more exactly then with a needle. 12 To find the declination of any wall. 13 To
find at what hour the Sun comes unto any wall, or window every ^^y in the
year: as also when it leaves it. 14 To find h^w many, and what hour lines
are to be drawn in every plain Diali. 15 To find how low the Sun is under
the Horizon at any hour of the night: and in what point of the Instrument the
true place of the Sun then is. 16 To find in which of the twelve houses the
Sun is at any time of the d^y or night. 17 To find the length of the
crepusculum or twy-light every day. 18 To find out the hour of the night. 19
To find the sign and degree in which the Sun is every day. 20 To find the
declination of the Sun every day.
But I could beside these add diverse other operations to be performed by the
Instrument as now it is: and many others with some additions to the Instrument:
as namely the degree of the Aequinoctiall in the Meridian at any time: and the
degree of the Aequinoctiall in the Horizon East and West: and the degree of the
Zodiac in the Meridian called Cor coeli: and the ascendent degree thereof
called the Horoscope: and concerning the twelve houses of the heavens for the
erecting of a figure: and concerning the ninetyeth degree of the Ecliptic above
the Horizon, and the altitude of it. and I know not what else, or rather almost
any thing else.

These are the ordinary, mean, and trivial uses, which I delivered, and are
to be seen in my letter. And has Delamain unvayled any I do not say more
(for he runs division) but other uses then I have done? Yes marry has he.
for in his book of his Horizontall quadrant, from page: 44 to 51, you shall
find these uses.

Eighth-ly, to find the inequallity of time in aequall months, or aequall
number of days. Ninth-ly, to find the degree of the Equator in the Horizon by
supposing the degree of the Ecliptic in the Horizon. Tenth-ly, to find the
degree of the Ecliptic in the Horizon by supposing the degree of the Equator
in the Horizon. Eleventh-ly. But if the degree of the Ecliptic in the Horizon
were required by knowing the degree of the Ecliptic in the Meridian. Twelf-ly,
to find the Horoscope, or the degree ascendent, or desc^^^ent and the
Nonagesime degree at any hour. Thirteenth-ly, to find what angle the Ecliptic
makes with the Horizon, or the altitude of the Nonagesime degree of the
Ecliptic above the Horizon: and what Azumith it is in at any hour.
O Sir (may Richard Delamain say) now I have overtopped you: in these things
you cannot deny, but that I have unvayled the subject to help your fight. Not
so neither: for every work is ascribed to him that first found it out. Nor is
the Author therefore to be accounted ignorant, or to want fight, though some
other after him shall make some addition or access thereto: seeing it is an
easy matter to add to an invention once discovered. But yet let us see what
learned and rare uses those are, which you have unvayled.

The eighth is utterly alien from this Instrument: and requires necessarily
the knowledge of the true, and proper motion of the Sun, which this
Instrument gives not at all: and of the exact right ascension, which this
Instrument gives but at large: and so is this use of no use, but a vain
flourish.

The ninth is nothing else but to find out the Suns oblique ^^cention.

The tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth (which indeed were excellent
uses, if he could show them) are utterly false. In all which you have unvayled
nothing but your own want of skill, and most gross ignorance of the very
ground of this projection. And now have you not very fairly h^^^en my sight,
and the sight of others, to see your rashness and lack of art? which all your
facing (though your face, if it be possible, were harder then it is) will never
be able to make good.

Yet for all this (and now I challenge you) let us see the performance of these
questions upon the Horizontall Instrument, with what reasonable addition you
can, which shall not quite alter the nature of it: and I will freely
acknowledge you to be a man of art: and not at all impute unto you any plagium,
or Mounte-banke tricks.

But seeing you have already ^nvayled your want of wit, I will take a little
pains for you to unvayle your want of honesty; to help the fight of these
Gentlemen our judges, to see what trust they may repose in such an
Instrument-monger and player of leger-de-la-main, as you are. While he was
printing his tractate of the Horizontall quadrant, although he could not but
know that it was injurious to me in respect of my free gift to Master Allen,
and of William Forster, whose translation of my rules was then about to come
forth: yet such was my good nature, and his shamelessenesse, that every day, as
any sheet was printed, he s^^t, or brought the same to me at my chamber in
Arundell horse to peruse. which I lovingly and ingenuously did, and gave him my
judgment of it. When we were come to the said page: 44, to 51, I gently showed
him the falsity of those propositions. And he said, o^ no^ they be wrought
then? No, replied I, not by the Instrument as now it is, without some addition.
I can work them; but you cannot he asked, why cannot I as well? I answered,
because you are ignorant of the ground of this Instrument and projection. What
shall I do then? said he. you must, said I, be content to lose that ^^eet,
and new print it: After a little pawse, he was not ashamed to resolve with
these very words, though your sight be so sharp, that you can note these
faults, yet many hundreds that shall see the book will never be able to spy
them. and withal told me that he had penned that book in a fortnight with
great have: I said I did easily believe as much: for Canis festinans caecos
parit catulos. This was at that time our communication, and his gallant
resolution. And if this be not juggling, never did any Hocus-pocus jugle. That
unless a man were given over to shame and shamelessness: he would never so
shamefully abuse his learners, and so shamelessely hazard his (I cannot say
good) name, and reputation. Yet sticks he not most vainly (that I may say no
worse) to conclude his said book with this braving flourish, But if any man
desire to say more upon this Horizontall quadrant, then I have done, I have
made way for him, and unvayled the subject to help his sight.

But he says the projection was none of mine: for Munster has it and
Blagrave, and some others, this latter writ some years since I began to use
this Instrument: and that in Munster is no projection, but a resemblance of a
concave D^^ll: which likeness can no more argue this Instrument, then
Delamains black clothes can prove him to be a scholar. And it were a wonder,
that seeing the writers of these Arts do imagine their Diagrammes upon the
plains of several Circles, as occasion requires: if none should be found
that have made their delineations upon the plain of the Horizon. But of such
as ever have used the same for an Instrument, before me, he neither can, nor
has showed any.

Of the Circles of proportion.
FOr these I must freely confess, I have not so good a claim against all men,
as for my Horizontall Instrument: though against Richard Delamain I have. The
honor of the invention, next to the Lord of Merchiston, and our Master Briggs,
belongs (if I have not been wrongly informed) to Master Gunter, who exposed
their numbers upon a straight line. which being once done, was there any such
masterie to bring the same line about into a circle? And what does this new
Instrument (call it the Circles of proportion, or call it the Ring, or what
other name you list) ought else, but only bow and inflect Master Gunters line
or Ruler.

The manner how I fell upon it, was thus. I have in my study and practice of
the Mathematics been not a little conversant in calculation. And that I might
both facilitate the labor, and try the work: I invented many solerties and
compendiations in logistica, for the one: and framed diverse kinds of
Instruments and mechanical practices, for the other: that when I should find
the performance in both ways not to disagree, I might be assured of my just
diligence in numerary computation. Among other Instruments I much liked the
same line or Ruler: only this defect I found that it required many times too
great a pair of Compasses, which would be hard to open, apt to slip, and
troublesome for use. I therefore first devised ^o have another Ruler with the
former: and so by setting and applying one to the other, I did not only take
away the use of Compasses, but also made the work much more easy and expedite:
when I should not at all need the motion of my hand, but only the glancing of
my sight: and with one position of the Rulers, and view of mine eye, see not
one only, but the manifold proportions incident unto the question intended.
But yet this facility also wanted not some difficulty, especially in the line
of tangents, when one arch was in the former mediety of the quadrant, and the
other in the latter: for in this case it was needful that either one Ruler
must be as long again as the other; or else that I must use an inversion of
the Ruler, and regression. By this consideration I first of all saw that if
those lines upon both Rulers were inflected into two circles, that of the
tangents being in both doubled, and that those two Circles should move one upon
another; they with a small thread in the center to direct the sight, would be
sufficient with incredible and wonderful facility to work all questions of
Trigonometry both rightlined and Sphaericall. And according to this my
speculation, above twelve years ago, I with mine own hand made me two such
Circles, which I have used ever since, as my occasions required.

In the long vacation 1630 I showed both the Rulers, and the Circle to William
Forster (somewhat more praematurely then for the desire I had to lead him on
in the right way of Art, I intended) at my Parsonage house, as in his Epistle
before his Translation he does himself testify. To whom, exhorting me to
publish them, I said I would not appear to the world in such toys: but if he
would take the pains to translate some rules I had written into English, we
would bestow upon Elias Allen (if he shall think they may be beneficial to
him) both those Circles of proportion, and also another Instrument, consisting
of two half circles most plainly and easily giving the Prosthaphaereses of
the Plannets according to the Theory of Copernicus (which I have had fairly
drawn with mine own hand above these twenty years) which might be set upon
the other side of the plate: and would together make up the most complete
Instrument for all Astronomy, that ever yet to my knowledge came forth. And of
this entire Instrument at my coming up to London in Michaelmas Term
following, to attend my service, I did accordingly make a most free donation to
Elias Allen by the engagement of my promise. And had also performed it long
ago (I doubt not but to your good contentment) had not this Trifler so
unseasonably blurted out his scrimble-scramble of Grammelogia, like an unlicked
Bear-whelp. Wherein under ambiguous words, and large unlimited intentions, and
the general names of Circles, Rings, and Grammelogia or declaration of lines,
he endeavors very honestly to hook in within his privilege, and to fasten
upon as his own, whatsoever invention any other Artist shall in a round or
circular form hereafter produce.

Will you be pleased to have an instance of this? Shortly after my gift to
Elias Allen, I chanced to meet with Richard Delamain in the street (it was at
Allhontide) and as we walked together I told him what an Instrument I had given
to Master Allen, both of the Logarithmes projected into circles, which being
less then one foot diameter would perform as much as one of Master Gunters
Rulers of six feet long: and also of the Prostaphaereses of the Plannets and
second motions. Such an invention have I said he: for now his intentions (that
is his ambition) began to work: but how wisely you shall see. He not
considering the proportion of the circumference to the Diameter, which is more
then triple, dreamed that I understood a Circle of six feet Diameter, by it to
work the Prosthaphaereses: as you may see in the very end of his tractate of
Grammelogia. which so monstrous conceit never entered into my mind. but this
may serve as a fair intention to lay claim to my Prosthaphaereticall
Instrument, if ever it shall come forth: whereof he knows no more then the
cap upon his head.

But he says, Then after my coming home I sent him a sight of my projection
drawn in past-board. See how notoriously he jugleth without an Instrument.
Then after: how long after? a sight of my projection: of how much? More then
seven weeks after on December 23, he sent to me the line of numbers only set
upon a circle: which I marvel he should be so simple to boast of, seeing
Ioyners, and Carpenters, and other Mechanics about this town, and elsewhere,
yea and schoole-boyes, in imitating Master Gunters Ruler incurvated only into a
circle, might have, and some have drawn, to more good purpose then ever yet
Delamain did. and so much only he presented to his Majesty: but as for Sine or
tangent of his, there was not the least show of any. Neither could he give to
Master Allen any direction for the composure of the circles of his Ring, or for
the dividing of them: as upon his oath Master Allen will testify how he misled
him, and made him labor in vain above three weeks together, until Master
Allen himself found out his ignorance and mistaking, which is more clear then
is possible with any impudence to be outfaced. Yea and the conclusion of his
tractate of Grammelogia page: 22 does plainly enough intimate as much: saying,
If there be composed three rings, etc. So if you move the sine of 90 degrees
unto the Tropicall point, etc. Again in the Circle of the tangents if you
bring, etc. Where you shall find his deep intentions set down in words then
which Sphynx it self never had more implexed: and teaches nothing, but
mocketh his Reader, as I have sometimes seen a child crying for a wild bird
deluded, with bidding him get the bird, and lay salt upon the tail, and so he
should catch it.

It will not be impertinent, but peradventure much to the purpose, that you may
rightly know our Challenger, to let you understand how he has dealt with the
Ioyner Thomas Brown of whom I spoke before. Richard Delamain hearing that
Brown with his Serpentine had another line by which he could work to minutes
in the 90 degree of fines: used a device to get Brown to come and bring his
instrument to some place where he himself should also be: there he insinuates
with Brown pitifully complaining of the wrong Master Oughtred had done him,
and to make the matter good reads to him in his Pamphlet, glorying much how
he had lashed me therein: and then gave the book to Brown: who in
thankfulness could not but gratify Delamain with his Lines also: and teach him
the use of them, but especially of the great Line: with this caution on both
sides, that one should not meddle with the others invention. Two days after
Delamain sent a Porter to Brown for the book he had given him, because he had
found some things to be altered therein, and that he would for it give him a
better and more perfect book. Brown refusing to send it by the Porter, the next
morning Delamain vouchsafed himself to come to his house near Algate: and
asked for the book, (Brown supposing he would then have corrected it) but as
soon as he had got it in his hands he rent out all the middle part with the
two great Schemes and put them up in his pocket and went his way, leaving only
what he blaterated against me: and did not only thus to Brown, but labors
to recall all the books he had given forth, (which were many) before the sight
of Brownes Lines. And shortly after this he got a new Printer (who was ignorant
of his former Schemes) to print him new: giving him an especial charge of the
outermost line newly graven in the Plate, which indeed is Brownes Verg line:
and then altering his book and craking of wonders in Prosthaphaereses, he
disperseth them by foures and sixes. But see how it pleased God (who
confounds the proud in their own imaginations) to bring to light Brownes
right and Delamains falsity. Brown himself was present when the Plate was
brought to the Printer, and heard the charge given concerning the new line: and
since by Brownes friends have been gotten diverse of Delamaines former books
and some Schemes of his Instruments, in none of all which that great line of
Brown is to be found: And yet such is Delamaines and a city (not knowing what
can be shown) that he stands to it to Browns face, that the said great line was
in the schemes in his former books. Wherefore we will (without stealing) borrow
our Authors own words, The window has bin as yet close, and darkness
possesses the place, I now withdraw the curtain that the sunshining light may
appear to expel those mists that have been scattered, and by a true and
sincere medium remove that which by Rich: Delamain has been falsely suggested.

Well then, to come at last to a conclusion concerning the Instrument called
the Circles of Proportion, as it is set forth, not having, as I have said, the
one half of my intentions upon it; nor with a second moveable circle and a
thread; but with an opening Index at the center (if so be that be cause enough
to make it to be not the same, but another Instrument) for my part I disclaim
it: it may go seek another Master: which for ought I know, will prove to be
Elias Allen himself: for at his request only I altered a little my rules from
the use of the moveable circle and the thread, to the two arms of an Index.

And now most noble Gentlemen my Readers and Judges, I humbly thank you for
the great patience you have showed in hearing me also speak for my self. I
do not request of you any partial respect or favor toward me at all: but
only what your wisdoms shall see the simple honesty of my cause does deserve.
And what sentence soever you shall be pleased to give herein; I will most
submissively, without any farther appeal, rest in it. Only I shall beseech
you to look back and consider whether R. D. has any the least color of show
for his so vile and base behavior toward me, in scoffing, slandering,
calumniating, backbiting, and exclaiming against me: contrary to all rules of
charity and Christianity, yea even of humanity and good manners. What wrong can
he charge me, or indeed does he charge me with, for which he may have a seeming
ground of his so great malice? Was it because so many years before I ever
heard of his name, I prevented him in the invention of those Instruments? That
was the gift of God, and his prospering my painful study. Was it because I
have not made them more public all this while? That was my modesty. Was it
because I at last produced them to light? Neither was this my doing, but
permission only. Was it for not giving way to him, when he was pleased to lay
hold upon both, to mount up with the wings of vainglory by? I withstood him
not, nor once opened my mouth against him: but rather furthered him. And if
understanding men, knowing his in abilities, and seeing the folly and ignorance
he shows in his Pamphlets, did even cry him down, and almost with one
consent and voice acknowledge the true Author: I sought it not. Was it for not
hindering William Forster to publish the translation, which with a great deal
of labor he had brought to an end: or not disavowing it when it was printed?
I neither had such power over him: nor any reason at all to frustrate his long
taken pains, for the ambition of another. Was it for making comparisons with
him? I made none. Was it for my pains taken with him in teaching and
instructing so ill natured a man? My gentleness and good will deserved better
respect. Or was it for my so long and patient bearing his injurious reproaches,
and unmannerly bravings of me? It was my meekness, humility, and good nature.
What other cause he could have against me, in the very strictest examination of
my conscience, I can find none. But he had a mind to climb, and thought my
neck might make a fit step for him to get up by. Indeed such is the furious
appetite of some wicked men, after their ambition and profit, that not the
sacredest ties of Christianity, friendship, or benefits received can withold
them: but they will not stick even to cut the throats of their best deserving
friends, so that they may attain to their intended purposes thereby I pray God
such be not his mind. for I hear he affecterh and is ambitious of public
action and employment: and something he thinks he must do, that he may seem
somebody, and make himself famous.

Concerning that he has in the behalf of vulgar Teachers, and others.
THere is yet a more fearful Adversary remaining, at the very thought of whom
I am stricken with dread and trembling: which is your indignation and
displeasure most honored and noble Gentlemen, and you most learned and expert
Professors of the Mathematical Sciences: all whom this Challenger, as if his
former injuries (most undeserved on my part) were too little, in the highest
strain of his malice labors to exasperate and incense against me: that I
with words downright and pernicious should both glaunce upon many noble
Personages with too gross, if not too base an attribute, by ^earming them
doers of tricks, and as it were to juggle; checking you grossly, and
abbridging you of your liberties: and also by vilification should style the
Teachers of Mathematics vulgar (common Teachers he would have them called)
ranking them with Iuglers, and teachers of tricks. Far be such unreverent
and unmannerly aspersions against you from me, ever to approach near my
thoughts: much more to proceed forth of my mouth.

And I beseech you observe with me by what degrees his malicious
ungratefulness does ascend to the height of calumniation: first he says, my
words, if they be truly scanned, rebound to the Nobility and Gentry: then
shortly after, that they are downright in their plainness. which two
accusations seem to imply a contradiction; if they needed scanning, and yet
did but rebound even now: how are they suddenly become downright in their
plainness? And lastly both openly in his Pamphlet, and in his railing
invectives against me in all company where he comes, yea and (such is his
impudence) to my face, that mouth which has very often implored my help, and
submissively acknowledged my courtesy, that very mouth, I say, has not been
ashamed most slanderously to accuse and charge me, That in express words I
should call many of the Nobility and Gentry doers of tricks and juglers: which
his bold and vile report, no doubt with many that know me not, nor the truth,
but have given credit to his audacious assersions, has bred me much envy and
discredit. Will it therefore please such as have been so ill persuaded, to
vouchsafe to accept of a true and brief information: As I did to Delamain and
to some others, so I did to William Forster: I freely gave him my help and
instruction in these faculties: only this was the difference, I had the very
first moulding (as I may say) of this latter: But Delamain was already
corrupted with doring upon Instruments, and quite lost from ever being made an
Artist: I suffered not William Forster for some time so much as speak of any
Instrument, except only the Globe it self; and to explicate, and work the
questions of the Sphaere, by the way of the Analemma: which also himself did
describe for the present occasion. And this my restraint from such pleasing
avocations, and holding him to the strictness of precept, brought forth this
fruit, that in short time, even by his own skill, he could not only use any
Instrument he should see, but also was able to delineate the like, and devise
others: yet for all this my severe hand I saw him obliquely to glaunce his eye
upon such Instrumentary practices: whereat I being jealous, lest I should lose
my labor, and he his end, which was Art: I brake out into that admonition
which in his Epistle Dedicatory to Sir Kenelme Digby he (I think in my very
formal words) sets down. That the true way of Art is not by Instruments,
but by demonstration: and that it is a preposterous course of vulgar Teachers,
to begin with Instruments, and not with the Sciences, and so in stead of
Artists, to make their Scholars only doers of tricks, and as it were juglers:
to the despite of Art, loss of precious time, and betraying of willing and
industrious wits, unto ignorance and idleness. That the use of Instruments is
indeed excellent, if a man be an Artist: but contemptible, being set and
opposed to Art. And lastly, that he meant to commend to me the skill of
Instruments, but first he would have me well instructed in the Sciences.

These words are to Delamain like a candle unto weak and rheumatic eyes, his
purblindnesse cannot endure the brightness of them, but makes him smart, and
prick, and vex, and cry out, away with this light it hurts mine eyes, put
it out: and merely out of the detestation of this light, and the disproportion
it has to his weakness, those tragical exclamations, wherewith his
unlettered and unmannerly Pamphlet is stuffed, have proceeded. Other Teachers
of these Arts, men of learning and skill, have (many of them) and do daily
acknowledge the truth, and seasonablenesse of this admonition, and are sorry
for the wrong done unto Art it self under color of me: Only one Richard
Delamain is found who forgetting truth, gratitude, good manners, and very
shame, does bewray his gald back by such impatient winching. Little did I ever
suspect when I spoke these words privately at home, they should be scanned with
so uncharitable and malicious a censure. Honored Readers consider I pray you
who it is that does you wrong, and offers you this contumely: if it be I who
not so much as having the least thought of any of you, privately tutored my
learner with a modest, gentle, and seasonable advertisement: or if it be not
Richard Delamain himself, that most insolently, to cloak his own
unskilfulnesse, and misleading you in Art, and juggling, does put upon your
ingenuities that base imputation, as if he had made some of you only Doers of
tricks upon Instruments, and as it were taught you to juggle. What his course
in teaching is I know not: but what his skill is I do perfectly know. And
concerning my honorable estimation of you most worthy Gentlemen, I do
unfeignedly glory in the behalf of this our native Country, that no Land
under the cope of heaven, is more happy with a gallant, and glorious flower of
Gentry, and which is more liberally enriched by nature with ingenuity, and all
excellent endowments both of wit, courage, and abilities of mind and body, and
has more propense inclinations to all good, then this our sweetest and most
indulgent mother of Great Britain brings forth: only if we can take care to
plant in our minds the good seeds of virtue, and knowledge: and not to neglect
them to be overgrown (as the best ground will) with the weeds of evil and
contraryous habits. whereunto on both sides no one thing conduces more then
the wise, or inconsiderate choice of Teachers, and Instructers. And then
consider I beseech you what slight account this our glorious Challenger makes
of your worthyest endowments; that having so long ordered your studies,
disposed of your times, and received your money, has even in his own
conscience done you so little good, that there being but the very name of loss
of time, juggling, and ignorance, occasionally mentioned, is himself first of
all ready most unmanerly for your ingenuity, yet more unadvisedly for his own
credit, to tax you therewith, and pin it upon you. And will you most
clearly see how he seeks not your good, but your intolerable expense, for
his ambition and vainglory, and no good at all of yours? His Ring forsooth
must be made of Silver and Gold: Brass belike is too base, or he fears the
wasting of it, lest there may not be enough left to furnish his face. And they
must be of six feet diameter, of which whether the monstrousness,
unprofitablenesse, or exceeding charge will be the greater, I cannot readily
tell. yet as if this were too little to exhaust your estate, he has a far more
hideous device then all this, that is a Cylinder of metal (Silver sure it must
be) three feet diameter, and of height sufficient to receive 100 or more
moveable rings, and as many fixed, having within it ingens, and movements, and
I know not what Automata (nor he neither) for the turning of those rings, which
by computation of skillful workmen can hardly be performed for three hundred
pounds: And when it is done, and you with a great deal of labor, can tell the
use of it, you are not any way in Art the wiser, or better by three single
pence: but in far shorter time, and with much less labor, you may be taught
with a book of twelve pence to work and perform far more, and more
exactly, then by that monstrous barrel Delamain himself can ever be able to
effect. And do you not now (most noble Gentlemen) cry shame upon such
teachers; shame upon such loss of time; shame upon such profusion of money;
shame upon such vile betraying of willing and industrious wits unto ignorance
and idleness; And many shames upon such dishonesty, to set out in print
against his own knowledge, so many false propositions, and precepts purposely
to abuse the ignorance of his Readers, and that they may esteem him for some
extraordinary and more then a vulgar Teacher.

Thus have I answered to the three parts of his plea: And I suppose that by
this time you wonder as well as my self, what just cause there should be of
all his clamorous and malevolous inveighings against me. But you must give him
leave to use his own nature and manners. I am not the first, that have been
in this petulant manner provoked by him. Who indeed has escaped him? The
stirring humor of some is, that if they think they know any thing, they love
to make a great noise, and raise a great dust, till all become weary of them.
Of this condition is our Challenger: whatsoever he has, he must have it with
such a breath, that all the world shall hear of it, and all that come in his
way shall suffer for it. England is too little, and his mothers tongue too
barren (and yet if his mothers tongue were like his, it were copious enough) to
yield him names, titles, inscriptions, and expressions. But France, and Greece,
and Lat^um must be raked and harrowed for him. to such a height of courage and
spirit selfe-admiration has wrought him. The Ass in Aesop having got on a
piece of the Lions skin begins to strut and ruffle among the Beasts. I am
not only contemned by him (for that mattereth not much) But that incomparable
Master Henry Briggs the mirror of our age for excellent skill in Geometry, and
therewith for exceeding meekness, was so vilifyed and slighted by this nifle
in a bag, a little before his death, that the good old man forgetting his
own mild nature, at his last departure from London, being on horseback for
Oxford, and taking his leave of a friend, spoke the last words, farewell, and
tell Delamain from me that he is an absurd fellow. and that we may not wrong
the dead, but give every man his due, we must suffer him to possess the
legacy of so worthy a friend. Yea and Master Gunter too (whom he would seem
to admire) escapes him not without a shrewd lash. for in the beginning of his
book of the Horizontall quadrant page: 3, he braveth him saying, this Master
Gunter delivers so OBSTRVSELY in his 66 page of the Sector, that if a man had
not more fundamental Mathematical doctrine then his book teaches, he should
never attain to it. It is well for him Master Gunter is not now to give him a
second legacy: and to tell him a liar had need of a good memory. for in that
part of his plea which is an answer upon his Quadrant toward the end, he
writes that Ioyners, and Carpenters, and schoole-boyes, and sundry Gentlemen
and others, having not had the least assistance from any, but the direction of
Master Gunters Book alone, as upon oath they have been examined, have drawn
the projection fully and completely. which two places being so quite contrary
are worth your comparing, that you may know Richard Delamain aright.

Which his usage of Mr. Briggs and Mr. Gunter excuses him the more that he is
so supercilious and strange to others, who are also teachers of those Arts, and
far more skillful then himself: diverse of whom I have heard complain and
stomach at Delamains standing so aloof, and keeping them off at such distance
from him, as not worthy of his noble profession: and vehemently suspect, that
besides his arrogance, there was also a diffidence, and fear, lest his
ignorance might chance to bewray it self, as does an Ass by his long ears.

I Must now borrow a word or twain with the Gentleman which writ the first
Verses in the beginning of this Pamphlet, and styles himself a friend to the
Inventer of the Logarithmes projected in circles. Sir I see you are not
disfavoured of the Muses and Apollo: your verse is good, and the conceit well
continued throughout: worthy of a better subject: or if you were pleased to
play and show your skill in so poor an argument, you might have spared me, who
never offended you, and whom peradventure you know not so much as by sight. Did
you ever hear me -- deny it was found out by you? Did I ever tell you -- it
was mine own? would I have professed and owned these and such slight toys, I
could have done it long before your Inventer had any ab^lity of invention in
this way. No I did nothing in publishing hereof: I only gave way and
permission. and it was not I that did addict it to my self: but his known
worthlessenesse that did abdicate it from him. Neither is your argument of any
force:

But if it were not thine, how durst thou say,
Thou would augment the same another day?
Why, what can he not say? What dares he not say, that may conduce to his
vainglory? And is it consequent, because he said if the line were de^upled
therefore he first invented it? If you are as good at the Mathematics, as you
are dexterous in making Meter; you cannot be ignorant that the breaking of the
Circles one into many is no new invention; but is performed in the Circles of
Proportion, as they were set out: wherein the Canon of Sines is broken into two
circles, and the Canon of Tangents into four. and I hope by the same reason I
could have broken them, or (if you will so call it) augmented or musriplyed
them, into as many circles as I had desired. But whereas you Poetically jest at
me,

It Is ten to one this will be challenged too, I think you will prove your self
to be a truer vates then you were aware of: though not by me (who have not
esteemed such minutiae worthy of me) but by Thomas Brown the Ioyner, whose
indeed it is, and not your supposed Inventers. Sir you will be pleased to
accept some reason in plain prose for your verse: and understand I do you a
favor to acknowledge you so far.

And thus most honorable and noble Gentlemen having (as I hope even in your
judgments also) vindicated my truth and ^onesty from such base
petti-larcionary, as to steal his labors, and pilfer the wares of so poor a
pack; and cleared my credit from the scurrilous and unmannerly calumniations
and standers, which he has so unjustly endeavored to fasten upon me: it will
be high time to ease and free your patience from the trouble of such idle
altercations. And I humbly beseech you, that if any where I seem to take his
injuries nearer to heart then in wisdom I should do from so contemptible an
adversary; not to impute it to passion: but courteously to consider the
unsufferablenesse of his most unworthy calumniations, and evil usage of me. It
may peradventure be expected that I should also read him a lecture of good
manners: But I will not take any more pains in tutoring so ungratious a
scholar. Only I wish him to study over his own instruction. Yet this good
advertisement I will receive from him, that I have work enough at home: and
that my calling inviteth me to spend my hours better, then any more to trouble
my self with answering him according to his folly.

Dixi. WILLIAM OVGHTRED.


