THE NINTH part of the Mirror of Knighthood, Being the fourth Book of the
third part thereof:

Wherein is declared, the high and noble acts of the sons and nephews of
the Noble Emperor Trebacius, and of the rest of the renoumed Princes and
Knights, and of the high cheualrie of the gallant Ladies: wherein also is
treated of the most cruel war that ever was in Greece, with the amorous
events, and the end thereof.

AT LONDON Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Royal Exchange 1601.

The fourth Book of the third part of the Mirror of Knighthood, wherein is
declared, the high and noble acts of the sons and nephews of the Noble
Emperor Trebacius, and of the rest of the renoumed Princes and Knights, and of
the high cheualrie of the gallant Ladies: wherein is treated of the most cruel
war that ever was in Greece, with the amourous events, and the end thereof.
The first Chapter. How the Princess Rosselia of Rome, being delivered from
the Enchantment, desired her father to be revenged on Don Heleno, Prince of
Dacia; and of that which followed thereof.
SO many were the harms received of the princes of the Greeks, (most Noble
Lord) that in all the Pagans countries there was no speech of any thing, but of
revenge, and that, the most cruel that might be: for those which were grieved,
were so great Monarchs, that each of them determined to invade Greece apart;
particularly, Bembo, who drue his pedigree from Jupiter, and felt himself most
touched, seeing the Greek lover to bear away the spoils, which were due to
his worth and valor.

Well had the Pagan some body else, who likewise was grieved for him. For
Proserpina below in her dark kingdom, through the malice which she bare
against the Greeks, entreated her beloved Pluto, for aid in the behalf of
Bembo, against the Grecia^s. The infernal prince was so subject to his wives
request, that he commanded Discord to be called, whom, with the greatest
company that possibly might be, he commanded presently to depart, and to leave
neither arms nor lance on end, which should not be bent against the Greeks:
for the Grecians bold attempts were not to be endured. Discord felt it self
some thing grieved, ever since the time of the venturous Octauius Augustus; for
her arm being unable to resist the valor of that young man, he peaceably
possessed the whole world; wherefore it was an easy matter to make her leave
that infernal habitation: she was well accompaned; for with her went
Ambition, and Ielousy, friend to the blind god, and there went Avarice and the
rest of the infernal Furies. Discord sallied, armed at all pieces, in russet
armor, with a sword in each hand, and upon her shoulders a bright shining
Mirror; a sign, that as she pardoned none, so would she go in safety from
her enemies, accounting all for such Covetousness marched with her spectacles,
which made all she saw seem greater, with a monstrous aspect. The first place
attempted, was in Morea, against the brave Epirabio, to the end yt in service
of his Liciana he should repair into Grecia, there now to recover that, which
before, by his late coming he had lost. They knew how to take so good order,
that although the Prince went with his confederates, all the kingdom was in an
uproar, to attend the service of their sovereign Lord. The king of Lituania
was already summoned, to the end that, with the greatest forces that he was
able to make, he should draw nere unto Niquea. Covetousness encountered this
man, and in such sort overcame him, that at the instant he began to order
his people, which were many and well armed.

The fair Lisiana would not stay from going into Greece; for not a little
succeeded for her there: Good friends had they ray3sed against Grecia, but
their chiefest trust remained in the brave Romans. Discord, Covetousness and
Suspicion took charge of the Con^uest: For the very soul of Resilia was
possessed, seeing her faith so ill rewarded, and that the Dacian had made a
scoff of her. There is no Uiper, which shows it self so cruel, as a fair
Lady does against him, whem she has once loved as her soul. Jealousy
crossed in the midst, until she was wholly overcome, forcing her to ask
cruel vengeance of her father, for that which the Dacian had committed. They
made herto add thereunto, which was, that the Emperor asking her, whether
there past any promise of Marriage? She (being blinded with passion) answered
her Father, Yea.

Wrath approached in so good a time, that a Basiliska returns not more
wrathful, then the Roman Emperor Constantius showed himself to be against
the Greeks: he presently commanded a Council to be assembled in this case:
there entered thereinto Arsiano, the brave Prince of Almany, whom Dishonor had
already overcome, bringing to his mind, the disgrace whereinto Don Heleno the
Prince of Dacia had brought him: and as his voice was the first, and he well
disposed thereto, he gave his opinion, that by fire and sword, vengeance
should be taken. No man gainesaid this passionate young man. The alarm was
speedily given in Rome, and in all the Towns subject thereto.

Thither came the Kings of Zerssa, of Carthage and of Argier, all which were
friends to the Romans.

The king of Rodes failed not in this war. As for the furious Almaine, he
thought with his own people alone to give battle to the whole world: for he
left not in all Almany, neither high nor low, one man that was able for the
wars.

The King of Scotland came with a mighty Hosse, in favor of the Roman
Empire, for the friendship he had amongst the Daughters. Discord was yet of
greater power; for it passed into Gibia, leading Revenge by the hand, where she
published the death of their Princes, by the hands of the Dacian Lord in Rome:
their death was there already understood, and mourned for.

But those infernal furies knew how to take so good order, that all that whole
populous Kingdom was at an instant in an uproar: who had a younger brother, and
the most valiant man in all those kingdoms, called Brundusio the strong, who
although that he were not a Giant of his body, yet there was no man (how
strong soever) that was able to resist his force, which yet was not known to
be borrowed. He speedily began to levy people, gathering together the
Borderers, which were brave Knights, with many proud Giants, which exceeded two
thousand: of other people, the strong Brundusio raised an hundred thousand
fighting men, and with them he went to join himself with the Romans,
carrying sufficient provision for many days, perceiving that the war would
be of long continuance. The Emperor of his ariuall received him with great
joy, seeming unto him, that with that people, and the rest which he would
levy, it were a small matter to subdue the whole world: they would not invade
the Greeks, without aduertising them of their departure, deeming that it would
be attributed to their small valor, although it followed a most cruel nauall
war, as that which passed between them and the Sultan of Egypt, which would
give them notice, that they were daily to expect them. Herewith was there made
a most proud defyance, signed by xii kings, which were joined in that
confederacy with the mighty Roman, who of himself and of his adherents, had
levied above four hundred thousand most ready and expert Soldiers: for
amongst them went the fierce Almaines, a people through all the world held for
valiant. Commandment was given for the making of many engines for the wa^res,
and providing of munitions, because they would not every day lend for
provisions. In such sort was the Roman furnished, that not of Grecia, but of
all the world, he made small reckoning, promising his daughter to crown her
E^presse of Constantinople, in despite of all the Grecians. And with this
preparation they speedily sent fo^re Giants, in company with a cousin germane
of Brundusio, called Coriando, a most valiant Knight, and held in the second
degree after his strong cousin, with a Damsel called Sabina, which knew Don
Heleno, for that she had invited him to the Iusts, who carried the defyance
signed and sealed, knowing what she had to say, as she which was one of the
most discrat women of the world. The messengers were about to depart, when in
the great Palace entered those, which were sent by the Sultan of Niquea,
advertised by Lupercio, of that which the infernal Furies had gained upon the
Roman Prince. There came the brother of the Prince of the Garamants, subject
to the Sultan, and two other Princes, which were of Media and of Armenia, who,
although they had been in disgrace with the Sultan, about the stealing of
L^riana, as is said in the first book, the truth being known, that they had
not be^n the cause, nor acquainted therewith, he received them into his
friendship, binding them by new favors, which was, to send them for his
Ambassadors to the Court of Rome: They went with such company as was fit for
so great Princes, as they were. The King knowing of their coming, with the
most principal that were with him, went forth to receive them, taking the King
of the Garamants by the hand, to do him the greater honor: they al let them
down to hear the Ambassade of so mighty a Monarch as the Sultan of Niquea. As
they all expected the Ambassade of the Sultan, the valiant King of the
Garamants, making a little reverence, drew out a sealed Letter of credence, and
giving it to the great Emperor of Rome, Constantius look it, and with a loud
voice a king of Arms read it, which said thus: was therein. The valorous
Coriandro, who went in company with the four Giants and the Damsel, answered
him, that therein went certain Knights of Rome, into Grecia, to defy the
Greeks. Much were they pleased with the answer of those Princes, and seeing
they held that course, having so good occasion, they said they would accompany
them: for no lesser displeasures had they also received of ye Greeks. It
appeared what they were, by their Arms: and so those of Rome also rejoiced in
their souls, to have so valiant Knights (as they seemed to be) in their
company, not seeing the hour to meet the^ in Grecia: where we will leave them
until their time, for they will bring in matter enough to talk of.

CHAP. II. Of that which happened unto the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria, with
the Damsel which carried him into the kingdom of Samogacia.
ALl those which have weighed the great travel of Imagination, with such sound
consideration, and so advisedly, as is requisite, (most noble Prince) have
judged it very great; and not without much reason: for he who will please many,
must seek out matter different: for that which to one is loathsome, another
holds for pleasant and sweet; and to hit right to please many, is impossible:
for even between three that are invited, there is great difference in tastes:
as he said, who had well experimented the same, Horace. I say so, because it is
not possible in so large an history as this, which I now have in hand, but to
be tedious, with the diversity of Chapters: although that if men impassionate
should be Judges therein, this is the most certain mean to entertain that
can be.

But of force, seeing I take this way, I must have recourse to pardon, and to
treat somewhat (leaving so many defiances) of the noble Tinacrian, who with
some amorous grief took his leave of Rosabel, both woondring at what they saw
the one in the other: but it made it the lighter, to see the valorous kinsemen
which he had, and what it behooued him to do, to be called brother to so great
Princes, and Uncle to such a Knight; for yet to Claridiano he was unknown.
With this conceit he retired to embarke him, where his Damsel attended his
coming, fearful that his long staying might be the occasion, that he should
not come in time with his succors; for the most accomplished Lady in all
Samogacia, had grounded her hopes upon him. At his coming, she told him, what
pain she endured, and the cause thereof. Great grief would it be to me, fair
Damsel, (said the resolute young man) if my staying should give occasion of any
defect, and I should be very glad if you would show me your necessity; for
since our coming out of Greece, we have had no place for it: and seeing that
now the Seas and fortune have given it, I should be very glad thereof. All
shall be performed, valorous Prince of Tinacria, seeing the life of her which
sent me to seek, rests in your hands: and because you shall be the more
willing to procure her remedy, harken, and you shall hear the greatest and
most unreasonable, that ever was used to Lady; for if you be sworn to the
laws of love, you shall understand how unjustly my Lady is condemned to an
infamous death: and understand, that in the great and populous kingdom of
Samogacia, there is a King, who for his valor and person is worthy to be King
of the universal world; it pleased the Heavens to give him sons and
daughters, which is the greatest pleasure in the world, and fortune willing to
try his valor, with taking them all away from him, leaving him one only
daughter, of whom it is said, that the sum and full perfection of beauty, and
accomplishment of qualities, is included in her shape and goodly proportion:
for in her, beauty is no hinderance to her discretion, with both which graces
she is adorned in the highest degree that may be, and so have they given her a
name conformable to her constitution, (calling her Celibella:) for her beauty
seems rather heavenly, then of the earth; where, if ought be excellent, yet
it brings with it some ill-fauoured abatement. With this Lady, the Princes of
Podolia fell in love, Knights to whom nature had showed her self very
bountiful, endowing them with what is most desired: she made them equals, to
the end that as brothers, and so like in proportion, but that by their names,
no man could have known them: the elder was called Daristeo of Podolia, and
the younger Rosaner: Both at their coming affected the Kings fair^ Daughter,
wooing her with many Tiltings and Turneyes, which they caused for her sake,
wherein they were both commended in equal degree. As to subject the mind in
these lovers cases, is reserved to love only, it ordained for the greater
evil, that Celibella most affected the younger, not for that he had more then
the other, but that fortune thought it an honorable trophe to triumph of these
two lovers: with her eyes did this fair Dame give her beloved gallant to
understand, to what estate fortune had brought her: but they had so small hope
of being beloved, that notwithstanding that she showed it with a thousand good
countenances, yet he could never be persuaded, that she loved him: for as that
Lady is the Phoenix of beauty, he held a favor from her hand, to be such a
thing, as love it self could not deserve, and so they proceeded in their loves
a-vie, without acquainting the one the other with the secret of their minds.
It was no small grief to the Lady, that Rosaner could not perceive how well
she loved him; and for the Lady to make show thereof by any signs or other
means, she would not for any thing in the world, well knowing, how much she
should therein prejudice her honor: with the often favors and public praise,
which she gave to whatsoever this gallant did, he was partly persuaded that she
loved him: but yet he could hardly believe, yt fortune would be so favorable.
At this instant, wherein Celibella showed her self most affected unto him,
accepting of the endeavors and exployts which Rosaner performed in her service,
there was brought to the Court a kinsewoman of this Ladies, who was the
beginning and ending of all these mishaps: She truly was fair; for somewhat
being of kin to the Kings daughter, claue to her. As my Lady was young, and a
nouice in love, she was of opinion, that it was much ease to disclose it: some
others are of the same opinion: but for my part, I utterly condemn it: for
there is no greater grief, then to reueyle the secrets of the heart, whereby
the renown may be touched, and from whence nothing is drawn, but the Lady to
subject her self to the party to whom she reueyleth her secret, who also
(peradu^^ture) will hold her for more light in discovering it, then for being
in love. This happened sometimes. The unwary Lady trod these reasons under foot,
and told all to Felina, for so was her kinswoman called. The discovery of this
secret served not to yield any ease to the Lady, but to incite her kinsewoman
to fall in love with the Prince Daristeo, and that in so good earnest, that
she speedily made it appear. But as he was so engoulfed in the love of
Celibella, he took no notice with what affection Felina showed her self to be
his. The Lady Princess perceived it well, and received no small pleasure
therein, imagining that therewith Daristeo would leave to be so enamored of
her, for the beauty of her kinsewoman was ^ell worthy to be beloved. There were
often meetings in the hall between these four lovers: but I know not who is
able to agree them, for with my tongue I am not able; for neither party left
to love, though it were not accepted. It appeared in their eyes: for the two
brothers fixed theirs upon the Princess, and she with new spoils beholds
her Rosaner, making her eyes fat with beholding him. But her cousin being
touched to the quick, with apparent signs gives testimony of her love, in
beholding her Daristeo, in whom she only delighteh, and from whom she draws
her life; and although she were but a nouice in that occupation, the carelesnes
wherewith the prince answered her, put her in such care, as I think no body
has been more careful: for from that time forward, her grief was such, as
her cousin was very sorry for. This amorous passion did so much pinch her, that
she knew no means how to remedy it, neither saw any possibility; for the
prince never took any regard of the favors which she showed him: which was
worse then death to this afflicted Lady, who growing desperate, would have
taken any course for remedy, although somewhat dishonorable.

As the king loved these Princes, holding them in place of sons, although he
had not yet determined upon whom be would bestow his daughter Celibella: so had
they opportunity to discourse with the lady, who seeing that her father was
well pleased therewith, forbear it not, making show that to be the cause,
concealing the truth. Rosaner being the man who wore the palm, his brother
could never imagine it, thinking with himself, that if the Ladies affection
were guided by reason, he was rather to be beloved the^ his brother: but love
led it another way, without respect of the large kingdom whereof he was prince;
for to him which perfectly loves, it never represents the qualities of the
thing beloved: but only what is in self, which otherwise were but a feigned
love: and so the Lady loved the fortunate young man, not with a little envy of
love, seeing what was enjoyed.

The passionate cousin was she, who sped worst in this business; for although
that the Princess loved not Daristeo, yet he was never persuaded that she
loathed him: for the discreet Lady bestowed some favors upon him, which were a
mean to entertain the Prince, and he held himself happy, to obtain so much
at her hands. But poor Felina neither perceived any show that she was
beloved, neither was there any end in understanding her ill hap in being not
regarded by him, whom she loved better then her self. In this mean while,
the brave Furiandro, bastard son to the king of Podolia (which he gat in his
young years, upon a most strong woman in the mountains Rifei) came to ye court
to seek these 2. brothers: he proved so fierce and valiant, (that they say)
that in valor he does exceed the great god Mars; for there is no knight, no,
although they be ten, nay twenty, that are able to keep ye field against him,
neither any Giant, how fierce so ever he be: he is beloved of the common
people; for he is not of that condition, which such men commonly are of, which
exceed all other in force and strength of body: but he is rather courteous and
a great friend and favorer of Ladies, although that in this occasion (I
marvel not) he have showed himself cruel to Celibella. Much did the
princess rejoice at his coming, and all the whole court; for the feasts were
renewed, wherein it is incredible and not to be believed, what that furious
knight did: for he was seen at one blow, to strike down both horse and man;
all men gave him the prize for valiant. The king respected him according as was
reason, for his valor and good government; for that was it, which most
advanced him above all others. All this was nothing, neither the assurance
which she saw of her pain, to cause Felina to give over her determination,
but rather increase it, attempting one of the boldest and most presumptuous
enterprises of the world, from whence could ensue no other thing, but that
which followed: for unable to endure to see her self so little respected, she
adue^tured to say unto the prince Daristeo, yt the princess would expect him
yt night in the garden, to confer with him of matter of importance. There could
nothing happen more pleasing to ye unfortunate prince, then such a message; for
as it was a thing unlooked for, now holding him self assured thereof, he held
himself ye most happy man in the world: he held ye day for as long as a man's
life: he thought the night fled from him: every minute he held for a year, such
was his desire to meet ye lady princess. The subtle Felina, seeing her plot to
take effect* took a suit of Celibellas, which did best set out her beauty, and
clad her self therewith: and as y^ heavens would not frustrate what she had
exployted, so could not the gallant see, whether it were the Princess, or
she. But he coming into the garden, less armed the^ was needful, went to
the window, so passionate, that he knew her not. The cruel damsel
cou^terfeyted her speech, and said, I have hitherto, Oh prince of Podolia,
dissembled how much I have loved you, for some respects which have forced me
thereto: but seeing your great deserts, I could not forbear (holding it
unjust) but to impart my faith unto you, and to say, that you are more beloved,
then all the men in the world. As he should have made an answer, in an alley
among ^ose trees, (privily armed) came Rosaner: for as he was wise, so would
he not come into so suspicious a place, carelessly and in danger of his person:
he had beforetime there spoken with the Princess, and seeing a Knight there,
and that she stood talking with him, well may a man judge what he felt, who
held him self beloved, and with so great affection: he was come somewhat
near, when the unlucky Daristeo said; My dear Lady, I could never imagine,
that the love which I have ever borne you, could have been so highly rewarded,
neither can it yet sink into my head, that I could ever deserve so great a
good, as thus to see you to bestow such and so particular favors, which wholly
is to be attributed to your generositie, more then to my love or desert,
although ye I might hope much: for I believe, that no man ever loved with
greater affection then I. The cause hereof is the little confidence which I
repose in my own deserts and worthiness, to attain to so great a good, as to
be beloved by your beauty, neither can I leave to consider the high estate you
hold, without understanding who he was, or imagining any thing of his brother:
for now Fortune would needs show her mutability against these two Lovers: with
the greatest suddenness of the world, the beloved Rosaner ran upon his dear
brother, not knowing who he was. Never Eagle turned with greater liuelynesse,
then did Daristeo against his brother; and as they were very valiant, so began
there between them a most cruel battle, but the elder had the worser, not
through want of force, but of arms and fortune. Although the other had
received some hurts, yet they were but small. The furious lover would needs
close with Daristeo; but therein he sought his own death: for the desperate
young man being deadly wounde^, before he gave up the ghost, revenged himself,
by bereauing life from his m^^t dear brother Rosaner: for stumbling forwards
by reason of his wounds, he thrust out his sword arm, and by chance hit him
right in the face. The elder brother had not yet so much lost his memory, but
that he followed the blow, until the point of the sword pierced through his
brothers brains.

These faithful lovers came to fall just together, losing with one only blow,
their lives, ielousies, and love, and the greatest good of the world, which was
the fair Lady. The unhappy Felina stood beholding this battle, until that
she saw them fall: then sorrowing their death, with her outcryes she
disqueted all the Palace, and falling down in the evil which she had done,
without dissembling it, neither had she strength to avoid the punishment, she
her self being her own executioner; for even in the same attire as she
stood, she cast her self headlong out at the window, falling upon her head
between the^, and in their death kept them company. The greatest part of the
people in the Palace, ran into the garden, and the king with the furious
Fur^ander; who when he saw the cruel hap of his two brothers, was likely to
have lost his wits, which was the cause of altering his condition, imagining
with himself, that they were dead through Celibellas occasion. Some others did
suspect it, to see the brotherly death between two lovers.

It caused extreme sorrow in all the court: for the king showed himself very
sorrowful (as was reason) to see so pitiful a chance. What the Princess did
in her chamber, I would rather that some other body would report it, then I
which saw it. A thousand times would she have ended with one death, y^ many
deaths which she should endure through ^he absence of her Rosaner, which she
began presently to show: for the company of her damsels was displeasing unto
her, wherein she was wont chiefly to delight: the fight of knights and
gallants was loathsome, and their discourses yrksome; so as her whole delight
was to be solitary, receiving some pleasure in me, discoursing of ye cruelty
which fortune had showed her. There was nothing but did put her in mind of her
knight; and to remember him, it was death to her: and having no more comfort
but what she reaped from her tears, which were so many which she shed, for
that lamentable mischance, that it bereaved her of a great part of her beauty.
All the Court was in an vproare; the king in making search for ye murderers,
could take no rest, so as in the city there was nothing but suspicion and
mourning. The most valiant Furiander disturbed all, forgetting what he had
promised when he took the order of knighthood, that he should never take part
against any Lady; for as each of his brothers had discovered unto him part of
his love, and seeing how much they were tormented, and how careless she was
thereof, which was not for want of affection, but rather of discretion, he
fully persuaded himself, that to be rid of their importunities, she had
procured their deaths; he conceived it with such apprehension, that nothing
could dissuade him, neither to see the sorrowful signs which the princess
gave for the death of the two brothers: for this furious young man had
determined what he would do, and would draw his comfort for the less of the
two princes brothers, from the death of a lady, whom to be hold, I know not who
but would have ve^tured his life for her. It happened (most valiant prince) that
one day the king being despised, for that he could not be certified concerning
ye death of these princes, as he had newly dined, ye fierce Fur^ander, armed at
al pieces in black, of bright and shining steel armor, without any device,
saving only in the midst of his shield he bare revenge most lively painted.
Being thus furnished, his coming into the Hall, made al those which beheld
him, change countenances, who with the fierceness wherewith nature had endowed
him, making a little reverence, and a little lifting up his visor, said with a
hoarse voice, (for yet I have not forgotten, what fear I was in to hear him)
Mighty king of Samogacia, not withstanding that I am of opinion that my
coming, and in this manner, will not a little offend you, the great grief
which I endure to see the most dearly beloved princes of the world slain in
ye palace, does enforce me a thing, even the heavens should lament for so
unjust a death: yt gods do know how much it grieueth me to come in this manner,
considering how much my dear brothers were bounde^ unto thee: but the fear
that I am in to return again to P^dolia to ye king my father, who sent me to
seek the^, has forced me, seeing that nothing can be done against that which
the heavens have decreed: and to the end that the common people shall not say,
that they dyed, and that no man would revenge their death; and seeing the many
certain signs which in their life, and since I have perceived, I say, that I
will maintain against any one, two, three, or four knights together, with my
horse and arms, that they were slain by order from your daughter the
princess Celibella: which from this day, to the end of 4. months, I will
maintain, because the princess shall understand, that I desire not to
prevail by reason of the shortness of the time; but that she may have time to
send whither and for whom she will, to defend her honor, so as she may not be
accounted murtheresse of princes.

The diuilish knight held his peace, and there was no man so valiant, that
durst so much as move. The king stood some what in a doubt, pondering on the
weight of the case, and at length resolved, and I believe he was forced
(^eeing how much Furiander was feared) to admit the challenge, and so he caused
the princess to be called, which God knows, was sorrowful enough for their
deaths; she imagined straight what the matter was; and so half amazed, forth
she came.

The king propounded unto her the Pagans occasion: she could not answer (for I
think no body could) until the qualme was past, which had almost bereaved her
of her life, and then she answered with so great stomach, as made me wonder;
it was the equity of the cause and the great wrong that was done her, did thus
animate her thereto, saying, that it was a lie, and that she would take such
order as should be requisite, to recover the honor whereof she was thus robbed
with so great treachery, she being innocent of the death of those Princes, but
seeing the one failed, she was to seek who might give account of her honor.
Her father the king commanded her presently to be committed to prison, because
he would show himself a Iu^^icer, notwithstanding it was against his own
daughter whom he so dearly loved, and of whose life depe^ded his own: for it
was y^ kings law, held inuiolably* (although very rigorous) that whatsoever
person were accused of an offense committed within the palace, that does not
either of himself, or some knight for him answer the challenge, within the
time lymitted in the challenge, shall be condemned to be burnt; the most cruel
thing that ever was heard.

Then came your fame (valorous prince) flying through Samogacia, with the
highest pitch that ever knight enjoyed. The poor distressed Lady was of
opinion (as in deed it is true) that she could not repair with more reason and
assurance unto any then to you, and so she sent me to seek you. I came from
the city with that care, which a matier of such importance as this is, does
require, and understanding of the great feasts which were in Grecia, I was of
opinion to find you there among your brothers; for by the way I understood,
that you are son to ye great Emperor Trebatius, with whose fame ye whole
world is replenished, and seeing it was my hap to meet you in so good company, I
am ye gladdest woman in ye world, assuring my self, yt bringing you, I bring
life to ye princess, and although yt we have bin hindered in our sailing, with
tempests, yet ye wind being favorable, we shall (I doubt not) come in time to
Samogatia, (for there yet remain twenty days, before the challenge be
expired:) and this is (Sir Knight) the cause that has moved me to take the
pains to seek you, and I believe it shall not be in vain; for seeing the
wrong that is done to the Princes, you will not suffer it to proceed; for the
fame of your valor imports no less, but that you employ it in favor of
those which are distressed, as is this Lady.

The lady having ended her story with some tears which fell from her eyes,
remembering how much it would grieve the Princess seeing her long stay, yt
valorous Tinacria was very pitiful, especially in the behalf of women,
holding it for no honor which was gotten against them; and so he answered, I
would that the heavens had given me far greater force (fair damsel) to the
end that your business might be the better assured, although having so much
equity on her behalf, I hope that it shall suffice to yield that contentment,
as such an excellent Lady as she is, does deserve, against any that without
reason shall procure her grief, and I refuse not the hour, to meet that
Knight of so little discretion.

Great comfort did those courageous speeches yield to the Damsel which the
Prince used: the weather was favorable unto them; for four days before the
time was expired, they landed near the City of Adibia, (for so is it called)
with great pleasure to them both, to see themselves so near; she to her
sovereign Lady bringing so good a return; and he, which much desired to show
all his valor in defense of the Princess: and but that it was only his, it
had never been accomplished with that good hap; for the Pagan was one of the
most strong men in the world. One day and a half did they spend in coming to
the City, which was full of strangers, although never a one so valorous, as to
answer the challenge, notwithstanding that Furiander came daily to the lists.
They passed the night in a grove of poplar trees, where, what happened unto
them, you shall hear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of that which happened to the Prince of Tinacria, with a Knight much
affected to Celibella, and how he ended the battle for her.
IT should be past midnight, (most Noble Lord) when a Knight with his
lamentations did awake^ the valiant Poliphebus, who a little from him had laid
him down to sleep. The son of the cruel Garriofilea, sa^e upon the green
grass, and being free from love, he harkned, and gessing which way the
complaint came, fully armed, not knowing what might follow, for he would not
go unprovided: he saw by the Moon light, which shined very clear, at the
foot of a great Oak, a great Knight stretched all along upon the ground,
richly armed in blew armor, wrought all over with many knots of gold, be
seemed to the Tinacrian to be some Knight of good account. In his shield, which
he had fastened to his neck, was painted love with a merry countenance, and
fortune in the skirt, with ye most piercing aspect, that ever was seen, with
these letters underwritten.

Fortune being so contrary,
With angry valor taking part,
Though constant love be on my side,
Yet nothing can assure my heart.
The Knight seemed to be in a trance, seeing he moved not, as indeed he was:
for the grief to lose the fair Celibella, had put him out of his wits. But
when he came again to himself, with a sigh, being out of breath, he began to
say, O Fortune, with how many trials do thou show thy mutabilitie, tyring my
heart with so many troubles! If I did imagine (blind Goddess) that I had ever
been rebellious against thee, that I had not respected thee, that I had not
put my trust in thee, that I had doubted of thy power, and of what thou art; I
should have taken this rigorous touch for a reward for my patience. But seeing
that without any occasion thou will show thy self my greatest enemy, I having
given thee no just cause thereof, I cannot forbear to complain, and only of
thy mutabilitie, seeing that with what, or for what, thou have brought me to
the point, that nothing but death only can yield me ease. O ^^wardly heart,
seeing that for being so, thou suffrest her to die, which might give thee life,
and in distress succor thee! Pardon me, worthy Princess; for now I see the
injury, which with my cowardice I have done thee, in not daring to oppose my
life in thy behalf: and seeing that so many ways I see it lost, and that now
failing with thee, the remainder will be worse then death it self: the Gods
defend that I see thy unjust death: but rather yt I with justice bereave my
soul thereof: for in so long staying, I wrong the love I bear thee: and
herewith, in a devilish fury, he snatched up his sword, and lifting up his
bres^plate, he would have thrust it into his own body, saying, Herewith,
sovereign Lady, I make amend, for not undertaking the battle, although that
I had seen my death before mine eyes; by how much more then, being for thee,
it might have been accounted life. The Tinacrian took hold of him, and before
that he could effect his devilish intent, he seized upon his sword, which he
plucked out of his hands, saying, Oh desperate Knight* and with committing so
vilde an act, will thou soader up that which thou have done against the Lady,
whom th^us^ much love? The Moore came to himself, who was Prince of Prussia,
a country very near adjoining to that of the most fair Celibella, and
beholding that Knight so tall and so well armed, being persuaded yt he saw his
remedy, he said unto him, Do me not, Sir Knight, so great displeasure, but
suffer me to satisfy with my life, that which I have committed against the
most fair Lady, that the world contains, seeing that undertaking the battle
for her, although with the loss of my life, I might have done her particular
service; but being against so furious a knight, with very cowardice, I lost yt
which I might have gotten, although I had remained without life and seeing that
now to hold it, it will be to my further hurt, give me leave to proceed
according to my determination, if you will not that I make a larger payment for
the error which I have committed which was the greatest that eu^r Knight
committed, against her whom he so loved. Leave off your so much sorrow (said
the warlike Tinacrian) for men are not bound to undertake matters above their
force; for in such case you of your part are excused. That cannot be, said the
Pagan, who owing his life, and would not venture it for her, in any danger how
doubtful so ever the success thereof were, cannot be excused, and therefore
you cannot deny me the wrong that I have done my Lady. Notwithstanding all
this, I will not yield that any such cruelty be committed in my presence,
neither is it weldone, but ill (you see the end of this adventure) to torment
your self in such sort, as may put you in such despair as this, which does
so much disgrace the valor which appears in your person. And because I came
from far about this business, and to fight for this Lady, I pray you be
satisfied, and hold me company to the City, where I will try my lot with
Furiander.

Who can presume, Sir Knight, (said the Moore) to come into that City where
he has committed so great a fault, such as the like has not been seen? I
have not the power, neither can any thing make me thereto able. It has not
been so great (said the Tinacrian) but it may be amended, if fortune favor
us. The Prince told him so many things, that in the end he offered to hold him
company to the end that he might see the forces wherewith he should fight for
Celibella. By this time it was day, and so they took their horses, and with
the damsel and the Tinacrian his squire, they took the way toward the City,
and by the way he knew that this Knight was the Lord and King of Prussia,
where he fell in love with the Princess Celibella, although he never knew the
necessity wherein she was, until he came with his arms only disguised to
the Court, to see her, which for her beauty was extolled through his whole
Dominion: and coming thither, he understood of Furiander his challenge: But
the fame of his valor was such, that he durst not undertake the battle for
the Princess, notwithstanding that he loved her, much more then his own
soul: and falling into consideration of what he had done, going forth of the
City, he meant to have slain himself. The Tinacrian recomforted him the best
that he could, and he did not a little prevail, being the most fearful young
man in the world. They arrived, when the King was newly risen from the table,
and had that day invited the famous Furiander, purposing with some good reasons
to have dissuaded him from that attempt, being very sorrowful, for that he
perseuered in his determination, he saw near at hand the certain death of his
dearly beloved daughter: for he continued so obstinate in his unjust
challenge, that nothing could withdraw him from his damned resolution. The two
Princes came in, whose presence gave no small joy to all that were in the hall,
principally the Tinacrian: for no man had a greater grace in his countenance.
In ouer-looking the hall with judicial eyes, the son of great Trebatius
doing some reverence, said, God save the great King of Samogacia, and grant
thee that peace which thy personage deserves; this Knight and I come from
far countries, only to defend the wrong, as we have understood, which is
done by a certain Knight unto thy Daughter; and casting lots, whether of us
should first enter into battle for her, it fell to me, which gave me no small
content, to do thy daughter this service, and perform that, whereto by the
law of Knighthood I am bounden; and therefore you may command her to be
called, and we shall see, whether she will commit the equity of her cause
into my hands. The Gods requite thee the band, (Sir Knight) wherein you have
bound me, with offering your person to such danger as this present, which is one
of ye greatest that you have seen, which might be ended by some other means,
if this Knight would, who is the defend^nt to the challenge: but seeing it must
go as fortune will appoint, there is no more to be done, but to come to the
battle, which the Gods grant may end, according to the equity of the cause.
To be of the Princesses part, (mighty King) has compelled me to come,
answered the Tinacrian. The fierce Pagan being somewhat moved, rose up, saying,
I would not, Sir Knight, that you should have so great confidence in the Ladies
innocence, but that you should come so well furnished with forces, as are
needful for the battle, and so you may take this Knight to help you; for my
challenge does extend to four. It shall not need, said the son of Trebacius,
to have any more company, the^ the equity of my cause does give me: for if I
be in the right, my person will suf^ice for a greater matter; if in the wrong,
little will great forces prevail against justice; and I much desire, that such
a Knight, which is so famous as you are, before so many people, should not make
show, to trust more in the strength of your arm, then in the equity of your
cause; which most commonly failing, valor is of little effect. The furious
Pagan being there with ^ffended, answered, saying, I thought not, Knight, that
my courtesy had animated thee to be so proud: but because thou may know, that
I will not pass the time in words, being more fit to use deeds, we will no
longer defer the battle. As he had ended his answer, came the most fair
Celibella, all clad in mourning attire, which did greatly increase her beauty.
The Tinacrian had never seen greater beauty; for there were few in the world
that did excel her. Her father told her at her coming, how that Knight
undertook the battle for her. The fair Princess knew him straight, by his
device of a bough which he bare in his shield, and that he was the man for
whom she had sent. She presently gave him authority, with greater contentment,
then can be spoken, although yt when she remembered the unfortunate Princes, her
most pleasing thoughts were watered with tears. These two valiant Warriors
made no delay, for ye fierce Tinacria^ taking his leave of the King, went into
the lists, taking with him the Prince of Prussia, who stood to look on. On the
other side of the lists, presently came in the valorous Furiander, much people
accompanying him although there was no body that would he should win the
palm, or wear those arms, wherein he had accused the Princess, who was set
upon a scaffold with a sufficient guard; where she prayed to her false Gods,
that her Knight might obtain the victory, seeing ye in so just a cause he
undertook the battle. Face to face stood these two warriors, whose looks
and gestures were such* that he which stood farthest off, did scarcely account
himself in safety, at the giving of the fearful sign; they drew with more
swiftness, then an arrow flies: In the midst of the place, was appointed
the course of their Carriere, making a greater sound in their meeting, then if
two hills had run together: they bowed not in their ^addles, with the force of
the lances, which brake like K^xes, whose splinters flew so high, that they
were out of sight. These two rare men in valor, turned their horses with their
swords in their hands, and approaching the one just to the other, they gave so
fearful blows, as would have beaten a rock in pieces; each of them could
testify his adversaries force, they redoubled the second with greater courage
then dexterity: either of them feeling his own blood in his mouth, they began
to make benefit of the nymblenesse, wherewith they were endued, closing, and
beating by the blows, in such exquisite manner, that Mars himself could not
have done the like. The valiant Moore spurring his horse, thinking by
swiftness to get advantage, charged, carrying his sword firm, with the point
forwards: The great Tinacrian was well aware thereof; there was never seen
any Eagle more swift then he in giving blows, and making his horse to give a
bound, he passed before the Moore, and turned him so suddenly, that he
wondered at the Son of Trebacio: they came to join, and the Moore would give
the first blow; he did it, which was more swift then the wind, and struck him
upon the rich Helmet, whose finenesse warranted his life, for otherwise he had
cloven him to the saddle; it sounded like a bell, and therein the Tinacrian saw
a thousand stars in the skies, he fell upon his horse neck, and the Moore
doubled his blow; but if he had given the third, the battle had been ended:
for it came with such force, that he was quite senseless: he had closed with
him, if he had not seen, that more furious then a Basiliske he returned with
his sword aloft. There was no man in that place, that yielded not the victory
for the Pagan; the Ladies fainting confirmed the same: for losing her Rosiall
color, it became like snow, seeing the blows which her Knight had received,
who was nothing discouraged therewith, but casting his shield at his back,
grinding his teeth against the other, he assailed the Moore, giving him so
mighty a blow upon his helm, that he left him all that part unarmed, charging
him so vehemently, that there mist but little to have laid him in the dust: he
took hold of his horse neck. The Tinacrian joined with him, accounting the
victory for his own, and with both his hands gave him another blow, which
imprinted his sword in his flesh, wounding him in the shoulder: as the Moore
settled him self, (losing no occasion) he gave him two thrusts, one after
another, which set him on the arson of his Saddle, griping him so, that it
seemed, he had stricken him quite out of breath. The Pagan advanced himself,
and closing with the Tinacrian, he thought to prevail by grasping with him;
but he found the son of Garofilia as fast in his saddle, as if he had been a
rock: they tugged so hard together, yt they both were out of breath; their
horses stood more fixed in ye ground, with ^^uing in their wrestling, then the
most moored roots. With one turn, they fell both to the earth. The Pagan had a
mishap, because one of his feet hung in the stirr^p: which if the Tinacria^ had
perceived in time, he had slain him: yet notwithstanding, before he could get
it out, with his dagger he gave him 2. cruel stabs, and left the marks in the
flesh, which the Pagan held for mortal; and so turning to his enemy, who as he
was higher then he, he lifted him from ground, carrying him in such sort, that
the Batchelour had lieffer have been deadly wounded; he did his best to
encounter his adversary, and so recover footing, whence twice wheeling about,
they hurled together with greater force then a Coluerine shot, they ga^ to
their weapons with such speed, that al those which were present, wondered
thereat. I believe, quoth the king, turning himself toward the principal of
those which were with him, that in these two warriors, is disciphered the
flower of cheualrie.

No pleasure can be compared to that which Celibella received, seeing how well
her knight had acquitted himself; for on foot none of her brothers could do
better: and yet oftentimes fighting with them, he made them to doubt of the
battle. Some advantage was perceived in him: for striking with great rage,
the Tinacrian happily crossing inwards and standing very firm on his right
foot, he joined hitting right on the side of the vaunt-brace, the trenchant
sword rebounded to the hollow, entering a third part in at the breast. The Pagan
feeling the wound, and thinking it had been to the death, gave a sign thereof:
for with the very pain of the wound he went crosse-leg'd, and was ready to
fall: the furious young man help him, doubling another blow upon his helm,
with so great might, that he made him set his knees to the ground. There is no
serpent so wrathful, which can turn so, as Furiander returned against the
son of Garofilea, and with the raging smart which he felt of his wou^d,
throwing his shield to the ground, he went with such fury, with his sword in
both hands, that he made more then four lose all their color in their faces;
the blow was with less heed then wisdom required to bear; for it had been
the last that ever the Tinacrian had received, he hit him so right upon the
gilded crest, that he made him to see a thousand stars in his helm, and he
charged his furious sword with such force, that he made him to (...) both his
hands and knees to ground. The impatient Moore drew near with another, no
less then the first, he had stretched him out for a pray: according as he was
strong, so he suddenly pinck't from him his v^^n^-brace: and Lirgando says,
that he also took his shield from him. Gualtenor saye^h no, but that he did
cut the greatest part of his Polarons.

If he had been able to have given the third, I know not how this Batchelour
had escaped from the battle: but as the wound fell upon that side where his
heart was, it made him breathless so as he could not thencefoorth proceed in
his fury, giving the Ba^chelour place to rise, there was no help for the
armor against the blow which he gave, for he clean carried away the crown
of the helm, and a piece of the head withal.

Well might the son of the great Trebacio have overcome him but he was a
Knight, who in deed did more affect the worth which the Pagan had shown,
saying thus unto him:

I do much desire, Sir Knight, that this battle may rest in that estate,
wherein it is, for I see you are dangerously and sore wounded, very near unto
death, and in going further, any your evil fortune whatsoever, would much
grieve me; for I do neither desire your death nor overthrow, but perpetual
amity and friendship, which from henceforth I offer unto you, swearing and
protesting unto you, that you most in^uriously uphold and maintain the wrong
against a Lady, who in apparent show has much sorowed and lamented the death
of your brothers.

When the generositie (most noble Prince) is so discovered, and proceeds from
a gallant breast, there is no Aspicque so fierce and cruel, but will be
therewith appeased: he had not been Prince of Tinacria, neither could that
have been the country of your most noble Lordship, if therein had not been bred
so rare a good, as was this.

And so this valiant ^^oore sound himself bound, with the reasons which the
Prince uttered, ^aying, F^^thu^g could happen to me so well as this, my life
and reputation being in such danger. I would (valorous man at Arms) gladly in
exchange, to purchase the friendship of such a knight as you are, and seeing
it behooves (...), and that of my ob^^inate contending there can nothing grow
unto (...) but perpetual infamy and discredit, I do from henceforth utterly
give over the battle, and freely se^ at ^^ertie the Princess, condemning my
euersight and blin^^^^e, seeing i^ was not possible in so perfec^ a subject, to
(...) any thing which should so much disgrace it.

When the prince of Prussia law the (...) league and bond of friendship
concluded bei^ ^ue the (...), he put sp^^res to his horse, and took his way
toward his country with all the speed that might be, where he passed his
time in great heaviness and sorrow, having atchiued no adventure.

The Judges were near at hand, hearing what the Pagan said, which yielded such
contentment to the whole Court, that no man is able to express it: but ^^ may
be better imagined, then any way described.

The hidden fire in the scattered powder (my Sovereign Lady) has not so much
power, neither is it of such effectual force, as is settled love, to show
what it is, and what it is able to do.

What man in the world could have confirmed a peace between Princes so much at
variance, and with so great reason?

Who could have brought it to pass, that Celibella, the beauty of the world,
should have been any whit sorrowful or grieved, for the spiteful Pagan^ hur^s
(though never so deadly) be receiving them, in fighting so disgrace and
confound her?

It cannot be imagined, that so great an alteration as this, can be attributed
unto any other thing but to love. Fortune was more favorable unto him, then he
was well aware of: for they were not yet gone forth of the field, when twenty
Knights clad in mourning attire, came into the Camp, which seeing him come
forth of the lists afoote, came to him to kiss his hands, and to acknowledge
him for their Prince and sovereign Lord; for the king had so heavily taken the
death of his two sons* that the sorrow thereof bereaved him of his life; and
he left no heir but this mighty Furiander. All the principal of the Realm
were of opinion, to give the crown unto him, and to accept him for their king,
seeing his valor deserved no less, but was much more worthy. The valorous
Pagan did not a little sorrow the death of his father* and the son of the
most cruel Garofilea kept him company, mourning with him for the one, and
reioy^ing with him for the other.

A new life and a long, answered the Pagan, I would the heavens would grant me
(noble man at Arms) to the end, to acknowledge how great a good it is to be
your friend; but such as it shall please the gods to bestow upon me, assure
your self it shall be to do you service, as he who is no less endebted unto
you, then for his life and honor.

It yields me not that joy and solace (said the Tinacrian) Soueragine prince,
to see how gentle fortune has showed her self unto me, to get such a friend
(as I hope in the gods you will be,) as to see with what affection, and in how
good earnest you have esteemed my offer, so as if I shall be able to equal my
deeds with my desire, none shall show himself a more faithful friend then I.

By this time, the king with the whole court, was descended to receive and
entertain the Tinacrian, who had already determined in himself, to entreat
the king to receive Furiander for his son. In approaching, with his Arms
displayed, he came to the fair young man, saying* Although^ ^t were for nothing
else, most valiant knight, but to say that in my arms I embrace the flower of
cheualry, I hold the troubles well employed, whereunto this Prince has brought
us. The fair Poliphebus well discharged the part of the Moore, saying. It was a
worthy matter, mighty king, to to considered, in how manifest a danger your
daughter was; but herein appears the nobleness of your generous breast, that
you not only pardon what is done, with the passion to see such princes to
fail, but you are now to receive him for a friend, seeing his valor
deserves, that all the princes of the world should hold him for such: greater
errors then these which may be pardoned, so venturous a knight undertaking the
same.

By this time was come the Kings daughter, so fair, that I know not any man of
reasonable understanding, but would have given, rather then to have lost the
sight of her, two thousand souls, if he had them. She drew near, giving the
prince great thanks for that which he had done for her, saying, I was well
assured (valorous knight of the Bough) that committing my affairs into your
victorious hands, it should have such issue as is this. While as the fair
Tinacrian made answer unto Celibella, love began to stir in the breast of the
Pagan, who regarded the beauty wherewith the Infanta was adorned, whom in his
conceit he had much offended: but love playing his part, had obtained his
pardon; for sometimes she cast her eye aside, to behold the wounds which this
new-come prince had received: and indeed the Pagan did not so much feel it, as
the Lady did, for it did ease his pain, to behold her beauty: But to her, who
had already yielded her self tributarie to love, every drop of his blood, was
worse then a cruel death: so far does his power extend, who is called the
blind god of love.

Within the Palace, were these Princes cured of their wounds; and fifteen
days the Tinacrian there remained, in which time he behaved himself so well,
that he obtained of the king all that he desired; setting before his eyes the
valor of Furiander, and the state which he held: love had so well disposed of
the fair princess* that it was no hard matter to win her. The valorous
Furiander knew not how to value this good; for all the Court feasted him,
holding it well content to receive such a knight, for prince and Lord thereof.
Much did the princess desire that the Tinacrian should have remained a longer
time, but being unable to end other matters, he took his leave of the Lady,
and committed himself to the deep sea, with Ruu^o his squire alone. The fifth
day of his navigations, with a prosperous wind he arrived in the kingdom of
Hilepsia, where happened unto him, that which in the next Chapter shallbe
declared.

CHAP. IIII. How the Prince of Tinacria near the Fountain of three spoutes,
met with the brave Eufronisa, and of the battle which he fought with two
Giants which would have robbed him.
SO much did absence (most noble prince) afflict the fair Eufronila, for the
love of Rosabel, that she took no pleasure but in coming to the fountain
where she first saw him. It fared with her, as with one which has lost a
precious jewel, who not finding it, a thousand times returns with great care,
to the place where he thinks he lost it. Eue^ so did this fair princess,
being not so much afflicted for the loss of the sons, as for the absence of
the Father. In company of her discreet gentlewoman, she passed a heavy and
solitary life, although it were some case unto her, to think yt her father had
promised to carry her with him into Grecia; for there came certain messengers
to him, from the Souldan of Niquea, to entreat his ^auour, which he thoroughly
purposed to grant, as he which was very mighty, and of great power. And
imagining with her self that there she should see her (...) made her to
prolong some what the rest of her days, it was a world to see, and to hear,
what she did, and said, beholding her self in the clear fountain.

Love is not such (most noble prince) as that he who is possessed there with,
can have any regard of reason, neither is reason of force to detain him who is
enamored, from going to any place, whither his cruel destinyes shall lead him.

In the Schole of my mishappes, I learned to discourse of the success of Love,
and how it deals with those which are subject thereto; this enamored
princess yields us sufficient experience thereof, whom love so many ways
(after she was subject thereto) tired with a thousand desastres, and being set
in the place where she first became enamored, she made a thousand complaints of
love.

Oh, fierce and cruel resolution, (said the fair Lady, and the pleasing
content wherein I liue^, before I saw that venturous prince the robber of my
liberty! I know not of who^ to complain me; not of love; for it showed it
self favorable in my behalf. I complain me of his cruelty, seeing that he,
seeing the sincere faith wherewith I loved him, never vouchsafed to give me one
sparkle of hope, but rejoiced to see me for him in so sweet annoy. Oh, my
sons, if the heavens grant you life, and by them it be determined that you
become loue^ vass^ls, fly cruelty, which is that which does most blemish and
dishonor those that den^e therein: In the rest I would have you resemble your
warlike father, but not in cruelty, who does tyrannize over her who bare in
her womb. Oh, my Selia, I am of opinion, (seeing the strangeness which this
prince shows unto me) that to see me in his country, will yield him new
cause of lothing; which to imagine, there is no death comparable to it.

Sovereign Lady, (answered the Damsel) you living so assured, whereof would
you more, then to love him with your soul, which makes show to abhor you?
But I am of opinion, that your going into Grecia should ease you of your sorrow
and yield you much content.

I shall never be so happy (my Selia) as to attain to the ^ight of a thing so
pleasing, as that might be, and the greatest yt fortune could give me, to see
him acknowledging how much I have loved him. This shall be some ease to my
pain, seeing the heavens have made all other impossible, that he is husband of
the Infanta of Niquea. Herein did this Lady pass her wearisome days, taking
no other pleasure (as I have said) but to walk abroad in the fresh shadow, in
a grove of poplar trees.

It happened one day, that walking abroad somewhat early, even when the sun
from the highest heavens sent his heat into the world, being somewhat annoyed
there with, they came to the fountain to refresh them, where they saw the
valorous Tinacrian, who to pass the afternoones heat, was come to this
fountain. This free young Batchelour was washing his fair face, when they
approached, being somewhat out of countenance, for that they had left their
company behind them, and also to find him so alone; hand in hand they came
thither, at the instant when the son of Garrofilea lifted up his head to
behold them. The Tinacria^ did some what resemble Rosabel, and so the new and
sudden sight caused so great alteration in the enamoured Princess, that she
certainly believed that he was her beloved prince: Joy so much suprized her
amourous heart, that she therewith fell breathless, into a swoone, giving an
amourous scritch, saying, Oh my Rosabel. This could not so be colored, but
that the free Tinacrian might well understand, that his dear cousin-germane
had travailed into those countries, and that this Lady much loved him; he
speedily came to the place, where Selia held her in her lap with so great
heaviness, that it caused the prince to accompany her therein.

What sudden mishap is happened to this Lady (said the son of Trebacius?) If
it be anything, wherein I, with the hazard of my life, may procure her remedy,
I will perform it so far forth, as it to me shall be possible.

The cause of this disease is so inueterate (answered Selia,) maruayling to see
a man so fair, and assuring herself also that it was not Rosabel, (for that he
was more strongly set) that notwithstanding that many have attempted to remedy
it, being men of much worth, yet all that they could do, has been but to
remove the humors. The fair Lady giving a deep sigh, came again to her
self, sheadding many bitter tears, which upon her fair cheeks, showed like
Oriental pearls; she fixed her deceived eyes upon the fair young man, until
that at y^ last she was assured that he was not Rosabel. It grieved her very
soul, that she had given so manifest a sign of her being another man's, and
not her own, in presence of that gentle Knight, who although that he had no
experience in love, yet he might nevertheless well perceive, that she was in
love. He again reiterated the offer of his life to be employed in her
service, for the recovery of her delight. The Gods requite you, gentle Knight,
answered the Lady, for your noble offer, which is correspondent to the great
valor, which your personage does represent: My annoy is so rooted in my soul,
that any remedy whatsoever to be applied, will but double my sorrow: only
sometime, as now, it yields me some ease, to make show of the evil which I
endure, and it has not been to any small purpose, seeing I find, that it has
moved those to pity me, which never knew me. The duty, (fair Lady) which I
acknowledge to owe to al those which please to use my service, is so general
that it forced me (seeing the great extremity, whereunto this evil as you
say, had brought you) to offer my life in quest of some means, to breed your
rest. It may be well perceived, valorous Knight (said the Lady) that if we
should entreat you to show your valor to purchase our contentment, you would
do it, as he which best might.

The amorous reasons of the fair Lady could no further proceed, for that they
heard a most terrible great noise. This young gallant betook him to his
weapons, because that to be found without them, it should not put in doubt that
which his valor did assure: he had hardly laced his Helmet, and embraced his
strong shield, when through the thickest of the wood, he saw approach two most
^^erce Giants, and with them a Knight of a gallant resemblance, richly armed;
he would not remain on f^^t, but getting to his gallant courser, skipt into
the Saddle, and with his lance in his hand, stayed to see what they would,
willing the Ladies to draw near to the fountain; for the manner of their
coming seemed not to be to do them any pleasure. By this, they were all
three arrived, and the Knight putting up his beuer, somewhat more discovering
his face, said, Many days, sovereign Princess Silepsia, with costly
experience to my heart, I have made show of my sacrificed faith to your
beauty, procuring (to my cost) by all possible means your content, and yet
could never obtain any the least hope; not that I would be beloved; for that
were to renew my life: but you would not so much as once regard my pain, not
withstanding yt you were ye cause thereof: The heuens have now permitted me to
come so in the nick, to understand how little you shall lose, to answer to my
pain: and knowing this, marvel not, though I procure that by force, which I
deserve should be freely bestowed on me; and so you are to have patience, for
you shall be mine in despite of all the world.

Well have I understood, Prince of Libonia, (answered the Lady) the affection
which you have ever showed me, and to be such as deserved worthy
correspondence: but never faithful lover, which delighted in the renown of a
worthy Knight, took pleasure to win affection, which was already settled; for
therein he should rather resemble a rigorous lover, then a man of that faith,
which you say you have borne unto me; and so seeing the impossibility in my
behalf, I have procured by all possible means to let you understand, how
small means I had to yield you remedy. Such affection as is mine (said the
Barbarian) accepts no such fained excuses as these, which you make unto me.
And seeing the heavens bear record how much I desire your content, there is no
prolonging of time, seeing my fortune has ordained it. He had scarcely ended
his speeches, when one of the Giant^ drawing near, stretched out his arm to
seize on her; which being dismayed, giving a great (...), cast her self to the
ground, which (...) the cause that the Giant could take no hold of her. But he
had no ne^d to do it, for the fierce young gallant, son of Garrofilea,
brandishing his reuengeful Lance, rai^^ng himself upon his Sti^r^ps, hurled
it with such for^e, that Mars himself did malice to see how great a (...) he
gave for hitting him right ((...) unawares) in the midde^^ of his spacious
breast, the well steeled Trenchant made so great a ^^ud-gate, that the h^rd
plates of Steel were not sufficient to s^ay it from appearing out at his
back, colored with his fresh blood. There needs not any great question to
be made, whether the Lady were glad thereat, or no, seeing it gave her
courage to raise up her self, to see with what force the free Tinacrian ^urned
heat against his two enemies, the which little remembered what to Knight^ did
appertain; both at once charged their ^aunces in the midest of his ^ree breast:
they made him vilely to bend in his Saddle, striking his head against his horse
buttocke: and it was no marvel, for these two valiant men charged him in
great fury, to see their friend slain.

The valorous Tinacrian recovering again his seat, and ward, returned upon
them, the Giant he found alone, who with a weighty Ma^e of steel came toward
him, giving place and time to the Prince to seize on the Lady, who lifting her
voice to heaven, cried to the Tinacrian for help. The Giant gave him so much
to do, that the Prince had time to depart in safety with his pray; which so
much despited the son of Trebacius, that he was ready to burst with anger,
calling himself coward, that one Knight should be able to withhold him from
helping that fair Lady, so unjustly taken; he doubled herewith ^o thick and
furious blows, as would have rent the most hard rock. But he had before him,
one, who held himself to have no equal in the world: the fair Poliphebus
desired to hazard ye fortune of the battle at one blow: and so approaching to
the Pagan, made show to stay for him; he lifted up his fearful Mace, and had
not fully done it, when the Youth flew within him, and with a blow struck it
out of his hands, and held the victory for his: and seeing that delays might
breed danger, redoubling his force, he struck him on the head, the blow was so
terrible, that it made him senseless. The Tinacrian was not a young man, which
would let slip opportunity, particularly in a matter of such importance,
which concerned no less then the Ladies liberty: and so the Moore being in
this trance, he with the greatest care of the world, with his sword in both
his hands, with all his power struck him upon the crown of the head; the
helmet could yield no defense, for he claue it so, as it fell at his horse
feet, and dispatched him suddenly. He turned about as swift as thought,
following the trace of the bold aduenturous Prince, and fortune was favorable
unto him; for without any let, within one mile where the battle began, he saw
the Prince with his pray, flying swifter then the wind; the Falcon never slew
so swift after the fearful Hearon, as this valorous Tinacrian, who giving the
spurs to his horse, made him to run swifter then the steeds of golden Apollo.
And thus riding, he called to the Prince to stay, whose voice caused this
gallant lover, whose haste to himself seemed slow, still to spur his horse;
for it sufficed him not, to see and hold his Lady in his arms, but with her
to escape the arms of that young man, who as a furious Lion (his sword died in
blood) approached, and in his flight struck him upon the rich Helmet; and if
it had hit right, it had ended the war with that blow: But it was not to any
small purpose, seeing it made him (for his own defense) to set her to the
ground, being wholly senseless.

The son of Trebacius returned, saying, Ill it beseems him, who reckons
himself a worthy Knight, to do ^o vile a thing, as that which you have
committed, and against such a Lady, as is this; he came not so little offended,
as to stay for an answer; but that with the well steeled point he smote him
in the breast with such force, that he made him to feel his sword within his
flesh. The Moore was most nymble and skillful; and if he had gone away with
this blow, he might have prolonged his life, but to his greater harm, he would
needs close with the valorous Tinacrian, where al happened acrosse unto him;
and the Moore well perceiving his strength, gathered new forces from his most
mortal wounds, considering with himself, how much he lost in losing that
battle, and so he suffered him to enter, and with his sword in both his
hands, he smote him upon the rich helmet, and had revenged the death of his
two companions, and recovered the Lady, had not the well tempered fine metal
been between; the which, although it gave the young man his life, yet it could
not defend him, but that it brought his head as low as the pommell of the
saddle, casting out blood, both at his nose and mouth: he reached him yet
another, which made him almost forget himself. Never was Eagle more furious in
defending her nest, then the Tinacrian showed himself, turning toward the
furious Pagan, and hitting him upon the helm; it sounded like a bell, and made
him tremble like an Aspen leaf, being shaken with the fresh wind in Autumn:
he smote off his crest, leaving him mortally wounded, and seeing him stagger,
he claspt him in his well brawned arms, whose betters the world contained not;
and pulling him from his saddle, he bare him in his arms, to the place where
the Lady was, being perfectly come to her self, who ioyed to see how well he
had revenged her quarrel. He leapt with him from his horse, and with his
poniard ended his life and love, in the sight of the Lady, whom he best loved
in the world: the which joyful and secure, rose from the place where she sat,
and with a countenance, which would have made love it self in love, she went
to the free young man, casting her arms about his neck, which I know not who
would have refused, and with a cloth wiping his armor sparkled with blood,
said, Well has my friendly fortune ordained, (valorous man at arms) that
although that your first offer served not for a medicine to cure the wounds of
my soul, yet with the second, restoring my life and honor, you have wholly
bound me unto you; and so I entreat you in the name and behalf of those things
which you love best in ye world, to tell me your name, and of what country you
are: for I am of opinion, that I shall yet love you better, for some other
reason* then for all that you have now done for me. Well did this young gallant
understand her; and so desiring thoroughly to satisfy her, he said, Worthy
Lady, the Gods do bear me record, how great joy I conceive for my coming into
your Kingdom, in time to do you some service: and know, that my Country is
Tinacria, and I am son to the Emperor Trebacius, and he, among all my whole
kindred, whom I love best, is the Prince of the great Britany. Afresh returned
the most fair Eufronisa to embrace him, saying. Now valorous Prince, I say,
that I will not rest beholding unto you, seeing that in giving me life, it has
been to the end I should increase my love toward that cruel Prince, whom you
say you love so much. And as we le^t speaking, streams of tears flowed from
her fair eyes, and she considered her oversight, saying, Marvel not, (noble
Prince) to see the many shows of my indiscretion: for the ^eruent affection
wherewith Rosabel is beloved in this Country, is such, and the cruelty which
he shows toward me, is so rigorous, that it forces me to complain of him,
seeing I have so dearly loved him. I would not for any thing in the world,
most worthy Lady, (answered the Prince) that I should give you any cause of
discontent, for I receive so much herein, that I know not ought, that may free
me thereof, although that if it may be held for an excuse, that he have not
equalled your affection, his being elsewhere devoted, yet a sufficient reason
it yields, to cause you to show your self less passionate. I never desired
(most valiant Knight) that he should wholly requite my love, seeing it
impossible for him to do: I only desired that he should consider that I loved
him, and how sweet a life I held it, and how much I ioyed to be his. But (Oh
extreme dolor!) it appears that if I did live, but to love him, he in good
earnest took pleasure to abhor me. Here did I furnish him with horse and
arms: and here did I show him the most faithful sincere affection, that ever
was contained in any humane breast. In my Palace did I cure him of his wounds,
hoping that that would have moved him to have cured those which he had given
me: but to my greater grief, I sent him hence whole and sound, and he left me
here, so, as you see me. Let it not (noble Prince) offend you to hear my
passionate complaint; for I would not have spoken it to any man in the world,
but to such a one, as were so near a kinseman, and dear friend as are you, to
that cruel Knight; and know, that my constancy shall serve for an example to
ye world: for first shall my soul forsake my body, before I leave to be his.
Behold and see unto what estate affection has brought me: for in hope to see
him, it does not grieve me to see my father, in the behalf of the Souldan of
Niquea to go against him. And I beseech you, valorous Prince, seeing you mean
to serve in those famous wars, to remember, some day to tell him, that
Eufronisa is in the Camp, not in show of an enemy, but as a tributarie. Much
did the cruelty of his kinseman grieve the Prince of Tinacria; wherefore to
comfort this noble Lady, he said, Be not dismaide (noble Lady) for I promise
you on my faith, and as I am a Knight, that I will so bring it to pass, that
in Grecia, the prince Rosabel shall visit you, and acknowledge the favor which
in this country he has received at your hands. I desire no greater joy for my
whole life time, answered the Lady, but only to see him, and that, that with
some acknowledgement he may understand, how much I have loved him; and herewith
let us go, for that Lady staieth for us, who is a witness of what I endure.

Upon the dead Princess horse, the Tinacrian set the Lady, and himself
mounted upon his own; they returne^ so pleasant and merry, that, but for the
remembrance of the loss of her sons, nothing could yield her so great joy;
of love was all their discourse, although this Youth had small skill therein:
But fortune determined to prepare him with those shows of love, meaning
shortly to subject him thereto; holding it for base, seeing he was not yet
subdued. Some horsemen they met upon the way, of her guard, which in a great
troop came galloping, fearing that they had lost the Kings daughter. Here
would the Prince have taken his leave, without coming to the City of
Goltuerg, where the King made preparation for his departure; but at the instant
request of the Princess and the discreet Silia, he could not refuse to go
with them, upon condition, that by no means they should discover who he was.

Being arrived at the City, it nothing amazed him to see it in arms, and the
great number of Knights, which hourly arrived there, among which were many most
fierce Giants; neither the great abundance of warlike instruments, which were
prepared in that City: for well he knew in what readiness his father would
be. Eight days remained he there, with the greatest entertainment in the
world: for the king knowing in what manner he had rescued his daughter, knew not
how to requite it him. At the end of which time, (with a determination to go
into Tinacria, and there to levy the mighttest Army, that possibly he should
be able, in the behalf of his father) he took his leave of that gallant
Lady, with such a farewell, as made him sorrowful. She likewise within four
days after, took her way toward Grecia, with her fathers Army, with so
great a desire to be there, that she imagined that the heavens could yield her
no greater content. The words of the Tinacrian did much hearten her, who in a
well rigd Galley directed his course toward his Country, with his aforesaid
determination. But the third day after his being at sea, the sea began to work
in such sort, that he lost his voyage, casting him by divine providence, into a
straight of the Mediterranean sea, where he wandered 3. days, and the fourth
took land in the most sweet and pleasant country that ever he had seen in
his life. He leapt ashore, desirous to know in what country he was arrived,
commanding the Mariners there to attend him; and with his Squire only, he
began to enter a most pleasant shadow of Poplar trees, where he took pleasure
in the fresh air thereof, seeming unto him, that there, industrious nature had
taken great care to exceed all humane art.

When he had travailed about a mile therein, busying his eyes in beholding the
stately Poplars and lofty Cedars, at the end of this wood, in the midst of a
fair field, he beheld the stateliest Palace that could be imagined; ye height
thereof seemed to touch the clouds, with such variety of stone, that it seemed
a work of the high heavens, or that it was the habitation of some rulers
thereof. This fair Castle was compassed with a br^ad ditch, cross the which
did run a main river; there were certain bridges which led to the Castle;
the principal he wondered at: for notwithstanding that it had but one A^ch,
yet the workmanship was very curious, for all the battlements were of most
pure white Alablaster. There entered the son of Garriofilea, beholding the
sore front of the Castle, the richnes whereof he could not value; it was shut
with most strong gates, wherein were engraven many Histories, with most rich
checker-worke of gold. This Tinacrian dismounted from his horse, the better to
behold the work; and giving his horse to his Squire, with a very speedy pace,
he marched toward the gates, where, of force I must leave him; for there is
so much else to be said, that there is no other remedy.

CHAP. V. Of that which happened to the Prince Claridiano, and to Florisiano of
Apulia, in their return from Lucania.
IT behooves me, (most noble Prince) the better to give delight in so long an
History, to follow the rule of well consorted music, sometimes striking the
sharp and loud strings of Cupid, treating of his sundry effects, and of his
power in a mind subject to a thousand passions; sometimes following the sound
and churlish buzzing of angry Mars, to the end, in ye end to make a pleasing
conclusion of all together: and where I find a lover, to conclude his
constancy, seeing how much many have held, not dismaying at any their beloved
Ladies disdain; but even when they have showed themselves most froward, have
continued most kind and constant, purifying in the extremest of their torments,
the forces of their hearts. And to him which will follow his liberty, and
therewith furious Mars his drum, it may appear how earnestly many have
followed it, and with how great content they have past the gates of the hard
Diamond, so as to give content to all, it behooves me to treat sometimes of
love, and sometimes of Mars his furious and horrible blows, and having left
the son of Garrifilea, so pleasant and victorious, setting Eufrosina at
liberty, it shall not be amiss, to prosecute the love of the Lord of Apulia,
which to those which delight in a sweet History, is the most principal, who
most faithfully loved and was least regarded, fortune showing in him her power,
what she is able to do when she will.

The Greek much desired, that his affairs might attain to a happy end; for
in his soul he much affected the prince Florisiano, who seemed to him one of
the most discreet that over dealed therein: and passing the seas, they
discoursed of a thousand things, and all of love: the wind being favorable,
they made a pleasing voyage; and being both enamored, with discourses of love,
they passed the loathsome t^yle of the seas, until the tenth day, at what time
the fair Aurora began to show her self in the East, foreshewing her brothers
coming. On the shores-side of Italy they discovered a very fair Galley, which
came with sail and cares more swift then thought.

The Greek betook him to his weapons, to the end yt retchlesnesse should
yield no ill success; and so they stayed, until drawing near, they heard
them, bid them amayne, except they would all be dead. He did not therefore
command to strike their main sail, but only to ^aye for them, and to see
who it was, that with such pride so threatened them, and is lying by the sea,
they stayed, until they might see aloft upon the poope a deformed Giant, and
about some twelve Knights, and the two Galleyes aboording, they might within,
hear the complaining voice of certain wronged women.

The valiant Prince of Greece was very suspicious, and any matter that might
concern women (to whom in former time he had vowed his aid) did much
trouble him. He turned himself to the Prince of Apulia, saying, Never trust
me, valorous Prince, but there are in this Galley, some Ladies prisoners; for
their lamenting does manifest as much, and therefore I would not for any thing
in ye world, being able to succor them, leave them, for any hap, though never
so dangerous Do as you think good (valorous Knight) said the gentle
Florisiano, for I, to lose my life (...) your service, shall but ^equite the
generositie wherewith you have offered yours to yield me content. I agree not
herein (said the Greek loner) but yt you remain a^oord this galley, and
suffer no man to enter: as for ye rest let me alone. And herewith hoysed all
the sails, and with sails and dares made after yt enemy, which stayed for
the^, accounting them very ill advised, having as it seemed within board, but
^armed man. And drawing near, Trebacius his nephew lifting a little up his
beuer, with a loud voice said, I desire, sir knight, yt you should tell me
whither you are bound: for if you sail toward Niquea we may the more safely
make our voyage together incompany from the danger on the seas, by reason of
these alterations and wars which sound over all the world. The fierce Giant
answered, saying, Our Galley, sir knight, goes so safe from any ill success
that may happen unto her, with those that are within bo^rd, that we have no
need of company, except you desire ours to make your voyage with such safety
as you desire; and therefore it suffiseth that your Galley may go with ours.

This is superfluous favor (said the Greek) fading fear, and to the end we
may go the more at pleasure, I pray you take aboard you a Squire, who is in
great fear, for that he hears that certain Greeks scour this coast. Let
it be as you will (said the Giant) and if he will, he shall see, how little I
esteem those proud knights of whom he is so much afraid; and so commanded to
strike sail, and to lay his Galley so near to the princes, that he might
easily (lying near together) leap aboard where the Giant was, and did it with
such dexterity, that when they betook them to their defense, he was already
aboard, with his sword in his hand, saying, It is requisite, you traitors, that
you leave your pray and your lives, for payment for your presumption. He
stayed for no answer, neither strained any curtsie; for before they could fit
themselves, he had slain two of the^. It was wonderful to behold, how he
cast himself amidst the thickest of the throng, and it is not a thing to be
written in so true an History as this which I prosecute, what this valiant
youth performed. Lirgandeo says, that at three blows he smote down six
knights at the Giants feet, who blaspheming heaven and earth, lifting up his
terrible axe, came toward the lover, making the Knights to give place. They
never better performed their Masters commandment then now: for no less then
their lives depended thereon. The fierce Giant gave so vehement a blow, which
made such noise, that it seemed to thunder in the air. It seemed not to the
lover of Arquisilora any wisdom to stay the lighting of so rude a blow: and so
winding himself on one side, seeing the blow come from aloft, he let it slip,
which came as it were thundering in the air: he smote it an hand deep in the
hatches of the ship, which was a very great good hap for the Greek: for by
that means, being unable to pull it out, so soon as he would, he joined with
him, and with both his hands gave him a blow on the thick helm. It little
profited him that it was three fingers thick; for he smote the greater part
thereof from his head, and left him sore wounded, and withal made him to
reele, he paid him the second time better then at the first: for hitting him
right upon the huge great arms, he made him let go his battaile-axe, which
put him to such pain, that he had much to do, to put his hand to his side, to
draw a broad crooked fauchion, wherewith flourishing, he assailed the prince.
There was no room in the Galley to shun ye swift coming thereof, neither was
it possible to ward the terrible blow with his most strong shield, which (for
the finenesse thereof) although that he could not cleave, yet he beat it to
his helmet with so great force, that he made him set both his knees to ye
ground.

Never did Knight better bear himself in a particular fight, then this prince
did: for oftentimes, with his agilitie and discretion he knew how to make his
benefit of his ill happes, against his enemy, as now, without loosing his
ward, by reason of this great blow: for he gave him a great slash over the
legs. This was it which assured him of the battle, for hitting him a little
beneath the gartering place, he cut it almost half off, he would not so give
over without giving him one more, which was a very fearful stroke, which
wholly bereaved him of his right foot: he made him go backewards with less
steadfastness then in battles is required.

The valorous Batchelour rose again on his feet, attending the fierce Pagan,
who came upon him, casting a thick smoke out at his beuer, but wanting the
assistance of his leg, he was to strike him with his eyes; he was
constrained to set him on his knee, and in that manner to attempt the doutful
victory, it cannot be imagined how great contentment the Prince of Apulia
received, in seeing the marueiles in arms, which that Knight performed,
esteeming himself happy to have such a companion.

By reason of the great noise which was made in this battle, out of a cabin
of the Galley came one of the most fair Ladies that ever was seen, all clad
in green Satin cut upon most fine cloth of Gold, and her yellowish hairs
hanging loose about her shoulders, pouring streams of tears down her fair
cheeks, which resembled the most rich Oriental Pearls, who seeing how
victoriously this Knight had borne himself, to give him the greater courage,
said, Let these cruel and accursed caitiffes dye, and assure your self, I
will not leave your travail unrewarded.

The Greek needed no new favors, for he had already ranged the Giant so well
to his will, that he would not give him so much space as to draw his breath,
and desiring to make an end of the war, making amends with a mighty blow upon
ye Moore, he closing, came to handy gripes and cast him on his back on the
floor, bereauing him at the very instant of his life, in the despite of all
those knights which would have hindered it; with which he returned again into
a deadly battle, but it lasted not long; for he lost all patience.

The cruel Lion is not more furious in the midst of the sheepe-flocke, nor a
she Bear that is robbed of her whelps, then was he among those which
remained; he overthrew three with mortal wounds, which gave occasion to the
rest (who before with much hate did resist him) to throw away their swords,
and to fall down and humbly entreat him to pardon them their lives.

The noble minded Knight easily granted it; for choler did never so much
blind him, as to make him tread that compassion under feet, which ought to
be held with those which yield.

By this time the fair Prince of Apulia was come aboard the Galley, who
embracing the Grecian, said, Fortune will not now (most puissant Knight) show
herself so cruel unto me, seeing it has together given me satisfaction for
so many troubles, bringing me in due time to joy at the view of your worthy
acts.

It is sufficient glory for me (noble Prince) answered the Greek, to have
deserved so generous a commendation, as what I hear from your mouth, which
has given me occasion to esteem better of my self, then my valor has
deserved.

The gallant Lady ended their discourse, who like a chased Lioness, taking
notice of whom she had held for a captive, who was also Lord of her soul,
wherewith she loved him, without giving the Greek any thanks for the
liberty which he had given her, clasping her arms about his neck, she
said, I never thought, neither Iaroe, with such satisfaction, as this, to
enjoy thy presence, or that Fortune should have ended my disgrace in this
manner: but the heavens have so decreed, that she who is borne to be thine,
shall be no man's else.

Now I will not complain of Iaroe, for I am persuaded, he would not have so
forgotten me, as the Prince of Apulia. With this, the gentle young man
presently knew her to be the fair Troyla, daughter to the King of Argel,
where he had been a captive.

The gallant Lady had made this Prince so much beholding to her, for the many
signs of good will which she showed him, being in prison, that at the instant
bowing his knees to the ground, desiring to kiss her hands, he said, My
troubles, noble Princess of Argel, have been such, since the destinies
ordained my departure from thy presence, that I know not how they have given
me leave to live, neither to think upon Iaroe, but the Prince of Apulia, as
he who at the last yielded himself more beholding, acknowledges the much and
many favors, which he has received at your hands, offering you now anew, his
life to be at your service, and speak I pray you, to this venturous Knight:
for both ours to him is due, according to the much which he has performed.
The Lady acknowledged the error whereinto she was fallen; but seeing it was
for love, it was to be excused.

Then began she to discourse of this valorous Greek, and to enquire who he
might be, and what adventures he had past? And hearing what the prince of
Apulia said of him, she said, Pardon (most worthy Knight) my retchlesnesse, in
that I have not all this while given you thanks, for that which you have done
for my liberty, which only may be esteemed a thing whereof there rests for
me no hope to make any requital, which the heavens reward you in your
greatest necessity. The great displeasure which I conceived against this
Knight, for departing out of my prison without my leave, was the occasion of my
oversight.

For many errors, (worthy Lady) this only were a sufficient excuse, if there
had been any such: how much more then, where there was none committed? Much
time they spent in entertaining with these sweet discourses. To entertain in
such manner (worthy Ladies,) is no error, which I leave to your discreet
considerations, omitting therewith the tediousness wherewith I should proceed.

The long absence of the Prince of Apulia, had given no occasion to lose any
part of the affection which she bare unto him when he was present; her
steadfast beholding him did manifest as much. All this did but increase the
Greek lovers pain, to see himself so unfortunate, and absent from his Lady,
and with such disgrace banished, and not to return into Grecia without
license, bearing the name of Claridiano.

It did somewhat grieve the Prince of Apulia, to see the coffeehouse of the
knight of Cruelty: he was generally so called of al men; for that was his
device in his shield. The gentle conversation of the Princess, did much
comfort him, whom these princes entreated to declare the cause of her
imprisonment. I can tell you none, valorous Knights, but that being one day in a
garden, upon the Stronds side, to recreate my self, in company of these four
Damsels, this accursed Giant, by chance, with the fury of the wind, came to
ariue at the gardens bancke side, he with those Knights entered, and coming
through the thickest, they arrived at certain fountains, where we were
solacing our selves. To small purpose served the callings and outcries which
we made, calling for help, that they should not carry us away to their
Galley. It was yesterday twelve days, he told me by the way, that he was of
the squadron of Ocho, vassal to the Prince of Almayne, in whose service he
went to the wars against the Greeks, in company of the Emperor of the
Romans, and to the same effect my Father is upon parting with the king of
Carthage, which are to join with the Souldan of Niquea, whom (as they say)
this war does principally concern, for the theft, which a Prince of the
Greeks committed, in stealing one of his Daughters; they purpose to ruinate
the whole Empire, according to the great numbers of men which they levy. This
is all that I can say, concerning my imprisonment. And seeing I shall not find
the King my Father at Argel, (for by this time he is gone) I should be very
glad, if you would take me with you: for being in company with such Knights,
for the present, nothing in the world could yield me the like content. You
shall do us (answered Florisiano) great favor, to take us with you, for
Knights of your guard. Whereto the Greek agreed, dissembling the grief he
conceived, to hear how great troops of men were levied to war against his
parents; he determined with himself to take his way toward Grecia, disguised
with new arms secretly, without acquainting any man therewith, except the
Knight of the Lions, who was the gentle Claramant. The Princes often times
discoursed concerning the success of the Prince of Ap^lia, and swear that it
should be kept secret, without discovering to any man who he was. With fair
weather they sailed six days, and on the seventh they discovered the land of
Lucania, with such alteration of the Prince of Ap^lia, that standing aloft to
behold it, the Lady said unto him, You shall do ill, to go ashore in this
land, which we have discovered, (valorous Prince) seeing that you will land
therein, with so sad and heavy countenance. Some things have happened unto me
to my liking, answered the Prince; but the most ordinary and that which makes
me to absent my self from my Country and friends, is that which carries me
after the current of my hard happes. (Love most noble Prince, is not so sweet
to be endured, nor so easy to be concealed, but that howsoever a man will go
about to dissemble the matter, hiding the grief of his soul, yet he will
give signs and certain notice thereof.) The Prince of Greece was of opinion*
plainly to discover it, for in his soul he was grieved; for it was a matter
to touch a man: for her beauty did deserve, that the Prince of Apulia should
love her: but he dissembled, offering himself to any danger that might yield
content to Florisiano. They attributed it to the great generositie of his
mind, desiring much, that occasion might be offered to requite the same. They
leapt to shore, and he of Ap^lia took the Arms of one of the Giants Knights,
which best fitted him, and a mighty horse, which was the dead Giants: other
four they took for the Ladies, which were with the Princess. They gave
commandment to the Mariners of the Galley, to attend them there: and licensing
the Giants galley to depart, they took the most direct and beaten way that
they saw: all the Ladies ware skarfes, which they cast over their faces, to go
the more unknown. There was never seen a fairer company: for the Ladies were
all young maids, and the others enamoured, so as there was no discourse of any
thing between the^, but of love. From the one side to the other rode th^se
valiant warriors, managing their horses with so great a grace, as Mars
himself: the Lady taking great pleasure therein, accounting it a pleasure, to
travel all the world over in company of such Knights, their valor assuring
her from al danger. By the same way that they went, they saw eight Knights
coming toward them, very richly armed, to whom at their meeting, the Greek
in their own language said (for he could speak any in the world) We shall
take it for favor, Sir Knights, to know of you, what Country this is, and how
far it is to any Town. Well pleased with his good speeches and behavior,
The Country, Sir Knights, wherein you are, (answered one, who seemed to be
Captain of all the rest,) is the populous Lucania, very near unto the famous
City of Troba; it would yield you great delight, to see the marvelous
stately buildings thereof: but now all the Country is so troubled with these
wars, which are a beginning, that there is no pleasure or contentment,
especially now, by reason of the importunacie of Asternio Prince of Calabria,
who has declared himself for a great lover and suitor unto the Princess
Polinarda, although it is imagined, that she admits none of his services:
But the King has so effectually dealt in the matter, that she is promised unto
him for his wife, in stead of his brother, whom they put to death through her
occasion. Greatly was the Prince of Apulia moved with the words of these
knights, although he past it over, holding the matter as concerning himself,
and holding such company as the Greek Prince, who desirous to return into
Grecia, to the aid of his parents, taking leave of these Knights, thanking them
for the news which they had told them, he said, Ualorous Princes, the best and
most certain mean yt I know to deal in this business, is, to remit it to the
fortune of my valor, and so to bereave this Prince (which procures your
spoils) of the mean thereto, here freeing us from any success that may
happen, to send a messenger to ye King of Lucania, that I will maintain the
beauty of this Lady, against any Knight that shall say the contrary, at al
assaies, to be the fairest that is in this kingdom: which shall give occasion
to this Knight (if he love and be valiant, as he is reported to be) to take it
in ill part, that any should be preferred before his Lady, and coming to
blows with him, for nothing in the world will I give over the battle: and if
the heavens grant us victory (as I hope they will) it shall be an easy
matter for you to carry the Lady away, she bearing you such good will, as you
say she does, and being in your Country, you may defend her against all the
world, or otherwise make your return into Grecia, in company with this Lady,
wherein you shall do the king of Argel great service, delivering her into his
hands. They all agreed to this, which the Knight of Cruelty had devised, and so
in conclusion, they dispatched a Damsel in company with Polisandro, to deliver
the message to the King, they remaining in a wood, expecting answer, which
shall be declared in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. How the Damsel delivered the ambassade to the King of Lucania, in
the behalf of the Knight of Cruelty, who admitting the same, the matter came
to trial.
AS Polisandro and the Damsel (as says Galtenor) were departed from the
Princes, with the Greek Princes message, and were come within two miles of the
great City of Troba, at what time as the King was newly risen from dinner,
accompanied with many principal knights, among which was the most strong
Astrenio, which was now respected of every body as the Kings son: they
desired leave to enter, which was granted, in the presence of many Ladies, and
the fair Polinarda, with Solesia the Princess of Campania, and her valorous
lover Lisander. The Damsel doing such reverence, as in such cases is
accustomed, the King willing her to deliver her ambassade, she began in this
manner: Thou shall understand (mighty King of Lucania) that in the confines of
the red Sea* in that part which boundeth upon Media, there lies a most
populous and rich Island, called the I Will of plate, for the great abundance,
which the earth there brings forth: of which Island is Queen, one of the most
accomplished Ladies of the world, called Troyla, with whom the mighty Prince
of Cumagena, (traveling through the world to seek his adventures, seeing her
rare beauty) fell in love, and that with such feruencie, that according to the
show which he has made thereof, nothing but death only may suffice to divert
him from his amorous conceit: he has performed (most Sovereign King) so
many and so great matters in the service of this Lady, that of very duty,
(and considering with her self, that it was no disgrace to her to accept him
for her Knight) thee resolved to admit his service, and him for her servant.
With the favors which she bestowed on him, he began again anew to make
triumphs for joy, in such manner, that she consented and promised to be wholly
his: She (valorous King) stands so assured on her self and her beauty, that
she requested him, in requital of the faith which she vowed unto him, to carry
her to the Courts of the most famous Kings, for the space of two years, to
maintain her beauty. A small request seemed unto her lover, that which she
required, and to all others that knew him, seeing by experience the great
valor which the heavens had infused into him. And now they go, accomplishing
the two years quest, performing such adventures therein, with so much honor to
them both, that he is held for one of the most valorous Knights of the world,
and hearing the fame of this Court and of the gallantrie of the Ladies of the
same, he would not pass by into Grecia, before he had here made proof of what
power his adventure might be, he yields to the battle at all perils: for
some having proceeded to the Iusts only, have remained thoroughly grieved,
bringing the battle to no perfection; wherefore he hate sent to entreat thee,
(if it shall so please thee) to send him safe conduct, to the end he may
maintain the cause for which he comes. Here ended the Damsel her Oration,
leaving not one in all the hall, which did not wonder at her bold demand. Some
rumor began among the young Knights, making a scoff thereof, auouching that
the Ladies whom they served, had attained to the highest of all beauty. Well
did the King understand it, and dissembling the same, answered the Damsel,
(which coming in the name of an Ambassador, was to be honorably entertained)
I do thankefully accept (fair Damsel) of the pleasure, which this Knight
with his presence will do unto this court, although (as I am persuaded) he
shall here purchase more enemies then friends: for here being Princes, which
delight in Ladies service, they will never yield to so general an offense, as
is this. The most strong Astermo could not dissemble his coffeehouse,
deeming, that therein was great disgrace done to his Polinarda, who said thus,
I do rather wi^h (fair Damsel) that this Knight had first seen the Ladies
of this Palace, that he might have perceived the error which he maintains,
before he had with such overboldness, defied their gallants. I am of opinion,
Sir Knight, (answered the dis^reet Damsel) that you have not yet made proof
of the power of love, seeing that you know not, that he which admireth the
beauty of his beloved, speaks according to his affection: I am of opinion,
that both of the one and the other, the Prince will put you out of doubt, if it
shall please the King to give him leave thereto. I grant it, quoth the King,
if he will; to the end we may see the effect of your hopes. The Lady would
have kissed the Kings hand for the savor which he granted, and returning, she
said, As these Princes (mighty King) have traveled a long journey, so come
they unfurnished of provision necessary; wherefore they pray thee to command a
Tent to be lent the^, seeing that the challenger is to make his abode therein.
Whatsoever shall please him (answered the King) I will command to be carefully
provided. In this manner (said the Lady with a high voice) begin you that are
enamoured, to set up your arms; for between this and to morrow, will come to
the Lists, the Prince of Comagena, with costly experience to make show of his
great valor. And so taking her leave of all, Polisander and she mounted on
horseback, and with a swift pace they returned to the wood, where they had
left the Princes, to whom (for by little and little they drew near to the
City) she delivered the message which she brought.

Much did Claridiano rejoice, to understand how well the Damsel had dispatched
her business. It might be about two of the clock in the afternoon, when
these valorous Princes came into the great Market place of the City of Troba,
leading between them the venturous Troi^a, so well pleased to see the good
which she hoped for, that she was as it were, ouerioyed. There were none but
did very attentively behold the Princes, the Lady seeming to them no less
fair, then the Knights to be of a good constitution, particularly he in the
yellew, whom by his device in his Shield they held to be the challenger, and
whom they deemed to be the most gentle Knight that was in that place. They
ware their visors perced, and bare their Lances in their hands. All the place
by this time was full of people, by reason of the report of their coming; and
so they approached to the beholders, where the King and all his daughters were,
the one doing that reverence to the others, as their estates did require.

The Greek a little lifting up his Beuer, said, Ualorous King of Lucania,
notwithstanding that my coming to thy Court has been to do thee pleasure,
yet my challenge I address to those, which profess themselves not to be their
own. Your coming (Sir Knight) is much esteemed (answered the King,) and so
at your pleasure you may begin to maintain the beauty of this Lady. When
they all entreated to come up to the beholders, in company of Polinarda, the
two Princes desired no other thing, accordingly as they had agreed: and so
alighting into the arms of him in the yellow, they led her up to the place,
where Polinarda was, who was very doubtful that Astermo should not lose that,
which the other held for certain.

All the courtly Ladies judged the fair Troyla, to be very beautiful,
Polinarda saying unto her, I now say, gallant Lady, that I marvel not, though
your Knight bear the prize in all hard adventures, justice being apparent on
his side; wherefore all good success is due unto him. This (noble Lady)
answered Troila, will be through the reflection from your beauty, mine being
very little. O prince of Apulia, who could help thee in the perplexity
wherein thou want? It was so much (most noble Prince) as who so had noted him,
might well have perceived it.

They spent not long time in discourses: for the Greek yet saw not the end of
his business, pricked forward with the necessity wherein his parents were,
and so doing a short reverence to the Ladies* giving his hand to the careful
lover, they came down the ^a^es, and mounting on their horses, they rode to a
most fair tent, which was in the midst of the place I would not, valorous
prince, (said the prince of Apulia) that any evil success should happen unto
Lisander my friend, and brother to my Sovereign Lady. There shall not (said
the Greek) for I will so handle the matter in the battle, that he shall lose
nothing, but that he shall not overcome.

By this time many were come into the place, who with their Arms would yield
testimony of what they felt in their souls. The first that tried their
fortunes, were two of the Kings nephews, young knights, and both much enamored,
but losing their saddles, there rested no more action for battle; for at two
encounters he put them and all the whole company out of doubt, that he wanne
the flower of cheualrie. Right before him past the prince of Campania, who was
but newly come to the Court, so enamored, that he made account (trusting
therein, to bear ye palm from the battle; his Arms were of the color of
the Lion, wrought over with gold; and in his shield, a sky, wherein was a
Lady: and beneath, Faith painted, only with this Inscription.

That in heaven which is reserved,
Will try the due by love reserved
Here below on earth.
His good gesture gave contentment to all. The sea beating against ye rocks,
does not make ^o great noise, as these two did at their encounter. The Prince
of Campania ^ell not, although in deed he made an ill favored bending
backwards in his saddle: he returned toward the Greek with his sword in his
hand; but the battle was unequal, for he seconded not his blow: and the
valiant Gre^ke, with his sword and shield making amends, first joined with him,
and with both his hands smote upon the top o^ his shield; there was no defense,
but he cast the one half thereof to the ground, the sword fighting on his
helmet with such ^^rce, that it set him senseless on the arson of the saddle.
The Greek was very desirous to end the battle, and so spurring his furious
horse, he ran against him with his breast, which cast them both to ground: and
the prince was so crazed with the fall, that he could not get from his horse.

The Ladies were much grieved that the prince of Campania should be overcome;
and most of all his sister the gentle Solersia, whose bravery had encouraged
the prince Lisander to come into the Lists, so well armed and disposed, that
the common people through affection, openly gave him the victory. He came
armed in a reddish armor, wrought all over with knots of gold, and in the
midst of his shield, Contentme^t, described after the manner as they depaint the
Arabia Foelix, set upon a Globe ruling the world, encompassed with this Mott,
Where hope is well assured,
And joined with steadfast constancy,
Fortunes mutabilitie
Is nothing to be feared.


Great pleasure did his mistress receive in his device, holding it done for
her sake, The prince of Apulia had given notice, that that was his dear
friend: wherefore the Greek with a soft pace went to him and said:

Ualorous prince of Lucania, there rests so little time to end so many
battles as yet remain, that I thought good to demand battle of you upon
condition, that whether of us that within two hours shall loose his Saddle,
through a stroke of his adversary, shall remain for overcome.

Be it, Sir Knight, (answered the prince) as you shall think good, presuming
to have the better of the battle. They managed their horses with so good a
grace, that Mars himself from his high throne took pleasure to behold it. At
what time as they should encounter, in sight of the whole troop, the valorous
Greek bare up his lance. There were few in that land, that could so well
behave themselves, and so gallantly, as he which was before him, who smote him
with such force, that it made him bend his body farther backwards then he
would: he past forwards, much esteeming of that Knight for his valor, and
hurled his lance with greater force, then if a man had discharged a culuerine,
striking the one half thereof into the hard ground, leaving the rest shaking
in the fresh wind, which did so much amaze all those that were present, as the
ouercomming of the prince of Campania: with a soft pace he came to the Knight.

There was no body there, but did note the honor which the Greek did unto
him; he was very near unto the prince, when he put his hand unto his sword,
more to defend himself the^ to offend ye other, as he made it to be plainly
seen: for the Prince of Lucania assailing him with his whole force, smote him
so great a blow upon ye top of ye helmet, yt it made him be^d down his head so
low as his breast; he came again with another, which the Greek took so ill,
that had not Florisiano been present, he had forgotten his generous
determination. With all this, not with the valor yt he could, but to put him
from him, he smote him every where where he could.

This is (gallant noble Ladies,) no ill will, said the sayre Troyla, that my
Knight has showed to his enemy, seeing how carelessly he proceeds in a matter
that so much concerns him; but I believe that ye justice of his cause
detaineth him which he sees in ye behalf of his adversary. They could not
answer her, for the great noise which was in the place: which was for that
that ye Greek imagining that the time was now expired, had closed with ye
prince, clasping his body within his brawny arms, he did not pluck him so
soon from his horse, as he would; for that that the valiancy of ye lover,
seeing what he had lost, did animaie him so, as he did somewhat detain him;
but it was but for a small time: for with a strong pluck he dismounted him,
desiring him yt he would not be overcome, but that he might hold him for his
friend. I desire no more, answered the prince, then mine eyes have seen, that
by so many ways you have won the palm of the battle: but seeing the heavens
will have it so, all is yours, and so will I be as long as I live. Many thanks
did the Greek give him for his offer, and so he mounted on horseback, the
valor of the knight of Cruelty being admired. There was none in that place,
(notwithstanding yt it was against their prince) but did extell with high
praises ye knight in ye yellow. The coming of the most valiant Asternio,
stayed their proceedings, whom show more mighty the^ Mars himself came mounted
upon a most ^urious flea-bitte^ colored horse, al his furnitures being of rich
green cloth of gold, sowe^ over with hearts, which made a very fair show; for
the defense of his horse, under this furniture, there was excellent fine mayle:
in his crest he wa^e a most fair plume, all spangled with gold, his armor was
of ye color of his furniture, saving that in the midst of his shield, in a
field azure, he bare a Lady so fair and well made, as it gave delight to all the beholders: before her was a Knight kneeling, showing her a burning heart
enflamed with a strange fire, and in ye border this Mot.

Well may this Sacrifice
Give hope assurance
Of great confidence.
Much did the fair Laydes extol the device of this gallant lover: But to the
fair Polinarda, who remembered her Florisiano, all this was a death; for she
had yielded her self to love, and who loves faithfully is not forgetull; but
absence rather reuiueth the memory of those which love perfectly, preserving
the touch of their faith.

The gentle disposition of this Moore did well please the Greek: but seeing
that without his death he could not accomplish his promise made to the prince
of Apulia, without further pausing on the matter, he turned about, and went to
the place where the lances were, where, with his own hands he made choice of
one of the greatest and most stiff and tough among them.

I am of opinion (said the fair Troila, seeing what he did) that the
affection is not alike, which my Knight showed to the prince of Lucania, to
that which he bears to him which is now before him. The occasion should not
be small (said the fair Solersia) who in her soul was grieved that Asternio
should by so many means procure Polinarda to be his wife. Let us see (quoth
she) what will become of this enmity; I am persuaded this battle will be
worth the seeing.

Now were these 2. famous warrious, confronting ye one the other, when the
Greek with a soft pace came toward him, saying, You already know (Sir
Knight,) the conditions of my demand, which are, that you tell me your name,
and the name of the Lady whom you serve; for to be assured that her beauty
does excel hers which is Lady of my life, without any battle I will yield
the prize.

I would not that we should have made so long delay (said the furious young
man) to make so long a discourse: for I am persuaded to resolve you sooner with
the battle, then to show you in fight the Lady whom I serve: Yet understand,
that I am called Asternio, prince of Calabria, and the Lady whom the heavens
have ordained for my Sovereign, is the kings daughter of this land. To have a
good foundation (said the valorous Greek) for you, to have presumed to lift
your affection to so high degree, it were without question no great matter to
give you the palm of this battle, and so I will have it, not in regard of
the beauty which the heavens have adorned the Lady withal, but to let you know
how presumptuous you have been, to make show to love her.

These discourteous speeches (said the warlike Moore) deserve the fury of the
brave Asternio, being as red in the face as a burning coal, without regard of
what to a knight did appertain, seeing him so near unto him, stung with that
which he had said, with more force then discretion, he hurled his well pointed
lance; only the excellence of Claridiano his shield saved his life: for being
unable to pierce it, the lance flew back again whole, but not in such sort,
but that it was likely to have made the Greek to have lost his Saddle; for it
made him strike his head upon his horse buttocks, which stood him in no less
stead, then the earth did Anteus; for redoubling his courage, he settled
himself with such wrath, that nothing could be more cruel; there was never
seen so angry countenance in any Knights, it made above four of the most
valiant to lose all the color in their faces, to see their furious encounters,
a good palm, he raised himself upon his stirrops, and whorling his lance
about his head, with greater agilitie then Mars himself, he hurled it at the
Pagan, who was about to draw his sword.

The thunder makes not so great noise in renting the clouds, as the Greek
made, hitting in the midst of the Pagans shield. It prevailed not, that it
had more folds of well tempered steel in it, then Ajax his shield had, to
resist the force of this lover; for it passed through, and smote on his
breast plate, but found no defense therein, (for as the shield was broken, and
his fortune prolonging his life to a worse end) the head of the lance turned
aside under his arm, so as it came forth at his shoulders, an arms length and
more.

The Moore fell not, for he had his legs fastened to his horse, but he made
him so much forget himself, that all the company held him for dead.

O mighty Jupiter (quoth the King) of what strength is this Knight! without all
doubt it is not matchable in the world; for he has at one blow overthrown
one, whom we held for one of the most valiant in the world. Few of the Ladies
were sorry for the Moors disgrace; for Mars his fury did more reign in him,
then any amorous regard: he at the first dash pretended to purchase Polinarda,
which with great joy said:

Now, I say, fair Lady, that your business is in better assurance then was
imagined, not through want of the beauty wherewith the high heavens have
enriched you, but for the great account which was held of this Knight.

I rather attribute it to the love (answered the Lady) which my Knight bears
unto me, then for that wherein (wholly to bind me) you would attribute to my
beauty; and truly I am sorry for this Knight, only, for that he resembled
one whom in my Country I knew; (an example for those which are lovers to
admire:) for me thought, as it appeared by him, that if love it self should
be enamoured, it should not possibly atteyne to that degree which his faith
held, which was the most rare that ever was seen: for I never saw heart so
tried with the crosses of Fortune, which so persisted as his did, only for
that he would not lose a jot of his lovely affection.

I would feign know (said the fair Solersia) what he might be, if it may be
spoken, to the end that having those parts which you report, we may esteem
of him accordingly, and as is reason: for here has been to the cost of many,
another affection without comparison, and tried with the rarest experience that
can be imagined.

He whom I saw in my Country (answered the discreet Troyla) was called
Florisiano, who for his faith, in my conceit, deserved any good hope: (she
had scarcely mande an end of naming him, when the two Ladies imagined, that it
was he whom they loved, and whose absence they so much sorowed, especially the
gentle Polinarda, who being much troubled, gave occasion to Troyla to say:

It seems to me (worthy Ladies,) that this is not the Knight whom I know,
yet nevertheless, I perceive that his name is not a little esteemed in this
Country, seeing that the remembrance thereof is so acceptable. It is true,
answered the fair* Solersia, that in time past there was a Knight in this
City, as rich in constancy, as poor in fortune, whose absence has been no
small grief to the chiefest in this kingdom. The discreet Moore Lady,
seeing the way so plainly open for that which she pretended, drue out of them
all that she would.

There is nothing more easy (most noble prince) then to discover the passion
of the soul, when it is grieved; for by a sigh, or by asking one name, two or
three times, it makes show of a life in love. The kings daughter of Lucania
plainly confessed all.

And as the two Ladies discoursed of the Prince of Apulia, at an instant the
discreet Troyla set before her fair eyes the plot of all the business,
declaring unto her with such persuasion, that he which had been her captive,
was Prince of Apulia, until at last, seeing all was in safety, she plainly
told her, that his companion, who fought these battles, was the same
Florisiano, and that if she so much loved him, she should dispose of herself
to depart with him.

The fair Solersia did so well discharge the part of the Prince of Apulia,
that Polinarda used these speeches:

It seems to me, worthy Dames, that the fates have disposed of this
business, according to the desire of the Lady Princess of Campania; and
seeing it is so, all that which the heavens and she will, shall be accomplished
in this manner (said the fair Troyla) with greater passion, then at the
beginning we may behold the battle, whose success is worthy of another
Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the end of the cruel battle between the Greek Prince, and
the brave Asternio, and of that which more succeeded.
THe power which blind passion bears in an amorous breast (most noble Prince)
is plainly set forth unto us in the rigorous behavior of Asternio, for wrath
did so predominate in him, that it made him to tread the Laws of Arms and
Knighthood under foot, and therewith rason: for, for not to defer (for a
small space, his revenge, he committed a thing never used, for which he was
justly requited: for the Greek drew new forces from his ill behavior, to put
him in the case which we left him, with opinion of all, that he was dead: for
although that the blow past smoothly by, renting his armor only, yet to see
the head out at the other side and his shield pierced, every man accounted him
dead; for so he seemed to be.

The furious Claridiano drew near. Gualtenor reports, that he never fought
battle with so great malice as he did this, (as he plainly gave notice) for
with all the might that he was able, he smote him on the top of the helmet,
and hit him on the bare, because that the Pagan could not lift up his arm with
his shield, there was no defense against the Greeks force: for he hurled all
his feathers to the ground, and part of ye crown of his head: with the pain
of the blow ye valorous Moore came again to himself, and breaking his lance,
as if it had been a reed, he threw the trunchion a great way off from him,
setting hand to his sword, and was so angry, and ashamed to be seen in such
estate, that before the Greek could make benefit of his agilitie, he had
reached him two sound blows, the one after the other, with either of which, he
had ended the wa^re, had not his armor been good* he made him bow down his
head to the pommel of his saddle, casting blood out at his mouth. The Greek
(out of his fathers battle) never met with a more courageous adversary, and
therefore it was a thing worth the sight, to see him fight, hastening such
mighty blows and so thick, as made the Moore stand in doubt of his safety,
and made him with his eyes to see his error, no less to his cost, then the
loss of his life and honor: but for all this, he left not sometimes to give
such blows, that the people should not account the battle for calm or ended.
Four hours were past since they began: and as at the first, they wheeled
about, drawing forces out of great blows, the Greek gave the Pagan such a
blow on the shield, that he cut the one half clean away, so tormenting his
arm, that he could not lift up the little which remained: and so he flung it
to the ground, pursuing the Greeks more fiercely, then the hungry Lion does
the fearful sheepe-flocke, he reached him upon the top of the rich helmet, a
blow with such fury, that although that he cut it not, by reason of the good
temper thereof, yet for all that, it made him to see the twinkling stars of
the skies, within the helmet, making him for a space to forget himself, and
taking benefit of the time, he gave him such a stabbe in his loving breast,
that it much grieved him; they were come so close and so near together, that
being unable to strike, and seeing him so near, he claspt him in his strong
arms: The Pagan refused not to wrestle, neither would he, if he had been
Anteus. There was never battle so fought; for they were so locked together,
that they stood more firmly fixed in the ground, then the roots of a great and
well grown Oak. All men wondered at this rigorous combat, thinking with
themselves, that there never was the like seen in the world: and so was the
King saying to the Prince his son, that he was much beholding to the Knight
of Cruelty, seeing how he had dealt with him, and the like to the Prince of
Campania, who maruelling much thereat, said, I do certainly believe, that
this battle will be perpetually memorable, and much it would grieve me, that
either of them should die, seeing how great loss their death would bring to
the world. The sorrow would be general, (said the gentle Lisander of
Lucania) who was of opinion, that he in the yellow would obtain the victory.
They turned to behold the battle, which at that instant was maintained with
much obstinacy, but in the end they were of flesh, and fell to the ground,
they gave over their hold, betaking themselves to their arms, where with they
afresh renewed the battle, which was worth the seeing, although with some
advantage to the Greek; for as he was more nymble, he charged and retired
with agilitie both of body and mind. The Pagan would have relied himself,
who, as he was heavily armed, and corpulent of body, and the battle had
lasted so long, he was out of breath, and said thus, If it please you, Sir
Knight, let us rest us a little; for there remains time enough to end the
battle. I will take none (answered the cruel young man) neither shall there be
any thing to give it me, but to see thy head in my hands, for the ill manners,
which thou did use toward me. There is no venomous Uiper, but was to be
accounted meek and gentle, in respect of the Moore, who being persuaded that
his speeches had encouraged ye enemy, assailed him as fiercely as a Tiger, and
said, Stay, and thou shall see to thy cost, what the assurance of that good
which I requested, might have done thee. It had so stung him in mind, to see
himself lightly regarded, that with greater force then at the beginning, he
again assailed the Greek, giving him with both his hands (...) great a blow,
on the top of his Crest, that it made him to set both his hands to the
ground. He hasted to him with another, wherewith he had wholly overthrown him,
but that he help himself with his knees, which were so strongly fastened in
the earth, that he could not stretch himself out at length, to give further
place to the Pagans fury.

Without all doubt, the Greek had been in great danger, and the ba^tell to
him would have been much more costly, but that rigorous fury being past, at
an instant appeared the advantage on his side, which was in the yellow.

There is no doubt to be made of yt pleasure, which ye gentle Sir Florisiano of
Apulia, would have received therein, seeing how well the Prince had performed
his promise: if he had there with known, how well the fair Troyla had
negotiated for him, no man would have been more glad then he: there was no
reason, but he which had loved, and did so effectually love, as he did, but he
should be so, and so he set himself, to see the end of the war, which
lasted not long: for the Greek being ex^remely angry for the blows which he
had received, arose more fierce then a Basiliske, often giving him such cruel
blows, as put him clean out of breath, making him sometimes to set his hands,
and sometimes his knees to the ground; which did much move him, seeing before
his eyes, the death, wherewith the cruel Knight had threatened him, who being
desirous to end the war, defending himself with his shield, closed with him,
and gave him such an encounter, that it made him give backwards; making show of
falling, he help him thereto, with a strong stabbe, which was the last that
he received: for he had not thoroughly upon the ground spread his broad
shoulders, when through his visor he cut from him all hope of enjoying
Polinarda, ending his life and his love, both at an instant, with so much
contentment to the lovers, that it shall be fitter to be left to
consideration, then any thing concerning the matter, here to be set down in
writing. The Greek entered into his tent to repose him, embracing the Prince of
Apulia, who knew not what to do for joy. By this time the fair Titan had ended
his journey, and the Lady Lucina was to begin hers, when the friends of the
dead Prince carried him from the place, giving, according as to him did
appertain, honorable burial. The Prince of Apulia went to the fair Troyla,
who with some shewe^ (although feigned) of sorrow for the dead man, said* From
this time forward, I will take the word from my Knight, if he please, because
he shall leave so cruel a device, as that which he bears for my sake. It was
agreed between them, that on that side of the Ladies garden which Florisiano
knew, they should come, where she would warrant his life, and receive him for
her husband. The young man went down so troubled, to see himself in her
presence, and not to lead her by the hand, which loved him as her self, as it
were impossible, but that his alteration would be noted. To avoid tediousnes, I
do not set down how he felt himself, when he knew what the Lady determined.
Happy love (said the Prince) seeing such hands have dealth therein, bringing
it to that end which the lover deserves, and happy Florisiano, which shall
enjoy the same. The contentment which I receive with my mistress favor,
(noble Princess) is no greater, then that, which to see the effect of yours,
does yield me, and how carefully you have procured it: it is a favor which I
have received, which cannot yet be requited, for that brings the payment
therewith, seeing you have accomplished it with your valor and my necessity.

Those few hours which they past, seemed a thousand, to go to the place
appointed, where, having taken order for all that was to be carried, the Lady
leaving a letter for her father, containing a thousand amorous excuses,
reciting to him all the whole course of their love past, she stayed in company
of the fair Solersia, who would not part without speaking to the valiant
Florisiano.

Without the enclosure remained the fair Troyla and the rest of the Ladies,
with Palisander, and the two Princes, he of Apulia helping the Greek, who in a
moment gat up to the top of the wall, and giving his hand to Florisiano, they
leapt into the garden, where ye lovers could not speak the one to the other (a
common thing in the law of love.) But the pleasant Solersia, embracing the
Prince of Apulia, said, I would not valiant Prince, that that Lady had told us
the discovery of Iaroe, for it had been to put us in new grief, to love you,
not as the Carthagonian, but as the Lord of Apulia. I was assured, worthy
Princess, (answered the Prince) that she who then did me favor, would now
worthily accomplish it with that generositie wherewith you are endued. Your
sight and new acquaintance (quoth she) is for so small a time, that I cannot
suffer this Lady to enjoy the same, to whom your absence has been so
grievous, that she could hardly be comforted: But seeing that the heavens
will that you come together, there is nothing to be done but to give thanks
therefore; and we are all glad thereof.

Those true lovers embraced each other with so much joy as cannot be imagined;
it suffices to believe, that it was the greatest in the world, being purchased
with so much troubles, which do season the good when it comes to be
enjoyed. About an hour they stood talking, giving many thanks to the Greek
for that which he had done for them, admiring his beauty and few years. Much
it grieved the Ladies to depart; but seeing that it was requisite, giving in
charge to Solersia, to procure her Fathers good will, and excuse the Prince of
Apulia, with his beloved Lisander, giving strickt imbraceme^ts they took their
leave, the Lady returned to her lodging without being perceived. The Princes
in their arms received the Kings daughter, which went away very fearful of
her Fathers displeasure; it was good hap that she lost not her senses for
sorrow; but Lisander and his beloved Solersia took so good order, that they
did not only satisfy him, but also procured him to pardon them, seeing she
was so well married, as with the Prince of Apulia, who, with his beloved
Polinarda, with the rest of the Princes, took the way toward Apulia, with
determination to levy the greatest forces, that he should be able, and go to
the succor of Grecia, for the much that he was bounden unto the Prince
thereof. And so in a short space, he armed twenty thousand Knights, entreating
the Prince Claridiano, to go into Greece with him: who yielded thereto, but
upon condition, that he should never speak to any man of him; for no less
then his life depended thereon.

And so they took their course toward the great port of Grecia, where they
arrived in happy time, not without many great sudden passions of the Greek
lover, to know himself so near to her whom he carried in his soul; they
took land, the Emperor receiving them with such gravity as appertained. But
the Greek lover would never discover his name, neither would he see her which
was Lady of his life; and therefore took his leave of the Ladies, promising
the Emperor, that he would not depart out of Grecia before the wars were
ended, which was then even at their doors, the enemies coming being most
certain; with his Squire Palisander alone, accompanied with a thousand
passions of love, he took his way into a wood, which was called, The wood of
Willowes, purposing to change his arms, and so unknown to give aid to his
Grandfather. He greatly rejoiced, to see the great good preparation in a
readiness, being of opinion, that with so great armies and so well armed, the
land might be defended against all the rest of the world. Four days he
wandered in that wood, without any adventure worthy of memory, until the
fifth in the evening he heard a great noise, as though it had been of Knights
fighting, he mended his pace, making toward the place where he heard the
noise: but he had ridden but a little way, when an old man leaning upon a great
Rush, took his horse by the Reins, saying, Hold thee, Prince of Greece, for
it behooves thee not in any case to go any further forwards; for to go, to
say the truth, it is to go to the house of death.

What art thou, honorable ancient old man (answered the Prince, being much
abashed therewith) which knowing me, have bound me unto thee, for the
aduertising of me of the danger wherein I went? He, valorous Prince, which many
years has procured your good, as he which most dearly loves you^; and
therefore alight; for without my help, you shall not come to the battle,
whereof you have heard so much, neither shall you serve in the wars in the
field, without being known to your parents, and friends, which will be little
for your ease, and somewhat hard for you to endure.

The valorous young man with a skip was on foot, very desirous to know who
this old man was, which knew so much of his life. He had hardly set his feet
to the ground, when the old man with his arms displayed, in his own
likeness of Gualtenor, came to embrace him, saying, Do not think, my beloved
son, that I take so little care for your contentment, but that I procure it
more effectually, then if it were for my self; and seeing I perceive your
desire to return into Grecia, ^and the disgrace wherein you are with your
Mistress, and the need that there is of your help, I have enforced my self
to come to yield remedy to all, aduertising you first (to the end that you may
with contentment endure this long war) that if you love, you are beloved in
good earnest, and with the soul; but the high heavens have so ordained, that
you shall not live assured from this, until that these warlike hands have shed
the blood of that person whom you best love in the world, your sorrows being
then grown to the highest, which you shall not be able to pass, and then will
come the joy which you desire, which your destinies have prepared for you, the
most acceptable in the world: and because you shall go unknown, I have
brought you here certain armours, which I began to forge long before you were
borne, and only against this war; they are such, as no other Master is
worthy thereof, but the Prince of the two Empires; there are only three which
equal them in value, for that that the temper of them all was given under one
planet; with these and this Jewel you may go in safety; for you shall be
known by no man (except such as you will.) At an instant the Arms were
present, and were such as the old man had reported, all set with Pearls and
black Checker-worke and some spots of Russet. The prince had never seen a
fairer thing, neither did the world contain any; for it seemed to exceed all
humane workmanship. The young man put them on, remaining the same that he was
before, and so well disposed, that Gualtenor could not forbear to say, O luckie
Planet, under which so gracious a Knight was begotten, and happy Armours,
seeing that it may well be said, that within them is encompassed the flower of
cheualrie. He gave him a rich Jewel, which was of most fine Rubies, of no
less worth, then fair in show. In putting it about his neck, he seemed to
be of greater age, and his color was not so white, his hair curled, and
turned up in his forehead, Lirgandeo says, that he resembled the god Mars,
when by force of arms upon the earth he won Venus. He gave him a shield of
the color of his Armor: and in midst of the field he set Cruelty, as he
bore it before, although with a different writing, for on the side appeared
many Ladies which took compassion of him, and under this Mot.

If to be grieved for your love,
Were a mean to ease your pain,
Who would defer the same,
If he knew what it were to love.
In the whole camp, for this device he was called, The Knight with the
Ladies, and he was rightly called so: for the most of them did affect him.

With these (valorous prince, and my son) you are to defend your Country,
which according to the perilous combats wherein you shall be, they are those
which shall assure my weary old age, and your good success: that which I
request, is, that you proceed not in the war in such sort, that your doings
be correspo^dent with your device; for there is nothing that does so much
dishonor a man* as cruelty. I can stay no longer, for the much that I have to
do elsewhere; but you may go in safety: for if you be in need, I will come
to your aid, as he which most leueth you. He embraced him with as much
tenderness, as if he had been his own carnal son: he took his leave of
Palisander, to whom he gave a girdle which altered his complexion.

The valiant Greek saw himself so plain in the stones of his shield, that he
needed no lo^king glass, he could not choose but laugh, and say to the old
man at his departure, Assuredly, dear father, if you could as well change my
lady Mystresse conditions, as the color of my face, wholly in your hands would
be reserved my contentment.

The old man presently vanished away, and the Greek returned to his begun
carriere, where let us leave him, to take our way toward Greece.

CHAP. VIII. How the adventure of the hateful Tower, with the liberty of the
fair Linda brides was ended; with the coming of the Ambassadors from Rome;
and of that which therewith happened to the Ladies.
THe Arms of the famous Athenian being lost, with his dagger only in his
hand (most noble prince) we left him in the end of the third Book to the
noble Claramante, in the top of the hateful tower, in view of all the Greek
Court, who stood there, with great desire from thence to behold the most
beautiful Lindabrides, he which most showed himself, was the great Emperor
Alphebus, who could not put out of his mind, how much he was indebted to that
Lady, and how ingratefully he had ever showed himself, treading under foot
that which she desired, worthy to be more esteemed of the world, then she was
by him. All those which had known her, desired no less, her rare beauty
leaving them affected unto her, and the faith and loyalty which she ever bare
to her prince.

They were quickly in better and more certain hopes; for to see the courageous
Knight without Arms, had shadowed it, as with a cloud: but not to see him so,
with great fury he struck the sail, with greater courage then before he had
shown, when his person was furnished, putting himself in point, not only to
defend himself, but also to offend and recover his lost Arms* Contrary to his
desire stood those of the tower, saying, There requires more care to be taken
in ye coming in, sir Knight, then you have yet shown; which is a matter,
which only to have it, will put it in your hands.

There has not been so great want thereof (said the furious young man) as of
your part there does wickedness abound, wherewith you have proceeded; and to
the end that you may see that I am not without Arms, stay, and you shall see,
how costly your cousinage will prove unto you. And here with like a royal
Eagle, with a iumpe he set himself in the midst of the Hall, where, O Apollo,
that thou had the describing of this battle, to set it out in particular,
the acts of this young Greek, according as they did deserve, which were worthy
of no less then thy wisdom, and not of his that is bare and unfurnished of
grace, and method, who yet has not had knowledge and experience of the
deceites in love, what it is to be beloved, and what to live secure from the
pain which the soul feels! Wanting this (worthy Dames) what courage can my
weary pen have, seeing the tears blot the letters I write, and drown the
conceits framed in my soul? Yet notwithstanding trusting in your favor, I
will begin to describe the doings of this Greek, to set at liberty the Lady,
whom he best loved ever in his life.

In the midst of the Hall, he stood expecting these 2. which more swift the^ a
Sacre flying after her pray, came, the one with a battaile-axe aloft, and the
other with the well sharpened sword of Theseus. The first was more speedy in
delivering his blow, (which stood ye prince in no little stead) for making him
to lose it, with a ship he closed with him: and as for his dagger, there was
neither Armor nor enchantment yt could resist it: and finding himself near ye
Knight of the tower, he struck him on ye top of his left shoulder, and drew it
out again dyed in his blood. By this time the other was come, with more
discretion the^ the first: for having noted the quicknes and agilitie of the
enemy, he came well in breath, with his sword in his hand, ye point forwards.
The young man had good hap, yt he ran him not through; for he took it under his
arm. He of the tower thought yt he had sped him; and so drawing back his
sword, which making way to ye flesh, came forth, without any dangerous hurt,
he marked his fortune, and considered that it was no fearful hurt; he would
not lose occasion in a matter where it was so necessary, to see himself
destitute of Arms, and so with the strength that he recovered above all others
of his time, he gave him a perilous stab in ye midst of his breast, and had
slain him, if he had not given back, drawing out his bloody dagger, at what
time as he with the battle axe came, well strengthened on ye left shoulder, he
would have run him in with ye point: the Greek could do no more, but with his
force and his dagger, shun ye fearful halbard; but not so, but that he first
wounded him shrewdly, going forth in the arm: he feared ill success, because
the battle was very unequal, with so apparent disadvantage: yet for all this,
although he saw himself hurt in some places, and the hal sprinkled with his
blood, he made no show of want of courage, but rather with greater the^ he had
held in former battles, he charged and retired upon his enemies, and ranged
them, covered all over with their own blood.

Those which saw the battle, did wonder, assuring themselves that they had
never seen the like in their lives; and it was so indeed, for few had there
past like this, for those of the tower live only to fight, and our Claramant,
to be feared, so as the heavens had the more enabled them both, to the end to
yield the battle the more cruel.

I believe (said the mighty Trebacius) that the heavens do take compassion on
this Lady, seeing that to relieve her they have sent such a Knight. We are no
less bounden (said the fair Litiana) for this, the^ for the enchanted tower,
that I not having the Knight of the Lions, could not be called your Majesty's
daughter, neither see the maruailes which it performs: God speed him, and
grant him well to end this present battle, (said the gallant Archisilora)
for there will not want Ladies to love him. O fortunate Knight (said the gentle
Clarintea of Celandia) seeing that before it is known who he is, the Ladies
dispose of themselves who shall best love him.

This follows valor well employed, said the gallant Venus, who drew near,
although I have known another Knight no less worthy to be beloved, then he
of the Lions; and herein the Lady Laysa will take my part. For this which is
so well known, who would but draw near, although with hazard of life,
answered the Lady? for there would want no Knights to help me.

I would not be the last (said the venturous Dacian) for me thinks, that
with those of the tower al runs at even hand. It is no small matter to come
to so doubtful battle, with this apparent disadvantage (said Claridiana) and
in requital of what these Ladies have showed, the Prince of Dacia shall tell us
who this Knight is.

He has here so much kindred (said Don Heleno) that whereas he might fight
for justice, here he might do it for affection. He presently showed them in
what manner he met with the Prince of Grecia, and Trapisonda, in Sclauonia, and
what had happened unto him concerning the fair Venus. I now say, (said the
gentle Rosamundi) that I marvel not, though a Lady so much beholding, return
for him, which set her in so happy estate as it is to be beloved.

They could proceed no further, for the great noise which the people made,
which were in the Court: and beholding the cause thereof, they saw yt the
Knight of the Lions, after two hours space, in a most bloody battle,
defending himself from him with the halberd joined with him, and clasping the
same near where he held it, with a sudden touch he plucked it out of his
hands, thrusting him a good way off from him: he gat it not so scot-free, but
that he received a greater wound then he had of all yt day given him, in one
of his thighs, so as without great pain he could not stir it; he felt-it not
for joy that he had gotten this wished for halberd, wherewith he was a Phoenix
in Arms: With this perilous weapon he made room in the Hall.

There can no sorrow be compared to theirs which were in the tower, especially
his which had lost it. For all this they would grant him no entrance: but with
two poinyards with a soft pace he made toward the Greek, and in coming near
him, making show with the greatest force and quicknes in the world to come
within him, he hurled one at him; the Lord defended him, for the great good
which for his sake he should accomplish. In throwing this cruel poinyard, he
mist his breast, but struck him through the arm, from side to side; the pain
pierced him to the very soul, but before they parted, he gave him his deserved
payment, welding his halberd so well as he could, he reatch him such a knock
on the p^te, that if it had been of Diamond he had broken it, and felled him
dead at his feet. His companyon seeking revenge, would needs close with him,
but knowing his meaning, he held out his halberd before him, and the other was
so blind, that he ran upon the point thereof, and as the young Greek help him
with his due, he threw him on his back in ye midst of the Hal, where in a
moment winning the entrance to the fast locked Chamber, he bereaved him of his
life with the greatest joy of the world, making account that all had been
ended. The Greek took up the good sword, and without staying for the rest of
the furnitures, he went, thinking to enter into the lodging, very desirous to
see the end of this adventure: he had but one foot within the door, when he
heard a new al-arme given, so hideously, that the Greeks were in great doubt
of their Knight, seeing him so shrewdly hurt: but he who feared nothing,
without any mistrust, with the battell-axe in his hand, would enter: but
without being able to avoid it, a fierce wild savage man, covered all over
with oke^ leaves, clasping him in his arms, said, Did thou think (prince of
Grecia) that there was nothing else to be done? Know thou, that for thy
presuming to come into my lodging, thou shall neither see nor know thy parents,
which then see here present. It shall be as it shall please the heavens to
appoint it, (said the furious young man) closing with him; where you might have
seen one of the most gallan^ wrestlings in the world; for notwithstanding yt
the Greek was so sorely hurt, that which this monster had said unto him, gave
him such courage, that he would that the monster had been stronger then he was,
to the end that he might the better have been able to show his own^, although
that that was such, that lifting him from ground, he drew him out of the
lodging, and carried him so far as the Hall, getting ground of him in
wrestling. The youth took footing, holding himself disgraced to be so
handled* and raising himself against his enemy, recovered what he had lost,
and on a sudden entered with him into the lodging, where they strugled a long
space, until at length (fortune showing her self favorable in the behalf of
the Greek) with a strong wheeling about he threw him down near unto a great
bowl, whereupon he set his hand, thinking to kneel upon the Savage: but
before he could doe^t, there was heard the greatest noise that ever was heard
in the world; a thousand visions coming out of the Tower, appeared to those
which were in the court; the skies were da^kened, and there was such lightning,
that made the most courageous heartily afraid, and much more the Ladies, which
being from their gallants, gave a thousand seriches for fear, after this
earthquake which seemed as though heaven and earth should have come together.
In the tower was heard the most sweet and best tuned music in the world: it
seemed to the^ a thing come from heaven; none were discomforted, but such as
were wounded with love, for to those only comfort may be given by those which
bereave it. And but that the great Lirgandeo did recomfort the Queen of Lira,
assuring her of the Princes health and safety, telling her that it was not
convenient that they should so soon meet, without doubt this heavenly music
had been loathsome; and but for that advertisement, she had gone to seek him;
for she could not forbear to lament his absence. This sweet harmony did no
less recomfort the warlike young man; for therewith he thought as in deed it
was true) that he was whole and cured of his hurts, and beholding with whom he
had wrestled, wondering to see himself armed and sound, he perceived that he
was in the arms of a very fair Lady, with a Queens crown upon her head:
every body knew that it was Queen Iulia; who taking the young man by the hand,
said unto him, Come with me, valorous Prince, and thou shall see a reward
worthy thy great valor, as well kept as you have seen. He could give her no
answer, imagining that it was some enchantme^t, but followed her, and entering
into a rich square room, two statues which stood at ye door, casting flowers
upon the Greeks head, at his entering bowed down, saying, The long wished for
Claramante of Greece is welcome: for with his coming are ended ye troubles and
anguishes of her who^ he most dearly loved, who although she were ill
requited, yet seeing her liberty gotten by so great valor, the injury which she
has endured, may be accounted happiness. As ye Greek came into the hall, he
was ravished of his wits, to see ye strange pictures, and curious workma^ship:
he stayed a while to consider of ye love which that Princess had borne the
Greek prince, and the faith which she had sacrificed unto him; and seeing how
desolate he had left her, it extreemely gr^ued him; he being a man (as
Gualte^^r says) who took exceeding compassion of ^adyes, would feign know
that Knight which was so ungrateful, and challenge him for it. But the Queen
put him from it, because that the gallant Lindabrides was come, whom ar^^yled
to see that Knight in her walk, where ^uer any body had been. The Queen
s^ept forwards and sa^e, Sovereign princess of the Scythians, receive here
the Knight whom the heavens have provided for you, in place of the ungrateful
Alphebo. It was long since that Lindabride^ had seen him, yet she presently
knew him to be the youth Claramante, whom she dearly loved, for the great
resemblance between him and Alphebo; and her love being now well cooled, she
presently affected him, being of opinion, that he only was the man, who next
after his brother did worthily deserve her beauty. The free young man escaped
no better; for neither his valiant heart, neither The^^us arms which had
preserved him from so many dangers, could defend him from the wounds and fire
wherewith love tormenteth his vassals; for beholding the rare beauty of the
Scythyan princess, and her gracious countenance, with the gravity of her most
fair face, he thought that there was nothing else to be desired in the world,
nor other contentment but to love her: for he was ready to give up his Ghost,
when he left to look upon her.

The gracious Princess answered Queen Iulia, saying, I will not receive this
Knight (dee^e Iulia) so much because that the heavens have sent him for my
comfort, as for the generositie wherewith (with the hazard of his life, putting
it into infinite dangers) he has procured my liberty, making me so much
beholding unto him, so as except I shall employ the same in that which may yield
him content, all other requital is unworthy of the name; for what I receive,
admits no comparison.

This (most worthy Princess) suffices, answered the amorous young man,
although^, had adventured far greater dangers, for I was bounden to do it
for your beauties sake, without ^eipe ^ing the deeds, but the desire earth
soul; wherefore I pray you, (kneeling down before her) give me your fair
hands, to pay the (...) which all the world owes them, and withal, receive
me for a knight, so do you service, which shall advance ^^e to the higheir
degree, that fortune is able to give me. He could ^^y no more, for beholding
her, neither could she make any answer: for love had so wounded them, that
they were speechless, leaving to the eyes, the imaginations of the heart. But
having recovered her speech, beholding the Princes goodly proportion,
considering his valor, and what he had (...) for her, she took him up by
the arms, saying, ^here is no reason, valorous Prince, to give my hand to him,
who has so good of his own, which have set at liberty, the most sorrowful
Damsel of the world: as for the rest, I would not show any token of
ingratitude, but to my soul, I have had so costly experience for you so much
resembling the Knight, which was went to be called Alphebo, that I am afraid
(and not without reason) you will resemble him in all; and being so, I should
but do you wrong, to give you occasion to show your self inconstant. I would,
Sovereign Princess, (answered the tenderhearted Prince) that I were not so
near of kin, as I think I am to that Knight, to make him know his
unthankfulness; for it is a sufficient defect in me, not to know what I see,
and nothing in the world can assure me to hope for any good, but from this
hand. Herewith, (answered Queen Iulia) I will be she, (noble Prince) which
shall inbute this ^orthy Princess to accept you for hers, and I will be ^^^^tie
to you for her, and to her, that you shall be thankful. The gallant (...)
^abrides granted what the Greek required, and (...) sh^e could not do, for
anything to be^ wished; for Love had made her wholly tributary to the Greeks
beauty: he kissed her hands with so great contentment to them both, that if he
thought that he spedde well, she accounted her self happy, to be beloved by
him. There was never heard sweeter music upon the earth, neither better
consorted, then they heard, when she made an end of entertaining him.
Although that those, which stood thereby in the Tower, did see what past* yet
they heard not what the Princes said, but seeing them to come, hand in hand out
of the hall, they well knew, that the adventure was ended. Let us go, (most
noble Emperor, said Lirgandeo) to receive these Princes; for you and my Lady
the Empress, are those which get most therein; seeing that you holding
Claramante for lost, who was stolen away in the Forest, the Heavens have
pleased to bring him again to your sight, with the extremities which you have
seen. This is he, whose name in the most remote and strange Countries shall be
feared, and he, who among the greatest Monarchs shall be (and that with great
reason) renowned. The Emperor was surprised with this new and sudden joy,
being hardly able to believe it; for so great a good as this, with much reason
may be suspected. There was no Knight nor Lord, which came not down,
accompanying the Ladies, who by any means would be absent at this
entertainment. At the descending down the Tower stairs, at the top thereof,
were four Nymphs, far more fair then the God Apollo, which with their
Instruments, made the most heavenly harmony that ever was heard, and with their
voices extolled the praises of the two Lovers, saying in this manner: Content
and pleased may you be,
Si^h Jove so much your friend you see,
Your wish effecting in every thing,
And constant love without wavering.
All grief from heart you may remove,
Since Claramante is your love.
What greater good can be desired,
Then herein plainly is deciphred?
Valorous Fortune seek'th your ease,
And with delights your mind to please,
Linking you in love most constant,
With the valiant lovely Claramant.
The Heavens you grant in blessed state,
Long to enjoy your loving Mate,
Without suspect or jealousy,
Caused by the angry Deity.
Nothing can disliking move,
Claramant being your love.
Valorous Prince, whose fame does fly
From here beneath, even to the sky,
En^oying beauty, and the comeliest feature,
That ever Nature wrought on creature:
Confirm this good, and waver not,
Let faithful love never be forgot.


This sweet harmony of the Nymphs did so amaze the hearers, that they
thought themselves taken up into the quires of the inhabitants of the heavens:
only the ^aire Archisilora was in greatest care, seeing the whole company
rejoicing, and her self wanting the cause thereof, yet with the hopes which
the wizard had given her, she showed a most fair pleasant countenance, which
served to no small effect to maintain the opinion which was held of her
beauty. And the Tower (giving a great crack) vanished away, the Princes
remaining hand in hand in the place, the common people began to extol her
beauty, above all the Ladies in Grecia, and I marvel not, for according as
she came, Venus would have seemed ougly. The valorous Greek led her by the
left arm without his Helmet, which one of the Ladies carried, and another,
Theseus his battel-axe: the Ladies train bore the discreet Queen Iulia.
Gualtenor does not describe the Princes countenance, but he says enough, in
saying, that he resembled his brother, when in Greece he overcame the great
Meridian. This most fair Lady came clad all in white, in a gown with four
sleeves, cut upon cloth of gold, set with Gold-smithes work, which showed like
Carbuncles, interlaced with certain knots: her yellow hairs were sufficient
to darken the Sunbeams, which she ware after the Egyptian fashion, made up in
tresses, whereon hang many precious stones, of sundry colors, never was
Phoebus so curious in guiding his chariot, as at that time; for seeing her
beauty, it was feared, that faster then with a good pace, he would have come
down to the earth: but for all that, he kept his course, beholding the beauty
of the Princess of the Scythians. I know not, (worthy Ladies) how I am entered
into this deep sea, which here presents it self to me: for if I should
describe all those Ladies which came to salute the fair Lindabrides, there
would be no end thereof. They did all malice her, (not so much for her beauty)
as to see her matched with Claramant. Some receive the prince, glad to renew
their old acquaintance, others rejoicing at the happy estate, where^o Love had
brought him. Those which he knew, he entertained with the grace, wherewith
the heavens had endued him, and as for the rest, with such countenance as was
requisite, he not knowing what they were.

Who is able to set down, what these two felt, being competitours in all,
when they came to embrace one another, Clandiana being secure, holding her
self assured of Alphebo, and she with her new Love, contented with her change?

This is a passage, (worthy Ladies) which without your favor, I know not how I
shall get out of it.

Worthy Empress, (said the free Princess) I would the heavens would have
granted unto me in time past, to do that with as little care as now I do,
seeing how little this Knight has had of me. Mine was never so much (answered
the Emperor Alphebus) supreme Princess of the Scithes, as the care which your
comeliness put me to, so as to defend my self from the force thereof, I was
enforced to shield me with the beauty of my Lady the Empress. The rest of
the Ladies left not to come forwards, which came to entertain her, some to
know her, and others to behold her bravery. They wholly (valorous Prince)
carried away both my wit and pen after them, and it is no great marvel: for
where Ladies are, there Knights are not to be spoken of, for that were to do
them wrong, and were it not for Claramante, I would not return; to whom his
mother holding him in her arms, uttered a thousand pitiful speeches. But
leaving at last, most glad to see him before her, dissembling the joy of her
heart, there came his severe Father, who embracing him, said, No man upon earth
has more reason to be glad then I, seeing that when I thought least thereof,
it has pleased the high heavens to cherish our old age with your fair
presence. The Princes and Knights which were there, took him out of the
Emperors arms, saying, Let us in part enjoy this Knight, seeing he has
been as much desired and wished for by us as you which are his parents. These
were those which told him, what all those Knights were which came to speak
with him: he received al with so great grace and discretion, that they al loved
him. I should spend more time then were reasonable, if I should particularly
set down the whole entertainment, only this I say, that with such contentment
as is requisite in such a case, they went into the Emperors hall, where each
Lady called to her, her gallant, entertaining with them the rest of the time
which remained, with great desire to know Don Heleno and the Princess
Rosamundi, and no less to know Rosabel and his beloved Liriana. In the midst
were the gallant Claramante, Lindabrides, (...) in all things, answered him, I
would not, Knight, that thy coming as an Ambassador, should have emboldned
thee to speak without any good manners; and feign I would, without offending
your office, make you know how ill informed you come. But men have patience
with those which bring a message. The Duke of Thebes took the defiance, and
with a high voice read it, that all might understand it, which was thus: The
defiance.
Constantius, Emperor of Rome, Lord of all the Mediterranea^; and Brunduso
Prince of Gibia, and of the confines of the Indian sea, with the mighty
Arsiano Prince of Almaine, and the rest of the Kings, Friends, and Vassals to
the prince of Dacia, greeting, For that in fear thou may see the cruel
vengeance which I mean to take of thee, and of those which have declared
themselves for thy partakers in requital of the breach of thy word, not as a
Knight given to my dear daughter to be her husband; a thing although thou
had entreated it, had been very well for thee, and having done so, guiding
thy self, not with reason as was requisite, but with passion, it is told me
that thou art married; whereat I am nothing sorry, but should have been, to have
had so faithless a son: This shall serve for a warning to thee, seeing the
revenge which the heavens will give me upon thee, which grant thee life.



AS all Greece daily expected the coming of so mighty a Prince as the Sultan
of Niquea, so was there no man troubled with this defiance, except the Prince
of Dacia, whose color waxing as red as a live coal, said, Well did I imagine,
Knight, that with your proud ambassade there should come some Knight which
should not weigh whether justice were on his side or not; for although that now
there be no time to make excuses, admitting the defiance, I say, that all that
wherewith thou do charge me is false, for although that I tried the
adventure of Bruto in the name of that Princess; yet there was never any
speech of her part that I should be hers; and in provoking such Princes against
me, they have done it disloyally, seeing in person they might have come and
requested me this: that without any other occasion they will trouble the world
led by their blind passion: as for the rest, I hope that the life which they
wish me, to see their revenge, but I believe I shall see it first on them; and
to the end it shall not happen, I with my parents and friends will seek them
at home in their own countries. He said no more, for he well remembered yt he
had been more choleric then is usual with Ambassadors.

But the fair Rosamundi could not dissemble her grief, seeing her lover
defied, of whom she had understood all that which had passed at Rome, and
taking occasion of what Coriander had said, she said, Me thinks (Knight) you
have offended many, with your presumptuous manner of proceeding, in scoffing in
disdain at the Greek Ladies, for to value the Dacian Prince to be of less
worth, for being in our company. Hereby the justness of the cause, for which
you come, is the more plainly to be perceived: and because you shall
understand, that the coming from Kings, does not warrant you, when you have
received your answer, I will make you know, that there are Ladies in Greece,
whose company yields honor to Knights which frequent ye same. There will
not want those which will maintain ye challenge (quoth the fair Archisilora
burning with anger) for such a disgrace as this shall not pass unpunished. For
a mediator (answered ye galla^t Empress Claridiana) here is mine arm which in
favor of ye Ladies, shall show their equity. In so just a cause (said the
fair Sarmatia) there is none that will refuse the combat against any of the
five. I would I had Mars his strength (quoth the fair Liriana) to let these
Knights know, that it had been better for them to have taken some other course.
Let not that offend you, (said the fair Rosamundi) for I, (as most iniuried)
do in challenge defy this Knight, and one of his companions, to the end they
may see how little they are esteemed. All which was done with such a sudden,
that the Emperor, although he would, yet he could not have enter meddled
therein. Somewhat milder than before, (the furious Coriandro answered) Fair
Ladies, where the victory is so apparently due to your beauties, the Knights
of Gibea do not use to enter into battles, but against stern Knights, where
the valor of the persons may appear, and I am very sorry, ye whereas so many
Knights are, they have yielded to the Ladies to maintain the honor of Grecia.
This did somewhat nettle the Greek Princes, that together arose three, which
well showed what they were. They were no less then Rosabel, the warlike
Claramante, and the furious Dacian, who being armed, without all doubt, would
have had them by the ears. But to avoid the hurly burly, the old King of
Macedonia arose, willing the Ambassadors to go with him, while the Greeks
gave answer: a thousand times was Bembo about to de^e Rosabel, in his
Mistress quarrel, and had done it, but that he saw, it would cause him to stay
longer then Lupercio had appointed. All was left to the field battle, where
wanted no occasion, and every man had his hands full, as you shall hear. The
defiance being accepted, they dispatched the Messengers, which did not a little
wonder at the Ladies, and much more at the great Navy, which they saw at sea,
and the innumerable army, which they saw on land: and (because that in the
City there was not room enough) the Captain general had commanded many
tents to be erected, compassed about with deep trenches, which seemed another
City. Some days they stayed, because that thither came the wise Lord of
Achaia who, before he would go forth of Greece, desired to be informed of the
state of his enemies; but finding many contrarieties, he much doubted of the
good success, according to most men's opinion, seeing the great and mighty
armies levied against the Greeks.

The four Ladies were so displeased with the Pagans answer, that in the
night, with their Arms, they went to seek them. They were quickly mist, and
for fear that any disgrace should happen unto them, armed at all pieces with
most assured Arms, there went after them, Don Heleno, and Rosabel, with
Captain Ar^^toldo, and the mighty Bransiniano; the valorous Brandafidel was
none of the last, and the gentle Te^feo, with his Uncle Bramido^o, in company
of the noble Alphebo, only Rosacler stayed behind: for that evening he felt
himself not well, and the travail of the fair Oliuia did much trouble him,
which that night was delivered of a daughter, no less fair then her mother,
neither did she cost less blood, as with the favor of the Muses, I will
declare, in the fourth part of this History, where her loves shall be
described, the beginning whereof shall be declared in this fourth book.

The new enamored Claramante, with his most rich and assured arms would go
alone, and notwithstanding that he knew not the country, yet the next day he
met with the^, but first the Ladies; which greedy to let them know their
valor, took such order, that the next day by nine of the clock, they saw
them descending toward the seashore: for Bembo desirous to know the number of
his enemies, had taken that way, wherea^ the Ladies greatly rejoiced,
especially Rosamundi, who spurring her horse, say^, Follow me, valorous Ladies,
for I know the country, for I have been a hunting here, and I will be first
with them* which will make them believe that we are but newly landed. They all
consented, which no l^sse desired it then she, although their horses were
tired; yet within an hour they came to the sea side: the fair Rosamundi came
mounted upon her beloved Don Helenoes horse, and Archisilora upon Corne^ino,
which was Rosabels: the gallant Sarmacia did not choose the worst, for the light
upon Aristoldoes, a better no man had in the world: the Princes were nothing
grieved withal, but were rather glad, seeing they should be in the more
safety, there they stayed some what to repose them, and to put their horses in
breath, all the Ladies gave Rosamundi the hand, not for that they did
acknowledge any preeminence, (for they would not have yielded any to Mars
himself) but for that they held her most wronged, for her sweet hearts
defiance, pulling down their beauers, and brandishing their great lances, they
went into a pleasant green meadow, where they tried what was in their horses,
charging on the one side, and then on the other, with a better grace, then Mars
himself could have done. Claridiana heartily laughing, said, I say,
(considering well, gallant Ladies, wherefore we come,) we shall do these
Barbarians too much favor, notwithstanding that they die through our hands.
Well, said Sarmatia, though we show them this favor, I am of opinion, our
gallants will not be offended withal: rather to give them so honorable a
death, is to anger them that shall know it, said Archisilora: let each of us
apart show what our Arms are able to do, said the fair Rosamundi, that if
hereafter, those which shall hear thereof, be desirous to make trial, they
may come into Grecia; for they which now can give it, may hereafter procure it.
In this manner, the four pillars of strength and beauty rode discoursing, when
even hard at hand they discovered the seven Knights, who seeing them, as they
were in their enemies Country, presently armed themselves, not knowing what
they would, they chanced to meet in the midst of a great beaten way, where
Rosamundi being somewhat before the rest, said as you shall hear in the other
Chapter.

CHAP. X. Of the bloody cruel Iusts, between the Ladies and the Roman
Ambassadors; and of the coming of Claridiano and the gentle Claramante, and
what followed.
IT is a common opinion among wise and discreet men (most noble Lord) that
courtesy is the most commendable part of a man, and which does most adorn his
person, advance his valor, and which does most avoid dangers and fruitless
contentions, whereof we have an example in hand: which being wanting in
Coriandro, in the presence of so many and so worthy Princes, it was the
occasion of all the strife which followed, all happening athwart unto him; for
the Ladies being stung therewith, determined to pursue them, and before they
should return to Rome, to teach them, how to behave themselves before Princes:
and so the fair Lady thinking with her self, that she stayed too long, set
her self in the midst of the way, and said, Sir Knights, the commandment
given us, by the Dames which remain upon the Stronds side, to just with all
th^se which we shall meet, for their beauties, to be the greatest and most rare
in the world, does hold us blameless for presuming to desire it of such
Knights as you, whom Mars would not dare to encounter. She did so dissemble,
and that with such courtesy, that it took away all occasion from them to
suspect them, although that without it, the five did assure them selves,
nothing imagining that there had been any women in Grecia which bare arms,
and that that which they heard at the Court was but a jest: and so the brave
Coriandro gently answered, holding himself sufficient to have overcome all the
four: Because, Sir Knights, you shall accomplish the command of the Ladies,
we accept thereof (upon condition, that whosoever shall lose ye Saddle at the
encounter, shall not desire to come to fight with the sword: you (requiring
this condition) shall not think it much, that we desire another in our
behalf, which is, that whosoever shall fall, shall lose his shield; for there
is nothing wherewith the Ladies are better pleased, then to see their beauties
so well defended, bringing for testimony thereof the adversaries arms. All
(quoth one of the Giants) shall be as you will have it, for remaining without
the shields, it shall be no great matter, to make you beholding to us for our
good deeds. Without making any answer, the gallant Rosamundi turned the
furious Tirian, who came more swift then the Sun beams between the clouds.

I would to God, worthy Ladies, seeing this matter concerns you, that you
would assist my slow hand with some new favors, which would furnish means to
make the matter the more easy, to recount the best iusts that ever were in the
world: for coming to encounter with a full carreere, (with greater noise, then
the swelling Seas make beating the miserable Ships against the high Rocks)
they brake their Lances as if they had been little Reeds; but before it was
done, the Pagan, who assured himself of the victory, smote the Lady in the
midst of the white breast, with so great force, that he struck her senseless
out of the Saddle: but fortune was much her friend, and durst do no other, for
she set her hand on the pummell of the Saddle; where she held fast till she
recovered breath, and therewith the Saddle, wondering at the strong encounter.
Hers was no less to be noted, for she smiting the brave Pagan with such
force, that before that her Lance brake, she laid him on the green field,
falling with such disgrace upon his head, that he remained senseless with the
blow. Well may you imagine (gallant Dames) whether the three fair Ladies were
well pleased, with the good beginning which the Princess had made: she stood
with a better grace beholding the fierce Pagan, then can be spoken, making her
adversaries to make more account of her, then of Mars himself: for being
mounted upon so good a horse, and so gallantly armed, never had any a better
presence then she; she commanded the Squire (for they all four had but one)
to take away the Moors shield. Presently comes forth the gallant
Archisilora, giving no less hope of her valor, then Rosamundi had done: one
of the four Giants confronted her; it did nothing move her to see him so
great, as a well grown Pine tree, but rather praying the Heavens to favor her
in this encounter, she ran with her Courser more swift then a star falling
between the clouds; there were those which bare record of this encounter, for
ye gods of the woods leaving their habitation, with their Nymphs and Tritons,
came into the green field at the very instant, that that famous Queen made
the brauest encounter that ever was seen in Greece: for hitting the Pagan in
the midst of the strong shield, it auailed him not that it was of steel,
neither the doubles which it had, for through it and the breast plate (being a
handful thick) it past clear, yielding an arms length of the lance
thorough his beastly shoulders, the swiftness wherewith her Courser came made
him to miss the shocke: she past forwards with so good a grace, as would have
entangled Mars, the countenance of Archisilora only was sufficient to have
made him to yield his soul captiu^, and to make the god of Love himself in
love to behold her. She returned, and with a soft pace came to the Ladies,
which were very glad of the good encounter which she had made; only she
wished that her Greek lover had been there. The valorous Empress of
Trapisonda would stay no longer, but mounting upon Cornerino her horse, came
sorth as swift as an arrowe which is shot by a nimble Sorian at a certain
mark: she did nothing envy the last encounters, for although that in that
which she received, she lost one of her stirrops; yet that which she gave was
so rigorous, that she therewith sent the Giant to the ground, wounded in his
breast; and but that her lance brake not, striking somewhat acrosse, it had
cost him his life. The two famous warriors, Bembo and the great Brauorante,
seeing the valor which the three had shown, and the signs that the fourth
had given, to be no less then the rest, it was even so as they imagined: for
the fair Sarmatia, with her furious horse, charged the third Giant with such
force and doxteritie, that she laid him, (though it much grieved him) in the
green field: forth she rode, and recovered both her stirrops, which in the
encounter she had lost: forwards went the gallant Rosamundi, having taken up
the dead Giants lance, and said unto those which remained on horseback, I
would very gladly, Sir Knights, that we were in number equal unto you, to the
end, that with equality, the Iusts might have been ended. But now me
thinks, that you seeking revenge, for that which is done to your companions,
we being but four, of force you must begin again with me. The last Giant,
which was the most valiant of al, made no longer delay, but whorling a ships
mast (which he bare in stead of a lance) about his head, took his carriere
against the Lady: she gave spurs to her horse, as and swift as thought,
encountered the Pagan, and did better this time then the last; for his strong
plancks of steel could nothing profit him, but that she smote him clean
through from side to side: the horses came to the shocke, and made greater
noise, then if two rocks had met: but as the Ladies horse had not his like in
that land, so he overthrew the Giant, horse and man, spreading them upon the
green field: and her horse set him on his buttocks, being unable to go any
further. The valorous Dame, fearing some ill success, (as light as an Eagle)
leapt to the ground, and seeing her good horse recover, with another iumpe she
leapt into her saddle. The most strong Pagan Brauorante, blaspheming against
heaven, would have taken his course, when the Lady said unto him, Hold, Sir
Knight, for there is time enough for our encounter; for I would speak with
this Knight in the green skarfe, pointing to Coriandro, which was the man whom
she had overthrown, who having recovered breath, was mounted on horseback,
but without spear or shield. The like had the other two Giants done, to whom
the Lady said, I am very sorry, Sir Knight, for your ill hap; but I was more
sorry to see the few manners which you showed in Grecia, for you should have had
more respect to the great princes which were in the hall, wherein you grieved
many Ladies, being in your proud behavior far more arrogant then valiant: if
that might not have moved you, it had been sufficient for you to have noted the
courtesy and good carriage of these Knights in the black, who made show to be
heartily sorry for your proud demeanor, which deserved that revenge which you
now have experimented: and because you may see the hands which have wrought it,
and may say ye in Grecia as Knights use Iusts and Tournaments; so like wise
Ladies also seek revenge, which peradventure may serve for a warning for you
Romans, that they come with less pride then their Ambassadors have done: and
so, although your pride deserve it not, yet we will do you this favor, to tell
you who we are, to the end yt being well assured, you may be glad to have left
your arms in ye keeping of such ladies, together with your honor: and at yt
instant they took off their caskes, appearing by reason of ye heat of their
encou^ters, sar^e more fair the^ Apollo in ye midst of his iourny: and because
you may understand, Knights (said the Lady) yt in Greece there is no miss of
gallants to serve Ladies, and yet there is not so great need of their Arms,
but ye the heavens have imparted some valor among ye Ladies, so as they may
make some challenge thereto: and as for you, valorous Knights, (having no
occasion but what these Knights have given) we refuse to just with you;
doubting to lose therein, what we herein have gotten. Never a one of those which
were overcome, could answer, they were so ashamed, holding it the greatest
disgrace that could happen, to be ouerthrown by ye hands of tender and delicate
Ladies. Bembo steps forth with a grace, and being in a maze, said, Ualorous
dames, this Knight and I were very sorry for the displeasure which is taken,
through that which these Knights said, although being sent, they might be
somewhat excused (if excuse may be admitted for error committed against such
beauty.) But it seems, as it does appear, that who can so well take
offense, can as well take revenge, without need of any offer to be made by any
your gallants: against whom rather then against your daintiness, the challenge
was made. But it is past in such sort, that you rest revenged, making us,
being bounden unto you for your courtesy, to give over the right, which we
had to the Iusts, for your challenge was to all. That which you do, valorous
Knight, is not of so small account, but may deserve requital at our hands,
which shall be, to leave us in greater doubt then before. The famous Prince
would have answered, when as not far from them, there came along by a woods
side, the ^lower of all humane valor, Claridiano and Claramante: who as I have
said before, having received the rich arms of his master Gualtenor, and having
taken his leave of him, by reason of the noise which he heard, hastened
forwards, till crossing a grove of high Pine trees, he saw his valorous Uncle
Claramante coming, mounted upon a mighty horse, with his spear and shield,
and at his saddle Bow, a battelaxe, he knew him by his gate, and the richnes of
his arms, and determined to discover himself unto him, to the end to go to
the wars together: they met, Claramante wondering to see his goodly
constitution, thinking with himself, that it was the same man, which indeed it
was. The Knight with the Dames, according to ye device which he bare upon his
shield, approaching near unto him, said, (Sir Knight) you are without all
doubt, he which is called the Knight of the Lions, to whom I bring a message
from far hence, from a Knight which is called the Knight of Cruelty, who
knowing that I came for Greece, requested me to visit you in his behalf, and
to tell you, that he would be here with all speed possible, and told me
farther, that I should be a gayner hereby, for I should see the gallantest
Knight of the world: he told me so many things in praise of you, that he made
me much to affect you, with a desire to try my small, with your much valor,
and although that I be sure to be overcome, I shall take it with the more
patience, but our fight shall be without swords or Helmes, with our daggers
only; and if you so please, we will defer no longer time, if you will not, I
have performed what I promised to that Knight, and as I desired.

For the news (Sir Knight) which you bring me, of that warlike young man, in
requital thereof, I would rather employ me to do you any service, then by
battle to offend you. But seeing you have challenged me, there is no reason
but to yield to your demand, accepting the battle, and ye presently, seeing
you so please. I assured my self before my coming, that I should receive so
generous an answer, said the other, so as weighing and considering the fame
and valor, which is bruted every where of you, I know not who would not
refuse it, and if I had not demanded it, I would leave it, for these reasons
have put me in more fear, then if I had seen the danger and my certain
overthrow before mine eyes: but yet let it be, notwithstanding, that without it
I will remain your prisoner so long as I live. The Prince of Trapisonda had
unlaced his Helmet, and seeing the valorous young man busied in taking off of
his, upon a sudden he was transformed into the likeness of god Mars.

By this time had Claramante fully taken off his Helmet, and being about to
assail his nephew, seeing him without a helmet, he said unto him, Stay,
valorous knight, for with my death you will offend your loving friend
Claridiano. He put off his inchaunted Jewel, remaining in his perfect shape,
saying, Why, how now, valorous Knight, so highly has the Prince of Greece
offended you, that you should prepare your self to grieve him? I reposemore
trust in your arm. This new lover was so surprised with joy, seeing him before
him whom he most dearly loved, yt he could make him no answer; but casting
his arms about his neck, he said: O gentle gods, how favorable have you shown
your selves in my behalf, having reserved so great a good for me as is this,
which is the greatest that could happen unto me! O desired Prince! and is it
possible that fortune should be pleased, to bring me to so happy estate? I
beseech the heavens, that they season this but with some mean ill hap. I will
not stand now to repeat what passed between these two, but of that only
which he told, had happened unto him in Greece, and how he knew that he was
his uncle. There shall need no great persuasion to make you believe, how great
joy he conceived of so pleasing news: he told him all that had happened, and
of the remedy which his Master the wizard had given him, to the end that he
should come into Greece, to the relief of his Grandfather, without being
known to any body, which it behooved him to conceal, until such time as he
should further advise him.

The noise which was in the Iusts with the Ladies, did interrupt their
discourse, and so putting on their Helmets, and the Prince his rich Jewel, as
hard as their horses could drive, they took their way directly toward ye
place where the noise was, arriving just at the instant when the Lady
Rosamundi had made an end of giving thanks to Bembo, for leaving the battle:
but as these two approached, who did most faithfully love in the world, O, who
had a refined wit to describe what the one and the other felt in themselves,
only in beholding the one the other? Claramante rejoiced for that he was the
first which came to the rescue of these dames, if there had been any need
thereof; he maruailed to ^ee them without Helmets, and the two Giants, cruelly
thrust through with Lances, and the Squire with five shields, being the
spoils of war, understanding that all this was performed by the Ladies: they
knowing him, were very glad to see him in that place, not for any need they
had of his help; the goodly proportion, good grace and rich Arms of his
companion did much please them: but they could not imagine who it should be. I
cannot tell how it came to my mind, to describe the suspicion which that
Queen conceived in her heart, that that should be her beloved Claridiano: for
as he had the best grace of any mortal man, if she saw any man to excel, she
presently imagined it was he. O mighty power of love! but the hour is not yet
come, to know who he was. Bembo and the great Brauorante knowing the gentle
Claramante by his arms, prepared themselves to fight, being netled with that
which past at Sea. All this is nothing (gallant Dames) to that which the
disguised young man felt, seeing himself disguised in the presence of her, (who
ruled the helm of his life,) ^o fair, and so surpassing excellent, that he
held the grief which he endured, well employed, seeing it was for hersake. But
coming near her, he became more timorous, then if he should have attempted
the most doubtful adventure of the world. There was not in all that land a
Gallant, yt more dearly loved, and therewith that lived more jealous of his
honor. He knew not whereupon to resolve, whether he should speak to her, or
make himself known, desiring her to pardon what was past. A thousand doubts
came into his mind: in the end he determined, to the end not to offend her, to
pass his discontented life as well as he could, in this shape of god Mars, and
to see if he could perceive by her looks, whether his absence were grievous
unto her or no, and whether she had so cruelly vanished him from her sight. The
valorous Claramante drew near, and seeing the Greek Dames, he suddenly put
off his caske, and discovered his fair face, saying, I know not, how I could
have come, without great error (valorous Dames) but to see the work of your
hands upon these Giants: but seeing this battle is fought in the behalf of
the gallants, I in their name do come to give thanks, and yield
acknowledgement for the much which they owe, for such a matter as this, which
admits no other requital, but what proceeds from your valor.

We would not, Sir Prince, said Archisilora, (who loved him extremely, for
having so long accompanied her lover) that you should discharge your self of
the debt, wherein these Ladies have set you. That should be too much want of
acknowledgement (quoth he.) Who would not be thankful, and to live only
thereof? for, what greater good can come to the Gallants of Greece, then to
acknowledge, what they owe to such Sovereign Princesses? In this manner we may
then in safety return, with the spoils gotten on the Roman Knights, who
reposing such confidence in their pride, little regarded our valor, and (as I
think) as little our beauty. The furious Bembo could forbear no longer, but
like a Uiper, (although with mild speeches) advanced himself forwards, before
these Dames should return into Greece, saying, We would not, Knight of the
Lions, that you should have come so assured, and with such confidence in your
own valor, that before whom you have so much displeased, as this Knight and
me, you should be disarmed: and were it not, that the order of Knighthood does
detain us, we would with small cost take revenge of our wrongs.

The confidence, Sir Knight, is not so much of my self, answered the Greek,
as of these valorous Dames, who with their presence, are able to encourage and
give new valor to the arrantest coward that lives: and moreover, behauing
your selves as to Knights appertains, you should first tell me the cause of
your displeasure, because I do not remember that I have offended any man. That
is the condition of those which do wrongs; for they write it in the sands: but
those that receive them, imprint them in their hearts, quoth the bold Bembo.

Well, let it not grieve you, quoth Claramante, for there is time, and now the
best that can be wished, having such witnesses, for your satisfaction, which as
you say, you prosecute with such vehemency.

Why then, quoth the Pagan, there is nothing that gives us any cause, why we
should defer the battle any longer, so as there may rest time for our
companions.

In stead of this Knight, quoth the proud Claridiano, seeing with what pride
they had defied his Uncle, he may fight with me, for my death will be no
less lamented then his, and it will ill befit us to stand by, dallying, and
see our friends maintain fight with manifest peril.

Let it be as you will, said the furious Pagan Brauorante, furning about his
swift running horse; the like did all the three, and that so suddenly, that
notwithstanding that the Ladies would have hindered it, seeing the matter so
far past, they durst not, for offending the Greek, assuring themselves of
his valor, and that he would end that fight with victory. And Archisilora,
rather to keep them company, said, turning toward Coriandro, I am of opinion,
that you are desirous to have occasion to help your friends; and because you
shall not say when you come to Rome, that you could not come to all kind of
battles, we give you leave thereto, and to that end return you your shield
again. The Pagan was so proud, that without giving thanks for what was offered,
he said, Why then, by and by you shall see, how ^oundly the Iusts shall be
revenged.

The two Giants made no longer delay, but drawing out their huge Cemitars, they
made toward the Ladies, which had already put on their Helmets: they left,
although against their will, the gentle Sarmacia for Judge, and so with their
swords in their hands, and their shields on their arms, they attended their
coming. Face to face stood the four most famous in arms in the whole world,
whose rigorous contention I will not describe in this Chapter, for it deserves
a new.

CHAP. XI. Of the cruel and bloody battle, fought by the four Knights.
IF the Heavens should give me so long a life, as to bring to light all the
books of this long History, there would (valorous Dames) be the like occasion
as this, to crave your assistance, without the which, I shall but stumble at a
matter, worthy to be written by no less personage, then Mantuan, or that
Orpheus should sing it, to particularize the mighty blows which were given,
with the discreet and advised retreats and cunning assaults: Here might the
god Mars have learned to fight: for leaving his fifth Throne, accompanied with
those which whilo^ did most flourish and were most famous in arms, he
descended to behold the battle, worthy to be recorded. Venus beautified her
self, accompanying Mars, to behold the Ladies, which made her seem to be
ugly, and Mars envious: for hurling over the field (with a most fearful
noise) came these pillars of valor and fortitude, until the ca^riere being
ended, they encountered in the midst of the field: neither of them mist in the
encounter; for they would not have done it for their lives: But they met
Claramante, and the fearful Achaian, with such a noise, as if two ships had
encountered, so as the splinters of their lances flew quite out of sight; there
was no moving out of their saddles, for they were fast l^^kt into them: they
returned with their drawn swords, where at Bembo was well pleased, for he
stood in some fear of the battel-axe, which he left when he saw him therewith;
and as he was most exercised in arms, so he gave the first blow, which he
reached him upon the top of the crest, but the good temper kept it from
breaking, but not him from feeling the blow, so as it made him to bow down his
head to the Saddle pummel: it was not possible it should do less: he seconded
it with another of no less force, so that the skies contain not so many
stars, as he saw within his rich Helmet. This served but to urge him to take
revenge; for settling himself in his Saddle, (considering what had passed) as
fierce as a Basiliske, he charged Bembo, who warded it with his shield,
whereon he received so great a blow, which was such, that it beat it to his
Helmet, and made him almost senseless: he help him with a thrust in the
breast, which set him on the arson of his Saddle, and reaching at him with
another, nothing doubting to overthrow him, but his sword winding in his hand,
so as he smote him on one side of the Helmet, which help to bring the Pagan
again to his remembrance.

There was never Lion which so fiercely assailed a heard, as this young man did
his adversary: they were close together, and at one time they smote each the
other upon the top of their Helmets, and bowed down their heads down to their
breasts. The Moore was most nimble, and knowing that therein he had some
advantage, spurring his horse, he joined with the Greek, who stood not at
his defense, when the Moore gave him two such thrusts, the one after the other,
that if they had not lighted on Theseus his arms, either of them had parted
the soul from the body, and made him (sore against his will) to fall back on
the arson of his Saddle. The Achaian knight was not a man which would lose the
benefit of any occasion: for before that he could come upon him again, with
all his whole power he smote him on the midst of the visor, and made him
stark blind, and yet Lirgandeo says, that he made him ready to fall. All
these blows gave occasion to put the young man in choler: there was no defense
in the Moors arms, against the strong arm and good temper of his sword, but
that he hurled the one half of his Helmet to the ground: he had scarcely
done this, when with another blow no less furious then the last, with his
sword he smote a great piece of his shield to the ground, and the sword
lighting on his shoulder, smote away the one half of his Poldron. All this was
nothing to that which passed between his nephew and the valorous Brauorante,
which encountering with a greater noise then the thunder makes between the
clouds, they smote their Lances into little splinters, which flying in the
air, gave sign of the fortitude of these warriors. The Pagan lost one of his
Stirrops, but he recovered it so soon again, that no body perceived ye fault.
That served but to inflame him like a Uiper against the Christian; they both
together encountered with their swords aloft: there were no better Arms in the
world then those which they two did wear, but they were not of force
sufficient to keep their Masters, being tormented with blows, from bowing
down their heads to their angry breasts, they seconded them with such force as
set them on their Saddles pummels; the Greek was better in breath, and
therefore he first recovered, and with such quickness as is requisite in such
a case, he gave him on the side of the Helmet, such a terrible blow, that made
him make a foul bending backwards in his Saddle: he was so greedy to give
him another, that he came more near unto him then was requisite, and for that
cause being unable to strike, they were constrained to make show of friendship*
being brought to this straight, as to claspe one the other with their arms;
there was never seen a more dreadful struggling: for although that they could
not help themselves with their feet, yet they did so tug with their hands, yt
they were quite out of breath, and their horses kneeling on ye ground, gave two
furious cries. They both came on foot, where the one to show the other ye
valor of his person, with a sudden hurled the one at the other with greater
force then is in a bullet, when it flies the fire out of the mouth of ye
Cannon. All the battles were renewed seeing these two on f^^te for ye valorous
Ladies, whose battle was cause sufficient to make all the battles in the world
to be forgotten: for as there was no defense against their weapons, so were
their enemies covered all over with their own blood, especially Coriandro, who
fought with Rosamundi, who seeing the Knight in the yellow in the ground, much
affected to the valor which he had shown, and assuring her self of the
strength of her Tirian, she assailed Coriandro, doing him greater favor then
he deserved; for she clasped her fair arms about his necks with such force,
that she haled him out of his Saddle; he fell on his feet, where again began
the battle, but with apparent advantage, for she gave him never a blow, but
that did cut his armor and his f^esh withal. She which had the worst hap
in this furious affray, was the Empress Claridiano; for the great Bembo, and
Brauorante, being come on ^oo^e, thinking that they had feign with some
advantage to the Moore, she took her course with her horse against Bembo, who
slipping aside, let her pass, whose horse flumbled so on the trunchions of the
Lances, that coming to the ground, he gave her a shrewd fall. After her came
a Giant, who was the cause that Claramante, shifting Bembo from him with a
thrust, at two skips he was with the Pagan, making him lose his Saddle, and
then he charged Bembo, who with a great pace went toward Claridiana, who being
sore bruised with her fall, was now risen. The valorous Lady had gotten nothing
by dealing with Bembo, but the new lover approached, doing wonders incredible
to any man's judgment. The fierce Giant which had a fall on the ground, seeing
his sword broken with the fall, ran to Claramante his horse to get the
Battel-axe. But he could not do it: for the Queen of Lira, as fierce as a
Serpent, met him with her horse breast, so as she tumbled him to ye ground. By
that time was the brave Claridiano come, and thinking that he should do good
with his Axe on foot, he took it from the Saddle bow; he was not so nimble
with this terrible weapon as his uncle was: for every blow yt he gave, was
mortal; he put it in practice against the Giant, which remained on horseback,
who with his monstrous sword had given the Queen such a blow upon her rich
helmet, yt being unable to break it, (the buckles thereof being loose) he
smote it from her head, leaving her amazed at the strangeness of the blow. The
Pagan would have seconded it, and without all doubt had slain her, but that
Claridiano came covered al over with a cold sweat, to see the mistress of his
soul in so notable a danger, he advanced his Battel-axe with greater fury,
then discretion, fortune was his good friend, for hitting him upon the top of
the shoulder, the edge of the Axe turning inwards, it smote off his head so
easily, that Mars was amazed thereat: he came to the Queen, who yet had not
put on her Helmet, who presenting himself unto her, said, Keep you aloof,
valorous Lady, for although that you be cruel to him which does most adore
you, yet it is not lawful for me so long as I live, to permit any cruelty to
be done against your worthiness. These words were so imprinted in the midst
of the Queens heart, that she was of opinion that without any doubt, that was
he whom she best loved: she had taken him by the arm and asked him a
thousand questions, but that they were otherwise so much busied: that
notwithstanding, yet she said unto him with a tenderness of heart, Follow,
worthy warrior, the fortune which the heavens have ordained for thy greater
fame, such a service as this is not requited with thanks, but you have made
me bounden unto you in any thing that shall please you. Ah, Claridiano, said
the gallant young man to himself, if the Lady knowing thee had said this,
what pain could there be which should not be pleasing? what displeasure could
the heavens do me which here with might not be made tolerable? And herewith,
faining that she said so, brandishing his cruel weapon, he assaulted his
enemy. It was in good time: for he found (in an ill taking) her who had borne
him in the midst of her intrailes: for the furious Brauorante at the very
instant of his arrival, with a blow had made her set her hands to the ground,
and was about to have given her another, when the brave Greek stopped his
passage, reaching him a far off such a knock with Theseus battel-axe, that
made him run faster backwards then he came forwards. Let your Sovereign
greatness hold your self aloof off, valorous Empress of Trabisonda, said
her dearly beloved son, for it is not reasonable that to hands so generous
should happen any disgrace. The Lady wondered to see that she was known by
that Knight, and imagining that it was some of her kindred, she assailed the
Giant which had fallen to the ground, with whom she returned to a most cruel
battle, but it lasted not long, quenching the same with the death of the
Giant. Alone remained Claridiano, Claramante, and the gallant Rosamundi,
against Bembo, Brauorante, and the furious Coriandro, whose fight, O Muses of
Pernassus, that a man might dip his pen in the fountain of your sacred liquor!
for much more do these fix most rare in valor deserve: they fell out of
order, for against Rosamundi, the Achaian addressed himself, and Brauorante
against the brave son of Trebatius: with Claridiano happened the wounded
Coriandro, which yet with mortal wounds prolonged his fortune.

There was no fight to be seen like to Rosamundies; for although that she were
not equal in force to the fierce Pagan; yet her rich and fair Arms in all
supplied that want; for against the edge of her rich sword, no armor nor
enchauntment could avail; for she never gave Bembo any blow, which did not
pare away his harness, together with his brawny flesh.

The Moore was wonderfully amazed to see his armor so torn, knowing that she
which fought with him, was but a gallant Lady: a thousand times would he have
withdrawn himself from her, accompting it a base thing to wage battle
against her, but she did so anger him with the often blows which she gave
him, that treading all under foot, he began to defend himself and to offend
the Lady, giving her such sound knockes, that, but that she took them upon
Semiramis armor, without doubt he had dealt but hardly with her: but if she
took any blows, it was to the greater damage of the Pagan which gave them:
for she charging and retiring, as nymble and quick as an Eagle, made the
victory very doubtful, and oftentimes brought it to that pass, that it
plainly appeared to be hers, she was so furious. The battle between
Brauorante and Claramante deserves a Roman Theater; for each of them knowing
his enemies force, they began to make benefit of their agilitie, which was
such, and employed in so good season, that neither of them could fasten a full
blow: but he which took any upon his armor, it made his flesh black and
blew, and brought him to the ground upon his knees. Unequal was the battle
between Claridiano and Coriandro: for as he wanted both breath and blood, his
overthrow did plainly appear, or his certain death, at the instant that
Archisiloraes Lover ended the battle, hitting him so hard upon his shield,
that it nothing auailed him to be of fine and well tempered steel, but that he
smote it in two pieces, sorely wounding him in the head, coming to the ground
upon all four, and yet he was ashamed, being in choler and before his Lady,
holding it but for a small blow, who having a thousand amorous suspicions in
her head, she stood rejoicing in his valor, unable to persuade her self that
it should be any other, then he whom she loved with her soul: but coming to
show him any favor, her gravity was such, that she resolved rather to die,
then to show any such lightness; this cost her so dear, that it made her to
shed bloody tears. The three pillars of humane fortitude arrived, when the
Greek drew near unto the place where Rosamundi with Bembo were together by
the ears, if need required to aid her. They were no less then Don Heleno of
Dacia, the fair Rosabel, and his friend, the Captain General Aristoldo; who
hearing the noise of the battle, came as hard as their horses could run. The
Dacian presently alighted, and with his sword drawn, went directly to Bembo,
thinking that his Lady was ouermatched, and forbear not, seeing the Greek
Prince to do the like, but rather overcome with fury, thinking yt he had meant
to have strike^ her, as he made great haste, he cried unto him, saying, Hold
thee, discourteous Knight, for this villainy shall cost thee thy life. The Greek
would scarsely have taken these words at his own fathers hands: he gave no
answer, but flourishing his axe about his head, with such courage, that he made
the^ al to wonder, he was so quick in delivering his blow that Archisilora
knowing that it was the Dacian, could not put her self between them, before
that the furious young man had stricken him with the axe, on the top of the
Helmet. Brutus his Arms stood him in good stead, for otherwise, from the head
to the foot, his axe had split him: and notwithstanding he made him to go
three or four steps backewards, being ready to fall, he followed him with a
thrust; there was never a better given in all these battles: for hitting him on
the one side of the breast, he brake all ye buckles, and within a little
disarmed him, making him set one knee to the ground, to stay him up. He again
lifted up his terrible axe, but not with such dexterity, as his Uncle would
have done, for being long in bringing the blow about his head, he gave place to
the Dacian to close with him, with such force, that he lifted him from ground,
and with a little more had overthrown him. The Greek was constrained to let
go his axe, the better to use his hands. O you Princes, which delight in
arms, I would have been glad to have seen you at this wrestling; for neither
weariness did any way cause ye Greek, to show himself to be any other then he
was wont to be: and the Dacian was so blinded with choler, that he dealt not
herein with such discretion as was requisite.

The manner how they gyrded one another, the gronings they made, their sometimes
clasping their bodies, sometimes parting asunder, then crossing their legs,
was such as no tongue is able to declare; for if the Dacian be strong, the
Greek is no less. Give ear, Ladies, for there is no reason that this
wrestling should pass in oblivion without witnesses; and these which came,
were no less the^ the most mighty Alphebus, the two pillars of fortitude
brought him between them, Bramidoro and Brandafidel with the gentle Tirifeo:
of the other part came Torismundo, the brave Lord of Spain, with his son and
his valiant brother in law: they mist not the venturous Zoilo, with the beloved
Lisart, and the Prince of Argentaria, so as a man may well say, there was at
that meeting the best and most tried company that was in the universal world.
All this coming could not cause them to give over the battle: for the Dacian
seeing his Lady in danger, it made him draw new forces even out of his
wearines, and to give the adversary work enough to do, who condemned
himself of cowardice, to suffer one Knight to use him so, in the presence of
his father and other friends. They were both out of breath, and they could not
continue and maintain their obstinate fight: but the one thrust the other a
great way off from him; the Greek fell down hard by, where Rosamundi stood:
and where he had left his battle axe, he took it up, and with a wonderful
readiness he made toward the Dacian, but before that he was come near him,
Archisilora stepped between them, saying, Hold you out, Knight in the yellow,
for the Prince of Dacia is not a Knight, with who^ this battle may be suffered
to be ended. The Greek stayed upon his Ladies words, and then knew the
valorous Dacian; for he had no desire to do ought, but what might please his
Queen. But the noise of a most fierce blow which Bembo gave the Lady, suffered
him neither to give any answer, neither to proceed forwards. The fierce
Claridiano turned about, as malicious as a serpent, to see his fair Lady on
the ground, upon her knees, and had somewhat lost her senses, and that the
Pagan, forgetting from whom he came, would have closed with her. There is no
Pard, that more lightly rampeth after his pray, the^ the Greek did to defend
her: he came in good time, for before yt his sword alighted on her, he reached
him a blow on one side of the helmet with his axe, and made him fall on his
hands, and his axe pierce his target, smiting him with both his hands, standing
on his left foot, and again smote him a full blow on the breast, and made him
(with greater haste then he would) withdraw himself three or four paces from
the Lady, the which free from danger, having been busied with him, had not
perceived the people which she there beheld, until she was about to assail
her adversary, her husband slept before her, saying, Shall I never, dear Lady,
leave to have cause to complain of your cruelty; since coming to so apparent
danger, you would not be defended by him which was borne to love you These
Ladies (good Sir) are in the fault, which alone desired to take vengeance on
the Romans; which is done in such sort, that those which remain, shall have
whereof to talk of the Greek Ladies. In few words she told him what had
past, and how they had overcome the^ in the Ius^s, and of the death of the two
Giants, and of the coming of Claramante, with the other Knight more furious
then a Lion, and how they had waged battle with those in yt black, to whose
aid came ye rest which there remained: round about had that famous company
compassed those famous warriors, whole battle seemed to Mars to be but new
begun, according to the dexterity wherewith they charged, and the quick
retiring of them all four. The battaile-axe seemed somewhat trouble some to
the Greek in a private battle; and chiefly, because he had never been used
thereto: wherefore pitching the blunt end thereof into the ground, he left it
for a testimony of the owners valor: and so drawing out his good sword with
his shield in his hand, he assailed the mighty Bembo. O Apollo, I would thou
would recite this battle, which made all men to wonder! for the dexterity
of them both was without comparison; they were both well breathed, by reason of
their long exercise in arms, and for that cause hastening their mighty blows
so thick, that it seemed to them which saw them not, that Vulcans Forge was
thereabouts; for according to the noise, it was to be thought, there had been
a great many of Knights: to the close came these two most rare men at arms
with their swords aloft: But that war lasted but little, for both fell, which
was a mean much to prolong the battle in that manner, and so again entering
with their left feet forwards, and their swords in both hands, they made hard
Anuils of their Helmets.

There was never particular battle in the world better fought; for each of
them both was the flower of his Nation, and exercised in the Art as well of
Love, as in this, wherein no man excelled them, no not love it self, nor Mars.
The Moore had the worse, by reason of the Christians good Arms, but supplied
that with his strength, giving and taking blows which would have beaten a rock
to pieces. The Greek would play the fencer, thinking with a thrust, to have
stricken his adversary in the face, but he had not well fastened his blow, when
ye Moore soundly gave him a knock on the top of the Helmet; he took him at
unawares, and so the blow lighted so much the heavier, and made him set one of
his knees to the ground, and in that ward he stood to see if he would second
his blow, which had lifted up his sword, but the young man would not attend the
weight, wherewith it came, but with a iumpe standing on his feet, he let slip
the blow on one side, leaving the Moore deceived, who gave so fierce a blow, yt
it turned him round about, and smote the one half of his sword into the hard
floor. Upon the arms, the nephew of the great Trebatius gave him a great
blow, he was much distressed, being assured that he should lose his sword;
breaking the little chain, with a skippe he turned about, for in agilitie no
man excelled him, and if the Greek had not the better looked unto it, the like
had happened unto himself. But seeing the Pagan give way, he let slip one
hand to weaken the blow* he stayed but little herein, but it was enough for
the nimble Pagan, who like an Eagle, seeing his sword was lost, he suddenly
took up the Axe wherewith he was a second Mars. In many days before he had
not received the like contentment, as in seeing that in his hands, assuring
himself now of the victory, he now made room in the spacious green field.
All men knew him to be very expert with that kind of weapon: many were sorry
for it, but he, whom it touched even at the very soul, was Archisiloraes
lover, who framed a thousand complaints against himself, calling himself
coward, seeing that so retchlesly he had committed so great a fault.

I do not deserve (said that grieved Prince) to love such a Lady as this, who
is judge of my baseness: I have justly lost her favor, seeing that in her
presence, I was not able to defend those weapons which were none of mine.
Gualtenor could not end this battle without a new Chapter, presupposing that
he should well ease them both of their pain, with forbearing a little.

CHAP. XII. Of the end of this cruel battle, and how the Greeks returned to
their City, and of what happened unto them upon the way.
HEctor was not so much grieved with the cruel wound given him by the Greek
Prince, for that it was by his hands alone, as Claridiano was to see himself
unfurnished of one of his weapons; and not only for losing it, but that it
happened in the presence of his parents, when it had been requisite to have
showed all his valor, rather then in any other part. The sight of the fair
Queen was to him as sauce for his choler, tempering the same in such sort,
that it made him to fall into conceit with himself, how he might recover the
lost Battel-axe, and so like a cruel Pard, he would have closed with the Moore,
but he met with the point of ye axe: his shield was no sufficient defense to
ward the blow, but that it passed clean through. This did more grieve the
Greek, then if he had in a manner felt the fine temper thereof in his flesh:
he remembered, that there was no enchantment, that could resist the edge
thereof: the Pagan doubled his blow, but before that he could fasten it, he
was gotten so near unto him, that he seized his arms upon him, and finding no
resisting, within a little he had overthrown him, and lifted him aloft from
ground. The Lord of Achaia was in some doubt, and thought with him, that it
were better again to lose the gotten battell-axe, then the victory; and so
letting it go, he did use such force upon the young man's shoulders, that he
made him in despite of him, to stay with his burden, and gave him place to
take footing on the ground: he resembled the Sun of the earth, in recovering
again his strength, again getting that, which he before had lost, the Greek
being unable to hinder the same, notwithstanding that he sweat drops of
blood. This battle made them that were present, so much to wonder, that they
took no heed to that which passed between Claramante and the Scythian Moore,
who were so fierce, that they seemed to begin the battle anew. Claramante
was sorry, that he had not begun with the axe, imagining that by this time he
had made an end thereof: yet notwithstanding, when he hit him a fall blow, he
made him to shake like an Aspin leaf upon the tree, when the Southwest wind
blows. They were both very desirous to end the battle, for it was above six
hours, since it began, and both together gave so mighty blows, that they
both set their hands to the ground; there was little difference in their skill.
But as occasion served, the Greek was more nimble in assayling, then the
other: and so raising him with a thought, before that the Pagan could recover
his ward, he gave him so cruel a blow upon his great crest, that he made him
to go crosselegd and ready to fall: he set his right foot forward, and with
a strong thrust he hit him on the breast, striking him almost out of breath.
Through the noise which they made which beheld this battle, he turned about
his head, and seeing that those which had wrestled, were come to that ground
where they were, he suddenly drew near, and would not strike the Pagan, which
all men thought much of.

By this time was the valiant Brauorante come, blaspheming against the heavens,
seeing that he never proved Knight in Greece that did not put him in doubt of
the battle: in approaching, he suddenly gave him a knock cross the helm,
which made him go on one side; not with the good grace which the place
required, where were so many beholders: he turned against the Pagan; and being
so near that they could not strike, they closed, Claridiano was so near to
the battell-are, that struggling with Bembo, he might have laid hands thereon;
and taking footing, he rose, finding himself hard by his Uncle, for these
warriors were sometime aloft, sometime under. The Achaian gave him not so much
leisure; who having recovered his sword, came toward the Greek: he went to
encounter him, beginning the battle anew. Those which stood by, had no time to
talk, fearing that in shutting their eyes, they might lose the sight of some
notable action, worthy eternal memory. By this time would the careful Lover
impart his light unto the Antipodes, hiding it from our world, leaving to us
that which his sister gave, when the four warriors (being the flower of Arms
and bravery) were most earnest: sometime the Greek seemed to have the
advantage, but it was so little and la^ted so small a time, that no man could
say to whether party it would incline. In like manner was it between Brauorante
and Lindabrides her new lover. But they all stood expecting the issue, when the
heavens began to lighten, and to give such terrible thunderclaps, that no man
there present could deny that he was afeard* all was darkened, and nothing to
be seen but flashes of lightning, which put great fear in those valiant
Knights which beheld the battle: no man was able to stir from the place
where the Earthquake had brought him, for any thing that he was able to do.
Some visions appeared to them which fought the battle: and as those clouds
were past, the skies remained clear, the Sun yet showing some fair streams,
as a certain token of his departure. All alone remained they which had fought
the battle, only excepting Bembo and Brauorante, with the wounded Coriandro,
which Lupertius had carried away, because that the Roman ships being arrived
at Niquea, had great need of their presence. Gualtenor says, that being
fearful of some ill success, he made that enchantment to carry away his
Bembo, and sought by all means to have done the like by the Battel-axe, had
not Claridiano seized upon it, out of whose hand he could not get it, by
reason of the virtue of the rich Jewel, which was of the greatest antiquity
of any that he knew.

No grief can be compared to that which Bembo and Brauorance conceived,
seeing themselves set in Niquea (for it seemed to them that they had far the
better of the battle,) which was the cause of their sorrow: they made a
thousand complaints of the wizard, who by all means sought to appease them,
telling them the truth of the cause, for which he brought them away, which did
somewhat appease them, and promising them that he would set them in Greece, in
a place where no body should part the battle. This is very little, in respect
of that which Brundusio felt, when he understood what had happened in the
Just against the Ladies; for he would not of all that day speak to his
Cousin, but the next day he came to him, saying, I know not, Knight, who would
presume to return again into my presence, coming overcome by a woman, I know
no reason why you should call your self my nephew, seeing thou have so much
shamed the royal blood of Gibia. Oh cowardly knight, is it possible that I
should have the patience to forbear to put thee to death? But I leave it to
her to do, which has bereaved thee so much of thy fame, and were it not for
that, I would tear thee in a thousand pieces with my own hands, for ye spot
wherewith thou have stained our worthy lineage. At the loud speeches which he
used, in came the Emperor of Rome, and the Prince of Almaine, who sought to
appease the furious Pagan, whose eyes seemed burning coals: they had much ado
to get him from thence, leaving the proud Coriandro so ashamed, that a thousand
times he would have killed himself, and but that he was in hope to be
revenged at his pleasure, no man could have saved his life: But that vain hope
did serve but to prolong his life, coming again to lose, in the same place
where he had been before overcome. The wizard with all possible care cured
them, making them whole and sound the fourth day, because that on the fifth,
they were to marshall their tro^pes to take the way toward Grecia. There were
sundry opinions among the Romans, about the admitting of Bembo for Captain
general, for Bru^dusio being a chief dealer in the ma^ter, would not yield
thereto: But seeing that all the high Soldanes, and the Califa, with the great
Assirian were contented, he was the man. They chose for Captain general, the
brave King of Fenicia, and for his companion the expert King of Zarssa, with
the King of Armenia, who undertook a heavy burden. They began to dispose of
the Navy, which was so great, that they had need of Bemboes help, who
divided it into three squadrons: neither of the wizards does set down the
certain number, but Lupertio says, that it was nothing to cover the Greek
sea. There was no disagreement among them, although it be seldom seen among so
many strange nations as there were assembled: for Bembo provided for all with
so good government, that every man knew to what Colors to repair, and what
captain to obey of the Almaines: seeing them so proud and well armed, their
Captain had a great opinion, purposing with them and the Achaians to make the
greatest part of the war. And coming to be of the mind, that it may be
possible to cure the wounds of the soul, there is (...) little need of our
presence, except to joy at the sight of so high Cheual^y: for when this
valorous Prince and I arrived, in my conceit, the victory was certain, as all
others will be in the world, which shall be purchased by so victorious hands as
these, which have ended this, whereto all owe duty, as of right. All came,
warlike Knight, said the fair Archisilora, (which without offense to
Claridiano, was much affected for his valor to this unknown gallant, seeing
what he had done) through the hope that we were in, to have you for Judges of
our battle, a thing which might have assured the greatest difficulty in the
victory which we attempted: And I and these Ladies do much desire to know
your name, and of what country you are, if it be no offense to you. Greater
would it be to me, to fall into your disgrace, by not discovering it, said
Claridiano, then that, which I should receive, by uttering it. In this manner,
it will be to your advantage, (quoth the Queen) in stead of not offending us,
and at the point to demand it of you by battle, to make us beholding unto you
for your courtesy. It is so long since, answered the Greek, (glad to see
himself so sought unto by such Princesses, which were so and the same in
beauty) that I have been without any will, for that I sacrificed it to
Ladies, that it is not meritorious to yield new obedience, seeing that so long
since I have given my self in sacrifice. My Country is in the confines of
Scithia Liuia, for it were not convenient that a Knight of any other country
should be entertained with such cruelty; sometimes I have been called the
Knight of Cruelty, but now (wherein they have hit right) the Ladies Knight,
for the pictures which I bear in the midst of my shield, enduring only the
cruelty, which so much tormenteth my soul, which has been of such power,
that the Ladies have had a desire only to help me, and my heart herewith
endures new torments. You have plainly told us (Sir Knight) quoth the
beautiful Queen, that which these Ladies did desire to know; and making show
of your obedience, you have told us more then we did ask. Let not your
beauty wonder hereat, quoth Rosamundi, for no man is wounded by Cupids hand,
which does not presently publish it, to qualify their faith, which the
Gallants now adays take for a cusion^e, when their Mistresses use them a
little unkindly: there is no reason, why they should complain of them, for if
they be adored, their disfavor were li^e to the Gallant, to whom she^
yields: but in their complaints, they show themselves excessiuely grieved, yt
of all the world they desire ease of their wounds. But because this Knight
shall not say, that in Greece such cruelty is used, as in his Country, I here
offer my person, to use all means to take away that sorrowful device: for it
is not expedient to bear it in Greece; for it is here offensive to the Ladies,
which delight in pity, and so would they, that those should be, whom they
love. And in hope to see him well, said the fair A^chisil^ra, every each on^
of us that have met him, shall do her best to comfort him. It is very
reasonable, said Claridiana, that he coming to our succors, should be by us
eased of his grief, in requital of his good will His grief from henceforth,
said the fair Sarmatia, shall be very little, if it please you to remove it:
for if you be of power to cause it, you may far better ease it. It is so
conjoined with my life, sai^ the excellen^ Prince, that the taking away of the
one, would bereave me of the other: and justly to esteem such a favor as this
is, with less then my life, it cannot be requited. So as, (excellent Ladies)
in my grief remains my life; for the faithful lover, in midst thereof, is
encouraged, making his torment easy, with the only naming of the cause
thereof. I would not for any thing in the world, said the fair Archisilora,
that you should so lightly regard so great good will, as that, which these
Ladies and I have offered you. Fair Queen* said the secure Lover, I confess
my error, and to have deserved your disgrace, but I came to these wars with
such desire to do you service, yt I determined not to be cured: for I am
banished in most strange manner, being to accomplish my banishment in Grecia;
and but for her sake which rules my life, I would take it for a favor, seeing
the graces which the heavens have imparted unto all the Greek Dames, which
kindles new fire in my sorrowful heart, seeing it self absent from that
which my sovereign inioyeth, which in all respects is equal to her cruelty.
Now I say, that he is worthy to be pardoned, and we are sorry for him (quoth
Rosamundi) seeing that if he desire to live, it is only to do us service. If
it were not for that, gallant dames, said ye Greek, I would rid my self
thereof, but I have therein settled this hope, that I should here find some
body, which would be sorry for my ill hap. About this matter those fair
Ladies rode discoursing, well pleased with the Knight of Liuia his gentle
conversation, and no less were all those high Princes, for the valor which
they had seen and experimented in him: the night they passed with sweet
discourses, that although the three Ladies, and their being in company with
their husbands, did restrain them from discoursing of love matters, yet they
delighted to refresh their memory, with talking of ye most plesing time of
their whole life. For never man loved well which lived not in love: for by
loving, knights are purified, they become frank, liberal, valiant, and he
which was the most careless, becomes most careful. In no part discretion
holds so due proportion, as between lovers, and never was there any
honorable end of wars, if love were not the ground thereof. For love,
gallants attempt doubtful enterprises, making them easy with this saying, My
Lady will take pleasure therein: and to procure her contentment, in exchange
of his own soul, is to purchase a new life, new Jewels of love, sufficient to
give life to him that so loves: and to conclude, Plato says, that there is no
good where is no love.

The valorous Claridiano entertained the fair Ladies, and gallant youths,
with discreet discourses, until the golden lover showed himself beautifying
the earth, at whose coming, all on horseback took their way toward the
City, highly extolling the valiancie of the two Pagans: they all came to the
place where they were which had the guard of the Tower in the sea, the
after-noones heat they past in a grove of Poplars, and again taking their
short way, until about two of the clock in the night, under a high Pine tree,
they saw a Knight laid all along on the ground, whose constitution was pleasing
to them all, he was armed with blew, set with many Stars of gold, with so
many precious stones of such worth, that they could not be valued, who seeing
so many coming on horseback, rose up, and buckling on a rich Helmet, he
lightly leapt upon his horse, being caparisoned of the same color that his
armor was, on his Caske he wore a most fair plume set with Spangles of gold,
he had one of the most rich shields of the world. In the midst whereof which
was of blew, he bare god Mars, and close by him his Venus, with several
crowns in her hands, as though she gave them to a Knight which kneeled at her
feet, with this Mot: For thy worth and beauty,
Receive this favor,
Worthy thy valor.


They took great pleasure to behold his goodly personage, and much more, that
with his Lance in his hand he came toward them, they all imagined that he
would just. If it be no otherwise, said Rosamundi, it falls to our lot to
begin, seeing we have given the occasion to seek us. No body gainsaid it,
seeing it was no great adventure: and so by that time that this gallant was
come, they had taken their weapons, who showing courtesy lifting up his Beuer,
discovered the best favored face in all the Pagans country, and said, My lot,
valorous Knights has been so good to meet you in this place, that I cannot
complain of fortune, seeing she has set before mine eyes what I most desired
to see. I do not tell you my Country, valorous company, being so remote,
neither my name, because there will be small notice of either, for there are
not two days, since I received the order of Knighthood, from the hands of a
most mighty warrior, who told me, that if I made haste, I should find here
all the best of Greece. I desired him to tell me his name, in requital of
which favor, I would be ready to do him service all the days of my life,
for his valor deserves it. He told me that he is called Bembo, and that I
should tell the Knights, with whom he here had fought the battle, that they
should pardon him for not ending it, and that there should not want time nor
place thereto. He told me so much of your force, and made me so desirous,
that I purposed, if it shall not be offensive, to desire to just with some of
those which here come: I know it a great boldness, being the first time, yet
is it a satisfaction, although I lose, to have iusted with warriors of so
great fame.

The discrete behavior of him in the blew, gave great delight to all, and so
the gallant Rosamundi answered him, thinking with her self, that she had
never in all her life seen a gallanter Knight, except the Greek Princes, for
they were borne to be the wonder of the world. I would that of your part some
harder matter to be done, had been required, to the end that you might have
seen of what power in Greece, the controversy is which you have used, and
seeing it is but to just, and to prove the strength of your arm, let be as it
shall please you, esteeming (according to reason) her courte^us answer. The
young gallant turned with so good a gesture, that he made the great Alphebus
say, Never believe me, if these iusts be not worth the seeing, for me thinks
that this stranger is locked fast in his Saddle. Of the same opinion were all
the rest, expecting what would follow.

It is not to be recounted, most excellent and worthy Dames, without having
recourse for aid to your beauties, for such a thing is not to be solemnized,
but by him, who has twice borne the Laurel: for the Eagle flies no swifter
after her pray, then these two rare persons in valor departed. The Lady (most
excellent Lord) had a better horse then any of those which compass the
heavens, and so they joined swifter then thought: neither of them mist in the
encounter; the Ladies was such as would have overthrown a rock, but could not
the young man; for on horsbacke few excelled him, and none among ye Moors, yet
something he bent backwards. But the gallant Lady losing both her stirrops
and the reins, was driven to take hold of her swift horses neck: they all
doubted more then before, of the success, seeing the fair Lady in such case
at the first encounter. In her place entered the fair Queen of Lira, sending a
new Lance to the young Gallant. The sage Lirgandeo passes over all these
encounters, saying, that in none of them he had the worse: he advanced
himself farther, and ouerthrewe the Princes of Tharsis, both the father and
the son, and the brave Captain Aristoldo, he was likely to have brought to
the same predicament.

Finally, notwithstanding that the brave Torismundo, and his warlike son
undertook the charge; yet he lost no ground, nor any part of his honor. Alone
remained the Emperor Alphebus; who would not just, because there should want
no lau^ces for Don Heleno, Rosabel, Claramante, and Claridiano; four of ye
best Knights upon the earth. The Prince of Hungary had scarcely ended his
course, when, with an excellent swiftness the Dacian began ye carriere: he
could not have wo^ne much honor, although he had overcome ye strange Galla^t:
for yt he had already run sixteen courses against ye most mighty knights, who
without any show of wearines, came against ye Dacian. The raging sea makes no
greater noise, persecuting the ships ready to wrack, then these two most
famous warriors made at their encounter in the midst of their carriere:
there was never seen any better encounter in Greece: for the greedy Dacian
smote him some what low, and so the blow was nothing sightly, and withal,
he made him make the foulest bending backwards, that he had made in all the
rest of his courses before, ^ was feign to let go the reins out of his hands,
and to keep the Saddle, he seized on the horse neck, he encountered Don
Heleno in the midst of the shield, and being unable to pierce it, by reason of
the most fine temper thereof, he shorked with the Helm with such force, as
made him forget himself, he was so angry for this encounter, that had not
the stranger had equity on his side, the battle had past a outraunce. You
would not believe how those which stood by did wonder, seeing the great
strength of the Knight with the Stars without staying, that Claramante or
Rosabel should do it, the unknown Greek took the matter in hand, purifying
his valor in his Ladies face.

The sparkles fly not so thick from Vulcans Anuile, as from these two famous
warriors Helmets, either knowing the others courage. He in the blew encountered
the valiant Claridiano, in the midst of the strong breast, but as in that
place love only did predeminate, so it could not receive any further wounds
from any other hand, he smote him so furiously, shiuering his Lance into small
splinters, as made him lose one of his Stirrops, and make such a backward
bending, as was strange to that young gallant: Archisiloraes lover got not much
by his fierce encounter, which might have set him on the green field: and had
he met him in the beginning of the Iusts, he had not escaped so good cheap,
but being weary, it was no great matter to ouerbeare him, with the Saddle
between his legs. In fair greater estimation from thencefoorth was the
Knight held with the Ladies, then before, seeing that he had ended that, which
all they could not do, which were in all things so highly extolled: at an
instant he again fitted his lost Saddle, and with a very good countenance
asking pardon of them all, (although somewhat ashamed) he took his leave of
the Princes. Gualtenor does not declare the name of this Knight, neither whose
son he was, leaving it to the fourth part of this famous History. Only he
says, that he was the famous competitor to the house of Tartaria, until that
a kinseman which he knew therein, should conclude the welcome peace, but
first he should cover the field with dead bodies, all caused through the love
to a Greek Lady: He did not a little in the behalf of the Pagans in the
field battle, whose acts the sage does not a little commend. All those Lords
were much affected unto him, although the most of them did desire to come to
single combat with him.

If the Youth had been advertised thereof, he would not have refused it,
although against Mars himself: for in the world was not known a prouder young
man, and this made him to attempt great matters, wherein he always bare the
fame of warlike. In discoursing of his valiancie, those Princes arrived at the
City, where they were by all men expected, with some doubt of some danger that
might have happened unto them, but knowing what had passed, all was turned into
mirth.

The noble Trebatius entertaining the valorous Ladies, said, I would not fair
Ladies, that you should so esteem the honor of Greece, that you should
therefore put your selves in such apparent danger.

There was none (noble Emperor) answered Archisilora, since it was for your
service, especially this Knight being there, pointing to the Knight with the
Ladies, who for his valor may be compared with Mars: the rest affirming the
same, it gave occasion to the Emperor to embrace him with as great affection,
as if he had known him to have been his dear nephew. All the fair Ladies
bestowed on him new favors, having heard of the valor of his person: By
general proclamation it was commanded, that all should obey him as a Greek
Prince: he lay with his beloved Uncle: the world never knew two which loved so
dearly: they were devising together, when into the hall there came two Knights
from the brave Astrusio, aduertising the coming of the enemies army, and how
that (without doubt) the next day they would be in sight of Constantinople. They
all put themselves in Arms, every one repairing to his three hundred thousand
men; a show worth the sight: with all the Flower of France, of Denmark, and
Apulia, went the brave Don Heleno commanding that squadron: his friend
Torismundo held him company, with the Princes of Tharsis and Argentaria: on the
one side went the fair Rosamundi; Polidolfo held the third place, with all the
Soldiers of his country, which were very many, and well armed. All the
Portugals kept him company, and great part of the Persians.

The fourth degree fell to the valiant Persiano; wherein he commanded all the
Babilonians and Persians, which were without number. With the rest of the Camp
remained the Emperor Alphebus, with all those of Trapisonda and Lira, much
practiced in the wars. There were never seen troops better ordered, nor
Captain that better provided for all points: he was gallantly apparelled all
in colors, with rich furniture of the same: for they say, the fight of the
General contenteth the people: he made them spread all along the coast,
opening their rancks: in the middle (for their greater honor) went the Flower
of all humane might, Claramante, Archisilora, and the unknown Greek, twelve
Spaniards, and as many Antiochians. Being drawn near to the sea side, and in
sight of the enemies fleet, which coming near the Port, drew themselves
together upon the top of a little hillock, with his Beuer up, he uttered this
oration: The Oration.
IT has pleased him (valorous Princes and excellent Knights) which has formed
the mould of the whole world, this day to put the Greek valor in these
spacious fields; to the end that the world may know the force of your arms: In
praise whereof I would spend some speeches, but that the necessity of the time
does force me to be brief. Only this I would call to memory: The royal
blood from whence we are descended, and that we have a cause in hand which may
be for our advantage* The lot is already cast, and the destinies have permitted
it, that at ease we may see our selves (not compassed with enemies) for, that
your noble hearts could not endure: But at the point to let us understand, that
we defend our Country with the edge of our swords, I speak to my Knights:
for to return to our Country it is impossible, except we overcome, or lose
our lives. And so seeing the Greeks themselves have chosen and called us to
their aid, consider that it is honor to die to advance theirs: our enemies
exceed us in number, and we excel them in valor and courage; equity is on
our side, and we shall have as firm ground to fight upon as they: There
rests nothing but to fight with discretion, for that, and readiness to be
commanded, makes the most doubtful enterprises, easy: never any nation made
but one General, under whose command an Army (be it never so great) is to be
governed, attributing to him the glory of the conquest, or the dishonor of
being overcome. This I have said in regard of mine honor, and of the Office
which you have bestowed upon me: for fighting in order, and upon firm land,
and the enemies in the water, if they should get any thing upon us, we should
lose the hope of any good success: as for me, it shall be glory to live or
die in your service: and there is no more to be said, but to march forwards
whither victory shall call us.



THe valorous young Gallant pulled down his Beuer, leaving them all much
affected unto him for the discrete Oration which he had made unto the^, being
al well pleased to have such a Captain: and so they drew near to the shore,
spreading themselves at large over all those fields; where it was a world to
see the wauing of their ensigns, the soundings of Drums and Trumpets, the
neighing of horses, and the devices of the Commanders; which to describe,
requires an eloquenter tongue, and riper wit then mine. All the Ladies were
put into Venus Castle, which stood toward the Sea, from whence, some with
sighs beheld their Lovers, praying to God to save their lives: they which
could do it, did publicly give them skarfes and favors, the better to
encourage them to adventure their lives for them. Already was the mighty
Astrusio on the Shores side, who leaping into a Friggot, went to the Emperor,
reciting to him all that passed, and how near they were to the enemies Fleet:
Wherefore if your Majesty please, command what people you like of, to enter
into this Ship Royal, with you for your Guard: for we are in readiness, for
the most memorable battle, that has been fought upon the Sea, where, if
fortune be our friend, they shall dearly buy their coming, although I assure
you, that Xerxes Fleet was but small, in comparison to that which now comes:
But I have so great confidence in the valor of your soldiers, and in mine
own desire to fight with them, that I doubt not, but that we shall end it
with honor.

Do, valorous Captain, in all, as to you shall seem good, answered the noble
Emperor; for neither now, nor at any other time, none shall resist your order.

Presently he embarked with the company aforesaid: all the Princes which
remained, repaired to their Galleys, where it was a thing worth the seeing, to
behold so many Galleys together, so many standards, so many flagges,
streamers, and penons, such thundering of Ordinance; the brightness of the
armours did so glister, that it beat back Apolloes glistering beams: the
valiant Warriors made so fair a show on the tops of the poopes, as gave
good hope of victory: and so being put in form of a Crescent or half Moon,
they began to make toward the enemies Fleet, the which they discovered in
order, veering in the wide Sea, holding their direct course toward
Constantinople, with resolution (although there were among them many opinions)
to win the main Port, with pure force of arms.

The desire which the Ladies had to be on land, did move them thereto: and so
the two Nauies came to encounter, where they discharged sundry Cannon shot,
in token that they should charge. The mighty Astrusio had in the vauward of
his Fleet, fifty great Brigandines, which had no other commission, but on the
one and other side, to discharge great Cannon shot, which put the valorous
Captain in good hope. The valorous Thebane, with an hundred Galleys, gave many
sudden assaults, and was ever in readiness, to give aid where need was: the
battle being joined, the Sea waxed calm. Oh, who had ever seen so unhappy a
day, when almost all was between the water, and the flaming fire! the noise of
the shot bereaved many of their hearing, with such fury, that all the world
seemed to shake; for the smoke, the fire, the noise of prows and broken mastes,
the callings, cryings, and sundry noises, made a confusion: Priamus his City
did not make so great a fire, neither were there so many brave swords drawn,
neither with such speed and noise, as these two Nauies made, the one showing to
the other the valor of their soldiers. A thousand masts were broken in
pieces, their high carved works swamme upon the water: it seemed, that the
water, the fire, and the wind, had concluded a peace, whose effect was so
fearful, that the sea was on fire, as if heaven and earth would come
together: the sundry deaths which were given that day, my slender wit is not
able to express, neither would the great confusion which was therein, give
place to a man, although he had Argus eyes, to see the particular encou^ters:
for after the fury of the Ordinance was past, they came so near as to strike
with their swords, they were so near on board, where, with much shedding of
blood, and many deadly wounds, were made many brave assaults.

In this most cruel battle, death (which daunteth the stoutest) was not of
power to discourage them, or put them in fear, for no man refused any labor
or peril, although he saw the Ca^non bent against his breast: they entered by
the (...) began to burn in a light flame. Death was not there feared; but yet
seeing before their eyes so manifest danger, they began to fly from her, and to
abandon the ship.

The great Astrutio his people followed so hard in chase, who were most expert
at sea, that some of those Princes were almost in danger. But there is no
danger, where Commanders are diligent: only the Giants paid for it, who were
so weighty that they could not make such haste, and so death ouertooke them,
before they could come to the sight of Grecia.

One of the best ships in the whole navy was lost. There was no less to do
where the three lights of Knighthood, Claramante, Archisilora, and the
disguised young Knight, with the Captain general by land were fighting. The
brave Souldan of Egypt fell to their lot, but to his loss: for against the
fury of those four Princes, there was no force or temper of any Armor, was
able to resist: for before he could put himself in readiness, they had
overcome him, and had wholly ended it, if that four Galleys had not with full
sails come to the rescue of their Prince: and with all this, presuming upon
the aid of the Giants, he placed himself near the board, where he assaied
to show his force to his enemies.

His youthful resolution lasted but a while, for his guard of Giants little
auailed him, neither his fierce Cousin which stood by his side, whom
Claramante, suddenly with a knock with his Battel-axe, bereaved of his life:
for taking him on the top of his Helmet, the sharp edge of of his Battel-axe
descended down to his breast.

This terrible blow struck a cold sweat, into all the Galleys which came to
his aid.

The warlike Causelio (as angry as a waspe) taking the Souldans part, would
needs be revenged, who in the Empire was the next that succeeded the dead
Souldan.

Fortune was here favorable unto him, reserving him for greater dangers: for
although he fell into the hands of Claridiano, yet he could not, although he
procured it, accompany his honorable Cousin in his death but yet he was
stretched out upon the Hatches, mortally wounded, very near unto the death: he
would have leapt aboard her, crying, Grecia, and had done it, and got^en the
Galley, ^ad not there come in his neck a mighty Gale^n to rescue the wounded
youth.

Herein did the Greek execute his rage: for in despite of those which came
therein, he leapt aboard, and presently the three which followed him.

The fight in no place in all the whole army was more cruel, then aboard this
Galley, neither were there hal^e so many ^laine men found elsewhere in that
battle: for if these four met but with never so little resistance, they
redoubled their valor.

To the loss of many lives they gat the Standard, just at the instant when Don
Heleno assailed the Admiral of the Romans, for he had long been about it.
The furious Lady advanced her self forwards, being very angry, for the
defiance which they had sent her husband. The first that was met, was the
strong Brundusio, who seeing the arms of Dacia wauing in the maine top, he
presently imagined what it was, and to be that which he desired: he made all
haste with his Galley to come aboard the mighty Dacian. The Moors Galley came
manned with so good Knights, and so warlike and mighty Giants, that here the
battle was most obstinately maintained. The warlike Pagan fell into the Ladies
hands, with whom she began such a stur, and with such valor, as made them
all to wonder; she had the advantage above all that followed the wars: for
there was not a blow that she gave, but did cut their armours clean through,
and most commonly the flesh withal. By reason hereof, the Pagan,
notwithstanding that he were known to be one of the most strong and valiant
in the army, yet was he so hardly be set by his adversaries, that he was
bathed all over in his own blood: but that was not sufficient to make him give
back, neither was there in him any point of cowardice, but deferring his
cruel destiny, be fought like a valiant Captain. The Dacian his Galley was
in great danger, for there were four, which at once with full sails, charged
him on all sides. I believe it was to the end, that he should the more show
his valor: for redoubling his deadly blows, there was nothing worth the
looking after, but he and his fair Lady. They divided themselves, ayding
those which were in greatest distress.

The high minded Spaniard was none of those which did worst, for both he and
his son made good show of the strength of their arms, wading almost to the
middles, ba^hed in Turkish blood: notwithstanding all this, they had hardly
escaped, but that the warlike Zoilus came to their ^id, with his squadron of
Galeons, appointed only to yield assistance, where greatest need required: he
came in, hurling so much artificial fire, and that with such swiftness, that
he thereby rescued the beaten Galley: which being therewith lightened,
charged so the Roman Admiral, that they had almost taken her, when the
warlike Lindauro arrived, whom the Dacian deadly hated: he set the Roman at
liberty, but not with such ease, but that he first had some taste of his
enemies valor. There was a huge noise in that squadron, wherein the mighty
Alphebus was, in company with his Claridiana; and of the Troiane Oristides, and
his fair Sarmatia, which was, that having adventured far, coveting to take the
Admiral of Niquea, they were enclosed with above twenty Galleys, holding them
in such danger, that if there had not been therein such people as there were,
they had without doubt been taken: but the most strong Lisarte with his dainty
son, kept all the one side, which did some what appease the battle. There
were never seen more cruel blows, then were given here: for the mighty
Emperor, holding his valor for nothing worth, to see himself so compassed
about, gave never a blow, which bereaved not some one of his life; so as the
Sea was full of dead carcasses, the enemies were so many, that they never mist
ten or an hundred; for presently there came so many fresh men in their places,
and of ours never a one: they had now no hope to depart from thence, for it
seemed impossible, seeing their great valor, to do yt which they intended,
which was, to take their Standerd. Afresh came the furious Knight of Epire, who
was accounted for one of the most famous, he was much in love with the fair
Lisiana, wherefore his doings were to be noted: he came in a very high carved
ship, he thought to have carried all, at the first charge; but he found such
company within board, as was the flower of Cheualrie; who came to join with
the loving Moore: before that he could take footing, as a valiant man, for
indeed he was one, the Emperor Alphebus gave him so sound a knock, upon the
top of the Helm, that he made him set his hands and knees both to the ground:
he was scarcely risen upon his feet, when with a thrust, he set him faster
then apace, out of the Galley; he would have followed him, had it not been for
fear to abandon his Galley, being in such danger: there came a Giant (to his
own hurt) to seek revenge, but before that he could discharge one blow,
Claridiana had left him armelesse, being desirous to hasten his death, she
came to the ships side, where, with a thrust she pierced him clean through:
she escaped not so scotfree, but that another smote her on the top of the
crest, whose good temper gave her life, and yet not so, but that she set both
her hands to the floor: the Pagan would have given a second, when the warlike
Spaniard, Don Clarus drew near, cutting both passage and life from the
renounced Infidel. In many parts they began to cry Uictorie, Uictorie, but
chiefly there, where the four pillars of fortitude, Claramante and his
companions went, who as there wa^ted not, on who^ to try their swords, so was
it a pitiful thing to see, how many they slaughtered.

No less went they ouercomming every where, where the brave Astrutio went,
encouraging his Soldiers to do well, in hope of the reward which they
expected: which made the Spaniards draw force out of weakness, and the most
tired, to show himself courageous: of such force are the spoils of war. But
the enemies were so many, and their Ships and Galleys so innumerable, that they
never mist any that were wanting: for all the care that Bembo, going from one
part to another, nor of the mighty Pagans, Brauoran^e and Brufaldoro could
take, were not sufficient, but that they gave ground upon the water. In this
conflict the Pagans were very desirous (notwithstanding they were mortal
enemies) to meet with Claramante and his companion: fortune here in gave them
their wish, for those Princes Galley came where they were, that made way
wheresoever they passed: well were they known by their Arms, the two valiant
young Gallants, Claridiano and Claramante, whom with his Battell-axe no man
would abide; so great was the damage that he did therewith. And the unknown
Lover seeing himself in presence of his Lady, who took pleasure to see him,
not knowing him for Claridiano: it was wonderful what he did. The four rare
men at Arms of ye world, seeing one another, with an excellent grace and
terrible boldness came to join. The brave Mauritania^ fell with Trebatius his
nephew: at their encounter, they gave together so mighty blows, that they were
enforced to receive them with ordinary courtesy: they rose again, and returned
to give other, and being assured to receive ye third; for they came not to the
fourth, but yt they first saw the stars of the heavens in their Helmets.
Behind the^ as a bird, some space was Claramante; who brandishing his axe,
smote the Pagan upon the rich Helmet more hard the^ Diamant; his ^^xteritie
nothing auailed him, but that he made him give two steps backwards with
apparent show of falling: he gave him a lucky thrust, which took him on the
side of the breast plate; and bar^^way the ma^les, and therewith the flesh: that
blow did so much trouble him, that the Greek had time to leap aboard his
Galley, and to cry, Grecia, and for it, Uictorie. His speeches cost him dear;
for Brufaldoro returning to it, finding him near at hand, and out of order
with his leap, with all the force that he was able, he smote him upon the rich
Helmet, he made a thousand sparkles fly out of it, and the blood out at his
mouth. By this time came Brauorante as fierce as a Basiliske, and seeing his
Galley entered, he threw his shield to ground, and with both his hands he smote
at him a cruel blow. The Greek well saw it coming, and unable to sh^n it, he
crossed it with his strong halbert; for if he has stricken him at full, he had
been in great danger: he smote it back to his Helmet, tormenting him so, that
he had almost lost his senses. With another came Brufaldoro, which put him more
to his shifts. It greatly grieved his Nephew to see what past: and although yt
with his Uncles leap, the Galley was put off; yet taking his rising in his own
Galley, he leapt above twenty foot at a iumpe.

With the force wherewith he came, he fell on his knees at Brauorante his
feet, who was about to fasten another blow on the warlike young man: but
seeing him so near unto him, and knowing him by his Arms, he addressed it
unto him, discharging with all his power a cruel blow upon the Greeke^ there
were but few Knights within board, and those so busied, and some wounded, that
they let these four proceed in their battle, which was wonderful to behold.

Claramante let slip no occasion to take revenge on the Moore, who seeing him
busied with his Nephew, before that the Mauritanian could come at him, making
room in the Galley, he came at him in such sort with his battel-axe, as would
have made Mars afeard.

The valorous young Gallant mist not of his blow; for striking him with great
force on the one side of the Helmet, he made him fall down upon his hands to
the ground. Claridiano closed with him, meaning to have killed him, and had done
it, had not Brufaldoro come so soon, who to rescue him, was likely to have
lost his own life; for again striking a down right blow with his axe, the
blow lighted on his left shoulder, leaving it all disarmed and with a small
wound: they all betook them to their weapons, where they began a battle worth
the seeing: for those which fought it were greedy thereof, and angry for
former matters, which was the occasion that made it far more cruel. The
night came so fast on, that for all that they could do, they could not end it:
the Greeks being constrained (except they would lose themselves) to return to
their Galley, where they might see their enemies Navy burning in a light fire:
for there coming a fresh gale of wind from the shore, it was a fearful thing
to behold the slaughter that there was made: if Nero had seen it, I believe he
had seen that which he so much desired.

The Greek Navy was not free from that danger; for as there were many
Galleyes grappled together, the flame took hold on them, and had done much
mischief, had not the Captain wisely prevented it, casting on much water, and
with all possible speed (as the case required) cutting the grapples and
tackling, falling off from the fire. The enemies used the like policy, and
were forced to take landing much lower then they would have done, having lost
great part of their Nauies: but seeing so great a multitude of people, they
were recomforted purposing to make amends by land. That night and the next day,
they landed all their people in the Haven of Hircambela, ten miles from
Constantinople, which they would have razed, but for staying. They presently
ordered their battles according to Bemboes direction, who that night came forth
of the Camp, accompanied with ye best men in the army, with a hundred
thousand men of war, to level the passages between that and the City, and
to pitch their Tents.

The victorious Greeks (although with some loss of their Gallyes) returned to
their Port, and went ashore; there was great joy made in the City; the
Emperor much esteemed this course of importance.

The valorous Astrusio, taking his leave of the Princes with many imbracements,
returned to the sea, setting his hurt men ashore to be cured, he came to the
mouth of the Haven for fear of a tempest, very joyful of the victory: the
Captain general by land, seeing his enemies therein, began to show the
worthiness of his person, as shall be declared in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Of the encounter which the Captains soldiers had with the enemy,
about pitching of their Camp.
THere is nothing, most excellent Prince, that gives the assurance in the
wars, as discretion, that makes easy that which is most difficult; the brave
son of Sacridoro, making benefit thereof, ended great battles, as shall
appear in this famous and large History.

This famous Captain was the first man, showing in all things not only his
valor, but ye excellency of his wit also: for the golden Apollo had scarcely
looked out at his fair baye window, spreading abroad his golden locks, bathed
in the Spanish Seas, when coming forth of Constantinople with all his royal
Cauallarie, he called the Spaniards and Antiochians, to whom for their much
experience he had shown much affection: with him went the flower of
Cheualrie, Clarama^te, Claridiano, and the fair Archisilora, with him also
went the warlike Giants, Brandafidel, Bramidoro, and the strong Tifereo. Few of
the principal but did accompany the General, who in few words told them
whereabout he went, and how much it did import after and seeing in what case
the Moore had left him, before that he had space to draw his broad sword, the
Lady was come, and with hers, she suddenly took him cross the Helmet,
cutting away a great part of the visor, and withal, made him reele in his
Saddle; she help him forwards with a thrust, so as his thick armor auailed
not, for she hurt him sore in the midst of the breast, his blood gave
testimony of his dangerous hurt. Like one of the wild beasts of Hircania, the
Paynim set upon the gallant Lady, who seeing the fury where with he came,
gathering her self under her shield, for she had no more room, she received
the terrible blow: it made the blood come forth at her ears, and to her breast
did she bend down her head, astonished with the blow; and but that her
dexterity stood her in stead, he had stricken her again, which had been no
great matter to do, she was so ill of the last, for the Moore was very
strong; but reyning her horse, she put her self somewhat from him: the force
of the blow made the strong Pagan to turn about, and fall upon the pummell of
his Saddle, and his horse being pricked with the Spurs, brought him hard by
Claridiano, who was glad in his soul: for a thousand times he was about to
leave the battle, to come (although there were no need) to aid the Queen of
his life.

Seeing the good occasion, putting the Achaian from him with a very strong
thrust, with all his whole power he smote him upon the Helm; it was a very
fortunate blow: for lighting upon the cannon of the Feathers, it plucked it from
his head, leaving it disarmed, throwing it at his horse heels, and but for
fear of the joining of the two battles, he had followed him; for seeing into
what case he had brought his Lady, it made him deadly angry. Then came the Lady
pursuing him, and seeing what revenge was taken of him, even enforced thereto,
to her self she said, O flower of Cheualrie, how unjustly does thy Lady
suffer thee to bear this device, being worthy to be beloved by the most
excellent! I believe, that, but that she loved Claridiano so extremely, she
had sure given passage to Cupids forces, who sought by a thousand means to
make her tributarie: but she was so constant in her love to the Greek Prince,
that the Knight with the Ladies inioyed only good will: she would requite him
for his blow, giving Bembo another with both hands, of no less force then what
of him she had received, she made him lay his head in his bosom, and before
that he again came to himself, she gave the Pagan such a thrust, as did much
grieve him.

In this hurry, came ye Captain general, and the most strong Mauritanian,
being some what out of breath; for having buckled together, there mist but a
little that the Antiochian had not been overcome, for the Moore was so strong,
that few could match him: they came before the Greek, who stood beholding his
beloved Archisilora, and suddenly the Pagan smote the son of Oriselua on the
side of the Shield; it was great hap that he had not stricken it out of his
hand, and his arm therewithal: he made him so dizzie, that he could not tell,
whether he were afoote, or on horseback; he would have given him a second, and
had stretched out his arm to give it; but the valiant young man opposed
himself, saying, Hold thee, thou ill taught Pagan, and know, that it is no
valor to strike him which cannot defend himself. He stayed for no answer, for
in such cases it is excusable: but hurling his sword about his head with Mars
his strength, he smote him upon the strong arms, which he had lifted up, and
made him to lose his blow, and also his sword out of his hand; which before he
could recover again, he gave him another, and within a little laid him at his
horses feet.

With the noise, about turns Claramante, who was in a terrible fight with the
Scithian: neither the one nor other could pass any farther forwards; for the
two armies came to join with such a noise, that it seemed that the heavens
were vnhung, and should come down to the earth: with a fair encounter they
repaired, wherein, above twenty thousand lost their saddles: It was a fearful
spectacle to see the diverse kinds of deaths which were given: some falling from
their horses, were trodden to death: others being thrust through, so ended their
journey: others seeking revenge, desired to kill, dying. As the place was
narrow, and the people infinite, no man l^st his saddle that could ever again
recover it. The horses not feeling their riders, ran out of ye troup, leaving
any more to trouble the troops. At the first charge, they lighted on ye famous
Brundusio; who escaping without hurt, with a new Helmet, would needs return to
the battle, desiring rather to die in company of his Knights, then to live any
where else. He entered, revenging himself upon that poor people, among which
he did exc^eding much hurt: Yet the Greeks did as great among them: so as some
of their Colors began to retire to the passage where they first came into the
field: but there they found the brave Sacridoro; who did not only stay the^,
but made a great slaughter among them, so as the Moors were beaten on either
side; for neither the force of their Captains, neither their great number of
people could defend them from having the worser of the day, by reason that to
the Greeks came still new succors.

This bloody skirmish was known in the City, there remained not one Prince
therein: the Duke of Thebes executing the office of Sargeant Mayor general,
brought forth in order, all the carts which came from Antiochia, which he
spread over all the fields, toward the willow field, where afresh they renewed
the battle: for the brave Emperor of Rome, which was much practiced in ye
wars, was come in great haste with all the rest of his army, setting before
all the Giants which he had, to keep their enemies busied, while ye Pioners
began to pitch their Camp by a woods side, leaving it to serve for a wall at
their backs; but another day it put them in point to be lost and overthrown,
as shall be declared.

They would enter to assist their Captain: But the brave King of Antioch had
so warlike set his gards, that they would not suffer them, the Persians and
Babylonians, which guarded the passage, fighting like Lions: so as seeing the
impossibility, they determined to pass over the top of the mountain,
although it were very hard to do: they did it, but not without much labor,
and the Greek stood attending their coming, although all their princes were
gone into the field where the battle was, refusing to return to
Constantinople without the fame of Homicides.

The Giants stood them in much stead, restraining the fury of the Greeks; and
although, that by all means they sought to let it, they were not able: for
within their sights they began to pitch their Tents, and their Pioners with all
speed compassing the same with deep tren^hes.

The warlike young Gallants could not end it of themselves, of the Moors part:
for seeing what passed in the field, although the passage was vary craggy, yet
Don Celino and Floralisa, with the gentle Clarisel, and Don Argante, and
Torisiano, with the mighty Epitabio and Tindauro, with the Kings of the East,
which were most mighty Giants, came down the mountain.

With their coming down, there began a most fierce and bloody fight: for on
that side where they came, they made a most deadly slaughter: and had it not
been for those Princes which were newly come, they had without all doubt done
much more harm.

Then there came Don Heleno, Rosabel, and the mighty Father and the Son the
famous Emperors of Greece.

Then came Trabisonda, with Florion of Babylon, and the fair Rosamundi, whose,
deeds deserve a particular history: for between Brandafidel and Bramidoro,
she was more mighty then Mars. They came to pel, mel, one with another: where
were seen gallant blows, bold assaults, and quick retreats. O Claramante, who
had seen thee girt with thy rich sword, and with thy axe in both hands,
rushing in among thy enemies! He only may be said to be the death of them
all: for as they went close together; so sometimes at one blow he smote down
two enemies, giving never a blow in vain. With all this they cried, Uictorie,
by reason of the many Captains come to their aid. Archisilora, which was by
her lovers side, came to join with the fair Floralisa, knowing her by her
Arms: and having a great desire to try her strength with her, said to ye
beloved yonker, Keep you this side, for yonder Knight in the cornation has
much wronged me. The Bull never better defended his ears against the mastife,
the^ the Greek obeying his Ladies commandment, whorling his shield at his
back: it was pitiful to see what he did: for he gave no blow, that was not
deadly, giving place to his Lady, to execute her cruel determination. The two
valorous Ladies came to blows, there was never seen a more cruel battle:
Floralisa gave the first blow, such a one as brought the Queen of Lira to
deaths door; for she gave her such a blow upon the highest of her Helmet, that
it made her lay her nose in her bosom, casting blood out at her visor: she
doubled her blow on one side of her shield, and beat it so close to her breast,
that made her almost breathless. It was not long ere the Queen came to her
self, who as fierce as an Ounce charged the Lady: there was no defense in her
shield, for although that she cut it not, for that it was Camillaes; yet she
smote her so on the helmet, that she set her on ye pummell of her saddle. She
paused, and then like a Lioness, giving her a mighty thrust, she clasped her
arms about her neck, and drew her out of her saddle. They both fell down to
the ground, where without all doubt she had lost her life, had not Don Celindo
leapt after her, and with him his three most famous companions, who when they
saw their sister Floralisa in so great and manifest danger, and at the point to
be overcome, being enraged with great sury, and without any regard of what to
Knights did appertain, they all three at once began to lay on load upon the
Queen. O Claridiano, there was never Lion comparable with thee* for seeing his
Lady in such peril, although she strangely defended her self, he skipt from
his horse like an Eagle: there fell into his hands a mighty Giant, which came
to the noise, and was going to close with the Lady. But the disguised lover
being therewith displeased, brandishing his sword about his head, he smote him
just in the waste, his plancks of fine Steel were like wax before his sword,
for in sight of the whole army, in two pieces he smote him down at the
Ladies feet, which then were in fight: a cold sweat ran through all their
veins, seeing so terrible a blow. This youngsters fury was not herewith
assuaged, for he more forcibly then a thunder bolt, rushed in where his Lady
was enclosed, and in great danger. He trod Don Argante under his feet, and
shouldred Thorisiano a great way from him, and with a leap, assailed the
valorous Assirian, which in defense of his Lady, performed very heroical
exploits. His fair looks could not avail him, for ye Greek with both his
hands smote him on the Helmet, and made him set both his hand and his knees to
the ground: he set upon Don Celindo, who was hammering upon Archisilora, and
with a terrible thrust made him run backwards, and fall upon his back among
the footmen: and although that he were roundly assailed, yet, making way with
his sword, he came where the Ladies were, and gave Floralisa a stumbling blow.
Camillaes armor saved her life, but they could not save her from falling on
her face before his Lady, who help her forwards with another which was no
less. By this time were come to their aid, the two valiant Giants Brandafidel
and his friend Bramidoro, who played the Devils; they cleared the passage on
one side, for he which had the Guard of Floralinda, never gave blow with his
Club which did not overthrow three or four. With this good assistance, the
brave Greek took his Lady in his arms, (the greatest pleasure that ever
fortune did him) and set her in her Saddle, saying, I would not, valorous
Queen, that your worthy acts should bring you into such danger. To joy in
yours, warlike Knight, it shall be but well done to seek it, seeing that
therewith is purchased the sight of the valor of your arm. There was no time
to use many speeches, for they were in haste, for seeing the enemies on foot,
no man remained on horseback. The Greek with a light leap recovered his
horse, leaving them all amazed at his doings; it was his good hap to be on
horseback: for there came the flower of Giant-land, with great Pine trees in
their hands, these the Greek desired to meet, and but for leaving his Lady,
he had gone to seek them: their huge bodies were clad with planckes of Steel:
to meet them went out two, with the Princes: Brandafidel advanced him and
gave a fair blow, for hitting one of those fierce Giants on the top of his
Murrion, he put him out of his remembrance, throwing him to ground with a
greater noise, then if a great horse had fallen: his death was not noted, for
there came so many, that there was no place void, although they fell more and
more. With all this, they felt the brave Greek keep a stir, and working
wonders among them: that which Bramidoro did, was no less worth the sight, who
had already slain four: the great troops of men which came to rescue one
another, parted the battle, but not the company of the four which first began.

Claramante having upon a sudden slain a King of the Giants, raising
himself on his Stirraps, saw much people toward Grecia: in a whirling, he
repaired thither, conducting the three Princes with him, one wondering at
another doing. They made great haste, for it was needful, and the matter was,
that the young man whom we will call the Knight of ye Stars, until the
fourth part of this History, where he shall lose his name and become a lover,
it was he which in the Forrestes, as is already said, put the Princes in such
danger, who was come in favor of the Pagans, as he had promised to Bembo,
whom he went to seek. Before that ever he brake his Lance, he had thrown
many of the most famous to the ground; for to the Princes of France, nothing
did their valor avail them: for he overthrow them. Liriamandro, Brandisel,
and Bariandel, with the brave Troiane kept them company: it was his fortune
with his sword in his hand to meet with that Knight, to whom by nature he was
bounden, which was Zoilo the Tartarian. They both struck together, but the
match was unequal, for such as the young man are few in the world; he had put
him in danger of death or of being overcome, if the warlike Lisait had not come
to his aid, with his beloved son, and the Prince of Persia Bransiniano, the
which with their power, having left the stand where Sacridoro was, seeing all
in safety, came afresh to the battle, and they came in good time for the
Tartarian. The young man more fair then Absolon, doubled nothing, but casting
his shield at his shoulders, as he never mist blow, he put them all out of
breath, without losing any ioat, who being near the Prince of Hungary, with a
side blow he cast him to the ground sore wounded: after him he set the Prince
of Bohemia on all four. Then came the Spanish Prince, who within a little held
them company, for he set him senseless upon his Saddles pummell: he had a
hundred swords about his cares, and those the most famous, but his lot was to
make show of himself, to be the Phoenix of the world. To his rescue came the
four Pillars of their Camp, Bembo, Brufaldoro, Brauorante, and the terrible
Brundusio, with whose aid he made more head against the Greeks. On the other
side came the brave Emperor of Trapisonda, all covered with blood, with
Rosacler and his son, they held their swords to behold ye young gallant. God
bless us, quoth Alphebus, what valor is in this knight, he would not assail
him? he so much affected him, but be held Rosabel, who like a Lion leapt into
the midst of the throng. All those which were of his side knowing him, gave
him good way, and the enemies for fear, left the field free: for the four
famous warriors, Claramante and his company, had taken them to task, and so
having fit opportunity, they put their determination in execution. I would I
were not so much affected to the young Knight with the stars, whose fame
reached unto them, because I would describe this battle without passion,
worthy to be related by Virgill or Mantuan. For these two rare persons in
valor coming to join, it is not possible to express what blows they gave:
only Gualtenor says, that they bowed down their heads to their Saddles
pummels, casting abundance of blood out at the visors of their Helmets: none
of those which beheld the battle, durst to give them any aid, for it was
needless: for they presently came again to themselves, and each of them
knowing the valor of his enemy, they began to use dexterity. The bold Breton
was most accustomed to arms, and therefore was more nimble in giving the
onset, but the late lost blow of the young man supplied that defect: for as
fierce as a Serpent, he sought to attain to the victory. He came flying in
with two blows upon the highest of his shield: the young man with the Stars
was not one who would lose occasion, and insuch a case as that: and so beating
by a thrust, he smote him on the rich Helmet, it much auailed him that it had
been Hectors: otherwise he had cleft him to the neck: it sounded like a
Bell: he made the fiery sparkles fly, and him believe that the skies were
therein when they are most starrie, for he did so astonish him, that for a
good space he lost his remembrance: it was a spur to put life in him, for
the young man to come with another as strong as the first, it cut off his
plumes, and as Lupertius says, the Cannon also wherein they were: but let it
be as it will, the Greek never saw himself in the like danger as then, in
his life: but being chaffed therewith, and that his Father did behold him, he
set upon his enemy.

In all these battles, there was never given a better blow: for against Hectors
sword, no force nor magical temper can resist. Smiting him upon the top of the
shield, he claue it in two pieces, and passing through to his shoulders, it
carried with it his Poloron, leaving him shrewdly wounded, he ran at him
with a thrust, which cast him back upon his Saddle, and if he could have
fastened another upon him, without doubt he had overthrown him. There is no
Uiper could be compared to that warlike young man; for seeing himself handled
in that manner, he flung his shield to ground, and with his sword in both his
hands, he let fly a blow at Rosabel, which lighted on his shield; it pierced
it not, but drove it to his Helmet with such rigor as made him senseless:
joining with him, he cast his arms about his neck, and within a little
plucked him out of his Saddle, but recovering his senses, settling his feet in
his Stirrups, wheeling most strongly about, they fell both to the ground, where
betaking themselves to their weapons, it was a world to see their agilitie, the
proud onsets, and courageous retreates.

Strong was he with the Stars, but he had before him one which was borne with
a breast plate. Some advantage there was to be seen in him, but it was so
little as could scarcely be perceived. The night drue on, for the Sun hastening
his course, hid his beams because he would not see so cruel a battle.
Wherefore those warriors were constrained to repair to their horses, desirous
to meet, where they might have time and place to end the battle, which at
that instant was so vehement, as was wonderful: but the Moors had the worst,
because they had no succors: this was the sorrowfullest day for them, that
they had during the wars. For of one hundred and fifty thousand men which
entered into the Willow valley, there never returned the third part, with the
loss of three Kings, which died among the first. The Greeks did not wholly
without loss enjoy this victory, although it were the greatest that ever they
had in all the wars, for it grieved them to see the Moors encamped: within
sight of the City in a most convenient place, the past all the night well
content on both sides; the one for having shown, that by land they were those
which with their persons defended their Empire, having shown unto the Moors,
with the price of many of their lives, the valor of their persons. The others,
notwithstanding that they had lost many people, yet were very glad, that they
were entrenched in so good a seat. The warlike Bembo, seeing the valor of the
young Knight with the Stars, extremely loved him, he was no less accounted
of by the Greek Princes, esteeming him more then all the rest of the Camp.

But the commendations which were given of the knight of the Ladies, were such,
and so many, that I am not able to recite them: there is no reason but to
believe them: the first that began to publish his famous acts, was the fair
Archisilora. Among the Pagans likewise his arm was much extolled, the which in
fortifying their Camp, and burying their three Kings, spent eight days, in
the which there wanted no sightly skirmishes, nor dangerous encounters, wherein
sometimes they were losers, and sometimes were victorious, a common matter to
have such adventures in the war^es: and while as they prepare themselves, I
cannot forbear to go thither where I left Poliphebus, for it is expedient
that in such a matter as this, so famous a Prince be not forgotten, to whom,
and that with great reason, is attributed the cause of the victory of the
Grecians and of atchiuing of their enterprises, which otherwise were dangerous.

CHAP. XVI. How the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria, entered the Castle of the
golden Bough, where he delivered the most fair Luzela, daughter to the
Emperor of Egypt, from enchantment.
I Am so afraid, fair dames, to be loathsome to your delight, with such wars
as are past and are expected, that I am enforced to entermixe some matters of
love, with those of furious Mars, because that if the one be tedious, the
other may yield delight, and so I will shake off the fear wherein I was in
this behalf; for not to proceed with that sweet and pleasant style as I
would, it is enough to be loathed; without living in fear also, you shall take
my desire, and not the fruit of my short wit in good part: for thereof, and
of your daintiness I am assured, seeming to me to be of gold the liberty of
the Tinacrian Ageno, and to have it, I acknowledge that it is a death to me,
and life to be estranged.

He enjoyed little by being at liberty, for that angry passage being ended
wherein we left him, he went directly to those Ports, whose fair rich luster
made him to wonder, coming to the Ports which seemed to be of no worse then
gold. The sight of the fair Pictures and Paintings therein engraven, yielded
delight to the beholders: he came to the Pillar which stood before the gate,
and without fear winding the rich horn (for he much desired to know what was
within) he had scarcely winded it, when with a greater noise, then if ye whole
architecture of the house had fallen to the ground, they opened. The courageous
young man put hand to his rich sword, and embracing his strong shield, and
seeing that no body came forth, he went directly to the gates: through them
he passed, when suddenly he was held back, for on either side stood two
deformed Giants, having their huge weighty Clubs lifted up. The young man was
aduenturous, thinking with himself, that what he had done, was cowardice, if
he should now retire, and so he went forwards. There was not a liuelier Knight
in all the land, and this advanced his valor, for on foot few could match
him. He entered with his shield before him, making a fair show, and with a
leap he cast himself in, but not without receiving such a knock, as made him
set his knees to the ground: it was then no time to be idle, for at an instant
the most strong Giants were with him, who attended their coming, with
determination, with discretion to maintain the battle. As he was skillful in
fencing, so he took his ground in the pauement which was under the Port, upon
the which were the two rich Pinacles: the Giants were in hand with him by fits;
it was not ill for him to go flourishing, and to charge when he saw time, but
if he were light and quick, they were Pards, yet notwithstanding, his
nimblenesse did avail him, for they both together being about to strike him,
with a skip (covering himself well with his shield) he put himself just
between them, making them to lose their blows, but he, not his: for with a
blow backwards in entering, he smote him which was on his right hand, just
above the knee; there was no defense against his arm, for his sword entered
into the bone. The Giant feeling himself sore burt, would have closed with
him, but his thigh failing him, he fell upon his face to the ground: he did not
let slip the occasion which fortune gave him, for before that the other Giant
could assail him, with a great blow he took him on the top of his huge
Helmet, it was three inches thick, but yet he pierced him to the skull. The
Tinacrian was so greedy of ending the battle, that it was like to have cost him
dear, for he gave opportunity to the Giant to strike him: those blows were
not such, as that a man should stand toward them, for it made him to set both
his hands and his knees to the ground, casting out abundance of blood at his
mouth: another blow the Pagan meant to have given him, but his fury was such,
that it made him to miss, for if he had hit him right, it had gone ill with
him.

Garrofileaes son arose, and seeing the Giant unprovided, for his blow was
past, without any fear he ran at him with a thrust, and smote him in the
midst of the broad breast, his armor was three double, yet the sword entered
into the hollow of his breast: he felt the wound which he had given, and seeing
the Giant coming drawing his lame leg after him, with a leap he joined with
him, who unable to strike as he pretended, compassing his Mace about his head,
he threw it at him, and smote him in the midst of the shield; it was a wonder
that he had not beaten it to pieces. The young man was not strong enough to
keep himself from falling to the ground, the blood gushing out both at his
mouth and nosthrils. The young man could not defend himself, but that he took
a blow on the shoulders, which made him think that all his bones on that side
were broken. Being now as furious as a Lion, casting his shield at his
shoulders, and smoke out at his visor, covered with blood and sweat,
brandishing his reuengefull sword, he smote the Pagan a full blow on the
breast; there were few such blows as this ever heard of: for neither his
thick breast plate, nor his doublet of fine Maile could defend him, but that he
almost cleft him into two pieces. The young man was glad that he had given so
good a blow; but he escaped not scotfree: for turning about to set upon the
wounded Giant, two crowned Lions ramped upon him, which in strength excelled
that which the brave Hercules slew, they seyzed upon him, and he was not able
to defend himself. His armor saved his life, but they so crushed him, that
they put him clean out of breath. The most cruel Pagan had not lo^ his joint;
who drawing out a broad crooked knife, was coming toward Poliphebus. He well
saw him coming, and not (as was reason) without most great fear, seeing he
had so much to do to defend himself: but there he showed the blood, from
which he was descended: for in despite of the Lions (haling them after him) he
eschued the enemy; and so with all his force he got one arm at liberty, which
he put to his dagger, and therewith ended the Lions war.

He was so greedy thereof, that the fierce Pagan came; who being desperate,
smote him upon the rich Helmet, and beat a thousand sparkles of fire out of it,
and made him set his knees to the ground. He came upon him with another before
he could recover himself: it was great hap that he had not stretched him all
along, for he made him to fall on his face upon the ground; and had it not been
for his lame leg, without doubt he had killed him.

But the future lover, which now for that he was a stranger, hastened his lot,
seeing yt he came again, shifted himself to one side, and with all the
strength that he was able, he smote him upon the shield: it was of hardened
steel, after ye manner of a Target, which hung at his neck: he parted it in
two, just in the midst, and made the Moore to reele, likely to fall.

The courageous young man, seeing him stand some what amazed, he showed not
him self so, but suddenly leaped close to him, so as that before he could
turn, he had given him a knock on the pate: he smote off half of his Helmet,
and good part of the crown of his head: he was driven to trip to keep
himself upright. With another blow came ye son of the great Trebatius,
wherewith he ended the battle, bereauing the accursed Moore of life, being so
tired, that he was constrained to lean to his sword, and put up his visor to
recover his breath: he might have inioyed his rich hood, which was
inestimable: he spent some time herein, and thinking it more then reasonable,
and taking a view of his weapons, he took up one of the Giants Macee, and went
to the other gate with so great courage, as would have made Mars afeard, which
stood wide open: a little within appeared a very comely Knight on a roane
horse: his Arms were all lion colored with some green spots: he seemed so
comely a man, that the great Tinacrian affected him.

He entered the gate without any show of distrust, with his club on his
shoulders. In passing a little vault, he of the Castle came to him, saying,
For the fair disposition, Sir Knight, which you show, I would not willingly
fight with you; but being commanded, of force I must obey, particularly
Ladies, to whom is promised the head of every one that comes here, since the
coming hither of a certain Damsel.

Without fighting with you, gentle Knight, answered the Tinacrian, I would go
forwards; but seeing it impossible, I am to be excused: wherefore bethink you
of the manner of our battle. On horseback, answered he: for, for you comes
one which the Ladies send you. He turned his head to one side, thinking that
that had been true which he of the Castle told him; but he had scarcely turned,
when the other clapping spurs to his swift running horse, ouerturnd him with
his horses breast, and gave him a great fall in the midst of the yard. He
thought that his body had been broken, the fall was so terrible. This horse was
taught for this purpose only: and so he was not full risen, when with a new
carriere he returned to tread upon him, and overthrew him upon one side: this
was worse then the first; for falling upon one side upon his shield, it had
almost put his arms out of joint. There is no Hircane Uiper like to this netled
young man, who lightly raising himself on his feet, without losing his terrible
club which he had taken from ye Giants, he attended the return of ye horse,
which was so quickly, yt he could hardly slep aside: he did him no harm to
speak of.

But it was much for him to see that he had escaped the trained horse his
breast, which with new force returned against the young man: here he gave a
sign of his warlike arm, and the great valiancie of his person; for leaping a
little to one side, the horse mist to run upon him, he giving a gallant
blow: for raising his Club aloft, he smote the Knight upon the shoulders,
making the blood to gufh out at his mouth, he stretched him along upon his
horses neck: but the blow which the Master received, was no let to the horse,
to return again at the Tinacrian, beating the pauement in pieces with his
heels. Now had the son of Trebatius taken fortune by the foretop: for
slipping to one side, he took the knight by the arm: it auailed him not, that
he was again come to himself, neither that he bare a gallant mind: for he
pulled him to the ground, where struggling, at length they came to let go their
hold, beginning a now battle, and although bloody, yet worth the sight: for
he of the Castle was valiant, and he fought for no less then his life and
honor, but he gat little by this young man, who was every way his better, and
much accustomed to feats of arms: And having gotten him a foot in that
manner, had he been Mars himself, he would have made small account of him.
With all this he of the Castle defended himself, and sometimes offended the
mighty Tinacrian, who thinking that he lost much time, reatcht him a sound
knock, yea he gave him another, which made him fall on his hands to the ground,
which, before that he could rise again, he seconded, that within a little he
had laid him all along.

This warrior of the Castle, as fierce as a Lion (seeing his death before his
eyes) considering the enemies force, falling into desperation, throwing his
shield to ground, with his sword in both his hands, went toward him, striking
him upon ye shield: the fierce blow came with such strength, that it beat it to
his Helmet, making him lose his senses. There was never seen greater haste
then he made to second that blow, and smote him on the top of his most fine
Helm, bereauing him in a manner of his sight: he would have closed with him
with a stabbe: but the young man as fierce as a Basilisk, prevented him,
beating it aside, they came to handy gripes: and as he was stronger then he of
the Castle; so lifting him up from ground, he hurled him against the pauement,
and gave him a sore fall: he of the Castle still kept his hold of him, being
afeard of death: and recovering strength in his weakness, he began to defend
himself, and to procure his liberty. But it was now too late: for kneeling
down upon him, with his dagger in his right hand, he made a good end of his
days work; but so weary, that he was not able to stand on his feet.

With all this, thinking that he had yet something to do, desirous to know what
that might be, which was so much defended, with the same club on his neck, he
entered in at another gate, he came into a large walk, at the end whereof he
saw about the number of twenty Ladies, so exceeding fair, that they did even
make his eyes to dazzle, thinking with himself (as indeed it was true) that
there was nothing else to be seen.

After that he drew near to behold them, they were Ladies of Greece, which
there were represented, although with new spirits, all taking that form.
Seeing him coming, they set themselves to behold him, very well liking his
proportion.

One of them, which to him seemed to have an Imperial Crown on her head, said
unto him, We would not, Knight, that you should pass from hence without our
favor, which shall be so needful for you, considering how much there yet
remains, that without it, it will be impossible to have good end of this
adventure.

No man can deny it (said the young man, putting up his Beuer) being a thing so
well known, and wanting deserts: if it shall please you to bestow any upon
me, as on him which has most need thereof, you may bind me wholly to do you
service.

We are all well pleased therewith (said the feigned Lady) but you are to
receive it here in our lodging, because that every one will impart some unto
you apart: and so you may come up here, and I will lend you my hand.

Being so heavily armed, fair Ladies (answered the Prince) it will be very
hard for me to get so high. You have your remedy in your hand, answered the
Lady, for disarming you; you may easily come up to our lodging, and it shall
be a new favor for you, to be new armed at our hands.

It will be so, said the Greek; but in a Castle where I have met with so many
enemies, it shall not be safe to go disarmed; wherefore if there be no other
stairs, I am not of opinion to fulfill your commandment.

Then I say, said the Lady, that you shall not accomplish what you pretend,
seeing that Ladies requests (so much in your favor) you have so lightly
regarded.

They were all gone upon a sudden, leaving him at their departure in extreme
darkness. The Prince in some sort was sorry that he had not obeyed them: but
imagining that it was some inchauntment, he was glad that he had on his Armor.

By chance he entered in at a gate which led him into a fair Court: the
Majesty and richness thereof bereaved him of his judgment; for there was
nothing else to be seen but portraytures of gold, set with many rich precious
stones: they all seemed to the young man, to be alive, the colors were so
excellent and so well laid on.

In the midst of the Court, he saw a most fair tree, the one half of most
fine gold, and the other of silver, set in so good and comely order, with such
exquisite art, that it was a most strange, wonderful, and pleasing thing to
behold.

Above in the Galleries there seemed to be people, although he could speak
to no body, nor know how he should proceed in this most strange adventure:
for he was very desirous to see the end thereof.

As he stood thus beholding the Castle, and the engraven works of the walls,
there came forth at one side of the Court, a most comely and well countenanced
Knight, in his hose and dublet of green cloth of gold, so fair and so young,
that the Tinacrian wondered at his most excellent constitution. He came with
his sword in his hand, and a scarlet mantle wound about his arm, with such a
gesture as was strange to see, and with very good behavior drawing near
toward him, he said,

I would not, Sir Poliphebus, but yt you had fallen into so great disgrace with
the Ladies, without which, you might have gone forwards with your good fortune,
which did assure you a certain end of this adventure; but now being to fight,
you are to perform it with me, and not with any other weapons then such as
you see I come withal: wherefore except you see^e (as it is requisite) a mantle
at some Ladies hands, having most highly offended those of this Castle, I know
not what order we shall take to be able to fight, which is a thing that I have
much desired, for the great fame which in this Castle I have heard of your
valor.

I thank you much, fair Knight, for that which you have said, answered the
Tinacrian. Although there be no such matter in me as you say; yet
nevertheless, there shall want no good will to obey yours.

This battle being ended, which seeing that it cannot be eschued (to end this
adventure) let it be as you will have it, although I want a mantle, for I am
persuaded, that I have so offended those yonder Ladies in denying what they
required, that they will lend me none, and yet I know no reason for it,
seeing that heretofore I have been so subject to their obedience.

All the Ladies which before he had seen, had seated themselves all above in
the Galleryes to see the battle. Yet the Tinacrian was of opinion, yt what was
past would give no occasion, that in such a case they should refuse to favor
him: and so he began with a very great good grace to put off his Armor,
remaining all in blew, so gallant a personage, as there was none like him.

In that manner he went toward the Ladies, and making unto them a very comely
reverence, he said unto them, I remember, Sovereign Ladies, the small reason
I have (considering what is past) to come to entreat you: but in that that I
did not perform your command, it is to be attributed to the natural fear
wherein I was, not conceyuing that your presence was sufficient to accomplish
with honor, any action whatsoever though never so dangerous, yet
notwithstanding, being challenged to the battle by this gentle Knight, with
mantles, and I having none, and to be given by Ladies, reposing my case in your
generositie, and not in my want of courtesy, which I acknowledge, I beseech
you that it may come from some hand, which may give me the palm of this, and
all other wars which I shall undertake to do you service.

I know not, Knight, with what countenance you can come to request any thing at
Ladies hands, whom you have so much offended, and in a matter which so much
concerned you (answered she which first had spoken unto him) particularly,
there is nothing wherein Gallants attain unto greater honor, then by obeying
Ladies: So as, that now if we should at your bare request give you our mantle,
it would seem that we did it of great necessity.

Therein consists your noblesse, (most excellent Ladies) answered the
fearful young man, and I will assure you to return it again to you, whole
and sound, although it cost me my life, which I will esteem nothing so dear,
nor no adventure so hard that I will not undertake: and there is no greater
generositie, then to pardon an enemy, principally, acknowledging his error,
and that he has deserved punishment. As they stood denying this Mantle, there
came into that same room, a most fair Lady. O love, how great is thy power!
for she was not fully come, and had set her self at the side of the Gallerie,
when to her was subjected the most free young man, who having forgotten what he
requested, and himself also, for he stood gazing, fixing his eyes so upon her,
that he was besides himself, and knew not where he was. And in exchange for
beholding her, he gave her the keys of his heart, and was yet sorrowful,
holding it yet too little, in exchange only to behold her. She came all clad
in cloth of Gold with sundry colors, with her hairs curled after her
Country fashion, with a Dutch robe of the color of the rest of her apparel:
the young man never saw any thing so well worth the seeing in his life.

All the rest of the Dames seeing him in this manner, with a fained laughter,
asked of him: How now, Sir Knight, what, have you felt, that you have so soon
forgotten, not only the Mantle which you desired, but even your self also? If
it be a wound of love, it is ill falling in love in this place, for here is
nothing to be hoped for, but cruel death. In her cruelty, answered the now
firm lover, consists all my life, seeing I have seen the most sweet death
that can be imagined: he spoke it with such passion, that I know not who would
not but have yielded, considering his goodly personage. The fair Lady was no
less busied in her imagination, persuading her self, that there was not so
comely a Knight in the world, giving love so free passage into her breast, which
lasted till her death, being no way able to leave to love. In her did love show
an example of power, and valor, and being unable to do any otherwise, (having
understood the request of this young man, and what the Ladies denied) she
said, Because, gentle Knight, you shall not think, that in this Castle is
included all the cruelty of the world, I will give you this Mantle, wherewith
you may end the battle, but upon condition, that you shall not depart from
hence, before you shall first have come to ask pardon of the Ladies whom you
have so offended. That should be a great want of discretion (Sovereign Lady)
for a man to fall into the reckoning, what it is to offend you, seeing how much
it concerns me, not to depart hence without it, it shall not need to
advertise me, that therein I should purchase your disfavor. Why then,
valorous Knight, quoth she, there rests nothing but to give you the Mantle,
and therewith to wish you the victory, as one which deserves the same. In
uttering these words with such a grace as would have made love himself in
love, she took off her rich robe, and cast it down to the Tinacrian, who
being much enamoured, with his neck in her yoke, winding it about his arm,
he turned toward the knight, who at his approach said unto him, You have, Sir
Knight, made so long stay, that but for that, that I did so much desire the
battle, I would have returned to my lodging, without giving you any place to
go any further forwards. In that I have made no longer tariance, I do marvel
(said the valorous Greek) for I know not how I could possibly depart from my
life, leaving it in the hands of those fair Ladies. Is it possible (said he of
the Castle) that coming in free, you are become already so subject? Therein
appears the force of love (answered the gentle Tinacrian) for he gives, and
bereaueth of liberty at his pleasure.

In this manner (said he of the Castle) you are desirous to give end to this
battle. It rather grieueth me much (answered the valiant youth) that we stay so
long, I expect no longer the contrary, neither did the Tinacrian give him
answer, but rather the one making to the other a due reverence, with angry
paces they came to join. O Thalia, that a man might put this battle into thy
hands, to the end that thou might give it that Sovereign grace which it
deserves, for with my dull wit, and want of favors, it is not much, though I
err therein. All the fair Ladies beheld the warriors. The Tinacrian did
purpose rather to suffer himself to be hurt, then that the Mantle should be
touched: it did encourage him, and that very much, that his Lady had given it
him; he entered with his right foot bearing the point of his sword firm
forward. He of the Castle was nimble, and so with his left arm he ba^e by his
thrust, giving him another very strong one: it did not a little avail the
young man, to see that his Lady beheld him, for otherwise, without fail he of
the Castle had hurt him, and yet he passed his sword under his right arm, and
without coming to the flesh, entering his clothes, he let pass yt blow,
winding to one side with such quicknes, as was strange. He cast another at his
shoulder: this gave him the victory, for through his elbow, he thrust the
third part of his sword, he drew it out dropping blood, and not content
therewith, he ^mote him athwart the thigh: it was somewhat a doubtful blow,
for had it not been so, he had certainly hought him, he wounded him
notwithstanding, although but little. There was never Uiper that so returned
against her enemy, as did he of the Castle* although somewhat out of breath,
which was the dangerous wound: being wholly desperate, covered with his
Mantle, he entered, and with a strong thrust, he stabd the great Tinacrian in
the arm: it made him to groan, to feel himself so sore hurt. At the instant,
the blood sprang out upon his Ladies Mantle. I know not who most felt it: for
she so^ing him hurt, waxed as red as a Rose: He, not for that he was hurt, had
also a good color, but for pure anger, as he well made it appear: for giving
a fierce leap, he joined with his adversary, who warded it with his Mantle*
^ut that was but a poor defense, for he cut all the pleites thereof, and part
of his arm: he saw him somewhat out of order, and lost not the benefit of ye
occasion: for he closed with him, thinking to have ouerborne him, but he gat
but little by his coming: for finding himself prevented by his adversary,
who with his dagger in his hand, if he had been a little more come to
himself, without doubt he had killed him: for coming to handie gripes, he gave
him therewith a mighty stab: it was below his hip, wherein he left the dagger
s^icking. The valorous Tinacrian took this wound very in patiently, and put
his hand to his dagger to have ended the war. He of the Castle set hand to
the scabberd, being afraid of death, but he could not be master thereof. But
going struggling even to the gate where the Ladies were, he had the better in
the wrestling, by reason of his hurt in the thigh: But coming where he might
behold his Lady, (his color changing and all his body trembling) he set upon
his adversary, whom being almost out of breath, he forced to fall on his
knees upon the floor, and with his dagger in his hand, he meant to have stabd
him into the forehead, and had done it, had he not heard the Ladies which
seeing it, cried out, holding him fast. The young man lifted up his head to see
who it was that called. They said unto him, Sir Knight, in requital of the
displeasure which you have done us, we entreat you to leave that Knight with
his life, seeing how little it imports you to be an Homicide, whereas you may
otherwise have the victory. It is a thing which I should be sorry for
(answered the valiant youth.) I would valorous Ladies, that of your part I
might be commanded, and as not a thing that I desire: and if it be your
pleasure, I give over the battle, on condition that he suffer me to give an
end to this adventure: and so he parted from him, thinking to have fought no
more, (for his deed deserved no less:) but the Knight forgetting his
kindness, with an increased stomach, far more then at the beginning,
assailed the young man, saying,

Do not think, son of Garrofilea, that thy coming into this Castle shall so
little cost thee. The Prince was ashamed to see himself so mocked. He turned
to see the Ladies, which holding his death for certain, seeing him so ill
hurt, and his enemy so sound and well, had left the standing. The like did his
fair Lady, having made streams of tears for the great sorrow which she
felt, to see the Gallant whom she so dearly loved, to be so sore wounded:
much more did the young man grieve at that, then to see himself so wounded.
But coming again to himself, as furious as an Aspicque, he charged upon his
enemy, although drawing one leg somewhat after him. There is no cruelty
comparable to this, for death is not feared, so as revenge may be had. He
crossed his sword somewhat low, making show to be overcome. His most strong
adversary thought to make benefit thereof, but it happened clean contrary; he
put by the blow, but with a full blow he smote him over the leg, and almost
cutting it off, he made him to stumble with the pain of his hurt, and he
reached him yet another sound one before he could stay. He smote him also on
the shoulders, where was his first hurt, but therewith the Tinacrian ended the
battle, for with the fourth, he felled him dead to the ground. He scarcely
touched the ground, when he vanished out of sight: all the Court was filled
with a thick dark (...); nothing was heard but the lamentations of distressed
Ladies. That being past, the Tinacrian felt himself whole and sound of al his
wounds and blows received, and again armed with his rich armor, which was
that which made him most to wonder, he saw nothing in the Court but the Silver
tree. He drew near unto it, wondering at the beauty and the rich enamelling of
the body of the tree. He read an Epitaph, differing from that which the fair
Queen of Lira met withal, when she entered into this Castle, as was declared
in the second part of this History, written with Greek letters in blood; the
Lover read them, which said thus,

When the bastard Lion shall come into this habitation, and with winning it,
shall lose his liberty, breaking off the Golden bough, he shall make free from
perpetual enchantment that personage which took him, leaving another free
entry for the fierce Basiliske, who shall set at liberty the father of this
Damsel, and many other Knights which here shall be enchanted with the flower
of beauty: leaving this Palace, this old and fresh repose shall be given them
in Olympus, where they shall remain many years.

The young man made no longer stay, but coming to the Golden bough, taking
good footing in the ground, he set to his valiant hands, he bowed the bough so
much, that he made it like a bow, he heard great exclamations, which came
forth of the body of the tree, saying, O cruel Knight, the case which
tormenteth me, I feel in the midst of my soul, leave me, it suffices for
my afflicted heart, that thou take compassion thereof, in knowing that I am
that unfortunate Alpatraphio, Lord of all Egypt, and to my great hurt a great
wizard, and this not suffices, for I was the murderer of my own daughter, in
whom rested my life. These words, nor the pitiful complaints of the Emperor
moved him not, so as to make him give over her determination: but rather with
greater force then before, he so hard pulled the bough, that he brake it off,
running down great streams of blood, all his armor and weapons were changed
into that Purple color, and having the boug^, he went therewith to a gate
within, which led into a great hall so rich, that it made him out of his
wits, to behold the Paintings and Carved works which were round about it.

The young man was much troubled to see the things, which were in that most
fair hall: in one side thereof, he saw coming forth, an ancient
Gentlewoman of good years, leaning upon two Nymphs, such as he saw the
Queen have, apparelled all in white, cut upon colored Tinsell, which coming
near unto him, said,

I know not, presumptuous Knight, who has given you leave to come into my
lodging, whither it is not permitted to any man to come, without bringing the
Golden bough, or at least, that of Silver. Why then, honorable Lady
(answered the young warrior) I bringing the tokens of the tree which you
speak of, you have no reason to show your self displeased with me. And with
that he held up his hand, and showed the Golden bough. The Lady very much
rejoiced, to see the Princess at liberty: she came to the gentle Tinacrian,
and taking him by the hand, she said, Come with me, valorous Prince of
Tinacria, and you shall enjoy the spoil due unto your rare virtue. She
brought him to a lodging, whose richness and beautiful building, made him
more to wonder then all the rest, it was supported by four Pillars, and upon
eu^rie Pillar, was a picture painted, holding arowe, signifying what he was.

These shall not be freed from enchantment (valorous Prince) said the Lady,
with the sorrowful Emperor of Egypt, which here shall remain punished for
his folly, and many fair Dames, until that the great Basiliske free his
lodging: for the present, to you is only granted the most fair daughter, for
reward for the pains which you have endured, in performing this enterprise, a
reward worthy of the son of Garrofilea, and she is a gainer, to be beloved
b^ so valorous a Prince. She would not let him stay any longer, but taking
him by the arm, she led him to other rich lodgings, till at last she
brought him very near where his Squire was, before he went forth.

She put him in a rich square room, which opened toward the Dungeon, where
Luzela the Emperors daughter was, lamenting her misfortune, to see her self
without liberty or any hope thereof. The Lady very pleasantly went in
thither, saying, Come hither, Sovereign Princess of Egypt, for now the high
heavens have practiced a mean to free you of your pain, and have sent you the
Prince of Tinacria, to set you at liberty, for whom it was reserved, as for
him which was most worthy. The Lady surprised with joy, could gave no
answer, the good, and such as that was, so busied all her senses, that she
could not believe it, although she saw it. She came forth with her, where in
seeing the great Tinacrian, she^ fell wholly in love with him: in loving and
being beloved, neither of both had any advantage. The valorous lover set him on
his knees before her, imagining that it was she which had given him the
Mantle, in pawn whereof, he left with her his heart and soul: he desired with
great affection to kiss her hand, and she, not to show herself unkind,
raising him, said,

There is no reason, valorous Knight, that she which has received so much
good at your hands, should be entreated for ought, seeing you have more
deserved. The most discrete Lady would not suffer them to spend any longer
time, but bringing them forth into the walk, where his Squire stayed, giving
to the Princess, those two Nymphs for her service, she embraced them,
saying, Although that the pleasure, valorous Princes, which I now enjoy to see
you, be great, I hope in the high heavens, to receive greater, although not so
soon: but the assured hope shall make me live contented, expecting the
Basilisk, on whom your and my contentments do depend. She had already
provided Palfreyes for the Ladies, and again embracing them, not without
tears, she returned to the Castle, at whose going in, there was so great a
noise, as made the lovers much to wonder, and within their sight, they saw the
building to arise and to fly in the air, until it past their sight, whereof
mention shall be made in the end of this fourth book, where it shall better
fit, to tell you what those lovers did.

CHAP. XVII. How the Prince of Tinacria took his way toward Grecia, in
company of the gallant Luzela, and how he set his sister Rosaluira at
liberty, from the power of the Giants, which carried her to Sea.
IN sight, fair Ladies, of the inchaunted Castle, we left the two Lovers, who
seeing themselves alone, who is any way able to express, what the one
conceited of the other? Now I would feign have a favor to be able to publish
with my own experience, of what power a favor is, which is given with a
pleasant countenance. All this was experimented in them: for if he loved her,
she lived by adoring him: they were well matched, and to live secure from the
changings in love, and with tenderness of heart, the valiant young man asked
her, saying,

Sovereign Lady, seeing that the heavens have reserved me to be yours, and
that I am never to depart your service, neither from what you shall command, I
should be very glad to knew your mind, and whither your will is that we go.
My lot, valorous Prince, is so contrary, (although that I now have my wish,
seeing I am in your power) that I am to do nothing after my own will, but
only follow yours.

The Gallant heartily thanked her, saying, I well see, valorous Princess, that
this your generosity is wholly to enrich me, and seeing that it is your
pleasure, that I shall dispose of all, for this present let our journey be for
the Greek Empire, for I have a great desire to make my self known unto the
Emperor Trebatius my beloved father, and also because that he may see what
chance is fallen unto me, in coming to do you this little service; for
there your greatness may stay with the Greek Ladies, in greater honor then
in that sorrowful habitation.

Ualorous Prince (said the tender Lady) I have ever had a great desire to see
the Greek Court, and the Ladies therein: for that I have heard say, that they
are the full perfection of all bravery. In this manner there is a thing come
into my mind, which if it shall please you to hear it, I will tell it you upon
the way between this and the sea.

Nothing (valorous Prince) shall displease me, if you therein shall take
delight. In Poliphebus arms the Lady took horse, and so did the Nymphs
given to do her service. He as nimble as a fly, leapt into his saddle, (a
new bayt to make the Lady the better to love him) and leading her horse by the
bridle, they went down the hill. In coming into the plain, the right way
toward the Haven, Poliphebus began after this manner:

I do, Sovereign Princess, understand of the great wars wherein my father
now is, and of the many enemies which beseege his City: I never yet durst to
make my self known unto him, without doing something, whereby I might boldly
vaunt my self to be the son of the mighty Trebatius: and for this purpose
I take occasion to go in your company; and having ye equity of your beauty
on my side, between the two Camps I purpose to maintain the same; not
against the Greek Dames, for the love of my sisters, and the rest of my
kindred, which live enamoured, which seeing my challenge, of force must come to
contradict it. Fame has reported, that in the Moors Camp there are Ladies,
which for beauty, are the Phenixes of their Countries: and if I prosper well
in this attempt, I may make my self known for the son of the great
Trebatius.

I would not, valorous Prince (said the Lady) ye through my occasion you
should lose that, which your virtue does assure of: for there want not Ladies,
whose bravery and beauty is to be preferred far before mine. I am not able to
go into Greece (answered the gallant Lover) without making it appear what
power your virtue has within my breast. So then (answered the Lady) there is
nothing to be said against your resolution. With sweet conversation they came
to the sea side, where they past all that night with such contentment of either
party, as can not be expressed. The next day, at what time as the fair
Phoebus began to beautify the earth with his presence, the two beloved Lovers
embarked themselves in the ship which Poliphebus brought. The Masters and
Mariners entertaining them with great joy, and wondering at the beauty of the
gallant Luz^la, hoyse^ their sails, directing their course toward Grecia,
sailing with so great pleasure and content, that they wished it had been
Ulysses voyage. After supper lying upon the hatches of the ship, casting their
eyes to behold the vast seas, and the form of the skies, this Gallant said
unto the Lady, If it may be told without grief unto you, I would gladly know
the cause of your enchauntme^t. Some it will be to me (warlike Prince in
renning the remembrance of what I there endured; but to give you satisfaction,
whatsoever you shall command shall be put in execution.

Then know, valorous Knight, that my father had an Aunt, the wisest woman in
all Egypt, where it is an ordinary matter to be given to the art Magic. My
father coming to receive the Crown, as Emperor of Egypt, was defirous to
learn that science; and so brought that his Aunt to the Court, of whom he
learned the greatest part of all her cunning. He married, and the destinies
would, that there should be borne so unfortunate a Damsel as am I, to have so
many desastres. Coming to the age that I now am of, without any pardon as a
father to his own daughter, he came to be so far in love with me, that he
took no pleasure of the world, seeing I would not yield to his desire. I
imagining that I should wrong my self, to yield in such a case to my father.
This my just disobedience made such an impression in his heart, that from
thenceforth his hatred was far greater toward me, then ever his love had
been. It did nothing grieve me to endure the troubles which he put me to, for
denying him a thing so unjust.

Wrath and blind affection so much prevailed over him, that being in my garden,
little thinking of his pain, although it did somewhat grieve me to see what
he endured, considering that he was my father, I saw him coming in a walk
among Canes, with a more unstaid pace, then his gravity required.

In seeing him I arose, and with a feigned smile went to meet him. But he which
came drowned in a deuillish determination, without regard of any thing more
the^ his passion led him unto, with a strange fury took me by the arm,
saying, My Luzela, if it may give you no occasion to ease my pain, in that I
am thy father, and to see what I endure with the grief and torment which thy
beauty has brought me unto; yet let the death which thou see before thine
eyes move thee to do it. And therewith he drew out his dagger which he set at
my breast. You may imagine, gentle Knight, what my soul felt between these two
extremes, and each of them so great. In the end I chose rather to die, then so
to defile my body, and answered him, My Lord and dearly beloved Father, the
heavens bear record with me, that if the loss of my life might do you
pleasure, I would presently give it, and should take pleasure to lose it, and
therein should offend no body, but rather ennoble ye obedience which I owe you:
but to be obedient in this, a thing so much against reason, I am of opinion,
that therein I should do injury, both to you and my self.

He suffered me not to proceed forwards; for with a strange fury, he
sheathed his cruel dagger in the tender breast of his loving daughter. Few
blows suffised to stretch me all along.

My father had not the power (repenting himself of that he had done) to take
out his dagger. I think the heavens would not that he should kill me; to the
end, that I in him should see sudden change.

O cruel destinies, began he to say, lifting his voice to heaven, in how many
sorts have you shown your selves coniured against me! O unfortunate Emperor
Alpatraphio, to how small purpose served the science wherewith I was endued! O
blind and vain affection, seeing that from thence is grown, to see before
mine eyes, a fact so inhumane! O heavens, if you hear me, be attentive, that
seeing that you are witnesses of my great cruelty, so shall you likewise be of
the revenge, which I will take of my rebellious heart. He was a thousand times
about to pluck out the dagger which he had stuck in my breast. I think he let
it alone, because he would not see my blood; and I saw it was even s^^ for
coming unto me, he uttered these speeches: Ah my Luzela, sometimes beloved,
not as a daughter; which is that which now (...) me, if there from the heavens,
where without change, treading them with (...) immortal feet, thou do
^^aunce to (...) the alteration (...), I have no eyes to ^caue pardon: but thou
wanting life, which to me (...) I give mine, it is not to be sought for upon
earth seeing I have sent it to the heavens, neither will I enjoy any, because
it will be loathsome, seeing I cannot forget to have been thy murderer. I do
pro^ise thee, my beloved daughter, to accompany thee in thy death, se^ing I
loved (...) so dearly in thy life: If for ^^ented his soul, to see how still
I lay, imagining that I was dead, and in p^lling out his dagger he had ^^ne a
greater harm, which he had done, had not his old Aun^ Cleonta prevented it,
the which in her kind, being angry, using her accustomed inchaun^ments, put him
far from me. She came to me and plucked out the dagger, and putting
certain herbs into the wound, cured me of the hurt, and said unto me,
Notwithstanding that the resisting of your fathers passion, be very worthy of
commendation; yet in that that thou wast not sorry for his pain (as was reason
being his daughter) it is just that thou make satisfaction therefore, in
straight and close inchauntment, where thou shall remain, until that the
brave Lion shall enter into my strong Castle, breaking by force of Arms the
strength thereof, and ouercomming the gards which I shall there set: and then
thou shall begin to feel some comfort, although thy father have none; for it
is requisite that he pay more for the injury which he has committed, not
only against thy renown, but against his own honor. But the ^^siliske shall
be given him, when he shall least think thereof.

She said no more unto me: but at that very instant me thought I began to want
my wits, and without knowing what I did, I went to that lodging from whence you
set me free, where I did nothing else, but be wail the absence of my father,
holding him for dead. She would never tell me any thing of him, although that
sometimes she came to visit me, giving me hope hereof: and she told it me so
plain, that I now perceive how much is therein contaynes: and I am given to
understand, that the time shall come, that I again shall see my father.

Yea, it will come (answered the gallant Lover) for the heavens give not one
contentment without another.

In this and other pleasing things, they past the greatest part of the night;
wherewith the young man began to ware somewhat bold: it was not wholly to
offend her, but to show with the mouth what the heart felt. He was of opinion,
that this Lady was sent to him from the heavens; wherefore, with the greater
joy they past the rest of the time.

It suffiseth, that to take their rest, they went to their Cabin (with a
determination on either side) that nothing should hinder their love.

Before that Aurora had done the Suns Embassage to the world, showing his
c^mming, the master advertised the Prince, that in the top he had descried
somewhat near, another Galley. He leapt out of his bed, not willing to show
any carelessness for the defense of his Lady. With the masters help he put on
his rich Armor, and being at all pieces armed, he went to put the Princess of
Egypt, and his soul also, out of fear: and with reverence (being wholly
overcome with love) he told her that there was an enemies Galley discovered:
willing her, that she should not therefore be afeard, for the sight of her
good grace did assure all.

With greater valor, valorous Prince (said the Lady) I would very gladly
accompany you, for the succor which hereof can come unto you (except the good
will) is so little, that it will rather be a hinderance. Ill should I, gallant
Lady (quoth the Tinacrian) go to fight, if not going wholly yours, and in
fighting, it shall be only for you.

By this time the two Galleys were come near together, wherein, in seeing the
Princes Gally, was heard a great cry, bidding them amain, if not they should
all dye The young man did it, but to another intent: for he commanded, that
all those which could bear Arms, should take them, and should stand at the
ships side.

As the Mariners with all diligence had ended the casting of grapples aboard
the other, to the end that she should not fall off, and that they might with
their swords fight aboard (it was no evil counsel, for it gave them the
victory) upon a sudden there came some twelve Knights, which bade them to
yield.

The valiant young Prince stayed until that they had fastened the Galley: and
getting a club in his hand, he set himself upon the poope, where he gave so
good account of himself, that two of them lost their lives with one blow which
he gave amongst them.

They were many, and for fear of their Commanders they set upon the Prince,
but it was to come with their lives, and there to meet their death; for he
never stricke blow which killed not a Knight, and sometimes two of them
together paid for their folly: before that they could return, he had made an
end of them.

By that time, there came forth three most fierce Giants, out of a withdrawing
place in the ship, where the Tinacrian heard cryings, as of forced Ladies.
Those three most cruel Pagans were much amazed, to see how soon that Knight
had made an end of all their Knights. All of them forgetting the order of
Knighthood, drawing out their monstrous faulchions, came to the ships side:
and one of them assuring himself of his agilitie, setting his one foot upon
his ship side, leapt into the Tinacrians Galley, and had done it, if the
young man's cruel club had not by the way taken him a blow on the pate, and
bereauing him of his life in the air, throw him in back again into the ship
dead at his friends feet, which were in a cold sweat. He which lost least
occasion, was the Tinacrian; for with a light leap he set himself against the
Giants. Whether that she which loved him better then herself, took pleasure
therein, there is no doubt, thinking that no man could be loved with more
reason then the Tinacrian, seeing his great valor conjoined with so much
beauty as has been aforesaid. He was one of the most gallant personages in
the world; so as many times he would not put off his Helmet, especially among
Ladies, to whom he was as a Cockatrice. Uery joyful she set her to behold what
he did in the Galley. He somewhat reposing himself, with a troubled voice,
said, How now, you traitors, and so easily did you think to bear away ye
prize. First you shall leave your lives in pawn for your foolish presumption.
The valiant Lover stayed for no answer, but whorling his club about his head,
he smote one of them upon the shield, which he brake in pieces, and there
withal his arm which it hung upon. He escaped not without his payment, for in
the wars, for love never gives the palm without it: for they both smote him
upon the inchaunted Helmet, and made him set his knees to the ground: they
there struck the Prince and his Lady in the shield, which her soul has that
faithfully loves: this, they which know what it is to love, call the heart:
he saw that these fierce Giants again smote down right at him.

He on one side crossed the blow with his club: and the other he shunned by
skipping to one side. The club was no defense against the force of the blow,
which brake it in the midst. It was good fortune that the Tinacrian gave back
with his body, letting go his club, which was ye cause that he escaped the
blow; which if he had not done, he had fallen on his face: the handle only
remained with ye valiant lover, which he would employ in his Ladies service,
which he saw did behold him: it did the more encourage him to do it, for that,
that by reason of the noise, there came cut of a Cabin in the Galley, a most
brave dame, clad all in blew, cut upon rich cloth of Gold, with her hair made
up, more bright then the Sun beams, upon her head, a net-worke of Silver:
the sweet prison of love, which to him had been life, if they would have
letten him alone, although somewhat painful in that place.

It was long since that the Prince had seen that Lady, but he presently knew
that she was his beloved sister: the gallant Rosaluira, a cold sweat to see
her in that place, ran over all his body, he would defer no longer time: but
threw the piece of the Club which he had in his hands at one of the Giants; if
it had been shot out of a Culuerin, it could not have fline with greater
force; he smote him right on the Helmet, him, who had already lost his arm:
the gallant never in his life gave bl^w more worth the seeing, for lighting on
the end, it sheathed it self in his head: he therewith stepped back, and drew
out his rich sword, and with a skip was with the Giant, who was yet troubled
with the last blow, and with all the strength that he was able, he gave him a
thrust in the midst of the breast. His strong dou^le breast plate auailed him
not, but that his sword entered even unto his shoulders, and in drawing out his
sword, cut came the Giants soul. He which remained alive, was much vexed
therewith, and seeking revenge with his sword in both his hands, he made
toward the youth, he could not avoid the blow: and to have received it, was
like to have been the Princes last: for striking him on the top of the Crest,
he made abundance of blood gush out at the visor of his Helmet, he was ready
to fall. The Moore came upon him with another, which made him fall upon his
hands and knees upon the ground: he would have trodden him under his feet, but
the warlike Prince had not yet lost his good resolution, seeing him come
running, slipped to one side, letting him pass with greater force then a
thunderbolt. The young lover followed him, and as he turned about with his
sword in both hands, he smote him athwart the Helmet, and struck away all that
side, and left him shrewdly hurt: he provided for him another, because he
should ^^aie, and with a backward blow, he left him astonished, for to smite
him on the side of the head: every blow was death to him, he closed with him,
seeing the advantage which then he should have. The Giant, with the pangs of
death griped him with such force, that his armor entered into his flesh. But
the fierce youth with his dagger ended the wars, and throwing them all into
the Sea, he went straight to his sister, putting off his Helmet, and said,

I know not, Madam, and my beloved sister, how I shall esteem this good hap,
which the Gods this day have powered upon me, seeing they have brought me where
I might do you service: for I believe, you were forced to come hither with
such evil company. By this the Lady knew him, and embracing him with a
thousand tears like Pearls, for joy, she said, Who that has gained,
valorous brother, has been my self, seeing that in giving me liberty, you
have given me means to rejoice at your Cheualrie. They again embraced, for
there were no brothers that more dearly loved then these two: he acquainted
her with his adventure, and the course which he held.

The Lady beyond all measure, rejoiced to see the prince Poliphebus so well
employed; she would then go to speak to the Princess of Egypt, taking much
pleasure to know her for her Lady and sister. The Prince carried her in his
arms aboard, entertaining her with such courtesy as was expedient; and
knowing her to be his sister, whom she so dearly loved, she showed her
great affection, which lasted so long as they lived. The Princess was very
sorry, to think how much her mother grieved for her absence: wherefore they
took order, that two of their people should go in the Giants Galley, directly
for Tinacria, where they should be well paid for their labor, which they did,
carrying certain letters from the Prince to his mother. They took their
course for Grecia, where in few days they arrived, and those with the letters
at Tinacria, where they were well entertained, knowing for whom they came. The
Queen read the letters, rejoicing to know what was become of her beloved
son, the contents whereof were these.

Poliphebus his letter to Garrofilea his mother.
MY business has been such and so much, Sovereign Queen and dear mother,
that they have not given me leisure to be my own messenger, notwithstanding
that I much desired the same: occasion was now offered me, when very merrily I
took my way toward the Greek Empire, in company, and as husband of the
Princess of Egypt, and the high heavens willing to favor me, ordained that in
the midst of the Sea I met with my Sister, whom three cruel Giants carried
prisoner. The gods were so favorable, that I gave her liberty, and with her
am going to do my duty to our father, who is vexed with most cruel wars;
and if mine and my sisters entreaty may ought prevail with you, we beseech
you, that (forgetting what is past) you will not only pardon, but also assist
him with men from your kingdom, which will be much esteemed through the world,
and to us it shall be much honor, to be the children of such a mother. We hope
that your wisdom will consider that this is very requisite, and much
imports. The gods preserve your royal person, and grant us life to return
again to do our duty unto you.

Poliphebus of Tinacria, and Rosaluira of Grecia, your loving children.


The sons reasons did so much mollify ye hard heart of the cruel mother,
that she presently altered her mind. In the end, as she was a woman, yet
therefore sh^e lost no part of her authority, but presently commanded
Proclamation to be made through all Tinacria, that they all should within few
days, with the greatest force that they should be able to leui^, make their
repair to her City. Her subjects obeyed, for she was well beloved of all:
and when they knew what voyage they should make, they levied thirty thousand
men, all very well armed, she issued of her treasure what was needful: for
although that the wars would be long, yet there should be nothing wanting:
she was a thousand times in the mind to have gone for Grecia: but she found so
many inconveniences, that she was enforced to stay.

She sent for Captain of all this people, until they should meet with the
Prince, the ancient and discrete Earl of Modica, a Knight, who for his valor
was to be trusted in a greater matter then this: he accepted of the charge, and
in company of his son the mighty Fartemio, he departed toward Grecia, with
so prosperous weather, that within eight days, without any tempests they came
within sight of Arisa, ten leagues from Constantinople: it behooved them to
bear into the Bay, because they saw the enemies Fleet, bearing about as
though they would follow them: but it had been in vain, for the Tinacrian
Galleys came well appointed; and therefore the next morning they bare in with
the Greek fleet, wondering to see it, little thinking that the Greek had
been of such power: They set up the Greek Arms, as they were commanded,
making sign of peace. The Admiral bare in, giving a merry salutation. The
most strong Astrusio commanded them to be answered. They took a Friggot, and
went to speak with the General; who knowing what they were, entertained them
with much honor, being very glad of the good succors which came to the
Emperor, where we will leave them, and the Prince, with the Ladies, taking
land below Constantinople, to declare what passes therein.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the bloody skirmish which was between the two Armies, about
the taking of certain herds, and of the coming of the Earl of Modica.
IT has been no small matter, illustrious Prince, for a short wit, to have
prosecuted so long an History, passing between the two extremes of Love, and
the fierce Mars, giving to either the right which his valor requires. But now
from henceforth, I am constrained to treat of so many, which in the wars
have made proof of themselves, that I hold it a hard matter for my small
talent: but hoping of your most noble Lordships favor, I will undertake the
charge; for without it, it shall not be possible to do any thing of worth, or
that may yield any content.

The Greeks were glad of their victory past, although it brought with it a
cor^^siue, to see the Moors (in despite of them) encampe themselves, who
desirous to repair the disgrace which they had received, by a thousand means
sought to try their fortune. It gave them as good occasion as they desired,
for their skoutes returning to the Camp, said,

That upon the top of the hill, they had discovered great abundance of
Cattle, on that side toward their Camp, and that there might be about some
thirty thousand footmen, which had the guard of them. The Achaian was very
wise, and as an expert Captain, before that he would determine what should be
done, he commanded the mighty Don Argante, and his friend Thorisiano, that
with 500. light horse, without charging the enemy, they should discover the
hill, and to see whether there were any Ambuscado, and if there were none, they
should with all speed take the passage, aduertising what passed, for he
purposed to leave none, if he once took the hills side: he was not so ill
advised which kept the flock, which was the good Knight Flamineo, but that he
gave present advertisement to Constantinople; for the two Princes could not get
up so high so secretly, but that they would be discovered. The expert knight
presently with ten thousand men, drove the flock down the hill, and he with
the rest came in the ar^iere Guard, for he thought (and so it happened) that
the enemy would charge him at their backs.

The messenger came before the Emperor, who with all the haste in the world,
in company of his sons, with all the men of war of Persia and Babylon,
which were most refreshed, he sailed a great pace out at the Sirena Port,
thinking to get the hill, but all his labor was in vain: for the furious
Bembo, despited with what was past, had already taken it with fifty thousand
fighting men, whereof the one half were his own, and the other were Almaines,
to whom he was much affected. It was an unlucky day for the Greeks: for
joining with Flamin^o his troops, they began a very fierce skirmish, but
being too weak, he was taken prisoner, and all his people overthrown, and
the most part of them cruelly slaughtered. They made no great boast: for
coming back with the Cattle, very joyful of the victory, they could not
pass so at their ease, but that they must extend themselves at large on the
hills side, making head against the Greeks, who understanding what had passed,
fought not like men, but rather like enraged Lions. The Alarm was given in
both Camps, and there was no Knight of any account, but repaired to the
battle, for the Princes of France, and the valient Torismundo, knowing of the
taking of his wives uncle, and how sorrowful she would be when she should
hear the news, even by pure force of arms, they went up to the top of the
hill, and so returning upon them which drove the Cattle, they took them from
them, putting the^ to cruel deaths. They drove down the beasts, til they gat
at the enemies backs, and then with a great cry they set upon the^, assuring
themselves of the victory, and brought them to such a straight, that whether
they would or no, they made them take the plain, and, but for abandoning the
herds, they had wholly ouerthrown them. But having again recovered the hill,
of force they were to stand there still, which stood them in greater stead in
the battle. Bembo was so careful, that he had already given notice to the
Camp, to the end that Brauorante, and Brufaldoro, with all those of Niquea,
should with all speed come thither, toward the hills side which falls by the
Sea side, for there he most feared the Greeks. The valorous Knight with the
Stars, whom Bembo had made his Lieutenant general, came with the rest of the
army openly to the battle. That young man came very desirous to fight that
day, and so encouraging his soldiers, putting up his Beauer, chearing them
with the beauty of his face, he said,

This is the day, valiant men of war, wherein friendly fortune has put the
enemy into our hands, which now were careless for joy of the late victory. I
will not encourage you, for I assure my self, that each of you in particular
has wished for this day, to let them know the strength of your arms, and
seeing we are before them; there is now no time to make many speeches, but
remitting all to the valor, wherewith the heavens have enriched you, assuring my
self thereof, I am of opinion, that we shall make them pay their old score. He
cast his Trunchion in the midst of them, which was a sign that no man should
take any prisoner, but that they should put all to the sword: for there is
never worse service, then that which is done perforce.

They all showted for joy, promising the Captain, yt they would all die, or
overcome. There went in the middle Floralisa, and Don Celindo, near unto Don
Clarisell. There went in the Uaunt-gard, above three thousand Giants, so high,
that they seemed to be so many Pine trees: the valorous Astorildo led the
arrere Guard, desirous to meet with his Cousin of Dacia, with whom he was
much offended, because that he had persuaded his sister Rosamundi, to renounce
the worshipping of their false gods. Thither came the mighty Emperor of the
Romans, accompanied with the best men in the army: by his side came the
Prince of Almaine, with the strong Brundusio, which could never be persuaded of
the fierceness of the Greeks: there came for his Guard all the flower of
Giant-land, which were above two thousand.

The brave Califa led his people, so greedily desiring to fight, that even with
passion not foreseeing the event, he commanded his Standerd to march
forwards, and so extending themselves in length, in good order they should
present themselves before the Greeks, for this should put the victory in
their hands. The mighty Greek came not so ill provided, but that he brought
all the Thebane horsemen by his side, commanding the Duke to bring forth all
the Carts, Wagons set with hooks of Iron, and the Elephants, and if occasion
were offered, to present a field battle, for he with his son would take the
green way. Then came the mighty Captain General, with the best company
that was in all the whole world: for he had twenty four Giants, the most
valiant that were in all the Army, which only had the charge of his person:
for so had the Queen Oriselua commanded, fearful for her dear son:
therewith went the flower of Cheualrie, Claridiano, Claramante, and the fair
Archisilora: there was also ye valorous Zoilo, with the men of Tiglia, who went
a great pace to recover a hills side, which was of great importance for the
battle. Good were these preparations, but fortune being against them, they
served to small purpose: for the enemy led her by the forelocke: for the
courageous Bembo, which led the vauntgard, seeing the Arms of Trapisonda,
which were five Eaglets in a field of silver, said to the Gallants which were
with him, See, yonder is the Emperor Alphebus, of whom fame has made so great
report; here is the place where you are to show your valor.

The mighty Greek came mounted upon Cornerino his good horse, with his strong
and rich Armor which he had won; for in this battle he meant to show
himself a Gallant. With him he brought three companions, which did assure any
hard adventure: which were the valiant Dacian, the fair Rosamundi, with his
Empress Claridiana, of whom the sons of the great Tituan took charge:
which were eight Giants, and they the most famous in all the army.

The brave Lord of Achaia went a little apart from his people, in sign that
first they desired so many against so many to break their lances, to show the
valor of their persons. They went forth four, and he made the fifth: which
were Brauorante, and Brufaldoro, with the fair Floralisa, and her brother Don
Celindo. Face to face stood they against the Flower of Christendom: for the
great Emperor, which had a great desire to prove himself against Bembo,
addressed himself against him: and against the Scithian, the valorous Don
Heleno: against Brufaldoro, Rosamundi: Floralisa, and Claridiana charged
together: and against her beloved brother, the prince of the Persians, the
valorous Bransiniano.

Bembo his encounter was somewhat low, for fear of missing, as he desired:
it was not such as he had given. But he that received it, his force not
auailing him, lost both his stirrops. The like happened to the valiant
Brauorant^ with the warlike Don Heleno, who turning his Tirian, returned
against a contrary party, and Alphebus did the like. There was never seen a
more cruel particular battle in a field, nor better fought: for as for four
of them* they could each of them apart do as much in the wars, as the angry
god Mars himself. The three past their carriere, amazing all the army.
Brufaldoro is more valiant; but the Ladies Arms supply her defect, and more
too: for returning upon him, she gave him a knock, the best that ever was
stricken in the wars: for by chance her sword lighted between his shield
and his breast: she struck it from his arm, and loosened a great part of his
vaunt-brace: she came upon him with a thrust, and well she felt that it fet
the blood.

Never was Lion so furious, as was this Mauritanian against this Lady: and
although her Helm were most strong, yet it was not sufficient to keep her
from falling senseless upon her saddle pummell, casting blood out at her mouth.

All the rest of the Combats were reasonably divided, but they were presently
parted: for the furious Dacian with the noise of so huge a blow (by chance)
looked backwards; and seeing his Rosamundi, to whom the Pagan was about to give
another blow, with two leapes off his Tirian he was with him, and took him
somewhat at unawares. What shall I say of his blows? they made him lay his head
on the saddle pummell. Then he ran against him with his horse breast, which
made him stagger, and likely (horse and man) to fall to the ground.

By this time was Rosamundi come again to her self, and was glad to see her
Dacian so near her. The Combat could not continue, by reason that the two
Armies joined with so great a noise, that it seemed that the last day was come.

Who is able to describe the sundry kinds of death, the mighty blows, and
the gallant attempts given and taken of either party that day? Some unable to
keep themselves upright, tumbled to the ground, and before they could rise
again, death met with them: others which kept their saddles much better, with
seeking means to hold them, lost their lives, and were glad that they were
dead before they fell to ground: others were thrust through, from side to side,
and were nothing sorry for their wounds, but because they had no time to be
revenged: others were so impatient, that being close by their enemies, they had
not so much trust in their swords, as in their fists, and with them mayntained
the wars, until that death cut off all hope to see the triumph for the war.

There were above twenty thousand dismounted, and the greatest part of them
lost their lives. At the first charge, where Bembo went and his fierce
companions, Gualtenor durst not tell what they did, but comparing them, he
says. That a River breaking his bounds, and ouerflowing a corn field, does
not so bear down the corn, as they did tread men under their feet.

The Christians were so desirous of revenge, that they would not suffer any
place to be void: for although they saw that they met with their death; yet
there was no body seen to refuse it, still being in hand with the gallant
Pagans, whose swords and Armours were died in Greek blood.

No less harm did the valorous Alphebus with his mighty company; for he did
so oppress them, that he made them retire a great way out of the plain.

On that side where the Duke of Thebes was, the Emperor of the Romans
charged, with the Prince of the Almaines, and the valorous Brundusio: who,
des^rous to meet with some of the Greeks, made the battles to join together
with such a noise, as if the skies had fallen.

The mighty Epirabio took charge of the assaulting of ye City: and so with
all the instruments and engines requisite for such an exployte, with all the
Assyrians and the power of the Parthians, they drew near to ye walls with many
timber Castles; with which they thought so enter ye great City. 3. clarions
were sou^ded in ye Castle of Venus, from whence the Ladies beheld the cruel
war. All the Greek Princes knew what it meant. The Emperor Trebatius was
very sorry, fearing some ill hap; for he saw all the troops of Niquea, in
above sixty ranks, marching toward the fountaynes, to charge at their backs.
He lifted up his eyes to heaven, saying, Into thy hands, O mighty God, I
commit my cause, and the equity of this persecuted Empire. He turned to
Rosacler, saying, I do believe that this day will never be forgotten: I
beseech the Lord to look upon his people.

He offered to come to fight with the Moors, but that was not their meaning;
for they deferred it for a better occasion, but only to cross the fields to
recover a hill, which was hard by the walls, where they meant to fortify. It
was wonderful to see; for the Captain Aristoldo had already taken it. A
better co^maunder the world never knew; and truly to have gotten the hill, had
been continually ready to enter the City.

The discreet Captain returned within the valley with all the Spaniards, and
made such haste, that they took it beforehand. The Pagan brought much valiant
people, and he was so of his person; but he met with those which he thought
not of, which were the flower of Knighthood; no less then Uncle and Nephew,
Claridiano, and Claramante, with the fair Archisilora. These were sufficient
to fight with their whole army. The Captain of the Moors came to an ill
market, for he met with Lindabrides her lover, who smote him senseless upon
his saddle bow: he was so quick with him, that before that he could recover
himself, he laid him on the hard ground, with a knock with his axe. He would
not trouble himself any longer with him, leaving him for dead: but withdrew
himself some what from his companions for not to be troubled with his
battel-axe, for therewith he made more room. There was nothing better worth
the seeing in all those wars. There was never any hired labourer in the
country, which shaking the Chestnut tree, threw down more Chestnuts, then the
son of Trebatius threw down Knights with his terrible battell-axe. Sometimes
with three blows he felled fix Knights: and sometime with a strong thrust
he plucked Knights out of their saddles, filed upon his axe, as papers upon a
thread. He never gave blow, which made not the noble company to look about, and
wonder at the strength of his arms.

The unknown Lover gave good account of himself, for he sought not out
particular Knights, but the grimme Giants; among which he rushed without any
sign of fear. Their coming to the rescue, was to so great effect, that they
made the Moors to retire out of the field to Bembo his squadron, who by this
time was within sight, for he had intelligence, that there was a supply of men
landed in the port of Antona. He made have, in hope to overcome; for he saw
that by their hasty going, his people gat the advantage of the field. Well did
the strong Breton see, that for that he was on the left wing, where he played
the devil: and as that ground was somewhat higher, those which took land might
well possess it; which ranging themselves into a strong Battalion, he saw
took their way toward the field. He called the Prince of Argentaria, and
said unto him, Now is the time come, valorous Knight, to show what has been
hoped for at your hands: and therefore if you will be my conuoy, it behooves me
to pass by all these Tents, to go to know what people that is which is newly
arrived; for if they be not enemy, we shall get the field. Do herein,
valorous Prince, said the noble Florisarte, what shall please you, which to
effect with the loss of my life, I shall be well content.

The valiant Rosabel (for he had no time to stay casting his shield at his
back, and in his hand his sword) gave his horse the reins, who, as swift as a
thunderbolt, parted from his squadron toward the sea side. The Prince of
Tharsis had enough to do to follow him, he went with such fury and
swiftness. Both camps beheld him. The Greeks knew him by the blew scarf
which Li^iana had given him. Some followed him, the first whereof were,
Claramante, Claridiano, and the fayr^ Archisilora, because they saw that
Aristoldo made all haste, getting ground upon his enemy: for Epirabio being
missing (whom sore hurt they had carried out of the battle) in a manner turning
their backs, they made toward their camp, notwithstanding that the Moors in
that place had the worst of the fight: in most places else, they cried,
Uictorie: for Bembo reinforcing his squadron, had brought to his aid a hundred
thousand Assyrians; with which he gave so fierce a charge on the squadron of
the Thessalonians, that he made them retire above a bow shot.

The Greeks were in better case on that side where Florisiano, with the gentle
Polidolpho, with the people of Lira, Apulia, and Croatia had entered: they were
somewhat of kin, and for that cause they always kept company. They were of
opinion, that the Sargeant Mayor general had reserved them and their people
fresh, only for that days service. They were very confident in their valor,
and through that occasion they undertook great enterprises, and fell on that
side from whence Rosabel went; who with the strong Flori^arte being to go
cross the tents, had put the^ in disorder. They came in good time; for the
people of that country being but a few left, had retired to back themselves
with a little hill, whither came the two famous Captains with all the horsemen,
which gave so sudden a charge upon their enemies, as did greatly annoy them;
but the best was to recover the ground which they had lost. They both did
greatly encourage the people, showing them what honor they wanne that day,
seeing it might well be said, that they had restored Grecia, being almost lost.

These courageous speeches wrought such effect, that every one fought for two:
no man was afeard of danger, so great was the hope of victory. All was but
need; for the Emperor of Rome did so busy the Duke of Thebes: and the
Souldan of Egypt charged on the right wing, so as the Greeks had their hands
full on every side; for with the Souldan came mighty Giants.

Against this squadron the brave Emperor Trebatius addressed himself,
compassed about with the best men of all his army: they two met, but the
Greeks force was such, that excepting his sons, it was matchless: he
ouerbare both man and horse to the ground. Many alighted after him, some to
defend him, others to kill him, or take him prisoner.

Twelve Giants which were of his guard alighted from their Elephants to rescue
him, which did much hurt. With all this as in a chase, there alighted the noble
Emperor and Rosacler, with the Princes of France, and Zoilo the brave
Tartarian, with Brandafidel and Bramidoro, and the gentle Tifereo. There was
renewed one of the most perrilous fights that had been seen of all that day:
for the Emperor making no reckoning of the Giants, rushed in amongst them, and
at his entry with a stabbe he thrust their Captain quite through the body,
from side to side, who for his heyght was like to a well grown Pine tree.

The fierce Giant fell not, seeking before be dyed to be revenged: for he
swinged his heavy club about his head, and therewith gave the Emperor
Trebatius such a blow athwart his shield, as made him go staggering to one
side, ready to fall, and he had fallen, the blow was so terrible, had not his
valorous Nephew Clarindo been by him, who held him up with his hand.

The young man made no stay there; for seeing what had happened to his
grandfather, casting his shield at his back, he made at the Giant. Others were
come to the aid, so as he was well revenged: for Bramidoro with his heavy
club, and the Prince with his sword smote him both at once: one of them made
his eyes leap out of his scull, and the other with his sword cleft his head.
Rosacler turned to another which had smitten his Uncle, whom he made to lose
his feeling.

This day did the young man win his credit and eternal praise; for with a
mighty blow he cut him almost in two pieces. Much did the father rejoice to
see the force of his son, who mayntained a cruel fight against another
Giant. This was no time to strain courtesy, for Brandafidel came, who with
his hideous club knocked him on the pate: his Helmet could not protect him, for
he stretched him all along at the Princes feet. The Greeks and Macedonians
seeing their Emperor, took herein so good order, that they wanne part of the
Giants camp. There remained two to bear news of the Greeks valor: and had
there not come so much people, that the trampling of their horses was
dangerous, they had without doubt taken the Souldan: but they mounted him
again upon a swift courser, whereon he rode encouraging his people. The Califa
of Sicon^a kept him better company then he thought for, who seeing so much
people there gathered together, brought ^wenty thousand men to the rescue. At
their first coming they did some harm because they were flesh men, but it
lasted but a while; for the Greeks, which by this time were already fleshed,
made a cruel slaughter of them, supplying that here, which was lost in the
rest of the battles: for the Fenician Prince, Don Argante, although unknown,
came afresh with all the Medians, and for that cause where he entered he made a
deadly but cherie.

This was no day for the Greeks, for even the Sun was against them: for
falling down in the West, he bereaved them of their sight; so as the enemies
might easily charge and retire at liberty. The Prince of Britany could not
sally on that side where he was, but that he chanced to see the furious young
man with the stars, who, desirous to end the war with him, seeing that his
people had ye better in the fight: he went along ye side of a hill, which he
could not do, but Be^bo would see it, who with ye other 2. famous Knights went
to seek him, leaving the charge of his government with the warlike Celindo,
who seeing himself in such authority, began also to encourage his people, and
with as good order as Bembo himself could have done. What happened to those
which so went out of the Camp, is fit to be told in another Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. How the Prince Poliphebus of Tinacria came to the Camp, and what
he did for the liberty of the Flemmish knight, with the coming of the
Princes of Silepsia, Leobulo, and Claribel, and what with them happened to the
Princes of Grecia.
VAlorous dames, if to be engulfed in the actions of bloody Mars, be an
occasion to leave to treat of loving matters, at the least, I cannot leave to
acknowledge the much which your Sovereign worthiness deserves. I speak it,
for that having one day detained mine eyes from beholding this intricate
history, keeping continually my Chamber, I chanced to look forth, and saw my
death and life both together. Death, because yt there is no remedy, for the
evil which I then received. Life also, which is to see my self wholly well
employed, without envy of a more happy lover (although he live daintily) for
although they love me not, neither does my state deserve it, yet for me to
love, it is a sweet life that I conceive therein.

Being confident in my new wound (although it be in my old soul) I presume to
begin to make relation of the most famous war that ever was seen, of so many
against so many: for Rosabel had scarcely parted from among his friends, and
enemies, when descending down the side of a hill which led toward the Strand,
he saw come that way, a (...), (to his seeming) of a goodly proportion, in
company of four Ladies.

This was the valiant Poliphebus, who having landed, and hearing the noise of
the battle, in great haste drue near unto it, but durst not disclose his
meaning, because he would not grieve the Ladies. The two nymphs of the Castle
understanding the matter, one of them said unto him, O, you may well, valorous
Prince, without caring for us, go to succor your Father, for it is not a
little needful: for if it were not so near night, the whole house of Grecia
would be near overthrown, considering the abundance of enemies that are
against it: for know, that this Ladies Aunt, who is held for the wisest woman
in all the universal world, for she was taught out of Medeas books, and in the
same sign commanded us, that in this battle, and the challenge which you are
to make, we should have especial care of your person, for considering with what
Knight you are to fight, you would lightly be brought into danger, if she use
no me^ne to the contrary: but she being of your side, you may boldly and
merrily attempt any enterprise, be it never so doubtful, and shall prevail.
The Prince was very glad of the news, which the Nymphs had told him: and so
willing him to go before, for they would come to behold, he embraced them, and
took his leave of the Ladies, not without grief: for the one he loved, as his
sister, and the other as his love, and the greatest in all Cupids band. He
plucked down his Beauer, and with his Lance in his hand, he marched away like
Mars, and came down into the valley, he did not bow the grass where his
horse went, he flew so swift with the enamored gallant. It was a luckie
coming for the Frenchman, who was taken prisoner and sore wounded, whom three
most strong Giants and four Knights carried away toward their Camp, to go
in the more security. Both princes saw them, but the Tinacrian, like an
Aspicque in fury, was the first that came, for knowing the Knight which was
prisoner, by his arms full of Flowers (...) Luce, he held him for a man of
worth, and of the Greek party. He would ask no questions, but rather
charging his Lance, assailed the Giants, who held him for a madman: one of
the^ opposed himself against him, who with his life paid for the young man's
displeasure: for in meeting him, before that ye Lance brake, he passed it a
third part through his back, and like a Lion, returned against the rest of the
rascals. Four times he hurled about his strong sword, wherewith he dispatched
the four Knights, remaining alone in the field, with the two fierce Giants,
where, O valorous Lady, newly mistrisse of his soul, who can depaint this
combat, in such sort as you may take pleasure therein? He which carried the
valiant Frenchman prisoner, was constrained to set him down upon the hard
ground, and with his Club, to turn against the son of Trebatius, who making
a hard rock of his rich and sure shield, attended the blow, bearing his sword
aloft; and seeing that the blow came, he spurring his Rubicane, came so near
the Giant, that he made him lose his blow. Luzelaes lover came with a good
will, for with a thrust he hit him on the midst of the breast, and came with
such force, that it past half through at one side: his armor was so thick,
that he scarce hurt him. His other companion came with a great Cemiter in his
hand, he slaied for his coming, but before that he could make any resistance,
he smote him upon the rich Helmet, and made him see all the least stars in the
skies, and the blood in great abundance to gush out at his mouth: had it not
been Poliphebus which fought this battle, without al doubt they had overcome
him: for the two Giants were the best in all the Camp, and therefore Bembo had
reco^mended unto the^ the keeping of ye good Frenchman, but they met with the
son of Garrofilea, who more fierce then a Basiliske, again rusht in between
them, and from him who had so handled him, on a sudden he smote his shield to
the ground, with the gretest part of his arm. The young ma^s fury rested not
here, seeing yt he came near to the knight, who also saw him, not knowing
whether he were his friend, although that (indeed) he was the greatest that
he had in the world, he would not meet him in this hurly burly with ye
Giants: for turning to the second, he smote him upon the Helmet, and left his
head all unarmed, and therein a great wound. By that time came his lame enemy,
who seeing himself without one arm, lifted up his crooked Faulchion, but it
was to small purpose, for his wound took away the greatest part of his
strength: with a leap he cleared himself from him, and just as Rosabel came,
with his sword in both his hands he smote him upon the top of the shoulder;
there was no defense in the hard Steel: for he struck away all that quarter,
throwing him down dead at his horse feet. He had so fatned himself
therewith, that he gave opportunity to the other (being in despair of his
life) to give him a blow, yea, he smote him a full one; and struck him down
upon his horse neck, past all feeling, senseless: and so he continued a
great while, giving place to the Pagan to second it with another: and had not
Rosabel come in time to hinder it, he had stricken him again.

The furious Breton returned, and smote the Moore on the side of the shield,
the one half he flung away, with great part of his Uant-brace, leaving him
sore hurt. By this time was Garrofileaes son come again to himself, who
seeing the Greek so near him, he presently knew him, and was wonderfully
glad to see him in that place, but he would not that he should end the war:
for giving his Spurs to his strong horse (for there were few such, and for
such did the wizard give it unto him) and joining with the Pagan, (desirous to
give his Cousin to understand, that he was no less then himself) with both
his hands he smote him upon the unarmed head: and as he hit him on the skull,
so he cleft him down to the breast: and then (as though he had done nothing)
wyping his victorious sword, he went to his Cousin Rosabel, saying, I would
gladly know, Sir Knight, of whether of these two Camps you are: for if you be
of the Greeks, my mortal enemies, I shall be enforced to become ungrateful
for that which for me you have done, by challenging you the combat, having
far better confidence in the equity of my cause, then in my own valor. In
understanding this, worthy Knight (in denying my self to be a Greek) I might
avoid the combat. But because that you shall understand that you come ill
informed, let our fight begin presently, and in what manner you will, whereby
you shall understand, that the equity of our cause will give us the victory.
Your personage, valorous Rosabel, is worthy of all the triumphs in the world:
and putting off his Helmet, he went to embrace him, saying.

Why, did you think, Sir Knight, that I would not have come into your Country
to see you, you having offended a Lady in Silepsia, such as is Eufronisa, by
whom I am commanded to challenge you the single combat? The young man could
give him no answer for joy. Sometime Madam, a sudden joy bereaueth me of my
senses, especially, when it comes unlooked for: but that qualme being past,
embracing him again, he said, I did assure my self, valorous Prince, and my
Lord, that considering how much need Greece has of your aid, you would
remember it: let us be gone, to acquaint the noble Emperor your Father
herewith. That may not be yet (answered the valorous young man) but it
behooves rather to conceal my name, for the love of certain Ladies which come
in my company, whom I have promised, to maintain their beauty in the
midst between these two Camps, against the Moors: for against the Greeks
who shall dare, although it were Mars him self, Rosabel being of their side?
Seeing that you so please (answered the nephew) there is no man that will
gainesay your will: but first I would that we might to day before the Sun
go down, let them know what your arm can do: and it comes well to pass,
for I come now out of the battle, to see what people this is which here
comes. I have been somewhat more near unto them (answered the Tinacrian)
and me thinks that they bear the arms of Greece. But I would not that we
should stay a ioat longer: and so presently they took the direct way toward
the place, where they saw these troops, which were those which came from
Tinacria, under the command of the great Earl of Modica. In drawing somewhat
near, the young man knew his own arms, which were on the one of the Greek
arms: he bare in blew the seven Stars in Gold: he was glad in his soul,
that his mother had partly forgotten the displeasure, which she conceived
against his father.

Rosabel, to be brief, seeing the alarm given toward S. Michaels Castle,
gave them to understand thereof: the Tinacrians were exceeding glad for the
meeting their prince, of whom they had heard, what a man he was, and of his
great valor: the Prince would not discover himself to them, until that he
had performed his challenge. Rosabel presently drew them into the form of an
Hearse, and with the swiftest pace that they were able, they took their way
toward the Camp: they came even when the Sun had ended his journey, giving
a beginning to a new. Some of ye Greek Battallions were in a confusion, ready
to fly: they looked where was most need, which was where ye Croacians fought,
although that in the beginning they had done great hurt. But the greatest part
of ye Sophi his people, with their Prince Thorisiano, charged into that
quarter, making them (notwithstanding that they fought like Lions) to retire
from the field. But the Tinacrians which were very earnest, did so reinforce
them, that had it not bin so near night, they had pacified the fight: But it
was favorable unto them, although that it lasted not above an hour: for
therein did the Tinacrians make known what a Captain he was, which led them,
for he and his son Fartemio did bear themselves ^o courageously, that they
wan therewith Poliphebus good will. That which they did, stood them in no small
stead, for it advanced their house, even to ye clouds, and to be the most
principal in all that kingdom. All was nothing in comparison to that which
the young man did: for seeing his fathers party to go to wrack, there was
never Mower that with his Sith, did cut down Corn so fast in harnest, as he
with his sword in both his hands did fell down those infidels, which were not
accustomed to overcome. At his first coming, he encountered with the gentle
Thorisiano, who seeing ye slaughter that that knight made of his people, called
for a Lance and went toward him. The young man suspected him not, he was so
busy; and his adversary was not a man that would greatly strain courtesy:
for if his armor had not been good, he had riuen him through from side to side:
he cast him so far back upon his Saddle, that he knocked his head upon his
horse buttockes. There was never any Uiper trodden upon, that was so angry as
Luzelaes lover: for coming to himself, and settling himself in his Saddle,
with his very looks he made above four of ye most proudest afraid: for being
fixed in his Saddle, and his feet in the stirrops, spurring his Rubican, with a
leap he was with him, and with both his hands he smote him on ye shield, and
(had not such hands tempered it) he had cleft it: for he beat it close to his
Helmet with such force, that having wholly lost his senses; he cast out the
blood out at his mouth, and set him on the arson of the Saddle: he had seconded
it with another, and that had been his death, for the son of Garrofilea was
now impatient, and being so, none of his brethren excelled him: being angry he
was cruel, which was soon past, which did much advance his fame. Thorisiano
had many Giants for his guard, which although that his father knew him not, yet
he loved him deerly, commanding the^ to have regard of his person: and so one
of the^ (being little less then a great Beech tree, mounted upon a furious
horse, such a one as was fit to carry such a personage) met with the
Tinacrians horse, who if he had not been given him by ye wise woman, they had
both fallen to the ground, for he had not his equal. With a fair shock they
staid, and his presumption cost him his life; for in field battles courtesies
are not observed: for Rosabel being near his Uncle, with Hectors sword ended
that war: for hitting him upon the shoulder, he cleft his armor and body
to the hollow of his heart. His companion would revenge his death, and charged
amongst them, as amongst ordinary Knights. But see, hither came the famous
Earl of Modica and his son, who leaving the Guard of the Standard, came
hither to their aid, as though they had known of the meeting: if Gualtenor
may be believed, he was one, that afterward was very famous in Grecia, who
coming with great power, equal to his discretion, he rushed into the midst
of those Barbarians. The good Knight Flamineo held them good company. Being
covetous of fame, these three entered, as though they had gone a hunting: by
their blows they purchased fame, for the Tinacrians, (now Sycilians) at the
first charge, overthrew two of those Giants. The Frenchma^ was so ch^lericke,
who seeking revenge, was so slow, that he was like to have been lost: for a
Giant being near him, cast his arms about his neck, with such force, that
within a little he plucked him out of his Saddle. The Frenchma^ was nimble, and
so drawing out his dagger, he suffered the Giant to bear him, who feeling his
weakness, drew him from the Saddle: but he put in practice what he had
determined, for he suddenly had two or three times stabd his dagger under
his taces into his belly, fetching his soul out at the wound.

They fell both to the ground, where Flamineo, obtaining the victory, began to
defend himself, but it had been to small purpose, had not the Tinacrian been
there, who turning about his furious horse, made way to enter where the
Frenchman was: he took him by the arms, and as if he had been a child, he
set him upon the Giants horse; all men wondering at the valiancie of that
Knight; which sufficed to give means to Florisiano, and Poliphebus, to recover
what they had lost. They advertised Don Celindo of what passed, who with the
Assirian, and his sister, made thitherwards. Here was the greatest press of
people that was in any place of all that day; for both squadrons coming to
meet upon a little plain, and seeing the great hurly burly, there were few of
any account which came not thither. The first that came thither, was the
valorous Don Celindo with his company: he encountered Rosabel, and made a good
encounter, although he lost both his stirrops. Rosabels courser was so well
trained, that at two leapes he was with his adversary, and by that means he
smote him before he was in a readiness, and had wholly ouerturnd him, had not
Clarisel come running in, who well seated in his saddle, charging his Lance
above hand, he darted it at the valiant Breton: the Armor which he ware, was
not such, but that it could well resist that blow, so that the Lance being
unable to pierce it, rebounded back again whole. The valorous Damsel
gathered it up, and therewith went toward him whom she loved better then her
own soul: it was Luzelaes lover, as has already been said. Floralisa, ever
since that she saw his picture in the wood where she was bred up, yielded her
soul to him, confirming the same, when he went out of Grecia, admitting him
for her Knight, which he thought not of.

This Lady was Mars in Arms, and Venus in beauty: she brandished her Lance
with such force and dexterity, that I know not, but that if he which
received it had known her, he would have taken it for especial favor. She
hit him right in the breast, the most enamored that the world knew, and brake it
with the blow, and made the Prince to bend on one side: who again settling
himself, knew her to be the same which had done him so exceeding favors. He
would not take any revenge on her. But the warlike Lady not knowing who he
was, turned her horse, and with Camillaes sword in her hand, she drew near
unto him whom she most loved.

Here appeared the valor of the mighty Tinacrian; who coming close unto her,
before she could deliver her blow, took her so fast by the arm, as if she had
been bound with a great cable, and in sight of all the army, saying. Upon him
who is less desirous to do you service then I, warlike Lady, you may execute
your wrath, and not against him who is so much and so long time yours, and will
be until I die. He spoke it so suddenly, that she knew not who he was: and yet
seeing him come with Arms differing from the Greeks, and that he came with
new supply, she presently suspected that it was the gentle Poliphebus, and
was glad at her heart: for it is an easy matter to persuade any one that
hops, and fervently loves, to believe any thing that they would have, and
said, I thought, valorous warrior, that my wounds were received for favors:
but seeing that in you there wants this acknowledgement, I will leave the^
for those which will take them for such. The youngster let her go, which was
to make her the more to yield: and seeing the contrary party begin to press
forwards, and because that she would not stay behind; otherwise she had anew
fal^e in love again. Thus proceeded the battle, when the brave Knight with
the stars, upon a high rock beheld him in the blew scarf working wonders: for
Florisarte was now come, who knowing of the battle, was sent by Rosabel from
the City. As an Eagle came this warlike young man down the hill: and in
despite of the Christians, crossing athwart their camp, he came where those
Princes were. He trod under feet all he met in his way, and came in such
fury, that he would have made small account of Mars: yet the Princes of Babylon
and Argentaria made head against him, but he cared for none of them, after he
had seen ye young man: at his coming he smote Lisarte his son in the middle
of the shield, and encountered him with his head and breast in such sort, that
he made him lay his head on his horses croope, and with another he had
overthrown him, had not Bransiniano been there, who with all his might gave a
happy blow for the Prince of Tharsis: for at what time as the young man lifted
up his sword, the Persian spurring his horse, gat within him, and gave him so
great a blow cross the Helmet, as made him to lose his, and going from him,
left him almost past remembrance. The Prince of Apulia which was hard by, gave
him a third. They gave him so much to do, that they made him more manifestly
to show the valor of his person: for seeing that three had set upon him, he
turned against them all, and put them so much to their shifts, that he put
them all out of breath. He charged and retired as quick as thought, and
sometimes it was impossible any way to hit him, he was so light. Don Celindo
had understood that Poliphebus had grieved his sister, and therefore with his
sword (which was Queen Iuliaes) he made toward the Tinacrian. At that very
instant came the famous Rosacler, who being near, of force could not choose,
but know his own good sword: a man cannot declare the contentment which he
conceived in seeing it: for he could no longer forbear, but said, Away, away:
for this fight belongs unto me. He came where the Prince was, who refuing
him not, the battle began. The Tinacrian at his coming knew him by his
device, and therefore withdrew, addressing his blow against the magnanimious
Lindauro, who to his own hurt was returned to the battle: for the blow which
Poliphebus gave him, was like to have cost him his life, who within a little
had stretched him all along at his horses heels. All the soldiers (for not to
be benighted) withdrew, to give place to Don Celindo, who now more courageous
then ever charged the Greek: both together they gave 2. mighty blows, which
brought their noses to their bosoms. The nights approach would not suffer them
to give the second, which made both armies to sound ye retreat, for fear to
kill one another his friend unknown. The Pagans were victorious, whereof they
made good show with their ordinary instruments. On either side died so many,
that they were innumerable* and yet for all this, neither in the City, nor in
the camp was heard any complaining; for those which remained, were mightyly
grieved, until they might see the hour wherein they might either die, or be
revenged. For the hurt men the Duke of Thebes took especial care, who was a
most expert Captain.

This was that which he with the stars desired; who leaving the battle,
came to Rosacler, to whom with a gallant grace he said, I would have been very
glad, Knight, that you and I with some other whom you please, might have gone
and ended the battle that other day, for I much desire it.

Let it be as it shall please you (answered the noble Breton, who desired the
same no less then he) and lead you the way, and I will follow. The nerest at
hand was Don Clarisel which kept him company: with the Greek was the
Tinacrian, who left word, if any body asked for him, they should say he was
gone about a little business, and would come again straight.

The Princes in withdrawing them, found some wanting; the errand was left with
Zoilo the Tartarian, who pacified his Lady and the rest: they were much better
pleased, when they understood that Claridiano, Claramante, and the fair
Archisilora were also missing, thinking that they were all together.

The night was wholly shut in, when the brave Don Heleno and his beloved Lady,
with the Captain general, and Brandafidel, and Tirefeo went forth of the
City: and within a little while after, the most part of the Princes went forth
also, and likewise out of the camp, to seek for their Gallants which were
missing. What happened unto them, shall be declared in another Chapter, because
(O Mistress of my heart) I would not be noted to be tedious.

CHAP. XX. What happened to the Knight with the starers, and to Rosabel in the
combat: and the end thereof.
I Cannot (O Lady of my life) leave to acknowledge what pain I endure; for
Love has made me fervently enamoured, and subject to his sw^e^e yoke: yet I
cannot have time to treat of love matters (a thing so pleasing to my life) but
all of furious Mars; to whom (although I have been affected) yet now a strickt
account is called for of the time spent with him, which might have been for
love. What good thing has there ever been without it? Who ever lived a merry
life, if he spent it not in love? The imagination of field battles has
overwhelmed me, otherwise, no man should have made more manifest shows of his
love in writing, then I: but notwithstanding my desire, I am to follow those
Princes which are gone forth of the camp.

He with the stars had no great experience in the wars, and much less knew
the country, for both which his few years might excuse him; for yet he was
not fully sixteen years old, and yet he gave all the flower of Greece matter
to think on. At last they came to a fit place for the battle, although
somewhat far from the City and the camp. Without speaking one word, these
two warriors turned their horses and parted, to return the one against the
other. Oh that my Mistress would allow herself to be beloved, which would
give me means to depaint this war, which was the most bloody, being between
so many against so many, that happened in all those wars! it were a sweet
pensill for me to understand, that she took pleasure to be adored; yet
persuading my self that I am beloved, I will go forwards, because they came
together with greater fury then the sea, when being most swollen, it threatens
the heavens, putting the ships in great danger. Neither of them mist in the
encounter, breaking their lances as if they had been reeds. They past the one
by the other with Mars his countenance. Lirgandco says, that he with the
stars lost one stirrup, but it was not perceived. The Briton had a better
horse then those which draw the Sun, a reason why he was with him before the
young man could turn about, he struck down right. Achilles never struck better
blow: for as it was Hectors sword, it did cut away half of his shield: for
Lupertius his enchau^tment was not of that antiquity as the swords: he beat it
to his helmet with greater force then can be imagined, and made him bow down
his head as low as the horses crooper, and gave him a terrible stab: within
little he had endangered him, for it lighted near ye ioynting of his
vant-brace. He would needs close with him, which was to his own hurt: for the
young man like a fleshed Lion, with a leap was on one side of him, the Greek
passing by with his courser, as quick as thought. He with the stars followed
him in hope of revenge: fortune put that into his hands which he desired: for
Oliuiaes son returning, he smote him at ease upon ye highest of his helmet: the
sword rebounded as if he had smitte^ a rock. The young man was nothing glad of
yt* yet he gave him another, which smote the Breton down upon his horse neck,
casting out blood at his mouth, nostrils, and ears. The furious Tinacrian his
blood did freese to see such a blow: at length coming again to himself, and
in state to seek revenge, thinking yt he returned against his companion, he
came to ye Assyrian, saying, Sir Knight, there is no reason yt our friends
should be in such danger, and we stand and look on. The same did the other
desire: but the son of Garrofilea is second to none in valor, and was every
way too hard for him: they encou^tred with as great noise, as if two rocks had
met. The Assyria^ lost both his stirrops and reins. Luzelaes lover past
forwards, esteeming him highly for the good encounter which he had received,
and took more pleasure the^ any man, to see warlike Knights, and desired to
try himself withal, although yt when he saw he had ye advantage, he presently
came to a peace; a thing which few men will do. The Assyria^ was more enamoured
then Love himself, and was of opinion, yt bearing so high thoughts as he did,
it were a great baseness for him to be overcome bearing Miloes Arms. He
returned against the Greeks, and smote him upon the helmet, which made him hold
his head more at one side the^ he would, and busied him so, yt he had means to
give him another, no less then ye first. He received it on his shield, which
was driven back to his breast and rich helmet: it seemed to ye new lover yt a
rock had fallen upon him, the blow was so mighty. There is no serpent in ye
sands of Libia, so furious as was the Tinacrian* but before he could be
provided, the Assyrian was with him with a strong thrust, and made him to bend
back upon his saddle. Here choler mounted to the highest degree in the son
of Trebatius; for now he would not have given place to Mars, but with him he
would that the battle had been: there was no defense against his blows, but
that he cut his Armor, notwithstanding the fine temper: at the first blow, he
smote the Assyrian down upon his horse neck senseless, casting blood: now he
assured himself of the victory: for although that he with the stars would
have helped him, he could not: for Rosabel with his Flyer was come, and his
other valiant uncle with his Rubicane, and trusting in his swiftness, he set
upon the young man, be laboring him with the best Arms that the earth knew,
pulling him out of his saddle: but he came to himself before he fell to the
ground. Don Clarisel was nimble; for drawing his dagger, his fortune was so
good, that he stabd him in the closing of his breast plate, and but that it
crossed in the entering, he had wounded him deadly: but this served him to no
small purpose: for it made the Tinacrian to let him go, and fall down upon
his feet: it was a prodigious thing, to see the Rubicane in the battle, for
he forbear no footeman; and so the Assyrian was not fully at the ground, when
he ran upon him and gave him a shrewd fall. The Tinacrian never perceived that
in his horse before, and was sorry for it in his soul; for he would not
overcome him with any advantage: and lightly leaping from him, he said, Pardon,
Sir Knight, for it was not in my power; for I desire not to fight with any man
with advantage either of horse or Arms. The Assyrian was so furious, that he
made him no answer; but with his sword in both his hands he set upon him. On
foot no man excelled the Tinacrian, for he was an Eagle: he suffered him to
approach: but before he could strike him, he shifted him to one side, and made
him lose his blow: which being past, he gave him such a knock upon the Helmet,
that he made him set his hands to the ground, and would have closed with him,
but it was too late: for the angry young man was again on foot, and very
nimbly made a famous assault; for he gave Garrofiliaes son two strong thrusts
one after another, which made him go backwards, somewhat out of breath, which
gave occasion to the young man with a wheeling about to lay him at his feet,
and within a little had hought him, one leg tormenting him. The Tinacrian felt
the blow, but would not show the effect which it wrought: for he charged his
enemy upon one leg, until the great pain was past: rare valor in a Knight*
for the want of his leg was not perceived: for with a leap, although but upon
on leg, he came home to the Assyrian: there was no defense against his arm:
for hitting him upon one side of the shield, he smote him so hard, as made him
set his knees to ye ground: he entered and shouldred him, and threw him down
upon his back: he kneeled down upon him with his dagger in his hand.
Floralisaes lover was in dout of his life, and this made him draw strength out
of weakness, setting both his hands upon Poliphebus his arm, and held him so,
yt the young ma^s choler could go no further: ye Knight with ye stars was sorry
to see his companions il hap, and as angry as a Serpent, he leapt from his
horse to go to help him. Rosabel did she like, but the unknown youth came
first. The Tinacrian saw him coming, and became he would give no occasion of
any ill success, he stood up, taking his good sword. The starred Knight came
blind for joy yt he came in time, whereby Poliphebus had means to give him a
cruel blow; for as he had never a shield, so he gave him a great slash in the
breast. Now was the Assyrian on foot, who seeing Rosabel come running, he gave
him a thrust, but he never boasted of it; for Lirianaes lover, with a blow
backwards, made him to fall on his face to the ground: the noise of this
battle was so great, that all the hills and valleys rung thereof. The moon
shined bright, which gave light to three Knights which sat on the hills side to
see all this battle; they were no worse men, then the Princes of Silepsia,
Leobello, and Claribel, which came with the Knight, which found them newly
borne, as has been before declared: he was one of the chiefest in that
Realm, and brought some troops to the aid of his King, which he had sent
under the command of his Lieutenant to the Camp; and he with his two sons
(for so he called them) went up that mountain. By reason of the noise of the
battle, they came down from thence in great haste, and came just at the time
that the Greeks had the better: for Rosabel had wel-neere overcome the Prince
of ye Assyrians: and Poliphebus, desirous to make the Knight with the Stars,
to know that he was the glory of arms, hastened so the battle, that he had
already made him breathless.

The Silepsian nouices wondered, who putting themselves in the midst between
the four Princes, said, In courtesy (valorous Knights) tell us the cause of
your cruel fighting; for me thinks, that the aid, which either of you might
give to your party, should be no small matter: why will you then end it thus
alone? It is no other thing, Knights, an^wered the beloved. Father, but that
these Knights main^^^^ the quarrel of the Souldan of Niquea: and that which we
could not perform in the last battle, we have left for this present: and
therefore stand out, for this battle is to be ended. Let us entreat you,
gentle Knight, (answered the Princes) to give it over until to morrow, because
we then may the better enjoy the sight of your fortitude. To content the
Princes, they all consented, whose beauty and comeliness made them to admire.
They all seven sat down under a green Olive tree, and taking off their
Helmes to take breath, it was a marvelous thing to see, when the one came to
behold the other: for if there were beauty in the world, thither it was
withdrawn. Rosabel was not yet thirty years old, neither had his travels
altered his complexion, for he was the Phoenix of his time: for Poliphebus, all
the sages agree that he was exceeding fair. He with the Stars, and the two
young men were but children: for the oldest was not yet fifteen years old,
but so fair, that they contended for beauty with the heavenly inhabitants.
The two Princes of Silepsia were so like unto Poliphebus, that their father did
marvel thereat, and seeing so much beauty met together in them six, that
for complexions and arms, they were the flower of the world.

The two youths came with a desire to receive the order of Knighthood, at the
hands of the Captain general of the Pagans army, whose fame reached to the
stars: but having seen the valiancie of those four Knights, the elder of
these youths, whose name was Claribel, directing his pace toward Rosabel,
whom according to the constellation of his Nativity, he was inclined to
love, said, Ualorous Knight, my brother and I are desirous to receive the order
of knighthood, at the hands of some worthy man of war, which desire has
forced us to come from far Countries with our father, to have received it of
the King of Achaia, whose worthiness fame has spread over the earth. But having
seen what you have shown in this battle, we both entreat you, that
(although we have not deserved it) yet we may receive it at your hand. The
Prince did so affect the two youths, that he was glad in his soul, that
occasion was offered to do them any pleasure, yet he would not bereave Bembo
of that which he deserved, saying unto them, The heavens defend it, that
seeing that you may receive it at the hands of so worthy a Knight, as is that
Prince whom you have named, that you should receive it of me, to whom fortune
has not bin so favorable. This knowledgement, valorous Knight, suffices
(answered Leobello, which was the younger of these Princes) to assure my
brother and me, that it remaining in your hands, there may happen unto us some
rest of good fortune, and so we beseech you to grant that which my brother
has requested. I would be very glad (answered Lirianaes lover, and Father to
these youths) that this act might be performed with the solemnity, which your
worth deserves, and not that I doing it, should wrong these Princes. Why then,
we will come to a composition (said the supposed father to these young princes)
that this knight with the stars, shall give the order to one of my sons, and
you, to the other; and this doing, both they, and I, shall be bound to do you
service all the days of our life. Quoth Poliphebus, It is very fit, that they
receive it from so worthy a knight, as is he with the stars. And so Claribel
kneeled down before his father, who kissed his fair cheek, with as great
affection, as if he had known him. He put on his Helmet, and pulled down the
Beauer, and with his sword he smote him on the shoulder, saying, Arise,
valorous Knight, and from henceforth show to the world, the virtue which your
good countenance and fair resemblance assures: the like did ye unknown Knight
with the stars: and Leobello lost nothing by receiving the sword at his hands:
for he might well say, that he received it of the most valiant Knight that was
known in the world, in that age. With pleasing conversation, they past the
rest of ye night, in the which the two nouices learned the cause of all those
wars: and as the careful Titan sent his messengers to declare his coming, the
4. challengers arose to give end to ye battle: Claribel buckled on his father
Helmet, and Leobello his with the stars. Poliphebus, which had less hope the^
ye rest, buckled on his Helmet himself, desirous to show the worth of his
person. With angry countenances they came, the one toward the other. I
believe, to have a sight of this cruel war, made Apollo to hasten his journey:
for just as they encountered, he showed his golden face, with shining Garlands
out of the East. Well did the one know the other, being assured of the valor
which either had shown to the other: particularly Rosabel, who addressed
himself against him with the Stars: and for this cause they fought with
discretion, and would not through want thereof, lose that which otherwise they
might be assured of. Being well in breath, they charged, with the points of
their swords about a third part before their Targets, standing firmly upon
their right feet, so near together, that they might strike with their pummels.

He with the Stars would have joined with the Prince of Britain, thinking
suddenly to have ouerborne him: but as the other was more nimble, and expert
in the wars, then he; so he changed his foot with a thought, and thrust at
him, and with a quick skip he leapt backwards, giving him in parting a blow in
the thigh, whose blood bare witness of the blow. Here was lost all order in
fighting, for the young man s^eing this blow, hur^ing about his sword, thought
to have cleft the Briton, but he warded it with his Target, which was a small
defense: for though he could not break it, yet he beat it to his Helmet, so
close, and with such force, that he made him to kneel upon both his knees on
the ground: he thought to have ouerborne him, setting his hands to his breast;
but it seemed that he met with a rock. For the nephew of the great Trebatius,
seeing him so near unto him, that he could do nothing but close with him,
took him at some advantage, and within little threw him to the ground: for he
lifted him from ground, and carried him a little along the field. He with the
Stars was mightily ashamed, that he had received the first foil, and that
in struggling: for therein he thought to have been too hard for Anteus: and
locking with the gentle young man, enraged, he took footing, thinking again
to recover what he had lost: but that was more then he could do: for letting
go their hold, with a strong wheeling about they took their weapons. The
son of Trebatius seemed to be most courageous, and so was he with the
stars, which made the battle doubtful.

It was more apparent between Poliphebus, and Don Clarisel: for there the
advantage was easily to be seen. The Assyrian with a blow would have made an
end of the battle; and so with his sword in both his hands, he made toward
the Tinacrian, who made show to stay for him: but knowing the ill success of
such desperate blows, at the falling of the blow, with a light leap he set
himself 2. fadome off from him: he so followed his blow, that it made him to
fall on his breast upon the pummell of Milo his good sword, whereof he struck a
third part into the ground. The Tinacrian lost not that good occasion, who
turning to join with him, with his hand he thrust him and made him to return
back, leaving his sword sticking in the ground, breaking the little chain.
The victory was in his hands, had not the fair Leobello with his sword in his
hand come between them, doubting of the Assyrians life, seeing he had lost his
sword. Succor came to either part; for of the Greeks (which better knew the
country) there came the Princes of Hungary and Bohemia, and with them those
of France and Spain, which by the Arms knew the Knight to whose aid they
came, whose valor was much esteemed among the Greeks: they cried to the two
youths that they should hold, thinking that they would have stricken him.

The brave Spanyard came in such haste, that he met with Leobello: but he
might as well have encountered a rock, he stood so fast, he made his horse
return 2. paces backwards. Then came Don Clarus and his brother, Spaniards, of
whom in the first part much account was made, and with much reason, for their
valor deserved it: but in this charge they got very little: for thinking to
chase Leobello in the behalf of their Prince, Claribel stepped close to him and
smote him on the top of the Helmet, and this was the first blow that ever the
young man gave with the sword, and was so good, that it smote him to the
ground: he stayed for his brother, which came mounted upon a great horse: but
he quickly lost him, and made the Princes of Hungary and Bohemia hold them
company: he rusheth in among them like Mars, and gives not a blow, but that
therewith he brings them on their knees or hands upon the ground.

Leobello entertained the Tinacrian, while as the Assyrian recovered his sword.
The brave Torismundo alighted seeing his friends on foot, and met with the
reputed father of the two youths, who was a good Knight, but he gat little:
for the Spanyard is one of the most valiant of the world: he smote him so,
that he made him stoop, and within a little had overthrown him: he would
have followed him, but the furious Leobello holp him, who was near at hand,
putting the Tinacrian from him with a strong thrust. The young man's valor made
him to wonder, and had he not been in such fury, he had not smitten him: but
having no respect of any, he smote him such a blow upon the head, that although
it was the first, if he had taken such another, as that, it had made an end of
him: for it gave such a thunderclappe, that he knew not not where he was.
They had aid at hand, for by the woods side came Don Celindo, and his sister,
with Argante, and Thorisiano, who seeing their brother Don Clarisel (for so was
he called) they all came a gallop. Poliphebus was in fear of their horse
breasts but drawing force out of ye danger (a thing worthy his valor) they were
troubled in such sort with their haste, yt Don Celindo and the Lady were like
to fall on their faces, and to avoid it, it behooued the^ to leap from their
horses; but Don Argante, and Thorisiano, who reiued their horses, encountered
them with their horses breasts, and made them to set one hand to ground, but to
their damage: for there is no Uiper yt shows it self so furious, as Luzelaes
lover. It was the Fenicians fortune to return first. The Tinacrian made room,
standing firm on his feet, and with his sword in both hands, atte^ded his
coming, with all his might he gave him a sudden blow: fortune was his friend,
for ye blow lighted on the horse; it was stricken by the hand of Garrofileaes
son: for dividing ye horse into 2. pieces, setting Don Argante on ye ground,
so amazed, that before yt Thorisiano came, he gave him a thrust. Gualtenor
says, yt he overthrew him: but the Prince stu^bled, it made all their bloods
to freese to see 2. such blows. Thorisiano wo^ld end ye battle on foot, but
he was deceived: for ye Spanyard set upon him; and before he could turn, had
given him a blow, which much troubled him. The combats were well divided: for
now were they so many, to so many: but they which met with the two youths, gat
little: for within three blows they were overthrown. The like happened where
Poliphebus went, who although he were somewhat weary; yet he put Don Celindo
with his haste out of breath: this order lasted not long: for of the Pagans,
thither came Bembo, and the two emulators, Brauorante and Brufaldoro, who,
especially the Achaian, as he knew Rosabel, and had a desire, as has bin
declared in this history, as a hungry Lion followed him, holding in his
conceit ye battle for ended, and himself reue^ged of the Prince. He with ye
stars defended him from being trode^ under foot, fearing they would do him
some harm: and so the brave Be^bo lightly passed by. By another means ye 2.
famous men sought revenge and victory: for standing strongly on their
stirrops, they hurled their Lances with greater might the^ if Mars had done
it. Brauorante his Lance (for that it came from a better arm) lighted first,
and smote him on one side of the shield, and being insufficient to break it
(the temper being so old) made it to turn twice about: and therefore
Brufaldoro could not by any means hit it, but smote against a rock, and
pierced it ye third part of ye lance in depth. The Knight with the s^ars
judged it for great cowardice: for three, so famous as they, to set upon one
alone, it was more then baseness: and seeing them return, he leapt to one
side, saying, It seems to me, Knights, that you come with greater passion
then discretion, which has made you to commit so great an error as is this.
These words did so win the heart, and animate the son of the great
Trebatius, seeming to him that they were spoken with such generositie, that as
if he had had wings, at 2. leaps he gat his horse, who never parted from the
battle, and with another leap lighter then an Eagle he recovered the saddle,
saying to him with the stars, Pardon me, valorous warrior, that I do not
end this battle with you; there shall not want time whenever you shall give
me warning: for the ill behavior of these Knights forces me to leave it, to
make them know what error they have committed. It is very reasonable (valorous
Prince) said he with the stars, and I would go to assist you, were it not to
hold my credit and word which I have given to be of their party. They could not
proceed in their discourse: for with another turn they were again come
against the young man. He quickly advanced himself, and with a loud voice
said, We shall have time, you cowardly Knights, to make you know your
cowardice, and the passion wherewith you come, which has made you to forget
the laws and orders of Knighthood. He bare himself well against those 3.
pillars: but he had bin in danger, had not Poliphebus come upon his Rubican.
The valiant young man had long sought Brufaldoro, and now knowing him by his
Arms, he came to him swifter then thought, and found him busy smiting of
Rosabel. He gave him a mighty blow on ye helm, laying him all along upon his
horse neck, and paid him yet another, which made ye blood to spring out at his
^isor. Now were ye Moors in danger, for on one side of ye field came 4. which
would have given Mars battle: the one was Captain general of the Greeks,
the other Rosacler, Don Heleno, and the fair Rosamundi, who knowing Bembo, who
for an old grudge ever since the battle by Sea she came to him more light
then an Ounce, and with her sword which was forged in Babylon, she smote him
upon the strong shield, the strength thereof served for little, or for that it
came from Lupertius, for from side to side she cleft it, and it was a wonder
that she had not done the like by his arm. The furious Sarafin was more then
enraged, for all that quarter was so tormented, that it had no feeling. The
Lady was not idle, for she was one which tought most earnestly, and so before
that the Sarafin could understand from whence that blow came, she took him
another on the side of the head, which if she had not ouerreached him, without
dout had put him in great danger: for in hitting him in this manner, she made
him to fall so backwards, that within little he had come to the ground.

The Pagan was terrible when he was angry: for seeing her which had handled
him in that manner, there was no Lion so fierce as he. He assailed the Lady,
meaning with that blow to have felled her. Well did Aristoldo perceive it, and
the fury wherewith he came, being well known unto them, by means of his
ordinary device which he bare: the Antiochians horse was well in breath, with
whom he passed between the Lady and him, and above hand he^ smote him on
the breast, wherewith he made him to lose his blow, and lay his head on his
horse buttockes. Now was this Prince clean out of patience, renouncing his
gods, and now seemed all they which were in the field, to be but a few: and
taking his sword in both his hands, as the Captain turned, he smote him
athwart the shield: he smote it from his arm, and descending to his Helmet,
he brought him to deaths door, for he laid him senseless upon his horses
neck: he meant to have assured the victory, and to have been revenged by
the death of such a Knight.

The most mighty Dacian hindered him of his purpose, who as he had the best
horse in the world, with a leap he was with him, when his sword was aloft,
he had no more time but to give him a cruel blow athwart the arms, and
followed his blow so well, that he gave life to Aristoldo, of whom the
Greeks stood in great need, and made him with the force of his, to let fall
the sword out of his hand. Rosamundi came in so good time, that they had
ouerthrown him: for they made the Moore to feel two thrusts, one after another
in his flesh. To his aid came he with the Stars, wondering at the valor of
those Knights. It had been no great matter, had not the two youths come: who
holding their valor, which fought for little in regard of theirs, all having
taken horse, they repaired thither where they heard the great noise.

The fair Claribel met with Aristoldo, although that in former time they had
been the greatest friends in the world: but he showed it not now, for he smote
him upon the rich Helm, making the blood spring out at his nose and mouth, and
laid him on his horses neck: he ran upon him with his horses breast, and had
not the Captain had a good one, he had cast them both to ground: all this was
nothing, for now were come to the battle, those which were borne for the
wars, which were Claridiano, Claramante, and the fair Archisilora, who had
mist the way, because that they knew not the Country, whose famous arrival
does well deserve a new Chapter.

CHAP. XXI. How the Princes of Grecia, Claridiano, and Claramante, with the
Queen of Lira came to the battle, and what end it had, with that which after
followed.
I Know not, Sovereign Lady and mistress of my soul, being compassed with
such wars, whither I shall repair for refuge, to ease me of the pain which
I endure, but to your beauty, to the end that by augmenting it, it may be my
death: for with accepting of my faith and service, you may ease the torment,
which mine eyes have brought me unto, through their presumption, referring all
the grief to the heart for having seen you, they remaining with the glory to
have seen your beauty, then which nature could frame nothing more excellent,
to the end that ye world should hold you for the alone, and as the Fenix
thereof. Being somewhat lightened, with speaking somewhat of that beauty, I will
tell you what an entry the gallant Archisilora made, who at her first coming,
met with the gentle Leobello, and settled well in her Stirrops, she hurled her
mighty Lance at him. The young Mars received it, but made an ill bargain:
for this Queens arm was one of the most famous. It passed clear through his
shield, and lighted on his breast, bearing the youth so backewardes, that he
was almost overthrown. She past forwards like an Eagle, to whose encounter
came the valiant Mauritanian, not knowing her, for she ware a blew Scarf over
her armor. The Moore meant with a^^ow to have made an end of the wars, but
it happened to him clean contrary: for the disguised young man, who took
more care for that Lady then for himself, prevented the Pagans blow, passing
between them with his horse: he could do no otherwise, but by holding up his
shield, to cross the blow: but that was to small purpose, for he beat it to
his head, and him out of his senses. Then came the matrone: and to requite the
Knight with the Ladies, casting her shield at her back with both hands, settled
upon her stirrops, she gave a mighty blow, it was one of the best that was
given ye day: for as (at ease) she smote him upon the highest of the head, she
smote away a little Target, which he ware behind his Helmet, carrying there
with part of his gorget of Maile. She returned with a thrust which pierced his
flesh. But at unawares, the furious Leobello smote her upon her precious
Helmet: he smote her down upon her Saddle bow. Her lover turned his head
about, and seeing his Lady in such a plight, his fury cannot be described for
making no account of ye Mauritanian, he made to ye young man.

The son of Eufronisa bare no such arms, as were convenient to receive the
blows of this Greek: for hitting him a full blow on the breast, he gave him a
marvelous wound, although without danger: he gave him another, which within
little threw him to the ground. Brauorante did much affect this young man,
seeing with what courage he fought, and would have come just to his aid, but
he found in his way the pillar of Grecia, Claramante, so near him, that he
could do no good with his Axe at large, and therefore drawing back his arm,
he gave him a thrust in the midst of his shield, and although it had been of
Diamond, he had cleft it: for his force was rare, and the weapon, the best in
the world: he made both him and his horse to make a stand. All men wondered at
the blow, it set him so besides himself, that he had time to retire from him,
and fetching his Axe about his head, he reached him a knock on the side of the
Helm: and if he had given him a third, I know not how it had gone with the
Pagan.

Then came the gentle Claribel, as fierce as a Fury, with a double blow. The
Greek thought much of it, and knew not well where might be contained so
knightly valor. After him came Bembo, for having heard the blows, he well
knew what it meant (as it was true) to his friends cost: he gat little by his
coming, for Claramante being come to him self, and missing the young man, he
fastened the blow upon the Ach^ian: it was terrible, for as he had never a
shield, he took it on the midst of his breast. This was that which the
Sarafin more feared, then all those which he had received in his life, for the
Axe entered his breast, wounding him mortally: he made no boast thereof, for he
with the Stars and Claribel, smote him both together, the one upon the
shoulder, the other upon the top of the Helmet; they laid him on the Saddle
pummell. To the noise came the famous Floralisa with Camillaes sword, she came
just as Claramante raised and settled himself, and with a course she smote him
upon the Helmet, it sounded like a bell, and left him half astonished: she
would have sent him another, but that she found hard by her, the famous
Rosamundi, with Semiramis her devilish sword, against whose edge, neither
freele nor enchantment had any force. She gave her a back blow upon one side
of the shield, and smote off the one half thereof, with great part of her
Uantbrace: to her aid came the wounded Don Clarisel, desiring to die in the
sight of her whom he so dearly loved: and like a Uiper, drawing force, not out
of his own feeling, but from his firm faith, he smote the Dame upon the rich
Helm, and made her bow down her head lower then she would: he gave place to
Floralisa, to be revenged of the Prince^se, giving her two thrusts, the one
after the other.

There is no particular combat, but may be ended: for now, of the Moors side
came Astorildo, and Epirabio, with the Calipha of Siconia, and the King of
Giant-land, with four Giants, all Cousins. They entered, treading the Greeks
under feet, and were like to do much harm: for Brandusio, and the Prince of
Almaine had advanced forwards, with those troops which remained at the entry
into the valley: but they found newly come before them, the mighty Trasondan,
Poliphebus, and his brother Rosacler, with the two courageous Giants,
Brandafidel, and Bramidoro, with the gentle Tifereo, and the fair Claridiana.
It was a thing worthy a Romans Theater, to see the encounters: for the Giants
matched themselves the one with the other: it was like as if two ships had met
in the middle of the Sea. In this encounter, the Greek party had the better:
for Brandafidel (who was one of the most famous in the world) laid his
adversary on the floor: Bramidoro did the like: they had them in chase, and
presently many after them: for Tifereo had likewise ouerturned Lindauro; within
a little the war had again been new begun: for in a manner, the greatest
part of the Princes came afoote, either party to aid their people.
Brandafidel was furious when he fought; being angry, they could fasten few
blows upon him: for on foot he was very light, and withdrew himself to play
his part with his club, wherewith he did things, although lawful, yet very
pitiful: for there happened to enter a Giant, which came with Brundusio: He
hit him but two knocks, and both on the Helmet, there needed no more blows;
for he laid him dead at his feet. Brundusio would be revenged; but it was to
meet with his death: for Bramidoro was at hand; and in passing by, with his
bat he made him go upon his hands. Tifereo help him, for he stretched him out
all along. They left their clubs to repair to him of Gibia, seeing that he of
Zardus was come to gripes with him. They had killed him, had not Brauorante
arrived: whose coming with Aristoldo did not only rescue him, but also renewed
the war: so as it then seemed much more cruel then at the beginning. The
great Alphebus after his old manner singled out Brufaldoro: for he had long
desired it, over since that in the woods of Greece he would have robbed his
mother. The Pagan refused it not, but rather at his first smote him on the
strong and rich helm, and made him auale his head down to his bosom. The
Mauritanian would have seconded it: but the famous Emperor, which with those
blows was nothing amazed, wheeling his horse a little to one side, made him to
lose his blow, and would not let slip occasion, but with all his might he
reached him a blow upon the shoulder, which smote away all his vauntbrace: it
went not alone, for he gave him another, which put him out of his remembrance.
The Greek spent so much time in s^riking him, that he gave opportunity to
Claribel to come upon him with a thrust: it was one of the most extreme blows
that over the Greek had received. His Lady would revenge it; but she could
not find him, for he was like an Eagle; and had upon a sudden hardly handled
the great Tartarian Zoilo: he made a thrust at the Troiane; and had not the
Princes of Tharsis and Argentaria been near, without doubt Hectors heir had
been in danger. The fair Sarmatia was troubled to see her Troiane in such
estate: and grinding her teeth, she set upon the youngster: she came so near,
that she could not strike him: the blow did him greater favor then he
deserved: for casting her fair arms over his back, she griped him so hard,
that she imprinted his armor in his flesh, as she took him at unawares; so
was it a small matter to use him so; and had he been any other, she had
plucked him from his horse. In the chase came the great Tinacrian upon his
Rubican: he seemed to be no other then a thunderbolt, whistling between the
clouds: he first took Don Argante to task, and set him without judgment upon
the saddle bow: he stretched Lindauro all along upon the ground; and finding
Don Celindo near him, with a strong thrust he set him besides his saddle.
Trebatius his son was never seen in such a fury, his fierceness made them
all to wonder; and had not he with the stars come, he alone had ended the
battle in that place: for before that he came, he had overthrown the Prince
of Almaine: he leapt after him, holding it to have been honorable to have taken
him prisoner, accounting him for one of ye most principal by his rich armor
in their camp. The unknown young man detained him from his purpose, smiting
him at the entering, in the chest of his breast: it is a great hap that he had
not killed him, for his sword pierced his armor even to the skin, and with a
little more he had thrust him in the heart pit. Luzelaes lover suffered
himself to be hurt with a stab, and seeing his blood spilt upon another
weapons, there was never Tiger so fierce as he; for the fleshed Lion is tame in
respect of him: for bringing his sword about his head with all his might, he
smote him with the stars athwart the Helmet, and made him see them within the
same with abundance of blood. The Greeks would feign have ended these
battles, because they knew that therein consisted the strength of their army,
and (they being lost) the victory against them was certain. But now there was
no remedy: for the Emperor of the Romans was already entered the wood, with
above a hundred thousand men. The Greeks doubtful of their Princes, had shown
no less care: for the valorous Meridian was come with as many. The battles
were ready to join; but both the one and the other were in fear to be lost
through the discommodity of the place: and so they parted, either having
something to talk of, (...) the valor of those Knights. The Greeks extolled
the (...) Knights with highest praises, esteeming the^ (...) the flowers of
Chivalry. They left no less occasion to (...); particularly Poliphebus, who
had shewe^ himself so valiant, that they wondered thereat, as prodigious, all
men entreating him, and chiefly his brother, to tell who he was: but he
excusing him self the best that he could, caused them the more to mistrust;
and most, when he took his leave of them, telling them that he was to go to
try a certain adventure. They all offered him their company: but then to be
alone did best fit him, accepting (according as was reason) of their gentle
offer: he took his way with his Ruvican, speaking first to Rosabel, whom he
entreated yt he should not tell who he was, until he had performed his
challenge. He went directly to the place where he had left the Ladies; but went
not long to seek them: for by ye Nymphs direction they met presently: they
made that day holyday, passing it in reciting what had happened between the
Greeks and the Moors; to the which they determined the next day to send their
message.

Their Captain was much affected to valiant Knights; and seeing what the two
youths had done, he went to embrace them; who knowing what he was, desired to
kiss his hands, putting off their Helmets, discovering more the^ humane
beauty; which struck them which were present with admiration, to see them so
young and so valiant. The warlike Bembo embraced them, saying, It were no
reason, that they which have so good hands of their own, should kiss any man's
in the world. All the rest of the Princes received them with such courtesy as
was due to their valor. There were no greater friends, the^ he with the stars
and they: all the whole camp did celebrate their coming, rejoicing to see
them: especially the King of Silepsia, when he knew that they were his
subjects, knowing the Knight whom they held for their Father, they all supt
together in the Sultan of Niquea his tent: and to show them the more pleasure,
there was that night masking and dancing, the Ladies meeting there, then
which, the earth bore none fayrer, nor more discreet. The Princess of the
Romans seeing there was no possibility to effect her good, sometimes from her
seats with no small affection, she beheld the Lord of Achaia, seeming to her,
that next after the Dacian, she might best employ her beauty upon him. Of
this Supper grew many new loves: for the mighty Argante, who till then had
been free from his snares, held the Soph^ his Daughter to be the Sun of all
beauty, and with this conceit, he gave her his life and soul, submitting
himself to her in such earnest and good faith, that nothing was of power to
untie the knot which blind love had made. Epirabio yielded himself to the will
of the gallant Lisiana, who seeing his valor, did never estrange her self
from him. It served to small purpose for the brave Soldane of Egypt, to subject
himself to the fair ^ufionisa, who had her eyes, soul, life, and heart fixed
upon her Rosabel, and without hope of remedy, seeing him otherwise busted.
Time being come to withdraw themselves (for some of the Knights were hurt) they
all went to their tents, carrying with the^ the young Knights to their unknown
Grandfather, which went, commending the bravery of the Greeks, who took no
other race but to fortify their City, judging that that war would be of long
continuance, both the one and the other had need of truce. And so, from the
Moors there came to the City to request it, the Kings of Fenicia and Armenia.
The Greeks granted it for fifteen days, and that into the City there might
come only 20. Knights together. And seeing that both armies were in quiet, the
discreet Earl of Modica, went to do his duty to the Emperor Trebatius,
making himself known unto him, who knowing from whom he came, graciously
received him. This increased his good liking: for he gave him a letter from
(...), which the Emperor read alone, not without understanding how much he
was bounden to that valorous Queen, which had so dearly loved him: he read
the letter, which said in this manner.

A Letter from Garrofilea to the Emperor Trebatius.
TO the great Emperor of the Greeks, Garrofilea sends greeting. Had I not
well known, mighty Monarch, how worthy those errors are to be pardoned,
when love is the causer thereof, neither would I have presumed to write,
neither had I any mind thereto, although I have had it, to desire thy death, my
life depending only on thee, that thou live. I acknowledge my fault: and for
amends, I send thee these Knights, to serve thy person, assuring me, that the
two sons which thou leftest here, will do the like. And if the affection
which I do and have borne thee, may move thee, the war being ended, I pray
thee to return them back to me again, that I may enjoy the presence of the
sons, which I hope not of the father. The God in whom thou beleeuest, grant
thee such health, as the forgotten Garrofilea desires.


If he had to his liking ended all these battles, he could have received no
greater joy then he did, in receiving that letter from that cruel Queen, which
was now become gentle, mild, and amorous. See of what force love is! for it
has even melted me, being of the country of the Tigers. The Princes of either
side were glad of the truce: for ye Greeks desired to see the Ladies in the
Moors camp, and the Pagans were no less desirous to see the Greek Ladies, the
fame of whose beauty recahed to the highest heavens. With this desire we will
leave them, to tell what the most mighty Poliphebus did the next day.

CHAP. XXII. How the Prince of Tinacria sent a Letter of challenge to the
Pagans camp, with leave from the Emperor of Grecia, and of what followed
thereof.
IMagining, fair ladies, that chaptere of love would be more pleasing unto
you, I have conceived so much joy thereof, that it has eased me of my pain
which I begin to feel, as the cause of my life: and if I entreat of any
sweet hope, it is but to deceive mine own frail understanding, who as a
nomes in love, is of opinion, yt there can be no remedy for his grief. And my
pain makes me live ever doubtful of any good: for although I love in good
earnest, my Lady does not yet know it: an excuse for that which I endure, not
to attribute it unto other, but rather to mine own mishap. The valorous
Tinacrian goes free and at liberty: for if he love well, he knows that he
is also well beloved. There is nothing in the world so sweet, as is mutual
love, between a Lady and her gallant: for it suffices to make him cheerful,
and well content: for to see himself beloved, was the occasion why he sent
challenges to the 2. camps by the Nymphs, which he brought. She which went to
the City, well knowing what she had to do, stayed until all those high
Emperors and Kings had made an end of their dinner, and til that the Ladies
were al come forth into the Hall: and seeing occasion, she entered, clad in such
attire as was fit for such a message. At her coming in, she did her duty to
such as were there: and addressing her speeches to the mighty Emperor
Trebatius, she said, Sovereign Prince, whom in reason the world should
acknowledge, confident in thy generositie, I am sent from the Knight with the
Eagle, who knowing yt thou have granted truce to ye Moors for 15. days,
although that he came from far to serve thee (as all men ought to do) he
would in the mean time with thy leave, entertain the loving gallants, giving
them occasion to show their valor: for in the midst between these two
camps, he will maintain after to morrow, that the two Ladies which are come
in his company, are indeed the most fair of the world, and this at all perils
of battle. This is my demand: and if it please thee that he come, he will
do it; and if not, he will stay until the truce be past, to come to thy
service. This seemed to the Greek Princes to be a great presumption in a
Knight: and so they desired that the Emperor should give him leave to come.
The Greek Lord himself had been so greatly enamored, that he would have
gone in person to answer the challenge: but trusting in his sons, he said,
Fair Damsel, I thank the Knight much for that which he will do for me, which
deserves that a greater request then this should be granted, and so you may
tell him, that he may come in safety: for no man shall offer him violence,
excepting such as shall fight in combat with him, which will not fail to do
it. The Damsel would have kissed his hands for the favor, saying, Then,
Sovereign Emperor, with your leave, I will deliver a message to the Ladies,
which I have brought for them. Do all that you will, (answered the Emperor.)
So she went directly to the cloth of estate, where they were, which might be
said to be a new Paradise of beauty: for they were come forth to recreate
themselves, some to favor their Gallants with their looks, which suffices,
for I would be glad to take it of my Lady, if it might be permitted to come to
see her. In seeing the Damsel coming (quoth the gallant Policena, daughter to
the fair Venus) and Polidolpho which stood hard by the second Helen, daughter
to the Prince of Babylon, and Persia, and Bransiniano, with the fair Aurelia,
daughter to the great Tartarian Zoylo, and the Princess Tigliafa, three Ladies
which did darken the Sun in the midst of his carriere: they were those,
which being but children, gave hope to be most fair. There was never a one
there that passed Rosabela, daughter of the fair Oliuia, although she were
younger. All which four sat hard by Rosamundi. Quoth the young Girl, I
believe that this Knight will challenge us too. Your Ladyship needs not to
fear it (quoth the second Helen) for where these Sovereign Ladies are, there
may we live safe from any defiance. It will end according to the equity of
the cause (quoth Aurelia) and not for our beauties. Take no care for that
(quoth Rosamundi) for there will want no Knights which will take pleasure so
go forth in our behalf. It is to be doubted (quoth Policena) seeing how
unpleasing we are. By this time was the Damsel come, who kneelde down before
the Empress of Trapisonda; which stood close by her daughter; she delivered
the letter to her hands, desiring her to be pleased to read it, because she
was speedily to return to the knight, who had sent her. It is a great
confidence that that Knight reposeth in those Ladies (said the Empress) and
seeing that my Lord the Emperor has given him leave, we confirm the same.
Rosiluera presently read the letter, with great laughter of all the Ladies,
imagining that it came for her: it would not have grieved Rosamundi, nor
Archisilora, to have tried themselves against him: with grateful hearing, the
Ladies gave ear to the letter, which said thus,

The Letter.
THe Knight with the Eagle, to the Greek Princesses, greeting. It has been
my fortune, Sovereign L^dies, so wholly to estrange my self, that I am
enforced to undertake the most difficill thing that can be imagined: I
acknowledge the great difficulty and your beauty, whose fame flies over all
the world. I have presumed to entreat your leave, to uphold the beauty of my
Ladies, in the midst of the field, against the Pagan army, well knowing that my
own small valor deserves it not: but therein shall your generosity appear.
The gods have you in his keeping.


This Knight said, Rosiluera is in the right, in making no questions against
the Greek Ladies, which may also return without arms for his part, and
seeing he has such confidence in us, it seems good to me (with leave of my
Lady the Empress Claridiana) to send it him with all the favor possible, to
the end, that through our fault he lose not ye assurance of those Ladies
beauties, which are in his company. We pass not for that (said Aurelia) for
having no experience of this Knight, it should be ill done to grant him so
much favor. Rosabel came, to the end that his uncles business might be so
handled as he did deserve, and said, If my being surety for the Knight with
the Eagle, gallant Dames, may be a means to procure this favor to be done
him. I presently impawn my word. There is no cause to stay from giving it, said
the gracious young Rosabella, seeing that my Lord and brother has taken upon
him the charge of our fame.

They all laughed at the girls speeches, which was not yet above twelve years
old: for so long time had the Pagans spent in leuying their troops. They all
went to Rosamundies lodging, where Rosiluera in all their names wrote to the
Knight, and giving it to the Damsel, she took her leave with great
contentment, leaving them very desirous to see the Knight. I believe,
Sovereign Prince (quoth Policena) that you do better know this Knight then we
do, seeing you have forced us to favor him in such a matter as this. His
acquaintance and friendship (answered the gentle Britanian) has cost me so
much blood, that I stand bound to be his friend, so long as I live. And this
Sovereign Princess Serinda, being so much bound unto his valor, I marvel
that she entreated not for him. Presently, at the entreaty of the Ladies, he
told what happened when he first knew him, fighting with the most strong
Astratio for the liberty of Serinda, as in the third book has been
declared, where they two fell acquainted, concluding such friendship as was the
greatest in the world: besides, they being so near of kin. Now I say, quoth
Liriana, that the favor has been very small that has been done unto him:
and seeing that there is Truce, we will encourage him with our presence. And
that will be a mean, quoth the fair Troyla, wholly to vanquish the Moore
Ladies: for yet they had never carried her to her Father the King of Argel, it
was so for her pleasure. The Tinacrian very joyfully received the answer,
reading it in presence of his Ladies in this manner:

The Answer.
THe Princesses and Greek Ladies, to the Knight with the Eagle, greeting. Thy
thankfulness, valorous knight, has so bound us, and Rosabel the Prince of the
great Britanie agreeing thereto, as surety, that thou shall be worthy the
favor which thou requirest: having in him reposed our hope of the victory,
we give thee leave, to the end that in the field thou show the degrees of thy
faith, whither thy love has advanced thee, subduing by them thy presuming to a
matter so difficill. We would that in thy wars, company might be admitted,
which we would hold thee: for upon thy sureties speeches we would adventure
any hazard. The gods have thee in their keeping.


Great was the contentment, which the Princes received with the gentle answer
of the Greek Ladies, giving his nephew many thanks for that which he had
done for him: he presently dispatched another message to the Moors Camp,
bearing a Cartel with his challenge. All the Princes and Ladies were in the
Emperor of the Romans his pauilion. The damsel went in, and doing her duty,
seeing so many of whom she was to ask leave, she asked it in general,
saying, The high gods, sovereign Princes, have you in his keeping. I am sent
hither by the knight with the Eagle, to deliver a message, which I will deliver
in few words. The president which was the King of Armenia, bade her to deliver
what she had to say. Quoth the damsel, My Lord the knight with the Eagle,
considering the Truce granted, to the end, that idleness mortify not the
desire of Arms, has thought good to entertain this time, and to show you
that he desires to serve all, and to maintain in the midst of ye field, the
beauty of two Ladies, which he has brought in his company, at all hazards,
from to morrow forwards, and commanded me to give this letter to him, who
holds himself most enamoured. The great and famous Captain Bembo rose up,
who in Love causes desired ever to be the first, and as such, showing some
coffeehouse, he gave the letter to the free Thorisiano to read, which he
did, thus.

Poliphebus his Letter to the Ladies of the Moors.
THe Knight of the Eagle, to the death servant to Cupid, to the Princesses and
Ladies which are in the famous Bembo his Camp, greeting. Because, gallant
Ladies, you may see the effects of Love, in him which has subjected his life,
seeing it employed in so sweet a seat, assured, that no man has seen the
like quiet as I have done: And relying on the beauty of the Ladies, in whose
company I come, more then in the valor of my person, I do challenge any one
that shall come from your party, that she, which is mistress of my soul, is
fairer and more discreet then all the Ladies in your Camp. It is a great
boldness, but I am to be excused, having justice on my side, wherewith, and
with my weapons and horse, from to morrow forwards, I will defend my demand,
swearing the battle, against all the enamoured gallants of your Camp at
outraunce. The gods keep you.


There was not one, whom Cupids (aye, me,) had touched, but showed himself
more fierce, then the Basiliske in the Libian sands, seeing the proud challenge
of this knight: the night seemed to them long years and many, that the next
day they might make him know, in how great an error he came. They allowed the
challenge, the Ladies remaining highly displeased, which they could not
forbear to show in their bitter answer, which they sent to the Knight by the
Da^sel: who laughing at the small account which they made of the Prince of
Tinacria, gave this answer. The fair Luzela took it with great contentment,
saying, This which belongs to your sovereign beauty, gallant Rosoluia, I
purpose to read, to see how the Moore Ladies received your brothers challenge.
For as those Princes are famous, it should be expedient to send a favorable
answer. This belongs to you, fair Princess, answered Rosoluia, seeing
that (grounding himself upon your good grace and discretion) he has
adventured to do this. Well, let it be how it will, but I believe we shall see
him in danger, Your favor, valorous Luzela, shall draw me out of a greater,
said the beloved Tinacrian. If that may serve the turn, (answered the Lady)
there shall be no want thereof, and therewith she read the letter.

An answer to Poliphebus.
FOr not to return without answer, seeing the much, whereunto thou knight with
the Eagle have opposed thy self, thy pride did not deserve to enjoy such a
favor as is this. But because thou shall know, with whom thou shall encounter
in battle, having displeased us, we from henceforth nominate for our part,
our Captain general, (which is the mighty Bembo, King of Achaia:) and as for
the rest, he will make thee know in how great errors thou come. The Gods
keep thee, and open thine eyes that thou may see thy fault.


With great pleasure the Princes made end of reading this letter, seeing how
angry these Ladies were, attending the morrow, in the which what succeeded, is
fit to be told in another Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII. How Poliphebus began to maintain his challenge, and of the
perilous battle which followed.
HOld, valorous Ladies, for now it is requisite that you condole my pain, to
the end, that I may depaint what happened after this defiance: for the golden
Apollo had not thoroughly shown his glittering beams, when in the middle
between the two camps, appeared one of the most sumptuous tents of the world,
for it was little less then the Greek Palace: it was all of colored cloth of
gold, with green knots, and many silver Eagles embrodered upon it; a man could
desire no more.

It was work enough for either army to behold the fair tent, imagining (as it
was truth) that humane hands had wrought but little upon it. All the Ladies of
the camp would see the battle, upon assurance of the truce. So came they in a
Chariot triumphant, drawn by 20. Unicornes, as white as the driven snow,
covered all over with rich cloth of silver. The Ladies came as it behooued for
their valor and beauty: for there was no less to be seen, then in the
City, from whence they might see the Greek Ladies and Princesses begin to
come, which as they were many, so of force they must have two famous Chariots:
there was never seen a fayrer show. There were made by the Emperors command,
certain most sumptuous rooms for the Ladies, covered al over with most rich
Canopies, where the Ladies went up, inuiting (with their standing so) those of
the Camp. Some did it, to see about them, those which they most loved, which
were Rosilia, Arbolinda, and the fair Eufronis^, esteeming their courtesy as
was reason, they remaining in their Chariots. Presently at one side of the
camp, entered sixteen Knights, either of which would have waged battle
against Mars.

That day did Bembo lay aside his sad device, which he ever used to bear. For
Lupertius had sent him most rich green armor, all wrought over with Suns:
there was no goodlier sight in all the field, except the challenge. In his
shield he bore Lady Fortune, as though she procured his good, holding her hand
out to him, with these words: My wheel sometime has little power,
If that love do please to lowre,
And the dame reject valor.


He had about his neck a blew scarf, fringed with gold, mounted upon a roane
horse. The Greeks took great pleasure to see him coming in so good order:
for although he were an enemy, yet virtue wheresoever is beloved. He brought
with him those, which in all men's judgment were most valiant. There came the
Knight with the Stars with his ordinary device, so gallant, that he gave
them all matter to look upon. They stayed but little with him: for looking
upon the two youths, to whom Lupertius had sent new Armours, they were all of
the Lions color, with much Gold-smithes work, and so many precious stones,
that they could not be valued.

The Caparisons for their horses were of the same, with great plumes of
feathers in their heads: in both their Shields one device, which was this, they
were depainted between Love and Liberty, with these words: If sorrow must
needs come,
It Is best to attend it,
And seek to amend it.


Every man affected the two valiant youths. After them came with their old
devices, the five brothers of the hidden wood, saving that Floralisa, and Don
Argante, according to that which they felt, had set in their shields: for the
Lady bore Jealousy proper, which was painted like a lover, having more eyes
then Argos, with these words: No eyes can behold
The plagues of this torment,
Nor heart but will rent.


The new enamored, whose eyes had made his heart to feel the flame, bore
Constancy naturally depainted, with this motte: No grief but may be endured,
If loving at leisure,
It pass not all measure.


All the place noted the device of these two, although that none of the Greeks
knew Floralisa: for fearing that the Knight would not fight the Combat with
her, she covered all her armor with blew silk. There came the famous
Epirabio, so gallant, that he gave good hope of him: the like did Lindauro,
and the most mighty Aristoldo, with the Prince of Almany, who came all in
gray, with many waves of gold wrought with the hammer, on his armor. The
mighty Brandaso, who would also show himself affected to Ladies, came into
the field, armed with clean and well tempered steel. The Pagan brought for his
device, a Lion, which he in his youth had torn in pieces with his hands, with
these words: What force would work his smart,
Which yields himself in every part,
Since the Lion has no heart?


There went with him the mighty Coriandro, a valiant knight, although he had
ill luck with the Greek Princesses. At last came in, with a gallant show and
furious aspect, the two emulators, Brauorante, although with no determination
to fight, and the brave Brufaldoro: who as he so dearly loved his Lady, so
could he not endure the wrong which he thought was done her. They all repaired
to the place where the Moorish Ladies stood, so fair, that they would make
the Sun to seem foul in the midst of his course.

The Knight with the Eagle (quoth the Emperor of Trapisonda) had need of
hands to answer all those which have presented themselves at the Lists: and
truly he has proceeded with much discretion, to crave favor at the Greek
Ladies hands, for such cruel battles as he is like to have; which if he
perform with his honor, it shall be to him the greatest of the world; for
the Knights with whom he is to fight, are the most famous under the Sun. All that which may be given him for favor (said the gallant Helena) has been
given him by the hands of these Princesses: for having such a suertie as is the
Prince of the great Britanie, what attempt but is assured? They could not
proceed in their discourse: for in the place was heard a great noise, which
was, that the Tinacrian coming forth at one side of his Tent, would show
himself to the Greek Ladies. There was never sweeter Music heard in Greece,
then at his coming forth, without knowing who made it: and there were many
Squibs and fireworkes thrown into the air, which gave great pleasure to the
beholders: But much more, when they saw Poliphebus the son of Trebatius, come
between two Ladies so gallant, that he carried every man's eyes with him: his
Arms were of the color of his Tent, set with many Eagles of Gold, so
artificially done, and with so many stones of sundry colors, that the Sun
shining upon them, no man could behold them, in the midst of his rich shield:
whose borders were of most bright shining stones: in the midst between two
towering Herons, he bare an Eagle, so excellently made as was wonderful to
behold, and under it were written these words: The Eagles wings he ought to
have,
Thereby to mount unto the skies:
From scorching flames himself to save,
Or other harm that may arise.


His device was well liked of, and for his presence there were very few but were
well affected unto him. The ladies (whose beauty and bravery made all the
assistants to wonder) came clad all in white, cut upon colored Tinsell, and
tho cuts set with most fine Rubies: their Gowns were after the Spanish fashion
with four sleeves, one pair straight, and imbrodered with Gold, and the other
pair, long and large, hanging down, serving only for ornament: their hair
made up very fair, and set with rich stones, so fair, that many in beholding
them, fell extremely in Love: and upon the top of al, rich Garlands. They came
alone: for so would the Tinacrian have it. He bare his Lance himself, with
his Beauer down, and with the same arms, which the Nymphs had given him, so
as no man could know him. They went directly to those standings where the
Greek Ladies were, whither when he came, making his horse to kneel down,
putting up his Beauer, with great reverence, he said,

Sovereign Princesses of Grecia, the favors have been so great, and so many,
which I have received from you, that I am not of hope to be able to requite
the^: but to acknowledge the duty on my part, and these Ladies all the days
of our lives, employing the same in your service, and to lose it therein, shall
be to us grateful. These Ladies beauty (said the Empress Claridiana) is more
worthy, and your valor (Sir Knight) binds all to favor you, although that
he which brings so good assurance with himself, needs no greater favor
then from his own presence, which is such as assures the palm of ye battles,
whose end we wish may ^e such as the Greek Ladies do desire. The young man
bowed down his head to his saddle bow, leaving them all amazed as much at his
gallant countenance and good behavior, as at the bravery and beauty of the
Ladies, which seemed to them to be exquisite. They took their leave, going
directly to their Tent, where they were solemnly received with such heavenly
music, as none could be better upon earth. In sight of the camp he was
armed, but by whom, it was unknown. There was a stately Theater made for ye
Ladies, to behold the battle. Upon a great pillar they hanged the Princes
shield, bringing an infinite many of Lances, that those which would but only
just, should want no Lances for that purpose. The Tinacrian paced over the
field upon his Rubican (a better horse there was not in the world) with such a
grace, as Mars could have done no better. There wanted not some in a readiness
to come into the lists: for Lindauro, who yet had not lost Venus love, would
there show it. Ah, he that had so excellent a wit, as might be able to depaint
(with contentment to all) those battles, which were the best worth the seeing
of any that ever were in the world: for the Pagan which first presented
himself in the lists, was valiant, and who without question was most
enamoured; although he never attained to any thing whereby he might perceive
that he was beloved.

He smote his furious horse with the spars: but with the Tinacrian he got
little; for he made him with the encounter to take hold of the saddle pummell,
for fear of falling. The young Gallant past forth with a brave countenance,
and turned his horse upon the hand, so lightly, as could not be thought. The
Prince came ashamed of his ill success; and desiring to amend what was past,
drawing his sword, with both his hands he smote the Tinacrian upon the Helm:
it sounded like a bell; and the enamoured youth well felt the blow: but seeing
how many and how valiant Knights there yet remained to come, it behooved him to
give a good account of himself, or not to be called the son of the great
Trebatius, repaying him another were but small hope of victory. They
encountered with Mars his might: for it seemed that some great house was fallen,
when their lances brake, they made such a noise. The Almaine lost his reins
and stirrops, and was so besides himself, that the Tinacrian perceiving it
(trusting to his Rubican) ran upon him with his horses breast, and ouerbare
them both to the ground; wherein fortune was contrary unto him; for as he was
taken so at unawares, he had no leisure to pull his foot out of the stirrup,
and so one leg was under his horse, who with the force of the encounter died
presently.

Trebatius his son alighted, leaving the whole camp amazed at his valiancie,
and went to the Almaine, and help him to free himself from his horse, saying
unto him, I will not, sir Knight, that you should lose that for want of a
horse, which your valor does assure you: and so you may end the battle on
foot. But he was in so ill taking with his fall, y^ he was enforced to give
over the battle, and to leave his shield behind, which much despited Bembo,
who loved him very much, admiring at that which he with the Eagle had used
toward him. I believe (quoth the fair girl Rosabella) that my Lord, my
brother Rosabel, did better know this Knight then me, that he was so ready to
be his surety: and seeing we were scrupulous in giving him this leave, it is
reason yt we should recompense him with something, the better to encourage him
against the Captain of the Moors, who (they say) is very valiant. Her fair
mother stood hard by, and laughed at the girls speeches, who well knew what
Knight that was: for her son Rosabel had told her: upon which assurance she
said, Seeing you are so careful for the good of this Knight, being challenged,
I am content that you shall send him a pledge from your hand, that he may see
how much his valor is esteemed. All the rest of the young girls h^lpe to
further what Oliuia had required. In the end Rosabellaes fair sister was to
take from her neck, one of the most rich Jewels in the world: It had been her
mothers, which Rosabel had brought out of Astrutio his Country: there was not
a better piece in that field. She gave it to a Damsel of hers, who with many
Knights which held her company, came down to the place where the Tinacrian,
with a n^w Lance in his hand, was on horseback. The Prince seeing her coming,
leapt from his horse, receiving her with much courtesy, which he showed to
women, more then any other Prince of the world. The Damsel said unto him,
Ualorous Knight with the Eagle, my Lady the Princess Rosabella, daughter to
the Prince Rosacler, commends her to you, and seeing the valor which you have
shown, which she imagines to come from the Greek Ladies hands, which with
such generosity gave you leave, she sends from them and her self this
Jewel, to the end you should know of what credit your suite is, and how highly
your valor is esteemed. The Tinacrian smiling, received it, and said, Tell these
sovereign Princesses (fair Damsel) yt with such favors, (such as the Gods are
unworthy of) it shall be easy to accomplish this enterprise, and again, a
new to bind me to be theirs, which this rich gift cannot do, seeing I am so
already, and shall be til I die. And acknowledging how much I am bounden, I find
it to be so much, that to lost my life, it is too little to requi^e al, of what
I have received. He delivered the message with so loud a voice, that the Ladies
which stood about the ^ent heard him. Luzela did assure her self of her
Knight, seeing the gift came from so near a kinswoman. He put it about his
neck, in sight of all the camp, which was a wound to the Moors Ladies hearts,
to see him so favored, which was enemy to their beauty. The Greek Ladies
did celebrate the courteous answer of the Knight, who seeing the place clear,
took horse, as light as a bird, and taking his place, expected the coming of
some adversary, desirous to make them know their errors. There wanted not
those who were so conceited of their Mistresses beauty, that they opposed
themselves against him, although that there were some question about it: for
every one would be ye first. At length the lot fell to the mighty Brundusio,
who being armed with strong plankes of steel, made head against the Tinacrian,
whose battle and the rest deserves a new Chapter.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the cruel battle between Brundusio and Poliphebus, with
the coming of the courageous Lindoriano, Prince of Niquea.
WIth Sovereign praises (most excellent Prince) did all Grecia extol the
noble Tinacrian, whose fame reached to the heavens: for in less then three
hours, he had overcome three of the most famous Princes in the Moors Camp.
And Brundusio Prince of Gibia, desirous to revenge their losses, with a most
gallant show confronted Luzelaes lover: there was never seen a more angry
onset: for before the beholders could imagine it, they were together, making
little splinters of their great Lances, whose trunchions flew out of sight, up
into the clouds. The Pagan lost a stirrup: they turned their horses, and
coming to strike both together with such force, as beat their heads into their
bosoms, they struck again, and again; and coming to the fourth blow, (not
able to endure the force of their strong arms) they laid their heads on the
Saddle pummels. It was good for the Tinacrian that he came so well armed: for
although that he did not cut his armor, yet he made his flesh black and blew.
The contrary happened to the Pagan: for in two or three places the blood began
to come forth. Garrofileaes son was not better chafed of all that day: for
seeing how the Moore had used him, he flung his shield at his back, (he was
never wont to do so, but when as in this manner he was in choler) and took his
sword in both his hands. I believe that he of Gibia was afraid, and had reason;
for coming to strike him, he put many in fear to see him brandish his sword.
The Pagan could not avoid the blow; for Rubican was so swift, that before he
could be in a readiness, the young warrior was with him, and cleft his shield
from side to side, and the blow lighted upon his Helm with such force, that it
struck away the one half, with a piece of his head, and made him ready to
fall. He knew not whether it were day or night: he gave him a second, and hit
him upon one shoulder; it carried away the poldron and vauntbrace: all the camp
thought that he had done the like by his arm; and the Moore to save himself
from falling, took hold of his horses neck; yet he recovered himself, and
more fierce then a Lion, he threw his broken shield to the ground; and taking
his sword in both hands, he set upon the Prince, who lifting up his sword and
shield, received the blow upon both; and as the edge of his was so excellent,
it cut the Moors in two pieces, making him to lose the greatest part of the
force of the blow. This notwithstanding, he struck him with the rest upon the
Helm and Shield, hurling him down upon the saddle pummell: he saw the
stars in his Helmet, and much blood gushed out at his ears and nostrils. The
Pagan flung at him the rest of his sword, with such force, as if it had been
shot out of a Culuerine, and as he raised himself, it smote him on the
midst of the brestplate, such a blow, as smote the best part of the wind out
of his body. And as he saw him thus troubled, valuing himself equal to him
in strength, he closed with him, and had he been any other then the
Tinacrian, he had pulled him from his horse: but it seemed to him that he met
with a rock.

Trebatius son recovered his breath, and setting upon the Moore (as he was
stronger then he) he plucked him from his Saddle, but could not hold him for
weight: for he was a big man, and so he was constrained to leap with him
to the ground, where, before he could recover him self, with his dagger he had
almost let out his soul: for he wounded him deadly, and so left him being
somewhat weary (although beholding his Lady so fair and so pleasant, and all
the rest of the Greek Ladies, which joyfully beheld him to see his rare
valor) with a skip he recovered his saddle, their beauties reviving his
wearied spirits.

The most strong Astorildo scarcely suffered him to take his lance, when he
came armed in sky colored armor, with Death in his shield, painted so at
life, that the workmanship was pleasing, although the work were not so. This
free Batchelour loved Eufronisa so much, that although that he plainly saw
she loved him not, yet he never left to love her until afterward, as shall be
declared. Round about Death were written these words: Her name does not put me
in fear,
For she is with me at bed and board,
As my mishap does bear record.


The Lady knew well how dearly this Prince did love her: but there is no
greater grief to one beloved, then not to be able to help, nor feign any
favor. He came with a good grace into the field, assuring his business
better then any before him. They parted swifter then the wind, and met in the
midst of the cariers. With too greedy co^eting the Tinacrian mist his blow,
which went to his soul, and the more, for meeting the Calidonyan, he made him
vilely to bend in his ^addle. There was never Hircanian Tigre that turned so;
for seeing his Lance whole, he hurle^ it as though it had been shot out of a
Cannon: the one half entered into the ground, the rest beating the unseen air.

The stranger returned with greater courage the^ a Lion, glad of his good
encounter, and would have given the first blew, bearing his Shield more forward
then was reason; but it happened accordingly: for the Tinacrian was more nimble
then he, who crossing his Sword, bore by the blow, and passing by with his
Rubican, gave him a knock athwart the Helmet, on the right side, and made him
to hold his neck at one side. He returned at one side with a thrust, which
put him from his Saddle, and had he known so much, he had overthrown him.
Rosamundies brother recovered, being ashamed to see himself in such a case,
and being in breath, he entered, not knowing his enemies strength, and before
that they had taken good hold of their swords, he suddenly smote him upon the
rich Helm. It seemed (according to the sparkles which flew out of it) that he
had smitten upon a fine flint stone: and the young man showed some forgetfulness
in his saddle, making the Moore more careful to come with another: he gave it
him upon one side of the Shield, and beat it to his Beauer, with such force,
that it made him hold his head backwards. Now was choler mounted to the highest
degree, and in such sort, yt it were mere madness to fight with him: for taking
his sword in both his hands, he would have beaten Diamonds to pieces: there was
no defense in the shield, nor in the Armor, although enchaunted, nor in most
pure steel: for the one his arm breaks: and the other, the ancient temper
of the sword cutteth, that except Rosamundies and Rosabels, there was not such
another in the world: it smote away a corner of his shield, and the sword
lighted on the shoulder: it tormented him so much, that he could not bear the
wayght of the shield; and so he let it fall, giving the young man opportunity
to come upon him with a thrust: and had he borne his arm a little more even,
he had thrust him through, from side to side, and therewith made him to feel it
in his flesh. All the Camp was in a tum^lt to see the young man's unmeasurable
blows; every where there was no speech but of his rare valor. I fear me
(said the Emperor Trebatius to him of Tribisonda) that the Princes of the
Camp will encurre some danger, with this furious Knight.

I am of that opinion (answered the son) although I assure your Majesty, the
courage which those three knights showed, (which were, that Knight with the
Stars, and the two new Knights) made me to wonder, and I greatly desire to
see them tried with him. That will quickly be seen, (answered the Father) for
as he lays about him, there are few within the Lists to resist his arm (as
it was true:) for turning again to behold the battle, the advantage was
apparent of Tinacrian his side, although that the other by defending and
offending himself so well, deserved the name of valiant, notwithstanding that
he should remain overcome: for now they said it was no disgrace to be so, by
such a Knight as that was: for the gods had not reserved to themselves any
greater valor, then they had infused into him. It seemed unto him, that
fighting with such de^teritie and skill, having so much to do, it was to spend
much time. And so caring for nothing but to end the battle, he griped the
Pagan so hard, that he knew not where he was; and would also with a blow have
ended the fight: for taking his sword in both his hands, he made toward his
enemy; he made many afraid, to see him come with such fury, assailing him at
one side. The Tinacrian would have bettered it: but it was like to have been
to his own damage; for the Moore was subtle, and perceiving that he warded
not his head, he gave him the greatest blow that ever he had smitten: hitting
him at one side, he beat his Helm round, and made him to lose part of his
sight, casting out much blood: notwithstanding all which, he was still very
heedfull, which in such extremities, was that which did assure him of y^
battle: for^losing with him with his dagger (for therewith great adue^tures
were to be performed, although not with ye Tinacrian, but by another young man,
as in the fourth part of this History, he which rules the heavens giving me
health, shall be declared) he gave him two mortal wounds, and left him
(although on horseback, yet breathless) and seeing him in such sort, he
shouldred him, and threw him to the ground. There was no fault in this Prince,
but that in particular battles he was very cruel until they were ended.
He caused him to be borne out of the field, leaving his shield for a pawn. All
the Moors were moved, and Bembo would be the first, but that Flora would have
him to be the last. Into the Lists came the famous Thorisiano, with his
accustomed arms, which were as good as any in the world. He was not enamoured,
but yet was sent by the Ladies. And as he was known to the Greeks, and held
for so valiant, they were in doubt of the Tinacrian, but not they which kn^w
what belonged to the wars: and much les^e Rosabel, who was ouerioyed to see how
well his uncle had acquitted himself: and he did the more rejoice, to think,
what contentment his mighty Grandfather would conceive, when he should know him
to be his son. If your favor were ever disagreeable, fair Ladies, said the
Empress Briania, to the young Ladies, in my opinion it is now: for with this
coming of the adversary, all the company does mutter, doubting of your
Knight. There is no cause of fear (sovereign Empress) said the fair
Aurelia, our warrior being so much loved and favored as he is. They had not
stepped a foot from the place, when they heard a great noise in the field, which
was, that the one ran at the other, with a greater swiftnes, then an arrow
flies out of a bow. The Pagan was extreme strong: but he met with one which
in fighting renewed his courage: for coming to encounter in the cariere, their
Lances flew into small splinters, and Thorisiano hardly escaped falling, for
he was driven to seize on his horse neck, without knowing what he did.
Luzelaes gentle lover was somewhat troubled, which was well perceived by the
assistants, whereby they judged of his enemies valor: who drawing the brave
Astrutio King of the Medes his good Sword, made toward the Tinacrian. At one
instant they struck two mortal blows, which made them both to see a thousand
stars in the floor.

The Challenger had the best horse in the world, for which cause his enemy
could not meet him, although he returned with excellent swiftnes against him,
but rather carried away with his furious blow, gave place to the Lover to give
a terrible blow behind, under his righ^ shoulder, which did so torment him,
that he scarcely felt his sword arm. The pain was soon gone, which was an
adventure for the young man: for the Tinacrian was come with another, with
greater haste then good speed: for he came so near, that Thorisiano might
well strike him. The Greek never received a greater blow: for he smote him on
the brimme of the Helmet, and with a little more had stricken it from his head,
making him bow lower then he would have done: and before he could recover
himself, he gave him a sore thrust, and hit him luckily in the joint of the
vaunthrace, and was the first that dyed his sword in the Tinacrians blood* The
rest (which remained) freezed in his body, and roaring within himself, more
fiercely then a furious Tiger, he ran upon Thorisiano. Had Mars himself
seen him come with that fury, he would have been afraid of him.

There was no steeled shield, nor plankes of fine steel, but all was too
little against the fury of the Tinacrian. He struck away his shield, and it
was a great chance, that he had not done as much by his arm: the blow passed
to his Helmet, with such force, that it made it fly from his head, breaking
the buckles, leaving all his face bloody, which came out at nose and eyes.
Wherewith was heard a great shout in the field, crying, The Moore Ladies
Champion is dead.

The Tinacrian seeing him so fair, and so amazed, was moved with compassion,
and to do that which he never did, which was, to hold his hands: for if he had
stricken him again, it had been the last battle that ever that Prince had
fought. But he stayed to let him take breath; and when he was fully recovered,
making himself ready for his defense, he said unto him, I would not, sir
Knight, that your great mind should be any occasion of your disgrace, for
which I should be sorry: you are wounded and disarmed; the best course will
be, to give ever the battle without farther contention.

The unknown Thorisiano was of good behavior, and seeing his gentle offer,
he said, I am very sorry, sir Knight, that by so many ways you have the
victory of me: but seeing the heavens have so ordained it, all is for the
best, and which best fitteth me. The Tinacrian took his answer very kindly,
calling to his Squire for the Helmet which he gave him, saying, I will not that
your Shield remain with me, as a sign that you are overcome, but for a token
that I am yours. The courteous speeches of the Tinacrian did greatly win the
hearts of all those which were in the field. The young man went forth of the
Lists, of whom was made great account for the valor of his person.

There was made a great noise in the camp: for Don Argante had taken the place
with so angry a countenance, that all men perceived with how great fury he
came. All this was nothing to move the Tinacrian. For with greater mildness
then in such a case was requisite, he went to the place where the Lances
were, and there he chose a great Lance: and putting up his Beuer to take the
air, and to wipe away the bloody sweat, (for never did any Knight endure so
much in so little time) he encouraged his Rubican, and giving him the spur,
he became as fresh as the wind, when it comes forth of his dark dungeons,
and then with a wonderful and incredible swiftness he made toward the
disguised lover. They met with so great noise, that if two great Carricks had
met in a rough sea, they could have made no greater. The Fenician with the
force of the encounter, lost his horse reins, but he quickly recovered them:
they turned their horses with such a grace, that M^rs could have done it with
no greater. Trebatius his Son being mounted upon his Rubican, had the
advantage of all the world, and with that strong armor: for in it
(notwithstanding so many battles) there was not one scarre to be seen: but
as the Sun went down into the Spanish Seas, there was no fayrer sight to be
seen, then the colors and reflection which it made, which suffices to make
Luzela to love him: which joyful to see him, said to the fair Rosoluia, I do
believe that but for your beauty, the Prince could never have achieved so
many battles with so much honor. Nay, from your beauty, fair Princess,
springs his valor which he has shown, quoth the Princess, and let us see
how he fares with him in the green scarf, who in my opinion is valiant. The
one took his course more swift then thought, against the other. They met, and
made a fearful noise at the breaking of their Lances, whose splinters flews
out of sight, they entered so far into the region of the air.

They were both courageous: and so they returned, the Fenician having lost both
his Stirrops, which he so quickly recovered, that it was scarcely perceived.
The Tinacrian presuming of his Rubican, would medes make a proud attempt, but
his hope failed him: for this lover was one of the most ready men in the
world, and in this case would rather dye, then be overcome. For as the
Tinacrian approached (putting his horse aside, he made him to lose his blow,
giving means to Argante to smite him as he passed by, a mighty blow
backwards, making him to lay his breast on the Saddle pummell. He hastened after
him, and both together met with such force, with their Shields and Helmets,
that both of them without any power to avoid it, fell together to the ground.
The Tinacrian fell upon his feet, although so troubled, that whilst he was in
that passion, the Fenician had time to rise again, but so bruised with the fall,
that he much douted of the battle. But he was so courageous, that therewith
he supplied that imperfection, and on foot, held himself sufficient to give
battle to Hercules. The battle was worthy to be seen by such persons:
for both their dexterities were such, as made all the beholders amazed. But it
was quickly seen, that the Greek had the better: for (as it has been
already said) he had the advantage of all men. His adversary would have
closed, to have wrestled with him, hoping thereby to have gotten ground. The
Tinacrian was well breathed, and had his sword with the point forwards, which
the Greek crossed, meaning to bear by the blow: but he understood his
enemies meaning: for he was not well fitted to that ward, when letting fall
his Shield and Sword, he closed with him so suddenly, that Poliphebus could
not help himself with his arms. This Lover took so good hold of him, that
he raised him from the earth, and had he bin any other then Garrofileaes son,
he had laid him all along upon the ground, getting great part of the Lists upon
him: whereat the people made so great a noise, that the Tinacrian became as
fierce as a Basiliske, and taking footing, he recovered all that he had lost.

Thus they struggled together over the field, beating themselves out of breath,
until that at last, the Tinacrian holding himself disgraced, with a round
wheeling about, laid him all along upon the ground, where, in despite of him,
(although that he therewith was more troubled, then he had been all the day
before) he made him leave his Shield for a remembrance of his overthrow: which
all men did so admire, that they knew not what to say, seeing that brave Knight
overcome, who was more furious then a Lion.

The Tinacrian went into his Tents, to take something of the Nymphs, to refresh
him of his wearines, which Luzelaes aunt had given them. He stayed but a
little, for now the Sun began to withdraw his light, and already was come
into the Lists. No worse man then the Prince of Assyria, Don C^a^^el, who
desirous to be avenged for his two dear friends, brandishing a great Lance,
came t^warde the Tinacrian. The strong blows which were given would have cleft
a Rock, and yet not them, which bore Shields more hard then the hardest
Diamond. The Assyrian was borne back in his Saddle, with the force of the
encounter, although so little, that it was scarcely perceived: but they rather
said (as it was true indeed) that he was the most valiant of them all, which
had entered into battle with the Prince of ^inacria. They returned with an
excellent grace, and with their strokes, each of them bowed down to the
Saddle. They seconded them with others, which with their blood bore witness of
their valor.

The Assyrian was skillful, and wore an excellent Sword, although that against
the Greek Lions Armor, the goodness thereof served to small purpose. And so
the fury of the battle was referred to the strength of the arm, striking
him so cruelly, that all his flesh was black and blew.

The Assyrian escaped no better cheap: for his armor could not defend him,
but that the blood came forth in sundry places, not without some grief to
Floralisa, who knowing how much that Prince loved her, she could not choose
but love him again, and be sorry for his hurts: the sight of his blood did
redouble his strength. Wherefore taking his Sword in both hands, he set upon
the Tinacrian, who could not avoid the blow, which came with such fury, that
it made him set one hand to the ground: he ouertooke him with another, which
made him set the other to ground, to keep him from falling downright.

There was never U^per trodden upon, that returned like to this angry young m^n:
it served to small purpose to have a Shield: for beating it to his head, he
made it so thunder about his ears, that he went crosse-legged, ready to
fall. He h^lpe him forwards with a mighty thrust, with such force, that if the
Lover had not wound about, letting it pass, it had killed him: and for all
this, he made him set both his hands to the ground: but he arose again with
more discretion then the Tinacrian imagined, who stayed, seeking opportunity to
strike him without danger. The Assyrian prevented him, setting one knee to the
ground, letting the thrust pass over his head: and therewithal thrusting out
his arm, he smote him on the left leg. The Greek bescarde, thought that he
had surely lost it, the blow was so terrible: and drawing it after him, he
became as fierce as a hungry Lion, and with both hands smote the Assyrian such
a blow upon the Shield, that it cut away a piece thereof, wounding him somewhat
in the shoulder: and therewith closed with him, fearing (because it was almost
night) that he should not overcome him by day light; which would have much
grieved him. They came to catch that catch may, where was a terrible
struggling: but as the Tinacrian led Fortune by the fore-locke, he made him
hold company with the rest: yet he went out of the field with double honor,
so much extolling the Tinacrian, that his fame passed the clouds. Into the
place came one of the most choice knights in all the fields, he was armed in
blew, set with hearts of gold, so well and so artificially, that it was very
pleasing to behold. In the midst of the Shield, which was of the same color
that his armor was, he bore Fortune depainted, as if she with her hand raised
him from the earth, although with small contentment, with this writing: My hand
will serve thee to no end,
Or other help that I can lend,
If thy Lady and love be not thy friend.


There was no man in that place, but took pleasure in that small show, which
fortunes Knight had showed: for so they all called him, who coming to the
Tinacrians Tent, and knowing his beloved Rosaluira, there is no grief
comparable to that which he felt, when he saw that it was for her, that this
Knight fought these combats, and that she took pleasure therein. The disease
of jealousy touched him, and seeing that no man came into the Listes, spurring
his horse, he entered, all men wondering at his good countenance. Poliphebus made
more account of him, then of any of the rest past, being much delighted in
beholding his good constitution, persuading himself, that he should
accordingly be very strong. With a slow pace bearing his lance upon his arm,
the mighty Tinacrian went toward him: and putting up his Beauer, seeing that
he was not of the Moors Camp, he said,

Ualorous Knight, in my Cartel I challenge only those which are in the Camp,
defending the beauty of the Moore Ladies, against her which commands my
soul, and so seeing that you are none of them, I cannot enter into the combat
with you. This made him more hautie, to hear the mild reasons of the
Tinacrian, gessing that in deed it was for fear, and so he answered him, For
many causes I may have the combat against you: for I assure you, that in the
Camp is that whereto I owe most dutiful love, and the like in your City, so
as I may well fight with you. I do believe it, answered the Tinacrian. But
yet, except you maintain the beauty of the Moore Ladies, I am not to fight
with you, these fifteen days, and then there will want no occasion for you and
me to meet. It may not be endured that I should go forth of these Lists,
without making you know the error which you uphold, and although that I may
not show you my Lady, which is here present, and that you are not worthy to
maintain such a challenge for her, I do challenge you to fight presently. The
young man was so much displeased herewith, that he was about to turn his
horse, and had done it, but for displeasing those of the Camp, who attended to
fight, and said unto him, I never thought, that by using you courteously, I
should have given you occasion, to show such pride: but because I will not
defer the revenge, let us go to the Judges, and they shall say, whether that
I may enter into this single combat with you or not, having only challenged
the Princes of the Camp.

All the Judges, which were four Kings, said, that he could begin no battle
without leave from the ladies. Stay, presumptuous Knight, said fortunes Knight,
for I will go to demand it; for your death does as much import me, as my own
life. He went to the proud Chariot where the Ladies were, where doing a slight
reverence, he said, Sovereign Princesses, seeing the great valiancie of the
knights which were appointed to be of your party, and for that you have
reposed this matter in their hands, I have not presumed to intrude to be of so
valorous a number, but by another way I hope to let you know, how much in the
world there is due unto you, and thereupon I have de^ied the Knight with the
Eagle, upon this, that he is not worthy to maintain such a challenge; but
he may not fight with me hereupon, without your leave: although that I have
not deserved it, yet relying on that desire which I have to do you service, I
beseech you to give me leave, seeing there yet remains time enough for these
Princes, to answer the challenge. The most strong Bembo drue near, to hear
the Knights Embassage: to whom (when the Empress of the Romans saw him) she
said, This Knights request, seeing it concerns you, is to be answered
according to your liking, whereupon all these Ladies and my self will stand.
The pride wherewith he answered ye courteous Tinacrian, had almost angered him,
and thinking that he would give account of himself, he said, There is no more
to be said, but that I may go with your good leave: for I shall stand in need
thereof. The Pagan humbled himself unto the Ladies, although not to Bembo,
whereat he was not a little offended. And returning to the Greek, he said with
a loud voice, that all those which were in the place might hear it: Go, to,
you cowardly Knight, the Ladies desire to see how dearly your presumption will
cost you. At the least, if pride may bear it (answered the Tinacrian) there
was never seen any more valiant then you. Let the battle begin presently,
wherein I will show you better hands, then you do me a tongue.

The Judges stayed them, saying, that after Sun set, a particular combat was
not to be allowed, and therefore they were to stay until the morrow. Let it
be as it shall please you, answered Fortunes Knight: for I never was in any
Country in my life, where combats were admitted with so many conditions. He
went from the Lists and the Camp also, because he would not be known, before
that battle were ended: for you shall understand, that it was the most strong
Lindoriano, who knowing in Tinacria, that they had stolen away his Lady
Rosiluira, went to seek her, until that in Niquea, he remembered to come to
the aid of his Father the Souldan: for where there were so great assemblies of
men, he might peradventure hear of her: and his fortune brought him in so
good time as this: and although that he were one of the most courteous knights
in the world, yet jealousy did so torment him, that it made him show his pride.

Those in the sumptuous Chariots, came to salute the Greek Ladies, between
which past many discreet speeches, the great Trebatius inuiting them to the
City, during the time of the Truce. Some were glad thereof, whereof Arbolinda
Princess of Scotland was none of the last, who looking among those Princes,
found out her beloved Florisarte, so gallant, and so brave, that she would
that she had had another soul, to have imparted one unto him in payment.

Also it did somewhat revive the spirits of the Roman Princess, to see her
Don Heleno. She which sped worst at this meeting, was the gallant Eufronisa,
who could not see her beloved Rosabel, who was secretly gone to visit his
uncle, who did not a little regard him, when the Ladies departed from the
Camp. The valiant Tinacrian went to accompany the Greek Ladies, till they
were out of the field, where he took his leave, saying, that he could go no
further.

With great joy the Ladies received him, passing the rest of the night in
pleasant discourses, although the Tinacrian were so angry with the Knight of
Fortune, that he longed to have him by the ears. Arbolinda desired nothing so
much, as the day, because she would send a message to the Prince of Tharsis.

In the next Chapter you shall know what passed: for now it is time to take
rest.

CHAP. XXV. Of the cruel battle between the two Princes.
THe power of Love, valorous Dames, does now so withdraw me, that in the
midst of so much blood as here is spilt, I cannot choose but steal a little
time to treat of the disease of Love, and what power it has in the soul of
the gallant Arbolinda, who came to her lodging, even Loue-sicke, which did so
gripe her, that she could not forbear to send to speak a word with her
lover, under the name of Artimio, which was the name which he took, when in
the habit of a Squire he went with Florisarte, as in the second part of this
true History is declared.

And taking paper and ^^ke, she wrote a letter to the Prince, which she gave
to a favorite of hers, to give the same unto him, so soon as the appointed
battle should be ended. And herewith the Lady reposed her self, attending
the day, which appeared so fair, that it seemed that the Sun had sought out
new and more bright shining beams: for he showed himself more fair, then when
he was heardsman, and kept his flocks by the shoares of Silisia. Through all
the City (for so had Rosabel commanded, that at the break of day, they
should discharge the watch with a peale of Ordinance, giving a merry good
morrow) the great captain Astrutio from the Sea answered them, who leaving his
charge with his Cousin, went disguised to the sh^are to see those battles. The
Ladies came forth of their Camp in their mighty Chariot, and hard by them,
those which remained for the battle. The fair Greek Ladies came accompanied,
as well with beauty as with Knights: for all the best of the City came with
them. They took their standing, attending the coming of the Ladies of the
tent, the which were clad all in green cut upon Cornation, so fair, yt
therewith they did assure the palm of victory to the knight with the Eagles;
who mounted upon his mighty horse. came armed at all pieces in green Armor,
with so many artificial knots, and such abundance of precious stones, that
more could not be wished for: he bare in the midst of his shield his usual
Eagle, so excellently well drawn, that it seemed to be alive, and had changed
the inscription: for by the Herons he had this motte: Well may firm affection,
Which is fixed and will not start,
Assure it self of just reward,
And certain solace for the heart.


The Greek Ladies were much delighted with the Tinacrians pleasant device, who
doing reverence unto them, with a great Lance in his hand, expected the
coming of his enemy, who was not slack in coming into the lists, armed with
his strong Armor: and without speaking one word, seeing his beloved Rosaluira
clad in the same colors as the Knight was; as malicious as a serpent, he made
toward him as swift as the wind. The two famous warriors brake their Lances
into small sticks, although the Pagan in the encounter lost one stirrup, with a
foul back bending in his saddle: Our Prince did likewise double somewhat in
his, but it was so little as could hardly be seen. He was so earnest and so
choleric, that he did not see the time to be revenged according as he
desired; but spurring his horse, he passed so far forwards, yt he could give no
blow to the purpose: which the warlike Moore perceiving, gave him (before that
he could clear himself from him) so huge a blow athwart the Helm, that it
made his teeth chatter in his head; and coming with another with no less
force, he smote him in the middle of the shield; which although he could not
pierce for the finenesse of the metal, yet he bore it against his head,
adding more pain to the former, making him to forget himself: and with the
third he set upon his horses neck.

All men wondered at the fierceness of the Moore; but much more at the angry
looks wherewith Garrofileas son turned to see himself so ill entreated. He
expected no defense in his shield, which he threw at his back, and as an
enraged Knight, he set upon him of Niquea.

Every body was afraid, and he (as strong as he was) was afraid; for raising
himself in his stirrops, he gave him one of the most cruel blows that had
been given in all those battles: for he smote him off a great corner of his
shield, and the terrible sword falling upon his left shoulder, left all that
side disarmed and sore wounded, and before he could fit himself again, he gave
him a thrust, but it was sidelong: it was great hap that he had not nailed the
one side to the other, but it carried away the side of his breast plate, and
part of his shirt of M^ile, casting him back upon his horses buttocks. The
Tinacrian showed courtesy to many men, but this Lover had much offended him,
and so seeing him in that taking, trusting much to his Rubican, he meant to end
the battle, by treading him under his horses ^eete. But this young man, who had
been in many fights, before he could come at him, made his horse to bound,
making him to miss of his cruel intent: and so he passed so far forwards,
and with such fury, as made many to laugh, although he were none of them; who
returned with greater fury, then the hungry Lion into the heard. They both
together struck upon their rich Helmete, and saw within them the clear sky,
when it is most starrie. They doubled their first blows, making their blood to
bear record of ye force of their arms: if they had given the third, I
believe, that with their lives they had ended the sport: but they both
withheld, entering like skillful men of war. The Niquean his sword sped best,
because that his enemy striking aloft, and finding resistance, letting fall
the point of his sword, he gave him a proud thrust beneath his breast plate,
and bare away more then a hundred Mailes of his shirt, with part of his thigh.

Trebatius his son ran out of his wits, when he felt himself hurt in the
thigh: he cared not for such preparations as men do usually make: for he
suddenly hurled at him, with a mighty blow upon the Helm, and made it clean
to his head, giving him a shrewd hurt: he came upon him with an other, which
put him quite besides himself, and with better heed then before, he closed
with him, and without being any way able to defend himself, he plucked him
from his Saddle, leaping with him to the ground, where the Pagan seeing the
danger wherein he was, held the Tinacrian fast, where they began a dangerous
wrestling, with great quantity of blood falling from either of them. It made
all men to admire, to see how long they did endure the fight, with such force
and obstinacy, with a fierce pluck, the vnseised falling one from another,
with great admiration to all that were present, holding the Knight of Fortune
for courageous, seeing he could so long make his part good against the
Tinacrian, who (thinking that his long stay would be noted for cowardice)
began to press his enemy with such force, that he made him to shift from side
to side, being almost out of breath; but he defended himself so well, as
purchased him great credit, but it lasted but a little: for within three
hours after the battle began, the advantage did plainly appear on the
Tinacrians side. He perceived it, being willing to shorten the battle, which
was likely to have been to his own hurt: for the Moore being well advised,
seeing him coming close, stayed for his coming, and before that he could
deliver his blow, he gave him one, which made him put his hands and knees to
the ground. There was never any Knight seen in such a chafe as was the
Tinacrian; for rising again upon his feet, hurling his sword about his head,
he gave him athwart the Helmet, a terrible blow, which made him go backwards
ready to fall: he help him forward with two thrusts one after another, shaking
with anger: but he felled him, and then more light then a Bird he set upon him,
bidding him to yield, who for fear of death, and in hope to be revenged in
the field battle, yielded, with such fear to the rest which remained, as is
incredible; for now there was no talk but of his great valor.

Many said that it was Claridiano; for he had been long missing from the Greek
Court: for of the rest of the Greek Princes there wanted not one. The Prince
was never so wearied in any battle as in this: wherefore to be cured of his
hurts, as otherwise ^o rest himself, he speedily went into the Tent where the
Nymphs were, who very carefully cured him, which studied nothing else but to
give him content in all things.

He again came forth out of the Tent, whereat they wondered more then at his
battles: for according to the liuelynesse of his countenance, it seemed as
though he had done nothing. He chose him a great Lance, waiting for him which
would next come, which failed not; for the brave Celindo took the matter in
hand, who was known to many by his Arms.

Of this battle many were doubtful, imagining that the unknown Prince was
more courageous then ye Greek. They made one at another as swift as the wind,
at which time there was a great rumor in the camp, about knowing of the
Knight of fortune: for the Souldan his father, seeing him so sore hurt, would
not that they should proceed with those battles any farther, but that they
should renew the war, being very desirous to be revenged for all together:
and had not Bembo been present, without doubt it had been so, who saw that
therein he should hazard his honor, which he dissembled. The wise Lupertius
cured him, but could not imagine what Knight that should be which was so
courageous and valiant: for the wise Lady had better provided for her Nephew,
(for so she took him) to end these adventures: who spurring his good horse
Rubican, the Souldan being now turned to behold them, they met in their cariere
with so great noise, as though two great rocks had met. The Tinacrian
encountered him so luckily in the midst of the Beuer, so as he disarmed his
head, and made him to miss the shocke. He returned again upon him, holding
the success of that blow for exceeding good fortune: and before that he could
draw Queen Iuliaes precious sword, with his he had given him two blows one
after another, which was a thousand to one, but that he had killed him, hitting
him athwart the Helm, without touching the forepart, where a great piece was
gone.

The enamored young man returned as fierce as a Basiliske, and with his rich
sword, smote the Tinacrian upon the Helmet, which was as much as if he had
smitten (...) hard well tempered ^ell, and therewith made him shake like an
Aspen leaf: he returned with another so soon, that before that he could defend
himself, or set himself in any good order to fight, he had again stricken him
in the same place, and made him bow down his head to the horses neck. There
was never seen a readier Knight, then the Son of Meridian, who seeing the
young men somewhat pes^ered, bearing his Sword hand close by his side, he gave
him a strong and a luckie thrust, which bore away his vauntbrace, taking it
just in the joint: and it was great luck, that he had not thrust him through
the arm. Saturn never showed himself more angry against Mars, then the
Tinacrian did against the Son of Floralinda: for hurling his good sword
about, he smote away his Shield at one blow, cutting those hands which hung on
his arm; and but that he drew back, he had put his arm in danger, which
notwithstanding did much torment him. They now care no more for defense, but
joining their horses close together, as though they smote upon Anuilles, so did
these warriors upon their Helmets, amazing all that behold them.

The Knight of the camp (quoth the king of Macedonia, and Grandfather to the
Prince) is of a mighty strength, but I believe that no man can compare with
the Knight with the Eagle: And had I not seen his face, thereby assured that
it is not Claridiano, I should have thought that it had been the same: for I
never saw man so like him, in lordly grace, and comeliness in battles, as
he is. Your highness says truth, answered the great Zoilo, and I believe
that the Pagans have met with one, who will give them enough to do. I expect
nothing, (quoth the fair Archisilora) until the two youths come in: for men
of greater courage the world contains not.

The warriors lost no time, which being out of breath, were yet more furious
then the raging sea. It seemed unto the unknown Macedonian, that he spent
much time in that battle, and the Tinacrian thought no less. It seemed also
that they agreed in one: for lifting up their swords, they smote so great
blows, that clean without any feeling, they fell upon their horses necks.
Garrofileaes son within a while came again to himself: he was never wont
to charge at advantage, but now he was so blind with passion and fury, that
he forgate himself, carried away with desire to overcome: and so seeing his
enemy, who as yet was scarcely come to his remembrance, with two iumpes he was
with him, just as he came to himself; yet he could not strike him, but took
him at such advantage, that he plucked him out of his Saddle, giving him so
great a fall against the ground, that he could hardly rise, he was so sore
bruised therewith.

All the Pagans camp was very sorry for Don Celindo his mishap. Luzelaes Lover
leapt after him, and before that he knew where he was, he gave him two blows
one after another, which put him past all remembrance, leaving him breathless
upon the ground, taking from him the best Shield that ever he got, and was
glad in his soul, that he had so ended the battle.

Much did those four shining Lamps of beauty, extol the valiancie of the
Tinacrian. Let us attribute it, quoth the fair Policena, to our favor: for it
is not possible that it should come elsewhere. He would make a new challenge
hereupon, said the fair Aurelia: for I rather believe, that it proceeds from
the Ladies which he brings in his company, who are endued with no less
beauty then courtesy, in favoring so warlike a Knight. Well may he be
called fortunate, said the fair Jewish Artimisa, seeing that they strive to
give him contentment, who are able to give and take it away, in despite of
love it self, There remains yet (fair Ladies, quoth the secretly enamoured
Rosaluira) so much for him to do, that in my opinion, this may be referred to
the end of all these battles. She said this in regard of Bembo, whom she
loved with her soul. The proud attempt of Floralisa put them from this
matter, who seeing her brother overcome, there was no Uiper that showed it
self so malicious. This Lady had a most delicate horse: for in his course he
would have outrunne even thought it self. She gave him the spur, who passed
his carriere swifter then any Eagle, and at their meeting made a greater noise,
then when a great high built house talleth to the ground: they passed with an
excellent grace the one from the other.

There was no man among the Greeks that knew the Lady, for she came
disguised, for fear that the Knight should refuse the battle against her.
And hereupon was much suspicion among them, who this might be, seeing it was
the first that matched the young man in the carriere. The Lady was of a mighty
courage: for if Mars himself had been in the field, she would not have
refused him in the single combat, with that Lords sword, which was the Trojans
greatest enemy. She made toward the Greek so speedily, that it wan his good
will, although he much felt the blew: for in receiving it, it made him bow
down as low as his Saddle. The Lady lost no opportunity; for she was one
that used all diligence: and so, before that the Gallant could recover
himself, she, which loved him far better then her own soul, gave him a
second.

O strange effects of love! The warlike Damsel entered with her shield somewhat
far from her breast, and came so near to him, that before that he could
deliver his blow, she gave him so strong a thrust, as had almost set him
besides his saddle, and made him to lose the half of his strength. The Lady
gat hereby, otherwise it had gone hard with her; for with that little which he
gave her, he made her to see a thousand stars under her fair brows, and
troubled her so with the blow, that thereby he gat means suddenly to give her
another.

He smote her cross the Helm, and smote her so much to one side, that he had
almost overthrown her to the ground.

There was never any Dunce like her, for she plied the young man so well, that
she put the battle a thousand times in doubt, which his Lady gave him to
understand for she carried her self so in her standing, as though the blows
which he received upon his armor, had pierced to her heart. The Tinacrian
perceived it, and imagining as it was, he charged the Daughter of Meridian in
such ^o^t, as made all the assistants to wonder. The Ladies have made some
sign to that Knight (said Venus) for the fierceness wherewith he set upon his
adversary, can proceed from no other cause: for nothing does so much
encourage warriors, as the favor of their Ladies. The second Venus said not
so, without reason: for having seen his Ladies countenance, he was so
grieved, that he would that that Knight had been Mars. But for all that he
could do, the Lady defended her self so well as could be wished.

The Tinacrian entered like a master at the wars, meaning at his pleasure to
have given her a great blow, bearing his sword aloft: but the warlike Matron
understood his pretense, and suffering him to come near to her, with an
excellent quickness she foiled his ward, and with her sword in both hands,
she gave the Prince upon the Beuer, one of the most cruel blows that ever
he received in his life: for falling upon his horses neck, the blood began to
spout out at his mouth and eyes. There came a cold sweat all over those 2.
Ladies, when they saw their Poliphebus in ye taking. But that being past, there
was never any Lion so furious as he showed himself. For very desperately he
flung his Shield at his back. There were few in the place but were afraid of
his angry countenance: and gnashing his teeth, he spurred his angry Rubican,
and was so soon with her, that she had no time to defend her: for he smote her
upon the rich Helm so aswash, that he could not pierce it, yet he brake all
the riuets on that side: which the young man well perceived, and giving her
another, that the blood sprung out, he set hand to her Helmet, and with a
touch plucked it away, leaving her covered with a fine Cawle of gold. All the
company was stricken with admiration, when they perceived that she was a
woman. The Queen of Lira knew her, and doubting that Poliphebus would have
used her discourteously, she would have gone down to entreat him to give over
the battle, for the great love which she bore her, ever since they had been
together in Tinacria, as is aforesaid: But the Greek was so grateful,
considering how much love this Lady had shown him in time past. He said unto
her, You having so good assurance of your part, valorous Lady, have wronged
your beauty, to seek it with your victorious hands, which if in ought I have
offended, as I doubt not but that I have much, you may with less cost take
just revenge, although that coming hither upon commandment, it may somewhat
excuse me. The victory is yours, and so are all in the world due to your
beauty and worthiness, and so I beseech you in token thereof, to take my
shield. To bear a pawn from so warlike a Knight, (quoth the Lady) ought to
have been done by some valorous knight, for it is not just that we should
take that, which to your worth belongs, seeing that you have so well woonne
it: for I am yours, overcome in battle, which otherwise I will not be.

She would have left her Shield, which was held for an exceeding greatness of
mind, for it was one of the fairest in the world. But the Tinacrian would not
yield thereto, but rather accompanying her forth of the Lists, offered her his
service: and so returned to his tent, de^^r^ing the rest of the battles until
the evening; for these already ended, had somewhat wearied him. Bembo seeing
what honor that Knight had gotten upon his dear friends, came forth like a
Lion. There was a great hope of those which remained, that they should again
recover that, which the rest had lost. In the standings, whither the Emperor
commanded meat to be brought for dinner, there was no speech so long as it
lasted, but of the valor of this Knight. If ever he had need, fair Ladies,
of your favor, said Liciana, it will be this evening: for I am of opinion,
that there remain some behind, which will put him to his shifts: and God grant
that he fall not into their danger. He shall not, said the fair Rosamundi:
for since that these Ladies favors have served his turn, for so good a
beginning, and middle it will be (no doubt) sufficient, to make a glorious end
of that which remains. They all wished it, for they loved him in their
souls, and were never well, until they might again return to see him. Those
of the camp stayed not long at dinner, they were so sharp set: and the
Greeks being aware of their coming, came to the standing windows to behold
them, whose sight deserves a new Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the cruel battle fought between the youth Clecbulo, and
Poliphebus of Tinacria, with what happened to Flori^arte of Argentaria.
Fair Ladies, by often craving your aid (as is reason) I am become
troublesome to you. But my necessity, and so great occasion is offered me, that
I cannot forbear to re^^ire anew unto you, for some new favor, whereby I may
be able with a pleasing style, to deliver unto you, the manner of four of ye
most famous battles that ever were fought in the world: for they which fought
them, were the flower of all valiancie, and for such a cause, as would have
made a Lamb a Lion. There were many cruel blows given, but those which the
Ladies gave to those youths, could never be cured, but by them which gave them.
No man employed himself so well, nor with ^ore reason, then the sons of
Eufronisa, which (notwithstanding their brave and courageous hearts) yielded
their souls to two Princesses of Grecia, whose brave beauty would have
expelled the first Venus. She to whom the gentle Leobulo subjected himself,
was the gallant Aurelia, daughter of the valorous Tartarian Zoylo, and the
fair Princess Tigliaf^, whose love gave occasion to this Prince, and his
elder brother, to work wonders, as I will (the Muses assisting me) declare in
the fourth part. Well did Lupertius know what peace would grow of these wars,
and that he should be a friend to the Greeks. But he was so much offended for
the imprisonment of his fellow Scholar Selagio, that he sought to be revenged
of the Greek Princes. The destruction of Troy was never so much desired, as
was now the ruin of Grecia. And although that he would that these youths
should have dyed thereby, to have despighted Rosabel, yet he forbear, to the
end he might see the blood which they would shead in the Greek fields, and in
the behalf of the Pagans. And for this cause, seeing the furious enemy, with
whom they were to encounter, and the luck of his hand, he sent them certain
most rich enchaunted Armours, which were of the best in the world, all russet,
with certain knots of colors, which made a marvelous fair show. They both
bare one device: for the gallant Claribel had chosen for his Sovereign Lady,
the fair Policena, daughter of the valorous Polidolphus, and of the second
Venus. In the midst of their shields they bare the God of Love, giving him
for tribute the spoils of their hearts and souls, with these words: What may
accounted pleasure,
Which does yield no greater smart,
If love therein have no part.


Both the camps took great pleasure, to see these two gallant contented
youths; which passing over the place, took the first standing, although there
were some question about it, for the Knight with the Stars had first desired
the battle. Brufaldoro was almost mad, because he could not be first. The
brave Lord of Achaia challenged it to be his. These five had fallen out about
it, had not the Emperor of the Romans, and the Souldan of Niquea taken up the
matter, which brought them to agreement, which was, that they should draw lots:
whereto they agreed, because they would not fall out. The first lot happened to
him, which in all was equal to the best, which was Leobello, and the second to
his brother, the third to the Knight with the stars, and next after him to
Brufaldoro, and the last of all to the furious Bembo, who was as fierce as a
Lion, who imagined that after those Knights, there would be no means left for
him to fight the battle: but the Tinacrian did so well discharge himself, that
he gave them all their hands full. The youth came into the field, with so
gallant a countenance, that all affected him: for putting up his Beauer, he
went to the Tinacrian, who entertained him very courteously, for they were
maruailous like: to whom the valorous youth said,

Mighty Knight with the Eagle, although it be a presumption for me to enter
into the Lists with you, yet, for that my Lady is fairer then she, whom you
have made Lady of your soul, if you please, let our battle begin presently:
if not, I will give place to these Princes which remain to give end to theirs.
The Greek did highly esteem the good speeches of the young man, imagining
that they proceeded from a pure noble mind, and made answer, To the end,
valorous Knight, that I might not fight with you, I would be glad that you
were excluded out of my Cartell: but being of the Pagans Camp, my challenge is
to be vnderst^od to extend as well to the knights as the Ladies. The young man
gave him no other answer, then by turning about his horse, and putting down
his Beauer, and took so much ground as might suffice for his carriere. The
Tinacrian did the like. Here, oh Nymphs of Pernassus, your help is wanting:
and in no occasion, O Mrcurie, thou can employ thine better, then to
explain, with what grace the one parted from the other. As for me to
intermeddle in the matter, I shall but wrong those valorous knights, which made
the one toward the other, and came so soon together, as could not be
imagined. Their strong encounters would have soon broken the hard rocks: but
they met with so hard breasts, that the Lances being shiuered into small
splinters, flew up into the air as high as the clouds; true witnesses of the
mighty strength of those two warriors, which without any moving, as though
they had been locked in their Saddles, with a singular good grace passed along
the one by the other: they returned with their swords aloft, and terrible were
their blows. The sparkles which flew from their shields, seemed to set them on
fire. The Tinacrian lost the reins of his bridle, and thought that the last
day had been come, he heard such thundering about his ears: and out at his
mouth came abundance of blood, and he was a while past remembrance. But the
young man which had received a full blow, and from the best arm in the world,
whose sword has the best edge, fell upon his Saddle bow bereft of his senses.

But his horse carried him ten paces off, and every body looked when he would
fall: but when he came again to him self, there was no Serpent that was
trodden upon, nor Lion in a fever, that was so furious. The courage wherewith he
came, made the sparkles of fire to fly out of his eyes. The Tinacrian came
again to himself, wondering at the mighty blow which he had received: and
seeing his Cousin come so furious, he thought it were but folly to stay for
that blow: and as he was more nimble, and was better mounted, so he bare to one
side, making him to lose his blow, which came with such force, that it made him
to fall down upon his Saddle pummell, so hard, that when he would have settled
himself again, he was not able: and the horse fi^ding his head at liberty,
with two boundings cast him to ground, although he fell upon his feet. The
Eagle never stooped with greater fury after her pray, then the Tinacrian did
after the young man, which was not yet fifteen years old: he was one of the
most light young men of the world: and when he came to perfect age, no man
excelled him; and so with a leap he came to the place where the Greek
alighted, and with a strong thrust he bare him a great way backwards. His
strong Armor saved his life; for the sword had pierced through both his sides,
had not such cunning hands forged it.

The Greek stood no longer upon his skill, seeing himself so battered; but
laid on such load upon the new Lover, that he put him quite out of breath, not
without loss of some blood* for against the Greek sword there was no
enchau^tment that could prevail. He gave him cross the Helmet a cruel blow,
he thought by his staggering that he would have fallen. Never was man so
furious: for noting his enemies strength, he began to make benefit of his
skill. And the Tinacrian meaning to overthrow him with some sideblow, let fall
his sword, and setting forwards his other foot, with his shield over his head,
gave him an unhappy thrust, which the Greek thought had put him in danger: for
glau^cing, it chanced to hit in the closing of the armor, where it entered into
his left arm, drawing out blood in streams: and not there with content, he
pitched his knee to ground, and smote him athwart the right thigh, giving him
another wound, although not great: he could not escape, but that the Tinacrian
would give him another knock at his ease over the shield, and smote away a
great part thereof: ye trenchant sword ^ighting upon the Helmet, gave him so
terrible a blow, that he set him upon his hands and knees upon the ground: he
would have laid him all along, striking him upon the shoulder: but the young man
stood firm, and laid hands on the son of Trebatius, who was not retchlesse,
for yt is most dangerous in such cases, but suddenly drue out that famous
dagger, with which so many high enterprises were to be accomplished, and gave
him 2. stabs, far enough more dangerous the^ the youth did imagine: for
trusting to his armor (which indeed was good) he took no care to ward them,
he thought he had bin wounded to the death, and so in despair (caused through
his hurts) he set his left hand upon his dagger hand, which he cros^ with his
right, and with maine force wrested it out of his hand, and would have stricke^
him therewith, and (without doubt) had killed him, if he had not taken hold of
his wrest, which he held faster, then if it had bin tied with a Cable rope.
Eufronisaes son did not let slip the occasion: for seeing the Greek bus^ed,
and his right arm at liberty, he wonderfully gat hold of his legs, and lifted
him from ground, who seeking to save himself, fell with his head first to
ground, pulling ye youth down after him: one sought to get advantage of
another, and so tumbling over the field, til they both were al bloody: but that
auailing not, as light as two birds, they skipt to their weapons. The youth was
not so much used to the^, neither so ready, nor strong, by reasen of his age,
as his well grown kinsman, who had the best sword and armor in the world.
There was small advantage to be gotten in this second battle, for that they
were both so well armed: but the time came when they were armed alike, and the
youth come to riper age, when he made him to sweat drops of blood, recovering
then, that which now he lost. But now it was impossible to match the Tinacrian,
which in arms was so skillful. But for all this he so plied him, that he made
him to shift from this side to that, being galled with his wounds, and much
more with the fear to lose the battle: but this was ye Tinacrians day, as he
made it well appear: for the young man entered with an excellent ward, which
gave great co^tentment to all men, saying, that if he and his brother lived to
come to perfect age, they would be the best men at arms in the world, as in
deed they were. There was much sorrow in all ye camp, especially the knight with
ye stars grieved (who loved him dearly) when he saw that he with the Eagle
breaking his ward, on a sudden cut away a great part of his Helmet, and the
sword slipped down upon his breast: he also cut away the skirt of his
breast plate, with more then half of his Taces, and made him to shake like one
that were in great fear: but the pain (which was great) being past, with his
sword in both hands he returned, and before that the Greek could step from
him, he was likely to have laid him all along. The blow was so furious, and it
was so great, that it drue much blood, and put him out of breath.

Garrosileaes son well perceived it, and holding the victory for certain,
crossing his sword aloft, he bare by a weak blow, through want of blood; and
closing with him, he lifted him up from ground, before he could recover his
breath; and so in his Arms he sent him to the Knight with the Stars, his
shield remaining with the Tinacrian. The two youths were so well beloved in
all the Pagans camp, that a man cannot imagine what sorrow there was made for
the overthrow of Leobello, and chiefly Bembo, who loved himself; and he with
the Stars wept blood out at his eyes, in stead of tears. The gallant
Claribel was so vexed, that he was besides himself: they began to disarme him,
with such grief to the King of Silepsia, and Eufronisa, as though that the one
had known him for his nephew, and the other for her son.

Then came Lupertius, who with his cunning stopped his blood, saying, that it
was nothing: wherewith they were appea^^d all, saving the Ladies, who gave the
Knight with the Eagle, a thousand curses. They were about to return to the
Camp, but it stayed them to see the brave Brufaldoro, who seeing the Princes
busy about Leobello, leaped into the Listes, more furious then the raging Sea.
The Tinacrian was glad at the heart; for he had many a day desired this
battle, as has been before declared, about a Pagans wife: he knew him by
his Arms, which was, a half Moon in a blew field. The young man made haste,
because that Claribel should not challenge the fight, whose lot it was. In
coming near to the Moore, he said, Me thinks by your Arms, Sir Knight,
that you should be the King of Mauritania, to sight with whom I have much
desired. The time is come (quoth the Moore) wherein we may end it, seeing thou
have so much desired it, but I would feign know with whom I should fight this
battle. I will tell thee, said the courageous Tinacrian, upon condition, that
thou will swear unto me by the order of Knighthood, to keep it secret, until
my challenge be ended. I will do so, said the Moore. Then thou shall know
(answered the young man) that I am he, to whom at Sea thou gave the order
of Knighthood, and which brought thy wife from the hands of those fierce
Giants: and I am glad that so old a challenge shall now be ended, for I will
not give it over, until one of us lie in the dust. Nothing could so well have
pleased the Pagan, who no less desired it then the Greek. Without answering
one word, he went to his place, while as the young man refreshed himself,
praying to the god of his Father to grant him victory, against that furious
Pagan, with a determination to forsake his Law and to be baptized. With this
new vow, he returned, more courageous, then with any thing that the Nymphs
had given him, which charged him to be very circumspect: for it should be
behouefull in this battle, because it should be the last. They were all very
attentive, without moving so much as their eyelids, for fear, that in the
mean space they should encounter, and they not see them.

There was never any Galley that went so swift with sails and Oars, driven by
a fresh gale, as they flew one against another, ending their carriers, with
far greater noise then the Sea makes, when in a tempest it assaileth the
firm rocks. On the shoares side they brake their Lances, as if they had
been little reeds. The one passing by the other without any moving, they
turned their horses, with their naked swords in their hands, giving such blows
as caused great fear, even in those which were farthest off. They were expert
in Arms, and therefore they made good show, with charging and retiring with
such speed, that thought could not overtake them. The Greek had the
advantage, by reason of his rich Armor and weapons: for he never gave blow
but it was bloody: and although that he saw not his blood, he was so weakened
with the blows which he received, that it put him out of breath. The Knight
entered, bearing his sword aloft, meaning to have ouerborne him with a course:
but the Pagan who in strength was equal to Milo, drawing back his sword to
one side, gave him two thrusts one after another, which seemed unto the Greek
as though he had broken all his ribs: He stayed so long, by reason of his
pain, that the furious African had means to strike him behind upon the Helms;
which although that the hardness thereof gave him life, yet it could not save
him from turning his head more to one side then he had would: he trusting in ye
strength of his arms, would needs close with him; but his presumption cost him
dear: for ye valorous Tinacrian, who although almost choked with blood, which
ran out of his mouth down his throat, had not therefore lost any part of his
understanding; but seeing him coming, he spurred his good horse Rubican so
hard, yt he made him to run upon the Moors horse: there was never seen a more
fearful shock in ye world; for whether ye Moore would or n^, he fell, horse
and man to the ground, which gave him a shrewd fall. The brave Rubican f^ll
backwards, setting his buttocks on ye ground, so bruised with the encounter,
that he could go no farther forwards. The Greek leapt from him, very glad
that he was on foot; for in that manner he would have given the god Mars
battle. The Painim was also glad, who was both light and valiant, so as
fortune gave to them both that which they desired. They came one toward
another like Masters of fence: for the Painim bea^ing his shield at his breast,
and his sword aloft, made toward the fierce young man, who came quite
contrary; for he bare all his body firm upon his left foot: they came to
crossing of their swords, each of them knowing the valor of his adversary.
This ward lasted but a little while: for Trebatius his son changing footing,
lifted up his right arm, and suddenly with all his strength, struck him upon
the top of his Helmet with his rich sword, he rapt away his Plumes, with part
of his gilded Crest: and stepping back, drawing his sword after him, he gave
him a thwart blow, which was the luckiest that he gave in all this battle:
for hitting him below the skirt of his breast plate, it struck away above a
hundred pieces of his shirt of Mayle, cutting his Taces, and therewith part of
his thigh, he could not so safely do it, but that the Mauritanian fastened a
^low upon his most strong shield, and bare it to his head with such force, that
it made him cast blood out at his mouth and ears; he thought it had been
night, he saw his Helmet so full of stars.

The Pagan in these cases was not so careless, but that he would give him
another before he should recover himself, and made him set his hands to the
ground; he would have shouldred him, but he found him as fixed as a rock, and
came so near unto him, that the Tinacrian could not strike him, but casting
his Shield at his back, he took hold of him, which he did so suddenly*
that he had almost thrown him to the ground.

The King of Mauritania recovered himself, and taking good footing, they began
so to wrestle, that Mars did envy them: the one assailed to trippe up the
others heels; they trample, they sweat, sometimes they gripe, and sometimes
they lock legs, that it was wonderful; all the company did wonder, to see
the furious obstinacy of those two warriors.

Sometimes wheeling about, they seemed as though they would have fallen to the
ground, sometimes they graspled, so as they were clean out of breath: it
seemed unto the^ that in this manner they spent much time, and so with a strong
wheeling about, the one hurled the other away from him, with greater force the^
if they had bin shot out of a Cannon. They both fell on their hands, but it
seemed, yt in touching the ground, they recovered new strength, by their
furious running to their weapons, beginning the battle anew, much more cruel
then at the first. Vulcan his workman made no greater noise, when they forged
Achilles Armor, then did these two warriors, tormenting their flesh. Three
hours did this second battle endure, without any show of weariness, or any
advantage. The Tinacrian was in such a rage, to see how that Knight did defend
himself, and offend him, that he hastened his blows in such sort, as he was
dyed all over with blood. The Moore was hurt in four places, and the Tinacrian
in two, both in the joints of his armor. They both agreed to rest them: for
there was never any such battle seen, that lasted so long, nor that was
maintained with such generositie; the courageous Tinacrian walking up and
down, saying, Truly, I know not how thou should be called the son to such
a father, seeing that in his presence, and of thy mistress, with so many
brothers and kinsfolks, one Moore has brought thee into this estate. The
brave Moore was no less grieved at the long stay, who a thousand times
renounced his gods. This did so much grieve them, that in all haste (as fierce
as two Lions, they ran to their weapons. But in this battle, the advantage
appeared in the Greek, whereof all men were glad (I mean those which were of
his faction) but Branorante was he which most grieved at it: for seeing yt
Brufald^ro was once overcome, it should be no disgrace for him to overcome him
also, and for the other less honor. He roared like a Bull, that he had not
first challenged the battle: and had it not been for the Emperor of the
Romans, and the Sultan of Niquea, which pacified him, he had, without doubt,
lept into the Lifts, and challenged them both the battle. But they persuaded
him to defer it until the battle in the field, for that none of them but
would be there. Floralisa prevailed much with him, whom the fierce Pagan
adored, who made him to do whatsoever she would, concerning Brufaldoro, who
now maintained not the battle as at the beginning: for the young man now
ranged him at his command, and without doubt had overcome him, if the sun
had not ended their days work, which was the cause that the Judges came
between them, alleging, that according to the laws of the Greeks, they
might no longer proceed in that battle: which much grieved the Tinacrian,
who would rather have ended that, then all the rest which remained, for that he
had so much desired it. But for that he would not give any sign of ill
behavior, he withdrew, and the Barbarian went out of the Lists on foot,
unable to get to his horse, he was so sorely wounded. He went up into the
Chariot amongst the Ladies, returning with them to the camp, and the Greek
Ladies to the City, carrying with them matter enough, to talk of the
valiancie of those two warriors, affirming that they had not their Peers in
the world. For this occasion stayed the messenger of Arbolinda, Princess of
Scotland, who burned in Loue^ fire for Florisarte of Argentaria, who coming
unto him, for he had learned which was he, and giving him the letter, he
said that he came from Artin^o his old Squire, who was newly come to the
camp, desiring him that the next day he might have an answer. The constant
Lover took the Letter, and withdrawing himself from the Squire, he went to
his lodging, and reading it, saw that it said thus: The Letter.
THe forgotten Artimio, to the valorous Prince of Argentaria and Tharsis,
greeting. I do not write, sovereign Knight, for that I am persuaded that
absence has been of power to make thee to change thy faith, as to call to thy
memory, and to put thee in mind of the promise which thou did make to me,
to love whom I would. Now is the time come to accomplish it: for the
contentment was so great which I received in thy company, that I have procured
by all possible means, to requite thy faith. Be revived, if thou will be
adored: and because thou may see to whom thou gave thy faith, if thou do
remember her picture, thou shall see the substance, which shall be the Lady
clad in green, cut upon cloth of gold, hard by the Princess of Rome: and thou
shall see, that her beauty deserves constant affection. I desire no answer,
until thou shall see her whom thou have loved, whom thou ought to love, and
by whom thou art beloved. The Gods keep thee, and grant thee that rest which
thou desire.




It is not possible to describe the joy, which this enamoured young man
conceived of this joyful news, that his Lady was in the Camp: he was a
thousand times in the mind, to go the next day disguised, to fight with the
Knight with the Eagle: but he had gotten little thereby; for the Tinacrian was
too hard for him, who departed to his Lady, sufficiently ashamed, for that he
could not overcome the Pagan: but they with the love which they bare, did
comfort him; to whom after the day was shut in, the Nymphs* spoke in this
manner: Ualorous Prince of Tinacria, you may well a^count your self for one of
the most fortunate Knights of the world, having obtained such a father and
brothers, which are held for the light thereof: and also for that the heavens
have preserved this Princess to be your wife, with the victories which you
have obtained in her service, which have been so many, as could not be
imagined in any other Knight but of you. The rest which remains, cannot be
ended, because there is this day a most mighty Pagan come, who is King of
Comagena, with a great army, and has besieged a city of importance, called
Hircambela, destroying all the marches thereof: and so the t^uce being broken,
there will be no time to end your business: content you with that which is
past, which has been so much, as will make them remember it so long as they
live. There is no more to be done, but to morrow to make your self known to
your warlike father, who will be very glad of you: as for us, we were
commanded by this sovereign Ladies aunt, that we should accompany her thus
far: and so she having no more need of our company, we will to morrow
return to her, attending the time wherein we shall meet again with great
contentment. Present this tent unto your Father, for no Prince in the world
has received a better gift. The Arms which she gave us for the last battle
with the Captain of the Moors, we will leave to you: for seeing you shall
often meet with him in sundry battles, we can with nothing pleasure you
more* then with them. Some sorrow the three Princes showed, when they
understood that the Nimphs would be gone; but seeing that there was no remedy,
they must have patience.

Then came his beloved nephew Rosabel, who every night came disguised to see
his Uncle, for there were no kinsmen in the world that more dearly loved, or
that better showed it then they. They received him very gladly, and he very
breefely told them the news of the siege of Hyrcambela, and how that succor
was sent thither, under the conduct and command of the Prince M^ridian, and how
angry his Grandfather was therewith, determining to give them the field
battle presently.

The Moors were no less sorry thereat, especially the mighty Bembo, and
because they should not think that it was done through his procurement, he
presently sent to excuse himself to the Greeks, and to Poliphebus, which was
noted in him for great generositie: and so Rosabel took his leave, attending
news from Meridian, which is left for another Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII. How the Prince Poliphebus made himself known to the Emperor
his Father, and of the good relief which Meridian brought to the besieged, and
of the rest which followed.
THe golden Apollo had scarcely discovered his golden locks, which he had
bathed in the Spanish Seas, when in four parts of the great City of
Constantinople, they sounded the alarm, in sign that the wars were renewed.
The Pagans answered them with their accustomed instruments. All put themselves
in a readiness. The careful General Oristoldo, angry and ashamed that the
Moors had gotten the first onset upon him, went plotting some stratage me,
whereby he might be revenged of them, and found ^ut so good a one as shall be
declared, which was like to have been the total destruction of the Moors.

All men prepared themselves for the field battle, which should be about eight
days thence: for the Emperor was weary of this long war. The most mighty
son Poliphebus made no longer stay, but took his leave of the Nymphs, with
tears charging them to recommend him unto the wise Lady. He went forth
armed with the best Armor that was in the world, sending his Lent to the
Greek Emperor his father, to whom he went between the two Ladies, whose
beauty dazeled the Sun, and made the most fair envious. They were clad in lion
color, cut upon blew, and the cuts set with precious stones of sundry
colors: they agreed with the Prince, whose armor was of the same color, set
with so many stones, that they could not be beheld, they gave such a reflection
like the sun. The Emperor understood of their coming. Rosabel and his
father, with many Princes, came to receive the Tinacrian, amazed at his beauty
and constitution. Joined with these Ladies, they came before his father, all
three upon their knees, desiring to kiss his imperial hands: who, for that
he knew them not, would not suffer it, alleging that it was a wrong to those
which should do it. Your Majesty may suffer it, said his Nephew Rosabel,
receiving them for your Majesty's children. For the valiant Knight with the
Eagle, is the famous Prince of Tinacria, and this Lady (poynting to the fair
Rosaluira) is his sister, together with this royal Princess of Egypt, Luzela,
whom the heavens have given to your dear son for his wife. The grave old
Emperor wept for joy, and embracing them he said, Now children of my loins,
my mind will be at rest, having such a Prince in my company as you are. The
Ladies presently took him away, chiefly the four young girls, who had so
much favored him: with which, and the rest of the Princesses, as well he as
the two Ladies* passed many things in making acquaintance. They kissed the hands
of the Empress Briana, who entertained them as her own children. There was no
time to stay long, for the Prince Meridian had sent word by other messengers,
of the great harm that the Moors had done in all the frontiers therea^out.
This was anew to set all the Greek camp in an uproar. To the Tartarian Prince
Zoylo, was committed the leading of the Apulians and Thessalians, with some
part of the Frenchmen, for (...) arrer^ guard: (to the end yt if they met with
the enemy, th^^ should fight with them, if they should see themselves in st^^
to do it) there was never a famous Prince but went with Zoylo, even to the
Prince Poliphebus, al with close cask^^* Claridiano, and Archisilora, went by
themselves, overthrowing the enemies, as the wind does leaves in Autumn. The
furious Spaniard Thorisiano and his son, did no less on the other side, in
company with Don Heleno, his dear friend, and the fair Rosamundi, then the
famous Tinacrian with his brother Rosacler, and his dear nephew: they were few
in their hands: for they went through the army from side to side, leaving some
without heads, others thrust clean through, and those which now were at liberty
(lately so giddie and amazed, yt they were ready to give up hte Ghost) came
forth of the city, with a desire to be revenged. Great was the slaughter which
they made, although that through the great multitude of enemies, they paid
dear for their victory. For the coming of such Princes, was the total
destruction of y^ Moors, who had never a famous Prince amongst the^, but the
brave Moore. A man cannot imagine what a slaughter they made: for where
Brandafidel, Bramidoro, and the gentle Tefereo went, there was no defense
against their clubs, for they trod all under foot. The greatest part of the
Pagans was slain, before that their succors came from the camp. In the auaunt
guard came the flower of Chiualry, which were Bembo, Brauorante, Brufaldoro, and
the young men, although y^ Leobulo by reason of his hurts, was not to have
taken arms so soon. On the other side came the five of the wood, desirous to
meet with the Greeks, who being more ready, seeing themselves revenged, and so
much to their honor, sounded a retreat, garding their backs with ye City
walls, leaving the enemy with less then ye third part of their people. And the
greatest evil was, that Poliphebus, desirous to make show of himself, in
company with his brother and Nephew, wan the Standard of Comagena, and the King
coming to the rescue, lost his life honorably, because it was by the hands of
the Tinacrian. This king was cousin and great friend to Bramarante, and uncle
to the furious Brauorante, who when he knew of his death, Gualtenor durst not
tell how angry he was: for before that the Greeks were wholly withdrawn, he
slew above a hundred of the^, and would not return to the camp without
revenge. The devilish young man went so compassed with his enemies, that in
despite of them he went into the city, where I would gladly see thee (O
Homer) to sing the acts which he there performed: he would not refuse to fight
with a hundred, for he sought with them all. He met with the Princes of
Hungary and Bohemia: it was nothing to strike them to the ground, considering
what he pretended. He turned to Thorisiano, who^ he left senseless at his
horses heels. And the brave Tartarian, although he deserved it not, he had
near bereaved of life; for casting blood at his mouth and nostrils, he threw
him to ground.

The strong Florisiano and the Prince of Croacia escaped not scotfree, for he
left them astonished. A proud attempt: sixteen Princes he threw to the ground,
in so ill plight, that it was doubted of their lives. He came to encounter the
two famous Giants, Bramidoro, and Brandafidel: to which he had an eye ever
since their meeting in the willow valley. He entered between them, nothing
weyghing their terrible clubbes: and they which were borne to be feared,
nothing feared him: for whorling about their fearful weapons, they both
together smote him so strongly, that they made him bow both his knees to the
ground, and had taken him, but the terrible young man bestirring himself with
his broad sword, struck Brandafidels club out of his hands, and came upon him
with another, which set him from him, faster then a good pace, which gave him
place to rise, and overtake the furious Bramidoro. He had paid no less then
his life, for the displeasure of this angry young man: for he made him to
fall upon his hands, and would have closed to make a final end of him, and had
done it, had not the gentle Tifereo come, who with a fierce blow, hindered the
purpose of the fierce Brauorante. But he paid that which he ought to
Poliphebus: for with a thrust he wounded him very sore in the midst of his
breast; and if his sword had entered a little further, he had nailed the one
side to the other. Brandafidel came to the rescue, laying hand to his monstrous
crooked Fawchion, wherewith he thought to have defeated the Pagan, and smote
him athwart the Helm, and made him see a thousand stars therein. The Prince
of France, Clarindo, by chance came at one side of him, who was so eager, that
he could not strike, although he would feign, but was likely to have met with
his death: for the Pagan seeing him so near him, yt he could not strike him
with his sword, gave him so sound a knock with the Hilts, that he said him at
his feet. Gualtenor says, that had any of the other famous Princes entered
with him, the City had been in danger to have been surprised: he roared like
a Bull at the stake, and was more wight then an Ounce: and thinking that he
should better execute his rage on foot, he forsook his horse, and so iustled
those which came mounted upon great horses, as though he had been an
Elephant: with two blows he struck down the two brothers Spaniards, which
were held for as valiant as most in the Camp: yet there were so many that
desired to come to blows with him, that ye place was never void, but rather
they met him in the way, seeking revenge. All this did but inflame his rage,
had not the Greek Princes been advertised thereof, who desirous to kill him,
came in all haste.

The Dane came first upon his Tirian, very choleric, for yt he had
overthrown his Captain, which brought his troops out of Dacia, who entered
pale with anger, and ran upon him with his horse breast, but he stirred him as
much, as if he had met with a rock. Then came the brave Claramante, who had
many times made him to feel what he could do with his Halbert, who leapt
from his horse, to whom every one gave place: he stood somewhat aloof, and
whorling his weapon about his his head, smote him over the Helmet, and did more
then Don Heleno his horse could do, for he made him set his hands to ground:
he seconded it with another, which made him stark mad: for making no reckoning
of the third (although that he saw it coming) he joined with him, giving him
a sudden blow with both his hands upon the Helmet, and made him to set both
his hands and knees to the ground: no man came to his rescue, for fear to
offend him, thinking that he would make an end of the Pagan: but he was become
such a Basiliske, that if the whole Greek Army had been there, he would not
have refused the battle, against them all. The lover gave him a thrust in the
breast, and had not his armor been so good, he had nailed him through, and
made him make two steps backwards.

By this time had all the flower of the Greeks compassed him about: and the
Tinacrian had so great a desire to try himself against him, that he leapt
from his horse, with his Shield upon his arm, desiring his brother to leave
that battle to him, wherein he should do him pleasure. All me^ desired to
content him: for he was beloved of all. The Pagan knew him well by his Eagle,
and knowing that he had slain his good Uncle, he assailed him, bidding them
both to prepare themselves: which Claramante would not do by any means, but
left the battle for his brother, who as he came fresh and eager, before he
could turn about, had given him two blows, one after another: there was no
enchantment against his weapons, nor force equal to his; for both his knees he
made him set to the ground, and reached him another, no less then the former.

The Pagan saw that which he never had seen: for the swords point entering
at a crack in his breast plate, as it found a little entrance, it cut the rest,
till it set out the blood: it was a great chance; and God preserved him, to the
end he should be his f^iend, and the greatest in the world to this Prince: for
falling in love in Egypt, he was a mean to put the Lady into his hand, as
shall be declared in the fourth part of this History: and so winding himself
to one side, the sword slipped out, leaving him wounded, although not much.

The brave Pagans blood did freeze in his belly, to see it upon the Grecians
sword, and giving a fierce cry, he assailed him; and but that his nimblenes
did much help him, I believe, that he had incurred great danger: for
notwithstanding all this, he hit him a blow upon the rich shield, and made him
run stumbling forwards ready to fall.

The Pagan (to his own hurt) closed with him: for the Prince was as strong as
he, who letting go his shield, set hand to his rich dagger. But the Moore had
such confidence in his armor, that he made no account thereof, and the young
man remembering the virtue of that weapon, gave him upon the top of his
shoulder, two sore wounds, one after another, which made much blood to run out.
The Moore was so highly angered, that with a push he put him far from him: and
seeing that it was mere madness to strive any longer, having no assistance,
he assailed the Knight Flamineo, who was mounted upon a good* horse: he
plucked him out of his Saddle, pulling him over those which were on horseback,
and with a leap he gat the Saddle, and rushing through the thickest, above
four lost their lives, in the Pagans going forth.

At the top of a hill all the whole army stayed, expecting him, hearing the
noise, but they were not able to come to help him: for from the turrets and
Parrapets of the walls, they threw so many stones and Darts; that without
manifest danger they could not come near him, and the Pagan escaped not
without it: so as when he came to the Camp, he was as weary, as furious: he
would speak to no man, but rather meeting with Brufaldoro, not remembering
their agreement, he set upon him, roaring like a baited bull. The brave
Mauritanian encountered, for he never feared him, where they began one of the
most fierce battles that ever was in the world: for they were two of the best
Knights therein: but Bembo came to part them. Herein did the Pagans blindness
appear, who not respecting him, turned against him, saying, that they should
all fight against him, for his dear Uncles death could not be revenged with
less, then with the destruction of all the world. The great Captain would not
lay hands on him, although he had much angered him. All the whole Camp could
not have made him give over the battle, had not Floralisa come, whom the Pagan
ever since he met her in Mauritania, had chosen for his God: for he was of
opinion, that there was nothing in the world worthy to be regarded, but her
beauty. Well did the Lady know how dearly the Moore did love her, although it
were single love, for she was otherwise provided, although she lived the most
sorrowful life of the world, seeing her hope to marry with the Tinacrian
frustrate: yet to appease the battle, she took off her Helmet, and putting
herself between them, she said, Give room, Knights, for this battle cannot
now be ended, and you wrong the Souldan of Niquea his whole camp, if in time
of necessity any of your Arms should be missing.

The Pagan lifted his sword no more up, after he heard his mistress voice.
Strange power of affection: for what so many Princes could not do, was ended
with her sight only. I would have been very glad, valorous Lady, (said the
Mauritanian) if you would have suffered me to have ended it: but seeing it is
your pleasure, I leave it in your hands. Let it rest (said the Lady) until
the field battle be ended. Let it be as you will appoint it (said he, now very
gentle) which before seemed to be a Lion; for from henceforth in any part I
will not break it: and so they returned to their camp, and although against
his will, yet she made him to sup in the Ladies Tent, where (although fained)
she showed him a thousand favors: they were means to withhold him from his
fury, for he had determined to pursue them al, to be revenged of the death of
his Uncle.

There was great sorrow for the loss of that day; and meaning to make amends
in the field battle, they concluded that it should be eight days after. What
happened in the mean season, you shall know by the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the Greeks with victory returned to the City, where they
made preparation for the field, and how the two youths were made known to
their mother.
WIth such contentment as winners use to enjoy, most excellent Prince, the
Greeks remained in the City of Hircambela, wondering at the fury of that
Pagan, holding it for a matter incredible, if with their eyes they had not
seen it, and so much to the cost of such personages, as they were.

There was none of the Princes but desired alone to fight with him, especially
Poliphebus, of whom the old King of Macedonia (returning to Constantinople)
reported wonders; all were glad thereof, especially his Father, who loved him
in the same degree, as he did the Emperor Alphebus.

By the Ladies which boldly might do it, those knights were disarmed, some
helping one with their hands, and with their eyes and soul, another. What
passed in the Camp was discovered, and how that from thence, eight days, they
had appointed the field battle: because that by that time, Leobello would be
cured of his hurts: Lupertius cured him very carefully, that all might see how
much he loved them.

One night the discreet Selia came by chance, who had folded them in their
swaddling clothes at the time of their birth, being much affected to their
valor, without any knowledge of them, by reason of Eufronisa, who was in the
same Tent, she went to see how he did of his hurts. She came as Lupertius
was dressing of him, and as women are very bold, and being by night, for that
she would seem to do him some favor therein, she took the candle, to give
him light to dress him: but he had scarcely lifted v^ his shirt to see the
wounds in his breast (for those were the most cruel,) she was so much
troubled, that she was ready to let the candle fall out of her hand, and
seeing the picture of a Ladies face in the young man's breast, and remembering
that that mark was upon one of the children borne by the Princess Eufronisa,
and she imagining that (without doubt) this was one of them, with very joy
she was overcome.

She desired to stay with him, to the end to know more of this matter: fortune
was her friend, desiring to do that Princess some new favor; and there being
no fit company to stay with the Prince, if he would have any thing, she
offered her self to stay for that purpose: which the young man much esteemed,
and more would have done, if he had known the occasion thereof: And seeing
her self alone with him, she came to his beds side, saying,

I would, valorous Knight, that you could impart your pain to her, who feels
the same as much as your self.

Your visiting me, fair Damsel, answered the young man, is a sufficient ease
for all that I feel, being from my Lady the Princess Eufronisa: which in
conclusion, does that which is annexed to her valor, which is, to remember
them which are in need, as I am.

And to remedy it with loss of her own contentment, (answered the Damsel) I
do believe, that she gladly would do it. And for my part, I should take it
for much favor, to know what mark that is upon your breast, which I saw when
you were a dressing.

I know not the cause thereof, answered the young man, but that I was borne
with this face, and my brother Claribel with an heart crossed, and hitherto we
knew no other, but that we were the sons of the discreet Sergio, for he
brought us up: but within these two days, he has put us out of doubt,
telling us that we be not his children, but that in Silepsia, near unto the
City of Golbergt, he found us newly borne, and his mother brought us up in
stead of her own children: wherein, as I say, we have continued until now,
that he has otherwise assured us. The pleasure which this Damsel conceived
was such, that she presently taking her leave of him, went into her Ladies
Chamber, and without speaking one word, she embraced her. The Princess
maruailing at the news, asked her the cause thereof, which should not be
little. So great (answered the the Damsel) is the good, which the heavens
(dear Lady) this day have done you, that you may live merry and contented
all the days of your life: for know, that the two famous youths are your two
lost sons.

The Princess could give no answer, she was so surprised with sudden joy,
which was then the greatest that could happen unto her. Ah, my Selia, I cannot
believe that so great a good as this, can happen unto so unlucky a woman, no
way deserving it; and therefore it cannot be possibly. Without doubt it is as I
tell you, for I have seen the very marks wherewith they were borne, and that
which Cleobulo has, I saw this night, when he was a dressing: and then she
told her what had passed between the Prince and her, whereof the Princess was
not able to contain the pleasure: and being unable to make an end of renewing
her delight, she said, It behooves me to see it, to the end to make me live
contented. That shall be an easy matter to do, answered the Damsel: for now
every body being at rest, I will lead you thither, without discovery: but why
will you not believe that I have told you of him? She presently came forth with
her: for the hope to see him, did encourage her in such sort, that she would
adventure to come to the Princes lodging: to whom at her coming she said, My
Damsel, Sir Knight, has told me so many and so rare things of you and your
brother, (that being somewhat hard of belief, although it may be noted for
lightness) that I in exchange to see it, have put my self in danger to be
noted. It is to me, Sovereign Princess, a great favor that which you do,
and the cause being manifest, brings therewith the defense: as for the rest,
seeing it is your pleasure, there is no more to be done, but to see it with
your eyes: and so putting his shirt a little by, he showed that fair face.

The Princess had so imprinted it in her heart, that she presently knew it.
She had almost discovered her self: but considering what might ensue thereof,
and to publish her contentment, she took her leave of him, the most joyful
of any woman in the world. Well did she deserve it, having recovered two such
sons as she had, being in all so accomplished. She was now of opinion, that
fortune could do her no greater pleasure, then that which she had received
with the sight of her two sons.

They withdrew them to their lodging, with determination never to marry, seeing
she had two such children; neither to make them known to the Greek their
father, for fear that they would stay with him in Greece. Heerewith they
passed the seven days which remained: she in one camp, and be in another;
until that that wished day did come, wherein should be the general death of
him, or of his enemies.

It seemed that Apollo this day hastened his course, to the end that there
should want no time for this bloody war: he appeared of a bloody color,
and Mars with his armed Trident appeared low, wherewith he touched Vulcans
Shield. There was neither Faune, Satyr, nor god in the woods, which came not
to the top of ye Mountains to see the battle. In the Camp, before the
Captain Bemboes Tent, was pitched up a black standard, the sides being of
colors: a sign that the wars should be made with fire and sword, and blood,
and that he should die for it, which took a prisoner: he drue forth his
Infanterie, which was innumerable, making thereof his maine battle, lyning it
with the fierce Parthians, which were above a hundred thousand men al Archers,
with their bows and quiuers, wherewith they did notable harm: for being on
horseback, before they came to charge their Lances, they wrought great hurt
in the head of the Cauallerie, which were divided into twelve mighty
squadrons. Forth came those two mighty Princes, the Sultan of Niquea, and the
Emperor of the Romans, whose persons compassed with huge Giants, were guarded
with no less care, then Achilles was with the Mirmidons. With the rest of the
people he made 2. Battalio^s: one of which he took for himself, leading them
to the right hand. At one side of him, went those two brave competitors
Brauorante, and Brufaldoro, with the most principal troops of Achaia. In the
Arrere guard, with ye Africanes came those three mighty young men, he with the
stars, Claribel, and Leobello, whose comely personages were pleasing to al.
The Duke Ferrer bare the Standard royal, with all the fierce Almaines, having
twenty four Giants for his guard. On the other side went the mighty Sultan of
Egypt, bearing down toward the valley of willowes: in whose company went the
five of the fair wood, with the flower of Giant land, which seemed as high as
Pine-trees. The King of Fenicia, and the mighty Assyrian, had in charge the
guard of the Camp: the charge of battering the City, with all the Chariots
with Sithes, and the strong Castles upon the mighty Elephants, wherewith they
thought it an easy matter to batter it, with all the Rams and engines, which
seemed to be greater then the City of Constantinople, was committed to the
King of England, with part of the Frenchmen, and a brother of the Duke of
Thebes, who was no less fit for it, then his brother for the camp: who took
good order for the guard of the City, putting all the Ladies into Mars his
Castle, making thereon fair weather. Those which could send favors to their
^allanis, did it with a good will, praying to God to give them victory. They
expected the coming of Trebatius his power (which seemed no less then the
Moors:) the Captain general committed to the Emperor of Trapisonda
Alphebus, the leading of one point of the horsemen: who with his beloved
Empress, and the brave Oristides and his wife, with the Giants of the Islands
Baleares, which were above 2000. took down into the valley, over against the
Souldan of Egypt. The other point he recommended to the mighty Trebatius, whose
company was no less in show, the^ that which Hector had: he went between
Poliphebus and Rosacler, with his Nephew, the valorous Rosabel, Bramidoro and
Brandafidel, with the gentle Tifereo and the sons of Tituan, took charge of
his person: the Battalions in the midst he divided, as best fitted: he
reserved the auaunt guard for himself: by him went the flower of Chiualry,
Claridiano, and Claramante, with all the Spaniards, Lirians, and Antiochians:
although that one half of the Spaniards, with part of the Hungarians and
Albanois, he had made pass by 2. and 2. and 4. and 4. to the number of 60000.
toward the camp, and yt lodging themselves among those crags and bushes, they
should there make a stand, until yt he should come to give assault to the
camp: it was the greatest stratageme yt ever Captain devised, as shall
appear. In the rere guard came ye brave Torismu^do, and his son, with ye
Princes of France and Bohemia. On the right wing, with all those of Dacia,
went ye mighty Heleno, with his beloved Rosamundi, armed in their rich armor:
24. Knights of his chamber had charge of his Lady. The great Tartarian Zoilo,
and the prince Meridian were left with a maine troup for supplies, with many
spare horses for those which should be lost. The Royal sta^dard was borne by
ye Theban Duke. Floristano and Polidolpho, with the good king Sacridoro, and
the valiant Lisart of Argentaria were reserved, for that the Captain had sent
them to command the Ambuscado, committing to their discretion and valor, a
matter of so great importance. Three times in all the Castles of the City, the
alarm was given, advice being given to the famous Astrutio, that then he
should give the onset upon his enemies, all the troops being ranged in good
order, and in a readiness to charge. The mighty Aristoldo, armed that day in
the most rich armor that he had, with a fair colored scarf, which his
mother had sent him, in the head of the troops, his Beauer being put up, with
the but end of his Lance stuck in the ground, spoke in this manner: The
Oration.
THis is the day (most excellent Princes) wherein the heavens and fortune will,
that we show that valor which it has given us. In this action it shall be
good to die, seeing that herein is purchased eternal fame. It rests in our
arms to be conquerours, fighting with courage and discretion. Otherwise in
losing our lives, we lose our fame likewise. Our enemies are in sight, and to
those, whom it so much behooves to do well, it shall not need to use many
words, but that every one consider how much this business concerns him; and
that in ouercomming, he shall purchase the fame and credit of valiant.



As he had said these words, he cast his Generals Trunchion to the ground, and
pulling down his Beuer, he put himself among his loving friends, expecting
when the brave Captain Bembo should do the like: who before his people, with
a courageous mind used these words: Oration.
I Would, mighty Princes, and valorous Knights, that the gods would bear
witness, and at this instant make manifest, with what desire I go unto this
battle, to die for any of you, making our enemies know what equity, Arms,
and hearts we have. It shall be an easy matter to overcome, having this
advantage, and being three times as many, herein is no more to be said, but to
be ready to be commanded, and that every one observe the order wherein he is
set: for this makes men atchiue noble enterprises. And seeing that you all may
be Captains, to day you ought to be Soldiers, for that, and the courage of
our hearts, will give us the victory: for I, in the Office wherein I am
employed, do mean to die for your service.



He likewise threw down his golden Trunchion, and commanded presently three
Clarions to be sounded, a certain token that they should presently give the
charge. He embraced the two competitors, a custom used in his country, and
worthy to be noted; for he (say they which have skill therein) which enters
into the battle, goes to contend with death. He turned about to see whether
they kept their first order, and was very joyful to see such Cauallerie: and
as they began to join, it was worthy of a new book, much more of a new
Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX. How the field battle began, and of the perilous combats and
famous acts which therein succeeded.
THe time is come, worthy Dames, and warlike Princes, if ever there were
single combats and lovers cases in the world, herein they shall be seen, at
life, but with your favor, for without it, there is no passage to be given to
my slow pen, to lay colors on such a piece of painting, as is this, wherein an
excellent wit and lofty style is very requisite. A sight worthy to be seen,
although it made some afraid, but to the rest it yielded new courage, to see so
many fair ensigns flying in the air, so many Cornets wauing, so much Armor
glittering, such neighing of horses striking one at another, such thundering of
Ordinance, so many instruments of war, such crying of Soldiers, such
encouraging of Captains, fixing their eyes on the palm of the victory, which
turned the most cowardly Soldier, to a fierce Lion, the noise of the
Charriots, and the snorting of the Elephants: having seen this, who would not
have thought, but that the last day had been come? The infantrie of either
side extended it self at large; whose Pike heads did so shine, as they
dazelled the Sun.

The most Christian Emperor full of water, lifted up his eyes to heaven,
saying, Seeing this is thine (O Lord, behold thy people.) Both together in the
points met these two angry Captains, charging the first battles, that it
seemed that the earth was not only oppressed in it self: but that the highest
heavens were vnhung. In the Auaunt-gard of these battles, came the flower of
both armies: for with the General Bembo, were joined the two competitors,
which advanced themselves forwards. And on our side, the mighty General, and
Claramante, with the unknown Greek, which came to join with greater force,
then can be imagined. Oristoldo lost his stirrops, but having so good a horse,
he past furiously along; the like did the four which remained: they returned
the one against the other with as great courage, as possibly could be imagined.
Bembo desirous to strike Claridiano, came so near, that he could not strike
him, and so came to handie gripes: the Greek knew the Pagans strength, and
leaving his stirrops, he suffered himself to be carried away: but in plucking
him from his Saddle, he took so strong hold, that he plucked him out of his,
before that he was able to quit his stirrops; which if the Greek had known,
he would have trailed him from his horse. It was a luckie chance for
Archisiloraes Lover: for as he was stronger then ye Moore, so he set him up
against his horse, and with his dagger was like to have slain him, for he hurt
him, although not dangerously. The young man was almost lost; for the Giants
seeing the Pagan in ye ground, charged with their squadron, and had trodden him
under foot, had he not bin closed with Bembo: but this and the approach of ye
battles gave the^ place to take horse, beginning between them anew so furious
a battle, as if they had bin alone within the Lists. It lasted not long, for
the floods of frie^de and enemies parted them, being mixed among the troops:
where, oh who is able to express what blows were given above 30000. lost
their saddles, and some presently their lives; for they were either trodden
under the horse feet, or smoothered with extreme heat, who had seen ye
gallant Claramante with his shield at his back, charge ye enemy with his
Battel-axe, and at large to let drive at those Giants, which as they were huge
and so many, he never mist blow, and at every blow felled one to the ground,
stopping the passage against the horsemen: his friends held him so good
company, yt it gave great pleasure to behold the^: for Claridiano, careful of
his Lady, suffered her not to strike a blow, although she well made show of the
valor of her person. The warlike Lady charged in so far among ye Giants, that
before she was aware, having ho^t her horse, they had her afoote: her Lover
repaired to the noise, and seeing the Queen a ground, I cannot tell, whether a
man should relate what the Greek did. For 4. Giants being alighted to help
their Captain, which was at handy gripes with the Lady, he laid the^ on the
ground at 4. blows, and came where ye Giant was, armed with plankes of steel,
and his Helm. He let her go, seeing ye Greek coming, and prepared for his
defense, but it was too late: for before he could turn, with ye fury which
did predominate in him, he smote him with both hands upon the head, and rasht
away a great piece thereof, and of his thick helmet: he seconded another
together with Archisilora; she with a thrust pierced him through, and he,
before he fell, had cleft his head, so as the best and fairest hands in the
world wrought his death. Many did envy ye Giant for his death in such manner.

Oristoldo and Claramante would not be out of the way, when they should assist
them. The three famous Pagans turned backwards hearing the noise, and those
which were a foot, were like to be in danger by their coming, for in the
Generals guard, they had done much harm. It was strange to see Bembo with his
sword died in blood. The furious Brauorante bare that day a great Mace of
steel; being stung with the death of his Uncle, he sufficiently revenged it,
for he gave many for one: at his coming he met with those of the Generals
Chamber, and flue three of them at two blows, and charging the Giants which
had the guard of his person, being nothing afraid to see himself alone amongst
them, he began to stir in such manner, that if Claramante had not come (having
first mounted those two princes) he had made an end of them: but knowing him,
they gave place, whose battle is not to be forgotten: for the one with his
Axe, and the other with his Mace, at every blow made the blood to gush out at
their Uisors. It was good hap for a great many, and as a man might say,
ordained by the heavens: for at one blow with his terrible Axe, hitting close
by his hand, he smote in two pieces his Mace of steel, and it was marvel
that he had not done the like by his arms.

O who had then seen the angry Moore, more furious then a Basiliske! he was
nothing amazed, neither did he strike sail to fury, but rather drew out a
sharp skeane, wherewith he would have smitten the Greek: but it was too
late, for he had already the edge of his Axe upon his Helm: here he saw that
which he never thought of his weapons; for hitting him athwart the Creast, he
smote it clean away, and a great part of his steel Cap. Forwards went the
lover, glad to see the Standard to march forwards, getting ground. The infidel
Bembo perceived it, and with great fury would have set upon him which bare it,
which was the good Duke of Thebes: had not his hands been as good as his
judgment, according to ye force wherewith he plucked it, he had never carried it.
Brufaldoro followed the chase. The old man was in great danger; but his 3.
sons which were ye flower of the Greeks, defended their father as well as they
did the standard. Oristoldo and Claridiano well saw ye hurly burly: but the
Giants did so much trouble them, that they could not pass: but seeing what was
lost in the Standard, notwithstanding he had a good guard, throwing down those
which stood in his way, the furious Claridiano ca^e, and met with Brufaldoro,
and taking him at unawares, it was a marvel that he had not killed him: for in
passing by, he gave him a mighty thrust in one of his sides, which finding
entrance in the iointing, came forth again all died in blood. The young man
passed by so swift, that he could not strike him: but others of less worth
which remained behind, paid for displeasing him. Bembo would that all the whole
army should charge: for ye being by half more then the Greeks, being mixed al
together, they might the better one help another. The horn was thrice winded,
which was a warning to give the charge. The brave Oristoldo well understood it;
and retiring with his company, then which, a better was not in the world, he
said unto them, The time is now come, valorous Princes, wherein your valor will
appear, for Bembo has given sign for the general charge: and because he
shall not think that we are careless, it shall be good to get the hand of
them, which he did: for he presently winded his, so loud, that all the valleys
rang thereof. The Ladies in Mars his Castle knew it, and the Greeks were in
such readiness, yt as he left, they marched as swift as the fresh wind. A
sorrowful day for a great many: for there they met with their deaths in a
thousand manners.

The earth shr^nk, it was so oppressed. The Sun hid his beams, because he
would not see so many deaths. The noise wherewith the battles joined, was so
terrible, that rebounding up to the skies, it made there also a great
slaughter: for the flying souls wanting air to maintain their flight, came
dead to ground. The 2. Nauies at sea, although they had already joined, heard
the noise which was at land. In came the mighty Trebatius, accompanied with his
sons, so furious, that he seemed like death it self; they did so well guard
him, that he never received blow. The famous Tinacrian was the best armed and
mounted of any man in the world; and so earnest, that sometimes his kinsmen
could not follow him, notwithstanding that they wrought miracles. But the
Pagans were so many, that although that they, where they went, had the
advantage; yet the Moors had it in the rest of the camp, fighting sometimes
four against one, and sometimes at more ease. On that side where the Souldan
of Egypt was, there the Greeks had the better; because on that side happened
to fight the invincible Alphebus, with the no less furious then redoubted
Knight Oristides, who seemed no other, then as Hercules among the Giants in the
plains of Egypt: or as Samson among the Philistims. Lirgandeo reports, that
before yt he had ever drawn his sword, he had felled ten Giants: those with
that in his hand he sought, and not the weak simple Knights. They made a broad
street for him: but Don Celindo takes him in hand, with his sister and
friends: he rushed in among them, and upon a sudden seized upon Thorisiano: he
made him lose his reins, and almost his saddle, and therewith his life, had
not Don Argante come at one side, who with his rich sword (when as this brave
Emperor would have seconded his blow, and there with have stinted the strife)
entered with a strong thrust, which he made at him, hitting him in the breast,
shrinking up his sword arm with the pain, and so he could not strike the young
man, but turned against the Fenician more fierce then a Leopard, and smote his
plumes from his head; and had he borne his hand a little lower, he had
endangered him: he returned a thrust at ye Assyrian, who seeing what ye knight
did, which knew him not (for he would never enter into any battle, but as a
private soldier) had aduau^ced himself forwards with a desire to strike him:
he hit him in the midst of the breast, and unable to pierce it for the
goodness of the metal, he pushed him so far back, that he tumbled him
out of his saddle. There was never a better blow given in all the battle.
Claridiana was glad to see it, who had taken Floralisa to task. Their battle
was apart: for the high heavens in valor, although not in beauty, had made
them equals. No man came to their aid, seeing their equality in fight. But Don
Celindo, who was of greater force then the Troiane, sorry for his friends
blow, parted from him, and assailed the Trapisonda^ Lord. He was never weary
with fighting, for therewith he was refreshed: he let him enter, and with all
his might, stepping aside, as he was more nimble and valiant, seizing upon him
with his arms, he plucked him out of his saddle: and but for fear to be
ouerborne by the beasts which the Giants rode on, he had killed him: he let him
go, spurning him with his feet: but he was presently remou^ted. The Souldan
of Egypt was extremely sorry, to see that of his side they had the worst of
the battle, and therefore he fought not, but did more in giving directions:
for by turns he brought new succors where they were ready to fly. Those in
the midst charged with all possible force. Rosabel his sons, and the
unknown young man with ye stars, had descended more lower into the valley.
They seemed like the bright Sun beams, amidst the black clouds, and amazed all
the army, to see how they played the devils. They resembled Auteus in strength,
and Caesar in fighting. They left not a Knight wounded; for they struck them all
stark dead.

The orchard keepers beat not down fruit so fast with their long poles, as
they did the Greeks with their sharp swords. No man durst abide them: and so
climing up a little hills side, and seeing that in all the rest of the battle,
their friends as fast as they could go, did get ground (and although yt they
saw them fall by heaps, yet they were so many, that there was no man mist)
leaving ye sta^dard in his hands, who well knew how to defend it, they came
down ye hills side.

The two brothers wore several colored Scarfes, which their mother had given
them, although not by that name, but as their country woman: they were seen by
both armies. He which went to meet them, was no less then the fierce Don
Heleno, with his beloved Lady, who was known to have the advantage of all
men, with those cruel Arms, which sometime did belong to Semiramis: on his
left side went that valiant Spaniard Thorismundo, to whose trust might be
committed any charge, although not this: for without doubt, Claribel was more
valiant, who fell to his lot, who (as this was the first battle that he had
seen) so would he therein purchase fame. He suffered the Spaniard to enter
upon a fair horse, of the race of Corduba, in whom he did put too much trust
and to his valor, giving the young man a great blow, who was nothing moved
therewith, and preparing a second, he entered, striking him upon the rich
Helmet, which then gave him his life: but for all that, it set him upon his
Saddle bow, casting blood out at his Uisor, and with another, he would have
ended the war, and had done it, had not his son come running, who seeing
his father in such case, drawing force out of fear, with both his hands took
revenge: it was enough to make him to lose his ^^ow, for thereby he recovered
his Fathers life, who with the help of his son, set upon the young youth,
who was glad thereof, the better to make them to know the strength of his arm,
which tired him more then they knew for.

This was nothing to the battle between Don Heleno, and Rosamundi, with his
brother and the Knight with the stars. She reposed great trust (as there was
reason) in her rich weapons, and for that cause, she joined every foot with
the youth, cutting both his armor and his flesh: he went more enraged then a
chafed Bull, to see himself so hurt: for before that he could clear himself
from this Ladies hands, he had received four wounds, which were the first that
he had received in all that battle. The Lady was no less tired and
endangered, then if she had been cruelly wounded: for in parting from him, and
at the arrival of troops of either side, she was constreyned to put up her
Beuer to take breath. Don Heleno came to her, entreating her to go forth of
the battle. Do not desire it, my beloved Heleno, answered the Matrone: for
what pleasure can she which loves you, have in rest, without your presence?
and to be persuaded to this, were a notabid injury: for yet my mind does
serve me to conquer another, Don Heleno: and therewith she pulled down her
Beuer; and calling for a Lance to them which had the charge to give the^, she
turned to her husband, saying, Now see what it is to have you by my side. It
seems that fortune had brought into her presence, the King of the profound
Island, in proportion like to a strong Pine tree: he had a crown upon his
head, and above a thousand Giants in his company. The Dame meant to charge him,
passing through those Giants: and sure, there was never any better encounter
given with a Lance: for hitting him in the middle of the shield, she sowed it
fast to his breast, striking a fadome of the lance through the other side. Her
Knights did much rejoice thereat, holding themselves for happy, to serve such
a Lady. He which most rejoiced, was the Dacian; and to be equal with her, with
a new Lance above hand, he bereaved a Giant of his life, whereat the Lady
was very glad.

Now was he with the stars parted from the Spaniards, both the one and the
other entering among the thickest of their enemies: the which (I mean the
Pagans) with their great number, with their ensigns displayed, drove up the
hill all ye Greek Cauallery to that part where the brave Trebatius was; who
seeing the ill success of the battle, with new grief recommended it to God.
It seemed that his force was two fold increased: for lifting up his voice,
saying, Go to, my sons, this is the most fortunate day for those which shall
die, seeing we shall do it in defense of our country: and if death must come,
let us sell them our lives as dear as we can. O, who had seen Poliphebus his
eyes full of water with his fathers speeches! for all the army seemed little
unto him: he gave not one blow, but that therewith he threw down a Knight. He
saw the gentle Epirabio, who to him seemed to be a man of account, although he
had before overcome him, and made to him, and giving him a fierce blow, laying
hands upon him, he plucked him from his horse, and for all that his guard could
do, he took him, giving good direction for the carrying of him to the City.
There came into that quarter 2. famous warriors, doing many fair exploits
upon the Greeks, which were the Princes of Niquea, and of Calidonia. The
Tinacrian rushed in between them, giving them so much to do, that he made
them both past remembrance. He closed with Astorildo, and trusting to his
Rubican, he ouerbare him to the gr^u^d with his horse breast: he would have killed
him, for he meant to leap upon him, if the sign agreed upon with Astorildo had
not let him, to the end that they should repair to the camp: who winded
his horn so loud, that it resounded, making both armies afraid, saving those
two, the Uncle and Nephew, Poliphebus and Rosabel; who seeing that their people
had somewhat the better, asking their fathers blessing, departed when ye
General sounded. In their passage they overthrew the flower of ye Moors: for
the furious Rubican meets with no body, but he treads them under his feet.
The valiant Nephew Rosabel upon his courser does no less: for with his horses
breast, and with the strength of his arm he leaves no man alive. They were
beheld by all the camp, and known to some, who although they followed the
chase, it was to their own hurt: for these 2. went, resolved to pass any
adventure, were it never so difficill. Rosabel saw certain Greek Knights, at
whose feet were 2. Knights at ye point either to die, or be taken prisoners:
for there followed the^, the 2. Spanish brothers, and ye Princes of Bohemia and
Hungary: each of which had 24. Knights in his guard: whose betters were not in
the army. Lirianaes lover knew them both, which were no less then his Ladies
father and her brother. His blood freezed in his body to see the^: for he
presently imagined how sorry Liriana would be for any hurt that might happen
unto them. The Uncle and Nephew furiously entered, and the troop knowing the^,
gave place, thinking yt they had come to ye same purpose that they were. The
young man being somewhat doubtful of his father in law, leapt into the midst
of ye prease, and in ^oing thitherwards, the Soul^an thinking yt he would
^trike him, as he was a man of high courage, he gave him a strong blow.
Trebatius his nephew skipt aside, letting ye blow pass, and then closing with
him, he took him in his arms, saying, Soft, Sovereign Souldan, I know no
cause why you should so show your self toward your daughter and me, and
therefore you shall see how much you are in the wrong, seeing I could in
despite of all mine enemies kill you, or take you prisoner: but I will not, but
perform ye duty of a son, and so will do ever: and so giving a leap with
him, he set him upon a mighty horse of one of the Greeks. And to do his
kinsma^ a pleasure, Poliphebus had done the like by Lindoriano: and so without
speaking one word more, or attending any answer, they kept on their way: for
upon a little hill they saw the General. The father and son were so amazed
with the gentle acts of the Greek (both which they knew, the one by his device
of the Eagle, and the other by his voice) yt they knew not what to say. Who can
from he^ceforth, my beloved son, bear arms (quoth the Souldan) against those
which have given us our lives and liberties? I have heretofore told your
Majesty (quoth the son) that ye gods do take especial care for the Greek
Empire: and seeing we are now in ye field, we may not return again without
some honorable agreement: otherwise, we shall remain with perpetual infamy.
They had no longer time to discourse: for certain Greeks coming thither,
forced the^ to withdraw them to their squadron. A new band of courtesy, if ye
passion had not blinded them altogether. Great cryings were heard that way
which the 2. warriors went, which was, that the King of Giant land, with above
200. Giants, had taken their passage, where it is incredible what they did: for
giving head to the best horses in ye world, with their shields at their backs,
and their swords in both hands, they did wonders; they were even together: for
they were equal in valor, doing things although lawful, yet pittyfull: for
rushing in between those Giants, they smote the^ down as if they had bin
ordinary horsemen* but they were so many and so strong, that it behooued them
to do more then they did. The invincible Alphebus with his valorous company
came to their aid; who knowing them for his friends and near kinsmen, kept
such a stir, that in despite of them they made way to follow on their journey,
leaving above 40. of those Pine trees stretched all along upon the ground. The
mighty Trapisondan followed them not, thinking that they went about some matter
of importance; but rather assembling the sons of Tituan, he began afresh to
charge the Giants. The King of Giant land had long desired to meet with
Alphebus: and now seeing him present, he went to him saying, Now ye time is
come, Greek Prince, that with thy head shall be restored the damage done to my
blood. He which meant to prevail with deeds, answered him not with words: for
he had scarcely said this, but with a Partisane he smote him over the rich
Helmet. The Emperor of Trapisonda was even at deaths door: for the Pagan gave
him another, which made ye blood gush out at his Beuer. There was never any
Uiper, but might be accounted gentle in respect of Alphebus: for before that ye
Moore could again lift up his cruel club, he was come close to him, and with
both his hands smote him upon the crown of gold which he ware: he smote it
in pieces, and a great part of the Helmet he cut from it, leaving him both
sore wounded and disarmed: he came again with another, which did wholly
perfect the victory: for hitting him there where he was disarmed, the one
half of his head he smote to the ground, leaving him dead and on horseback.
Thither came so many for revenge, that the noble Greek had been in danger,
had not Bramidoro and his friend Brandafidel with Tefereo come to his aid: for
to the noise came Brauorante, overthrowing more Greeks then the wind does
leaves in Autumn. There began a brave battle, for the Greek desired it, and
the other was ready to die for it. By this time were the two famous warriors
come to the little hill, Poliphebus, and Rosabel meeting there the flower, not
only of the Camp, but of the whole world, Claramante, and Claridiano, with
the fair Archisilora. There was great joy at their meeting: for they did
reciprocally love extremely, and not without great grief they beheld the
success of the battle: for although that particular men did prevail, yet the
multitude of the rascal Moors was so great, that they gat ground upon them,
although that at Sea the famous Astrusio sped better: for therein he was the
most expert in the world.

For as being better of sail, with his greatest vessels he bare toward ye
South, where, with a fine Southeast wind, which blew a fair gale, haling their
Tackles close aboard, they weathered the enemies Fleet, and coming hard
aboard them, they cast so much wild fire into it, that they set certain
ships on fire, which they left burning in a light flame, with such a mortal
slaughter of men, as cannot be imagined: for as the wind from the shore was a
help unto them, coming close aboard the enemies ships, they fired the
greatest part, and the best rigged and appointed in the Fleet: and but for the
loss by land, it had been great pleasure to have seen them: but that which
made them most to wonder, was, to see come from the South with both sails and
Oars, a great Fleet, which drawing near the shore a little beneath where the
battle was fought, upon a sudden landed so many men, as exceeded the number
of two hundred thousand, with above thirty thousand mighty Giants. They saw
them divided into two battles, and that the one over the valley toward the
City, went in ye manner of a Crescent, without charging Lance, or assailing
any body, gathering together those which were dispersed over ye fields. As the
Sun was then at the highest, shining upon their armor, it was a fair sight
to behold: the other battle wherein there seemed to be a Chariot triumphant,
drawn by twelve Elephants, took the lower way. Both armies were much troubled
herewith: for they well saw that to whether party this should lean, there the
victory was certain. Now is there need of your horses swiftness, and the
valor of your arm, said the Captain Oristoldo: first to the son of
Garrofilea, and then to the unknown Claridiano, who obeying the commandment
of the brave and discreet Captain, answered, Let it be as it shall please
you: but it fitteth better for our business, seeing that they are friends,
that we should at our pleasure sack their Camp: for I have to day a great
desire to steal some Ladies, or at the least, if I miss thereof, that
ensign, which is set yonder in the side of the little hill: for they shall not
joy at our losses. And therefore, valorous Prince, (with your favor) I will
win it, and with my own hand will give it to the most fair and ungrateful
Lady of the world, in the behalf of the most faithful Lover therein, and
worst rewarded. Herewith they descended down the hill, far more swift then
thought.

The exployts which were done in this journey, are not to be written in so true
a History as is this, which I follow: for there were no four Knights of the
most valiant in all the Camp, that durst to stand two blows: for a stone does
no more easily strike down the tender ears of Corn, then their swords did
fell those Infidels. They threw to the ground above two hundred, not wounded,
which had been a greater harm, but stark dead. The furious Giants which
opposed themselves against them, could not stay them in their journey: for
against them, like the lightning, finding some resistance, they showed
themselves more furious. As they were perceived to mount upon the side of the
little hill, some from the Imperial Standard came to their relief, among which
were the sons of Rosabel: but both one and other came too late: for the
furious Claridiano, much stronger then a thunderbolt, rushed in among the
flower of the Almaines, which had the guard there.

The blows which they gave, nor the Lances and Darts which they hurled, could
not defend them: for without lifting up his sword, he assailed him that had
any, striking him down with his fi^^s, with greater force, then the hungry
Tiger does the heardes in the mountains Rifei. He was assailed by many, but
there were above twenty Knights which took his part, which before had known
him; with whose aid, and the help of the famous Poliphebus, in the sight of
both Camps, he took the Standard, which was the richest in all the army. They
crossed the Camp (although with much ado) which did encourage those which
were overcome, to see the Pagans Standard in the hands of the Knight with the
Ladies. They came to understand of the army which was arrived, and seeing by
the wauing of their colors, that they were Greek ensigns, without longer
stay, holding now the victory on either side for certain, in the twinkling of
an eye, they came to the place: where the General with his friends stayed for
them, glad of the exploite which they had done: and the courageous young man,
taking the ensign in his hand, delivered it to his Lady, saying, Although that
it be a presumption and apparent error, valorous Lady, I bestow this Standard
upon your beauty and valor: but seeing it is done, and that I have gotten it
in your name, my ouer-boldnesse is excusable. Upon some other more worthy
(answered the Lady) I would you had bestowed it: but coming from you, none
will refuse to receive it (as from the best Knight of the world) and I will
this day be Standard Bearer to all this company, to charge into the Camp,
for it now grows somewhat late. And setting upon those which are come to the
Camp, it will be their whole overthrow to see themselves assailed by so many:
for there is nothing that puts men in such fear, as to see before their
eyes, their goods and friends consumed with fire. And presently they took
their way down the hill, until they were out of sight of those of the Camp,
who were busied with beholding the great army, which was newly arrived. The
six valorous Princes came to the Ambuscado, where Florisarte joyfully received
them, and with all speed put their people in order. What followed and who it
was which came, shall be declared in another Chapter.

CHAP. XXX. How the mighty Andronio, Lord of the great Tartaria, came to aid
the Greeks, and of the end of the field battle.
HOw highly gratitude (most excellent Prince) is to be esteemed, it shall be
needless with many examples to amplify, having one in sight, as the coming
of the famous Tartarian, who as he ever had been a friend to the Dacian
Prince, and to Thorismundo, as in the first and second parts was declared, who
in his country hearing of the wars which the Romans made, determined to
come to their aid, with the greatest power that he was able* he levied two
hundred thousand men, and thirty thousand Giants, with which (for they were
both valiant, and expert in the wars) he purposed to aid his friends: he
came thus late, because he thought that the war had been in Dacia, whither
he went, and there understood of the fierce proceedings of the greatest part
of the world. He came in good time, and was not a little glad thereof,
especially when he saw that the Greeks had the worse, imagining that his
succors would be the better esteemed.

In coming to land, he divided his troops into two battles: and with the one
he sent the mighty Prince Daristeo, with 15000. Giants; who taking his fathers
blessing, was accompanied with those proud Giants, whereof, 100. had charge of
his person, which was armed with ye most co^^ly armor in the camp: for it was
set with stones of great price; and in some places, with exquisite workmanship
were set great Carbuncles, which when the Sun did shine upon them, bereaved men
of their sight. There was no goodlier show in all the camp; for he was a very
youth, not yet 15* years old; but matched the Greek Princes in valor. Of his
standard, which was of the color of his Armor, which was Lion-colour, 50.
which were the flower of all the Giants had the guard, which presumed to defend
it against has the camps. As he took the way about ye camp, he might well
see the estate of the battle. He hasted to come to the port of Mars his Castle,
where all the Ladies were: for he perceived that the Greek Caualiery gave
back: and to get before them, he hastened his march, to the end that with his
aid they might be encouraged, coming at the instan^, that the ramer of humane
hearts, the son of Venus, attended his coming: for passing before their
windows, that the Ladies might see, and be seen by him, delighted with his
bravery, and the more, for that he came in their aid, he looked by chance, and
saw his life, enclosed in a sweet death: for as Rosabella the daughter of
Rosacler did shine like the Sun at noone-tide, he could not resist the beams
which came from her beauty, but that he must yield, giving her his soul in
exchange, for the pleasure which he conceived in beholding her: neither did
she so escape from his bravery, but that she thought him to be one of the most
gallant youths in the world (which in deed was true.) With this new alteration,
marshalling his troops, he stayed, very joyful to see himself by his fathers
direction so well employed* who wheeling along the bottom of the valley, had
placed himself right over against the flower of the Parthians, which were
those, which of all others had done most harm in Grecia. In the triumphant
Chariot they thrice sounded three great Clarions, so loud, that the noise was
heard over all the fields. As they left, the mighty young Daristeo stayed no
longer, but with the greatest courage of the world, casting up his golden
trunchion, taking a great Lance in his hand, he turned about to behold his
Lady, which to him seemed now more beautiful then before. I know not how to
express the noise which he made when he gave the onset: for it seemed that
all the whole frame of heaven and earth would have suncke. At the first
encounter they threw to the earth above 30000. for as those fierce Giants went
in the vaunt guard, there was no defense against their arms; for they were the
total confusion of the Pagans.

The fierce young man having well employed his Lance, drew out a rich sword,
wherewith he began by the deeds which he performed, to resemble Hector of
Troy: for he gave no blow, but overthrew a Knight, and sometime, both horse and
man. Herein did Bemboes wisdom appear, providing for either party: for
against this young man came Brufaldoro with all his people, who had not yet
charged: but his valor could not serve the turn: for the Tartarians, to win
their Princes favor, fought valiantly. Both Captains met with their swords
aloft. The blows which they gave were cruel, for they saw the stars within
their Helmets. They came again with others, which made the blood to gush forth
at their visors. Then they advanced themselves, beginning one of the most
perilous battles of the world. The Affricane was more accustomed to labor:
but the young man, being in his sprouting youth, and being newly wounded with
love, was so ready to strike and retire with his well made horse, that he made
the Moore sweat drops of blood. Never was man seen so furious: for perceiving
that he was none of the Greeks, and to see him so valiant, it put him out of
his wits. This fight lasted but a while, for the armies coming to join,
made them to part, each of them going where was most danger, the better to show
their valor. But the Mauritanian had a mishap: for as he charged in among
those Giants, working wanders, at the last being so many and well angered, they
^lue his horse: he leapt from him like a Bird, and on foot he began to defend
himself so valorously, that no man durst come near him, until that they
seeing him somewhat wearied with the Lances, which they darted at him afar
off, then those furious Giants drew near, putting him in such a straight, that
he was out of breath upon his knees in the ground.

But the dead bodies which he had before him, were as good as a Rampart to
defend him, especially against horses, so as they could not trample him under
their feet; and so he prolonged his life: which had been but a while, if the
most strong Brauorante had not come to part the affray, who like as the Sun
parts the clouds, even so made he a lane through his enemies: some he troad
under his feet, others he slew with the sword, and those which came nearest to
him, he defeated with his fist.

He saw from his high horse, his brave competitor, and being able, would not
leave to give him assistance, which he esteemed to be nobly done, which in
deed was very worthy.

At his coming, he bereaved four or five of them of their lives, and leaping
from his horse, he said, Courage, King of Mauritania; for Brauorante being
here, there is no cause of fear, for the gods will grant thee life, to los^
it by my hands, the time being expired which we have agreed upon. These words
gave such pain and courage to the most furious Affricane, that with a leap
he came on foot, saying, Because I will not show my self ungrateful for the
help, which thou, proud Knight, have given me, therein giving me my life,
without stirring any one step from this place, I would keep touch with thy
desire and my credit: for my valor is not yet so decayed, that I will give
thee any preeminence. Now to do it (answered the proud Pagan) agrees not with
my honor: but the time will come, wherein I shall make you know the valor of
my person.

The two courageous warriors could pass no farther forward; for the Giants
were so many which came against them, that they had much to do to recover
their horses: but being mounted, seeming to the world to be friends, they began
to keep themselves side by side, so close and in so good earnest, that they
did much harm: but they were but two only, and had lost through the force of
the Tartarians, above a flight shot of their ground, retiring back as far as
the Almaines which led the vaunt guard, with which they began a new stir: but as
they were newly come, and the young man led them, there was no resistance in
all the army against the force where with his standard ma^ched. All this, in
respect of what his father did at his first coming, is nothing: for with the
mighty and tryumphant Chariot, with those with the Elephants, he did mortal
hurt, with so much glittering armor, with such puissance, with such cries and
shoutings, that all the camp was troubled. O cruel Nero, had thou seen
this spectacle, how much it would haae eased thy mind! for presently streams
of blood began to run over all the field. I speak it not without tears: for
the most part of the Almaines and Parthians he tare in pieces.

O cruel Roselia, it suffices that thou wast a Roman, to extend thy wrath so
far, as that thou might see the Greek fields dyed with Roman blood, and
of the Almaines.

Here the Souldan of Niquea seeing his army go to wrack, considered of his
error. Here the Souldan of Egypt repented for coming to his aid, although
another thing grieved him more then this.

The mighty Andronio, upon his Chariot cast his eyes about, to see his two
friends: and their good hap would, that he found them in good time, for they
were in danger: for they had entered so far among the Assyrians, which gave
them so much to do, that the blood flowed out at their Uisors, and had wounded
Rosamundi with a stab. With a great cry knowing them, he en^red, calling them
by their names. His Chariot overthrew above two hundred to the ground, and when
he saw them at liberty, he s^ayed; and lifting up his Beuer, he entreated
them to come up into his Chariot. They presently knew him, for they loved him
as themselves: and they all three leapt up, putting their horses in sure
keeping of those Giants, which took care of them. I cannot in so great a war
spend so much time, as particularly to express the pleasure they conceived in
seeing their friends, but will leave it to their consideration which have felt
the like.

In company they returned to the Camp, making a great slaughter, so as where
so ever they went, the Moors lost ground, the Greeks taking more courage,
seeing such succors, and most of all when they heard them sound in their Camp,
in sign that they were in distress, which was such, that the most part of
those which battered the City, were constrained of necessitte to leave the
battery, to go to succor them.

The brave Earl of Mod^ca and his valiant son, were no small let unto them*
very joyful for the favor which Poliphebus had done the young man, giving
him his own company, for his greater honor. Those of the ancient Tinacria,
did so long and so valiantly detain the Pagans, that the Captain General,
with his courageous companions, might set upon the Camp, although that those
Princes, whose force was to be feared, were left to guard the same, and had
defended it (notwithstanding that they were surprised) had not those Pillars of
humane fortitude led the way, which were Oristoldo, Claridiano, Clarama^te,
Poliphebus, Rosabel, and the fair Archisilora, with the beloved Flori^arte,
who went joyfully, in hope to see his friend Artimio, and also to know his
Lady. As he was put in hope by the letter, the furious Spaniards entered,
being greedy of spoil, doing notable harm: for not content to cut, and
overthrow the Tents, they presently set them on fire, which in a Pater noster
while, was greater then that of Troy.

They are not things to be written, what those seven Princes did in this
journey, for I know not whether I shall be believed or no: for keeping
themselves together, they brought death to those in the Camp, which in the
midst of them were slain and tro^en under foot. In less then half an
hour, they had overthrown all their enemies: they happened all together to
enter a Tent, leaving at the entrance fifty Spanish Knights for a guard, which
would have held it against Mars, which Tent was the Emperors, where waued an
ensign with the Arms of Rome: all the Ladies of the Moors were there
assembled, which were no less fair, then those of the City.

The seven warriors entered, being besides themselves, to see such brave
beauty. At an instant, they all, excepting the fair Queen, put off their
Helmets, putting them out of fear, assuring them, that they should have no
harm, notwithstanding the noise which they heard in the Camp: but it gave
them greater, to see some which they loved better then themselves: for
Eufronisa with the sight of Rosabel, was stricken speechless.

The fair fearful Arbolinda accompanied her in delight. The mighty General
which was not acquainted with Love, became suddenly enamoured: for seeing
Clabela, the daughter of the mighty Assyrian, so fair and so young: he gave
her his heart for a recompense: they were some of those, which dearly loved,
and which endured much, as shall be declared in the fourth part.

The first which spoke, was the beloved Tinacrian, to the fair Eufronisa,
saying, I have travailed with such pain, most excellent Princess, seeing my
self your detter, and upon my word, that I have sought all means to
accomplish it, to bring you to this Knight, pointing to Rosabel, to the end
that you take such revenge of him, as your beauty deserves.

With such hazard to these Ladies, valorous Prince of Tinacria, I would not
that you should have accomplished it, although that therein you have done me a
favor, according to the hope conceived of your valor. There is no revenge to
be taken of this Prince: my grief suffices me, which shall serve for a
punishment for his unkindness. I was never so (worthy Princess) answered
Rosabel: the much which I owe you, binds me to lose my life for your sake.
They could no longer continue their discourse: for the greedy Spaniards made
such a noise, and such shoutings, as though the skies would have fallen.

Let this satisfaction suffice (said the most fair Queen of Lira, putting off
her rich Helmet, whose rare beauty made them all to wonder) until you come to
the City, where shall want no means to favor your cause. And so I beseech
you, in behalf of all these Knights and my self, you will be pleased to come
with us: for so fair a prise is not to be left for any thing in the world: and
more, I being the cause, and only instrument which has ordained it. To many
of them, it was no grief to go prisoners thither, and although that others
grieved, yet perforce they dissembled it. Love took good order herein: for the
fair Arbolinda, seeing her beloved Prince Florisarte of Argentaria, was glad
to go in his Arms, and Clabela, with Oristoldo, which was life to the young
man.

Eufronisa at length came to see her self in the Arms of her beloved
Britanian, as though that she had never been there before. Claridiano took
the Sophie his daughter, Claramante the kings of Fenicia, Poliphebus ye
Souldans of Egypt: all the rest which I leave out, whose beauty was great, the
Spaniards took, so as they departed with the most rich booty of the world,
which were sixteen daughters of the chiefest Princes in the army, with a
sister of Bemboes, very young, whose beauty in her time caused no small
troubles.

There was much to do to get the greedy Spaniards out of the Camp, until
that they saw their Princes go pestered and loa^en with rich spoils up the
hill, at which time rescue came from the Army, but it was too late: for they
had already made their boot, and put the same in safety: for having the hill
at their backs, they would have defended themselves against all the army.
These warriors descended at that point, which leads down into the valley,
on which (...) the City was not battered, for the strength thereof. There they
entered with their pray, a better then which, and without bloodshed, Alexander
never took with all his Monarchy, neither the famous African, much more
victorious.

The news was presently known in the Army, where the battle was fought of
the taking of these Ladies, which was an occasion to encourage the Pagans. O
who had seen the mig^tie Bembo, the redoubte^ Brauorante, with the brothers of
the Wood, with this ^n sickle news! They fought not like men* it is not to be
imagined what hurt they did: fourteen Knights of the Greek Emperors chamber,
by their hands lost their lives, (...) a number which were trodden under foot
and wound ^^ but yet they had the worser: and although that the Princes were
absent, that was no hindrance to the victory, which they had wholly ended, had
not the warlike Sarmatia, and Bembo his mighty cousin come to their aid, who
seeing him fight so desperately, came to him saying,

In such times, valorous Captain, you are to take order, not with your
disliking, but with fortune, which declares it self for your enemy: for I
see all the Army at the point to be lost. The Camp is spoiled, the Sea died
in your blood, so as there is no remedy, but to take this blow with patience,
and know* that it comes through the small equity of your cause, which was
great, to covet those spoils which the heavens had prepared for the British
Prince. Look well to it, for you ought to give over a thousand battles
whatsoever, rather then to give cause of offense to your Lady, whom you make
show to love so much: and seeing that she is not able to do you pleasure, put
me in trust, and I will so employ my self, as shall be to the contentment of
all.

The discreet Lady had taken off her Helmet; and thereby the Captain knew
her, who well considering, that what she had said, was wrought by the Almighty
hand, and preserved for some great Christian, he put the matter in the
Princesses hands, willing her to do as best pleased her: although that being
so many, which hold themselves agrieued, it will be a hard matter to obtain
any peace, in the midst of such a tempest, I desire nothing, but that some
occasion may be offered, wherein I may be able to do Liriana any service.
Leave this charge to me (quoth the Lady) for I will obtain it of those which
can do most in this war.

She took so good order, that she persuaded the Souldan of Niquea to peace,
seeing how much it concerned him, seeing he thereby should recover such friends
and kinsmen. She obtained the like of the Emperor of the Romans: and all
perceived, being of the losing side, that it better fitted with their
Nobility, to offer them peace, then when they had the better of the war. And
as of these men depended the command of all the rest, and the new enamoured
Oristoldo agreeing herein for the love of his Lady, with all haste the
retreite was sounded between both armies, that valiant Lady being the
occasion of all that good: they were parted at an instant (for it behooved them
that were overcome, seeing it was for their good) and the others, to please
their Princes, sheathed their swords.

The Pagans would not that night enter into the City, because they would take
order for their hurt men, and to bury their dead, which were so many, as made
all men amazed thereat: from the City they sent many dainties to the Camp,
which were not a little esteemed, for the want which there was thereof in both
Camps. There was as great joy, as though there had been no such slaughter.

All the Greeks awayted the morning, to go forth to receive the Moors: what
passed, shall be declared elsewhere: for certainly with just reason he may
be weary, who has ended a war so cruel as was this.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Princes of the Camp entered into the City, and of the
feasts which were made them: and the Marriages, which were contracted for the
confirmation of the peace.
SO sweet is peace (most excellent Prince) that Dion said, that a man was to
fight a whole year, to enjoy one day of peace: it is so pleasing a good, that
it cannot be valued, being so highly extolled. So said he which desired it,
as Aristophones: That it grieved not the maimed man, to eat his bread poorly
in peace, although it had proceeded from a cruel war.

Well did the famous Bembo understand that, when he so easily yielded to all
that which the Princess of Lacedemonia required, who the better to make her
doings more famous, had spoken to the most principal gallants, to the end that
the next day they should in her company go forth (as with her which had ended
that which seemed impossible) to receive the Pagans. They were all content to
please her, seeing that therein she had done the like by them. The next day
with new beauty, not with any bloody color, the Sun showed himself,
hastening his course to behold so much bravery as there was among those
Gallants, which by that time were gone forth of the imperial City in a well
marshalled squadron, all light, with their swords only, with such costly
attire, as a man would not desire to see more in all his life time.

Between Claramente and Claridiano, went the fair Sarmatia, armed with most
rich Armor, which Lirgandeo had given her, without any Helmet, and in stead
thereof, a colored hatte of the color of her Armor, with such costly
workmanship, that the price thereof could not be valued.

In the midst of her breast (for she bare no Shield) she ware Peace painted
so at life, that it was very pleasing to behold it, with these words: The name
of peace is passing sweet,
Which to obtain,
We ought to take pain.


She had so good a grace, besides her beauty, that all men rejoiced to see
her.

By that time began to come forth of the imperial Pauilion, those mighty
Monarchs, the Souldan of Niquea, and the Roman Emperor, Constantius, with the
Souldan of Egypt, and the rest of the mighty Kings (inhabiting thereabouts,
which came to this most sumptuous sight) being in all above thirty. There were
never seen so many together, nor that commanded so many countries, in coming
so ne^re that the one might see the other, the warlike Lady said,

Sovereign Princes, and valiant Knights, because you shall know how much the
Greeks do esteem of the peace granted on your behalf, they commend them
unto you, praying you to accept of their City at your service, wherein they
will show you (in doing you service) that, if they fought, it was but to come
to enjoy this day: there is nothing sweet, but what is gotten with pain,
which seeing it has been between both Camps, it is reason that they both
should enjoy that which is redounded thereof. Ualorous Lady, answered the
courteous Bembo, although it were but to be delighted with your valor and
discretion, after so many tempests, they were all employed, and we will accept
of the favor which those Princes offer us, entering into their City, from
whence it will be more hard for them again to put us out, in peace, then in
open war. They all took their way toward the City, where was nothing to be
seen but Knights and Ladies, the sight where of exceedingly much pleased the
Pagans.

I know not how, discreet reader, I am entered, neither the middle, nor ending
of these entertainments: for even to imagine it, is as much as for me to wade
through the swollen Sea drie-foote. Who is able to describe what Bembo felt, when
the fair Liriana came to speak to him, saying, I never thought, famous
Prince, that your arm should have wrought me so much displeasure: but now to
content you, I will requite you, praying you to dispose of all: for although I
have gone with you in the opinion of a tyrant, I will draw you from that by
experience. The young man could not suddenly answer her, until that fear
was past, and then he said, Most excellent Princess, I ever thought that your
beauty would one day come to take compassion of my grief, but not to remedy
it: I never pretended, but that all the whole world might know, of what power
my sorrow was: and if I came to this war, I was forced thereto, to the end to
enjoy the sight of you.

Let those old quarrels proceed no farther (said the most fair Lindabrides)
for hearing of this Prince his valor, I had affected him without offense to
Claramante: for having him in our power, he shall see, how much worse it shall
be for him to get out of our hands, then from the Greek Princes.

As these things passed, it was a life for Bembo: for it seemed to him that
fortune would turn to favor him. The excellent Sarmatia had made such haste,
and taken so good order, that she had procured for Bembo, no less then for
Rosiluira, which was, to give him what he desired, and her, what she desired,
although that Don Celindo was grieved thereat in his soul, who by Lupertius
his order, who was there present, was made known to be Meridian his son.

He restored to the Assyrian, his son, and to the King of Fenicia, and the
Sophy, theirs: a thing which anewe renewed their content, and for them also:
for they knew that their father Selagio was at liberty: who what he did when
he saw himself free, shall be declared hereafter.

The Emperor of the Romans was very glad, that Don Celindo was so high a
Prince, which was the cause why he gave him his daughter.

The fair Arbolinda, upon the way seeing herself in the arms of her beloved
Florisarte, told him the effect of all her love: he made them to betroth
Rosabel, and because that there should be perpetual peace, they gave to the
prince of Niquea, Lindoriano: the fair Tinacrian, Rosiluira, whom he loved as
his soul: to Astorildoes lot, fell the fair Clarintea of Celandia: and to the
Prince of France Clarindo, the fair English Artemisa: to the Princes of
Bohemia and Hungary, to the one, the fair Troyla, and to the other, the fair
Feniciana, sister to Don Argante.

The mighty Tartarian Daristeo* was so enamoured of the young Rosabela, that
her Greek parents were glad to give her* seeing how much they were beholding
to him, which cut the heart of the Knight with the stars, for thereupon grew
a great quarrel, which lasted long, to the loss of much blood, as you shall
hear.

All these marriages were deferred for the space of fifteen days, because
that Bembo was to be christianed, and Poliphebus and his wife, with Lindoriano
and his wife.

Triumphs are a preparing, which will be reported over all the world. In the
mean time, upon agreement, the Moors discharged their Nauies, remaining for
every Monarch, twelve Galleyes. They set at liberty all prisoners, and
amongst the rest, Epirabio, whom, as he had deserved, they gave Lisiana, which
he so much desired. The great Assyrian, Don Clarisel (by the consent of all
the Greek Princes) married with Floralisa.

In this pleasure, remained all those Princes and fair Ladies, which of all
the world were the flower, when as Selagio framed a new revenge; for herein is
cruelty depaynted in his colors: he obtained so much by ouerturning
Lupertius his books, that he came to find this prophecy: Into Mars his
Castle, no man shall be suffered to enter, but him which mounting upon the hill
Olympus, shall win the passage, and after that he is entered, shall bereave
Mars of his Arms.

He was very glad, imagining that no man could do it: and he stealing away
the greatest part of the Ladies, which were busied with pleasing feastings,
being so hard to set them at liberty, he should remain somewhat satisfied.
In a moment he put it in execution: for taking a Chariot with flaming fire,
which he brought into the hall at Constantinople, so as no man could stir,
with such lightnings and thunder, as though heaven and earth should have come
together: which being past, there were missing the fairest Ladies of the world,
which were Policena, Helena, Aurelia, and Rosabela, with the fair Artemisa:
and of the Moors, the daughter of the Sophie, of the Assyrian, of the
F^nician, Troyla, and Bembo his sister, although but a girl, and the Souldans
of Egypt. All the Court was in an uproar, and there would go to seek them
particularly, Rosabel his sons, and he with the stars, with the great
Tartarian: but in the mean time in came Nauato, who pacified them, saying,
that then to go to seek them, was to no purpose: for he found, that they
should not so soon be set at liberty: for there was a prophecy, that until
that the disguised Lion should hold the Ounce in his paws at the point of
death, who loved him as her self, having wounded her, and set her in such
manner, not springing from thence the furious Basiliske, which may break open
that which is locked, it shall be impossible for the world to see the enclosed
Nymphs. So as, excellent Princes, it behooves you to make merry (although
there be so many Ladies missing) by reason of the peace which has cost you so
much: and because I have much to do, and all for your service, I can stay no
longer, neither see any body, until all be accomplished: and so he presently
vanished, lea^ing both ye Greeks and Moors somewhat satisfied, in that they
knew that they were in some part, whither they might go to seek them. And so
all the gallant youths began to prepare for ye feasts, until that one day, all
the Ladies passing their time merrily with their Gallants in the midst of the
great hall, with all those mighty Princes, discoursing of pleasant matters, the
famous Brauorante s^ung with his own honor, rose up, and began in this manner:

CHAP. XXXII. How the redoubted Brauorante required the brave Brufaldoro to
perform the challenge past and agreed upon, and of the cruel battle which
was between them, with that which followed.
A Touch in honor (most excellent Prince) is of such force, that there is no
pleasure taken in any thing, until that it be defaced, or the breach
repaired: we have an example hereof in the most mighty Brauorante, who being
stung with the sight of his fathers Arms in another man's hands, it made him
stark mad: and it was a sufficient pain, since he felt not how great it would
be to him, to see Floralisa married: but his wits were so troubled with this
grief, that it gave no place to feel any other, which he plainly discovered:
for nothing regarding what coffeehouse he should give therein, in time of
so much content, he stood up and said,

The gods are my witness, Sovereign Princes, what pleasure I conceived, to
see you reconciled for so many years, and that after that you have showed the
heights of your displeasure, it ends in such joy, so fixed, that it is
needless to fear that fortune may alter it.

In general, we are all victorious: for if the Greeks may glory in that
name, the Pagans may also wear garlands of green ^ke: but in particular I
alone cannot joy in this name, although that for some respects I have so much
deferred that, which ought not to be endured for a minute: and how can it be,
that I should live contented, seeing my fathers Arms in the hands of
Brufaldoro, so much defended by the Greeks, that therein they have bound me to
do them service so long as I live? and having twice given over the battle,
for the love of my Lady Floralisa (and a hundred would:) but she deferred it
until the end of these battles: and seeing that they are so well ended,
there is no reason why it should be any longer delayed: for it is a great
stayne to my honor, and much for this King to have challenged me. And
heerewith the Barbarian gave an end to his discourse, remaining so furious,
that all men marueyled at the order which he observed in his challenge.

The brave Brufaldoro stood up, and with that fierceness wherewith the heavens
had endued him, he said, I would, Brauorante, long since have accomplished thy
desire: but in time of such joy as this, to trouble them with new wars after
so many past, it is rather a sign of pride, then of any thing else: and
because thou shall know, that if I took those Arms, I mean to defend them,
to morrow I will in the place fasten them to a Lance, from whence if thou
take them not, it will be for want of that valor, whereof thou so much
vauntest.

The Pagan leapt out, crying, It is to be delayed no longer: for there is time
enough betwixt this and night to chastise thee.

The brave Affrican had set upon him, had not the most mighty Tinacrian stepped
between them, at whose request it was deferred till the next day. It was a
marvelous thing to see; for before that Titans Messengers were departed from
their logdings, the place was all full of people, which attended the sight of
the horrible battle. As they were courageous, so were they both desirous: and
it seemed to be one of the most sightly battles of the world, and with much
reason: for therein were few that could match them.

All the Greeks discoursed of the success thereof, but durst lean no more to
the one then the other, not to disgrace either, although that in secret, some
more affected Brauorante, for that which they had seen him do in those wars.

When Apollo began to show his golden locks bathed in the Spanish seas, all
the Court began to stir: some set up tables: others, scaffolds: there was
nothing in the place, but was put to use.

Then came forth the Greek Ladies, so fair, that if the Sun had not taken
care of those warriors, he could have taken no benefit of the counsel which
he gave to his son, it would so much have troubled him to see so much rare
beauty together, seeing that he only for one, left his aboade in the heavens,
living in a rude office, and held it for greater glory, then in his rich
Chariot to compass the heavens, who seemed to stay, which was for that, that
at one side of the place, the two famous warriors presented themselves: with
the one, came all the Affricanes: he would not have his arms brought to him,
for he came in with his Beauer down, and with his Lance in his hand, with so
angry a pace, that there was great hope of him: he was covered all over with
clean and well tempered steel, enamelled green, with many knots of gold.

In the midst of the shield, which was of the same color, he had his Ladies
picture, when he took her from four Giants, which he slew in requital for
their presumption, with this ^ot in the borders; A strong conceit in a loving
mind,
Makes easy what ever it does find.


He rode round about the place, with a greater grace then Mars, causing at one
side thereof, a great Lance to be set up, and thereon to set up the Arms
which had belonged to Brauorante: to the end, that he who gat the victory,
should bear them away for a Trophe and token of his valor.

He presently took his place, attending the great Scythian, who had challenged
the famous Affrican, if ever there were any in that land.

On the other side came in (in valor) the rare Brauorante, with all the
Assyrians (that were left) in his company.

It was a thing worthy to be seen by the Greeks, to see how prowdly he came
in, all in clean tempered steel, from the head unto the foot: his colors
were Lyon-colour, with many streams of green, and the skirtes gilt.

There was never seen in the world (except it had been a Giant) a greater or
a goodlier Warrior: and in remembrance of the Lady which he had chosen for
his god, he bare her painted so at life in his Shield, as when he met her in
the kingdom of Mauritania, where he fought for her, as in the beginning of
the third part is declared.

The borders were so set with precious stones of such inestimable price, that
there was no fayrer show to be seen. Therein was also a Warrior far in
love, and between the two, these words: Well may he presume to win,
Who first found you,
And by his service bound you.


He came in, with a furious aspect confronting his adversary. The Judges of
the field were the two famous Queens of beauty: for the Affrican chose for
his part, the fair Archisilora: and the great Brauorante chose his goddess
Floralisa, which doing that, which to that office did appertain, appointing
them an equal space for their carriere, arms, and sun, they withdrew them
to one side, to give the more room.

Although this be the last, fair Dames, there is no reason, that he which in
the beginning craved leave to begin this History, and to give it, in the
middle should now leave to repair to your beauties, to give it a pleasing
ending, and to extol the blows of the most famous warriors upon the earth:
for with angry paces they set themselves face to face, and the Sun between
them both staying his course, because they should hasten theirs; which they did
more swift then the fresh wind in Autumn.

None of those which beheld them, durst cast their eye aside, for fear to lose
the sight of the effect of their swift carriere. They performed it (gallant
Ladies) with greater noise, then the raging Sea makes, when it threatens the
highest heavens, and being unable to reach unto them, contenteth it self with
beating the rocks upon the shores side. And although that their Lances had
been Ships masts, they would have broken them in small pieces: for they came
more strongly seated in their Saddles, then any rock in the Mountains, and
their Lances being broken into splinters with the force of their encounter,
flew into the air clean out of sight. I believe they flew so high, as to the
Throne where the angry god makes his abode, who did malice their peerless
encounter: they past one by another with a better grace, then he could have
done. They returned in the air with their swords in their hands, with so
fierce a countenance, and so proud an aspect, that the most valiant of the
Greeks cast their cloakes over their faces, because they would not see it, all
their blood of their bodies being retired to their hearts.

And seeing that Claramante was afraid, and Claridiano shrunk aside, what
shall my wearied pen, and my dull short wit, but make an end of this book,
entreating pardon for the faults which are in them all, not looking into them,
as into a work of so tender years; but only into my desire so give content?
But being now entered into more ryper years, I do promise the fourth part: in
the which, an end shall be given of this terrible battle, and also of the
love of the unknown Greek, with the noble acts of the sons of Eufronisa:
and also of the Knight with the stars, with the mighty Daristeo: for the
things which they did in seeking the Ladies, were wonderful to the world,
which does anewe encourage me to treat of their loves, which were not
comparable with the Queens of Lira.

Wherefore (worthy Ladies) excuse my errors, and my so abrupt giving over this
History: whereof if ^ may be assured, I shall begin it with courage, only to
give you contentment.

FINIS.

