Short questions and answeares, containing the Sum of Christian Religion.

Deuteronomy. 6.6. 6. These words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart:

7. And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk
of them, when thou tariest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

LONDON. Printed by John Dawson. 1623.

These are the orders which I have seen observed in a Christian Gentleman's
house, to the profit of his ho^sholde, example of others, comfort of Gods
chil^^en, and honor of God.
WHile they had a minister the whole household met at the Church twice every
Sabbath; and once every week day: but since the restraint of their minister,
they meet every morning in the week day in the parlour, where their master
kneeleth down with them, and prays using these prapers following.

The confession of shines, with morning prayer for private householders, for men
before their labor, for the Church, the Realm, the Queen, and Magistrates,
the Lords prayer, and confession of faith, all which prayers are in the book
of common prayer.

If he be from home, or sick then does his Steward, or some such like of them
say those prayers.

After prayers the household departs either whither necessity of their
offices call them, or whither delight in honest ^xercises for recreation does
carry them.

Before prayer meditate of these places.
They shall call upon me, Pron. 1.28.
but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

29 Be (...)

them to the former excess of riot, say you, and perform with Joshua. 35.17.
We and our households will serve the Lord. And you, O Lad^es; mistresses and
dames, say every one of you with Hester, I and my maids will do the like.
Hester. 4.16. And howsoever the world condemn you, the Lord will reveal
himself unto you, power his blessings of knowledge, of peace, of religion, of
good rulers, and will continue the same unto the remnant of our children and
posterity, which shall come after us, which he grant for his Christ's sake.


