A MANVELL Or brief volume of Controversies of Religion between the
Protestants and the Papists: wherein the Arguments of both sides are briefly
set down, and the Adversaries Sophismes are plainly refuted.

Written in Latin in a brief and perspicuous method by LVCAS OSIANDER, and
now Englished with some additions and corrections.



At London Printed by Humfrey Lownes. 1606.

TO THE READER.
AS their part is the chiefest in defe^ding the truth who do sifte the full
state of Controversies, explicating the question, maintaining reasons for the
truth, and answearing the opposite arguments at large, as the nature of every
one does require for the full settling of men's judgments, who with singleness
of heart desire to be thoroughly satisfied; so is their labor requisite also,
who do contract those larger disputations into a brief and compendious sum.
For it helps the memory, in calling to mind that which has been read in
larger discourses before; it furthereth the judgment, by giving grounds of
arguments and answeares, which may afterward by the learned Reader be further
enlarged by his own meditations as occasion shall require: it may serve for
some good taste in the knowledge of controversies for such as have not the
leisure and other opportunities and means to read the larger disputations; and
lastly being comprised in a small volume, it may easily be carried abroad, if ^e
desire to read such things, where we cannot have not the greater volumes.
Which reasons moved our Author to pen this brief Manuell in a perspicuous
method, and it were to be wished that some of our Country men, who^ God has
furnished with judgment and other necessaries for such a purpose would endeavor
to do the like in our vulgar tongue, in this brief and plain order, In the
mean time the translation of this present work shall be, I trust, neither
unprofitable nor unwelcome. Some things are altered, which I judged might be
offensive, or otherwise hinder the Reader; but they be such and no more, than,
I hope, who so shall compare the translation with the Original with
indifferency, will confess there was reason to do so. Some things also,
where need seemed to require, I have added, and whereas the Author in
testimonies alleged out of the Scripture quoted the chapter only, I have
generally throughout for the ease of the reader annexed the verses also, as the
case required. The censure hereof I leave to the indifferent reader, and
commend the success to God, whose Name be glorified for ever, Amen.

A Table of the Chapters and Questions.
CHAP, (1) Of the holy Scripture, 1 Whether it be insufficient. 2 Whether it
be obscure. 3 Whether it be uncertain or pliable to any sense.
CHAP, (2) Whether the Scripture be to be read of the lay people. CHAP. (3)
Of the interpretation of the holy Scripture. CHAP. (4) Of Traditions. CHAP, (5)
Of the Letter and the Spirit, CHAP. (6) Of counsels. CHAP, (7) Of the Church,
1 Whether our Church or the Church of Rome be the true Church. 2 Whether, it
be to be granted, that there is an invisible Church. 3 Whether the church may
err.
CHAP, (8) Of the Bishop of Rome. 1 Whether Christ have need upon earth of
any Vicar or visible head. 2 Of the power and authority of Peter. 1 Over the
rest of the Apostles. 2 In the rule and dominion of faith.
3 Whether Peter were at Rome, and there instituted an ordinary succession, 4
Whether the Bishops of Rome be Peter's successors, 1 In Doctrine. 2 In Manners,
5 That the pope is Antichrist.
CHA (9) Of free will. 1 Whether unregenerate men can of themselves by virtue
of their free will b^gin their conversion* 2 Whether Original sin have in it
the nature of sin* 3 Of the works of Infidels. 4 Of Grace.
CHAP, (10) Of Justification. 1 Of imputed righteousness, or of the
signification of the word Justification. 2 Whether the grace of Justification
be aequally alike in all. 3 Whether we be justified by good works. 4 Whether
we be justified by Faith alone 5 Whether Paul do deny Justification by the
works of the Ceremonial law only.
(1) CHAP. (11) Of the true conditions of faith. 1 Whether Faith be taken
respectively or habitually. 2 Whether Faith be only a bare knowledge and
assent. 3 Whether Faith be also in wicked men. 4 Whether true Faith may be
void of good works. 5 Whether Faith be informed by charity.
CHAP, (12) Of good works. 1 Whether good works please God, ex opere operato.
2 Of Will Worship in general. 3 Of works of supercrogation or Counsels in
particular. 1 Of Poverty. 2 Of single life. 3 Of Obedience.
4 That good works cannot be communicated to others.
CHAP, (13) Of Renouation or imperfect Obedience. 1 Whether our obedience begun
in this life be perfect. 2 Whether Concupisceace remaining in the regenerate be
a sin.
(1) CHAP, (14) Of the Number of the Sacraments in general. 2 A particular
examination of the five falsely supposed Sacraments. 1 Of Confirmation, 2 Of
Penance, 3 Of Orders, 4 Of Matrimony. 5 Of extreme unction,

CHAP, (15) Of Transsubstantiation in the Eucharist. CHAP, (16) Of enclosing,
carrying about and adoring of the Sacrament. 1 Whether the Eucharist out of the
use thereof be a Sacrament. 2 Whether the Eucharist be to be adored. 3 Whether
the Eucharist be to be enclosed and carried about.
(1) CHAP, (17) Of the Mass in general: whether it be a propitiatory
Sacrifice. 2 An appendix of the abuses in the mass. 1 Private mass. 2 The
wresting of the mass to other affairs. 3 Simonie in the Mass. 4 The mingling
of water with wine, 5 A sink of Ceremonies. 6 The nouelty of their ceremonies.
7 The errors and fooleries of the canon of the Mass. 8 The mass said in
Latin. 9 Mass for the dead.

CHAP, (18) Of Communion under both kinds. CHAP, (19) Of Purgatory, 1 Whether
there be a purgatory. 2 Whether the dead be relieved by the suffrages of the
living.
GHAP. (20) Of Invocation of Saints. 1 Whether Latria be given to Saints in
popery. 2 Whether Saints be to be prayed unto, 3 Whether Papists commit
idolatry in worshipping of images,
CHAP, (21) Of the Vow of single life in ecclesiastical persons 1 Whether
marriage be a state, that defiles a man. 2 Whether single life have any
prerogative in Gods sight before marriage. 3 Whether it be in a man's choice to
vow single life.
CHAP, (22) Of the errors of popish fastes. 1 Of choice of meats 2 Of the
tying of fastes to certain and set times, 3 Whether fasting be meritorious 4
Of the fast of Lent. 5 The keeping of fastes is more straightly urged by the
Papists than the keeping of Gods commandments, 6 Mockeries in popish fastes. 7
The judgment of the holy ghost of the fastes of hypocrites,
CHAP. (23) Of Repentance, and of the errors, which the papists bring into
this place of Repentance, 1 Of the merit of contrition. 2 Of the sufficiency
of contrition, 3 Of popish satisfaction. 4 Of omission of faith. 5 Of Auricular
confession, (2) Conclusion,

A Manuell or brief volume of Controversies, between the Protestants and the
Papists.
CHAP. 1. Of the holy Scriptures.
The holy Scripture alone is the Judge of all controversies which arise in the
Church, and the most certain rule of truth.

REASONS.
THE Prophet Isaie sendes us in

Christ in the controversy of his person

Saint Paul greatly commends the holy

The Citizens of Beraea judged of Paul's Sermons and opinions out of the
Scriptures;

Christ answered out of the Scriptures to the questions of the Pharisees.
Matthew, 19,

The Apostles confirmed all their assertions out of the Scriptures, as did also
the Evangelists. the Messiah, out of the writings of the Prophets. So Peter
also proves out of the holy Scripture, that Jesus is the promised Messiah,
the Savior of the world. Acts, 2, 25, etc. And Chapter, 3. verse, 18, etc.
and Chapter, 4, verse, 11, 25, etc. and Chap. 10, verse, 43, Stephen fights
against his adversaries, the Priests, Pharisees, and Scribes, with the weapons
of the Scripture. Acts, 7. Paul in the controversy of Religion, which he had
with the Jews, prouokes to the law and the writings of the Prophets. Acts, 24,
14, and 26, 22, 27. The same Paul gathered the doctrine of Justification out of
the Scripture Romans, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 10, Chapters. Galath. 3, and 4, Chapter:
and clears the controversy of the person of our Savior out of the
Scriptures. Ephesians, 4. Peter draws Baptism (1, Peter, 3. 21) And other
controuersed points betwixt the Jews and the Christians out of the Scripture
of the old ^estament. The Epistle to the Hebrewesis wholly herein occupied, to
prove the greatest controversy of his time, concerning Christ the only and
true high Priest, out of the Scripture of the old Testament.

The same did likewise the ancient Fathers

The Position of our Adversaries.
The holy Scripture alone cannot be the Judge of controversies.

Their reasons are.
Because it is insufficient, and contains not all things, which pertain to
faith.

Because it is obscure.

Because it is uncertain, and may be drawn either to this or that side.

Hence arise these questions following.
The first question.
Whether the Scripture be insufficient. They affirm, we deny that it is
insufficient: and that for these testimonies following.

These things are written (says John) that attain everlasting life by those
things which are left written in the holy Scriptures: and so the Scripture is
sufficient for the salvation of men.

Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, (says Paul to Timothy)
which are

All things, that I have heard of my Father, have I made known to you. John,

The holy Scripture does m^ke ^he man of God absolute, and perfect to every
good work. 2, Timo: 3, 17.

I kept back nothing, but showed you all the counsel of God. Act: 20, 27.

There can be moved no controversy of Religion, for which the Scripture has
not

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) The Apostles taught many things, which are not written.

Answer, 1.
This is a begging of the question; for this same thing is it, which is denied.
Now a doubtful thing ought not to be proved by an other as doubtful. 2, The
contrary heereto is contained in the places of Scriptures before alleged. 3,
The Apostles should hereby be convinced of unfaithfulness, as having kept back
things necessary to salvation. 4, Moreover, there is extant, not one only
writing of an Apostle or Evangelist, but more: that that, which is not
contained in one, may plainly be seen in other of the Apostles writings.

(2) I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now.
Ioh. 16, 12:

Answer. 1.
It is a fallacy, from that which is said in some particular respect, to the
same spoken absolutely and generally, in all respects: for Christ speaks of
his Apostles not yet illuminated by his holy Spirit; but he speaks not of them,
as being endued with the holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost: That which the
word Now does plainly declare. 2. While our Adversaries argue from the
Apostles not enlightened, to the Church instructed by the writings of the
Apostles, there arise in the Syllogism four terms. 3, Besides, it was one
manner of knowledge, which the Apostles had before the day of Pentecost, and an
other after the receiving of the holy Ghost: therefore these different things
ought not to be confounded.

(3) Other things (says Saint Paul) will I set in order, when I come. 1,
Corinthians, 11, 34* therefore Paul did not write all things.

Answer.
Paul speaks of indifferent Ceremonies in the Church, not of articles of
Religion necessary to salvation: Their Argument therefore (as the saying is)
is from the staff to the corner.

(4) Many things are not contained in the holy Scripture, which are
necessary to faith:

Ans. 1. This we deny. and it is the very thing in question: therefore it is a
begging of the question, 2. Our Adversaries play with the word Faith: for they
mean not a true and saving faith, whereof our question is, but in a large
sense they take the word Faith (unfitly wrapping in the word Faith, every
frivolous toy, long after the Apostles time, as it were yesterday obtruded upon
the Church of Christ): and so from the twofold signification of the word,
Faith: there arise four terms, which hinder that there can be no just
conclusion.

(5) The Scripture says nothing of Christ's descension into hell.

Answer. That is most false: for the Scripture says, thou will not leave my
soul in hell. Psalm, 16, 10. The sorrows of hell compassed me about. Psalm:
18. But that these Psalms speak not of David but of Christ, our Adversaries
themselves cannot deny, seeing the former is alleged of Saint Peter expreslie
in his Sermon of Christ. Acts: 2, 27.

(6) The Scripture says nothing of the perpetual Virginity of Marie of a
certainty. Therefore it is insufficient.

Ans. 1. Be it never so much, that the scripture say nothing at all of the
perpetual Virginity of Marie, yet might it not therefore be said to be
insufficient to our salvation for we are not hereby saved, because we believe
that Marie after the birth of Christ remained a Virgin; but because we believe
in Christ, who according to the Scripture (Isai 7. 14) was borne of a Virgin.
2. The perpetual Virginity of Marie may be showed by the phrase of Scripture
where it says: And he knew her not Until She had brought forth: The word
Until does note also perpetuity: as the Raven returned not until the waters
were dried up upon the Earth. Genesis 8. 7. which Raven yet never returned at
all.

(7) Many things are rightly believed, although they be not contained in the
Scriptures, as the words, Trinity, Essence, Person, etc.

Ans. 1. A thing is said to be contained in the Scriptures two manner of
waves, according to the letter, and according to the s^nse by a good
consequence. Or sometimes the things only, sometimes together with the things
the words signifying the things are expressed also. So the thing of Trinity
and Persons in the Deity, the Scripture expresses Mat, 3, 16, 17, 28, 19.
Although the very words be not contained there 2, We are not heerby saved for
that we use and approve these words, which were invented for a more easy and
plain way of teaching, but for that we steadfastly believe the thing it self,
which is found in the scriptures.

(8) There are many books lost, as the Epistle to the Laodiceans etc.
Therefore the Scripture cannot be sufficient to salvation.

Ans, 1, There are yet remaining other books which are sufficient. 2, S. John
says of his Gospel alone, that it contains all things necessary to
salvation, Ioh, 20, 31,

(9) The Canon of the holy Scripture (which is a thing necessary to salvation)
is not contained in the holy Scriptures.

Ans. 1. The Canon is a thing necessary not of it self, but by an accident, to
wit, because heritickes had forged certain counterfaite books; which if they
had not done, there had been no need of a Canon. 2, The true Canon is the
perpetual rule of truth which is comprised in the Scripture. For therefore
false and counterfaite books are not received, because they contradict the
Scripture and the truth, neither do agree with the authenticke and Canonical
books. 3, And the Church of Christ could (for 300. years almost) discern the
true Scriptures from the counterfaite, before the Fathers had composed the
Canon, and catalogue of holy writ. The Canon therefore is not simply
necessary and is contained after a sort in the Scripture.

(10) He shall be called a Nazarite (Mat, 2, 23.) but this is not contained
in the writings of the old Testament.

Ans, Yes; this is typically spoken of Christ in the person of Sampson. Judge
13, 5. And our Adversaries (if they be well in their wits) will not reject the
types of Christ, set out in the old Testament.

Question 2.
Whether the Scripture be obscure. We deny, they affirm. We say it is plain
for these reasons.

The Law of the LORD is perfect converting the soul; the testimonic of the
Lord is sure, and gives Wisdom to the simple. Psalm, 19, 7, Nothing of all
which the Scripture could effect, especially to the simple, if it were obscure.

The commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes, verse, 8

Thy Word is a Lantern to my feet, and a Light unto my path Psalm, 119, 105.

We have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which you do well, that
you take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place etc. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) Many sayings in the Scripture are very obscure.

Ans. 1. We may not dispute from a part to the whole, saving only particularly;
and of mere particulars no conclusion will follow: 2. Some things be obscure in
the Scripture not of themselves, but accidentally: and the veil that covers
the eyes of the Jews, and other infidels is the cause thereof, the word 2, Co,
3, 15
is not the cause. 3. That which is spoken more obscurely in one place, is
explained more clearly in an other. And so by conference of places, the
clearenes of the Scripture appears.

(2) Saint Peter says that in Paul's Epistles there be some things hard to be
understood, 2. Pet. 3. 16.

Ans. 1. Some things are hard to be understood, therefore not all. Here the
former answer fits this objection, that is, that those things which are
written of Paul more briefly and some what obscurely in one place, are in
other places most fully explained. 2. Peter lays the fault of the obscurity
upon the unlearned and unstable, which wrest and pervert the Word of God. Now
nothing was ever so plainly delivered, which may not be wrested by the
froward to a wrong sense: which is apparent in the outrageous dealings of
Heritikes. Neither yet is the Scripture for that cause to be accused of
obscurity. 3. Over and besides the greek text says not, that either the
Epistles of Saint Paul or the manner of his teaching, which he uses in his
Epistles is obscure; but only thus much it says, that Paul does entreat of,
not only such things as are plain and easy for every one to conceive, but
that he does not let pass, in handling of things necessary to beknowe^, such
things as have in them some difficulty. Which to be so the nature of the
Greek Article En Hois, which cannot answer or agree with the Antecedent En
autais, but with peri Toutoon: accordingly also as Xantes Pagninus, and Arias
Montanus, both of them Papists and Men very skillful in the tongues have
translated this place.

3 In the Scripture are handled many things most obscure and such as cannot be
found out by the wit of man, and to reason seem very absurd.

Ans. 1. They be obscure and absurd to the reason of the natural man, but not
to faith, 2 It is not all one to say obscure things are handled in the
scriptures; and things are handled in the scriptures obscurely. For the^ by the
same reason every explication of an obscurity should be it self nothing else
but obscurity.

(4) The Greek and Hebrew Phrases breed obscurity.

Ans, 1, To them that know not the tongues, they be obscure. Therefore that is
but accidentally. 2, This inconvenience is easily remedied by the knowledge of
the tongues. 3, Therefore the Primitive Church had the gifts of tongues. And at
this day by the singular blessing of God, there are many excellent men, endued
with the knowledge of the tongues, who do fitly and properly expound the
Phrases of the Scriptures.

(5) There be some customs of the former ages unknown unto us, as that which
is said (1, Cor. 15, 29.) of them, which are baptized for dead.

Ans. 1. Some: therefore not the whole Scripture. The argument therefore goes
from a part to the whole. 2, Those things pertain not to faith, but to some
special Ceremonies of the Ancients: which faith is never a whit the worse, if
it know not.

(6) The Scripture handles heavenly and high matters, such as our reason
cannot comprehend.

Ans. 1. By faith we believe the heavens were made, Heb, 11, 3. 2. The
Scripture, as much as may be, descends down, and applies it self to us and
our capacity. 3. Many things are simply to be believed, which in this life we
know but in part, but in that which is to come, we shall know fully.

(7) Some things are handled mistically, as the Revelation.

Ans. 1, Such are not Articles of faith, and therefore we may be ignorant of
them without loss of Salvation.

(8) Some cannot bear strong meat. Therefore in the Scripture some things are
plain and some things are not plain.

Ans. 1. This is an Argument from a particular to a General; on this fashion:
Some things are not understood of all, therefore all the Scripture is to be
accused of obscurity. 2. Because the weaker sort cannot bear strong meat,
the fault is not in the meat, but in their weakness. Therefore here is the
fallacy, whcih Logicians call fallacia accidentis. And the stronger in tracte
of time may expound the obscure things to the weaker.

Question, 3.
Whether the Scripture be uncertain, and pliable to any sense. Our
Adversaries affirm, and we deny it. Because,

If the Scripture be pliable to any side, then it will follow, that either God
could

We have a most sure word of the Prophets

The Word of our God shall stand for ever. most certain, if the Scripture were
flexible.

Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away. Luke, 21,
33. If we must believe this word, then doubtless it must not be flexible,
doubtful, and mutable.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) In expounding of the sayings of Scripture, the best Interpreters and the
fathers of the church do not agree: therefore the Scripture may be drawn
into diverse senses and meanings.

Answ. The Scripture is not the cause thereof, which remains always the same
both for Simil. As if the motion of the stars should therefore be said to vary
and to change for that Alphonsus and P^olomie have not hit upon the truest
motion.
words and meaning: but the cause is the weakness of man's judgment. Whence it
comes, that one understands more than an other, that one has more clearenes
of judgment than an other, that one is more or less furnished, with knowledge
of tongues than an other, or does less diligently compare places of Scripture
together, and weigh the things themselves by their necessary circumstances,
antecedents, and co^sequents, what went before, and what comes after: so then
the Scripture is not flexible, but man's judgment is diverse: therefore let us
choose the better and refuse the worse.

(2) But all Heretics do allege for themselves the Scriptures.

Ans. I answer, 1, as to the former objection. 2, That happens not by the fault
of the Scripture, but the fault is in Heretics, as S. Peter says, for that
they wrest, and offer violence to the Scriptures, haling their opinions into
the Scriptures. 3, Unless the Scripture were certain, and free from
flexibilitie, it could not confute any heresy, therefore it is not uncertain.

(3) The Copies of the books of Scripture might be corrupted by the
Scriueners, and such as copied them out, or by the Jews.

Answer. From what may be, to what is, is no good argument. 2, By comparing of
ancient Copies, as also by the Analogy of faith if any be corrupted, they may
be amended. 3, Again, here is the fallacy, which they call fallacia
accidentis, whereas the Scripture seems to be flexible and uncertain, but of
it self it is not, but by an accident, to wit, through some men's negligence.

(4) But the Hebrew Copy in many places agrees not with the translation of the
seventy Interpreters: therefore it is corrupted by the Jews.

Ans. That disagreeing hinders not the certainty of the Scriptures: for the
translation of the seventy Interpreters, is not of absolute authority in the
Church of God: neither is to be compared or opposed to the Hebrew Bible,
whereto as to the fountain in the diversity of translations, we must ever
have recourse. And who can assure us, that that which commonly goes now a-daies
under their name, is the right translation of the seventy whereas it may
evidently be showed, that a great part of the Latin translation of the Bible
is not Hieroms, which notwithstanding is thrust upon the Church of God under
the name of S. Hierome: for this, the barbarousnes of the Latin translation,
and ignorance of the Hebrew tongue, as also the diversity of the style in
diverse places compared together, do apparently in many places convince.

CHAP. 2.
Whether the Scriptures ought to be read of the Lay People? Our Adversaries
deny, and we affirm it, for these reasons.

Because the Scripture does make a man

The Lord commanded that the King who is a civil person, should read in the
book of the law all the days of his life. Deuteronomy. 17.

The Epistles of the Apostles were written, not only to Bishops and Clergy
men, but to Hearers that they discern between false and true teachers: So
both the former and later Epistle to the Corinthians speaks many things to
Lay men. So likewise the Epistle of S. John, where the Apostle says, I write
unto you little children, etc. I write unto you fathers, etc. I write unto you
young men. I write unto you Babes, etc. 1, John: 2, 12, 13, 14. Peter wrieth to
the Elect strangers dispersed abroad. If therefore Epistles be written to Lay
men, why should they not also be read of Lay men?

The brethren of the rich glutton were Laymen, who^ notwithstanding Abraham
sends

This was foretold by Isay, They shall be all (and so Lay men too) taught of
God. Isai, 54, 13.

We have examples hereof in the Scriptures*

Christ bids all in general, search the Scriptures. Neither did he give this
charge to the Priests alone, but to others his hearers also: Ioh: 5 39.

S. Peter wills all even Lay men too, to be ready to give an answer to every
man that asks

Contrariwise our adversaries reason thus:
(1) The Scripture has many obscure things, therefore the Lay people can read
it with profit.

Answ. 1. Although all things be not to every man plain: yet the people
always find such things, as they may understand. 1, those things, which seem
hard, by often reading become more easy.

(2) The Lay people by reading the Scriptures misunderstood, do easily fall
into heresy, it were better therefore they should refrain.

Ans. 1. If they fall into heresy, that comes accidentally, not because they
read the Scriptures, but because they read them not in such manner, as they
should do, and do prefer their formerly conceived opinions before the
Scripture, and wrest it to them. 2, On the contrary side, good men and well
minded, having been delivered from herisie by reading the Scriptures, have
returned to the truth.

(3) To whom it belongs not to judge of controversies, to them neither does
it belong to read the Scriptures, but it belongs not to Laymen to judge of
controversies, therefore neither to read.

Ans. 1, The Minor or second proposition is most false. 2, Then had the
Beraeans done amiss in reading, and from thence deciding a controversy, then
newely sprung up. 3, Seeing every one is bound to answer to God for himself,
it is needful for every Layman to prove all things, and keep that which is
good. 1, Thessa: 5, 21.

(4) So should the order, which discerns between teachers, and learners, be
confounded.

Ans. This we deny: for a Lay hearer may try and examine those things he
hears by the Scripture, and remain for all that a hearer still: for he does
not therefore take upon him the office of teaching in the church, because he
examineth the things, which he has heard of his teacher by the touchston of
the holy Scriptures. As likewise the Beraeans became not therefore of the order
of teachers, because they judged of the Sermons of Paul and Silas.

CHAP. 3
WHether the interpretation of the holy Scriptures be to be sought for from
the Church of Rome.

This question arose from hence, that the Papists seeing, that we did esteem
more of the holy Scripture, than that we would suffer the authority thereof to
be diminished, and that the letter of the Scripture did manifestly make for us,
did straight change the state of the question, and said, that the question was
not of the authority of the Scripture, but of the interpretation thereof: the
right of which interpretation they make to be so peculiar to the Church of
Rome, that they would bind us to receive any interpretations, that should come
from thence, be they never so absurd and false. But we gainsay them herein,
and reject the forged power, whereby the Bishops of Rome make claim to the key
of knowledge and interpretation, as committed to them alone.

Reasons proving our opinion.
Because the interpretations of the Papists contradict the evidences of holy
Scripture,

Because the greatest part of them are most vain, as for example, that the
eight Psalm the Pope, which notwithstanding speaks of Christ alone, as the
Apostles and Christ himself have interpreted it.

Because they affirm (as by name Cusanus does) that if the mind and opinion
of the Roman

Many times they explain not the Scripture, but wrest it violently and
shamefully to uphold

The gifts of God (such as the interpretation of the Scripture is one) are not
tied to certain to every man as he will. 1, Corinth: 12, ^1.

It is no where read, that the whole Church is tied to the meaning of the
Roman Church,

Contrariwise our Adversaries do argue.
(1) If we believe the Roman Church, that it has conuayed unto us the true
and proper books of the Bible, and not counterfeit and forged, the^ must we
believe her also in the interpretation, which she brings of the holy
Scripture.

Ans. 1. It is one thing to bear witness of the truth of the sacred books, and
an other thing Simil ^t is one thing to acknowledge the Seals hanged to a
Testament and another to expound it contrary to the Teuor of the letter
to expound them, So the Jews are witnesses of the Canonical books of the
old Testament, and yet we accept not of their Talmudicall interpretations. 2,
Moreover the interpretations of the Papists do contradict that same Scripture,
whereof they bear witness.

(2) The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do, Matthew, 23, 2, 3.

Ans. 1, The Pharisees were to be believed, not simply in all things, but when
they sat in the chair of Moses, that is, when they taught the truth out of
the law of Moses. It is therefore a fallacy from that, which is spoken but in
part and some respect, to that which is absolutely spoken. 2, They were to be
hearkened unto, when they taught Moses, but in the mean while Christ said
also, Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees. Now Christ by the leaven of
the Pharisees meant their false doctrine, as S. Matthew expressly witnesses
cap. 16, v. 12. that is, Christ did reject the Pharisees false interpretation
of the Scripture. So then we must distinguish between the scripture it self,
which the Papists handle, and their false interpretation or humane traditions
wherewith they defile it.

(3) God would have the^ punished with death which would not obey the judgment
of the high Priest, Devter, 17, 12.

Ans. 1, Moses speaks not of matters of faith, but of civil government,
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between plague, and plague
(as the words of Moses are, verse, 8) in which matters for public peace sake,
it was necessary there should be some order appointed for ending of
controversies. For the high Priest at that time was the highest Judge, from
whom no man might appeal. 2, It was not in the high Priests choice to judge as
he pleased, but he was tied to the law of the Lord, according to which he
gave sentence: In like sort is the Popetyed to it too.

(4) The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the law
at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, etc Malach, 2. 7.

Ans, 1, Malachie there shows what is the duty of the Priests. But that the
Priests did not their duty the very next words following declare. But you are
gone out of the way, you have caused many to fall by the law, etc. verse, 8.
2, This argument changes the manner of the speech; for the words are a
commandment, teaching what the Priests should do, but the Papists do unjustly
turn them into words of promise, just as if a man should say; God has said,
thou shall not steal, therefore no man steals.

CHAP, 4. Of Traditions.
THE word Tradition often times is simply taken for any kind of doctrine,
whether it be written or delivered by word of mouth. But by the name of
Traditions are such things also meant, which were not written but only
delivered by word of mouth, and so have been from hand to hand conveyed to our
age: These kind of Traditions are of two sorts: Some contain Ceremonies of
nature indifferent and changeable according to the circumstances of place and
time, which though they be not expressed in Scriptures, yet because they are
not contrary to the same, and are retained in the Church as things
indifferent, are not called into question. But there be other sort of
Traditions in Popery, which are contrary to the Scriptures, and whereof there
appears not so much as one step in the Scriptures, (such as are the Canon of
the Mass, Holy water a set number of prayers, holy Candells, and an infinite
number more) which are commended to the World under the glorious name of
Apostolic Traditions, to the observing whereof as being Apostolic, all
Christians are bound, if we will believe the Papists, The question The state
of the question
then is. 1. Whether besides the Scriptures the Apostles delivered some things
by word of mouth only, 2, Whether they delivered those things by word of mouth
only which at this day the Papists bragg of as of, Apostolic Traditions. We
deny both: the former whereof we prove by the sufficiency of the holy
Scripture, which contains all things necessary to salvation. Whereof we have
entreated before: the later we prove by these reasons following.

Because these their Traditions are contrary

Because in Paul's time such Traditions began appears by the words of S. Paul.
2. Thessal, 2, 2. Be not suddenly moved from your mind nor troubled, neither by
Spirit, nor by Word nor by letter as sent from us.

Because it may be proved out of histories, de Inuererum lib, 5, cap, 11, etc.

It is proved by many and manifest reasons,

Such Traditions of men are condemned

1, Because they are in cause (as Christ witnesses) that in the mean time the
Commandments of God are neglected. Mat 15, 3:

2, Because God is worshipped in vain by the doctrines and precepts of men,
verse, 9.

3. Because the Traditions of men cannot reach into the mind of God: for my
thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither are your ways as my ways (says
the Lord). For as the Heavens are higher than the earth so are my ways higher
than your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Isay, 55, 8, 9. Whence it
comes to pass, that those things which men admire for their singular
holiness, do most of all displease the Lord God.

4. Because such plants as are not planted of the heavenly Father shall be
rooted out, Mat, 15, 13.

Because we must rely our selves wholly on the Word of God, in worshipping of

Because the Traditions of men are deceipts deceit, through the Traditions of
men, according to the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, Colos, 2, 8.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do argue.
(1) Brethren stand fast and keep the traditions, which you have been taught,
either by word or by our Epistle. 2, Thessal, 2, 15. Therefore our Traditions
(to wit the Papisticall) are to be received and kept as Apostolic Traditions.

Ans, 1. All the Propositions are particular, and it is such a kind of absurd
reasoning as this: The Apostles delivered some things by word of mouth; we have
some Traditions, therefore our Traditions are Aposto^ike. 2. It is a fallacy
from a part to the whole for when Paul wrote these things, few of those things
which appertain to the Canon of the New Testament, were then written. That
therefore, which Paul meant in respect of that time, when as al were not yet
written, that the Papists understand simply, even of that ^ime, when the Canon
was perfected: when as ^ow we have all things in the Apostles wri^ings, which
are needful to be known for ^aluation. 3. There are four terms in the
syllogism, in the Mayor are understood Traditions doctrinall and Apostolic;
in the minor, forged Traditions, invented long after the Apostles time.

2 Christ did not altogether reject the Traditions of the Fathers where he
says, these things ought you to have done, and not to have left the other
undone. Luke, 11, 42.

Answe. Christ there opposes the strict observance of Moses his law, (not of
men's Traditions) in outward small matters, (as in ^ithing of cumime and mint)
and the neglect of the principal duties of ye first and second Table, both
which should have been joined together and observed, as being both the
commandments of God. This reason therefore (6)
is like a rope of land.

(3) When Paul and Timothy went through the Cities, Tradebanteis, they
delivered, or gave them for Traditions, the decrees to keep, which were
ordained by the Apostles and Elders, which were at Jerusalem, Act, 16, 4.

Ans, 1, It follows not: The Apostles (7)
delivered somethings, therefore the Papisticall Traditions are Apostolic.
There is no coherence in this reason. 2, Paul and Timothy delivered not
unwritten verities, but those things, which were decreed of the Apostles, and
then comprised in writing, and sent to the Church of Antioch. The Papists
therefore dispute from a written to an unwritten Tradition.

(4) Paul says, that he delivered certain precepts to the Corinthians, which
they did well that they observed them. 1, Corin. 11, 2.

Answ. The same answer, which was given to the first objection, fits this too,
that is, that there is no sound proof of all particulars. The Papists should
prove, that those Traditions proceeded from the Apostles, which they brag so
fast to be Apostolic.

(5) The Fathers testify, that certain Traditions came from the Apostles to
them.

Answ. 1. The Fathers many times by the name of Traditions understand such
things, as are contained in the Scripture, according to the sense and meaning
thereof, though not according to the Letter. And in this sense there be in the
reason four terms: the Fathers understanding Traditions contained in the
Scriptures, and the Papists, Traditions not at all there contained. 2, The
Fathers by Traditions Apostolic, understand sometimes, general customs and
rites of indifference, which was in the liberty of the Church to alter as
occasion should require. 3. If any of the Fathers have maintained other sort of
Traditions as Apostolic, then the question is, whether they did well in
accepting such Traditions for Apostolic, which were not Apostolic, neither
did consent with the holy Scripture.

(6) That infants should be baptized, that the Eucharist should be delivered
to women, etc. we have received from unwritten Tradition only.

Answ. 1. The Antecedent is not true: for concerning the former, we have
Scripture that Baptism is needful for all, and that it does belong unto
Infants. John, 3, 5. Mark 10, 14, 15, 16. 1, Corinthians, 1, 16, etc. 2, The
Trent Catechism proves the Baptism of Infants by diverse places of Scripture
Part: 2. cap. 2, quaest. 26. As for the latter, that the Eucharist belongs to
the whole Church, and so unto women, we have Christ's commandment. Math: 26,
26, 27, 28. Mark, 14, 22, etc. Luk, 22, 19, 20. 1, Cor: 11, 26, 27, 28.

(7) The observation of the Lords day, is not found in the Scripture.

Ans. Seeing it is acknowledged by both sides, by the Papists as well as by the
Protestants, that to set a certain time a part for Gods service is a moral
and immurable law, and that the Apostles left to the Church the first day of
the week, which is the Lords day, in Part terti^, ca. 4, quaest: 4.
steed of the seventh day, which the Jews observed, (as the Trent Catechism
proves out of 1, Corint. 16, 2, and Revel. 1, 10:) We ought to acknowledge it
as a precept of God grounded on the Scriptures.

CHAP. 5. Of the Letter and the Spirit.
THE Papists seek themselves an other starting hole (when as they cannot prove
See Fran. Coster in his Enchiridion of Controversies. Cap 1, of the holy
Scripture.
out of the holy Scripture many their Idolatrous and superstitious opinions;)
to say that the Scripture is a dead and killing letter, but the Spirit, that is
the meaning of the Scripture, is contained in the living tables of the heart of
the Church: and that therefore all things ought to be judged and determined not
out of the Scrip: but by the consent of the Church. So, for examples sake,
whereas nothing is found in the letter of the Scripture concerning the
worshipping of Images, that, say they, is to be sought for in the hearts of
the faithful (that is, of the Pope, Cardinals, etc:) Wherein the holy Spirit
has written it, that Images are to be worshipped. As for us we acknowledge no
other Scripture, wherein God does by writing reveal his will, beside the
sacred books of the Bible, and this spiritual Scripture of the Papists we
reject.

Because the holy Scripture, described and comprised in letters, deserves this
praise, perfect: therefore unto There is one manner of Spirit in the outward
Scripture, and another in the inward, which are contrary one to another
concerning the authority of the Scripture. Note here the Spirit of Christ and
Antichrist.
perfection, there is no need of any other new spiritual Scripture.

(2) Because that spiritual Scripture, which the Papists forge, does disanull
the authority of the holy Scripture penned in paper by the instinct of the
holy Ghost. But the holy Ghost cannot be so contrary to it self, as to
commend highly the Scripture by the Apostles and Prophets, and to diminish the
authority of the same by an inward Scripture.

(3) Because this inward Scripture is manifestly proved to be often ontrarie
to the outward: Therefore the hol^ Ghost, if he be the Author of both, should
^^ convicted either of falsehood or inconstanie.

By this means we should it open a wide gap to all errors, whiles euey man
would

Besides, this savors strongly of the error of the Enthusiasts, and
Schweneldians, on

All the pains, which the Evangelists and Apostles did take in penning the
Scriptures,

Contrarily our Adversaries do argue.
(1) The Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. 2, Corin: 3^. Therefore we
are not to heed the Scripture w^tten with ink, but the inward Scripture of
the Spirit, sealed in the heart of the Church.

Ans. 1. T^^t Paul does not speak of any inward or o^tward distinction of
writing, but of the diference of the law and the Gospel, the w^rdes immediately
going before A view of a Doctor* like exposition, proceeding from the inward
writing of the heart,
do show: ^od (says S: Paul) has made us able Minist^rs of the new
Testament, not of the ^etter b^t of the Spirit. 2, So then there are five
ter^es, taking the word Letter in the Antecedent or former proposition,
according to Paul's meaning for the Law, and in the consequent or later
proposition for the whole body of the holy Scripture, according to the Papists
meaning: and understanding the word Spirit in the Antecedent for the Gospel,
and in the consequent for Enthusiasme, or immediate inspiration from God: the
argument therefore hangs together like sand. Now S. Paul calls the law a
killing letter, because that no man can be justified and saved by the law: but
the Law does rather condemn, and spiritually kill. But he calls the Gospel,
Spirit, because the Gospel received by faith, does give the holy Spirit, which
does quicken our hearts create them a new, and stir them up to good works.

(2) I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
etc. Ierem: 31, 33. therefore the will of GOD is to be learned, not out of the
outward but inward Scripture or writing.

Answer. 1.
The Epistle to the Hebrews (cap: 8, verse, 10;) does so expound these words,
that he compares together the constraint or coaction of the law of Moses, to
wit, the involuntarie and enforced obedience, and the renovation of the mind by
the Spirit of the Gospel, whereby the believers, by the Sanctification of the
Spirit, wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, do perform a willing and
voluntary obedience to God (the will of man being set at liberty by the Spirit
of God) and do delight in the Law of ^od, and have no more stony hearts, but
fleshly and tractable to perform obedience unto their Lord. 2, What privilege
soever is granted by this gracious promise, the Pope, Cardinals, and the rest
of that Hierarchy, have no reason to challenge it, as proper to themselves,
seeing the Apostle applies it, as does also the Prophet to all, even the least
of Gods children. They shall no more teach every man his neighbor, saying,
know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest of
them, as it follows in the next words. Ierem. 31, 34, and Heb. 8, 11.

(3) Ye are the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, and written, not with
ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the
fleshy tables of the heart: 2, Corinthians, 3, 3.

Answ. 1. Paul compares the commendatorie letters, whereby some of the fal^e
Apostles did glory in their ministry, and the work it self, which ought to
commend the workman* and shows that he has no need of letters of
commendation, because the effect of his preaching in the Corinthians did
testify, that his Ministry joined with the holy Spirit, was powerful and
effectual. It will by no means therefore hence follow, that there is one
inward, and an other outward Scripture. 2, The contrary does rather follow
hereof, because the holy Ghost was powerful by the means of Paul's ministry,
that therefore it was a mediate and not immediate word, whereby it pleases him to
save those that believe. Rom, 1, 16.

(4) Ye have no need that any Man should teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you all things etc. and you have an ointment from him,
which is holy, and ye have known all things. 1, Ioh, 2, 20, 27. Therefore we
must have recourse not to the Scripture but to the anointing of the Spirit.

Ans, 1, That Saint John speaks of the anointing, which Christians receive
by the preaching of the Gospel, these words do show, Let therefore abide in
you the same, which ye have heard from the beginning, verse, 24. Also, I write
no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment, which ye have had from
the beginning, etc. verse, 7. Therefore S. John does not teach that there is a
twofold Scripture, but declares that they were enlightened by the public
ministry of the Word, and endued with the Holy ghost, that now they do know,
by those things, which they had heard, how they ought to behave themselves in
all things. 2, It is therefore no good conclusion from the public mediate
ministry to the immediate writing of the Spirit, seeing there be four
terms. 3. If such an inward writing had been sufficient, what need had there
bin of John's outward writing?

(5) All thy Children shall be taught of God, Isai, 54, 13. Ioh, 6, 45.

Ans, 1. The Prophet and Christ do speak of the knowledge of Christ, which
should be more plentiful in the new Testament, than is was in the old: but
never a whit of the inward and outward Scripture 2. If they mean an immediate
teaching, then fall they into the absurdity of the Enthusiasts and
Schwenfeldians: if they mean a mediate teaching, let them know that the holy
Scripture is that medium, that means, which is able to instruct us to
Salvation, 2, Timoth, 3, 17. 3. It were strange If the Papists would attribute,
this inward writing and gift of understanding Scriptures, which they claim by
these places to the common lay people among them: and yet all these places are
meant of all the faithful under the gospel, as it is evident by the words and
circumstances of the places cited.

CHAP. 6. Of Counsels.
THE Papists in defense of their errors object unto us the authority of certain
Cou^cells, as sacred, and such as may not be gain said. We willingly embrace
those Counsels, whose decrees speak out of the holy scripture, alleged in
his true meaning: but if any where they swerve from the truth, we think they
ought to be examined by the rule of the holy Scripture, and do believe that no
faithful man is bound to stand to their authority, if they decree any thing
against Scripture. But above all we detest their Idolatrous counsels. And that
which I have said, is built on these grounds following.

We read in the holy scriptures that some Counsels have erred.

1, The Council which was for the condemning of Christ, Mat, 26, and 27. 2,
The Council which condemned Peter and John, Act, 4, and 5. 3, The council
which condemned Stephen, Act, 7. 4 The Council that was gathered against
Certain Counsels celebrated in the time of the ancient Fathers and
afterward, have erred; for example:

1, Many Counsels forbade the Ministers of the Church to marry contrary to
the express Word of God.

2 The Council of Constance admitted the mangling of the Lords Supper.

3 The Trent Council has confirmed Carte loads of errors. So some other
counsels (which for brevity sake. I pass over in silence) have either decreed
false opinions, or have approved them being invented of others before, Which to
be so our Divines have plainly proved in their several Treatises.

Because some Councels disagree, one with See Erasmus in his annotatio^s on the
1, Corinth, 7
no man can deny who has read and compared together the decrees of all the
Counsels. Read but the decrees of Gratian, and thou shall often times find
diverse and contrary Canons concerning one and the same matter, alleged of
him in the same distinction

The Papists themselves receive not all

Many Canons of Counsels are countersaite.

In one and the same Council in diverse copies the words and number of the
Canons

They be men, that are gathered together

Contrarily thus our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) All the faithful were bound to the observation of the Council of
Jerusalem, Acts, 15. Therefore they be bound to keep the councels of Bishops.

Ans, There is great difference between the Council of the Apostles and the
Papal councels. In that there were witnesses without all exception, but in
these, men do meet, among whom there be many unlearned, wicked, in part
Epicures, and such as have sworn homage to the Pope. In the council at
Jerusalem the decrees were made out of the Scripture, but the papal counsels
make constitutions very often against the Scripture. This is therefore a loose
reason.

(2) In the council of the Priests and Scribes, Caiaphas by the holy Ghost
prophesied, that it was better that one should dye for the people, than that
all the people should perish. Ioh, 11, 50, Therefore Counsels speak by the
holy Ghost, and are therefore to be obeyed.

Ans. 1. Although Caiaphas vnnwittingly spoke the truth, that that it was
better that one man should dye then all the people perish, yet the mind and
meaning of Caiaphas was nothing so. But the definitive sentence of the High
Priest and the Council was, that Christ was an heretic, a blasphemer, a
seducer of the People; a wicked man, and such as well deserved the shameful
death of the cross. This was the decree of that council; which if the Papists
will subscribe unto, they shall be reckoned impious, and blasphemous Men. And
by alleging this devilish council they shall gain small credit to their
own, 2, This argument proceeds from a particular to an universal, Caiaphas
minding an other thing, and unwittingly spoke a few true words, therefore all
the decrees of their counsels are simply in all things from the Holy Ghost,
and cannot in any case err, 3. They might with as much truth and better reason
conclude that Southsaiers, when they are sought unto to speak for a reward
cannot speak an untruth, Because that Balaam being consulted with of Balak to
speak against Israel, did on the contrary side by inspiration bless them,
and which is more then is said of Caiaphas could not do otherwise: and
whereas the prophecy of Caiaphas was only in his words, which he spoke in
an other sense, Balaams prophecy was both in his words and his meaning, Numb,
22, and 23.

(3) Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds, which thy Fathers have made,
Pro. 22, 28. Therefore the decrees of Counsels are to be kept.

Ans, 1, We have to deal with Counsels, whose decrees are contrary to the
holy Scriptures, the ancientest bounds of all: Therefore are the Counsels
themselves tied to this precept. 2, This is an argument drawn from the not
changing of ancient things well ordained unto new things constituted the last
day, and that against right too: 3 And this do we at this day against the
Papists: we show men the ancient limits and bounds, which the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles have set; but the Bishops of R^me have overturned and cover
those most anti^t bounds with their newfangled opinions, and humane Traditions.

(4) Which he commanded our Fathers to teach their children, that the
posterity might know it, Psalm, 78, 6, 7. Therefore counsels declare to us
those things which they were enjoined by this commandment to teach their
children.

Answ. 1. There is more in the Conclusion Simil. A Prince bid^ his servant^ be
faithful, therefore none of the can be unfaithful.
than in the premises: for it follows not, God commanded our Elders to
derive the truth to us, therefore of certainty they did so. 2, It is a changing
of the manner of speech, for the Antecedent contains a commandment, the
consequent a story or narration of the fulfilling of that commandment.

(5) Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Math: 18, 20. Therefore the decrees of Counsels are sacred, etc. for they
are gathered together in the name of Christ.

Answ. 1. Here be four terms. To be gathered together in the name of Christ,
is to be gathered according to his word and will, but this they apply to the
companies of them, which decree contrary to the word and will of Christ: 2, It
is a begging of the thing in question, for this is the special doubt, whether
Counsels decreeing contrary to the Scripture, may be said to be gathered in
the name of Christ: for it is not enough in counsels to bragg, and make show of
the name of A protestation contrary to their deeds.
Christ, and to recite the words of the Apostolic Counsel; It seemed good to
the holy Ghost, and to us, etc.

(6) In the assemblies of Counsels invocation is made to the holy Ghost, that
he would be their guide:

Answ. 1. That is done with Idolatrous rites It is as if a man should hear one
ask advice of a wise man, but would not obey his advice.
of the Papisticall Mass, therefore their prai^rs are not heard: nay, such as
their service is, that is Idolatrous, such is the Spirit, which rules them. 2,
They obey not the Spirit, whom they pray unto, neither do they rest content
with his pleasure comprised in the Scripture.

(7) But who would say that so many, so great, and so worthy men could all
err at once?

Answ. 1. The Scripture says, that every man is a liar, therefore it is not a
thing impossible, Psa. 116, 11
that so many and so worthy men should err. 2, We cited before examples of
famous Counsels, which have erred. 3, There is no respect of persons with God.
4, I give thee thanks, O Father (says Christ) because thou have hid these
things from the wise. (Matthew, 11, 25,) 5, Not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise (1, Corinthians, 1, 26, 27,) 6, Only
one Prophet Micha spoke the truth, when in the mean time four hundred false
Prophets consented together in a lie, 1, King, 22.

(8) All herisies at what time soever they have sprunge up, have still been
overthrown by Counsels, therefore this honor is as yet due to Counsels.

Answer.
This is a fallacy, putting that for the cause, which is not the cause, for
Counsels, not as For example so the Sam^ritans speak unto the woman, we do
not now believe because of thy words, but because we have heard him our selves.
Ioh. 4. 42.
Counsels barely considered under the name of Counsels, but as proving the
truth by the word of God, have trodden under foot and ouerthrown herisies Had
the Papists such cou^cells, we would of our own accord willingly give them the
honor due unto them for their ^rue and right alleging and expounding of
Scriptures.

CHAP. 7. Of the Church.
FVrther yet the Papists seek an other shift for the defending of their humane
Traditions and Doctrines; whiles boasting of the name of the Church, with open
mouth they tell us, that the true Church was of old time at Rome, and that the
Bishop of Rome with his band, are at this day that Church; and that the Church
cannot err, and that therefore all whatsoever is delivered unto us from the
Church of Rome, is to be held for most certain and infallible, as being
received from heaven. Here therefore we are to handle three questions. 1,
Whether the Church of Rome, or our Church be the true Church. 2, Whether we
ought to grant, that there is an invisible Church. 3, Whether the Church can
err.

First of al in the entrance we must obserue^ that there may many ways arise
ambiguiti^ in the word, Church. First it does signify indefinitely Ambiguitie
in the word Church.
every Church or congregation and is taken both in the good and bad pa^^ for
any kind of assembly or congregation whence also the Scripture makes mention
of the malignant Church. Secondly, it is taken for the company of them, which
a^ called by the outward ministry of the word and Sacraments, wherein are
gath^red both good and bad. Matthew, 13. Thirdly, it is taken for the
invisible Church, or the company of them, which use the Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments to their salvation, and are truly believers: which also may be
called the company of the Elect. Fourthly, it is taken four manner of ways in
respect of the four fold outward face of the Church. 1, For the most pure
Church of the Apostles. 2, for the Church of the Fathers; wherein there was a
more sincere state of doctrine, than in after-ages, yet it was not altogether
void of superstition. 3, For the Church of Antichrist, which is overflowed
with horrible Idolatry, as with a kind of deluge. 4, For the reformed Church,
restored according to the conformity of the Apostolic Church. A fifth
signification the Papists have made us, understanding by the Church, not a
company of teachers and learners, but the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks,
etc. By observing of these distinctions, we shall detect many stratagems of the
Papists, seeing they play continually with the ambiguitie or equivocation of
the word Church, and in their arguments they bring sometimes five terms. But
now let us come to the questions.

Question. 1.
(Whether the Church of Rome (which at this day blasphemes the Gospel of
Christ, curses and persecuteth the professors thereof) or ours be the true
Church. We deny that the Church of Rome is the true Church for these reasons.

Because they want the true notes, and the definitum, that is the Church.

1. The Church hears the voice of Christ. (John. 10, 27,). Which is revealed
in the Scripture, which the Papists do not hear, and that 1, in refusing it
for their Judge. 2, in making decrees in many things against it. 3, In giving
it but cold and slender commendation.

2. Because they have not the sincere ministration of the Sacraments, and that.
1, in forging new Sacraments. 2, in defiling Baptism with humane
superstitions. 3, in making Monastical habit and state equal to it 4, In
changing the Lords supper into a sacrifice. 5, And in the C^munion of lay
people, in maiming it of the one kind, that is by taking the cup from the
people: they have not therefore an vncorrupt Ministry, and consequently their
Church may not be called a true Church.

Because they have not so much as the

1. Their Church has not unity. 1 Because they strive amongst themselves
about many things* 2, They have not unity by reason of the fourfold face
and condition of the Church before noted.

2. Their church is not holy. because they trust in their own holiness, which
before god is not holiness, but as filthy clouts. Isai, 64, 6.

3. It is not Catholic. 1, Because they have not the consent of the whole
world: for the Greek Church has always dissented from them in diverse points.
2, because they defend not the universal true doctrine of all times, therefore
they neither agree with the Church of the Apostles, nor yet with the Church of
the Fathers.

4. It is not Apostolic, because they agree not with the Apostles doctrine,
seeing very many of their things are not Apostolic, but superstitions raked
together and compiled of sundry Authors. Take for example there of the Canon of
the Mass; and the mangling of the Lords Supper, which was unknown for many
ages, and at length established by the Counsel of Constance. Likewise
Indulgences, the feast of Corpus Christi and other more without number,
concerning which look Polidor Virgil. lib. 4. cap. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, As also the whole. 5, 6, 7, 8, books. But of such like superstitions of
the Roman Church, (that they be contrary to the Scripture) shall hereafter be
spoken in their proper places sufficiently.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) The Church of God has had the name of the Church ever since the Apostles
time: therefore it is the true Church.

Answ. 1. It follows not; It was long ago, Simil. This woman was long since
a Maid, therefore now she cannot be an harlot.
therefore now it is. 2, There is no good argument from the bare name of a
thing to the thing it self. 3, Neither yet do we deny, but that there does
at this day remain some Church in the City of Rome, to wit, of such as be
young children, girls and simple men, which simply believe in Christ their
Savior, and trust nor in their own merits. Neither is it to be doubted, but
that there be some intelligent and wise men in Rome, who with all their hearts
derest the Popes impiety and tyranny. But all these are not that Roman
Church, with the authoririe whereof our Adversaries do seek to oppress and
bear us down.

(2) The Fathers themselves did account the Roman Church for the true Church.

Ans. 1, Here be four terms. For in the Antecedent the word Church is taken
for that face or condition of the Church which was in the Fathers time, in the
consequent for that state, wherein Antichrist does reign Now it follows not,
it was so twelve or thirteen hundred years ago or upward, therefore it is so
now.

(3) The state of the Roman Church is most ancient, therefore the Roman Church
by reason of his antiquity is the true Church.

Ans. 1, We deny the Antecedent, for the testimonies alleged before out of
Polidor Vergill. 2, not simply that which is ancient is to be received, but
that which is most ancient. For the Devil is ancient, but God is more ancient.
3, Antiquity cannot make that good, which in it self is bad.

(4) The Church of Rome is the Universal and Catholic Church: therefore it
is the trve Church.

Ans. We deny the Antecedent. For if by the word Catholic be meant that,
which agrees with the Catholic and so with the Apostles doctrine, then the
Antecedent is absolutely false. But if the Church of Rome be called Catholic
by reason of the multitude of those, that take part and cleave to that side,
then the multitude of them that err is no just defense for the error. Otherwise
in the time of Arrianisme, the Apostolic, CHVRCH as being brought to a great
paucitie, should not have been the true and Catholic Church; but the
Arrians should have been the Catholic Church for that they far exceeded in
number the rest, which were the true Christians. In this sense therefore we
deny the consequence. The Antecedent also is not true, because (as before I
said) the Church of Rome does not consent with the Church of the Apostles, nor
yet with the Church of the Fathers. And therefore they have not that
universality of multitude whereof they boast.

(5) If the Church of Rome be not the true Church, then for some ages together
Christ had been without a spouse, but Christ never was without a spouse,
Therefore, etc.

An, 1. From a special to a general; arguments are drawn only affirmatively.
It is no good consequence therefore; the church of Rome consisting of Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and others of the same rank, who withstood the
heavenly truth, were not the spouse of Christ, therefore Christ had no spouse.
2. I deny the mayor or first proposition. For there were also other Churches,
as the Greek Church, which always gainsayd the Bishop of Rome, and wherein
Christ might have his spouse. The argument therefore proceeds from an
insufficient enumeration or reckoning up of the parts to the whole. 3, In the
visible erroneous Church of Rome, there was the spouse of CHRIST hidden to the
eye of the World (all glorious within Psalm, 45, 13) or the invisible company
of belieuers. Ans. so Christ nevertheless had his Spouse.

On the contrary side that we have the Church of God with us we prove
Because to us agrees the definition of the church: therefore the church which
is the

1. For in our Church the vncorupt ministry of the word and Sacraments does
flourish; for witness whereof we have the holy scripture, nay our Adversaries
themselves who hither to could never show out the Scripture, that there is
any thing in our Ministry, doctrine or administration of the Sacraments
contrary to Christ, or his Apostles. Therefore we are the true Church.

Because our Church in respect both of the

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus.
(1) The Protestants believe not all things, which the Church of Rome does.
Therefore they are not the true Church.

Ans. 1. There is more in the Conclusion, than in the premises For no more
follows thence, than that we do not agree with the Church of Rome in all
things: which who will deny? But we may not for that cause be thought not to
be the true Church

(2) The Protestants Church does not agree with the Church of the Fathers in
all things.

Ans, 1. This argument is too common, and agrees to both sides. For by the same
reason it may be proved, that the Papists are not the Church; because their
Church (which they cannot deny) has much fallen away from the Church of the
Fathers 2, the church of the Fathers is not the sampler of

(3) The Prodestants doctrine is new; It is but few years ago, since it first
saw the light: Therefore their Church is not the true Church.

Answ. 1. This is a begging of the question. For that same is the matter in
controversy, 2. Our doctrine is not new, but renewed, 3. There are therefore
four terms in the Argument. For in the Mayor proposition the word New, is
taken for that which is simply and altogether new: in the Minor, for the
refined and renewed ministry of the Word, reformed according to the rule of
the most ancient doctrine of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles.

(4) The Church ought to have unity, but so has not the Church of the
Protestants; for it is rent and divided into parts and schisms.

Ans. 1 Here be four terms. For in the Mayor proposition by the word Church
are meant those, which in truth and deed are the Church: in the minor those
which are in the outward company of the Church, or those which have mingled
themselves amongst our Church, when as in truth they be not of our opinion: And
these sever themselves from the true Church of them who maintain the truth,
and stir up Schisms. Of such sort of men Saint John says: They went out
from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us (1, John 2, 19) 2, It is a fallacy taking that for a cause,
which is not a cause. Because the Church is not the cause of tumults and
schisms, but Schismatickes are the cause thereof. Otherwise the Church of
Corinth had not been the true church, seeing Paul writes. There must be
heresies among you. 1, Corinth, 11, 19.

Question, 2 Whether we must grant that there is an invisible Church.
The Papists acknowledge only a visible Church, which same they tie to the
Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, etc. rather than to the hearers: But we, in this
visible company of them that hear the Word, and use the Sacraments, do
believe that there is an other company invisible to the eyes of men (not in
respect of the members and persons themselves, but in respect of the intent of
their heart, and their faith) which is only known unto God. And that for these
reasons:

Because we believe the holy Catholic Church: but faith is the ground and
evide^ce of things, which are not seen. Heb, 11, 1.

Because those which are in the visible Church, may a great part of them be
hypocrites, between such and the true believers God alone does discern, unto
us the hearts of men are not known, and the Church does judge of secret ^gings.

1. Christ knows his sheep, Ioh 10. 14, 27,

2 The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows
who are his, Timo. 2. 19.

Because we have the thing it self, the invisible Church deciphered by
examples in the holy Scriptures.

1 For a long time has Israel been without the true God, and without priest
to teach, and without law, but there Christ was not altogether

2 I will leave unto me (says the Lord) seven thousand men in Israel, which
have not bowed the knee unto Baal. 1. Ki. 19. 18. But this company could not
then be perceived with bodily

^ At the time of Christ's coming into the world, when the public Ministry
of the Word was corrupted, God had his invisible Church, Marie, Joseph,
Zachary, Elizabeth, the wise men that came from the East, Simeon, Anna, etc.

He is not a Jew, which is one outward. neither is that Circumcision which is
outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew, which is one within, and the
circumcision is of the heart, whose praise is not of me^, but of God. Romans 2,
28, 29.

Now how God in the time of Popery, the public Ministry of the word being
corrupted, had his invisible Church, is thus declared.

There were a company of baptized Infants, Note. By this declaration it
appears, that we do not condemn our godly ancestors, who lived in the time
of Popery.
the Church was never at any time without baptized children, seeing that
Baptism even under the reign of Antichrist remained in the Church.

There were always godly and intellige^t me^, which gaine-said the Pope,
sometimes open^y, sometimes secretly: (See the book, inti^uled Catal^gus
testium veritatis): and those the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome, they durst
not openly make profession thereof.

There were also many simple men, whose hearts were more pure, tha^ were the
mouths

The simpler sort had the chief fundamental points of Christian Religion in
the

They heard the Passion of Christ read out

They confirmed their faith by receiving

The Mass and other idolatrous service by the special providence of God, were
celebrated the Lay people, were the less partakers of their idolatry, which
understood not what was done.

They had Christ the foundation: It is credible

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason.
(1) Ye are the light of the World; and a City that Note (...) this (...) our
Adversaries should prove, that the church is only visible, but they prove
nothing else, but that the church is visible, which is not questioned.
is set on an hill cannot be hid: also, no man lights a candle, and puts
it under a bushel, etc. Mat. 5, 14, 15. therefore the Church is visible.

Ans. 1. I grant the whole reason, if by the Church be meant the external
public Ministry. 2, It is a fallacy from that which is spoken in some
respect to the same taken absolutely: for in that the Church is said to be
visible, that is true in some respect only, that is, not in respect of the
inward man, but of the outward public Ministry.

(2) That the Church is visible, and that the Church is invisible, be
contradictories, therefore if it be granted that the Church is visible, the
invisible is overthrown.

Ans. Contradictions are not, unless they be spoken of the same things, and in
the same respect: but that Church is called visible in one respect, and
invisible in another: for it is visible in respect of the external company of
them that hear the Word and use the Sacraments: but it is invisible in respect
of the inward man and true faith, which is known to God alone, as before I
said.

(3) Unless the Church be visible, there will not be an apparent and free
access to the Church for any man, which ought notwithstanding continually to
be so.

Answer. 1.
There is an equivocation in the word Church: First, it is taken for the
public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and so I grant the whole reason.
Secondly, it is taken for those, which do truly believe the Word and rightly
use the Sacraments; and so the conclusion is to be denied. 2, By that, which
has been sai^ it appears, that the Antecedent speaks of the former, the
consequent of the later acceptio^ of the Church: and so there be four terms
in the Syllogism.

(4) Christ bids us hear the Church. Matthew, 18. Which if it be invisible,
cannot be found out.

Answer. 1.
I answer to this reason as to the former. 2, Our Adversaries have more in the
conclusion, than in the premises. For thus much follows, that there is a
certain visible church, or that in some meaning the church is visible: but
that there is only a visible Church, there is never a word in the place cited.

(5) The Fathers did oppose the authority of the visible Church, against
Heretics; therefore there must needs be a visible Church.

Ans. 1. It is a fallacy, supposing that for a cause, which is not. For they
did not oppose the authority of the Church against the Heritikes, for that it
was either visible or invisible; but because at that time it preserved the
sacred books, and the sincere profession of the Doctrine. 2, Neither did the
Fathers seek to repress the Heritikes by the only authority of the Church:
but strove against them with the authority of the Scripture.

Question. 3. Whether the Church may err.
Our Adversaries deny it, hoping that if it appear (as in truth it does) that
the Church in ancient times was at Rome: and if that the Church cannot err,
that they shall easily without any ado, free themselves from all crime of
falshoode by the bare name of the Church, being free from all error. But we
deny it for these reasons.

Because the promises of preserving the

Because, where the thing does testify the contrary, there no plea has
place. But we have examples ready at hand, both in the

1. The Church of the old Testament (a^ concerning the public Ministry)
has often erred: as in the Wilderness, when i^ worshipped the Calfe; in the
time of the Judges, it oftentimes fell away from the true service of God. The
like happene^ under the government of King Ahab, i^ the time of Jeremy, and of
Christ's coming in the flesh.

2. In the new Testament the Church erred. 1, In the Church of Corinth many
doubted of the Resurrection of the dead. 2, The Galathians swarued from the
Apostolic doctrine of Paul in the article of Justification. 3, The Church of
Pergamus favored the Nicholaitans. Revelation, 2, 15.

3. At this day the Church of Rome does err in many things, which hereafter
shall be made to appear as clear as the noon day.

The particular members of the Church are not free from error, as it is plain
that

All admonitions and predictions of the changes of the Church, of taking heed
of 1: John, 2, 18, etc, 1 cor, 11, 1^ Math, 7. 15 Act, ^0, 28, 29, etc, 2,
Thessal, ^ 2. 15.
false teachers, of diligent keeping of sound doctrine. etc, were frivolous and
superfluous, if ^t were impossible that the church should err.

And why above all other Churches, the Church of Rome (whereof we now treat)
should have this special privilege, that it cannot err, there is not one
syllable or title in ^he holy Scriptures.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) The Church is the pillar and ground of truth. 1, Timothy, 3. 15.
Therefore it cannot err: and consequently the Church of Rome never did err.

An. 1. There are here four terms: because the Antecedent speaks of the true
Church, in which alone is Salvation to be had, and which is the keeper of the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: but the consequent speaks of the
Church of Rome, which is indeed the company and Church of Babylon. 2, It is a
fallacy from that which is spoken but in some respect only, to the same taken
absolutely. Because the Church is the pillar and ground of truth; that is, so
long as it maintains the truth, and follows the direction of Gods word. But
and if it swerve aside from the word of God, it can no longer be called the
pillar of truth.

(2) Christ promised to the Church the Spirit of truth. John, 14, 16, 17,
Therefore the Church cannot err.

Answer. 1. This promise did principally pertain to the Apostles, in whom it
was most exactly fullfilled, and secondarily to the Church, which holds the
doctrine of the Apostles; such as the Church of Rome is not at this day 2, It
follows not, the holy ghost was given to the Church, therefore the Church
shall retain it forever. Or the spirit was given to the Church, therefore the
Church does always follow the direction and guiding of the Spirit. For
neither did Christ so promise his holy Spirit, that needs it must abide with
the Church, howsoever the Church behave it self, and turn aside from the
revealed Word of God. For so the Church of the Galatians could never have been
seduced.

(3) Christ prayed for the Church: Father, sanctify them with thy truth etc,
Ioh, 17, 17. therefore it cannot err.

Ans, 1 Here be four terms. The Antecedent speaks of the company of the
Elect, or the invisible; as is plain by the whole text, the consequent of the
visible Church. 2. It is a fallacy from that which is spoken but in some
respect to the same taken absoly. For Christ speaks so, adding withal a
condition: Thy Word is truth. Therefore this promise is tied to the observance
of that word, as to a certain condition.

(4) My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed from
henceforth for evermore, Isai, 59, 21.

Ans. 1 If this promise had been made without condition, then it would follow
that God had not kept his promise. For these words do immediately go before:
They shall fear the name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from the
rising of the sun, or the East: but the Eastern Churches have had a most
miserable downe-fall long ago. This promise therefore is condtionall, as if
God should say, I will not forsake thee for ever, if thou forsake not me. It is
therefore a fallacy from that which is spoken but in some respect to the same
taken absolutely. 2, This promise belongs to the Church which obeieth the
word of God, unto which God will never be wanting with his spirit.

(5) The Comforter shall abide with you for ever, Ioh, 14, 16. therefore the
Church of Rome cannot err.

Ans, 1, What agreement is there between the Apostles, witnesses against whom
no exception can be taken, and the present Church of Rome, as now it is under
the kingdom of the Pope which differs so much from the Church which Paul
taught at Rome, as light does from darkness. 2 There is no good consequence
from that which is spoken indefinitely, to the same spoken definitely or
determinately, but in the Antecedent the speech is indefinite, in the
consequent definite. There be therefore in this reason four terms.

(6) Christ says that he will abide with his Church until the end of the
World. Mat, 28, 20. Therefore the Roman Church cannot err. Simil. The Husband
promised that he would be faithful to his wife all his life long therefore
she cannot become an adultere


Ans. 1 There is more in the conclusion, than in the Premises; for it
follows not, Christ remains with his Church, therefore the Church can in
nothing swerve from Christ. 2, Besides the Argument is from that which is
spoken indefinitely to the same taken definitely, 3. And there be four
terms. For Christ speaks of the true Church wherewith the present Church of
Rome (to which our Adversaries wrest this promise) has no agreement besides
the bare and naked name only.

(7) The gates of Hell shall not overcome the Church Mat, 16, 18.

Ans. 1, Here be four terms. In the Antecedent the Church is meant, which
is built upon Christ, his Word and Sacraments: but in the consequent such a
Church is meant, as is built upon the Pope and Traditions of men, 2, As long as
the Church remains upon this Rock that is, Christ, it is invincible: but not
so, if it make defection from the Gospel of Christ.

CHAP 8. Of the Bishop of Rome
THe Papists being driven from their holds, which have now been treated of,
do flee to the authority of the Pope, as to a sure and sacred anchor. For
they imagine 1, that Christ appointed Peter as his Vicar in the Church, 2. And
gave unto him both the dominion over the whole Church, and also the dominion of
faith. 3, that Peter was Bishop at Rome, and gave the same authority of
dominion to that sea or place. 4, That the Bishops of Rome are his successors
both in Power and Office. And that therefore whatsoever proceeds out of their
mouth of any point of Religion must needs be infallibly true, and that all the
faithful or all Christians are bound to obey them. From this rope platted of
sand arise moreover these questions. 1, Whether Christ have need of any such
Vicar on earth 2, Whether Christ gave Peter authority and power, whereby he
should bear rule over the rest of the Apostles and have the dominion of faith.
3. Whether Peter were at Rome, and did there constitute this order. 4, Whether
the Bishops of Rome be the successors of Peter the Apostle.

Question, 1
Whether Christ have need of any visible head or Vicar in his Church on Earth.
The Papists affirm, and we deny it for these reasons.

Christ had ill provided for his Church, if he had ordained a man universal
Vicar, which being a man (as Peter also erred Galat, 2, 11, 14.) Neither could
be present in all places.

Christ only is the head of the Church, Ephesians. 1, 22, and 4, 15. But the Church
is not a two headed

The Heavenly Father commended only Christ unto us, that we should hear him,

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason.
1 From a similitude. A Prince that goes into an other Country, has need to
leave some man behind him furnished with full and absolute power: so we must
believe that Christ did, when he was to depart from us.

Ans, Here be many falsehoods, and ridiculous toys. 1, Similes do some times
illustrate, but never prove, 2 If it were never so true, that Christ had
appointed a Vicar, yet it would not follow that the Pope should be he. 3,
Neither is there absolute authority such as is falsely ascribed to the Pope)
granted to any vicar, but authority only, which is bounded and limited by
laws.

2 It is needful, that some one watch for the whole Church.

Ans. 1. Christ watches for the whole: and for the parts and special members,
let every Bishop watch amongst his Clergy. 2. It is a thing impossible, that
any one man should watch over and for the whole: this reason therefore
supposes an impossibility.

3, In the old Testament God appointed a Vicar, in deciding controversies, to
wit, the high Priest, that he might be a visible head in the Church, Deuteronomy, 17.

An, 1, They argue from a type, (the signification whereof was accomplished and
ended in Christ) to the Pope. Which makes four terms in the Syllogism; for
the high Priest was not the type of the Pope, ^ut of Christ. 2, The Priest was
Judge in civil affairs (between blood and blood, etc) therefore from civil
affairs to Ecclesiastical, no good consequence can be drawn: unless perhaps
from the type of Christ to the Pope.

(4) It is needful that there should be some Vicar of Christ to interpret
controversies which arise or fall out in the holy Scriptures.

Ans. If this were granted to be never so true, (which yet may not be granted)
it would not therefore follow, that the Pope should be that interpreter. 2. The
Holy Ghost sends us back to the Scriptures which is that our firm word of
the Prophets (2, Pet, 1, 19.) 3, We do not reject any Interpreter, which
shall speak according to the law and the testimony, that is, which shall
interpret the Scriptures according to the Analogy of faith. But the Pope will
never suffe^ himself to be tied to this condition.

(5) It is certain there should be one and a certain visible head for the
preserving of the unity of the Church.

Ans, 1 Christ is that head which governs his Church by the Ministry of
the Word and Sacraments; to whom whosoever joyneth himself, is made one body
with the Church under one head. 2, The Pope draws us from this unity,
whilst he sends us away from the Scripture to the closer of his breast, which
does very often cross the holy Scripture directly.

6. A Monarchy is the best state of government; but we must think that the
Church is to have the best state of government: therefore a Monarchy.

Ans. 1. As concerning a visible head, there ^s great difference between
Civil and Ecclesiastical government. And Christ himself shows a very great
unlikeness between them, when he says, The Kings of the Gen^iles reign over
them: but you shall not be so: Luk, 22, 25, 26.) 2, But as concerning an
in^isible head, we have Christ the only and true Monarch of his Church.

7, In the Church all things ought to be done Corinth. 1. 14, 40.
^^ order: but all Ecclesiastical Order is contai^ed under the Pope.

Ans. In the Antecedent proposition Paul ^eats not of the order of inferior or
superi^ur persons: but of the outward order of Ceremonies, which is to be
observed in the ^ssembly of the Church for comeliness sake. Such an order every
Church ought to observe, (as the circumstances of time, person; and place shall
require,) though they submit not themselves to the yoke of the Bishop of Rome.
The alleging therefore of that saying of Paul, makes nothing at all for the
establishing of the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome: and so here be four
terms in this argument.

Question. 2.
Whether Peter received 1, power of Dominion over the rest of the Apostles, and
2, the dominion of faith: We deny both, and first we deny that Peter received
Dominion over the other Apostles, for these reasons.

Because it is no where taught in the holy Scriptures.

Because Peter does no where testify, that he received such power, but
behaved himself

1. I which am a fellow-elder (Consenior) and witness of the sufferings of
Christ. 1, Pe. 5, 1.

2. Not as Lords over gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the
flock.

3. Therefore he suffered himself to be sent of the other Apostles into
Samaria, with John as his fellow and equal. Act. 8. 14.

4. He suffers himself to be accused, for that he had gone in unto the
Gentiles, and as being their equal, clears himself before them. Act: 11. 2,
3, etc.

5. He endured himself to be reproved of Paul. Galat: 2* 11, 14.

6: Who is Paul? who is Apollo? 1, Cor: 3, 5, which words do show that there
was no authority, no superiority among the Apostles, one over another.

7. When James, and Cephas, and John knew Note. 1. Paul places Iame^ in the
first place. 2, He says not, pillar, but pillars. 3. H^ calls the^ fellows.
of the grace of God that was given unto me, which are counted to be pillars,
they gave to me, and to Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, etc, Galat: 2,
9.

Christ says, the Kings of the Gentiles reign over them; but ye shall not
be so. Luk, 22, 25, 26.

When the Apostles strove for superiority,

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1. Math: 10, 2. Where the Apostles are reckoned up in order, Peter is said to
be the first.

Ans. There be four terms: in the Antecedent the word, first, is taken for
the order of counting or reckoning, and in the Consequent for the order of
dignity or authority.

2, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. therefore Peter
is the foundation of the Church; and thereupon has power over the rest.

Ans. It is a fallacy of Composition, because in the Papists argument, those
things jointly are spoken of Peter, which Christ spoke distinctly, and
severally of himself and of Peter. 2, Because Christ spoke to all the Apostles
under the person of Peter, it would follow (arguing as the Papists do) that
every one of the Apostles was the Prince of the Apostles. Now what an
absurdity were this?

3, Christ says to Peter, feed my sheep; etc. Ioh: 21, 17. Therefore he
made him head of the Apostles.

Ans. 1. Here is the changing of an indefinite proposition, (which in this
place is but a particular) into an universal, thus: feed my sheep, therefore
feed all my sheep*

2, Here are four terms: The word feed; in the Antecedent is to do the
office of a Minister of the Gospel: but in the Consequent it is to be a
Prince, and to exercise dominion.

4, Christ paid tribute for Peter and not for the rest of the Apostles, Matthew:
17, 27, Therefore Peter was Prince of the Apostles.

An. This is a Doctor like exposition to pay tribute, that is, to make a
Prince; for Peter, that is, Peter. These dotages of the Papists declare, how
absurdly, for want of proofs, they scrape together any thing, to bleare the
eyes of the unlearned.

5, Peter after the manner of a Prince lifted up his voice on the day of
Pentecost, when the rest of the Apostles held their peace, as it were for
reverence sake to him: Act: 2, 14, and 4, 8.

Ans. This is a fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is not a cause,
because the Apostles might give Peter this honor, either for his age, or
eloquence, and not because they acknowledged him for their Prince and head.

6, In the Counsel of the Apostles, Peter first of all gave his voice: Act:
15, 7: Therefore he was Prince of the Apostles.

Ans. 1, The voice of Peter is described but whether he first of all gave his
voice, or some other before him, that is not written: therefore there is more
in the Consequent, than in the Antecedent, on this wise. Peter's voice is the
first, that is mentioned, therefore no man gave any voice before him. 2, It
seems rather that others spoke before him, by these words next going before.
When there had been great disputation, etc. Whence it appears that some had
spoken their minds before Peter. 3, out of this place it might rather be
proved, that James was the Prince of the Apostles; for that he, their voices
being gathered, gave the definitive sentence: the argument therefore of the
Papists is most fond.

7. The Fathers and Writers of the Church have acknowledged Peter to be the
Prince of the Apostles.

Answer. If any of them did so, they had it from uncertain reports contrary
to the meaning of the Scripture. Neither ought the error of a few to be any
prejudice to the truth. 2, They gaine-saide the Primacie of Peter. Augustine on
the 16 of Matthew. Cyprian in his Epistles, Gregory the great and others.

Now in the second place, let us treat also of Dominion of faith with the
Papists is that power or prerogative, whereby the Pope may as please him
determine and judge of articles of Religion.
the power of knowledge, or dominion of faith.
We deny that such a power was granted by Christ to Peter, or any other man;
and that for these reasons.

Because it is Christ alone, of whom the heavenly Father has said, hear him.
Math. 3, 17, and 17, 5, and there is one Master or Doctor Math: 23, 8.

Though that we, or an Angel from heaven

Christ and Paul had not done well in sending their hearers unto the
Scriptures, whereas

Peter himself sends us to the word of the Prophets, and teaches us to attend
to the

Peter in his Sermons and Epistles never

By this means there had been no need

Paul would not seem to have received any thing from Peter, as concerning his
doctrine:

It may not be thought that such a dominion

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
1, I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew: 16, 19,
Therefore Peter had the key of knowledge, and the dominion of faith.

Ans. 1. There is more in the Consequent, than in the Antecedent* for it
follows not, the keys were given to Peter, therefore power was given him to
appoint and constitute what he pleased in doctrine and faith. 2, There are
four terms. In the Antecedent the keys are taken for that part of the
ministry, which consists in binding and loosing of sins: in the consequent
it is mistaken for authority to determine and constitute any thing what seems
good in doctrine. 3 The keys did not only belong to Peter, but to the rest of
the Apostles also; unto whom Christ promised the keys under the person of
Peter, who had answered for all. And Christ gave authority alike to all to
retain and to remit sins, Mar, 18, 18, Ioh, 20, 23, which Panormitan also
does advertise us of.

(2) Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail. Luke, 22, 32,
therefore Peter received the Dominion of faith.

Ans. 1 Christ speaks of Peter's denying of him, from which by his prayer for
him, he reclaimed Peter, and did not suffer him to perish with Judas. To argue
then from a particular case to all the actions of Peter, is very absurd. 2, If
to pray for a man's perseverance be all one, as to give him the dominion of
faith then because Christ prayed for the perseverance of all those, that should
hear and believe in him through the preaching of the Apostles, (Ioh, 17, 20,)
it would follow that he had committed unto all them the dominion of faith,
which is absurd. There are therefore in this argument four terms.

3 Christ said to Peter, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren,
Luke, 22, 32. Therefore the dominion of faith was given to Peter.

Ans. 1, Christ speaks of such a strengthening, whereby he that has been
tempted, knows how to strengthen them which are tempted, in the like manner.
But concerning the dominion of Faith, there is not one title. Again therefore
here are four terms: 2, Every man that strengthens his brother, should (by
the same reason, as the Papists here argue) have the dominion of faith assured
unto him. 3, And so also Peter could not have been blameworthy, if he had
Gal, 2, 11 14.
obtained the dominion of faith, but he ought rather to have chid Paul that
reproved him.

4 Upon this Rock I will build my Church and the gates of hell shall not
overcome it, Math, 16, 18. Therefore it must needs be, that Peter received an
infallible dominion of Faith.

Ans. 1, If Peter had been that most firm and sure Rock, then that would
follow. But we have showed the contrary thereto before (Chap, 8, quest, 2,
object: 2.) this is therefore rotten stuff. 2, Now that Peter is not that
rock, and foundation of the Church, whereof Christ speaks in this place, is
proved by these reasons.

1, Because the gates of hell prevailed against Peter.

1, When he denied Christ; in which his So the gates of hell prevailed against
Pope Marcellinus, who sacrificed to Idols, and against Liberius, who sell in to
Arianisme.
denying doubtless he had perished, unless by the merits of Christ, he had
been pulled from the jaws of hell, Mat, 26.

2, when he was worthy to be blamed, being deceived of Satan to flatter them
that were converted of the Jews and to offend them that were converted of the
Gentiles Galat, 2

3, When Christ called him Satan, Ma, 16, 23. Then he would have hindered the
passion of Christ, which was no small sin. Because Christ is the
Cornerstone, and not Peter.

1, Christ is the Chief Cornerstone, elect and precious. Peter speaks this
of Christ and not of himself, 1. Pet. 2, 6.

2, Other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1, Corinth, 3, 11.

3, Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. Ephesians, 2, 20. Isay, 28, 16.
Psalm, 118, 22. Matt, 21. 42.

Question, 3
Whether Peter left his authority and power behind him to his successors at
Rome* We deny it. because it cannot be certainly prooved, not so much as that
Peter was a^ Rome. We hold it more probable that he^ was never at Rome, for
these reasons

Because it agrees neither with the accoun^ of times in the Scripture, nor with
the account of other histories.

1. It crosses the account of the Scriptures. For about the year of Christ,
37. Paul first returned to Jerusalem, Galat, 2. 18. and found Peter abiding
there. About the year of Christ 51, (fourteen years after. Galat, 2, 1) Paul
went up again to Jerusalem, and found Peter there. Now add thereunto ^, years
only, which Peter should have ^pent in travailing into Galatia, Pontus etc. 37
14 3 25 79
^not reckoning the years, in which he is re^orted to have governed the Church
of An^ioch) and there amounts the ^4th year of Christ. Add to these 25.
years, which he ^s said to have been Bishop of Rome, and ^here arises the
year of Christ 79. But it is ^eported by the Ecclesiastical historia^s, that
^eter was martyred in the last year of Nero, which was the 70th year of
Christ. So by his reckoning Peter should have been Bi^hop of Rome 9, years
after he was dead.

2. It crosses the account or chronolo^ie of Ecclesiastical writers: but
first we pre^ppose See Eusebius, lib, 2, cap. 25.
and take for granted, that there were ^, years, after which Paul found him
at ^erusalem, and so there arises the year of Christ, 51. Add then 7, years;
for the space ^^ which, Ecclesiastical historians do write that Peter was
Bishop at Antioch, and 5 more which they say he spent in iourneying, and there
arises the year of Christ, 63. Add hereunto 25, years, and there arises the
year of Christ 88, and so Peter should have taught and preached 18, years
after his death. The Papists will not see these absurdities, but pass over the
truth hood wincked.

3, If any man shall say that we must reckon backward from the end of the years
of Nero and Peter, then it will follow, that Peter was in prison, not at Rome
but at Jerusalem, in the 24 th, year before his death, and in the second year
of his being Bishop at Rome, Act 12. For in the 45 th year Peter was cast in
prison by Herod. After which time Paul found him still as yet at Jerusalem.

If Peter had gone to Rome, he had done contrary to the covenant, he made with
Paul

Paul writing an Epistle to the Romans at that time, when Peter is said to have
bin^

When Paul came to Rome, he was received

When Luke writes that Paul abode 2,

In the Epistles written from Rome (to the

I have no man (says Paul) like minded,

At my first answering, no Man assisted me (says Paul) but all forsook me.
I pray GOD that it may not be laid to their charge, 2, Tim, 4, 16. Which but
to suspect, of Peter, were very hard, if he had been then at Rome.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason thus.
(1) Ecclesiastical writers and the Fathers do with one consent agree that
Peter was at Rome.

An, 1 Because these Writers do agree neither amongst themselves (for neither
do the Jesuits deny, but that they disagree very much concerning the time,
when Peter came to Rome) seeing I say, that they neither agree amongst
themselves, nor with the holy Scriptures, let their authority carry as much
weight as may be, so that less be not ascribed to the truth of the
Scripture, than to them. 2, One of them transcribed and took it out of an
other, as if a man should tell to others the reports which he heard. 3,
Irenaeus the most ancient Ecclesiastical Writer of all, whose writings are
held for not-counterfeits, does affirm indeed that Peter was at Rome; but
he lived in the year after the birth of Christ 185. that is 150, years after
Christ's ascension into Heaven. Neither was he the Scholar of John the
Evangelist, (who is held to have lived the longest of all the Apostles) but
Polycarps Scholar. Wherefore it is no wonder, if Irenaeus. Who was so far
off from the Apostles times, were somewhat deceived in the story of Peter.

2. The Church which is at Babylon saluteth you. 1, Pet: 5, 13, There Peter
calls Rome Babylon:

Ans. 1. This is to gather every thing of any thing: to change Babylon into
Rome. 2, Hieron. in his Epistle to Marcella.
We grant that Rome at this day is Babylon, but that purple colored whore, as
S. Hierom also thinks. But out of question the Papists will boast but a
little of this appellation of Babylon.

Question. 4.
Whether the Popes of Rome be Peter's successors: this we deny for these
reasons.

Because this ordinary succession tottereth

1. Platina, Sabellicus, Epiphanius, reckon thus.
1. Peter: 2, Linus. 3. Cletus. 4. Clemens. 5. Anacletus.
2 Eusebius, Irenaeus, Hierom reckon them thus.
1. Peter. 2. Linus. 3. Anacletus. 4. Clemens. 5. Of Cletus they say nothing:
3. Damasus, the Tomes of the Counsels, Maria^^ Scotus, Caranza do reckon them
thus.
1, Petrus, 2, Clemens, 3, Anacletus.
4. Onuphrius reckons them thus.
1, Peter, 2, Linus, 3, Clemens, 4, Cletus, 5, Anacletus.
Caranza says: In a matter so intricate I leave the defining thereof to the
judgment of the Reader. Summa council. pa, 13.

Amongst the Ecclesiastical Writers

Because the Church of Rome, in respect of this succession, has not any where
in

They are not the sons of the Saints (as their works: nether does the Sea
make a Bi^^op, but a Bishop makes the Sea: as also the ^ace does not sanctify
the man, but the man both sanctify the place. Distinct, 40, cap, ^ulti
Sacerdotes, etc. But the Pope is not the ^ccessor of Peter, neither in
doctrine, nor in ^anners.

1. Not in doctrine.
Peter taught thus. There is given no other name under heaven whereby we must
be saved,

The pope has other names, that men may be saved by the merits of Saints,
the virgin Mary, John Baptist, the holy Martyrs, as also Francis, Dominicus,
etc.

Peter: To him (that is Christ) gave all the

The pope: Sins committed after Baptism are not remitted, but are
recompensed for by us; not because we believe in Christ, but in our works.

Peter acknowledges one only foundation of the Church, even Christ the corner

The pope places himself for the foundation and corner stone of the Church.

Peter: Submit your selves to all manner of ordinance for the Lords sake,
whether unto

The pope would have all Kings and Emperors subject to him.

Peter ascribes unto Christ, that he is the Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls. 1, Pet.

The pope takes it to himself that he is the pastor of all souls; and the
head Shepherd.

Peter: Baptism is the stipulation or taking

The pope: The state of Monkerie is equal See Aqui^ as lib, 4, (...) distinct.
4 art* 3.
to Baptism and Christians, that have fallen into any sin after Baptism
cannot comfort their consciences by their Baptism, although they repent.

Peter: If any man speak, let him talk as

The pope* If any man speak, let him speak our Traditions of men.

Peter: Feed the flock of God, not for filthy Venalia nobis Templa,
Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra Coronae, Ignis, Thura, preces, Coelum, est venale
deusque Mautu^n.
lukers sake, 1, pet 5, 2,

The Pope. Wares of all sorts are here to be sold: Buy what ye will for money
down told: Churches, Priests, Altars, Offerings and Crowns: We pass for
quick sale all Cities and towns. Fire, frankincense, Dirges and pardons from
pain, Hell, Heaven, God, the Devil we give al for gain.

1 Peter: not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage 1, Pet, 5, 3.

The Pope will be Lord over Angels, Church and Christian Monarchies, etc.

Peter; Resist the devil steedfast in the faith,

The Pope: Resist him by consecrated candles, holy water, the sign of the
Cross, moonkish weed, etc.

Peter* Make your calling and election sure

The Pope: seek for your justification before God by good works.

Peter: we followed not deceivable fables, when we opened unto you the power
and

The Pope has canonized the fabulous Books of Dominick and the conformity of
Saint Francis; as also the lying Legends are yet set abroad to sale. And more
over he has gone about to confirm the most of his trash by fables.

Peter: we have a most sure word of the

The Pope does no otherways run away from the scripture, than the devil is
supposed to do from the sign of the cross.

But and if we would further compare the Popes decrees with the doctrines and
writings of the other Apostles, we should find that they differ as far as
Heaven and hell.

2, Peter and the Bishops of Rome differ very much in manners.
Peter inueigheth against them, which live luxuriously, delighting themselves
in their

The Pope feeds a great number of such massing servants of his own.

Peter lived in humility.

The Pope in more than Ruffian-like riot.

Peter carried himself as a Minister or servant

The Pope behaueth himself as Lord of Lords.

Peter carried about a wife with him, i. Corinthians 9, 5.

The pope abhors marriage in priests.

Peter condemned Simonie, Act. 8, 20, etc:

The pope, for money sells Indulgences, A book openly set to sale, wherein is
the price of absolutio^ for most hai nous sins whereof Espencaeus co^plaineth
most pittifu^ly in Tit. cap. 1. Digress. 2.
taxa paenitentiaria.

6 Peter was godly, holy, honest, chaste, etc.

The pope has in the Genealogy of his succession, Thieues, Magicians,
Southsaiers, Witches, Adulterers, Whoremo^gers, Warriors, and what not?

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
The Fathers called the Bishops of Rome the successors of Peter.

Answer, 1.
They were better Bishops then, than they be now a-daies. The ancient
Bishops of Rome, the most of them were holy Martyrs, the late ones voluptuous
persons. 2, And all godly and good Bishops are the successors of the Apostles
in office; and not only the Bishop of Rome, if he were good and godly. 3, The
Fathers also called Rome the purple colored whore. Hieron to Marcella, and
Augustine. ^^ Ciuit. Dei, lib, 8, cap, 22, and other.

An other (or the first) Question, coincident with the former.
Who the Pope is.

I Answer.

He is Antichrist.

Because all things, which are foretold of Antichrist in the holy Scriptures,
are fulfilled in the Pope.

He is called in the Scriptures an Adversary,

1. Christ commends the holy Scripture, Ioh, 5, 39.

The Pope calls it the matter of strife, and a dead letter.

2. Christ condemns the Traditions of men, Matthew, 15, 3, etc. But the Pope
diggeth out of their graves Traditions long since buried, commends them
highly, and binds men's consciences, under the pain of excommunication to
observe them.

3. Christ says: out of the heart proceed evil thoughts: Matthew, 15, 19. so
that the heart is as a corrupt fountain. The Pope says: man is not so
corrupted by the fall of our first parents, but that he has still free will
as well to good, as to evil.

4. Christ so expounds the law, that it is impossible for us to keep it
(Luke 10, 27.) with all thy soul and with all thy strength, etc. But the Pope
says: the law of GOD may be fulfilled by man.

5. Christ received them, which believed: as; Thy faith has made thee whole,
Luke, 7, 50. But the Pope contendeth that faith alone justifies not, but that
we have need of good works to our justification.

6. Christ says: when ye have done all, that is commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants, Luk, 17, 10. The Pope says; consecrated persons over
and above the fulfilling of the law, do also works of supererogation, which
they may bestow upon others, as having no need of them themselves.

7. Christ says: verily verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, has
life everlasting, loh, 6, 40, 47.

But the Pope lays at him with a curse, who persuades himself, that he
ought certainly to believe without doubting, that he is the heir of eternal
life.

8, Christ says, that that goes into the mouth defiles not a man, Matthew, 15,
11.

The Pope says, that a man is defiled by eating the meats which he has
forbidden.

9. Christ says: Drink ye all of this, Mat, 26, 27.

The Pope says: Drink not all, but only Priests.

So likewise, the life of Christ and the Pope are directly opposite; but we
will not treat of that now.

Because he exalts himself against all that is called God. For he takes
upon him to alter the Word of God, and the Sacraments: as is proved in this
whole book throughout.

The Pope sits in the Temple of God, as a tyranne; captiuating Emperors,
Kings, Princes

The Pope shows himself, as if he were God: which he has done in accepting
of

1. That the Pope can do all things above law, contrary to law, and without
law. Bald. ad caput cum super number. 1o. Extr, de cause, posses, et propt.

2. That he has the same consistory, and the Sea Baldus in C. cum super de
causa Propt, et pos, Lib, cerem, Pon. 1, li. tit, 7.
same tribunal seat with God.

3. That to him is given all power in Heaven and in earth.

4. If the Pope neither respecting his own, nor his brethrens salvation should
by heaps draw innumerable souls with him into the pit of hell, etc. yet may
no man say unto him, what do thou. Distinct. 40, cap, Si Papa.

5, The Pope is god. Felinus. as also in the Canon law, Distinct, 96, cap.
Satis.

6, The Pope is the Christ or anointed of the Lord.

7, The Pope may change the form of the Sacraments delivered by the Apostles.
Archidiaconus.

8, The Pope can do those things on earth, which God can do in Heaven.
August. Berovius in C. cum tu, number, 1, de vsuris.

9, The Pope has no peer, but God: the same Berovius in Rubric: de offic. de
leg, n. 10. And many other things which it were ouerlong to rehearse. If the
Pope approove not these glozing flatteries, why does he not condemn them? why
does he not forbid them? why does he not accurse them? As Herod therefore
which rejected not the impious acclamations of the people, was therefore
guilty of their blasphemies before God and perished very miserably: so the
Pope, in that he condemns not the impious flatteries of the Canonists, he
approves them, and is guilty of eternal damnation and shall be tormented
with Herod for ever in Hell.

The coming of the kingdom of Popery is by the working of Satan, with
miracles

The Pope worshippeth his God Mauzzim

The Pope cares not for the desires of Women, but forbids marriage unto

He has taken away the daily sacrifice; withdrawing those prayers from
Christ, which idolatry. This was doubtless to abolish the daily sacrifice.

These and such other things declare, that the Pope is not the successor of
Peter, nor the Vicar of Christ, but the Antichrist; who^ the Lord Jesus shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, etc. 2, Thessal, 2, 8.

Hitherto therefore we have maintained the authority of the holy Scriptures,
against the vain Traditions of the Papists, against Enthusiasmes or
inspirations, counsels not rightly celebrated, the counterfaite name of the
Church and the falsely pretended authority of the Pope of Rome. The Popes them
selves then are not the Judges of controversies, but the party accused before
the tribunal of the Church: the Church is the Judge, the voice of the Church is
the Scripture, which always speaks: by the rule whereof ^ll whosoever they
be are bound to give ^nswere, and make their account unto God. ^t is therefore
good reason that no other rule ^f truth should be accepted of saving the
^cripture; according to which all opinions and constitutions are to be
examined and ^dged in the Church.

CHA. 9 Of Freewill.
QVESTION 1.
OUR Adversaries that they might the more strongly urge justification by works
do falsely affirm, 1, that a man not regenerated or converted, 2, even after
the fall of Man, has remaining in him so much power, 3. in his will and
understanding, 4. in matters spiritual, and such as pertain to the salvation
of the soul, that he can begin his conversion, 5, of and by himself, and so
deserve a more plentiful grace of justification. This we deny for these
reasons ensuing.

Because the Scripture calls unregenerate dead men.

1. And you that were dead in sins and trespasses, etc. Ephesians 2, 1.

2. When we were dead by sins, he quickened us. verse 5.

3. Give your selves unto God, as they which are alive from the dead, Rom, 6,
13. Because the Scripture compares our will

1. Impenitent sinners are holden captive of Satan at his will, 2, Tim. 2, 26.

2. If you continue in my word, ye are verily my Disciples, and ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Ioh. 8, 31, 32. If they were now
at length to be freed, the^ were they before not free men, but captives and
slaves.

3. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8, 34.

4. I am carnal, sold under sin: Rom: 7, 14.

Because the Scripture bereaues us (so to of our selves.

1. All the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil
continually. Gen, 6, 5.

2. The imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. Gen: 8, 21.

3. The natural man perceaveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they
are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spirituallie discerned. 1, Cor. 2. 14.

4. We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves.
2, Cor. 3. 5:

5. Therefore God would signify the hardness of our hearts by the tables of the
law, made of stone. Iere: 31, 32, etc. 2, Corinth. 3, 3, 7.

6. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of yourselues. Ephesians. 2,
8.

Because the Scripture ascribes to God alone, what good so ever we have either
in

1. Our sufficiency is of God. 2, Cor. 3, 5.

2. God has quickened us in Christ. Ephesians. 2, 5.

3, It is God, that works in us, both the will and the deed. Phil: 2, 13.

4, No man can come unto me, unless the Father which sent me draw him. John,
6, 44.

5, Without me can ye do nothing. John 15. 5.

6, So God opened the heart of Lydia. Act. 16, 14.

Because the doctrine of our Adversaries savours of the heresy of the
Pelagians.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus.

1. God gives a choice to his people of obeying or disobeying: Deuteronomy. 30, 19.
Iosuah, 24, 15. therefore GOD presupposes freedom of will.

Ans. 1. There is more in the Conclusion, than in the Premises: for it
follows not. GOD offers them choice, and exhorts them to obedience,
therefore they can obey of themselves. 2, Had the Israelites never so much had
freedom of will to good; yet they were regenerated, and renewed by the word of
God and the Sacraments. Now to argue from them to men unregenerate, is no good
consequent: for there arise four terms.

2, God reproves men in the Writings of the Prophets and other where, for that
they would not convert, hear and obey, etc. therefore they had freewill,
whereby they might have conver^ed, Math: 23, 37 Luke, 19, 23. Ezech. 18, 31.
Iere. ^, 19, etc.

Ans: 1. There is more in the Conclusion, ^han in the Premises: for it
follows not, ^hey would not convert, therefore they might convert of
themselves, 2, It is a fallacy taking that for a cause which is none: for the
final cause of these legal Sermons, is not to free the will, but to increase
wrath, that the acknowledgement of finne may follow. It follows not then, The
Law requires this or that at our hands; therefore we can perform it of our
selves: but GOD would have us to learn to acknowledge our own bondage, and to
pray, that he would create a new heart within us, and take away our stony
heart, and give us in place thereof a heart of flesh.

3. Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. Zacha. 1, 3, Here God would have
us, to prevent him in our conversion.

Answer. 1.
The same answer serves for this argument, Simil. The debtor Mat, 18, is
reproved for that he paid not his debt to his Masters, therefore he was able
to pay.
which was given to the former: for the legal words of commandment,
vpbraiding, reproving, etc, do not make us able to amend that, which is
reproved in us, as being amiss. 2, And the meaning of this place is, turn
unto me, and I will look upon you in mercy, and do you good. And what makes
this for avouching of free will. 3, The conversion of man is ascribed unto God:
Convert me and I shall be converted: for thou art the Lord my God, etc. Ierem:
31. 18.

4. If there were no freedom of will in spiritual things, then it would
follow, that God mocked men, commanding them by the preaching of his word to
do that, which were impossible, namely to convert.

Answer, If God suffered his word to be preached without giving of the spirit,
then that might follow: but because God joins his Spirit together with his
word (whereby the hearts of the hearers are opened) it no way follows, that
GOD does mock men.

5. God gave David the choice of three plagues. 2, Samuel 24, 12, and the
residue shall choose rather death than life. Jeremy, 8, 3, and such others.

Ans, The freedom of this choice was about outward matters of the World (to
wit temporal punishments) and not about spiritual things. There are
therefore four terms, 2. There is no controversy betwixt ^s about outward
matters.

6, God says unto Cain: If thou do well, ^halt thou not be accepted? and if
thou do not well, sin lies at the door: the desire thereof shall be
subject unto thee, and thou shall rule over it. Genesis 4, 7, therefore a man has
free will.

Ans. i: There is more in the conclusion, than in the Premises: for thus much
only does follow; that Cain might have refrained from killing of his brother;
neither is there any mention or determination, whether he might have done it
by power of his own, or derived from some other where. 2, GOD speaks of an
outward thing, that is, the eschewing of manslaughter, therefore it is nothing
to the purpose. 3, The latter words of the place alleged are ill translated;
for Moses means not any dominion over sin that Cain should have, but over
his brother. Therefore the place should be translated thus: his desire shall
be subject unto thee, and thou shall rule over him, that is, over Abel thy
brother.

7, A man may nill, therefore he may will also:

An: From nill to will is no good consequence, seeing there is not the like
reason of such contraries, as have not the like cause* Now to will, proceeds
of God, as from the first cause: but to nill comes from Satan and the corrupt
flesh: here is a fallacy of composition and division; because those things
are joined together, as having the like reason, which nature will not suffer to
be joined together for the reason above named.

8: Thou have done evil (et potuisti) and thou might do it: Ierem: 3, 5:

An. 1: The same answer serves for this Simile. This man can run into debt,
therefore he can pay his debts.
argument, which was given to the former: for it follows not, a man may
sin, therefore he may work his conversion. 2, It is a fallacy from that,
which agrees to one of it self, to that, which happens accidentally or from
an other, which is not in his power: For we can sin of our selves, but we
cannot do well but by power received from God. 3: The word here used,
translated by the Latin Interpreter (potuisti) signifies to be able to do any
thing, and sometime to be of strength, or to be strong in doing any thing: the
meaning of the prophet is, ye they kept no measure, but with all their strength
and power committed sin.

9 The just man might offend, and has not offended, and do evil, and has not
done it. Eccl. 31. 10. Therefore, etc.

Ans, 1, There is more in the conclusion, than in the premises. For all that
follows is this, that the righteous man might reframe from transgressing; but
it does not hence follow, that he could do it of himself. 2. The Author
speaks of an outward matter, name ly the outward use of money. Therefore it
is nothing to the purpose. 3, If it be meant of spiritual matters never so
much, yet the argument follows not from a righteous and regenerate man (whose
will is freed by the Holy Ghost) to a man unregenerate.

10, I will sacrifice freely unto thee etc, Ps, 54, 6.

Answer, 1, Again this argument proceeds from a regenerate man to an
unregenerate, 2, and that this willingness and voluntary service was not in
David of himself, it is plain, because he could not of himself acknowledge
his sin of adultery and manslaughter, until he was admonished thereof by the
Prophet.

11, Cornelius could of his own accord prepare himself to the grace of God,
and dispose himself to the acknowledgement of salvation, Act, 10. 4, etc.

Ans. Cornelius was before amongst the jews instructed out of the Scriptures
concerning the Messiah; so that only he did doubt of the person of the
Messiah: therefore it is said of him, that he was a devout man, and one that
feared God etc. and prayed God continually (Verse, 2) therefore this argument
proceeds from a regenerate man to an unregenerate. For Cornelius did already
believe the sayings of the Prophets concerning the Messiah: but did not yet
know that those things were fulfilled in Jesus Christ of Nazareth.

12. Every Man that has hope in God, pargeth himself. 1 John 3. 3.

Answer, 1, He speaks of the regenerate, which have hope and trust in God by
faith. 2, Neither does he speak of their conversion, but of their renouation
or sanctification, which follows conversion, and has his growth and
increasing in the regenerate until the end of their lives. This argument
therefore hangs not together, but has four terms.

13. If any man open the door unto me; I will come in unto him, etc. Revela,
3. 20. Therefore a man may aforehand dispose himself unto grace by his
free will

Ans. There is more in the Consequent, than in the Antecedent. For this only
is said, what the Son of GOD will do to him, which opens the door unto
him: but there is never a word said, by what power the heart of man is
opened, whether by his own, or such as he has received from an other.

14, He that stands firm in his heart, that he has no need, but has
power over his own will, etc. 1, Corinthians, 7, 37.

Ans. He speaks of things merely external, of marrying or not marrying.
Therefore this is impertinent.

15 Every man, as he has determined in his heart, etc, 2, Corinth, 9, 7.

Ans, 1, The speech is of the regenerate, 2. And of external matters, that is
of giving of Alms. There are therefore five terms.

16, Yet not I, (to wit, have wrought) but the Grace of God (as the Papists
expound it) has wrought with me. 1, Corinth, 15, 10. Therefore our strength
does work in our conversion, and not God alone.

Ans, 1, Paul speaks not of his conversion, but of the labor of his
Ministry, by which GOD did work, 2. The text speaks of Paul being
regenerated. 3, Paul disables himself in respect of all things, (even those
that concern his ministry) and ascribes them to God alone in the words
going before, where he says: By the grace of God, I AMTHAT I AM: and his
grace which is in me, was not in vain, etc. yet not I, but the grace of God,
which is with me. Here is therefore made a great confusion of the terms or
words, 1, with me, that is, I and God by joint working. 2, with me, that is
in me. 3. the regenerate, 4, the unregenerate, 5, conversion, 6. Ministry.

17 We are Gods (Cooperarii) fellow-workers. 1 Corinthians 3. 9.

Ans. 1, He speaks of his ministry not of his conuesiron. 2, And if it could
be racked to his renewed state, yet were it then an argument from the regenerate
to the unregenerate. 3, The Latin and Greek phrase is ambiguous, and may
either signify that we are fellow workers with God, or we fellow workers
amongst our selves, are the workmen of God. This later is the plain meaning
of the place and therefore, to avoyde ambiguitie, it is rightly translated we
together are Gods laborers.

18. If man be so enthralled unto sin, that he cannot convert of himself;
he cannot justly be accused of sin, unless God will accuse nature.

Ans, 1, God does accuse nature, not simply as it is in it self, but in some
respect, as it is corrupted. 2, The first man before he fell, had the power of
his free will, which he should have preserved. Man therefore is nevertheless
justly accused of his corruption.

There remain yet, besides this first, now ended, three other questions more,
in this matter of free will; which we must needs discuss. 1, of Original
sin, 2. of the works of infidells, 3, of Grace.

QVESTION, 1. Of Original sin.
The Jesuits at this day do deny that Original sin in us is truly and
indeed sin; which they do, least they should be constrained to acknowledge
the great and horrible corruption of the power of man's nature. We on the
contrary side do affirm that Original corruption is a sin, and that no
little or light one, but a very great one, and that for these reasons.

Because the holy Scripture gives plainly

1. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me,
Psalm, 51, 5.

2. Thou have set our iniquities before thee and our secret sins (that is,
original sin in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 90 8,

3, I knew not sin, but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except the
law had said, etc. Rom, 7, 7.

4. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin
that dwells in me. Rom, 7, 20.

Because, seeing it is the fountain and wellspring of all actual sins:
Original sin

Because Original sin or concupiscence,

See more hereof in the 13, Chap, of Concupiscence.

Contrariwise our Adversaries reason: thus.
1, Sin is not sin, unless it be voluntary; but original sin is not
voluntary, therefore, etc.

An, 1. We may not leap from one science See Chap. 13, quest, 2 object, 6.
to an other, which is done in this argument, whiles in defining what is sin,
the Adversary goes from Divinity to Philosophy to fetch the definition
thereof from Aristotle, 2, And so here is a confusion of distinct principles
and several arts; and a fallacy of many questions as but of one. 3,
Original sin, though it be not voluntary in us now, in respect of the
present corruption, which we draw by nature from our Parents yet it was and is
voluntary, in respect of the beginning, principle, and cause thereof. Adam and
all his posterity in his loins committed the first sin of disobedience
against God willingly; and thence issued Original corruption. And this is
sufficient even in reason and philosophy to make an action sin^ull. For a
drunken man, though he know ^ot what he does, yet if he kill a man in ^is
drunkenness, is by the Civil Laws of men guilty of murder, because himself
was the cause of his drunkenness.

See more in the place of Renouation, Cap, 13, quest. 2.

QVESTION 3. Of the works of infidels.
The Question is, whether the good works, or virtues of infidells, be so
devoide of all fault, that the doers thereof do deserve grace. The Papists
affirm they be, we deny it, for these reasons.

Without Faith it is impossible (note that he impossible) to please God. Hebr,
11, 6, but infidells want faith; otherwise they should not be called
infidells, therefore, etc.

Without Christ there is no salvation, no^

The end of the works, which Infidell^ usually for their own glory, or
covetousness, or ambition, or pleasure etc.

4 If the person that does the works be not accepted of God, then neither can
the works be, how glorious soever they be; So God had no respect to the
sacrifice of Cain; not because for that the sacrifice was not of it self good,
but because God hated Cain, for his impiety.

See more hereof in the 12, Cap, quest, 1^

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason thus,
1 Virtuous actions in infidels are not of themselves Simil: Wine that is of it
self very good if it be kept in a corrupt vessel, becomes so distastful
that it may breed loathing or cause vomiting in them that drink of it.
evil; therefore they may not be reckoned amongst sins.

An. What virtues are of themselves, we are not here to dispute; but how
they are to be esteemed by reason of the faultiness of them, in whom they
are, 2, It is therefore a fallacy making more questions, where there should be
but one: for these two are confusedly shuffled together; what virtues are in
themselves and what in respect of the man, in whom they be, It is also a
fallacy, from that which is spoken in some particular respect; to the same
taken absolutely and simply, for these actions are in the former place taken
absolutely, and in the later, as they are considered in respect of him that
does them.

2 Virtues in infidels are the gifts of God, therefore they are not to be
accounted for sins.

Ans. 1. As they are the gifts of God, so they are no sins: but here they
are considered, not as they proceed from god, but as the good and holy gifts
of God are polluted in corrupt instruments. 2. There are some gifts of god which
sanctify the receiver, and some which do not: of these later sort, are all
the gifts of God in infidells. 3. A good thing by abusing of it, may become to
be not good.

3. God has sometimes rewarded the virtues of infidels: therefore they have
pleased him, and have not been counted for sins.

Ans. God has commanded outward honesty and civility, and does bestow
temporal rewards on it, but our question is not of temporal, but of
spiritual rewards, therefore this is nothing to the purpose.

The Jesuits in the Article of Justification, do expound the word Grace for a
gift or habit infused into the soul of man from heaven, vvherby he is moved
or stirred to work righteously; and by the which his works are accepted with
God, and this Grace they divide into the first and second Grace, or into a
preventing Grace, (whereby a man may prepare himself to the grace of
Justification) and a subsequent grace, (whereby a man is actually and
habitually made just) and so they go about to shift of by this their
explication, all the sayings of the scripture concerning the free instification
by faith. But we in the Article of Justification acknowledge no signification
of the word Grace but such as excludes all merits of men; and that for these
reasons.

Because the word Grace (in the article of justification) is opposed to Merits,
works, and

1 To him that works the wages is not accounted by favor, but by debt. Rom:
4. 4.

2 If it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else grace were no more
grace, Rom, 11. 6:

3 He has saved us, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace which was given to us through Christ Jesus, before the world
was. 2, Tim: 1: 9,

4 By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God, not of works, etc. Ephesians: 2: 8, 9;

Because it is opposed to the law which causes wrath: we are not under the
law, but under

Because the Scripture declares the same by equivalent terms, or words of the
same value

1 They are justified freely by his grace, Rom, 3, 4.

2 When the bountifulnes, and love of god our savior toward man appeared, not
by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy
he saved us, Tit, 3, 4 5:

3 Let us go boldly to the throne of grace that we may receive mercy, Heb, 4,
15.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1 The word grace is oftentimes in the Scripture taken for the gifts of the
holy Ghost as. 1: Corin, ^^ 4, there are (Diuisiones Gratiarum) diversities of
graces:

Ans 1 The propositions of this reason are mere particulars, and therefore no
conclusion follows, 2. Whereas Saint Paul in that place treats of miraculous
gifts, not of justification, and our question is only of justification; the
argument is frivolous, and not to the present purpose: 3. Though we deny not,
but that the word grace is sometimes in Scripture taken figuratively for the
free gifts of God bestowed upon men (for only we deny it to be used in that
signification in the article of Justification any where in the Scripture) yet
neither in this place alleged is the word Charis used, which properly
signifies grace, but Charisma, which signifies a gift freely bestowed: and
therefore the place is fitly and properly translated. There are diversities of
gifts.

2 We have received grace for grace, John 1, 16.

1 This is a Doctor like exposition, made of their mere Doctor like
authority, without reason: we have received grace, that is the grace of
justification: for grace, that is, for the first preventing grace, but the
meaning of Saint John is: because the son of God was in highest grace and
favor with his heavenly father, therefore the father does embrace us also with
his grace and loving kindness for his sons sake, in whom we believe. 2. That
grace in this place is opposed unto merits, the words next following do
declare: for the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ; Here Christ and Moses are opposed betwixt themselves, as it were in
the proper differences of their offices, that is of wrath by the law and of
grace by the Gospel.

3 Grace is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. therefore it is an infused and
inherent habit.

Answer, 1: It is a fallacy of composition and division, arising from the
construction of the words, for the word gift is not simply and alone construed
with the word grace, but with salvation by grace, which if it might should have
been expressed in one word. Brieffely and plainly, the Apostle says not,
Grace is the gift of God, but that ye are saved by grace, that is the gift of
God, 2 and for the same cause the gift in this place is not a habit, for gift
is opposed there to works and merits, as being a thing, that is bestowed of
mere favor.

4 It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace: Heb, 13, 9:

Answer, 1: It is a begging of the question; because this is controuersed,
whether Grace do in these words signify an infused habit, 2. In that very
place the Apostle opposes Grace to the vain confidence of works, against
them who put confidence in meats, drinks etc. Therefore by the nature of
contraries it appears, that the word grace is here taken for the free
favor and mercy of God, and so the argument hangs not together, for in the
Antecedent Grace is taken for the favor of God, in the consequent for an
infused habit.

CHAP. 10. Of Justification.
SEeing our adversaries do diverse ways wr^p and inuolue this disputation,
let us devide it into certain and distinct members and questions.

Question: 1.
And first of all, whereas the word Justification, wrested to a wrong
signification by our adversaries, as if to justify were of an unjust man to
make one just habitually or by a habit infused: and seeing they hiss at
imputed righteousness, let us consider the true signification of the word,
which is no other, but to be absolved from the guilte of sin, that it be not
imputed, but pardoned, which appears to be so by the reasons following.

Because the word Justification is a borrowed word from the court and place of
judgment;

1 Woe to them that justify the wicked for a reward. Isai. 5, 23.

2 The righteous shall be justified, and the wicked condemned, Deuter, 25, 1,

3 Every man that has a matter might come unto me, that I might justify him
(as the original has and is translated agreeable to the sense more plainly;
that I might do him justice) 2, Sam. 15, 4.

4 He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are abomination Note, that the whole act of Justification is very lively
described in the scripture, as a kind of judicial act and process, the
person guilty is called to ye bar, is accused, witnesses are brought, he is
condemned or acquitted etc.
to the Lord, Prove. 17, 15.

So does the same word keep the same signification borrowed from the court and
judicial proceedings in the Article of Justification in the Scripture.

1 Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
Justifies, who shall condemn? etc. Rom, 8: 33, 34, here ye see words and
phrases borrowed from the court and Judicial proceedings to accuse, to
condemn, to justify etc.

The equivalent terms of justification, or other words used to signify
justification, does prove the same.

(1) Reconciliation is taken for Justification Rom, 5, 9, 10* 2, Corinth, 5, 19,

(2) Remission of sins is taken for Justification.

1 Blessed is he, whose wickedness is forgiven. Psalm, 32, 1,

2 Jesus shall save his people from their sins: Matt. 1: 21.

3 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins, Luke 1: 77:

(3) To cover sins is used for Justification. Blessed is he whose sin is
covered, Psalm, 32, 1, 4 The holy Scripture does describe Justification by the
words, imputation, reckoning, accounting, etc: as,

1 God was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing
their sins unto them: 2: Corinth. 5: 19.

2 Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: Psalm: 32: 2:

3 As David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works Rom: 4, 6,

4 Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: Rom: 4, ^

5 To him, that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness, Rom, 4, 5.

6 It is not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness, but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness
which believe in him etc. Romans 4. 23: 24:

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason.
1 To justify by force of grammatical composition of the word is all one, as
to make a man just, of one, who before was not just, therefore to justify is
to make just.

Ans. 1 Here be four terms; in the Antecedent the signification of the word
justification is taken grammatically, in the consequent it is taken according
to that signification, which belongs properly to Divinity. 2. The true
signification of the word is to be sought for in the proper science, wherein the
question is contained.

2 By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. Esai, 53. 11,
therefore he does justify them by an infused habit.

Ans. It is a fallacy called ignoratio elenchi, for the necessary
determination or limitation is omitted; which follows in the next words: for
he shall bear their iniquities, which words declare, that justification is to
be understood here by imputation, for they are justified by his bearing
their sins, as if themselves had borne and wyped away their own sins.

3 Holiness shall preserve and justify the heart, that is shall cause, that
the heart be made just. Ecclesiastic. 1. 17.

Answer, 1: The book is not Canonical, and therefore in a point of such
moment, his authority is not sufficient ^ in the Greek text the word
justification is not found, 3: Neither if to justify in this place, and some
others, should signify habitual or inherent righteousness, would it thence
necessarily follow, that it should have the same signification in the article
of Justification.

4 Defer not unto death to be justified Ecclus. 18. 21, therefore there is
habitual righteousness, gotten by many actions.

Ans. 1 The meaning is: defer not, to be converted and reconciled with GOD,
etc. Therefore this argument hangs not together. 2. If to justify be all
one with the author of that book, as of unjust to make just, then an absurd
sense would follow from the same words, in the beginning of this chapter. The
Lord only (iustificabitur) shall be justified: that is by the former
interpretation, of an unjust God, shall be made a just God by an infused habit.

5 He that is just, (iustificetur) let him be justified still. Revel, 22, 11,
therefore justification consists of an habit.

Ans. 1 The speech is figurative, for by a Synecdoche the whole is put for the
part, or the cause for the effect, for he speaks of Renovation, (under the
name of justification) which the words next following, added by way of
explication, do declare: and he that is holy, let him be made holy still
(Sanctificetur adhuc) 2. from Renovation to justification no conclusion can be
made, but by four terms.

QVESTION, 2, Whether the grace of Justification be bestowed equally upon all
them, that be justified.
In this question the controversy is not about Renouation, which may and ought
to receive growth and increasing all our life long, neither is there
controversy about the gifts of the holy Ghost, bestowed upon them, who are
justified; but about that righteousness, by the which we are said to be just
before God, and are reconciled to God through Christ. Our adversaries affirm
that this justice or righteousness is not equal and alike in all them, which
are justified, and that it does receive increase, according to diversity of
persons and times; but we utterly deny it for these reasons.

Because our righteousness, whereby we are just before God, is not our own, but
is the

Peter writes to them which had received like precious faith with him, amongst
whom

So Christ gives to them which believe, not an half, but a whole and entire
justification:

Christ was the same to Peter as he was to Paul, as he was to the father of
him that was

So the man sick of the palsy was justified wholly and not in part, by one
act (so to speak)

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason thus
1 To every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ Ephesians. 4. 7. therefore etc.

Ans. Paull speaks not of Justification, but of the gifts bestowed upon them,
which are Justified, for the adorning, and edifying of the Church, as the
words following do declare. There are therefore four terms in this argument,
for in the Antecedent the word grace is taken for a gift of the spirit, in the
consequent for justification:

2 There are diversities of the gifts of God, 1 cor. 12. 4.

Ans; He speaks of gifts, which are bestowed upon them who are justified; and
so justification is presupposed to go before, as already has been said. And
hereof there is no controversy. Justification is on thing and the strong and
weak apprehending or laying ^ould of it, is an other


3 Justifying faith is stronger in some men, and weaker in others.

Ans. 1 Yet there is the same object, total and not partial, of faith whether
it be strong o^ weak; to wit Christ Jesus whole and entire with his most holy
merits, which is our righteousness. Peter calls faith like precious, (2, Pet.
I, 1) because there is the same object apprehended or laid hold on by all,
although without all doubt* all, to whom he wrote, had not the like strength
and firmness of faith, which Peter had: and Christ yielded himself to be
received or laid hold on by a weak faith. Mark, 9, 23, 24, etc. Isai: 42,
3. as was aforesaid.

4. We are commanded to pray for the increase of Gods gifts: therefore, etc.

Ans: We are commanded to pray for Note. The Papists do still confound
justification with renovation or sanctification.
the increase of the gifts of renovation or sanctification, but not of
justification.

Question: 3.
Whereas Renovation does concur together in Justification; and faith cannot
be without good works; it is questioned, What that is, whereby the
righteousness of Christ is apprehended of us; whether it be faith or good works.
The Papists ascribe it to good works; but we prove, that justification may not
be granted or attributed to good works, by these reasons.

Because good works are not accepted of God, unless they be done by men that
are justified: therefore justification goes before good works by the order of
nature: which order is inverted, if justification be ascribed to good works.

Because good works only in them, which are justified, please God: and so
justification

Justification by works does derogate from Christ so much, as is attributed to
our works:

1, I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of all the people there was none
with me. Isai, 63, 3.

2, The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. 1, Ioh 1, 7.

3, He (not our good works) is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1, Ioh. 2, 2.

4. Among men there is none other nam^ under heaven, whereby we must be saved.
Act: 4, 12.

Justification by works, takes away the certainty of Salvation, which the
Scripture

1, Because we know not what, and how many works are necessarily required as
sufficient to Justification; that we might know that we are truly and
sufficiently justified.

2, Evil doers, which are drawn to death and have done none, or without
doubt, very few good works (such as the thief was, Luke, 22) should by this
means despair: whereas notwithstanding God desires not the death of him that
dies. Ezech: 18, 32.

The holy Scripture does take away the power of justifying from works, as well
by

(1) In his sayings it takes away justification from works.

1, To him that works not, but believes in him, that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. Romans 4, 5.

2, By the works of the law no flesh shall be justified in his sight. Romans 3,
20.

3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law.
Romans 3, 28.

4 If it be of grace, it is no more of works: or else grace were no more grace.
Romans 11, 6.

5, We know that a man is not justified by the works of the law. Gal. 2, 16.

6. As many, as are of the works of the law, are under the curse. Gal: 3, 10.

7, Not of works, least any man should boast himself. Ephesians. 2, 9.

8. According to the power of God, who has saved us, and called us with an
holy calling, not according to our works, 2, Tim. 1, 9:

9. Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done* but according to
his mercy he saved us: Tit. 3, 5.

(2) The same is declared unto us by the examples of others: such as is.

(1) The example of Abraham, who was not justified by works.

1, If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to rejoice, but not
with God: Rom* 4, 2:

2, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now to
him that works, the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt: Rom: 4, 3, 4
Gal: 3, 6: Now it is not written for him only, but for us, etc. Rom: 4. 23:

(2) The example of David:

1. As David declares the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, Psa. 32, 1, Rom: 4, 6.

2, Enter not into judgment with thy servant. Psalm. 143. 2. Now he is the
servant of God, that does the will of the Lord, and walks in his ways. Psalm.
119.

(3) The example of the Patriarck Jacob. Not by works, but by him that
calls. Romans 9, 11.

(4) The example of Paul.

1, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. 1, Cor, 4, 4.

2, If any other man thinks that he has, whereof he might trust in the
flesh, etc. touching the righteousness, which is in the law I was unrebukable,
but the things which were vantage unto me, the same I counted loss for
Christ's sake, etc. for who^ I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them doung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ. Philip: 3, 4. 6, etc.

3, We (to wit Peter and Paul) which are Jews by nature, know that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, etc. and we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law. Galat. 2, 15, 16.

(5) The example of the man sick of the palsy, to whom without any his good
works before done, Christ says: Thy sins are forgiven thee: Math: 9, 2.

(6) The example of the Thief upon the Cross Luk, 23. 43.

(7) The example of the Publican. Luke, 18.

(8) The example of the sinful woman. Luke, 7.

(9) The example of the Jews converted by the Sermon of Peter: Acts, 2, 37,
41, etc.

Moreover, works do therefore not justify, because they are imperfect in the
regenerate

Contrariwise our Adversaries do argue thus.
1, Evil works do condemn, therefore good works do justify.

Answer.
The opposition is imperfect: therefore no good consequence can be grounded
thereon: for evil works are perfectly evil; but good works are not
perfectly good: therefore they cannot justify: for we do not the good thing,
that we would; but the evil, which we would not, that do we, Rom: 7, 19.

2: Eternal life, (which abides in them that be justified) is called a
reward. Matthew. 5. 12. and 20. 1. 2. etc. Luk, 6, 35; therefore by good works we
deserve eternal life.

Answer, i. The word Reward is taken two manner of ways. 1, In the
Antecedent The word Reward is diverse in the Law and in Diviniti^^
of this argument for a reward that is due, and answers in a just and exact
proportion to the work wrought. Secondly it is taken otherwise in the
Scripture, namely for a free It is as if a father should promise a reward to his
son for his pains, where as notwithstanding all the fathers goods do bv right
of inheritance come to the son, and the son does owe obedience to his father
although his father promise him no reward.
gift: and hereof it is, that everlasting life is called a gift. (Ephesians. 2, 8)
an inheritance (Gal. 4, 7) and that, whereunto no proportion of desert does
answer, but the elect themselves do esteem the reward greater than their
labor, or deserving (Matthew. 25, 37) there are therefore in this Syllogism
four terms. 2, The word reward is understood many times not of life eternal
it self, but of the increase of glory in life eternal: as Math 5, and Luke,
6, for the glory of the blessed Saints in the life to come, shall be different.
Once again therefore here be four terms: for the middle term (Medius
terminus) is one while taken for life everlasting it self, and an other while
for a special and singular recompense in life eternal.

3. Christ shall frame the judicial sentence at the last judgment from their
good works, Mat. 25, 34. 35, etc. He will reward every man according to his
works. Rom 2. 6.

Ans, 1. Christ does reason from sanctification to justification going before,
as from that which is better known unto us (for in that last judgment, he will
make manifest the faith of his Elect even before men also) and he concludes as
it were from the effect to his cause, from the fruit to the tree, and from the
later to the former. In this argument therefore they turn the later into the
former and the effect into the cause: 2, These very same works, if Faith be
not there before, are of none account, neither do they deserve any spiritual
blessings: as was before said, when we treated of the works of infidells.

4, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, Mat, 19, 17.

Ans, 1, It is a fallacy from that, which is spoken but in some respect only,
to the same taken absolutely and in all respects: for that which Christ spoke
in a particular respect, that is, to beat back the persuasion of perfection
in the young man, that our Adversaries take as simply and absolutely spoken. 2,
And Christ would that the young man should have trial of the weakness of his
strength in fulfilling the law.

5 Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does my fathers will, which is in Heaven, Matthew, 7.
21. Therefore we are justified by works, which we are to do.

Answ, 1, This is my Fathers will, that every one, that sees the Son and
belieueth in him, should have eternal life, says Christ. The Heavenly Father
therefore wills that we believe in his Son, and by faith obtain eternal
life. For this is the work of GOD which is required at our hands, that we
believe in him, whom the Father has sent (Ioh, 6, 29) 2. We deny, that those
which bragg of their faith in Christ, and yet do no good works, are the
heirs of eternal life, because they have not true faith, which works by
love, Galat, 5, 6. But it does not hereof follow that we deserve eternal life
by our good works. For we are saved by grace, not of works, least any man
should boast. Ephesians, 2, 8. 9. And good works are not pleasant to God, but only
in them, which be justified*

6 Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Philip. 2, 12.

Ans, He speaks of sanctification or renovation in men already regenerate.
And warns them, that they do not through security let go the means of
their salvation; but inure themselves daily to the exercise of piety, and the
works of sanctification. Now to apply this to justification, is to confound
justification with sanctification. The argument therefore hangs not together.

7 With such sacrifices God (Promeretur) is promerited. Heb, 13, 16.

Ans, 1, The Author of that Epistle speaks of men, which are justified, they
do then wrongfully wrest it to men which are to be justified. 2, That
translation is corrupt. For the text according to the Greek is, with such
sacrifices God is well pleased; which is not all one, as to be justified. For
good works do please God, as being a begun and imperfect obedience in them,
which are justified; although those works do not justify.

8 God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work, and labor of
love etc, Heb 6. 10.

An, 1, There is more in the consequent than in the Antecedent; for it
follows not, God will recompense the good works of them which are justified,
in the life to come. Therefore those good works deserve justification. 2, It
is a fallacy making many questions, where there is but one. For it is one
question, whether good works do justify, and an other whether God will
reward the good works of the justified.

9. Redeem thy sins by almsdeedes, and thine iniquities by mercy to ward the
poor, Dan, 4. 24.

Ans, 1, He speaks of the escaping of temporal punishments, and not of the
manner of justification His words have this sense; Repent and be merciful to
the poor, that God may turn from thee the temporal punishments of thy
sins, which now hang over thy head. 2, His speech is a Sermon of Repentance,
which does include faith in it, by the figure Synechdoche. 3, The place is
corruptly translated: The proper signification of the word, and true meaning of
the place is rightly rendered thus: Break of thy sins by righteousness, etc.
that is, cease thy woonted sins, and begin a new life, etc.

10 Alms do deliver from all sin, and from death, and will not suffer the
soul to come into darkness, Tobit, 4, 11.

Answ, 1, The book of Tobit is Apocriphall, and therefore can prove no point
in controversy. 2: He speaks not of justification, but of temporal death,
and of the temporal punishments of sin (which are meant in this place by the
word Sin, after the phrase of the Hebrews) And he teaches here the same,
that is in Psalm. 41, 1. Blessed is he that judges w^^ely of the poor, the
Lord, etc. 3. By a Synechdoche faith is included also in the words going
before: set the Lord God always before thine eyes, etc. (Verse, 6) 4. The
work cannot please God: unless it be done of one that is justified.

11, The hearers of the Law are not righteous before God; but the doers of the
Law shall be justified, Rom, 2, 13.

An, It is a fallacy from that which is spoken but in some respect only, to
the same taken absolutely and in all respects. For Paul speaks upon
supposition: If justification be by the law, then not the hearers, but the
do^ers of the Law shall be justified: and so he expresses represseth the
insolency of the Jews, who would be justified, whereas notwithstanding they
kept not the law, as if he should say, If justification be by the law, then not
the hearers, but the dooers of the law shall be justified: But there can no
man be found either amongst the Jews or the heathen, which is a perfect doer
or keeper of the law; (as Paul, prooves it in the first, second, and third
Chapters to the Romans) therefore if justification be by the law, no man
living shall be justified, look the place^ Even as Paul also does ouerturne
this supposition (Gala, 3.) Therefore this sophisme of our Adversaries falls
to the ground.

12 VV as not Abraham our Father justified through works? James 2, 21.

Ans. If the words be understood as they sound according to the letter, they
are repugnant to other Scriptures, 1. in the meaning, because they speak
clean contrary concerning the justification of Abraham (Romans 4, 3. Genesis
15. 6.) Secondly in the history. Because James says, tha^ Abraham was
justified after the offering up of his son, whereas it appears by the
former places, that he was justified about some twenty five years before.
The meaning then of Saint James is, that they which are justified are not
without good works: but that they do so manifest their faith by their works
that by the effects they may be known of others to be justified; which is
nothing else, but to be declared just or righteous.

13 Love covers the multitude of sins, 1. Peter 4, 8.

Answ. In the proper place whence this sentence is cited (Prou, 10, 12.) it
appears, that it is meant of that hiding of sins, which is before men, not
before God. Therefore it is impertinently alleged for justification.

14, Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. Luke 7. 47. Therefore
love meriteth forgiveness of sins.

Answ. 1. In the Parable going before, Christ shows that we may gather by
the love that follows in the party, who has had many sins forgiven, and
who few, in their justification going before: seeing he will love more for
the time to come, to whom many, than he, to whom few sins have been
forgiven. This is therefore a changing of the consequent into the Antecedent
and of the effect and that which follows after into the cause, and that which
goes before.

15 The chiefest virtue does chiefly justify. But Charity is preferred
before faith, 1, Cor, 13. 13. Therefore Charity does justify.

An. 1, Paul compares love or charity with faith, not in respect of
justification, but of duration and continuance. Therefore this is a fallacy
from that, which is spoken in some respect, to the same taken absolutely and in
all respects, 2, Faith does not justify, as it is a virtue or habit for it
own worth but as it is considered respectively, in respect of Christ, whose
merits it applies unto us, and so does justify us for his sake. There are
therefore in this argument more than three terms; and it hangs together
like a rope of sand.

16, If justification be taken away from good works no man will thence forward
be moved to do good works.

Ans: 1. It is a fallacy supposing that for the cause, which is not the cause:
for the true doctrine of justification is not the cause, why some men do not
good works. 2, Neither may we do evil, that good may come of it, that is, we
may not falsely ascribe justification to works, that men may thereby be stirred
up to good works. 3, There are notwithstanding many most weighty causes
besides, why we should do good works, although justification be not ascribed
unto them.

Question: 4.
Our Adversaries deny, that we are justified by faith alone, but to faith
they join hope and charity. We on the contrary side ascribe justification to
faith in Christ alone; for these reasons.

Because in the former question all works are excluded from the act of
justification, question.

Because the holy Scripture, wheresoever it speaks of Justification, does so
describe it, that it mentions none, either work or affection, but only faith
in Christ. Let us then briefly run over the places of the new Testament.

(1) The Gospel of John.
1. As many as received him, to them h^e gave power to be the sons of God,
even Let our Adversaries show aniething, but faith alone in all these sayings
of Scripture.
to them that believe in his name. John, 1, 12.

2. As Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, etc. That whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. John, 3, 14, 15.

3, So God loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ioh.
3, 16.

4. He that believes in him shall not be condemned. Ioh: 3. 18.

5. He that believes in the son has everlasting life. Ioh: 3, 36.

6. The Jews demand, what shall we do, that we might work the works of GOD?
Christ answers: This is the work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he
has sent. Ioh. 6, 28. 29.

7. This is the will of him which has sent me, that every one which sees the
son and believes in him, should have everlasting life. Ioh 6. 40.

8. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in me, has life
everlasting. Ioh. 6. 47.

9. These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ,
the son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name.
Ioh. 20. 31.

(2) The Acts of the Apostles.
1. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that
believe in him, should receive remission of sins. Act. 10 43.

2. By him every one that believes, is justified, Act. 13. 39.

3. By faith the heart is purified. Act: 15, 9.

4. The Iaylor asks; Sirs, what must I do to be saved? and they said,
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine household.
Act. 16, 31, 32.

(3) The Epistle to the Romans.
1, The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all
that believe. Romans 3, 22.

2, We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
law. Romans 3, 28.

3, Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted to him for righteousness: Romans 4, 3.

4, To him that works not, but believes in him, that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. Rom: 4, 5.

5, Therefore it is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise
might be sure to all the seed. Rom: 4, 16.

6, This is written for us also, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness,
which believe in him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: Rom: 4, 24.

7, Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. Rom: 5, 1.

8, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. Rom:
10, 11:

9: With the heart man belieueth unto righteousness. Rom: 10, 10:

(4) The first Epistle to the Corinthians
It pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching, to save them that believe. 1,
Corinth. 1, 21.

(5) The Epistle to the Galatians.
1 We know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but (note that
he says but or except) by the faith of Jesus Christ: and we have believed in
Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law. Galathians. 2. 16.

2, They which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. Galathians.
3. 7.

3. God does justify the Gentiles through faith. Gal: 3. 8.

4. They which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. Gal. 3, 9.

5. The just shall live by faith: Galathians, 3 11.

6. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. Gal: 3, 22.

7. The law was our school master to bring us unto Christ, that we might be
made righteous by faith. Gal: 3. 24.

8. Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus: Gal. 3, 26.

(6) The Epistle to the Ephesians.
By grace are ye saved through faith, not of works, least any man should
boast. Ephesians. 2: 8, 9.

(7) The Epistle to the Philippians.
That I might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ Philip: 3, 9.

(8) The Epistle to the Hebrews.
1. By faith Abell obtained witness, that he was righteous, God testifying of
his gifts: by the which faith also he being dead, yet speaks. Heb: 11. 4.

2. By faith was Enoch taken away, that he should not see death. Heb: 11: 5:

3, He that comes to God, must believe that God is, etc. Heb: 11, 6, Finally,
that whole Chapter is spent in the commendation of faith alone.

Now whereas in these sayings of Scripture, there is handled the way and
means to attain salvation, justification, everlasting life, forgiveness of
sins, a testimony of righteousness, etc. Why if any other thing be required
but faith alone, why, I say, is it not, once so much as in one word, at the
least insinuated by so great and worthy Authors in so many and so serious
sayings of theirs? therefore faith alone does justify.

Contrariwise, Infidelity alone is the cause, that sinners do not obtain
forgiveness of sins, and so are condemned: whereas no sin is unpardonable,
where faith is:

1, He that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in
the name of the only begotten son of God: Ioh: 3, 18:

2 He that obeys not the son (or that The word in the latin translation is
incredulus, that believes not, the original, H^ Ap^^tho^ signifies h^ that
believes not, or he that obeieth not, how soever it be taken here it is
certain it is opposed to faith and believing as appears by ye words next
going before.
believes not on the son) shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him: Ioh: 3, 36:

3, Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins: Ioh: 8, 2.

4. The holy ghost shall reprove the world of sin (as if this were the sin
by an excellency above other) because they believe not in me. Ioh: 16. 8: 9.

5, If any man hear my words and believe them not, etc. he has one that
judges him: Ioh: 12. 47, 48.

6. He that will not believe, shall be condemned. Mark. 16. 16.

7, The sin of the Jews, for which they were rejected, was their unbelief.
Romans 11. 20.

8. Christ is to them that believe not, a stone to stumble at, and a rock of
offense. 1 Pet. 2, 8.

9, He that believes not God, has made him a liar. 1, Ioh. 5, 10,

10, He that has not the son (now the son is had by faith) has not life.
1, Ioh. 5, 12.

11. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb, 11: 6:

Contrariwise our Adversaries do argue.
1, As a gift is received, not with one finger, but with the whole hand, so we
do not receive justification by faith alone, but by hope and charity together
with fairh.

Ans. Similitudes have no force to prove a thing. And yet a gift may be
received with one finger too, as for example, a gold chain may. This is
therefore a most fond argument, although it were sometime alleged in a
famous place and company by a Jesuit, a man of no small authority and
account.

2, We are saved by hope, Rom, 8, 24. Therefore we are not saved by faith alone.

Ans, 1, Paul speaks not of justification, but of the future possession of
everlasting life, which in this life we possess in hope only, and this is all
he says, that we are truly blessed through faith, but we do wait for the
revelation of that our blessedness in hope, And therefore, because, to be
saved is in this place taken of S. Paul in one sense, and of our Adversaries in
an other sense, in the conclusion, there arise in the argument four terms.

3 Go and teach all nations etc. not only to believe but to observe all
things, whatsoever I have commanded you. Math. 28. 20. Therefore faith alone
suffices not.

Ans, Unto Renouation (whereof Christ speaks in the observing of those things
h^ Our Adversaries make no difference between Sanctification and justification.
commanded) it suffices not only to believe, but to work is required also.
But as concerning justification, in the very same instruction of the Apostles,
Christ says; he that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved, without
making mention of charity, or any other works, Mark, 16, 16.

4 It was not enough for the blind man, that his eyes were anointed, but it
was needful Eckius.
that he should go to the poole Siloam (Ioh. 9, 6. 7.) that is, faith
suffices not, but works are required also to justification.

Ans, We may not determine of controuersed points by such Allegories, as have
no ground in scriptures.

5 If I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I
were nothing etc. 1. Cor: 13, 2.

Ans, 1, Paul speaks of the necessity of love or charity, not as pertaining
to justification, but to unity and the profit of the Church. It is therefore
a fallacy, from that which is spoken in some respect to the same taken
absolutely, and this saying of the Apostle is wrongfully wrested to
justification. 2, Neither does he speak of justifying faith, but of the faith
of miracles. Here be therefore five terms in this argument.

6 To you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake. Philippians 1, 29. Here Paul joins faith and
works together.

Answ, 1, Here is not any thing meant of justification; only the Apostle
shows, that they that believe should bear all things patiently for Christ's
sake: and that it is the gift of God, and not of the strength or ability of
man, that they do patiently suffer adversity for Christ's sake, 2, He speaks
that of those, that be justified which our Adversaries expound of them, that
are to be justified. There are therefore four terms.

7 Faith is effectual (or works) by love, Gal, 5, 6. therefore faith alone
does not iustfie, but love or charity together with faith.

An, 1. There is more in the conclusion, Roffensis, faith full of good works
does justify before* it bringes forth the good works.
than in the premises. For there does no more follow, but that faith which is
void of charity, is a dead faith: but that charity, which follloweth faith,
does justify, here is not one syllable. 2, The question is not, what virtues
are linked or joined with others; but what is the peculiar property of every
one of it self. Here is therefore a fallacy in works making many questions
for one.

8 See thou not, that the faith wrought with his works? and through the
works was the faith made perfect. James, 2, 22. and ye see then, that of
works a man is justified, and not of faith only, Verse, 24. and faith without
works is dead, Ver, 26, Show me thy faith by thy works. and I will show thee
my faith by my works, Verse 18.

Ans, 1. He speaks of a dead faith, which we reject in the article of
justification also, 2, The meaning is, that our justification is to be delared
before men by our works, according to that, which our Savior says, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, etc. (Mat, 5,
16) 3, works are not good, unless they be done by them, which are justified.

9 This word (Only) by faith, or by faith (alone) is found no where in the
Scripture. Therefore we are not justified by it alone.

Answ, Exclusive particles, equivalent to the word (alone) are found in the
holy Scripture.

1. The word Grace, Ephesians, 2, 8, Rom,, 11. 5 6. Tit, 3, 7. 2, Timo, 1. 9.

2, The word freely, with other of the same signification Roman. 3, 24,
charisma a gift freely bestowed Roma. 6. 23: doron a gift Ephe. 2, 8.
kecharistai Ho Theos God gave it freely, Galathians 3, 18. 19.

3. The word One: by the grace of one Rom, 5, 15, with one offering etc, Heb,
10, 14.

4, Without the Law, Rom, 3, 21, not by the law, Galat, 2, 21, and 3, 11.

5, The exclusion of works: without works Romans, 4, 6. not by works, Titus,
3, 5, not according to our works 2, Timo, 1, 9. not of your selves. Ephesians, 2,
8. Not having mine own righteousness Philip, 3. 9. going about to stablis^
their own righteousness, have not etc. Rom, 10, 3.

6, The word Imputation which is opposed unto merits, Rom, 4, 3, 4. 6, etc.

7, The forgiveness of sins, and the not recompensing for them by works.
Psalm. 32, 1, Rom, 4, 7.

8, Not, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, Gala, 3, 16. The force of which
exclusive what it is, is plain by the like Phrase and manner of speech. Ioh.
6, 44. No man comes unto me, except the Father draw him. and, No man
comes to the Father but by Me. Ambro, in Epist. ad Roma. ca. 3, 14. August.
in Ps, ^8. et in Ioh. tract. 42. et de ^empore Ser. 68. Basil homil. de Humil.
Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Gal. cap: 3, etc.


Therefore exclusive words (which exclude all things in us, from justification,
but faith) are fully contained in Scripture. Neither can it be denied, but the
Fathers have used the word only by faith, or by faith alone.

10. If justification be ascribed to faith alone there will be made too too
easy a way to eternal life.

Ans. 1. To believe is not so easy a thing. For faith is the gift of GOD, and
it is not in the power of man to believe when he will. 2, We require good
works to salvation, as necessary conditions, but not as causes of
justification or salvation, 3, Nay the Papists do make the way to Heaven much
more easy, while first they place it in the free will of man, and then
expound it, that Heaven is to be purchased with money.

QVESTION. 5.
Our Adversaries move us a fifth question while they seek for themselves a
starting hole, affirming, that by the works of the law in the places before
cited, Paul understands the Ceremonial law only, and not the moral. And
secondly, that the works of the Law are opposed to the works of the
Gospel, as if the commandments of the Gospel were diverse from those, which
are contained in the ten commandments. The places of the Scripture following,
do most manifestly contradict this opinion.

The righteousness of the Law is denied the Ceremonial law cannot be
understood. for that it had then no being, but the moral law is meant.

Paul uses the word (Works) absolutely

So in like sort he rejected the works of

He convinces the Jews to be sinful

Paul decreede the moral law to be the

We establish the law, says Paul, Romans 3, 31. But the Ceremonial law

By the law comes the knowledge of sin, which seeing it is a general speech
appertaining as well to us, as to the Jews, it cannot be understood of the
Ceremonial, but of the moral law, Rom, 3, 20.

8 I knew not sin, but by the law (but what law was that? hear some
particular commandment by way of instance, out of that law) I had not known
lust, except the law etc. Romans 7. 7: but the Ceremonial law contains nothing
concerning lust. It is evident therefore that Paul does speak principally of
the moral law, although he do sometimes adioyne the Ceremonial law too, but
he bereaueth both moral and Ceremonial of all power to justify.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1 Paul makes an opposition beetweene the law of works, and the law of faith,
Rom, 3. 27. therefore we are to accept of this distinction.

Answer, Paul does in that place use the word law in a general
signification, for a doctrine. And whilst he denies justification to the law
of works, he does certainly deny it to works, therefore this is nothing to
the purpose. And our Adversaries do not, or will not understand the phrase and
manner of speech of the Hebrews, whereby the word law, Thorah, is taken for a
doctrine.

2 Paul speaks of some things, that are Ceremonial, as of the Sabbath, of
the new moons, of Circumcision, in the Epistle to the Galatians, therefore he
understands not the moral law.

Ans. 1 Paul passes sometimes from the particular to the general, and
sometime from the general to the particular, that he may make it manifest,
that no works of the whole law do justify a man. 2. We have already proved
that he speaks of all parts of the law, and not only of the Ceremonial.

3 In the Acts of the Apostles Chap; 15, the Ceremonial laws only are handled,

Ans. 1 Be it never so true, that the Ceremonial law is there only handled,
yet we may not argue thus. Justification is denied to the Ceremonial law,
therefore it is not denied to the moral. Now in that place the mention was of
the Ceremonial law; because there was expressly moved a controversy
concerning the keeping of ceremonies. 2, And yet that that place does not only
treat of the Ceremonial law, is proved by these words: which we were neither
able to bear, neither our fathers (amongst whom, the fathers that lived before
Moses without the Ceremonial law may be understood) but we believe through
the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be saved, even as they (Act, 5, 10,
11.) In which words Saint Peter had reference to the fathers, which were not
able to bear the burden of the moral law, so that they might perfectly
satisfy and fulfill the same. And Peter does expressly oppose the grace of
Jesus christ and faith in Christ to the fulfilling of the law: that which the
whole course and order of the place does manifestly declare to be true.

CHAP. 11. Of Faith.
Question, 1.
IT is no marvel, that our Adversaries do deny justification by faith alone,
seeing they do not acknowledge faith, and those which be the necessary
conditions thereof. Wherefore now let us treat of the conditions of faith what
they be, and wherein our adversaries do dissent from us.

We consider faith, not (as our Adversaries do) and relation unto Christ, and
i^ grounded upon him:.
: that is, faith is not that righteousness in it self whereby we are just
before God; but it is that instrument; whereby we lay hold upon Christ and his
righteousness; which being by faith made and accounted with God as ours, we
stand just by the righteousness of Christ before God, and this we prove.

1 Because the Scripture speaks still of faith relatiuely, as it respects
and is referred unto Christ: as: He that believes in Christ; in him; on him;
the faith of Christ etc. Ioh. 3, 15, and 6, 40, 47, Act, 10, 43, and 15, 11,
Galat, 2, 16, Rom, 3, 22, 26, and 4, 24, and infinite more such like.

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason,
1 Faith is the gift of God: but the gifts of God are qualities: therefore
faith is a quality.

Ans. 1 We deny not but it is a quality: but it does not justify as a
quality, but because it lays hold on Christ. 2. Faith is called in the
Scripture a gift, not that it should be defined as a quality, but that we might
understand, that it is freely given us.

2 Faith is oftentimes in the Scripture used absolutely without determination
or reference to any other thing: as, He that shall believe, and be baptized
etc. Mark: 16, 16, if ye believe not, surely ye shall not be established:
Isai. 7. 9.

Ans. The object of faith is always understood by the figure Synecdoche: for
without it faith does neither believe, neither is it faith:

2, The Apostles taught their hearers to believe not absolutely, without
reference to Christ, but to believe in Christ, in whom they were bid to
believe, and to be baptized in his name. Matt, 28, 19,

3 Faith is a work, John 6: 29: therefore it iustifies, as a work.

Ans; 1 The question is not, whether faith may be called a work, but how it is
considered in the very act of Justification. This (how it is to be considered)
Christ declares in the words next following: This is the work of God, that
ye believe in him (See there is the relative or respective acception) whom he
has sent. 2, Besides in this argument, there is more in the conclusion, than
in the premises: for the collection they make, is such like, as this, faith is
in some sort a work, therefore it justifies as a work.

Our adversaries do acknowledge nothing in faith but a bare and general
knowledge and assent, that in faith there is required a trust or confidence
whereby we rely and depend upon God: and that for these reasons.

Because trust or confidence is the essential

Because the Scripture, when it speaks of faith does expressly use such
words, as be token

1 By Christ we have boldness and entrance with confidence by faith in him,
Ephesians 3, 12,

2 Let us go bouldly unto the throne of grace Heb, 4, 16,

3 Seeing that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy
place etc; let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of faith,
Hebrews, 10, 19, 22,

4 Herein is love perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of
judgment, etc. There is no fear in love: but perfect love casts out fear:
for fear has painefulnes and he that fears, is not perfect in love, 1, Ioh:
4, 17, 18. In this saying the excluding of fear presupposes a trust in Christ:

5. Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Matthew, 9, 2.

6 Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. Matt, 9: 22.

7 Be of good comfort: I have overcome the world, Ioh. 16, 33.

Contrariwise our adversaries reason,
James acknowledges no other faith, but that which consists of a mere
knowledge and assent Iam. 2.

Ans. 1 This holds not, James found no other faith in the Devils; therefore
neither did he find any other in true Christians. 2. Neither does this
follow. James entreats only of one kind of faith, to wit, of historical
faith; therefore the Scripture teaches none other kind of faith.

Our Adversaries affirm, that faith may be in

Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, Romans 5, 1, but every one
that commits

All men have not faith, 2. Thessal, 3, 2,

The hearts of the believers are purified by

Paul speaks of the wicked ones after an

1 That as concerning faith, they have made shipwreck, 1, Timoth, 1: 19, of
those, which have bid all conscience farewell,

2 That they have erred from the faith, 1, Tim; 6, 10, of covetous men;

3 That they have denied the faith; 1, Tim, 5 8: of such as are without
natural affection,

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason thus
1 Wicked men have wrought miracles in the name of Christ, by faith Matt. 7.
22, 23: therefore there is faith in the wicked ones.

Ans. They have the faith of miracles, but not justifying faith:

2 Satan himself has faith: James 2, 19.

Ans. Satan has an historical faith: but our question is of a justifying
faith, therefore seeing one kind of faith is meant in the, Antecedent, and an
other in the consequent, there be four terms:

3 Simon Magus believed, whose heart notwithstanding was not right: Act: 8: 13.
21,

Answer, He was convicted in conscience, that the miracles of the Apostles
were not magical but divine: as the forcerers of Egypt acknowledged the finger
of God, Exodus, 8, 19, Simon therefore believed, as Saint Luke says* but it was
an historical faith only, and not a true justifying faith.

Our Adversaries dream, that true faith may be without works: but we
maintain, that a true justifying

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, Matt, 7, 18.

Faith works by love, Galat. 5, 6,

Faith without works is dead, James, 2, 26,

Because Christ shall prove our faith by our

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason,
1 Show me thy faith without works, Iam. 2. 18 therefore faith may be without
works.

Ans. That translation is faulty; for according to the Greek it should be
translated: show me thy faith by, or out of thy works. 2: unless S. James
thought true faith to be effectual and working by love, he would not make
comparison between a vain and true faith: and desire to have the true faith to
be showed or proved to be such by works, 3. That which he does derogate
from a dead faith is wrongfully wrested to a justifying faith:

2 Yet the Protestants cannot endure this proposition: Good works are
necessary to Salvation, therefore they believe that justifying faith is
without good works.

Ans. That which we deny in some respect and consideration only, that our
Adversaries take, as simply and absolutely spoken in all respects. We
distinguish between faith and works, as between the cause and effects of
justification: we deny good works to be necessary as causes of justification
or salvation; but we require them as necessary conditions of them, which are
justified and shall be saved.

Our Adversaries maintain that faith is informed

Because faith does not please God in i^ self, but for and because of Christ,
whom it lays hold on:

In every Relation two things do concur (now faith in that respect, in
which it justifies,

Because the efficient cause does inform: therefore because charity is the
effect of faith, and faith the efficient cause of charity, faith cannot be
informed by charity.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1 Paul makes faith to be of no reckoning without charity, 1. Corinthians: 13:
therefore charity does ^nforme faith.

Ans. 1. Paul speaks there of the says of miracles, not of justifying faith,
2. He does not say that faith is informed by charity, but commends the
necessity o^ charity in some respect, because that the faith, that has not
charity following it, is not the true and saving faith.

2 Faith works by charity, Galat. 5. 6, therefore charity does inform
faith.

Ans. 1, Charity is here placed for the means and instrument, by which says
works. Now means and instruments are not the form of that thing, by which
they are moved: but are said rather to be informed by that, which moves or
works by them, 2. Paul here describes a true and justifying faith by the
effects thereof.

Therefore our Adversaries understand not what faith is.

Question: 2. Of the certainetie of salvation:
Because in the handling of this question, the Author has many things
throughout, which might ^rooue off^nsiue, I thought it better to refer the
reader to the writings of our Contrymen, then to leave ^^ things scandalous,
or to make it up with many patches, which the reader may have exactly done
otherwhere, if he please to read Master Perkins in his Reformed Catholic,
and in his treatise of Conscience: and Master Downham Christian warfare: book
2: and Chap: 6: 7: 8: etc.

CHAP. 12. Of good Works,
What we are to think of justification by works, has been declared in the
former chapter, there remain yet two principal errors of our Adversaries: one
of the work wrought, an other of good works themselves, to the doing whereof
Christians are bound. Now let us treat of them in general and in particular.

Question: 1.
Whether a good work do please GOD, by virtue of the work wrought, though it
be done without a good and sanctified mind (as for example, while they use the
Sacraments, hear Mass, singe Canonical hours etc. without de^^tion:) Our
Adversaries affirm it: but we den^^ it, and teach, that the work does not
please go^* unless it be done by a man that is justified: and when that the
person is in savor with God, then that the work is accepted also. And this is
proved by this reasons following.

Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: Rom, 14, 23, But that which is by the
work wrought

Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye tithe mint, and anise
and cummin, See a work otherwise commanded (tithing) with out mercy and
faithfulness.
the law, as judgment and mercy, and fidelity. Matt, 23, 23,

This people draws near unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
their lips, but there heart is far of from me. Matt,

The same thing is proved by the example of the Israelites and others; whereas
their works, no not those which were comman^^d the^, did please God any longer,
because of want of faith in the persons that did them.

1. Sacrifice was a work acceptable to God: Abel sacrificed; and Cain
sacrificed, but his work was not accepted: the reason whereof is given in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. cap. 11. ver: 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a
greater sacrifice than Cain, by the which faith he obtained witness, that he
was righteous, etc.

2. To him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my words. He that kills a bullock, See works* what they are
by the work wrought.
is as if he flew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs
neck: he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood: he that
remembers Incense, as if he blessed an Idol. Isa. 66, 2. 3, 4.

3. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord?
I am full of the burnt offerings of Ramms, and of the fat of the fed beasts:
and I desire not the blood of bullocks, nor Here is a large Catalogue of works
done without faith and an honest heart.
of Lambs, nor of Goats. When ye^ come to appear before me, who required
this at your hands, to tread in my Courts? Bring no more oblations in vain:
Incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot suffer your new moons, nor
Sabbaths, nor solemn days (it is iniquity) nor solemn assemblies. My soul
hates your new Moons, and your appointed feasts: they are a burden unto me:
I am weary to bear them. And when ye shall stretch out your hands; I will
hide mine eyes from you: and though ye make many prayers, I will not hear:
for your The cause why they displeased God.
hands are full of blood. Wash you, make you clean* take away the evil of
your works from before mine eyes: cease to do evil: learn to do well:
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed: judge the fatherless, and defend the
widow. And come now and let us reason together, faith the Lord: though your
sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow, though they were red
like scarlet, they shall be as wool Isa, 1, 11, 12, etc.

4. The same is witnessed, Psalm. 50. 8, etc: and 51. 16. Where the true
sacrifices are not defined by the work wrought, but such as come from a
person, contrite, and humbled, and which is in favor with God.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1. Though the person be not in favor, yet the work it self is good.

Answer.
The work has a double respect: either as it is considered in it self,
whereof we speak not here: or as it is considered in an other. According to
this latter respect the work is considered together with the worker: and so
the work which is good in it self, is polluted by the impure and impenitent
worker. Whereof we spoke more before.

2. The work of Ahab, though an hypocrite, pleased God, when he humbled
himself. 1, Kin. 21, 29.

Ans: As Ahab did not truly repent, so neither was there any thing meant as
concerning eternal salvation, but only of the diminishing and mitigating of
temporal punishments. Now our question is of works, which (as our Adversaries
think) merit everlasting life: they argue therefore very fondly.

Question: 2.
Whether works and services of man's choice and tradition; having no warrant in
the holy Note, The state of the Controversy is not of things indifferent, and
such as pertain to order in the Church but of the true manner of worshipping
God.
Scriptures, do please God, and be to be observed, as necessary to
justification. Our Adversaries hold this affirmatively, laying so great a
necessity upon those traditions, that often times a man shall be judged to
have sinned more greevously, for transgressing one of those traditions, than
for neglecting some of Gods commandments: but we out of the word of God, do
reject these wil-worships.

Hitherto may be applied those arguments, which were brought before, chap. 4.
against

Because to appoint and define the service of God, belongs to God alone, and
not to

1, Hence it is, that the Lord does set this preface before the 10
Commandments, as it were to procure authority to them. I am the Lord thy God.
Exodus: 20. 2.

2. God (not we) has ordained good works, that we should walk in them.
Ephesians. 2, 10.

3, Prove what is the good, and acceptable and perfect will of God, not of men.
Rom: 12. 2.

4. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.
Math. 28, 20.

The will of God is perfectly declared in the holy Scriptures, that we have no
need

1, For the Scripture does instruct a man, that he may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works. 2, Timothy, 3, 17.

God will not have any man to depart from this his revealed will, or to add
any thing thereto, or to frame or invent any new things beside.

1. Ye shall not do, every man, whatsoever seems him good in his own eyes;
but whatsoever I command you, take heed ye do it. Thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought there from. Deuteronomy. 12. 8. 3^.

2. Take heed that ye do, as the Lord your God has commanded you: turn
not a side to the right hand, nor to the left: Deuteronomy. 5, 32.

3, Seek not after your own heart, nor after your own eyes. Numb, 15, 39.

4, Thou shall not turn away from the law to the right hand, nor to the left.
Iosu, 1, 7. Because GOD does witness, that such works are very displeasing
unto him.

1, By the example of the Israelites, who of a good intent did erect for Gods
glory, Groves, Temples, high places, Altars, etc.

2, So those, who would, without the commandment of God, imitate the fact of
Abraham in offering up his son, are most sharply reproved by God. 2, King 16,
3, and 17, 17, and 21. 6. and 23. 10: etc:

3. Saul, in sacrificing without the commandment of God, offended: 1: Sam:
13. 9. 10. 11.

4. In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, the precepts of men:
Matthew. 15, 9.

By these services of men's choice and devising it comes to pass, that the
commandments

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason:
1. Whatsoever is done with a good intent; cannot displease God; but the
service of God; of man's choice and invention is done with a good intention;
therefore; etc.

Ans: In the first proposition is the begging of the thing in question: for
that proposition is not only controversed, but also it is very expressly
condemned in the places of Scripture before alleged.

2. The holy Ghost, which is promised to the Church, will not command those
things which are contrary to Gods will: but those services of God are
delivered of the Church from the mouth of the holy Ghost: therefore etc.

Answer, 1.
If the CHVRCH did ordain those things by the instinct of the holy Ghost, then
would we grant them the whole reason: but seeing that this same thing is a
matter in controversy, here is a begging of the thing in question. 2, Christ
says of the holy Ghost, he shall bring all things to your remembrance, that
I have told you. (John: 14, 26) Now let our Adversaries prove that ever
Christ told such things, and we will believe them. Likewise, the holy Ghost
shall glorify Christ, John, 16, 14: but these services do obscure Christ with
his merits. 3, Neither may we impute that to the Church of Christ, whatsoever
certain superstitious men have broached under the title and name of the
Church; bringing hereby the true Church of Christ into bondage, and vexing
them with the observation of men's traditions.

3. Christ says of his Apostles, he that hears you, hears me. (Luke. 10.
16.) therefore it is all one, as if Christ had delivered those services of God
with his own mouth.

Ans. 1. What agreement is there between Christ and Belial? between the
Apostles and the Prelates of the Roman Antichrist? 2, It is a fallacy of
division, because those necessary words, which are part of the instruction
that Christ gave to his Apostles, are omitted, to wit, teach them to observe
whatsoever I have commanded you. Matthew 28.

4 As the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in the chair of Moses,
was approved, so the constitutions of the Prelates of the Church, concerning
the service of God, are to be approved and ratified.

Answ. 1, To sit in Moses chair, is not to frame new devises of GODS service,
but to teach MOSES. It is therefore a fallacy from that, which is spoken in
some respect only to the same taken absolutely and in all respects. For then
the Pharisees fate in Moses chair, when they taught the law of Moses; but not
when they broached superstitious and false conceits, whereof Christ said.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, meaning their doctrine (Matthew 16, 6, 12)
2. There is more in the conclusion, than in the premises. For there follows
no more, but this, that the Ministers of Christ, that teach well and live ill,
are to be heard, if in the mean while they teach that which is truth. But
what is this to the purpose?

5 Many things are held and defended in the Church (that is of Rome) which are
not in the Scriptures.

Answ, For this very cause they are forgeries, and deservedly for the reasons
before alleged, to be rejected.

6 There are in the most ancient Councels, which are approved and allowed on
both parts, constitutions, which are not comprised in scripture; but are
received as being de^^uered by the Church.

Ans, 1, These constitutions belong to order and comeliness, and are not
matters of faith. Therefore this is nothing to the purpose. 2, Neither are they
proposed by the Counsels as meritorious of eternal life, but as things
indifferent. 3 And in Counsels, which we approve of, we receive those things
only, which are not contrary to the Word of God.

7 Christ never commanded to abstain from that which is strangled, which
notwithstanding the Apostles commanded, Acts. 15, 29. Nay they were abrogated,
and afterward brought up by the Apostles.

Answ. It is a fallacy from that which is spoken in some respect to the same
taken absolutely and in all respects. For the Apostles did not require this, as
a thing necessary to salvation, but did ordain in some respect according to
the rule of charity in favor of the weak ones, who might be offended at
Christian liberty used unseasonably. But the Papists contend for such
constitutions, as they make necessary. It is therefore an argument from that,
which is necessary by an accident and special occasion, to that which is of
it self absolutely necessary.

QVESTION, 3.
The question is, what kind of works those be, which our Adversaries do
call works of supererogation. Our Adversaries commend them highly, as making
men perfect: but we have some things to except against them both in general,
and in particular. as,

That which they presuppose as a ground is

When ye have done all things, which

It is contrary to the article of sanctification,

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus
1 Christ says: if thou shall supererogate any thing, etc. Luke 10, 35.
Therefore he had reference here to works of supererogation.

Ans, 1, In controuersed points of Religion, we may not play with allegories,
which have no ground in Scripture, 2. Christ does there extol the charity of
the Samaritan^, who before had given money to the host to make provision for
the wounded man, and with all promised him, that if he^ spent more in providing
for him, he would repaie it. But what is this to works of supererogation?

2 I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies
sake, which is the Church, Colos. 1, 24.

Ans, He speaks nothing of the perfect keeping of the law, much less of
works of supererogation, but of that parcel of the Cross, which God lays
upon the shoulders of the Church and the members thereof, to be borne of them,
that they may be made like to the image of his Son (Romans, 8, 29). For the
meaning of Paul is only this, since that certain afflictions are allotted to
the CHVRCH, that himself bears a great part of them, that the measure of
sufferings may be fulfilled in the mystical body of Christ. And what is this
to the works of supererogation?

They feign that Christ has brought us a

Because many of those things, which they call counsels, are indeed
commandments,

Christ was not a Lawgiuer, but a Mediator.

1, The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ, Ioh, 1,
17.

2, And therefore (that he should not seem a Law giver) Christ judges no man
Ioh, 8, 15.

3, Therefore the preaching of the Gospel (not of the Law) is called the
preaching of Christ, and the Ministry of reconciliation. 2 Corinthians, 5,
18, 19, 20.

This false assertion of our Adversaries savoureth

Our Adversaries reckon Poverty amongst Evangelical Counsels, and works of
supererogation, (3) Poverty.
but falsely.

Because it is not a council, but a commandment, when need so requires, we
Mat, 8, 19, 20, etc, and. 10, 37, 38, etc. Lu, 18, 29 etc.
should part with all the goods of this life, nay life it self for Christ's
sake. But the Moonkish poverty is far from this.

The Moonkish poverty is but a mockery. For therein the sweat of the brows

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason,
1 CHRIST said to the young man, who asked a council of perfection: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all etc, Matt, 19, 21. Mark 10, 20.

Ans, The whole text does make it plain, that Christ would repress and pull
down the proud young Pharisee, that swelled with persuasion of his own
perfection, and that he meant nothing less, than to teach, that perfection did
consist in poverty. Neither would Christ by this answer prescribe a common
rule of attaining to perfection. But, as God proved Abraham's obedience, when
he commanded him to offer his son (which yet he would not have done) so Christ
by enioining the young man poverty, would bring to light his disobedience, and
idolatrous worshipping of money: That so it might appear, that he loved
riches more, than God; and that therefore he lied in bragging that he had kept
the law.

They ground the counsel of vowed chastity (4) Chastity.
upon the words of Paul. Concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the
Lord: but I give counsel. 1. Corint: 7, 25, and, he thas is able to receive
this, let him receive it. Matthew, 19: ^2.

Ans, 1. Paul's counsel in this place was not concerning perfection, or of
obtaining of eternal life, but his counsel was fitted to the present
necessity; that is, for fear of persecution: it is not then to the purpose.
2, Paul left this counsel free at their own choice, neither did he lay a
snare on their consciences: Wherein there is no agreement with the moonkish
vowed chastity. 3. Christ (Matthew, 19) handles nothing of the perfection of
man, but only teaches, that the unmarried man wants many molestations,
whereunto they which live in wedlock, are subject.

They call Moonkish obedience, under the rule of their founder, the third
evangelical counsel: (5) Obedience.
but very shamelesly.

For they have no one word, whereby they can prove it us out of the Scripture.

Because it is obedience performed not to Christ, but to men, Benedict,
Bernhard, Francis,

True obedience, commanded in the word of God, which is to be performed to

They teach, that these works of supererogation

If one man might communicate perfection

Every man shall give an account for himself, not for another. Romans 14. 12.

Simonie is committed, when heaven and heavenly goods are sold for money. Acts.
8.

By this means, the poor should be debarred from salvation; because they are
not

CHAP. 13. Of Renovation, or Regeneration, and the obedience, which is begun in
the justified and the regenerate.
QVESTION. 1.
THE question is not here, whether the regenerated be bound to do good
works: (for that is confessed by both sides) but whether the good works of
the regenerate, such as they be in this life (in keeping of the law) be so
perfect, that if God would deal with them in judgment, he could find
nothing in their good works, which he might rightly and justly condemn. Our
Adversaries hold the affirmative, we defend the negative part, upon the
grounds following.

The very nature of the law, wherein the

1, The law is a burden, that cannot be born of any, neither regenerate, nor
unregenerate as peter says the law is a yoke, which neither our Fathers, nor
we (namely the regenerate, the Apostles) were able to bear Act: 15, 10.

2. Christ did that, which was impossible to the law. Romans 8, 3.

3, He that keeps the whole law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of
all. Iam: 2, 10.

4, The law is spiritual, but I (Paul regenerated) am carnal, sold under
sin. Romans 7, 14, for Paul was not as yet in this life altogether spiritual.

5. The law requires the whole heart, soul, and all the powers of man: which
no man can perform. Luke, 10. 27. Deuteronomy. 6, 5.

6. The law reckons Concupiscence in the Catalogue of sins, which is not yet
taken away, but remains in the regenerate.

This is proved also by the complaints of regenerate men in the Scripture, who
complain

1. All our righteousness is as filthy clouts. Isai, 64, 6.

2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall none that
lives, Paul does not only acknowledge that the first motions of Concupiscence
are remaining in the regenerate, but that they were also evils wherwt himself
was cu^bred; when he says, the evil that I would not, that do I.
be justified. Psalm. 143, 2.

3. Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from secret faults. Psalm. 19, 12.

4. I allow not that, which I do, for what I would, that do I not, but what I
hate, that do I: to will is present with me: but I find no means to
perform that which is good: for I do not the good thing which I would, but
the evil which I would not, that do I. etc. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7, 15, 18, 19, 24.

5. Not as though I had already attained to it, etc. Philip. 3. 12. 13. Where
Paul does manifestly affirm, that he has not as yet attained to full
perfection.

6, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. 1, Corinth. 4.
4. for God sees many sins in us, which are unknown to us, but are not hid
from God.

7, My power is made perfect in weakness. 2, Cor. 12. 9.

8. If we say, that we have no sin (we the regenerate, John and his
auditors) we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. 1, Ioh. 1. 8.

9. Therefore the children and Saints of God pray, forgive us our trespasses:
and, therefore (because thou have pardoned my sin, in hope of the like, by
mine example) shall every one, that is godly, make his prayer unto thee in a
time, when thou may be found. Psalm. 32. 6.

Because there remains still in the regenerate agree with the law of God.

1, But I am carnal Romans 7, 14.

2. I do not the evil, but the sin that dwells in me does it. Romans 7. 17.

3. I know, that in me, that is in my flesh dwells no good thing. Romans 7, 18.

4. If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that
dwells in me. Romans 7, 20.

5. I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. Romans, 7.
23.

6, I my self (Paul regenerated) in my mind serve the law of GOD, but in my
As much as is added to us so much is taken from Christ. Not we, but Christ did
those things which belong to the perfect keeping of the law.
flesh the law of sin. Romans 7, 25.

Because the doctrine of our perfect fulfilling of the law, is contrary to the
full and perfect merit and obedience of Christ: for

1. If we could have perfectly kept the law, what need was of Christ? and why
should Paul abandon all his own righteousness: Philip: 3, 8, 9. etc.

2. That that was impossible to the law, in as much, as it was weak, because
of the flesh (see our imperfection) God sending his son, in the similitude of
sinful flesh, etc. Rom 8. 3.

3. After our first reco^ciliation with God. Christ should be unto us
unprofitable and fruitless: because they who were reconciled and already
regenerated, might by themselves satisfy God, that they should not have any
more any need of a Mediator and intercessour: which to say, is in Scripture
absurd.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the law; and love is the
fulfilling of the law. Romans. 13. 8. 10. but the regenerate have love:
therefore they do perfectly fulfill the law.

Ans. 1. It is one thing to fulfill the law in a certain manner and after a
sort, (that is, according to the measure of begun and imperfect obedience) and
another thing to fulfill it perfectly. Whereof this latter agrees to Christ
alone, the other to the regenerate: therefore there is more in the conclusion,
than is in the premises. For if our Adversaries can show us perfect love in
any of the regenerafe (such a love as is required Luke, 10, 27, Deuteronomium
6. 5.) then will we willingly yield unto them the perfect fulfilling of the
law.

2 God commanded not impossibilities: therefore Simile. A rich merchant buyeth a
tower of a Noble* man at a great pric^ Now before the buyer p^i^ the money, he
loses all his wealth by gaming, may he that so^ld it now be^ accuse^, a^ if
h^e had made a contract with the merchant, which he^ was not able to perform?
we may perfectly keep the Commandments of God.

Answ, God commanded not impossibilities, but to whom were they not impossible?
to man before his fall, in the integrity ^f nature, and endued with the Image
of God. But Paul says that the law was impossible to man, after he had
fallen, (Romans, 8, 3.) Therefore God is not to be accused, as is he had
commanded things impossible to be done, but we are to be accused, who have
lost the ability and power to perform them.

3 His Commandments are not grievous, 1, Ioh, 5, 3. and my yoke is easy, and
my burden is light, Matt, 11, 30

Ans, 1, The Commandments of Christ are easy to the faithful, because the
regenerate do obey them with a willing motion of the Holy Ghost, and not by
constraint, etc. It is therefore a fallacy from that, which is spoken but in
some respect only to the same taken absolutely. 2, There is more in the
conclusion, than in the premises. For thus much only follows: the
Commandments are easy, therefore Christians do them not with grief. And yet
this willing and ready obedience does not comprise in it absolute and full
perfection.

4 Those things, which are burden some and impossible in the law, do not
pertain any longer to the regenerate, neither are they tied to them, but to
the possible things only.

Answer. 1. Seeing, that this is said without Scripture, we may deny it with
the same facility, that it is affirmed. 2, Paul acknowledges himself to be
bound to the Law of Concupiscence, that forbids lust, which is one of the
impossibilities in the law. Therefore the Antecedent proposition is false.

5 There be in the Scriptures examples of perfect men: as, Hezekiah walked
with a perfect heart. 2. King, 20. 3, the heart of Asah the King was perfect.
2. Chron. 15, 17.

Answ, 1, Perfection there is opposed unto hypocrisy. It is therefore
perfection not absolutely, but in some respect 2. This perfection of those
Kings was imperfecte, For Hezekiah is in the same Chapter accused of sin, and
the punishments for sin are denounced against him. And of Asah it is
recorded, that he cast the prophet of the Lord into prison, and that he trusted
more in the help of the Physicians, than in the Lord, etc, It is then a bad
sequel, to conclude from perfection in some respect and sort, to absolute
perfection, which is without all spot.

6 Zachary and Elizabeth were both just, and walked in all the Commandments
and ordinances of the Lord without reprove, Luke 1. 6

Ans, 1. It follows not, they are said to be just: therefore they are said
to be just by the works and perfect fulfilling of the law. 2, For they are
said to be just in some respect, that is for Christ's merit. 3, Their
righteousness in a holy conversation is opposed to hypocrisy. 4, They lived
without reproof before men, but they were sinners before God. For Zachary
sinned through unbelief, and therefore was made dumb. Therefore this reason is
many ways faulty.

7 If thou will be perfect, etc. Matthew, 19, 21, Simile. A sick man thinks
himself ^ound, and yet cannot stand upon his feet, his Physician, to let him
^ee his disease, bids him walk, therefore he can walk.
therefore we may be perfect.

Answ. Christ in this place by these words conuinceth the young man of
imperfection: so far is he from decreeing and saying that perfection is
possible; as was declared before Chap, 12.

8 The regenerate are called perfect. Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus
minded. Philip, 3, 15. Among them that are perfect, 1, Corin, 2, 6, The
Scripture makes a man perfect, 2, Timoth, 3, 17.

Ans, 1, Paul speaks of them, which do acknowledge Christ, not
hypocritically, but truly, and are inflamed, not with an hypocritical, but
with a true zeal of amending their life, and he speaks of such a perfection,
as befalls the Saints of God, who yet carry about with them the corrupt
flesh. There are therefore four terms; seeing that perfection in this
argument is taken two manner of ways, first for sincerity opposed to
hypocrisy, and then for absolute and full perfection in every point. 2, As
concerning the place, For example, the law is holy, the law is proposed to
sinners. Therefore sinners also are holy
(2. Timoth, 3, 17.) the Scripture contains perfect instruction of a holy
life. But it does not hereof follow, that the regenerate are perfect. For no
man lives in all things according to the rule of the Scripture.

9 The sins of the regenerate are venial sins, therefore they hinder not
their perfection.

Answer, 1, They do not therefore become no sins, because they be venial
sins, neither do therefore cease to be contained under sin as their genus,
because they become of an other species, than other sins be. 2, They are
even hereby convicted of imperfection, because they be venial, and have need
of pardone, 2, No sins are venial, in the Papists sense.

QVESTION. 2.
The fond evasion of our Adversaries does give occasion to this second
question; whilst they deny that Concupiscence, and the first motions thereof
be sins, or have the nature of sin; for they cannot but confess that they
remain in the regenerate. We on the contrary side affirm, that both
Concupiscence it self, and also the first motions thereof, are sins in the
regenerate: and that for these reasons following.

To whatsoever thing the definition of a

1, Sin is the transgression of the law, 1, John 3, 4. But Concupiscence
swarueth from the law. Therefore Concupiscence is sin.

2. The wisdom of the flesh is not subject to the law of GOD, neither indeed
can be Romans, 8, 7. But concupiscence rebelleth against the law of God, Romans
7, 23. therefore it is a sin.

The name of sin is expressly attributed to concupiscence.

1, Whilst it is forbidden in the tenth Commandment.

2, Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof Note. Paul calls concupiscence sin, Romans 6 five times. Rom 7.
six times* Rom, 8, thrice.
Rom, 6, 12.

3, I knew not sin, but by the law; for I had not known lust or
concupiscence, except the law had said, thou shall not lust, Rom, 7. 7.

4, Sin took occasion by the commaundedement, and deceived me. Rom, 7, 8, 11.

Because terms aequiualent to sin are attributed to Concupiscence.

1. An evil present with us, Rom, 7, 8, 21.

2: A thing not good, Rom, 7, 18.

3. The flesh lusts against the spirit, Galat, 5. 17. which is enimitie
against God. Rom, 8, 7.

4, Therefore Paul teaches us to crucify Concupiscence, or the lust of the
flesh Galathians, 5, 25.

The first motions of lust or concupiscence, and other bad affections, are
condemned as sins.

1, Of anger, Christ says, whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly,
shall be culpable of judgment, Matthew, 5, 22.

2. Of hatred: whosoever hates his brother, is a Manslayer, 1, Ioh. 3, 15,

3, Of the first motion of Concupiscence unto wantonness, Christ says
whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committted adultery with
her already in his heart, Mat. 5, 18.

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason thus.
1. There is nothing, that brings damnation, in them which are in Christ
Jesus. Romans 8. 1. But sin is a thing that causes damnation. Therefore sin
is not in the regenerate, and consequently Concupiscence, seeing it is in the
regenerate, is no sin.

Ans. All sin deserves damnation, but it brings not damnation to any, in
whom it is pardoned, as it is in all the children of God, and that is Paul's
meaning, that there is nothing that shall cause damnation, in them which are in
Christ Jesus, because that which is damnable in them of it self, is made
venial for Christ's sake.

2 Christ has purged all our sins. Heb. 1. 3. Therefore concupiscence in the
regenerate is not sin.

Ans. This is a monstrous and misshapen reason; for by the like argument,
because Christ has purged all sins: therefore neither adultery, nor
manslaughter should be sins any more.

3 Christians regenerate are sanctified and washed from their sins and
offenses. 1: Cor: 6: 11. therefore they have no sin, and consequently
Concupiscence in them is no sin.

Ans. 1. There is more in the Conclusion, than in the premises, for this only
does follow: they are washed and sanctified: therefore their sins are not
imputed to them. For if they were not sins, they had no need to be washed
from them, 2. Washing from sins, does not cause, that they should not be, but
it respects the guilt of sin, which is taken away: otherwise the regenerate
should not sin any more, which sauoureth of the error of the Anabaptists. And
marvel it is, that our Adversaries da^e come into the light with such toyish
fooleries. The Anabaptisme of the Papists.


4 Concupiscence, if it be overcome, as it is in the regenerate, gives but
matter of victory and glory unto them, therefore it is not sinnne.

Ans. 1 It were a shameful argument, for by the like reason, Satan should not
sin, because if he be overcome, he does but yield us matter of reward, 2.
It is a fallacy from that which is a cause by accident; not of it self: for
we may not say that Concupiscence is not sin by his own nature, because the
conquest of it yields us matter of glory.

5 If concupiscence be sin, then all sins be equal, and be a like
sinful.

Answer, 1.
Though we keep the just degrees of sins, yet sins of the lowest degree,
cease not to be sins: and qualities in the smallest degrees do not, because
of their smallness, cease to be such qualities, as they by nature are, 2, The
consequence of the argument should be this: If concupiscence be a sin, then
all men are sinners before God, but this conclusion likes not our Adversaries.

6 Sins are not sins, unless they be voluntary, but Concupiscence is not
voluntary: therefore, etc.

Ans. 1 The theological knowledge of By this reason original sin should be
no sin.
sin is not to be learned out of Aristotle, or Baldus, but out of the holy
Scripture, which reckons Concupiscence and inuoluntary sins amongst sins.
2, And according to this definition of the Papists, Concupiscence is a sin,
for though it be not done by the consent and will of the spirit, yet it is
voluntary in respect of the flesh, (Rom, 7, 25,) 3, It is a proposition Ethic.
N^. com. lib. ^. c. 5.
delivered by Aristotle himself, that those things be done of us willingly,
the beginning and cause whereof was in our selves: as if a drunken man commit
any fault in his drunkenes, when he knows not what he does, and cannot avoid
it, yet he is to be accounted to do it willingly; because himself was the
cause of his ignorance and disabilitie: so by nature God made us able to keep
his law, we through our fault have lost this ability, and have brought upon
our selves a necessity of sinning: which is therefore voluntary in us,
because our selves were the cause thereof.

7 Concupiscence, when it has conceived. brings forth sin, James, 1. 15.
therefore Concupiscence it self is not sin, but the cause thereof.

Ans. 1: James speaks of actual sin: and in the mean while he does not
acquitte concupiscence of the name of sin: for if therefore concupiscence be
not sin, because that, which springs from it, is by Saint James called
sin, then neither can concupiscence be a sin in the unregenerate, which is
absurd, 2, Seeing every thing does beget and bring forth his like (to insist
in the metaphore of S. James) certainly concupiscence, which brings forth
sin, is it self sin also. And that which makes another to be so, is it
self much more so: but concupiscence does tempt and entise us to sin, as
saint James says in the same place, therefore, etc,

8 Concupiscence is in the Scripture called sin improperly; as Christ also is
called sin, 2. Cor. 5. 21.

Ans. 1. Why we should not take the word sin in his proper signification in
the place alleged (2, Cor, 5. 21,) the text gives us reason, when it says,
That God made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, but there be noe
reasons why, when we speak of concupiscence, we should change the proper
signification of the word into an improper, 2. Neither is it in the place of
Paul, an improper speech, but a manner of phrase borrowed from the Hebrews,
wherein the word sin is taken for a sacrifice for sin: therefore our
Adversaries do bewraie their great ignorance.

9 Blessed is he, in whose spirit there is no guile Psalm. 32, ^. therefore
Concupiscence is not a sin in the righteous. Ans: 1. To be without guile is
opposed unto hypocrisy, and nothing else is meant, but that the righteous are
of a single and upright heart. 2. It is a fallacy of division, whiles the
things, that go before, are severed from those that follow after, for the
whole verse is this. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is noe guile: therefore if sins be not
imputed, yet they are in the man, though they be not imputed un to him.

10 The fathers deny, that concupiscence is a sin.

Ans. They deny it to be sin according to the civil definition, where the
will consenting and the act performed and consummated is understood: not
according to that definition, which is taken out of Divinity.

CHAP. 14: Of the Number of the Sacraments.
We deny not, but that the ancient writers did use the word Sacrament some
times (but in a very general signification) to note other things by, than
Baptism and the Lords supper, partly for reverence, and partly for some
mystery in the thing. But the question is of the more stricte and most proper
signification of the word Sacrament, in such sort as it agrees to the Lords
Supper and to Baptism. Hereuppon the question is, whether the other five
papistical Sacraments (to wit Confirmation, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order and
Matrimony) be to be received unto the number of Sacraments in such sort, as
that they may have the like authority, and the same definition of a Sacament
with the other undoubted Sacraments, and most properly so called. Our
Adversaries contend for the number of their seven Sacraments: but we admit not
of that number, for these reasons.

Because that number of 7 Sacraments is, no

Neither can there be any of the ancient fathers

Whereas it is the power of God to ordain Sacraments,

Our Adversaries themselves cannot (although their schoolmen have toyled in it
many ways but al in vain) they cannot, I say, give a general definition of a
Sacrament, which is not larger the^ the thing defined (that is, so that it does
not admit within the definition other things besides those 7. Sacraments) or
else which is not straiter than the thing defined, (whiles they endeavor to
exclude other things, which besides their 7. Sacraments do arise out of their
larger definition) that is, which is so framed, that there be not some of the
5, counterfeit Sacraments excluded by that definition. Here our Adversaries
do stick in doubtful plight, whiles they make the definition of a Sacrament
either too large or too strait.

Seeing those two, undoubted Sacraments, the Lords Supper and Baptism, do
admit

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason,
1 As there are 7 spiritual diseases, so there must be 7 remedies and
Sacraments. And as there be 7 cardinal virtues; so there must be 7 Sacraments,
which confer the same.

Answer 1.
These diseases and these virtues what ever they be, were in the time of the
old Testament also. If therefore 7 Sacraments be necessarily concluded from the
7 diseases and 7 virtues, it will likewise follow, that in the old testament
there were neither more nor fewer than seven: but because the co^sequent is
false, therefore the Antecedent is false also. 2, Besides, those diseases and
virtues may either be restrained to fewer, or extended to more: these are
therefore ropes of sand.

2 The number of seven in the Scripture is an holy number, and is oftentimes
used in mysteries the 7, Seals, Revel. 5. 1. the 7 trumpets; Revel. 8. 6, the
7 stars and Candlestickes Revel. 1, 13, 16, the 7 loves, Matt 15, 34. the 7
eyes upon one stone Zachar, 3. 9. and such like both in the old and new
testament, concerning the number of seven, therefore there are 7 Sacraments.

Answer 1.
If our Adversaries would make a perfect syllogism, thus it should be framed:
wheresoever in Scripture there is the number of seven, there the 7 Sacraments
are prefigured etc. But this proposition, as is cannot be proved, so it is
ridiculous, and therefore our Adversaries keep it close. 2, Yea, not 7. but 70
Sacraments might by the same reason be proved, seeing that the number of
Seventy is often used in Scripture. The captivity of Babylon endured 70
years there were 70 palm trees in Elim, Exodus, 15. 27, the patriarchs
descended into Egypt with 70 souls, there were 70 Elders of the people, there
are 70 years of our life, Psalm: 90, 10. Christ chose 70 disciples; we must
pardon our brother that sins against us, seventy times seven times in one
day, etc: It is therefore a fallacy taking that for a cause, which is no
cause, whereof follows no conclusion:

3 There are 7 principal orders in the Church. The first is of them that enter
into it, whereto answeareth Baptism. The second is of them that war and
play the soldiers, and to this confirmation answers. The third of them that
resume strength and refreshing, in the Euchariste; the fourth of them that
arise after a fall, by penance* The fifth is of them that depart out, with
extreme unction. The sixth of them, that minister and do service in the
Church, and heereto belong holy orders. The seventh is of them, that bring in
new soldiers, by matrimony: therefore needs it must be, that there be: 7.
Sacraments, and neither more nor less:

Answer,
These distinctions of orders, diseases, virtues, are speculations of idle
brains, which cannot beget us any Sacraments, for it should be proved by the
holy Scriptures, that all these things have the force and property of
Sacraments. 2. Neither may the counterfeit Dionisius in his Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy rest content with this number of 7, for such reason: as these be:

4 The fathers have given the name of Sacrament unto other things beside
Baptism and the Supper

Ans: 1. Yet did they never precisely define the number of 7 Sacraments to be
necessary, 2. Neither did they name other things Sacraments in the like
sort, as they did Baptism and the Lords Supper, but either they called them
so, for renerence of the things, or for some mystery in them.

A particular Examination of the five Papisticall Sacraments.
Whether that the other 5 Popish Sacraments be to be called properly and truly
Sacraments, (seeing that the word Sacrament is not contained in the Scripture)
we can not better learn, than if the true properties of Sacraments be fetched
from the definition and nature of the two proper and undoubted Sacraments,
baptism and the Lords supper. Whereby afterward, the agreeing or disagreeing of
the rest of the Popish Sacraments, will be made manifest. For this is a ground
without co^rrouersie, so that it neither can, nor ought to be refused of
either side.

Now the properties of a true Sacrament (as they are taken out of Baptism and
the Lords Supper) be these.

There is required on outward sign, or visible, used and given.

It is required, that the Element and the rite

That it be an institution and commandment

That it be such an institution or ordinance, which is to last not only for a
time, but to the

That there be some promise of God, of the grace, fruit and effect of the
Sacrament.

That that promise be not bare and naked, but joined unto, and as it were
clothed with

That the promise be not of any forte of blessings either Corporal or
Spiritual, but of

That it be not a general promise only, but such as respects every one, even
every particular man that uses the Sacraments.

These properties and conditions, seeing they agree to both the undoubted
Sacraments in all things; it must needs be, that the other, if they be true
Sacraments agree with them in the properties rehearsed.

Contrariwise our adversaries do reason.
1 The Apology of the Augustane Confession does admit absolution and orders
into the number of Sacraments, therefore themselves (the Autors of the
Apology) do not observe the properties proposed.

Ans. 1 They admit them for Sacraments, in a general acception of the word
sacrament, according to which acception, the fathers called all those things
Sacraments, whereby the general promises of God were applied to every several
man; in which the Ministry may be called a Sacrament: It is therefore a
fallacy from that which is spoken but in some respect only, to the same taken
absolutely in all respects, 2, But because Absolution and Orcers do want the
visible Element, the Apology does protest, that it can endure they should be
called by the name of Sacraments, so that they be not made equal to Baptism
and the Lords Supper. Therefore the Apology does not speak of that
signification of the word Sacrament, where of we here dispute. And therefore
there be four terms in the argument.

2 The same Apology protests that they will not contend about the word
Sacrament, therefore it is frivolous to dispute thereof so exactlie.

Ans. Because the word Sacrament is a thing not contained in Scripture,
therefore the autors of the Apology do not brawle about the word: In the
mean time the controversy of the matter and thing signified by it, is not
laid aside: that is, whether there be one and the same reason and dignity of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, as of the other, which over and besides these
two, are by our Adversaries graced with the name of Sacraments: They do
therefore but dally by a fallacy from that is spoken in some respect only to
the same taken absolutely:

Now then let us compare and examine the 5 popish Sacraments severally every
one by it self, by the proposed properties

1 Confirmation:
We cannot allow Confirmation for a Sacrament for these reasons following.

Because it has no commandment from God, for there appears not so much as
any steps of commandment, or example in the holy scripture, whereby it may be
certain, that the faithful were anointed by the Apostles with the oil of
confirmation, and that magically exorcized or coniured.

1 Philip is not said to have confirmed the treasurer of Candace. Act, 8, 27,
etc.

2 Neither is it written that Peter did it to the three thousand Jews that
were converted, Act, 2, 40, 41, etc.

3 Neither is it read, that Paul confirmed any of the believers with oil or
Chrisme, in all the story of the acts of the Apostles.

^ There are abominations in the Popish confirmation.

1 That Exorcizing or coniuring of Chrisme is altogether magical, whereby some
legions of Devils are coniured from the oil; superstitions, the sign of the
Cross and others, being annexed thereto.

2 It turns to the disgrace of Baptism, as if more grace were received in
confirmation, than in Baptism, according to the doctrine of the Papists.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1, In confirmation there is the matter or element, oil, and the word of the
Lord, In the name of the Father, etc. it is therefore a Sacrament.

Answer: 1. There is no commandment of God, whereby we are enioined to use
oil, to confirm the minds of the faithful. 2, By the same reason, when we
say grace at dinner, there is the matter, meat, and the form, the word of
blessing it, or giving thanks: therefore by the same reason we should eat and
drink nothing but Sacraments. 3. There wants also the commandment of God,
whereby the word of blessing and consecration is appointed and tied to the
visible element. It is therefore a fallacy taking for a cause, that which is
no cause, and here be brought partial causes, not total: part of those
things, that are required to a Sacrament, but not all.

2, The Apostles Peter and John confirmed the Samaritanes, and Paul the
Ephesians. Act. 8, 15, 17, and 19, 6.

Ans. 1. We read not one word that they confirmed them with exorcized oil, or
giving a blow on the ear, which is the Popish ceremony. 2. The places
alleged do speak of the wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost, which are ceased
in the Church: but Sacraments ought not to cease, but and if our Adversaries
can bestow the admirable gifts of the holy Ghost by their confirmation, we
will also receive their confirmation.

3. Christ instituted the Sacrament of Confirmation, and the consecration of
the Chrisme, the day before he suffered.

Ans: 1. Let them, if they can, show us one syllable hereof in the whole
story of the Gospel. 2. Certain writings, wherein such traditions are
recorded, as being received from Christ, which are thrust upon us under the
name of antiquity, are counterfaits: neither are they warrant enough to make a
new Sacrament.

4: Certain persons were anointed with oil in the old Testament: therefore
Christians ought to be confirmed with it.

Ans. 1. Our Sacraments ought by their beginning to be Sacraments of the new
Testament. 2. Oil in the old Testament was a shadowing of the holy Ghost: but
shadows are already ceased, therefore this is an inconsequent argument. 3,
And, if oil may be translated out of the old Testament into the new, why
should not also all other the ceremonies of the Leviticall law, which Christ
has abrogated at his coming?

5. The believers were confirmed by the imposition of the hands of the Apostles.

Answer. 1.
The Apostles laid their hands on the believers, that they might receive the
wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost (as was aforesaid) besides it was to last
but for a time, neither was it used toward all: for there were many thousands
of Christians, on whom the Apostles laid not their hands: for those wonderful
gifts were not bestowed on all Christians. And what is this then to Popish
Confirmation? 2. Here be more terms than three. 1, Confirmation. 2,
Sacrament. 3. Laying on of hands. 4: Ceremonies different from laying on of
hands. 5, The bestowing of the gifts of the holy*Ghost. 6. The bare Popish
spectacle of Chrisme or oil.

6. Christ confirmed the little children. Mar. 10: 16: therefore Confirmation
is a Sacrament.

Ans. 1. The Antecedent speaks of blessing and prayer (such a Confirmation as
is used at this day in our Churches) neither is there any mention of oil: but
the Consequent speaks of a quite other thing, altogether different from the
action of Christ: there arise therefore four terms.

(2) Penance;
Repentance, though it be necessary for all men, yet it is not to be counted
among the Sacraments, for these reasons.

Repentance was commanded, and was

Seeing in the old Testament (where also was repentance) it was not reckoned
for a

It wants a visible element, ordained by God for Repentance.

Those ceremonies, which the Papists use in their penance (laying on of hands
and such like) have no promise, that God will be effectual, in us by those
rites:

The Popish penance is polluted with many

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1, penance is commanded, Mar: 1, 15: Math: 3, 2. therefore it is a Sacrament.

Answer. 1.
It is a fallacy, for that there is not a sufficient reckoning up of the
causes and parts requisite to a Sacrament: for not some one or other partial
cause alone, is a sufficient cause of a Sacrament. 2. By the same reason
Charity should be a Sacrament too, for that also has the commandment of
Christ. Ioh. 13, 34. and in other places.

2, Penance has an outward element also, as the laying on of hands: therefore
it is a Sacrament.

Ans. 1. If the ceremonies of actions performed by the hand be elements in the
Sacraments; then in Baptism there will be two elements, to wit, water and the
laying to of the hands, or the washing of the child by the hand of the
Minister: which is absurd: therefore the Antecedent is false. 2. The rite or
ceremony of laying on of hands, is not commanded in Scripture. 3. Neither can
it be showed, that the grace of God is tied to the ceremony. Neither do we
read, that John Baptist laid his hands upon every one of that innumerable
multitude of men, whom upon their repentance he baptized.

3. In penance there is an application of the grace of God to every one in
particular: therefore it is a Sacrament.

Answer.
It is a fallacy, from an insufficient cause: for remission of sins is
applied to every one in particular by faith, and yet it is not therefore a
Sacrament. And as Papists say, the grace of justification is applied to every
one in particular by good works* therefore, according to their opinion, the
good works of the regenerate should be counted amongst the Sacraments. And by
this means what an infinite number of Sacraments shall we have?

(3) Order.
We deny that Popish Orders are to be accounted a Sacrament) if we speak
properly of a Sacrament) for these reasons.

Because it has no outward element.

Because the rites, which are there wont

Because those things, which are alleged

1. That Christ was Ostiarius, a doore-keeper, and so thereby did institute
this See Durandus in his book called Rationale Divinoru^ officioru^.
degree of Orders, they triflingly prove, because he said. I am the door: by
me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. Ioh. 10 9. And so their Ostiarij,
the door keepers in Popery shall be that door, by which we must enter into
heaven.

2. The degree of Lector or Reader they prove, because Christ did read out of
the book of Isai. Luk, 4, 17.

3, They prove the degree of Exorciste, because Christ gave power to his
Apostles to cast out Devils. Mar. 6. 7, 13.

4, The degree of Acolythites, they prove, because Christ said: He that
follows me, walks not in darkness. John: 8. 12.

5. The degree of Subdeacon is proved, because Christ when he washed the
Apostles feet, was girded about with a linen to well. Ioh: 13. 4.

6, They prove the degree of Deacon, because Christ did distribute the
Eucharist or Communion to his Apostles, Math: 26 26, etc.

7, They prove the degree of Priesthood, because Christ was a Priest after the
order of Melchisedech: because he offered himself to his Father in his last
supper: because there he ordained his Apostles to be Priests.

Because the rites of the popish ordination,

Because the end of the popish ordination

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus.
1 The institution of the ministry is contained in the Old and New Testament.
Therefore it is a Sacrament.

Ans. 1. The mayor proposition (which our Adversaries do not set down) is
manifestly false, which should be this: whatsoever is instituted in the Old
and New Testament, that is a Sacrament. 2; It is a fallacy from an insufficient
reckoning up of the causes; for it is not some one property of a sacrament,
that can suffice, unless there be a sufficient cause brought, that is such a
one, as consists of all the properties, which concur to the making of a
Sacrament, 3. There is more in the Conclusion, than in the premises. For there
does no more follow, but that the Ministry depends not upon humane but
divine authority. 4, And by the like reason, (to answer them by an instance)
the ordination of the Magistrate should be a Sacrament For it has his
institution both in the Old and New Testament.

2 Order has a visible sign, the imposition of hands as appears by the
ordination used of the Apostles. Therefore it is a Sacrament.

Ans, 1, We answered a little before, that imposition of hands is not the
Element or matter of a Sacrament. 2, We do not read that that ceremony was
ever commanded of Christ. 3, * Though there be no certain co^mand^ment for
imposition of h^^des, yet because we
And it is now in the liberty of the church to v^e it, or not to use it. But
sacraments have not Ceremonies which are left to men's liberty. Seeing the^
here be understood sacramental Ceremonies, both which are see that it was
still used of the Apostles their so precise using of it. ought to be unto us in
steed of a comman dement. Calvin Iustitut. lib. 4. cap. 3 5. 16. How soever,
there is no thing in it to make it the matter of a Sacrament.
left, and which are not left to men's choice and liberty, there arise four
terms.

3 The order of the Ministry has a promise of grace, that God will work
effectually by the ministry. Therefore it is a Sacrament.

Ans, 1. That promise respects rather the hearers, than him, that is
ordained. For he may preach unto others to their salvation and himself be a
castaway: but the Sacraments do apply grace to him, that uses them.

4 But we read that in Ordination grace i^ bestowed upon them, which are
ordained. As we read of Timothy, 2, Timoth, 1, 6.

Answer. 1, The Apostles had the gift of miracles, and did give the Holy Ghost
miraculously by the imposition of hands, 2, GOD does usually work by the good
means ordained by himself: and so does bestow his grace upon the person
which was ordained at the prayer and request of the whole congregation,
gathered together in his name for so holy an exercise. Yet we may not
therefore think, that the imposition of hands is a sacramental sign, which
conferreth grace.

5 Augustine, writing against the Donatistes does call Order a Sacrament: as
do other of the Fathers also.

Ans, 1. They did so in some sort and respect, for the excellency and
reverence of the ministry, which the Donatistes did debase. 2. The Fathers
used the word Sacrament in a larger signification, than we here take it, as was
said in the beginning of this Chapter.

4. Matrimony.
Why we do not account matrimony for a Sacrament, these be our reasons:

Because it has no promise of grace of justification.

Because by the same reason it should have

Because if it were a Sacrament, then Sacraments should be amongst infidells,
and

Because it has no visible Element.

Because there is there no applying of

Because our Adversaries do so speak of Pope Syricius.
among Sacraments, calling it a carnal state, wherein they that live, cannot
please God; they say also that Priests are polluted by this state. How then
dare they call Matrimony a Sacrament, seeing their Ecclesiastical persons do
abhor it, as a profane thing

Contrariwise our adversaries do dispute.
Paul calls matrimony a Sacrament, Ephesians, 5, 32.

Ans, 1, The Papists translation is corrupt the word in the Greek, signifies
a mystery or secre^ ^, Paul says not of marriage, that it is a mystery, but
of the spiritual conjunction of Christ and his Church as he expounds
himself, But I speak concerning Christ and the Church*

2 Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed without spott, Hebrews 13, 4.
But the bed should not be without spot, if there were not They be the words
of Eckius in his Enchiridion.
the Grace of the Sacrament.

Ans, 1, The Ministry, Magistrates, Parents are honorable, and yet no
Sacraments. 2, Here is a fallacy taking that for a cause which is not. For the
bed is said to be unspotted, not because matrimony is a Sacrament, but
because the religious Man and Wife does not defile the bed with whoredom
and adultery; as the next words following do declare. 3, If the grace of the
Sacrament do make the bed spotless, why do they not grant matrimony to their
priests? why do they esteem it more tolerable, for a Priest to be a
whoremonger and adulterer, than a married man? For such Priests have they to
lerated many in popery, when as they will not away with honest marriage.

3 Marriage has the promise of eternal life For the woman shall be saved by
bearing of children, 1, Timoth, 2. 15.

Ans. 1, By this reason all married persons, even the infidels should be
saved. 2, Paul comfort women; that their sorrows which GOD lays upon them
for a punishment, do turn to them to be offices of their calling, and
exercises of the cross, of a Sacrament never a word, 3 Paul speaks upon
supposition and with limitation; If they continue in faith, etc. He does not
ascribe salvation to matrimony, but only does teach, that those wives shall
be saved in the state of wedlock, who keep faith, godliness, charity, and
chastity. 4. Godly women, by perseverance in faith, love* etc. do sanctify
their matrimony; but sacraments are not sanctified by man, but on the
contrary side, men receive sanctification from the Sacrament.

4 The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the Wife. 1, Cor. 7, 14 Seeing
therefore Matrimony has the power of sanctifying, it is a Sacrament.

Answ. 1. If this sanctifying here spoken of, pertain to salvation, then it
follows, that infidels shall be saved by their believing wines; which is
absurd; but if to sanctify here signify an other thing, then the argument
falls to the ground, 2, But there be four terms; For in the Antecedent
holy signifies (after the phrase of the Hebrews) that which is granted and
permitted as a thing that is lawful to be used in holy manner (in which sense
creeping things are said to be purified, Acts, 10, 15.) but in the consequent
it is taken for sanctity or holiness and justification and renouation.

5 Matrimony has his institution and blessing from God, Genesis 2, 18, 22, 24.
Therefore it is a Sacrament.

Ans. That promise of blessing is not of the grace of justification and
reconciliation, but only of a temporal felicity. It is nothing therefore to a
Sacrament, which is conversant only about the grace of reconciliation.

6 Matrimony is a remedy or medicine (as the schoolmen speak) of a
spiritual disease, to witfornication, 1, Cor, 7, 2,

Ans, 1, This is not sufficient to make it a Sacrament; because it is a remedy
against fornication! 2, Faith and prayer are remedies against tentations: shall
they therefore be counted Sacraments?

(5) Extreme unction.
We admit not of extreme unction; because it neither has the words of
institution which is to continue in Church, nor any certain ordination of his
rite, described by the circumstances thereof, nor the promise of grace of
justification, nor any other property at all of a true Sacrament.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. Extreme unction has the outward element of oil; therefore it wants not
the property of a Sacrament.

Ans. Unless to this element there come the word, to destinate it to this
purpose, to co^ maund it, and to promise the forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting life (of all which our Adversaries can show nothing in the
Scripture) their oil of the sick is no more to be esteemed, than oil Olive,
which is provided to be sauce for a sallet of herbs.

2. The Apostles did anoint many sick men with oil, and healed them. Mark.
6. 13, therefore Extreme unction is a Sacrament, en^oined by Christ to the
Apostles.

Ans: 1. That anointing was a temporary thing, neither has it any
commandment, that we should do the like. 2. By the same reason the
handkerchiefs of Paul (Act: 19. 12. and the shadow of Peter, whereby many
sick men were healed (Acts. 15. 15.) should be Sacraments. 3. The text
speaks of miraculous gifts, which because they endured but for a time, do
not come within the compass of Sacraments.

3 Is any man sick among you? let him call for the elders of the Church, and
let them pray for him, and anoint him with oil. etc. James, 5. 14.

Answer. 1.
It follows not: James speaks of oil, therefore of oil of Extreme
unction magicallie exorcized. 2. That anointing was not extreme unction, but
was for the recoverie of health; whereas on the contrary side extreme unction
is administered in Popery, to them which are ready foorth-with to die, when
there is no hope of any recoverie. 3, The meaning of Saint James is, that
prayer should be made for the sick, that their sins may be forgiven them,
whereby they have drawn sickness upon them: but thence arises no Sacrament. 4.
Caietan no mean Cardinal among the Papists, says this place cannot be
understood of extreme unction, but of the miraculous anointing spoken of*
Mark, 6. Whereof he gives three reasons. 1, Because James does not say: Is
any man sick unto death, but simply, is any man sick. 2, The end and effect
hereof is the easing of the sick: but of remission of sins he speaks not
but only conditionally: whereas Extreme unction is not administered but at the
point of death, and is directly intended for remission of sins. 3, James bids
call for many Ministers to one sick man, both to pray for him and to anoint
him; which is much different from the rite of Extreme unction. So one of their
own pillars has wyped them of two places at once. (This of James and the
sixth of Mark) which are the only shows of authority, the Papists have for
this forged Sacrament.

CHAP. 15. Of Transsubstantiation.
Our Adversaries do expound the sacramental union in the Eucharist, to be by
manner of Transsubstantiation; whereby they imagine, that after the words of
consecration, the elements do altogether vanish away, and are changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ, so that besides the bare accidents,
which are seen, tasted and felt, there remains no whit of the elements in
the Sacrament: but we deny that there needs any such fiction of
Transsubstantiation for the making of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and
that for these reasons.

The nature of a Sacrament requires, that there be together an earthly and an
heavenly lie matter: as Irenaeus says: or, not that the substance be changed,
but that grace be adioined, as Theodoret speaks.

Because there be other means of Sacramental

Christ says not; This shall be made my body; or this is changed into my
body: but,

Paul, the heavenly Interpreter of Christ's words, does not admit
Transsubstantiation,

1, The bread (says he) which we break (that is, distribute after the
consecration) is it not the communion of the body of Christ. 1, Cor. 10. 16.

2. All we are partakers of one bread. 1. Corinthians: 10. 16.

3. As often as ye shall eat this bread. 1, Cor: 11. 26.

4. Whosoever shall eat this bread. verse. 27.

5. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread. verse, 28.

So have the Fathers explaned this mystery, that they declare, that the
elements remain

These manner of speeches in the Scripture are almost alike: God is man: This
is

Upon the opinion of Transsubstantiation many absurdities do follow.

1, So Christ should be said to have a twofold body or two bodies; whereof the
one should be taken from the virgin Marie, and the other should be made of
bread.

2. We should not receive the body crucified for us, but a certain other
thing, which an hour before was not that body, but bread; nay, which a little
before had no being in nature; which is absurd and impious, contrary to the
words of Christ, whereby he promises us that body, that was given for us,
and that blood, which was shed for us.

3. Accidents are hereby made to be without a subject: as if when the snow is
melted, the whitenes of the snow, should remain alone with out a subject.

4. Mise, that gnawe the consecrated bread, cannot gnaw bare accidents alone.
Therefore either accidents are substances, that they may be subject to the
grinding of teeth, or the glorified body of Christ is subject to elementarie
passions and natural sufferings, both of which are most absurd. The like
question may be made concerning the burning of the Eucharist: what it is, that
burns? whether bare accidents? or the body of Christ?

5, Infinite such other gross absurdities may be seen in the Writings of
that famous man, Wilhel. Holderus, (de mure exenterato) wherein are recited
many other such like things, according to the opinion of the School men.

Our Adversaries themselves do not believe

1. And therefore they seek out other and more goodly words, as annihilation
of the elements, or a ceasing of them to be, desinition they call it.

2. Gerson amongst his reasons for the communion under one kind, brings this
as a reason, why the cup should be denied to the people; because the wine
might be corrupt, and turned into Flies and vinegar. If the wine be truly
transsubstantiated, then can it not be corrupted, unless we will say, that
Flies and vinegar may be generated of the glorified body o^ Christ, or that
they are generated of accidents, there being no corporeal matter or substance
required thereunto.

3 Transsubstantiation was not believed in the whole Church before I take is,
this is a fault in the print, and that the Author mea^t to say* 1300 years, as
^ c^tur ^ writers also do (Ce^^, 13, cap, col, 622) for in the 13th centurie
after Christ, was the Council of Lateran under Innoce^tius the 3d. whereof the
Author here speaks: which was the (...) general Counsel wherein
Transsubsta^tiation was defined and so after generally received, how soever for
so-400, or 500 years, before it was disputed of, and maintained by some
three hundred years: and this error at the length was spread further, and was
confirmed by the Lateran Council.

Contrariwise our adversaries do dispute.
1, That which Christ reached to his Apostles, was the true body of Christ.
Therefore the bread was turned into his body by Transsubstantiation.

Ans, 1, There is more in the consequent, than in the Antecedent. For it
follows not, Christ gave his body to his disciples; therefore there was his
body in none other manner, than by Transsubstantiation. For it was in the
sacrament by sacramental relation and union, and received of the belieuers
spiritually by faith.

2 Christ said not: This bread is my body; but he said: This, meaning
thereby his body: so that the demonstratiue particle, (This) is construed and
taken, not for the bread, but for the body. Hereby therefore he insinuated,
that the bread was not then in the Eucharist.

Ans, 1. Then the speech shall be this: this body shall be my body, which is
idle. 2, This explication of Christ's words cannot stand with the doctrine of
the Papists. For whereas they say, that the power of Transsubstantiating is
contained in those five words pronounced Hoc enim est corpus meu^.
(for this is my body) doubtless when Christ took up the bread, and
pronounced the word (This) as yet was made no Transsubstantiation, and so the
speech should have bin of a non ens, a thing which had no being.

3 The word (est, is) is a verb substantive, which notes a being, or
subsisting; therefore there must needs be Transsubstantiation.

Ans. 1, By the same reason, it will as well follow: Christ says, I am a vine;
but the verb ( sam or I am) is a verb substantive, which notes the being
and subsisting of a thing. Therefore there must needs be Transsubstantiation
of Christ's nature into a vine. 2, It signifies the being, but not the manner
of the being. There is Christ's body indeed, but not after a natural manner of
being by Transsubstantiation, but after a spiritual by faith and sacramental
union.

4 There must needs be an Identitie, that the body may truly be predicated of
the bread: (for it were not true that bread remaining the same, and a
different thing from the body should be the body:) but an Identitie of the
bread and body can be no other way made, but by Transsubstantiation:
Therefore, etc.

Ans. There needs no Identitie to make the predication true: for this
proposition is true, the Lamb is the Passover, and yet the Lamb and the
Passover be not the same thing. For some things are affirmed of other,
because they are really and formally inherent in them: and some things again
are affirmed of other, because they have an external union and coherence,
which is most usual in all the sacramental speeches both of the old and new
Testament. Circumcision is the Covenant, the Rock was Christ* etc.

5 As that predication is understood (Matthew, 3) This is my beloved Son, that
is, whatsoever ye see; is my beloved Son: so are the words of Christ to be
understood in the supper: as, This is my body, that is, that which ye see, is
my body. So that the bread remains no longer bread.

Answer, 1, Howsoever the predication be understood (Matthew, 3,) the contrary
will rather follow thereof. For by reason of the near conjunction of the two
natures in Christ, the one is predicated of the other in Concreto, but there is
no Transsubstantiation or changing of one nature into the other. 2, Christ was
the Son of God both in respect of his deity and of his humanity. And
therefore this speech is nothing like those of the Sacrament.

6 Seeing that the predication is changed (so that the bread is afterward not
called bread, but the Lords body) it must needs be that the subject; (that
whereof it is spoken) must be changed also, and therefore there is
Transsubstantiation.

Answer, There is a great change, but it is of use and quality, not of
substance. Therefore after the consecration it is called blessed and holy
bread, the communion of the body of Christ, and is not common vulgar bread.
But it follows not, there is a change, therefore by Transsubstantiation.

7 Tropes and figures are not to be admitted in the words of the supper. For
it is to be supposed, that Christ would then speak plainly without figures)
but if Transsubstantiation be not granted, there must needs be admttted some
figure, Therefore, etc.

Answ, All figures and improper speeches are not obscure, but they are, when
they be usual and known, most clear and significant. Now there be no other
figures or tropes in the Lords Supper, but such as are, and always were usual
in Sacraments, and familiarly known to the Church, 2, How will the Papists
avoid a trope in those words of Christ (Luk 22, 20) This cupp is the New
Testament in my blood? Is the cupp properly the New Testament?

8, Bread, before the consecration the Fathers call bread; but afterward they
call it the body of Christ.

Ans, And so do we. For though it be in nature bread, even after the
consecration, as Paul oftentimes calls it, yet is it sacramentally the body
of Christ.

9 In the liturgy of Saint James Transsubstantiation is approved.

Answer.
This is a testimony from a forged and counterfaite writing.

10 All things are possible with GOD; therefore Transsubstantiation.

Answer.
From what GOD can do to what he will, is no good consequence. It is a fond
reason, to argue as Papists do, from the absolute omnipotency of GOD, without
his Word or Promise.

Here follow certain shifts of our Adversaries.
1 Bread, after the phrase of the Hebrews, is often taken for nourishment, so
whereas the body of Christ is the nourishment of the soul, it may well be
called bread by Paul, even after the consecration.

Ans, It follows not, bread in some places signifies nourishment; therefore
in the Lords Supper bread does not signify bread. All these propositions be
mere particulars: and therefore nothing follows thereof.

2 Some things which have been changed in nature, have kept their old name in
the scripture; as the Rod of Moses, that was turned into a Serpent. So may
bread after it is transsubstantiated, keep the name of bread.

Ans, 1, They should first prove that there is Transsubstantiation, but this
argument of the Papists presupposes Transsubstantiation, which we deny. It is
therefore a begging of the thing in question. 2, They be mere particulars,
from which nothing will follow.

3, The Ancient Church admitted of the Phrase (Sub specie) that is under the
shape or Accidents. Therefore they intimate hereby, that the bread and wine
remain not.

Ans, Our Adversaries trifle with an aequiuocation of the word (Species). For
the Fathers took it, for the one part or kind of the outward Element in the
Sacrament, as it is also meant in that question between us and the Papists,
whether the people are to receive (sub vtraque specie) under both kinds, that
is both the bread and the wine; not under both accidents, which were a
senseless speech: but they take the word (Species) for a shape or accident,
which the Fathers meant not.

CHAP. 16. Of the adoration, inclusion, and carrying about of the Eucharist: as
also of the Sacraments out of their use.
THe adoring, carrying about, and shutting of the Eucharist in a box, uses to
be glosed with this color especially, among the Papists: for that they say,
that the Eucharist is and remains a Sacrament besides and out of the use
thereof; turning that into an argument or proof, which is a controversy:
therefore are we also to make a question hereof.

Question. 1.
Whether the Eucharist remain a Sacrament out of the use thereof: We deny it
for these reasons.

Because, seeing Sacraments are actions, they consist only in use and action,
that they

Seeing our Adversaries themselves do not account, Baptism to be a
Sacrament, of the action are contained in the institution) and more words of
the action do concur in the Lords Supper, than in the institution of
Baptism, much less also may the Eucharist remain out of his use, than
Baptism may.

Where the whole action is not, neither is there the whole Sacrament: but when

Christ does prescribe a certain end and use; Eat, drink. Christ instituted
this use

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. When Christ pronounced these words (This is my body) the Disciples had not
eaten as yet; and yet the words of Christ were true then, before they did eat,
therefore it was a Sacrament also even before, and without the use thereof.

Ans. 1. If we made the action and use only to consist in eating and
drinking, then the argument would follow: but we do not define that action to
consist only in eating and drinking, but in doing all those things, which
Christ either by his example or commandment bids us do: as namely, to
receive the bread, to break, bless, distribute and eat it, to give God
thanks, and to show the Lords death. It was not therefore out of the use of the
Sacrament, when Christ reached the bread to his Apostles.

2. Luke omitteth these words; Take, eat; intimating thereby that the body of
Christ is in the Eucharist out of the use thereof.

Answer. 1.
By a fallacy of Division those things are severed asunder, which ought out of
four rehearsalls of the institution, to have been joined together: for that
which Luke omitted, the other two Evangelists, and Paul have supplied. The
whole action then is not to be taken from some one of them alone, but jointly
and together from them all. 2: They conclude here any thing of every thing:
for what coherence is? Luke omitted some words, therefore he did omit them for
none other cause, but to show, that the Sacrament out of his use, is
nevertheless a Sacrament.

3. Christ faith: this is; he says not; It shall be made my body hereafter,
to wit in the eating.

Answer. 1.
It was answered a while ago, that the action and use does not consist in
eating alone; And therefore in the act of the Supper, the bread is rightly
called the body of Christ, even before the eating; that it shall not be
needful to say; This shall be made the body of Christ. 2, And Christ in
these words would simply say this much: I give you my body to be eaten.

4 If the Eucharist be not a Sacrament out of his use, it would follow, that
not the words of Christ, but our use does make a Sacrament.

Answer. 1.
Christ's will (whom we ought to obey in eating and drinking) makes the
Sacrament, and not our use. The use of the Sacrament therefore relyeth upon the
words of institution: and how then do we ascribe it to us, and not rather to
the word of Christ, while we do that, which is commanded by the words of
Christ. It is therefore a fallacy supposing that to be a cause, which is none.

5. In the Primitive Church the Deacons were wont to carry parts of the
Eucharist to the sick: therefore the Eucharist remains a Sacrament out of the
use.

Ans. These parts were carried to the sick, that they should take them and eat
them, as Communicants and partakers of the common action, according to Christ's
institution: and therefore that was not out of the use of the Sacrament. It is
therefore a loose conclusion from the Sacrament in use, to the Sacrament out of
his use.

6. Ecclesiastical writers do report, that some were wont to carry the
Eucharist home with them, and to reserve it.

Ans. 1. And it may be doubted, whether they did well or no: 2. Other men's
abuse does not make a rule for us, and impose a necessity to do or approve
the like. And the Reader may here obscrue that the Papists do usually in
their Sophistical reasons suppress that proposition, which is weak and
liable to open exception; as knowing that they cannot prove it: but this is not
to deal sincerely with the Church of God.

7. But when afterward, some days being passed after the consecration, they
did (in the time of persecution) eat the consecrated bread, which they had
reserved, who would deny but that they received the body of Christ, especially
being, as they were, so devoutly affected?

Ans, 1. We may not make rules of those things, which happen in case of
necessity. 2. Neither may we think, that those devout Christians, in that
agony of persecution did receive the reserved Eucharist without the memory of
Christ's passion, without godly prayers, and giving of thanks. All which seeing
they belong to the use and action of the Supper, it may not be said that they
received the Sacrament out of the use. And the elements, which they used, were
destinated to the use of the Lords Supper.

Question. 2.
Whether the Eucharist be to be adored. Our Adversaries do adore it with
divine worship only due to God, not only in the use thereof, but out of the
use too, in their Oratories, and in public processions when it is carried
about. We say that the Eucharist is to be reverenced, as an holy mystery, but
not to be adored or worshippeed; and that for these reasons.

Because the Sacraments do consist of an earthly and an heavenly matter:
therefore Artolatria, a worshipping of bread.

Out of the use, the worshipping of the Eucharist is more absurd Idolatry: for
out

True adoration cannot be without faith.

If the Eucharist be to be adored, then by

When Christ reached the Eucharist to

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1. Transsubstantiation takes away all occasion of Idolatry: therefore (say
they) we are unjustly accused of Idolatry.

Ans. 1. Transsubstantiation is a principle simply false: therefore it is a
begging of the question. 2. If Transsubstantiation were granted, yet it could
not be prooved that it should have place out of the use of the Sacraments:
these are therefore rotten and ruinous foundations.

2. If it be rightly adored in the use, why not rightly also out of the use.

Ans, Because the Sacrament out of the use, is no Sacrament. As was declared a
while ago.

3, Wheresoever Christ is, there he is to be adored: but Christ is in the
consecrated host* therefore he is to be worshipped in the host.

Answer, 1, We worshipp Christ in the Eucharist, (for we say at the Communion
we praise thee, we worship thee etc.) but we worshipp not the Eucharist, nor
CHRIST as there carnally present. 2, The mayor proposition (as it is proposed
by the Papists) is not simply and in all respects true. For Christ was in Peter
the Apostle, yet Peter would not suffer himself to be worshipped, Act, 10, 25,
26.

4 If the manhood of Christ, (which yet is a creature) be ^ightly adored
because of the hypostaticall union, why may not the bread be adored too,
because of the Sacramental union.

Answer 1, There is great difference between the Sacramental union and the
personal union: the one makes one person and subsistence, the other does
not. 2, The flesh of Christ never subsisted by any proper subsistence of his
own before the incarnation, but as soon, as it began to have a being, it
subsisted in the person of the Son of God, and that not by any proper
subsistence of his own. Hereof it comes to pass that whosoever does adore
the Son of God, that is, the second person in Trinity, the same does also
rightly adore the flesh of Christ. which things seeing they be nothing so in
the bread and wine of the Euchariste, the case is nothing alike, 3, The
Sacramental union is only by relation, and may be dissolved, the personal
union is a most near joining of two natures in one person, which never can be
dissolved. 4, Concerning the worshipping of the flesh of Christ, we have the
word and examples in the Scripture: but we want both for the worshipping of the
Eucharist, as was said a while a go.

QVESTION, 3.
Concerning carrying about, and enclosing the Eucharist in a box, we deem all
those things impious.

Because they have no commandment

Because they are contrary to the commandment, of eating and drinking the
Sacrament.

Because in so doing, the sacramental action

The use of the Supper, is turned into an action altogether different from the
institution

The feast of Corpus Christi, and the carrying

If the commandment of Christ, concerning the true use of the Sacrament, were

There be no examples of the Apostles

Neither can there be showed in the purer

CHAP. 17. Of the Mass.
THe Papists have turned the sacrament of the Note here the ^nrse is to be
observed aagainst so^e of the Papists who pervert the state of the question in
this disputation and say that they strive only for the sacrifice of Eucharist,
or thanksgiving, these same are stracken with a curse by the council of trent
Lords Supper into a sacrifice; wherein they offer daily, the consecrated
bread and win^ to God the Father, for the sins of the living and the dead.
And more over they contend, that in the Eucharist, there is not only a
sacrifice of remembrance and thanksgiving, but that there is also a
propitiatory sacrifice. For so says the Council of Trent (Sess, 6. cap. 2,
can. 3.) If any man shall say, that the sacrifice of the Mass, is only a
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the sacrifice
performed upon the Cross, and not a propitiatory Sacrifice, or that it does
profit him alone that receives it, and that it ought not to be offered for
the huing and the dead, for their sins, punishments, satisfactions and other
necessities, let him be accursed. But we acknowledge no such visible
Sacrifice in the Church, neither do we find in scripture any other
propitiatory Sacrifice besides the Sacrifice of Christ: and this sacrifice of
the Mass, we do re^ect for the reasons following.

Because to make of the Lords Suppera propitiatory sacrifice for the living
and the

1, Christ did not command to offer his body and blood, but to eat and drink
them.

2. And there is not so much as one word in all the action and institution of
the supper, which might infer any mention of a Sacrifice.

3, Neither do we read, that Christ offered himself in his supper (as if by
his own example he would institute mass) for if he offered himself to his
heavenly Father in his supper, then should he not have perfected his
sacrifice, with one oblation once made, (Heb, 7, 27, and 9, 26., 28, and 10,
10. 14.) but with a double oblation twice made, namely, once in his supper, and
once upon the Cross, which is false and absurd. But if he offered not himself
in his supper (as it is most true, he did not) then neither can his example,
which we should follow, lay upon us the office of sacrificing.

4. Paul received of the Lord the institution of the Eucharist: but made
mention of no sacrifice at all; which the Apostle, (especially seeing he
boasts that he had showed all the council of God. Acts, 20, 27,) ought not
to have omitted, if there should have been any respect of a propitiatory
sacrifice in the supper.

5, Paul bids us, to show the Lords death, not to represent it by a stagelike
spectacle, not to sacrifice, 1, Cor. 11, 26. For to show the Lords death, and
to sacrifice are things altogether different.

The doctrine of the propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, does twhart the
perfect satisfaction of Christ. For if CHRIST have satisfied for the sins of
al men with one sacrifice once offered, and that propitiation of his be
sufficient. what need is there so often to iterate a propitiatory sacrifice in
the Mass?

1, He (Christ, not the mass) is the propitiation or reconciliation, not
only for our sins, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1, Ioh. 2, 2.

2, And therefore, upon the cross he cried; It is finished. Ioh, 19, 30.

But the mass twharteth also the priesthood The Priesthood of Christ is not
common to him with any man.
of Christ.

(1) For Christ alone could offer himself for a propitiatory sacrifice;
neither could any man offer up Christ, but he himself alone. Therefore Popish
priests, unless they willingly say that they are new Christ's, can not offer a
propitiatory sacrifice,

1, Christ did it once, when he offered up himself, Hebr, 7. 27.

2, Not that he should offer himself often. Heb. 9, 25.

3, Otherwise the masse-priestes should be Priests after the order of
Melchifedech, which agrees to Christ alone.

4, Neither does any man take unto himself this honor, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. So likewise Christ took not to himself this
honor, to be made the high Priest, but he that said unto him etc, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchifedech, Heb, 5. 4, 5. etc.

(2) It is repugnant also to the doctrine of the Priesthood of Christ, in
respect of the perfect and plenarie sacrifice, which is not to be iterated. For
herein is the priesthood of Christ opposite to the Priesthood of the old
Testament, that the sacrifices thereof ought to be iterated, but the sacrifice
of Christ had no need to be iterated.

1, Christ needed not daily, as those high Priests (of the old Testament) to
offer up sacrifice, for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for that did
he once, when he offered up himself. Heb. 7. 27.

2. The law having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image
of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offer year by year
continually, sanctify the comers thereunto: for would they not then have
ceased, to have been offered, etc. Heb. 10. 1. 2.

3. After he had said: This is the Testament, that I will make with them,
etc. and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where
remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin. Heb. 10. 16.
17. 18.

4. Christ by his own blood entered once into the holy place: and obtained
eternal redemption for us (not such a redemption as is to be iterated every
day.) Hebrews. 9. 12.

5. Not that he should offer himself often, as the high Priest entered into
the holy place every year with other blood, (for then must he have often
suffered since the foundation of the world): but now in the end of the world
has he appeared once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as
it is appointed unto men, Once to die, and then comes the judgment. So Christ
was once offered to take away the sins of many. Heb. 9, 25, 26. etc.

6. By the which will we are sanctified, even by the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once made Heb. 10. 10.

7. And every Priest (namely of the old If our Adversaries say, that they
offer the same and only sacrifice of Christ: here let them see that there is
not granted an iteration of the same sacrifices in the new testament.
Testament) appears daily ministering and often times offers one manner of
sacrifice, which can never take away sins: but this man, after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God, etc. For
with one offering he consecrated for ever them, that are sanctified. Heb* 10.
11. 12. etc.

The sacrificing Priests, do daily as much as in them lies, kill and crucify
Christ in the Mass: wherefore the Popish Mass is so

1. Without shedding of blood is no remission. Heb* 9: 22.

2. Where a Testament is, there must be the death of him, that made the
testament. Heb: 9, 16.

3. If Christ must be often offered, then should he have often suffered.
Hebrews, 9, 26.

The Mass was unknown in the primitive Church for some certain ages: as
shall

Many Massing ceremonies, were of a certain blind zeal brought in out of the
old

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. It is needful; that the Church have some visible sacrifice, to help man's
infirmity withal.

Ans. 1 No man denies, that we need visible helps, for the strengthening of our
faith: but to feign, choose and appoint such sacrifices, is not in our power,
but belongs to God alone. 2. Such visible helps and stays of our faith, God
has given us in the Sacraments, wherewith it is meet we should rest content,
and not frame new ones at our own pleasure.

2; Every Priest is taken from among men. etc. that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for men. Heb. 5. 1. Therefore it is needful that the Priests of the
Church have some thing, which they may offer to God for sins.

Ans: 1. If the Apostle in this place had compared together the Priests of the
old Testament, and the Priests of the new Testament, then the argument would
follow. But he makes the comparison between the Priests of the old
Testament, and the Priest Jesus Christ, which was prefigured by them. This then
is all that follows: that it was necessary that Christ should offer some
sacrifice for our sins. And so there is more in the conclusion, than in the
premises. 2, We do not read any where in the new Testament that there were
Priests appointed, who should offer visible sacrifices: but there were ordained
Ministers of the word and Gospel.

3. We have an Altar. Hebrews, 13, 10. therefore it is necessary that we
have oblations also and sacrifice.

Ans. 1. This is a Paralogisme of all Particulars, thus: In our Altar (which is
spiritual) is required a sacrifice: therefore it can be no other sacrifice,
but that of the Mass. 2, It is a fallacy from that, which is spoken but in
some respect, to the same taken absolutely: for the Apostle does not simply
speak of every sort of sacrifice, but treats expreslie of a spiritual
sacrifice, saying: let us offer the sacrifice of praise unto God, etc. verse,
15. and, to do good and to distribute, forget not* for with such sacrifices
GOD is well pleased. verse, 16.

4, Daniel prophecieth of Antichrist, that he shall take away the daily
sacrifice: Dan: 8, 11, and 11 31. But that cannot be understood of spiritual
sacrifices, of praise and thanksgiving (which Tyrants cannot raze out of the
hearts of men) but of the outward and visible sacrifice, which is the Mass.

Answer. 1.
Daniel speaks principally of Antiochus, who having defiled the lawful
worship of God, did abolish the daily sacrifice for the space of three years
and an half: and allegorically he speaks it of the Antichrist of Rome, who
has abolished the true and sincere public service of God, and in the place
thereof has set his Idol service. 2, There is more in the conclusion than in
the premises; for it follows not: Antichrist shall abolish the daily
sacrifice: therefore that sacrifice can be none other, but the sacrifice of
the Mass. whereas notwithstanding there be other, and far truer sacrifices
of Christians, which are abrogated and corrupted by antichrist, as the daily
sacrifice was of old by Antiochus: such as are godly prayers (which are called
sacrifices. Heb: 5, 7. Reu: The Popes of Rome are very careful of the
fulfilling of this prophecy; which notwithstanding* themselves have fulfilled
long since very diligently.
5, 8. and 8, 4.) which the Antichrist of Rome has robbed Christ of, and
commanded them to be offered to Saints: such as are also the sincere preaching
of the Gospel, and the right administration of the Sacraments; all which are
in such horible sort, turned vpside down, mangled and corrupted by the Bishop
of Rome, that it may well be said, that they are abolished, and that this
prophecy of the abolis^ing of the spiritual, true and most acceptable
sacrifices to God, the daily sacrifices of Christians, is of a truth fulfilled
in him.

5. The types of the old Testament, of the daily Sacrifice, did decipher the
daily sacrifice of Christians, to wit, the Mass.

Answer.
The Sacrifices were types of that one and only sacrifice of Christ, but not
of the ministry of the new Testament, save only spiritually. (Hebr: 7, and
9: and 10, chapter.) But here in this matter of the Mass, there is no strife
concerning spiritual sacrifices: therefore the argument is of no force, seeing
it has four terms.

6. From the rising of the sun to the going down of the same, my name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering, Malachie: 1, 11. But there can be no purer offering,
than the body and blood of Christ: therefore the Prophet speaks of the
sacrifice of the Mass.

Answer. Paul bids men lift up clean and pure hands in prayer every
where: 1, T^. 2, 8. (which is the same with that sacrifice of prayer and
invocation of David's. Psalm. 141. 2.) There are therefore other spiritual
sacrifices, which are also called clean. Here is then a fallacy, a non
distributo ad distributum, arguing by two particulars, as if the one were
contained under the other, as a particular under his general: for there be
more sacrifices of the new Testament, none of which is that one, which our
Adversaries catch at: for beside that one only sacrifice of Christ, there be
these also reckoned in the holy Scriptures.

1. The Ministry of the Gospel. Rom: 15, 16.

2. The conversion of the Gentiles. Romans 15, 16. Phil. 2, 17.

3, The Prayers of Christians: Hebr: 5, 7: Revel: 5, 8, and 8, 4.

4, The sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving* Heb: 13, 15:

5, Liberality toward the poor, and for the maintenance of the Ministry,
Heb: 13 16, Phil: 4, 18:

6, Mortification of the old man and renovation, Rom: 12, 1.

7, Endurance of persecution, or martyrdom for the name of Christ, Philip, 2.
17.

Therefore if there were no where in the World any popish or idolatrous
massing sacrifice, yet the prophecy of Malachie should be nevertheless
fulfilled among Christians by these spiritual sacrifices. Now the spiritual
sacrifices of Christians are called clean, because our heavenly Father does
accept them for clean and perfect for Christ's merits sake.

(7) The Pascall Lamb was a type of the holy supper. But the Lamb was not
only eaten, but also offered. So it is requisite in the Eucharist also, not
only to eat but also to offer.

Answ, 1, Thence this only follows, that our Lamb, CHRIST JESUS, was to be
sacrificed. But that we should offer him, that b^ the type (which was fulfilled
in Christ) cannot be proved. 2, We have before declared that the rite of
sacrificing yearly was abolished by the one only sacrifice of the true Lamb.
3, If all things that belonged to this type should be applied to the Lords
Supper, then because it was needful that the Lamb should be killed, they
shall make themselves a bloody sacrifice in the mass: which our Adversaries
themselves hold absurd. 4, Yea, and that which is more, we read no where,
that the Paschall Lamb was offered or sacrificed, but that it was killed. For
both the Hebrew word, and the Greek word (which Paul uses, 1, Cor, 5, 7) does
not always signify to sacrifice, but to kill. Therefore the Popish argument
falls to the ground.

(8) There shall be a handful of corn in the papists in their scarcity of
arguments are driven to (...) to the Rabbi^^.
the earth, even in the top of the mountains, etc. Psalm, 72, 16. Rabbi Solomon
expounds these words of a kind of Cakes in the days of the Messiah.
Therefore the Psalm speaks of the elevation of the mass, wherein the bread
is lifted up above the sh^uen crown of the Priest.

An, This is a scuruie argument, to draw the spiritual fertility and
plentifulnesse of the Church to the propitiatory sacrifice of the mass. But
such as the matter is, such be their arguments.

9 Christ says: facite hoc, but facere does sometimes in the scripture
signify to sacrifice. Therefore it is all one, as if Christ had said; facite,
that is, sacrifice, hoc (this) that is my body.

Answ, 1, They be mere particulars, whence nothing will follow. 2, The word
(facere) when it is put absolutely without express mention of a sacrifice,
does never signify to sacrifice, except in that verse of Virgils Bucolicks,
Cum faciam vitula pro fr^gibus, ipse ve^ito. But Virgill will not stablish a
massing sacrifice. 3, And if the word facere in the holy supper do signify to
sacrifice: and Christ spoke those words to all Christians, Hoc facite in mei
Commemorationem (Do this in remembrance of Me) it will follow that all
Christians ought to offer the massing sacrifice: and so all shall be Priests,
though they be not oyled and shaven.

10 Christ says: Hoc facite Do this, to wit, that which you see me do. But
Christ offered Himself then to his heavenly Father. Therefore he commanded
that his body should be offered in the mass.

Ans, 1, The minor or second proposition is false, for if Christ offered
himself to his Father in his supper after the manner of the mass; and the
mass be (as the Trent council defines it) a propitiatory sacrifice for the
living and the dead, for sins, punishments, and satisfaction and other
necessities, etc. then was there at that time satisfaction made to the heavenly
Father already by a sacrifice in the supper, for the sins and punishments of
men: and Christ offered himself the second time upon the altar of the Cross,
when there was no further need, which required him so to do: and the heavenly
Father would have one and the same debt twice paid unto him: and those debts
are paid the third time over at this day, while Christ is offered again in
the mass. But if Christ at length offered himself upon the altar of the
Cross, it is false, that he offered himself to his Father in his supper. 2,
The word facite, do, in these words is referred to a certain action, that is
to the reiterating of the celebration of the Lords supper in the Church, of the
blessing and distributing of the bread and wine, of the eating and drinking,
of the remembrancing and showing CHRIST'S death, and of giving of thanks for
Gods benifits, etc.

11 Christ was offered in the supper after an unbloody manner, and upon the
Altar of the Cross after a bloody manner.

Ans, If so, then was he not offered once but twice, which is contrary to the
Epistle to the Hebrews, cap, 7, ver, 27, and 9, 28, and 10. 12.) 2, And the
scripture does not any where say, that Christ should be offered after
unbloody sort.

12 The distinction between a bloody and unbloody sacrifice, has the
ancient Fathers for Autors thereof.

Ans, The ancient and purer Fathers distinguish between the bloody
sacrifices of the Old Testament, and the spiritual sacrices of christians in
the New Testament. But what is this to the visible massing sacrifice of the
Papists?

13. He was offered, because he would. Isay 53, 7. Therefore Christ is offered
in the mass, and he offered himself in the supper.

Ans, Who can choose, but laugh at suc^ a reason? first the translation which
they follow, is false, quite disagreeing from the original; and then does it
follow, that because Christ was a sacrifice upon the Cross, that therefore he
is sacrificed in the supper?

14 Christ is a Priest for ever; therefore that he may for ever be offered, it
must needs be, that he did institute in his Supper an eternal sacrifice, that
is, such as is daily to be offered.

Ans, 1. By this argument it would follow, that it should be necessary, not
that the Priests, but that Christ should offer himself daily: for not the
massing sacrificers but christ is the Priest for ever. 2, It would follow also
(seeing they press the word Eternity or for ever) that the sacrifice should
remain to be offered still in the World to come after the last judgment. 3,
The Apostle speaks of eternal efficacy and virtue of Christ's Priesthood,
whereby, he one and the same to day and yesterday, has for ever sanctified
them which were to be sanctified. Which while our Adversaries apply to their
sacrificers, there arise four terms. 4, And Christ abides nevertheless a
Priest for ever, although there be no where any sacrifice of how Christ is a
Priest for ever.
the mass. For 1, in sanctifying us, he brings us to his Father. 2, He
always makes intercession for us. 3. He is able for ever to save them, that
come unto him, which are all the offices of the high Priest.

15 Melchizedeck was a type of Christ: but Melchizedeck offered bread and wine.
Gen, 14, 18, Therefore it must needs be, that Christ offered his body and
blood in his Supper.

Ans, 1, If it were true, that Melchizedeck offered bread and wine, (which yet
is not true) nothing else would follow, but that Christ offered bread and wine,
which our adversaries themselves would not grant. For they avouch that the
bread and wine does not remain in the holy supper, but that they are
annihilated and so transsubstantiated, that nothing remains beside the body
and blood of Christ. There are therefore 4, terms. 2, But neither did
Melchizedeck offer, but brought forth (as the Hebrew word signifies) bread and
wine for the refreshing of Abraham's soldiers, as the text does clearly teach.
3, Neither is Melchizedeck said to be a type of Christ in this, whether
offering, or bringing forth of bread and wine: But first in respect of the
name of Melchizedeck, the King of righteousness. Secondly, because he was
King of Salem, and Christ is King or Prince of peace. (Isay, 9, 6.) Thirdly
because Melchizedeck was together both a King and a Priest, and so is Christ.
Fourthly, because the progeny of Melchisedeck is not related, so is Christ a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck (Psalm, 110. 4) All which,
whereas the Epistle to the Hebrews does most clearly and distinctly say, yet
it says nothing of the mass. It is therefore a fallacy from that, which is
spoken but in some respect only, to the same taken absolutely and in all
respects.

16 The text (Genes. 14, 18.) says: for he was a Priest, but it is the office
of Priests to offer sacrifices. Therefore Melchisedeck then offered bread and
wine.

Ans, The hebrew text has not the particle, for; but reads thus; and he was
a Priest of the most high God: and blessed him, that is, Abraham. There is then
no reason of the consequence: Melchizedeck was a Priest, and blessed Abraham;
therefore he offered unto God bread and wine: let the Papists at length be
ashamed of such Paralogismes.

17. Paul compares together the table of the Lord and the table of Devils:
which comparison cannot be entire, (seeing there is an offering in the table of
Devils) unless there be also an offering in the table of the Lord 1, Cor: 10.
21. therefore there must needs be a sacrifice in the Lords Supper.

Answer.
In the place of Paul cited by our Adversaries, it is not said, that the
Heathen did offer on their tables sacrifices to Devils: neither that there was
any offering at the table or celebration of the Lords Supper. But this Paul
treats of, that Christians cannot with good conscience both eat the body of
Christ at the Lords table, and nevertheless in the banquets of the heathen,
eat of those meats, which were offered unto Idols: for all sacrifices were
not wholly consumed with fire, but a good part thereof was reserved for costly
banquets. And what make these things for the confirming of the sacrifice of the
Mass? 2, Be it that at their tables, they offered those meats to Devils; how
does it follow, that there must needs be an oblation at the Lords table too?
unless they have some strange Logic to show (contrary to the old received
axioms,) that things which are compared together, must needs agree in every
particular point.

18. The body and blood of Christ be propitiatory for our sins. In the holy
Supper there is the body and blood of Christ: therefore the Mass is
propitiatory for our sins.

Ans. 1. The body and blood of Christ is not in the sacrament, save only
sacramentally and spiritually, and therefore cannot be there offered. 2. By the
same reason it would follow, that in every place where Christ was on earth,
there should be a propitiatory sacrifice. The virtue and efficacy of Christ's
sacrifice does at all times flow from the flesh of Christ, but it was made a
propitiatory sacrifice but once, and that upon the Cross; it is offered and
given in the Supper; and received of the believers by faith. 3. There is a
changing of the predication: for in the minor it is said: The body and blood
are in the Sacrament, in the conclusion: therefore the Mass is propitiatory.
Were it granted that their Mass were nothing but the Sacrament duly
administered, and that the body of Christ were carnally there, yet there would
no more follow but this, that in the Mass there is that, which is
propitiatory for sins. And if it be propitiatory in bare being, why needs
it to be sacrificed, that it may be propitiatory.

19. The Fathers of the Church called the Eucharist by the name of a sacrifice:
therefore the Mass is a sacrifice.

Answer. 1. It is a fallacy heaping up more questions for one: for it is one
question, whether the Fathers called the Supper a sacrifice (which is not yet
sufficient for the purpose) and another, in what sense they called it a
sacrifice, whether as the Papists mean it, or otherwise: 2 It is a fallacy
from a thing spoken but in some respect, to the same taken absolutely: for the
Fathers called it a sacrifice in some respect only (as namely, 1. because all
sacred rites may be called by the common word of the old Testament,
sacrificia, sacrifices, quasi a faciendo sacra, from doing holy and sacred
actions. 2. Because in the Supper there is a commemoration of that one only
and true sacrifice of Christ, they gave that name to the action from the more
chief and principal respect. 3, Because of prayers, which were poured out in
the celebration of the Supper, which are called sacrifices as was before
declared. 4, Because of praise and thanksgiving, which were used in the
celebration of the Supper, and are called sacrifices in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. 5. Because of their offering of first fruits, and food which they
called (...) loue-feasts. 6, Because the spiritual sacrifices, faith, hope,
charity, etc, are exercised and stirred up by the vle of the Supper.) 3, The
Papists should prove, that the ancient Fathers ever taught, that the Mass is a
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead: but this
they will never do.

20. The Church has always acknowledged the Mass for a sacrifice: therefore
it is a noveltie to deny the Mass to be a sacrifice.

Answer.
The Antecedent is prooved false: 1, because there is no Mass in the new
Testament. 2, Neither can it be showed in the Primitive Church, as was before
alleged out of the book of Valentinus Vannius, who has plainly proved,
that the Popish sacrifice of the Mass was not in the Church of Christ for the
space of 600 years or thereabout. 3, Because the chief things in the Mass
are new of late invention, and were heaped together at sundry times, one after
another. some by one Pope, and some by another. And such novelties are justly
rejected by us.

21. The Mass is an application, whereby that, which Christ merited for us, is
applied to every man in particular.

Answer. 1:
It cannot be said to be any application, unless it be thereunto so
ordained by God. Now we have a twofold application only of the merits of
Christ, recorded in Scripture. Whereof the one is by the word and faith without
any external element; and the other by the elements and rites in the
Sacraments ordained thereunto. But the Mass is a thing altogether different
from the Lords Supper: therefore it makes nothing for the applying of Christ's
merit. Moreover, the Mass has no testimony from the Scripture of either of
these manners of applying. Neither therefore does it apply the merit of
Christ. 2, And, because the Mass has no commandment of God, it may not be
lawful for men to tie the grace of God to man's inventions.

22. In the Mass there is remembrance of the passion and death of Christ:
therefore the Mass is to be reverenced.

Ans. 1. The remembrance of the passion and death of Christ, ought to be done
by the celebration of the Lords Supper, which Christ ordained and instituted,
but not by the theatricall celebration of the Mass, which was not instituted
by Christ. 2, The Papists strive not only for the remembrance of the Lords
death in the Supper, but for a propitiatory sacrifice, as the Canon of the
counsel of Trent has it. There is therefore more in the consequent, than in
the Antecedent.

23. There are many good things contained in the Mass: therefore, etc.

Ans. And there be very many idolatrous things contained in the Mass. And,
Magic is thereby made good, because Magitians use good and holy words: for
good mingled with evil does not make that, which is evil, to become good, but
that, which was good of it self, is corrupted by the evil: as when a man
mingleth poison with good wine.

24, The Mass is a representation of the death and passion of Christ. Now
seeing a representation does work more strongly than a bare commemoration, the
Mass cannot displease God.

Answer. 1. Because a representation seems stronger and more forcible to
men, it does not therefore seem stronger to God also: for my thoughts are not
as your thoughts (Isai: 55, 8.) 2, Seeing that representation is a kind of
commemoration, they which contend for a representation alone, are stricken by
the Pope with a curse, in the Canon before cited. 3, Neither does the first
Supper of Christ bear a representation, in which Supper our Adversaries
themselves do not admit of a representation.

25. Luke makes mention of the * Liturgy of the Apostles: Act. 13, 2.
therefore the Apostles celebrated Mass.

Ans. 1. The word Liturgy is understood of any service of God: and therefore
their own vulgar Authentical translation renders it, ministrantibus illis,
and our English (...)
accordingly, as they ministered to the Lord. 2, Seeing the most of the things
in the Popish Mass are new, how, I pray you, does the Mass suit with this
allegation of the Apostles who were dead sundry hundreds of years before the
Popish Mass was borne.

26. We read of many miracles, that were done at the Mass of the Papists:
therefore it is not to be rejected.

Answer. 1.
The most of those miracles are such, as If those mir^^les be true, how
ch^nceth it, tha^ now the^e be no miracl^s done about the Mass, (...)
seldom, and those most false too.
the Papists at this day are ashamed of the books, wherein those miracles are
reported. 2, The coming of Antichrist shall be with all power, and signs and
lying wonders. (2, These. 2, 9:) as Paul prophesied of him. 3. Miracles without
the word of God are not sufficient to prove articles of religion as we read,
Deuteronomy, 13, 1, 2, 3.

27 Luther does confess the devil suggested arguments unto him, against the
mass. Therefore to impugn the mass is devilish.

Ans, 1, Luther describes the conflict of Luther dimis^a priuata.
his conscience, wherein Satan after his manner, laying a truth for his ground,
endeavored to build thereupon falsehood and desperation. Even as the devil
tempting Christ, alleged the holy Scripture, which undoubtedly is true. But
it does not therefore follow that simply every thing is a lie, which Satan
brings in his tentations. For when he obiecteth our sins against us,
certainly he speaks a truth. 2, We oppose not against our Adversaries either
the authority of Luther or the tentation of Satan, but the Word of God. Now
the testimonies of Scripture which overthrow the mass, cannot be termed
deuilish suggestions. Let them then answer unto them if they can.

28 Our Adversaries seek a shift, to wind themselves out of the danger of the
thunderbolts of the Epistle to the Hebrews and say, that Christ's body always
remains one; and therefore though it be daily offered, yet it is always the
same, and but one only, and so it does not any waiet whart the Epistle to the
Hebrews.

Answ, 1. That is not the question: whether Christ's body be one and the same.
But here is the controversy, whether that body, which is one and the same, be
often to be offered to God: seeing the Apostle to Hebrews witnesses, that
that body was once only offered, and that the offering thereof may not be
iterated. There is then no connection of the Antecedent and consequent in this
paralogisme, 2, But neither do they offer the same body of Christ, which was
offered upon the Croffe, but an other body, which within a moment of time
before was bread, if all be true, which they feign of Transsubstantiation.
But the true body of Christ was not bread. Therefore neither do they offer
one and the same body of CHRIST.

An appendix of other abuses of the Mass.
The followers of Antichrist have transformed 1, Abuse private mass.
the Mass into a private action, wherein there is no communion, but the
masse-maker only receives the sacrament, whilst others, that be present
only look on, who are persuaded, that such a mass benifitteth them
neucrthelsse, though they communicate not. But we reject this private mass
fos these reasons.

Because the Lords supper, by those private

Christ gave not only a bare spectacle to

That appellation of the Lords Supper used which is nothing else, but by a
hebrew phrase, the distribution of it, shows, that in the primitive Church in
the celebration of the supper, there was a communicating, and that private
mass was altogether unknown.

The same is meant by the words of

That which Paul speaks of the abuse

Contrariwise our adversaries do dispute.
1, There is mention made of a private communion even in the histories of the
primitive Church.

Ans, 1, Private communion at that time was a thing much differing from private
mass now a days. For from the beginning whilst persecution did still rage,
and the Christians were therefore inflamed with great zeal, the whole Church
did use to celebrate the Supper every day. But after persecution ceased, the
zeal of Christians was by little and little abated, so that afterward they
did communicate only upon the Lords day. In the mean while they of the
clergy and the ministers of the Church kept the custom of the daily
communion. And this Communion, when they of the laity were absent, began to be
called a private Communion, and that which was celebrated on the Lords day, was
called a public Communion. It is therefore a frivolous argument, and
altogether from the purpose, whilst our Adversaries argue from the private
receiving of the Lords supper to the private sacrifices of the Mass (so making
four terms.)

2 Those which are the lookers on in private mass, do communicate spiritually.
Therefore they want not the fruit of the mass.

Ans, 1. We speak of the sacrament and sacramental eating, and our Adversaries
allege spiritual eating. There are therefore in this argument four terms,
2, That spiritual communion may be by faith alone, even out of the mass and
communion. Therefore it is nothing to the mass.

3, This is the nature of the ministry, that the benefits of God be by it
applied unto men. But private mass is a part of the ministry. Therefore by it
there is application Made to the standers by.

Ans, 1, The minor proposition is fal^^, It suffiseth not that a Preacher
preach to himself without having any hearers: so neither suffices it, that
the masse-maker alone communicate for others.
because our adversaries cannot free their public mass, much less their
private mass from idolatry, and how shall idolatry then be a part of the
ministry? 2, Sacramental application does not consist in a bare spectacle,
but in the use and fruition, as it is not sufficient to salvation that an
unregenerate man be a beholder of Baptism, unless himself also be baptized.

4 Priests that do mass are the mouth of the Church. Therefore if the Priest
communicate, it is all one as if the whole Church had communicated.

Ans, 1, The Antecedent has no ground in the scripture, 2, Neither do the
Papists themselves believe this which they say, otherwise the private communion
of the Priest would be sufficient for the^, that they should never have need
of any public communion. 3, The mouth of the Church should be an impure
one, when the Priest is polluted with adultery, whoredom, and such other
wickedness.

The Priests in the Old Testament did sacrifice for others, the laity being
present: so in private mass the Priest may communicate for them that stand by.

Ans, 1, There is great difference. For the Priest in the Old Testament in
sacrificing and offering did give something to God, but he that communicates
does not give, but receive some thing. There are therefore four terms, whiles
for one medius terninus, there arise unto us two, the one whereof is to offer,
the other, to receive or communicate. 2, And he that brought the sacrifice to
the Priest to be offered, was not excluded from the act of sacrificing, but he
also was said to have sacrificed, which also has no affinity with private
mass, in which, the laickes which are present at private mass* are bare
lookers on.

They have wrested the mass from the end of 2, Abuse the wresting of the
supper to other business.
Communion to infinite other affairs, and altogether from the purpose: hence
have arisen many kinds of masses: as namely,

1. The Mass of the Crown of thorns, 2. The Mass of the three nails. 3.
The Mass of the foreskin of Christ. 4, The Mass for seafaring men. 5, The
Mass for travelers on horseback, or on foot. 6. The Mass for women great
with child. 7, The Mass for women in travel of childbirth. 8. The Mass for
women that be barren. 9. The Mass for those that be sick of a quartane or
^ertian ague, and others of the like sort: which is nothing else, but many
ways to profane the holy Supper.
But they do also ^ell those Masses for money to every one that as keth for
them. No^ our Adversaries 3. Abuse. Simonie.
themselves do greatly condemn^ Simonie, not marking in the mean while, that
the ^ost of their Priests are Simoniacal: In which rout of men the Pope is mos^
Simoniacall of all, as by whom, heaven, and God, and all is set to sale, as
Mantuan says.

In the Mass they mingle water with wine (perhaps 4, Abuse. The mingling of
water with wine.
to fulfill the prophecy of Isaie. Thy wine is mixed with water. Isa: 1, 22.)
which, were it held as an indifferent thing, might be borne with all; as
there be some conjectures, that the Eastern Churches were wont to mingle
water with wine, because of the strongnesse of the wine, and least they might
seem to make feasts in the holy Supper, and as we are not sure that the wine
which i^ bought for the use of the Sacrament, is not mingled with water by the
Vintners: but because our Adversaries hold it as ^ thing of necessity to be
done, therefore it may not be endured.

Because neither the Evangelists, nor Paul

This mixture of water brings the Papists

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1. We read that of ancient time the wine was mixed with water in the supper.

Answer. 1:
It is a fallacy from that which is true in some respect, to the same taken
absolutely: for we said, that the Eastern Churches did it in some respect. 2,
It was a custom of the Eastern Church, which laid no necessity on it: but
our Adversaries make it a law, and of necessity. 3, The question is not what
and of whom, but how rightly it is done.

2, Water and blood flowed out of the side of Christ; therefore water ought to
be mingled with wine.

Answer. 1.
Christ ordained no Sacrament upon the Cross: It is therefore here vn^itly
alleged. 2, The Scripture does no where refer this to the Supper. 3, It
would thence follow, that not the blood of Christ alone, but water also ought
to be in the cup: which crosses their conceit of Transsubstantiation. 4, The
ancient Fathers have expounded it of the 2 (...)
Sacraments, the blood of the Supper, and water of baptism.

3. In the Revelation the multitude of Nations is compared to water: therefore
mistically water is to be mingled with wine in the Sacrament.

Answer. 1.
That place has nothing of the Sacrament. 2, The new Testament, especially in
matters of the Sacraments, admit not of allegories, especially such, as have no
ground in scripture. 3, Neither is it lawful for us to add anything to the
Sacraments, upon sandy grounds scraped together here-from.

4, It seems, that Christ did mingle water with the wine, in that the Host
carrying a Pitcher of water went before them into the Inn.

Answer.
This is a Doctor-like proof: In the pitcher there was water; therefore the cup
must have water mixed in it in the Supper.

In the Mass they have brought in a huge heap of ceremonies, which sprung up
one after another 5. Abuse. a sink of ceremonies
no long while ago; which Sleidan does briefly describe, ^peaking of the
tumult that was raised at Strasburge because of the Mass, in the 21 book of
his history, in these words.

There was a great co^course of men, especially, of the youth: for it was to
all these a rare spectacle and not heard of before, that many there with shaven
crowns, c^oathed after a new fashion, should sing together such things as no
man understood: that candles and torches should burn, as the saying is, at
noone day; that smoke and perfumes should be raised up with Frankincense;
that the Priest with his Attendants should stand at the Altar; pronounce words
in an uncouth language; use diverse bowings and gestures; bend downward with his
hands close shut; one while ^ling abroad, another while pull back his arms;
ever and anon turn himself; one while cry aloude, another while mutter over
some things with great silence; cast his eyes on high; look groueling to the
ground; stand in no one place; turn himself now to the right part, now to the
left part of the altar; wagge with the fingers; breath upon the chalice, and
lift it up on high, and after set it down; in certain places name sometimes
the living, sometimes the dead; break unleavened bread, and dip it in the
chalice; strike his breast with his fist; sigh; make as though he slept with
his eyes shut; awake again, eat one part of the bread, and drink up the
other whole with the wine, least any drop should be left; wash his hands; show
to the people with his back toward them, and his hand stretched out, the
gilded Paten, moo^e the same to his forehead and breast; kiss one while the
Altar, another while an Image enclosed in some matter or me^tall: thus far
Sleidan.

This Mass therefore has none affinity with that Mass, which some
Ecclesiastical Historians do write, that the Apostles, and their Scholars
did celebrate without all ceremony, only adding the Lords prayer: which our
Adversaries cannot deny, unless they will reject the witnesses of their own
religion.

Moreover, how lately those Ceremonies arose, ^. Abuse. The new^es of their
ceremonies
and were unknown to the Primitive Church, we cannot more briefly learn,
than by the narration of Polydore Virgil. He writes on th^^ wise. D^ in^ent.
rer. lib. 5, cap. 11.

All mysteries (of Religion) were delivered of Christ amongst his Apostles
plainly and simply: the whole order of Ceremonies was naked and plain, having
more devotion than gay furniture: for it is evident enough, that Peter, (who
either first of all, as being the chief of the Apostles, or together Where was
here the offering after the Co^s^^ cratio^^
with the rest of the Apostles, did estsoones celebrate divine service, with
that rite, which he received from Christ) was wont straight after the
consecration to bring in the Lords Prayer. Afterward Iame^ the Bishop of
Jerusalem, increased these mysteries: Basil also increased them, and others at
sundry times instituted other things. Caelestinus the Introitus of the Mass,
the beginning whereof is the Psalm; Iudica me Deus. Damasus ordained the
Confession, which is made by the Priest before he ascend to the Altar: yet
some there be, who ascribe it to Pontianus. Gregory ordained the Antheme,
which follows the Introitus, and therefore it is commonly called by the same
name: as also that Kyrie should be said nine times, and the Antheme after the
Epistle, Gospel, and Communion. But the Antheme after the Epistle they call the
gradual, because the Deaco^ ascends into an higher place to read the
Gospel. Telesphorus ordained the Hymn, Gloria in excelsis Deo. Gelasiu^ first
invented the Or^isons, that is, the clauses of prayers, as they call them.
Hier^m the Epistle and Gospel: and Anastasi^s first appointed when it was
read, that all which were present at service, should stand crooked and bending
down for reverence, that they might be more ready to defend the faith of the
Gospel, or to mark and note it, which we use to do rather standing, than
sitting. The Alleluiah was translated from Jerusalem. The singing of the
Creed, that it should be sung after the Gospel on feastivall days, and
should be repeated by the people, which were present at service, was the
decree of Pope Mark the first. The same decree was renewed afterward by Damasus.
Gelasius made the Antheme, which Here Mass was so celebrated, that the people
might answer.
they commonly call the Tract, and the Hymns: and the prefaces, which go
before the Canon, he framed in an elegant speech and song, which, as Pelagius
reports, are nine in number. Vrbanus adds the tenth unto the honor of the
virgin, the mother of God. And whereas Incense is burned at the Altar, Aaron
did that first; as the Lord said unto Moses. Thou shall set an altar before the
veil, and Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense; as it is in Exodus (30, 6,
7) And afterward Leo the third decreede, that the same should be done amongst
us; which was also observed of the heathens. Hereof it is, that Virgill says
of Venus in the first of his Aen^ids.

Vbi Templum illi, centumque Sab^o
Th^re calent arae etc.
Where stand her famous seats,
And Temple rich, and of incense an hundred altars sweats.
The use of washing their hands seems to have come from the Old Testament,
for that the Jews were wont to begin not only divine service, but their
banquets also with washing of hands; as holding it wicked to eat bread with
unwashed hands, which fault they objected against the Disciples of Christ. Or
else this custom was taken from the Heathen, amongst whom those which
sacrificed did first of all wash their hands: and as Hesiod says, there was a
charge given, that no man should in the morning ofter wine to Jupiter with
unwashed hands, lest the glory of the sacred things should be polluted. (And
here again he alleges verses of Virgils) thus far Polydore Virgill. Who
so would see more, let him read Durandus his book entitled Rationale
Diuin^rum Offic^orum.

Behold the great impudency of our Ad^ersa^ies, who boast of antiquity in the
mass and endeavor to fetch it from the very Apostles, contrary to their
consciences and credit to all histories, but least they here seek a shift and
pretend that these things are spoken of the ceremonies only, which are not of
the substance of the mass: let us hear what the same Author writes of the
chiefest and the substantial mystery of the mass, of the Canon, I mean in
the same book and chapter. Where he says thus:

In the prefaces, that Sanctus, Sanctus, How finely the mass came from the
Apostls
Sanctus, Dominus, Deus Zebaoth should be sung, was first decreed by Sixtus,
which was taken from the Prophet Isay. Gelasius made; Teigitur, which afterward
was made, the beginning, as before Syricius had made Communicants; which now is
set in the third place. Whence it appears that the Canon it self, was
neither al framed by one man, neither brought into that form, whereof it now
consists. The certainty whereof hence appears, that Alexander the first,
who was along time before Gelasius and Syricius, appointed for the memorial of
Christ's passion: Qu^ pridie, qua^ pate^eter, etc. unto these words: Hoc est
Corpus meum. Wherefore it is clear enough, that then was the beginning of the
Canon, when, as has been said, Gelasius was Bishop of Rome, about 360, years
or somewhat more after Alexander. Then Leo added Hanc igilur oblationem etc,
unto these words, placitus accipias. Gregory annexed thereto three petitions,
Diesque nostras in tua pac^ disponas, atque ab aeterna damnatione ^o^ eripe, et
in Electorum t^orum iubeas grege numerar^. The same Gegorie the first added,
Sanctun^ sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam. And in like sort others added other
things. Thus far Polydor Virgil.

By this narratio^ you see, that they are stark and shameless lies, which the
Papists boast of the antiquity of their mass, and of Apostolic traditions of
the mass. You have here the history of the beginning of the principal and
substantial parts of the mass compiled out of the Ecclesiastical histories,
not by some Lutheran, but by a faithful servant of the Roman Church, even by
a Mass Priest. 7, Abuse. The errors and ^ooleries of the Can^^ of the mass.


Now le^ us see by one or two examples, how absurd that Canon is, thus patched
together by diverse shreds.

The Ancients in times past, at the time

In the Canon, God is requested to accept that pure sacrifice of the body and
blood and Meschizedeck. If our Adversaries refer these words to the old
accustomed offerings, they make mockeries, seeing this manner is now ceased
amongst them: and they pray for that, which is no where. But if they refer them
to the present sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ in the mass; what is
this else, but to make intercession to the heavenly Father for his Son Christ?

Again how absurdly is that most precious sacrifice of Christ's own body and
blood,

There is comparison made with the sacrifice An error in the sacrifice of
Melchizedeck, who did not sacrifice but brought forth bred and wine.
nothing in Scripture (as has already been showed) that Melchizedeck did
offer bread and wine. The sacrifice of Christ is compared with that sacrifice
which is not, never was, and never shall be.

The Canon says that they offer the bread of life to the heavenly Father: But
where are they bid to offer the bread of life? Whereof we read nothing in the
whole course of the scripture, but that the bread of life should be eaten, not
offered.

The Canon is contrary to the article of

Again seeing Christ is never in his glorified

And lastly, that we may not seem here in the celebration of the Supper, and
offerings of charity, all that (though the manner of those offerings be
abrogated, with which that part of the service should rightly have been
abrogated too) all that, I say, our Adversaries do so retain, that they have
(of a foolish ordinance) trasferred to the bread of the Eucharist present in
the Supper, all those which formerly belonged to an action altogether different
from this. As any man may easily find more, than be here alleged, if he
do but only read the Canon of the mass. In the mean while the Council of
Trent strikes all them with acurse, which say there be errors contained in the
Canon of the mass. But it is ^uident how it wants no errors, but abou^deth
with them.

This is also one of the Abuses of the mass, that 8, Abuse. Mass said in
Latin.
it is celebrated not in a known tongue, and such as the people understand,
but in a strange and indeed only in the latin tongue, which we reprove for
these causes

Because in the supper, there ought to be a co^memoratio^, of the death and
passion of Christ which how can it be done in a tongue which the people
understand not. And how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say
Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not, what thou say? 1,
Corin 14, 16.

Paul writ the institution of the Lords

Before the receiving of the Supper, to the fruitful use thereof it is
needful to admonish

Paul, though he commend the gift of

I had rather in the Church (says Paul)

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus.
1. Mass is to be said in Latin, that they which come to us out of France,
Italy, and England may understand it, and thereby set the unity of the Church.

Ans. 1 By the like reason, we should not preach in the Dutch tongue, but in
the Latin amongst Dutch men, that strangers, which come unto us may understand
and hear the consent of our doctrine: 2, The whole flock and company of the
godly are not to be neglected, for the cause of a stranger or two; whereas
notwithstanding there is often times never a one present. 3, If there be a
necessity, that all strangers should vn^erstand Mass, how much more
needful, ^^at the whole Church at home should understand? 4, It is not
certain that all strangers do understand the Latin tongue.

2. The words of some one language (for example, of the Dutch tongue) are in
sund^y places of the land, different and disagreeing, which falls not out in
the Latin tongue.

Answer. 1.
The Papists may be ashamed of such senseless Paralogismes: for by the same
reason it should be unlawful to preach in Dutch. 2. And why do not the
Jesuits at this day, for the same reason, cease to publish their writings in
the Dutch tongue? But a fit cover for such a pot: such as is the Popi^^
Religion, such are the Popish reasons.

3. If service should be said in the vulgar tongue, then there would be a
profanation of the mysteries of Religion.

Answer. 1.
This is the sore that our Adversaries cannot abide should be touched: for
they are afraid, least the gross absurditities of the Canon of the Mass
should be espied even of the Laics. 2, By the like reason, it should not be
any more lawful to read the Gospels appointed for Sondaies, (wherein are many
high Mysteries of faith contained) in the vulgar tongue before the people: but
mysteries of Religion, whiles they are proposed to the Church and explaned, are
nothing at all by this means profaned. unless they account the Church as
Swine and Dogs, before whom it is not lawful to cast sacred things.

4. Strangers, which understand not our vulgar tongue, would laugh at our
service, which they understand not.

Answer. 1. And what if the common people deride the Mass, because they
understand it not, being said in Latin? 2. And what if those strangers
understand not the Latin tongue neither, will they not therefore deride it
too? If when the whole Church is come together in one, and all speak sta^rge
languages, (that is, if nothing be done in the vulgar tongue) there come in they
that are unlearned, or they which believe not, will they not say, that ye are
out of your wits? as Paul says. 1, Cor. 14, 23.

(Note that what is here spoken of the saying of Mass in Latin, may also be
understood of prayers rehearsed in Latin only,)

It is an abuse of the Mass also, that they ^. Abuse. Mass for the dead.
offer the Mass not so much for the living, as for the dead, residing (as the
Papists think) in Purgatory: and that they persuade them selves, that the
Mass does profit the dead, and that they are helped by the multitude of
Masses: the vanity whereof how great it is, shall be declared afterward in
the question of Purgatory, and therefore we will surcease from that labor
now: let it suffice; that we have rehearsed now some few errors and abuses of
the Mass in steed of many.

CHAP. 18. Of Communion under one kind^.
THE Antichrist of Rome has moreover mangled the holy Supper of Christ, and
has bereaved the people of the one part or kind of the Supper, namely the Cup;
which he pretends to appertain not to the lay people, but to the Priests
only: but we greatly reprove this mangling of the Supper, as a kind of
sacrilege, and that for most just reasons.

Because it does directly oppugn the sacred and first institution of the
Supper by our

1. For Christ instituted an entire and whole Sacrament consisting of two
kinds, or rather of two parts, and not a maimed Sacrament.

2. Neither did he institute two Sacraments of the Supper; whereof the one,
which is for the Priests, should consist of two parts, or, as they speak, of
two kinds; the other for the people, but of one.

This maiming of the Supper, is repugnant

1. Drink ye (a word of the Imperative Mood) all of this. Math. 26. 27.

2. And all of them drank of it, according to his commandment. Mar. 14, 23.

This was not barely commanded, but

1. For the Cup, which our Adversaries bereave the people of, is the Cup of the
new Testament. 1, ^o^. 11. 25. Luk, 22, 20.

2. This is my blood of the new Testament. Math. 26. 28. Mark. 14, 24.

The Lord tied the commemoration of his death to the Communion of the holy

As Christ ordained the bread, as a means to partake his body, which was given
for bloud^ therefore, seeing the lay people have need to receive the blood of
Christ shedd for their sins, it is needful also to receive it in the Cup,
the ordinary means thereof, and not in the bread.

Those things which Christ by the great wisdom of his Father, did sever from
them

It is proved that the ancient and Primitive

1. By the example of the Corinthians, to Note. The B b in the counsel of
Constance, co^sesse that the Communion under one kind, was neither instituted
by Christ, nor used by the faithful of the Primitive Church those Papists the
whom Paul prescribes the entire institution of the Supper equally to all. 1,
Corinth. 11. 26, 27, 28.

2, By the Ecclesiastical Histories in the times of the Fathers.

3, By the confession of our Adversaries in the Canons of the counsel of
Constance; which have these words.

Though Christ did administer to his Disciples, this venerable Sacrament under
both the kinds of bread and wine: yet notwithstanding this, the Communion
under which would prove the Communion under one kind by the Scripture, do
reprove the counsel of Co^stance for a lie* and do hold that the Counsel may
err.
one kind only, is to be held for a law. And again,

Although in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was received of the faithful
under both kinds: yet notwithstanding this, the custom being brought in, etc.

(8) Seeing therefore that the Communion under one kind, was neither ordained
by Christ, nor used of the Apostles, this constitution of Communion under one
kind only, can neither be Divine nor Apostolic, but Antichristian, as having
had no place in the Church of Christ for many hundred years. And when as
afterward it crept into the Church by little and little, in some places, not
every where; it was at length confirmed and brought in publicly by the
counsel of Constance.

The lightness of those reasons, which they bring for the mangling of the
Supper, ought This book was published by Gerson, in the year, 1417. August.
20.
to make it justly hated of godly men. Now we will very briefly note the
reasons of the counsel of Constance, as Gerson has explaned them in a
particular book for that purpose: and these be they.

1, If the cup were granted to the people, there were danger of sheading.

2, Danger in carrying it from place to place.

3, In the si^^inesse of the vessels: which should be Sacred, and not
commonly handled and touched by the Laickes.

4, In men's long beards.

5, In the reserving of it for the sight: For vinegar might be generated in the
vessel: add moreover, that in summer time flies might breed^ in it, and some
times the wine might pu^rifie.

6, Many would abhor to drink it, when many others had dr^nk^ before them.

7, In what vessel could there be so much wine consecrated, as would be
required at Easter time for some thousands of Co^municants.

8, There would be loss in the chargeable providing of wine. For in some
places it is hardly gotten, and other where it is sold dear.

9, There would be danger, least it should congeale.

10, Hereof would arise a danger of a false conceit, as if there were as great
worthiness in the Laickes, about receiving Christ's body, as is in the Priests.

11, It would be thought, that the Communion of the cup has been
heretofore, and now were necessary, and so all the Doctors of the Clergy and
the Prelates, which have not opposed themselves against the contra^ie custom,
by their pre^ching and writing should have offended.

12, The power and virtue of this sacrament, would be deemed to be more in the
receiving, than in the consecration of it.

13, It would follow that the Church of Rome did not judge soundly of the
sacraments, neither were herein to be imitated.

14, It would follow, that the Council of Constance did err in faith and good
manners.

15, It would be^ an occasion of Schisms in Christianity.

Had it been strange, gentle Reader, if this council had been beaten to powder
with lightning and thunder from Heaven; which has mangled, turned up side
down, and broken the Testament and last will of the Son of God, given us in
charge by the eternal Wisdom of GOD, with such frivolous, foolish, and idle
reasons. Thus forsooth the Sacraments are to be handled, so great ought to be
the authority of the Son of God in his Church, with what burden of
conscience then do our Adversaries defend this mangling.

Contrariwise our aduersarie^ do dispute.
1. Christ says: Do this in remembrance of Me, that is administer the
Supper, in remembrance of Me; but this agrees only to Priests, not to
Laics. Therefore neither does the Cup belongs unto the Laics, seeing it
pertains ^ot to them to administer the Supper.

Ans, 1, By this reason the Laics should be thrust, not from one but from both
kinds of the Sacrament. 2, The word (Do) has not only reference to him that
administreth, but to the co^municants too. Otherwise seeing the apostles did
not administer in the 1, supper but only received the Sacrament from Christ,
they also should have communicated but under one kind.

2 All the Apostles were Priests; therefore the use of the Cup and that
precept, Drink ye etc. belong to Priests only.

Ans, 1,
Then the Primitive CHVRCH did amiss, and Paul the Apostle too, who delivered
the Supper unto the lay people, not mangling the Communion of the Laics (as
they call them) but in such wise, as he had received it from the Lord, that
is, so as it was delivered unto him. 2, Again by this reason the latity should
be excluded not from the cup only, but from the whole Sacrament. 3, It cannot
be, that Apostles were then Priests, that is, sayers or doers of mass: because
then the mass had no being at all: and that the Apostles were made priests at
the Supper, it is a tale, framed without authority of the scripture. If it be
objected, that they were made Priests before, when they were sent to preach,
the schoole-diuines deny it, who say that they were made Priests at the
supper, and reduce the Apostles at the time of their sending forth, into the
order of ex^rcists, not of priests.

6 Christ did not so institute both kinds, that it may not be lawful also to
communicate under one kind only.

Answ, 1, The Antecedent proposition is most false: for it cannot be showed in
scripture, that Christ did institute both kinds as a thing indifferent and
arbitrarie. 2, The words of Christ are unanswerable: Drink ye all of this. Now
unless they can show a restriction or limitation in the scripture of this
universal proposition, it remaiueth an universal in his full force. 3. It is
a Doctor like interpretation: Drink ye all; that is, it is not needful that
all drink. Then those universal sayings shall also be so expounded: Come
unto me all ye, that are weary, that is, it is not needful, that all which
are weary and heavy laden, should come unto me, etc. A rare kind of
Divinity no doubt.

4, The true body of Christ is not without Concomitance.
blood, therefore seeing the blood is contained also under hat kind, it is
sufficient to communicate under one kind only.

Answer, 1, This argument deserves thunder claps and eternal brimstone.
Christ forsooth seems foolish to them who (not considering that his blood was
contained under his body) instituted unnecessary things in his last will, as
not having his wits well about him for fear of death. But Wisdom is
justified of her children. 2, And if under the bread there were the body not
void of blood, yet we should not so satisfy Christ's commandment, who
commanded us not to eat, but to drink, drink, drink his blood.

5 Paul says: whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink, etc. 1. Corin, 11,
17. there by the disjunctive particle (or) is granted a Communion under one
kind.

Answer, 1,
If that were Paulls meaning, then were it lawful to communicate with the cup
only without bread which seeing our Adversaries deny, they do thereby expose
the vanity of this argument to be derided. 2, Paul when he describes the
institution of the Supper in its proper place, 1, Corinth, 11, 24. 25, 26, 28.
Uses no disjunctive particle. 3. Our Adversaries in running to the Greek
text, do against the council of Trent, which enioyneth the old vulgar latin
translation of the Bible, to be held for authentical in disputations, so
that no man may dare or presume to reject it upon any pretense what seeuer.
Sess, 4, Decret, 2.

6 Paul says in the Greek text: All we are Partakers of one bread: and
those words (et de vno calice, and of one cup) though they be in the old
translation, yet they are not in the Greek text. Therefore Paul allowed a
Communion under one kind.

Answ, 1, It is a failacie of composition and Division, because those words
are severed from the entire and perfect reasoning of Paul, by which words he
argues afterward from the communion of the cup, as in the beginning he did
from the communion of the bread, saying: ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord
and the cup of devils. From these words, a man might conclude by the same
consequence, as the Papists upon their authority do, that it were lawful to
communicate with the cup only without bread.

7 Paul says: let us keep the feast in unleavened bread. 1 Cor. 5, 8. There
Paul makes no mention of the cup, insinuating one kind only.

Ans, Paul speaks of the newness of life of the regenerate, by an argument
drawn from a rite of the Passover whereby they abstained from leaven. This is
then an idle and inconsequent reason. For these are Paul's words whole and
entire: let us keep the feast not with old leaven, neither in the leaven of
ma^^tiousnesse and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth. These are nothing to the Lords supper, there are then four terms.

8* Christ celebrated the supper under one kind only, before his two disciples
in Emaus, Luke, 24, 30.

Ans. 1. There is described Christ's usual custom; wherein he used to break
bread (at dinner or supper) and to bless it: neither does there appear any
show of the celebration of the Supper in this story. The words are not said:
This is my body. they are not bid, eat; or call to remembrance the Lords
death: neither is it said, that the two Disciples did eat, but it seems
rather, that they broke off their Supper straightwaies for joy*

9. Paul celebrated the Supper under one kind only, in the ship. Act. 27, 35.

Ans. There is nothing at all of the Supper, but of alaying their hunger:
unless our Adversaries would have it, that the heathen and unconverted
Soldiers did communicate too, and that they grew to be merry in the
celebration of the Supper of the Lord, as at a feast or banquet: for both these
are comprised in that rehearsal of Saint Luke. The argument then is this:
hunger is alaied with bread, therefore the lay people may communicate under one
kind only.

10. In the Church of the Apostles, the faithful communicated under one kind
(of bread) only. Act. 2, 42:

Ans. 1. The breaking of bread in that somewhat The connsel of Co^stm^e does
con^es in express words, that in the Primitive Church, this Sacrament was used
to be received of the faith full under both kinds.
obscure place, may as well be understood of the community of goods, and
rereceaving the poor into their fellowship, as of the Communion in the Supper:
for by the circumstances it should rather be meant, that their bread was broken
in their houses and not in the Church, that is, that the Christians lived of
their goods in common: neither is this interpretation or sense absurd. 2, But
be it granted, that the speech is there of the Supper: yet it being a
Synecdochicall speech, where the whole is signified by a part, it will not
exclude the Cup.

11. Christ bad us pray: Give us this day our daily bread, etc. therefore the
lay people ought t^ communicate under one kind.

Answer. 1. The Priests say the same prayer, let them then abstain also from
the Cup. 2, The word (Bread) in the Antecedent is taken for food and raiment,
in the consequent for Communion under one kind: so there are four terms.

12. The Fathers, when they speak of the Supper. do oftentimes mention the
bread only, and not the Cup also.

Ans. 1. They name the Supper so by a figure Synecdoche, from the more
principal part signifying the whole: but the figure Synecdoche has not an
exclusive power; but under one part includes the other two. ^, The counsel of
Co^stance does grant that in the Primitive Church (in the time of the Fathers)
the Communion was used under both kinds. 3, If such sayings of the Fathers do
exclude one part of the Sacrament, why does this exclusi^e belong to the Laics
only, and is not extended to the Priests also.

13. The ancient Canons did thrust bad Priests down to the Communion of the
Laics: therefore Communion under one kind^ for the Laics, was then in use.

Answer. The Communion of the Laics was a punishment for evil Priests,
because The a godly Laicke and a evil Priest are esteemed of the Papists alike.
they were suspended from their office, and the power of consecrating, whereby
they did minister and distribute in the holy Supper, was taken from them, and a
place was appointed for them amongst the Laics: In which signification the
Communion of Laics is taken in the Antecedent; because therefore it is taken
otherwise in the consequent, there are four terms.

14. In ancient time, they carried the consecrated bread home with them: but
there is nothing said of the carrying of the Cup: therefore, etc.

An. The question is not what was done; but whether it were rightly done, and
according to the rule of Christ's institution.

15. The Communion under one kind is an ancient Tradition.

Ans. 1. The counsel of Constance says no: as has been said sundry times.
2, The Tradition of Christ and the Apostle Paul, concerning the Supper, is
far more ancient. Let this tradition then, which is of no such antiquity,
give place to the more ancient.

16. The Church has power to change the Sacraments, because at this day all
hold, that tha^ change is lawful, whereby the Supper is translated from the
evening to morning meetings.

Answer. 1.
The change of the circumstance of time in the celebration of the Lords Supper,
belongs not to the substance of the Sacrament, but to the accidents and
circumstances: to reason then from these, to changes in the substance, is
against art and reason. 2, And that was spoken to the Church, Turn not aside
to the right hand, nor to the lea^t Deuteronomy. 5, 32.

17. Of the sons of Eli it is written: Appoint ^e, I pray thee, to one of the
Priests offices, that I Eckius in his Enchiridion.
may eat a morsel of bread. 1, Samuel. 2, 36 therefore the Communion under
one kind is due to the Laics.

Answer.
I will only reckon up the several Terms that be in this argument. 1, The
sons of Eli. 2, Lay Christians. 3, The Priests office, or maintenance by the
revenues of the Priesthood. 4, The Lords Supper. 5, The repulse from the
Priests office. 6, Admission to the Supper. 7. A morsel of bread. 8, The
Sacrament under one kind. Is not this a very fertile argument of many terms?
and how prodigal are our Adversaries in terms.

CHAP. 19. Of Purgatory.
Our Adversaries lay it for a ground, that as there be three sorts of men,
some good, some bad, and some of a mean sort betwix^ both, so there shall be
three estates of men's souls after this life; that they are either altogether
blessed, or ^uerlastingly damned, or else in the temporal punishment of
Purgatory. And this last sort of souls, (to wit those that be in Purgatory)
has much augmented their rents and revenues: for the Papists ^each, that those
souls may ^e h^lpen by the prayers of the living, purchased by gold and
silver, yea by lands and other revenues also: of these things then let us
treat briefly.

Question: 1.
Seeing that which is not, has no proprieties, first the question is, whether
there be a Purgatory. Our Adversaries say there is, we say, no; for these
reasons.

Because the Scripture teaches us nothing of Purgatori^, neither in the
letter, nor in the

Yea, a^ often as Christ and the Apostles

1, He, that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he, that
will not believe, shall be damned. Mark, 16, 16.

2, Verily, verily, I say unto you; he that hears my word, and believes in
him, that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but has passed from death unto life. Ioh. 5, 24*

3. He that believes in the son, has everlasting life, and he that
obeys not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him:
Ioh: 3, 36.

4. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he that believes
not, is condemned already: Ioh. 3, 18.

5. So in the parable (Luke, 16) there are only two places after death
mentioned: everlasting life, (wherein was Abraham and Lazarus) and eternal
damnation (wherein was the glutton:) neither is there granted any passage from
the one to the other.

6. Christ at his coming makes only two flocks, to wit, the blessed and the
damned Matthew: 25: and Christ says nothing of the purging of them which are
of the mean sort betwixt the other two, by Purgatory; whereas notwithstanding
in that congregation of all men, the three sorts of men, the good, the bad, and
those of mean sort betwixt both, shall all appear before the tribunal seat
of Christ.

7, So Christ, did not send the Thief upon the Cross to Purgatory (though
he had done many ill deeds), but calls him directly to heaven: Luk, 23, 43:

Paul would not have Christians to be ignorant

1, He says, the faithful departed do sleep, not they are tormented in
purgatory, ver, 13.

2, He speaks it for our comfort. But there would be no comfort, if we should
know that our friends religiously departed, were in pain and torments and such
as be extreme, ver, 13.

3, Christ will bring with him at his coming the faithful departed, he will
not then at length, call them to him out of Purgatory, ver, 14.

The Popish purgatory, whereby we should be purged from sins after death,
does cross and twhart the one only and true

1, Men's hearts are purged by faith, not by the fire of purgatory) Act. 15, 9.

2, The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, purges us from all sin, 1,
Ioh, 1, 7.

3, Be not deceived; neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
wantons, etc, shall inherit the kingdom of God: And such were some of you; (now
see their purgatory, what it was) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our
God, 1, Cor. 6, 9, 10, 11.

It twharteth also the perfect satisfaction, and perfect merit of CHRIST, if
no we

1, For so the passive righteousness of Christ shall be thrust out of doors.

2, Christ is the reconciliation for the sins of the whole World, 1, Ioh. 2,
2.

3, Surely he has borne our infirmities etc. I say does in one place refute
Purgatory by many arguments.
He was wounded for, our transgressions etc. with his stripes we are healed,
etc. the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, etc. The chastisement
of our peace (the punishment of our sins) was upon him, etc. He has carried
our sorrows. Isay 53, 4, 5, 6.

It is contrary to the article of the Christian

1, We believe the remission, not the compensation of sins.

2, We believe eternal life. Here is no mention of Purgatory.

The opinion of our Adversaries concerning Purgatory has no weight.

1, For they confess that there was no purgatory in the time of the old
Testament.

2, They cannot avoid the absurdity concerning them which shall be found
alive at the latter day, and have deserved Purgatory: what shall be done with
them: whether God will pardon them those punishments: or whether they must be
tormented for a time after the final sentence of the last ^^dgment.

3, The grounds of this opinion were taken from Plato and Virgil, lib, 6. Aened.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1, Because all men have not perfect and firm faith, therefore all after this
life cannot perfectly be^aued.

Ans, 1, Christ, when he says, that faith is the isntrumental cause of
saluati^n, he speaks of faith generally, and excludes neither weak, nor
imperfect faith. 2. Christ laid hold on by faith, cannot be deu^ded; that he
should be said, to be laid hold on but in part; and they which lay hold on
him, to be saved but in part; but whole Christ is apprehended as well by a
weak, as by a strong faith. 3, It is a fallacy, taking that for a cause which
is no cause. For the strongnesse or weakness of faith (or an accident of
faith) is not the cause of apprehending salvation, but of retaining it, Now
that which is spoken of retaining, that ou^ Adversaries do wrongfully apply to
the apprehending thereof.

2 No unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Revel, 21, 27.
Therefore needs they must be purged by purgatory.

Answ, 1,
There be four terms in the argument. For the purging from the filth of
sin in the Antecedent is taken for the justification of faith, whereby all
that believe, are washed, are sanctified, are purified, (1, Cor, 6, 11, 1, Ioh
1, 7. Acts 15, 9.) in the consequent it is taken for a clensing in purgatory,
neither known to God, nor to the Scriptures. 2, There is more in the
Consequent, than in the Antecedent. For it follows not: the heirs of
eternal life are unclean, therefore they are purified only by the fire of
Purgatory, and not by any other means, such as these which concur together
are, faith, the blood and the merit of Christ.

3 In the name of Jesus shall every knee bow, both of things in Heau^n, and
things in earth, and things under the earth, Philip. 2, 10, Revel. 5, 13. But
the devils hate Christ, and do not bow the knees unto him. Therefore there
are souls in purgatory; and consequently there is a purgatory.

Ans, 1, The bowing of the knees in this place is the same, that subjection, in
which sense even the Devils (though they tremble) do in outward carriage
confess subjection to Christ. 2, It is an error taking that, which is spoken
indefinitely of al sorts of creatu^es, whether reasonable or unreasonable, as
i^ it were spoken definitely, of a certain sort of men; of whom
notwithstanding there is no certainty in Scripture. 3, As concerning the place
(Reuelat, 5, 3, 13.) where there is mention made of such as are under the
earth, I answer. 1, If there were a purgatory, yet were it not certain, that
it were under the earth. 2, Under the earth, are both the creatures under the
earth; and also the dead, which are buried, which shall appear before Christ
at the resurrection, and shall testify their subjection.

4 If any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe
himself: nevertheless yet as it were by the fire. 1, C^rin, 3, 15. Therefore
there is a Purgatory.

Ans, 1, It follows not, the fire shall ^ye it; Therefore purgatory fire
shall try it, 2, Paul says the work shall burn, not the person; but our
Adversaries imagine the persons and souls shall burn. 3, If Paul speak of
purgatory, then the Saints shall be thrust into purgatory; which is proved by
the universal particle Eueri^ man's work, etc. 4, He speaks of the fire of
tribulation, affliction, and tentation; against which, stubble may not be
opposed, but faith which is more precious than gold, 5. So then while they
confound the work that shall burn, and the persons that shall burn, and also
the fire of tribulation and the fire of purgatory, there arise not four, but
fi^e terms.

5 Of the sin against the Holy Ghost, it is said, it shall neither be
forgiven in this World, nor in the World to come. Matthew. 12, 32. Therefore
there remains a place after death wherein sins are forgiven.

Answer, 1, CHRIST speaks of the World to come; but our Adversaries
themselves deny, that there shall be any Purgatory in the WORLD to come,
unless they will fall into the error of Origin. 2, Christ speaks of
remission in the World to come: but our Adversaries urge not, remission, but
satisfaction in purgatory. There are therefore four terms. 3, The phrase of
speech (neither in this World, nor in the world to come) in Mark 3, 29. are
expressed thus: he shall never have forgiveness

6 Thou shall not come out thence, till tho^ have paid the v^most farthing,
Matthew, 5, 26. It must needs be therefore, that there is a purgatory.

Answ. 1.
Christ in these words does not speak of the state of the World to come; but
admonisneth us, that in this present life we study for peace and quietness,
and be reconciled to our Adversaries: least by our stubbornes we draw upon us
greater euilles from the civil Magistrate. 2, Were the place never so much to
be expounded allegorically; ye^ herein it fails, that we, (who have offended
an eternal and infinite God) must neede^ be subject to eternal punishments:
where no place is granted to temporal punishment. 3, There would follow this
absurdi^ie also: that we must agree with our Adversary, that is, with Satan:
this end allegories have, which are st^^tched beside the meaning of the
Scripture.

7, We went through fire and water, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy
place. Psalm. 66. 12 therefore there is a Purgatory.

Answer. 1 Our Adversaries allege this out of the old Testament contrary
to their conscience; whereas notwithstanding the Schoolmen teach, that in the
old Testament there was as yet no Purgatory. 2, That the Psal^ne speaks of
temporal tribulations, is prooved by the^e words next following: I will go^
into thy house with burnt offerings* which cannot agree to souls departed. 3.
In the Psalm it is said: Thou have caused men to ride over our heads: (men,
not Devils, as is imagined to be in Purgatory.) 4, A sweet interpretation
forsooth, we have gone through water, that is, through fire of Purgatory.

8 I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. Zachar, 9.
11, that is, I have freed them out of Purgatory, and consequently, there is a
purgatory.

Ans, 1, It is a metaphorical speech, wherein is described the deliverance of
all mankind after they had fallen. It is then a fallacy from a thing spoken in
part and some respect, to the same absolutely taken. 2, There be
contradictories in this, and the argument going before, if they be understood
of purgatory. In the former argument, water is affirmed to be in purgatory,
in this it is denied, that there is any water. 3, If the lake without water
be urged, let our Adversaries know, that that place (Luke. 16. 23, 24) is
hell, whence is no returning. And so it does not agree to purgatory neither.

9 He is like a purging fire, and fullers soap; and he shall sit down to try
and fine the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Leui etc. Malach. 3, 2, 3.

Answ. 1.
That they be mere metaphores, the word (like) does show. It is then a
fallacy urging a misconstruction of the words. 2, There is more in the
consequent than in the Antecedent. For it follows not: he shall purge the
sons of Leui: Therefore that purgation can be none other, but by the fire of
purgatory. 3, The whole text does speak of the first coming of Christ, and
of his ministry, whereby he shall confound and wipe away hypocrites, as
dross, and shall institute the true worship of God, and shall consecrate
spiritual priests and Levites by his blood. It is nothing therefore to the
purpose.

10 Have pity upon me, O my friends: for the hand of God has touched me.
Ioh, 19. 21 Therefore there is a purgatory.

Answ, 1, Yet again our Adversaries remember not, that the Schoolmen know of
no purgatory in the old Testament. 2, Job desires his friends, that they
would cease from rebuking an innocent man, and rather pity him, than continue
to reprove him. 3, Job was alive and how could he be in Purgatory?

11. C^^is^ ^^nt in his Spirit, and preached to the Spiri^^ (...) which were in
time past disobed^ent, when once the long suffering of God abode in the days
of No^. 1, Pe(...), 19, 20. therefore there is a Purgatory.

Answer. 1. Some of the Popish Doctors (though impertinently too) do expound
this place of Limbus Pa^^um, and not of Purgatory. 2, These belong to the old
Testament, in which the doctrine of the Papists admits of no Purgatory.

12, Judas Ma^^habaeus sent to Jerusalem two thousand ^^achmes of ^^^ver for
those that were slain: and the Author adds withal. It was an holy and good
thought, to pray for the dead, that they might be delivered from sin. 2,
Maccab. 12, 43, 45.

Answer. 1. The book is Apocriphall, and in the end of the book the Author
craveth pardon, saying: If I have done well, and as the story required (note,
he wrote as an Historian, and not as one that delivered points of faith it is
the thing, that I desired: but if I have ^poken slenderly and barely it is that
I could* ^ M^acchab. 15, 39. 2, Judas had no comma^^dement o^ ^od to do so:
therefore it is no pre^^^ption to us. 3. Once again we must remember our
Adversaries, why they would endeavor to prove Purgatory out of the old
Testament: seeing themselves deny, that there was any Purgatory in the old
Testament.

13. Augustine in some places does not dislike the mention of Purgatory.

Ans. 1. Augustine speaks of it very staggeringly and doubtfully: adioining
to his dispuration of Purgatory these words: Perhaps it is true. Deciuit.
Dei. li. 21, cap. 24, and 26.

14, Because there be three sorts of men, good, evil, and of a mean sort
betwixt both, it must needs be, that there be three such conditions of
souls after this life.

Ans. 1. We are not now to deal with the moral and politic principles of
Plato, Aristotle, Virgill, etc. but with principles far different from them,
namely with the principles of Divinity revealed from heaven. Seeing then, that
diverse principles are confounded, it is a fallacy, involving many questions as
one. 2, The distinction of men in Divinity is far different from this, and is
only twofold; betwixt the Believers and the Infidels: betwixt the Sheep and
the Goats: betwixt those which gather with Christ, and those which scatter:
betwixt those which are with Christ, and those which are against him. And
therefore unto these there are two places only, and no more assigned after
death in the Scriptures.

15 Gregory the Great, learned Purgatory from spirits, that appeared unto
him, and showed the punishment of Purgatory.

Answ. Those spirits were not the sovles of men departed, but they are the
tricks and mockeries of Satan. 2, The truth should be learned, not of the
dead, but of the Word of God, (the law, and the testimony. Isay, 28. 20). 3,
Gregory in this uncertain kind of arguments, had a humane slip; seeing he
ought to have sticken rather to the Scripture, than to visions and spirits.

QVESTION, 2.
Whether the dead, after their death not having attained the bliss of Heaven,
may be helped in Purgatory by the suffrages of the living (especially by the
mass, and those s^^uices of God of man's in^^ntion and chois^. Our Adversaries
affirm, we deny it.

Because that which is not at all, has no accidents. Therefore seeing it
cannot be

The time of repentanc^ in Scripture is only granted to this present life:
after

1, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, Isay, 49, 8. Behold now the
accepted time, behold now the day of salvation, 2, Cor, 6. 2.

2. While we have time, let us do good. Galat, 6, 10.

3, The godly must redeem the time, Ephesians, 5, 16.

4, The time is short 1. Corinthians, 7, 29. as if he should say: He that will do
well, let him do it in this life; for in the other life the time of doing
good cannot be recalled.

5. Exhort one another daily, while it is called To day. Hebrews 3, 13. To day
if you will hear^ his voice, etc. let us study therefore to enter into that
rest. Heb: 4, 7, 11. and Psalm. 95, 7, 8.

After death there is none amendment of

1. If the tree do^ fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place
that the tree falls, there it shall be Eccles, 11, 2.

The dead do not after death by any good procure Gods favor for the
altering

1. For every man shall receive the things that are done in his body. 2:
Corinth: 5, 10. he faith not, after death, out of the body.

Neither are the dead helped by the suffrages or works of other men.

1, Every man shall bear his own burden. Galat: 6, 5.

2. Neither could the wise virgins give of their oil to the foolish virgins:
Matthew: 25, 9:

But especially the dead cannot be helped which God has rejected?

Contrariwise our adversaries do dispute.
1 The works of the dead follow them, Revel, 14, 13. Therefore they are ^ased
by good works in Purgatory.

Answer, 1,
The text is by this argument corrupted and wrested many ways. 1, The place
speaks of the blessed and those that rest from their labors; but our
question is of them which are not yet blessed, but are excluded from rest. 2,
The text speaks of the recompense of a man's own works; but our Disputation
is of the works of the living, done in favor of the dead. 3, The text
speaks of the increase of glory in the heavenly life: but our disputation is
of the diminishing and shortning of pains in purgatory. This argument then is
nothing else, but a heap of terms that have no coherence one with another.

2 In the Scripture holy men have mourned for their dead, as Abraham for Sarah,
^acob for Rahel, Joseph for his Father. Therefore the dead^ ^re helped by the
works of the living.

Answer, 1, It is a fallacy, taking for a cause, that which is no cause. For
we no where read, that the cause of their mourning was the relieuing of the
dead, but sorrow for their friends, parents, brethren severed from them by
death was the cause thereof. 2, For the same cause Paul bids us to keep a
mean in mourning, because those which are dead in Christ, live in rest; not
in torments; with Christ, not with the devil.

^ In old time, the living were baptized for the dead. 1, Cor. 15, 29. But
that had been in vain, v^lesse the works of the living might advantage the
dead. Therefore, etc.

Answ, 1. The Greek text is, to be baptized over the dead, not for the dead,
that is, they would be baptized over their graves, both to show their hope of
the resur^ection (which was very incredible amongst the Gentiles): and also for
a testimony, that they were ready to expect death for Christ's sake, in whose
name they were bapt^zed. But that this baptism was used for the dead, to the
profit and help of the dead, hereof nothing is said in the text.

4 Liberality pleases all men living, and from the dead restrain it not,
Eccles, 7, 33.

Ans, 1, In the old Testament, our Adversaries confess there was no
purgatory: Ecclesiasticus then could not speak of a thing, which had no
being. 2, There is more in the conclusion than in the premises, namely, it
becomes us to be thankful toward our friends departed. Therefore our
thankfulness consists herein, that we help them being in purgatory
with masses and other such works; whereas notwithstanding we may be thankful
to them, in burying them honorably, in doing good to their posterity, and in
preserving their good name after their death.

5 Power forth tears ou^r the dead, and begin to mourn, as if thou had
suffered great harm, etc. Eccles, 38. 16.

Ans, 1, The whole text speaks only of an honest desire and remembrance,
which our friends departed leave of themselves with us after their departure.
There is therefore more in the premises, than in the conclusion.

6 Power out thy bread on the burial of the lust, Tob; 4, 17. Therefore the
dead are helped by the works of the living.

Ans, 1, Whether the pouring of their bread upon the burial do help the
dead, or no, thereof Tobias says never a word. 2 He speaks of the burial
of the just, and if he were just, then should he not be in purgatory, (if a
purgatori^ were granted) neither should he need good works to be relieved by
them, According to the saying in the book of wisdom: The souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God, and no hurt shall touch them (Wisd, 3, 1.) 3,
And, those which at this day in the reformed Churches, do give alms after the
death of their friends do it not, that they may help them being in purgatory
(for they do not believe that there is a purgatory) but that they may preserve
an honorable remembrance of the dead. Some such thing it was also, that ^obie
enjoined his son concerning the pouring of his meat upon the burial of the
dead. Or; seeing it appears, it was a custom amongst the Jews, that the
friends and well-willers of the dead, for the love they had to him, used to
make a banquet to his children and kindred, to comfort and refresh them at the
burial of their friend. As appears, ler. 16, 7. It is most probable, that
Tobie alluded to that custom.

7 Monica the mother of S. Augustine, when she lay a dying, desired a memorial
of her to be kept in the celebration of the Eucharist.

Answ, 1.
She desired a remembrance of her, not a massing sacrifice, thereby to be
helped. 2, Augustine praying for his mother says, he doubts not, but that
God had done that long since, which he desired for his mother. 3, And the
examples of christians (which some times slip into a superstition) are not
rules to order our life by.

8 In ancient time, there was a remembrance kept of the dead in the
celebration of the Eucharist

Ans, 1, This antiquity reaches not so far back as to the Apostles time.
Therefore it is not sufficient for us. 2, The memory of them was ordained, not
that they doubted of the salvation, and blessed estate of the godly departed:
but the examples of the dead were proposed to be imitated, and thanks were
given to God for his gifts bestowed upon the faithful departed, while they
lived, and grace was begged at Gods hands, for imitation of them and the gift
of perseverance. The remembrance then which was observed of ancient time, does
not su^e with that, which is now a days kept in popery for the deliverance of
souls (which remain in Vtopia.)

CHAP. 20. Of the In^ocation of Saints.
QVESTION, 1.
IN this Chapter we are enforced to proceed with an other method, than we
have done in the former. For whereas the papists cannot clear themselves from
the crime of idolatry, very boldly they begin to deny that, which is
noto^iously known: And (as if the thing it self might be mitigated with
milder words) they refrain from the word invocation, and place instead
thereof, the word veneration. After the same fashion, they change their doulian
or a certain kind of service, with Latria, or the worship due to God. That
these things then may be brought to light, and the state of the question truly
and rightly set down, let us see out of a few examples, in the prayers
directed by Papists unto Saints, and as yet not cancelled in their Churches, or
disallowed: hereby, I say, let us see, whether it be a bare veneration or
reuer^ce, or whether there be divine worship therein, which they give to Saints.
That is, whether they pray for any thing to Saints, which is only to be craved
of God: and do ascribe unto Saints, that which is proper to God alone.

And the first that here offers it self, is ^, This psalm ter was printed at
Venice in the year, ^476 by ^ohn de Hallis: and there ^^mai^e yet two other
copies, the one printed at Pa^i^^ the other at Li^
the Ladies Psalter; wherein are contained these things following.

1, Come unto her (that is Marie) all ye, that labor and are troubled, and
she shall give refreshing, and comfort to your souls. Come unto her in your
tentations and the gratiousnesse of her countenance shall stablish you, Psalm, 2.

2, Deliver us by thy holy prayers from the gate of hell, and the belly of the
depth. Psa, 6.

3, I trust in our Lady, because of the sweetness of the mercifulnes of her
name, etc, And let her mercy take away the multitude of your sins, and let
her fruitfullnesse acceptable to God, procure to us the plenty of merits.
Psalm, 10.

4, Arise O Lady, prevent him (that is our adversary) and supplant him, and
destroy all his endeavors, Psalm, 13.

5, Keep me, O Lady, because I have trusted in thee, and mercifully grant unto
me the droppings of thy grace, Psalm, 15.

6, Unto thee, O lady, have I lifted up my soul: through thy prayers, let me
not be ashamed in the judgment of God, Psalm, 24.

7, I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of praise, and d^uoutly will I exalte
thy glory, Psalm, 29.

8, In thee O Lady, have I put my trust; let If this be not to worship Sa^^ts
with the p^^ per worship of GOD, what the^ is? Surely this whole psalm is due
to GOD, as Christ and Stephen did commend their soul^^ unto God.
me not be confounded for ever; receive me into thy favor, incline thine care
unto me, and make me joyful in my heaurnesse: thou art my s^^ength and refuge,
my comfort and protection, unto thee have I cried, when my heart was troubled,
and thou heard^st me from the ^opp of the ^uerlasting hills. Into thine hands O
Lady, do I commend my spirit, my whole life, and my last day, Psalm, 30.

9, Blessed are they, whose hearts do love thee, O Virgin Marie, their sins
shall be mercifully washed away by thee, Psalm. 31.

10, By thy holiness my sins are purged, by thine integrity
incorruptibilitie is given me. Psalm. 44.

11, The Lord said unto my Lady; sit on my right hand, Psalm, (...).

And infinite oth^^ more, which the shortness of a Manwell will not permit, to
set them down here. But by a few the reader may see, that throughout the whole
Psalter, whatsoever the Psalmist ascri^eth to God, and Jesus Christ his Son,
and such things, as David durst pray for to none, but to God alone, are all
ascribed to the Virgin Mary.

And the hym^ which they use now to sing daily in their Churches very devoutly,
does

All hail O Queen of mercy: our life, sweetness, and hope, all hail. Unto
thee we banished sons of Eve do cry. Unto thee we sigh g^^aning and ^eeping
in this vale of tears: Ah, then our Advocate, turn those thy merciful eyes
unto us, and show unto us after this Exile, Jesus the blessed fruit of thy
womb, O gentle, O sweet, O godly Virgin Mary.

Hereof see the Roman Breuiary printed at Antwerp in the year 1579, as also
the book called Horculus animae part, 5.
Heereto may be adjoined the titles, adversity, Refuge, Rock, the Fountain of
Grace, etc. Which are ascribed every where throughout the psalter to the
blessed Virgin Mary, and partly in the Rosaries, and partly in that, which
they call Cursus horarum and other prayers. These fa^e ^^tles are contained in
the forecited Breuiary, as also in the service of the blessed Virgin (in
officio beatae Virgi^s*)
In the letany of the blessed Virgin these titles are given her: the fountain
of mercy, the stream of wisdom; the rod of Iesse, the tree of life, the
orient light and splend^r, the window of heaven, the passable gate of paradise,
the true salvation and blessedness, the mother of orphans, etc. See that
notable work called mariale, printed at Strasburge in the year 1493: there ye
shall find al these and in some points those that f^^re exc^ede them.
Moreover there they crave of Mary, that she would deliver us from all evil:
from all evil tentation ^^ from the wrath and indignation of God: from danger
and despair, etc. That she would vouch safe to keep the holy Church^ etc.
There is a book extant printed in Italy in Octauo: Wherein he that prays
speaks to the Virgin Marie thus: Ora Filium iuum suppliciter, and prae^ipe
sublimiter, etc. pray thy Son humbly, and command him loftily, that in the
even tide of the World he would bring us to eternal joys. How great are these
abominations?

But they have dealt the like with other See their Breuiaries and hymns* yet
not ca^celled in the popish kingdom, you shall mee^e with many such for the
things following cannot be denied seeing they are fo^g in many places until
this day:
Christ, and craving of them those things, which it is not lawefull to crave of
any but of Christ alone.

1, O holy Virgin Dorothie; make us happy by thy virtue: create in us a new
heart. In the old Missals.

2. He save us from sin, that we may rest with the blessed souls in Heaven.
Of Saint George.

3, All hail pre^ate Augustine; hear us calling upon thee, and after death
bring us triumphing into the heavenly Kingdom, Of S. Augustine.

4. O Francis, brightsome light, chiefest crucified Martyr, now thou triumphest
with CHRIST in the company of celestial wights. Be thou to us the way of
life, show thou to Christ for us always thy godly wounds. Of S. Francis.

5, All hail glorious Agnes, keep thou me in the true faith, sweet and
dearly beloved Virgin, I heartily beseech thee: gran^ to all men religiously
to serve GOD by whom thou art elected, with perfect charity.

6, Loose the guilte of my polluted lips, 5. John.

7, O reverend Bishop, a religious and present worke-man to them, which with a
faithful heart do seek to thee in their perils. Take away the damages of
death, and give us the wages of life, that after this departing of the flesh,
we may be with thee in glory. Of S. Nicholas.

8, Give he unto us the heavenly armor, when tentation is at hand: let him
fighting for us hand to hand, put the harmefull enemy to flight, of S. Martin.

In diseases and other perils and dangers, they were wont to pray unto
fourteen Helpers Relieuers; whereas these things were to be begged of God. So
they assigned saints as so many guardian gods, to every particular art,
workmanship and country, wherein the names used in paganism, only were
changed, not the things themselves. For as of old time Mars, Mercury,
Hercules, Minerua, etc. were worshipped of the Gentiles, so in their steed the
Papists do now worship George, Nicholas, Martin, Katherin, etc.

Out of this short narration, thus now I reason. Whosoever prays to a
creature for that, which is to be begged of God alone, he does not only
reverence that creature, but places him in the steed of GOD, and commits
idolatry. But the Papists do so. (As was proved a while ago.) Therefore they
do not only reverence the Saints, but place them in Gods steed, and commit
idolatry. And whosoever gives to a creature the titles of God, and the glory
of God signified by the same titles, he commits idolatry; (as is most
certain in the Scripture:) but that the Papists do so, has bin already
proved. Therefore they do not barely reverence Saints, but they worship them as
Gods, give unto them divine honor and so commit idolatry.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1 We make not Gods of Saints, because we worship them with a lower degree of
worship, than is Latria, or the worship proper to God: namely the saints we
worship with Dulia: the Virgin Mary with Hyperdulia, etc.

Ans, 1, This is the same, as was the divine worship of the heathen; who (as
Plato witnesses) did worship one God, that is I^piter, for the chiefest God:
the rest they called lesser Gods, and worshipped them with a lower degree of
worship. 2, There needs no protestation, where the thing itself is evident.
Now the thing it self proclaims as before was showed, that divine worship is
given unto Saints. It is in vain then to make any protestation. 3, Suppose the
names of a thing be changed, and if the thing remain the same, no man can
hereby defend his fact.

2 Austin brought in the distinction between Dulia and Latria. Therefore the
invocation of Saints is justly defended by this distinction.

Answ, 1, Augustine by this distinction distinguishes the obedience of the
first and second table, or our obedience toward God, and our obedience toward
our parents and Magistrates; granting that obedience is due to both, but in a
lower degree to the Magistrate than to GOD as it is Act, 5, 29. Now this is
nothing to the invocation of Saint^, whereof Austin says nothing in this his
distinction. Moreover Austin speaks of obedience to be yielded to the living:
but our Adversaries of the invocation of the dead^. 2, The Scripture uses the
words Latreuein and douleuein without difference. Doule^ein is referred to God
also. Rom, 7, 25, as also 1. These, 1, ^. so also doule^^n to ^uri^ Acts, 20.
19. and latreuein in the translation of the seventy interpreters is used to
signify servile works also. Leu. 23, 8, and 28. 18.

3 We do not pray unto, but mention and name the Saints.

Ans, The contrary has been already proved. 2, This compellation or naming
them has no ground in Scriptures.

QVESTION, 2.
Whether we may pray unto Saints.
Ou^ Adversaries hold the affirmative part, but we the negative, for these
reasons.

By the confession of our Adversaries: who and the helps received from Saints*
when prayers were powered out unto them, that the Saints were to be
worshipipped, etc. Thus far E^kius. Ou^ of this confession these corollaries
following are to be noted.

1, That invocation of Saints was unknown in the time of the Apostles, and in
the time of Christ's Ministry upon earth. Where is now the antiquity of the
Apostolic doctrine among the Papists?


2, That the Apostles did not only not write, but that they would not write of
the worshipping of saints, least themselves should seem to hunt after that
honor (because in truth it did not belong unto them.)

3, That after the canon of the Scripture was perfected, yet nevertheless the
invocation of Saints was unknown: and that yet notwithstanding Christians
might beel^ued, as John witnesses of his Gospel, ^ap, 20, ver, 31.

4, Seeing the Apostles wrote all things necessary to salvation (Act, 20, 27.
Ioh, 20, 31,) and the holy Scripture is such, as makes a man perfect to every
good work (2, Timoth, 3, 17.) It follows hereof, that either these things
are not true, which are here spoken of the scripture, or that it is a lie,
that invocation of saints is necessary to salvation.

5, It follows, that invocation of Saints has none other grounds, than lying
miracles, from which God dehorteth us De, 13, 2, 3. 2, These, 2, 9. Isay, 8, 19.

6. It follows also, that all those papists do impudently and against their
conscience, which being of Eckius his mind, do go about to prove invocation of
saints by sayings of the Scripture.

7, It follows also, that because invocation of Saints is not contained in
Scripture; were it never so void^ of sin, yet no man were bound to accept of
it.

The Scripture bids us worship and

1, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat, 4,
10, Deuteronomy, 6. 13. and 10, 20.

2. Call upon Me in the day of trouble. Psa, 50, 15.

3. I will not give My glory unto an other. Isa. 48. 11.

4. Christ bid us pray, Our Father etc. Matt. 6. 9.

5, Come vnto^e, all ye, that are weary, etc. Matthew, 11. 28.

He is to be prayed unto whom we may call upon in faith. But faith is by the
Word

But neither may we pray unto Saints, as to mediators; because the holy
Scripture

1. So he is called the Mediator of the New Testament. Heb. 9, 15.

2. There is one GOD and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus: who gave himself a ransom for all men (1, Timo, 2, 5, 6.) Now
1, This unity is taken away, if there be erected more Mediators. 2, And the
saint^ gave not themselves a ransom for us, therefore, etc.

^ If any man sin, we have an Adu^cate with the Father, Jesus Christ the i^st,
1, Ioh, 2, 1. But Saints are no^ Jesus Christ the I^st.

^ Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My
Name, He will give it you. Ioh, 14, 13, and 16, 23.

^ No man comes unto the Father, but by Me, Ioh, 14, 6.

By the doctrine of the invocation of Saints, Christians are bereaved of that
confidence

1, In all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he
might be As the Priest was a mediator between God and the people so Christ in
one and the same word is called a Priest and a Mediator. He. 2, 17, 18
merciful, and a faithful High Priest in things concerning God, that he might
make reconciliation for the sins of the people for in that He suffered, and
was tempted, He i^ able to su^^ou^ them, that are tempted*

2, Seeing then that we have a great high Priest, which is entered into heaven,
even It (...) ^l^^ Son of God, let us hold ^a^^ our profession. For we have
not an hig^ Pr^est, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in al^ things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let
us therefore go bouldly unto the throne of grace, that we may recei^^ merry,
and find grace to help in time o^ need. Heb. 4* 14. 1^. 16.

3. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them which come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb, 7. 25.

4, The Lord is gracious and merciful slow to anger and of great mercy.
Psalm. 145, 8. Number, 14, 18.


Yea and God the Father also is merciful toward repentant sinners, for the
intercession

1. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy; slow to anger and of great
goodness. He will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever, He has not
dealt with us after our sins n^r^^warded ^s according to our iniquities. Here
the implacable popish god is not proposed unto us, to whom we should not da^e
to come but by the med^ation of Saints.
For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
the^, that fe^^e him. As far as the ^ast is f^o^ the west, so far has he
removed our sins f^o^ us. As a father has compassion on his children, so has
the Lord compassion on them that fea^e him. Psalm, 103. 8, 9, etc.

2, Hereto belong all the penitential fermo^s of the prophets, wherein God
opens his ready and willing mind. Ezech, 18, and 33, chap. and many other
places.

3, Paul in the 8 th to the Romans, is wholly herein busied, to show us, with
what confidence we should cometo God by his Son, with the ^ro^^ings of the holy
Spirit, ^so that we should nothing doubt of the favor of God toward us.

The ^i^^^cation of Saints is for this cause,

1, Though Abraham be ignorant of us and Israel know us not, yet thou art our
Father. Isai, ^3, ^6.


^, Thus does the Prophet comfort Josias: Thou shall b^^ put in thy grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this
place^, King 22, 20.

And because the most seruent prayers are often made without the voice or
motion

1; Thou alone know the hearts of all the Children of men, 1, King, 8, 39.

2, I the Lord search the heart and try the reins, Ier, 17, 10. and ^0, 12,
Reu. 2, 23.

There are many also in the popish catalogue

We have no examples of the invocation

1, Paul and Barnabas would not be worshipped. Act, 14, 14, 15.

2, So the Angel of the Lord forbade himself to be worshipped* Revel. 19, 10,
and 22, 8, 9.

GOD accounts all the worship of a

1, By the example of the Samar^tans, who worshipped the creature together with
GOD, 2, King, 17, 41.

2, My people has committed two evils: they have forsaken Me the fountain of
living waters, and dug to themselves broken cisternes. Iere, 2, 13.

3, The Gentiles offended, for that they wo^shipped and served the creature,
paraton ktisan^a, beside the Creator.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason thus.
1 Even as in Princes Courts, there is need of some mediator to procure
access to Princes; so when we would pray unto God, we have need of the Saints
to be our mediators

Answ, 1, Similitudes prove nothing. 2, A certain widow calling to the
Emperor of Rome for justice, when he answered, I am not at leisure to hear
thee, then (quoth she) have no leisure neither to be Emperor.
It is a similitude ill befitting this thing: for it is a fault, if Princes
themselves refuse to hear their subjects, either for negligence or pride. And
if they refuse, because promiscuous admittance of all might be dangerous to
their persons, or because themselves cannot do all, but leave many things to
their officers, these be infirmities which belong to men, but no way to God.
For God is not as man

2 It is a point of Christian humility, to seek for a Mediator, when thou
iudgest thy self vnworth^e. Hos, 11, 9.


Answ. 1. We have need of humility, but of true humility; which is such, that
we esteem our selves, and the merits of all Saints more unworthy than we may
obtain mercy for them, but for Christ's sake alone. This is true humility,
which does not lead us from Christ. Seeing then our Adversaries mean another
humility than this, by this ambiguity of the word (humility) there arise four
terms, 2, The popish humility is repugnant to the commandment of God. For
God says Call upon me in the day of trouble. The Papists will answer: Lord,
humility teaches me, not to call upon thee because I am unworthy.

3 He that honors the friends of the Prince, does that which is acceptable
to the Prince. So the worship of Saints may be acceptable to God.

Ans, 1, Again our Adversaries deal by Similitudes and conjectures in a
matter of such difficulty. 2, That saints are to be honored or reverenced, no
man denies, but they may not so be honored, as that God be thereby robbed of
his honor, which is done by invocation, but they are honored by publishing the
virtues, wherewith God endued them, and by imitating the godliness, wherein
they flourished.

4 Christ is of greater dignity, than that we may dare to come unto him
because he is made higher than the heavens. Therefore we have need of the
mediation of Saints.

Ans. 1, The Antecedent is false, as has bin showed before. And Christ calls
us, to come unto him saying* Come unto me al etc. Mat, 11, 28. 2, This is not
humility, but diffidence reproved and condemned by God.

5 Let my name be called upon these children, and the name of my Fathers,
Abraham and Isaac. etc. Genes. 48, 16. Therefore the Saints are to be called
upon in prayer.

Answ. 1.
The Papists deny that invocation of Saints was in use in the old Testament,
the Fathers (as their fable is) being then in Limbus. Why then do they
allege a testimony of the old Testament? 2, It is an hebrew phrase, to call
or name ones name over another, that is, to be reckoned in his family; as,
seven women* shall take hold on one man, saying; let thy name be called or
named over us, that is, let us be called by thy name, and so be thou our
husband. Isay, 4, 1.

6 Though Moses and S^amuel stood before me, yet mine affections could not be
toward this people. I^r, 15, 1. Ezech, 14, 14.

Ans, 1, A conditional speech proves nothing, unless the condition be first
granted. And the sense of the text does show that these men did not then stand
before God, for the people. 2, The Papists themselves do deny, that they t^en
stood before God but they say they were in Limbus. Therefore they allege
this saying against their conscience.

7 The Fathers in the old Testament, did often pray for the merits sake of
the Patriarchs, as Jacob, Genes, 32, 9. Moses Exodus, 32, 13. Deute. 9, 27.
Psalm, 132, 10, etc.

Ans, Let the places be considered, and it will be manifest, that they provoked
not to the persons or merits of the patriarchs, but to the Covenant, which God
of his mere favor and mercy had made with the Patriarchs and their
posterity. The argument then is altogether impertinent.

8 As Absolon, when he was reconciled to his father, was not by and by admitted
into his fathers presence. (2, Sam, 14, 24.) So sinners reconciled unto God,
may not go straight into Gods presence, but must use intermediate persons,
namely the Saints departed.

Ans. 1, There is great difference between the reconciliation with God, and
reconciliation with a civil Magistrate, and neither prescribes any rule unto
other. The argument then is unfit, and drawn from things of unlike and
different quality. 2, The Heavenly Father is glad of the return of his
prodigal son, and goes out to meet him, not waiting til some days man make
way for the son to his father, Luke, 15, 20.

9 As Adonias did not himself go unto Solomon, but sent his mother before,
whom the King set at his right hand: so we send before us the mother of Christ,
who is placed at the right hand of Christ. 1, King. 2, 19.

Answ. 1. The Kingdom of Christ is one thing, and an external politic
kingdom is an other: neither can it be proved, that the Kingdom of Christ is
to be governed on the same fashion, as politic kingdoms use to be. 2, From
this place we may conclude against our Adversaries, that as Adonias obtained
nothing by his Mother, so those, which seek for the intercession of Saints s^al
obtain nothing, nay they shall have the heavenly King, Christ, angry with them.

10 Call now, if any will answer thee: and turn thee to some of the Saints,
Job, 5, 1.

Ans, 1, The right translation is, to which of the Saints will thou turn thee?
and the meaning is, look and see* whom thou can find to agree to thee: or to
which of the saints or holy men thou will be take thee, for the defense of thy
cause. The godly will not, and the ungodly cannot defend thy cause. Where then
shall thou find any defense? 2, Or, Jobs friends bid him look to the examples
(not the prayers) of the saints: whether ever God do use to afflict his saints
so: but here is nothing of intercession. 3, Moreover our Adversaries confess,
that there was no in^ocatio^ of saints in the old Testament.

11 If there shall be an Angel speaking for him, one of a 1000. to declare the
righteousness of man; the Lord will have mercy upon him. Job, 33, 23, 24.

Ans. 1. The Translation is bad, which should be thus according to the hebrew
verity. If there be an Angel (or messenger or prophet) with him, an interpreter
one of a thousand, who may declare unto man his righteousness, the^ he will have
mercy on him, etc. that is, if he, who is corrected of the Lord for his sin, be
admonished by an Angel (or a faithful prophet of the Lord) of his righteousness
(either of the Lords, how justly he punishes him, or of his own, what he ought
to do, to amend his life,) he shall obtain mercy: Therefore this place is
nothing at all to the purpose

12 Intercessions are commanded and approved of, in the Church. 1, Tim, 2, 1.
Iam, 5, 14, etc, Paul desires intercession, Rom, 15, 30, Colos, 4, 3. Abraham
prays for Abimelech, Gen, 20, 17. The Lord bids Jobs friends to require
his intercession, Job 42, 8.

Ans. 1, To argue from the living to the dead, i^ to make four terms. 2, If
the Saints pray never so much in general for the Church, yet they are not
therefore to be worshipped. And whereas it stands with reason that the
Angels do pray for the Paul did not worsl^p or p^ay unto the Ro^^ans,
church, yet they would not suffer themselves to be worshipped. (Revel. 19, 10.
and 22. 8. 9.) 3. To desire the prayers of other men alive, and to pray unto,
are things very different. 4, And it is a far different thing, to join the
prayers of many men together, whose prayers they being alive, we desire, that
the prayer may be the stronger; that is, I say much different from directing
our prayers unto them.

13, The Saints departed are said to be aequall unto the Angels, Luke, 20, 36,
But Angels do from God know things present, and things to come. Therefore the
Saints know the same also, and so they know our prayers.

Ans, 1, Christ makes the comparison between the blessed Saints and Angels,
not in respect of their offices, but in respect of their glorification and
state of life in the other World, wherein they shall have no need of
Matrimony. It is then a fallacy from a thing spoken but in part and some
respect, to the same taken absolutely. 2, The office of Angels is, to be
ministering spirits; by reason Heb, 1
of this office, God does many times reveal to the Angels things present and
things to come; but neither does he reveal all things, nor always. Now
because this office is never in Scripture given to the blessed souls departed:
doubtless, the cause of this special revelation being denied, both the
necessity and certainty of their knowing our prayers, and so of our praying
unto them, is denied.

14 Elizeus, though he was absent, yet by the spirit knew the actions of
Gehazi. 2, King, 5 26. So the Saints in the spirit may know our prayers and our
estate.

Ans, Of pure particles nothing follows. Elizeus being absent, saw the
actions of Gehazi. Therefore the Saints hear and see al things, that are done
upon earth. What foolery is this? For it is never said in the Scripture, that
the dead do in the spirit know our affairs, as Elizaeus being alive did know
the deeds of Gehazi, and that in a miraculous manner

15 The Saints do pray for the Church, Revel, 5, 8. and 8, 3.

Answer, 1. In that vision it is not certain, that the speech is only of the
prayers of the Saints departed, but in general the prayers of the Church are
pourtraied out by the 24. Elders. 2. It is granted that the Church triumphant
does in general pray for the militant, but that they do in particular pray for
certain and definite members thereof, the Scripture says nothing of it. 3,
Neither is there any mention made of invocation of Saints, in the places cited
(Revel, 5, and 8.)

16 Yea but the Scripture does grant adoration to Creatures, in their kind. As
Abraham adored the Hittits. Gen, 23, 7. Jacob worshipped Esau. Genesis, 33, 3.
Nathan did the like to David, 1, King. 1, 23. and Salomo^ the King unto his
mother. 1, King, 2, 19, etc.

Answer, The Phrase is there a hebrew Phrase, whereby, an external ceremony
(bowing of the body) and civil reverence is described: but we speak of the
inward spiritual affection and devotion of the heart. Here are therefore
four terms.

17 There is one that accuses you, even Moses etc. John, 5, 45. Therefore the
Saints departed deal for and against the living.

Answ, It is a figure called Metonymia, whereby Christ signifies not the
person of Moses, but his law.

18 The rich glutton comes not with his prai^^ to God, but to Abraham as to a
mediator, Luke 16, 24.

Ans, 1, Right. We must forsooth learn the invocation of Saints from the
desperate and damned souls. 2, There is much difference between the parable
of the glutton, and the popish invocation of Saints. 3. These prayers got the
g^utton nothing; and so may the Papists speed.

19 Onias and Ieremias appeared praying for the people, 2, Maccab, 15, 12, 13,
14.

Answ. 1.
The book is Apocriphall. 2, There is rehearsed a deame, not an article of
Religion. 3, We do not read that the Jews did for this dream pray unto
Onias and Ieremias, but they prayed unto God.

20 Hear now the prayers of the dead Israelites. Baru^h, 3, 4.

Answ, 1, The book is not canonical. 2, Lyra expounds it, not of the prayer
of the dead after their death, but of those prayers which the Saints being
alive did long since before their death ^owre out unto God, for the
preservation of the Church.

21 Miracles have beeen done, and yet are done at the invocation of Sainrs.

Answer, 1, Miracles alone without the Word of God, especially if they be
contrary to the Word of God, are not fufficient: as God admonishes, that we
should not believe miracles, without the word (Deuter, 13. 2, 3) 2, And the
coming of Antichrist shall be with lying Miracles. 2, These, 2, 9. Revel. 13,
13.

QVESTION, 3.
Our Adversaries deny, that in worshipping images they do commit idolatry:
but the contrary is proved by these reasons.

Let them Gra^matically expound the word Idolatry, and they shall be able to
make none

It is proved by experience* For they prostrate

Their own confession, and their books do

1, Every image is to be worshipped, as that whose image it is, is worshipped.
Seeing therefore Christ is worshipped with the worship of Latria (Divine
worship) it follows, that his image is to be worshipped with the worship of
Latria. Tho. Aquinas. part; 3, q, 25, art, 3.

2, Because the image of Christ is brought in, to represent him, who was
crucified for us, neither does it show it self to us for it self, but for
him: therefore all reverence, that is offered unto it, is offered unto Christ
and therefore the worship of Latria ought to be given to the image of Christ.
Bonauent, upon the senten. lib, 3, Did, 9, Quest. 2.

3, In the pontifical the sign of the Cross is consecrated with this prayer:
We beseech thee O holy Lord, Father Almighty, Eternal God, that thou would
vouchsafe to bless this wood of the cross that it may be a saving remedy to
mankind that it may be the strength of Faith, the increase of good works, and
the redemption of souls: it may be a comfort, and protection and safeguarde,
against the cruel darts of our enemies, etc.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1 As we honor the images of Princes, so it is mee^e we should honor the
images of Saints.

Ans, 1, He that uses the princes image with honorable respect, does not
therefore adore him: and all men would count him ^ fool, which should put off
his hat to the Princes picture, or kneel thereto, or lying prostrate should
utter these words to the picture which should be spoken to the Prince. 2, If
any man do not of purpose dishonor or disgrace the Princes image, he has
honored it sufficiently. 3, Let us honor the image of GOD in the Saints
alive, on that manner, which Christ has prescribed, Matthew. 25, 36. 40. That is
by doing good unto the needy saints.

2 The stock or wood or stone is not worshipped amongst the Papists, but the
intention is directed unto him whose image it is.

Answ, 1, Doubtelesse the Israelites were not so senseless, as to worship the
gold, or the ^umpe that was moulten of the gold (Exo. 32.) But they
worshipped in the sign that which they thought was the true God: nevertheless
God condemned them of Idolatry. 2, If they worship not the images, why do
they prostrate themselves before one image of the blessed Virgin, rather than
before an other? If this only be their purpose, that they may be put in mind
of the blessed Virgin Mary; might not a less regarded image pictured at home,
or in some more obscure place of the Church be sufficient therefore? Wherefore
seeing they are used to do their devotion before one certain particular image,
who will ever believe that they give not that worship to the Idol^ themselves?
And to deny that they worship idols, what is it else, but to desire to pull
out men's eyes, that they should not see that, which all that be present, do
behold with there eyes.

Now it shall not need to refute the worshipping of idols, seeing our
adversaries themselves do acknowledge it abundantly refuted, if this
worshipping can be proved against them: Therefore they seek to give us the
slip, and deny those things, which are most manifest to sense.

CHAP. 21. Of the Single life, and Vows of Ecclesiastical persons.
THAT the Pope of Rome might make up the full measure of Antichrist, he has
defiled also the sanctity of Matrimony, whilst he accuses that state of
impurity and imperfection, and proclaims that those, that live therein, live
in the flesh (for so Syric^us and Innocencius say, Did. 82. cap, 2, and 3.)
and for this cause forbids Ecclesiastical persons, as pri^sts, Monks, and
Nuns marriage, as being a thi^^ not so fit for sanctity and perfection, as
they call it; and admits no married man to holy orders; and thrusts him
out, that is already in Orders if he do marie; and thinks it more tolerable
for a Mass Priest to be a whoremonger and an adulterer, than joined to a wi^e
by lawefull matrimony. This doctrine of Devils (1, Timo. 4, 1, 3) they go
about to hide by three arguments especially: by the first of which, they
deprive matrimony of purity and holiness; by the second they deny unto it the
excellency of perfection (as they call it:) and in the third, they allege
the insolubilitie of their vow; adjoining heereto some few frivolous reasons
more. We will, by Gods help, examine every of these in their proper place.

Question. 1.
Whether marriage be a state, that defiles a man, and makes him unfit for the
exercising of sacred offices. Our Adversaries affirm it, and we deny it, for
these reasons.

Because Matrimony is an holy ordination

God will have Matrimony (even after the H^^ can that which is honorable and
vnd^filed d^^^le a man?
undefiled. Heb. 13, 4.

Matrimony was always counted very honorable, both in the old Testament
and in the new.

(1) In the old Testament take for example the places following.

1. It is not good that man should be himself alone. Genesis 2, 18.

2, Two are better than one, etc. Eccles, 4, 9.

3, David gave honorable testimony of marriage, Psalm: 127, verse, 3, 4, 5: and
128. 3, Moreover, be compared the mystery of Christ and the Church to marriage
Psalm, 45, 9, 10, etc.

4, Solomon wrote a most excellent song in commendation of matrimony and of an
happy marriage, Pro. 31, 10, etc.

(2) In the new Testament the holiness of the state of Matrimony is
maintained.

1, By Christ, when he renu^th the first institution, May we think that
Christ would be present at polluted marriages?
Math: 19, 4, 5, 6:

2, And he honored marriage both with his presence, and the first miracle of
his ministry. Ioh, 2, 2. 7. etc.

3, The mutual ^^ndnes and the bond of love between Christ and the Church, is
compared by Paul to marriage. Ephesians, 5, 25, 32.

4, And the same Paul (1, Cor, 7, 2,) shows the profit and the necessity of
marriage: and likewise defends the holiness of marriage against the spirits of
error, 1, Tim, 4. 1, 3.

There are also in the Old and New Testament examples of most godly men, who

(1) In the Old Testament we have very many; but these may suffice.

1. Henoch walked with God, after he begot Methuselah, three hundredth years;
and begat Sons and Daughters. Gen, 5, 22.

2, Noah was a Just and Upright man in his time, and Noah walked with God, and
he begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Iapheth, etc. Genes, 6, 9, 10.

3, Abraham the Father of the faithful, was Will any man say that any unmarried
man is more pure than was Abraham being married?
married, as were also the other Patriarchs.

4, David a man after Gods own heart was married, and in state of wedlock
composed Psalms most acceptable to God, being endued (in a principal measure)
with the Spirit of God.

5, Ezechiel the Prophet was married, Ezech, 24, 16. 18.

6, The high Priest, who offered holy oblations to GOD, might by the law of
God marie a wife: neither was he polluted by marriage bed, to be made thereby
unfit for the Priests office. And Aaron was commanded by God to burn sweet^
incense every morning in the tabernacle before the Arc of the Covenant, as it
is Exodus 30, 7. Neither did the use of marriage bed hinder him in this behalf;
For he begat sons.

7. And so were the rest of the Priests married also.

8. Zachary and Elizabeth were both just before God, and walked in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord without reproof: and yet they were
man and wife, and had John Baptist to their son. Luk, 1, 6.

(2) In the new Testament also there were Ecclesiastical persons, holy and
religious that lived in wedlock.

1, Peter had a mother in law, and therefore a wife. Math. 8, 14.

2, Have we not power to lead about a wife, being a sister, as well as the
rest of the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. 1, Corinth.
9, 5.

3, Philip the Evangelist, which was one of the seven Deacons, had four
daughters, which did prophecy. Acts. 21, 8, 9.

4. A Bishop must be vnreproveable, the husband of one wife, etc. having
children under obedience with all honesty. 1, Tim. 3, 2, 4.

5. Let Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as can rule their
children well, and their own households. 1, Timo. 3, 12.

6. The like appears by the examples of Spiridion, and of others in the
Primitive Church: who being holy men, and endued with singular gifts of the
Spirit, were married and begat children. And often times the legitimate sons
of Bishops succeeded their Fathers in the Bishoprics.

Paul does sharply reprove them, which disgrace marriage, saying: In the latter
days

Finally, if matrimony be a Sacrament, if

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1 The use of Marriage bed after the fall is impure, and not without lust.
Therefore priests who ought to be pure, must abstain from wedlock.

Ans, 1,
If the speech be of the motions of concupiscence remaining after Original
sin (whereof the Psalmist makes mention in his conception. Psalm, 51, 5) then
is it a fallacy of an accident, and that which agrees to the accident (to
wit, Original sin) is transferred to the use of Marriage bed, which of it
self is right, lawful and ordained by God. And if because of this accident,
men should abstain from marriage as from an impure state, then should they
abstain from all other states and works, because in all of them there
concurreth somewhat of Original sin. And because pureness becomes all
Christians, therefore all should abstain from marriage, 2, But if the use of
marriage bed be compared to unlawful lusts, and aequall thereunto; it is
manifestly repugnant to these sentences of Scripture.

1, In the Scripture the use of marriage bed and lust are opposed as contraries:
but contraries, seeing they destroy one another, are not the same.

2, To avoid fornication let every man have his wife. 1, Cor, 7, 2. and what?
may the remedy of lust and impuritie, be called lust S^ the s^n beams, which
are as it were the remedy of darkness, should be called darkness.
and impurity?

3, Paul says; let the Husband give unto the wife due benevolence, he bids
them also come together again. 1. Cor. 7. 3, 5. And what? does Paul bid them
follow after impuritie? does he egg them forward to sin?

4, The bed betwixt the godly married couple is undefiled. Heb. 13. 4.

2 If Marriage bed were so pure, then would not Paul bid them abstain in the
time of prayer and fasting.

Answ. 1, He speaks not of all sorts of prayers; but of solemn prayers. 2,
Neither does he bid them therefore abstain, because the use of marriage bed is
impure, and would pollute their prayers, but that they may give themselves to
prayer, and their prayers may be the more fervent, etc. Even as in the time of
solemn prayers we leave of the exercise and duties of our proper and honest
calling, that we may attend to prayers and sermons. Here is then committed a
fallacy, taking that for the cause, which is not the cause.

3 I was borne in iniquity, etc. Psalm, 51, 5. There David confesses the
impuritie of marriage therefore, etc.

Answ, 1, He speaks not of the use of marriage bed in his parents, as if that
were of it self a sin: but he shows that lump or mass, so to speak, of
which he was created, even then to have been polluted with sin (for the whole
substance of man was corrupt with sin); not by reason of the act of marriage
bed, but by reason of original sin, which does accidentally concur there
with: here is then committed the fallacy of an accident. 2, Whereas our
question here is not concerning original sin, whether it be in the
regenerate, and do concur also in their good works; but whether there be in
matrimony of it self any impurity; our Adversaries change the state of the
question, and play the Sophisters.

4 They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Rom, 8, 8. But those which are
married, are in the flesh. Therefore, etc. This is pope Syricius his argument.

Answ, 1, What it is to be in the flesh, Paul expounds. Gal, 5, 19. Where he
reckons up the fruits of the flesh, (to wit, sins and crimes) but there is
no mention of marriage, but of the contraries thereto. 2, To live in the flesh,
with Paul is to live in sin, but with our adversaries, to live in the flesh,
is to live in the state of matrimony. Therefore there are four terms in this
argument.

5 Yea, but many do use marriage bed intemperately, which is not without
impurity.

Answ, 1,
This is the fallacy of an accident. For this is a thing that accidentally
agrees to marriage besides the right use, and that but amongst some only. ^,
Neither is a thing which is of it self laweful, to be condemned, because some
use it excessiuely: Otherwise men should be forbidden wine, because some be
drunken.

6 I speak this by permission, or indulgence not by commandment (this to wit,
that the married do not defraud one an other, but that they come together
again, as man and wife) 1, Cor, 7, 6. But those things, which are honest and
good, have no need of permission and pardon.

Answ. 1, Paul grants leave and pardon to those, which are too incontinent,
which appears by these words going before, that Satan tempt you not for your
incontinencie; but what is this to the lawful use of matrimony, and to them
which use the marriage bed moderately? 2, And if permission or leave be granted
them, which exceed, how much less shall they be defiled thereby, which use it
temperately? 3, If Satan's way be stopped (as Paul here says) by the use of
wedlock, is then Satan driven from us by lust and impurity? 4, For this very
reason, the use of marriage bed is lawful and without impurity, even because it
is permitted: unless we will say that God permits and grants dishonest
things. Neither durst the Apostle of Christ have granted any liberty to
sin. 5, And seeing they play with the ambiguity of the word, indulgence, (as
sometimes for the pardoning of an offense, and some times for the permitting of
a lawefull thing) there arise four terms in the argument.

7 These are they which are not defiled with women. Reu, 14. 4. Therefore the
company with women is a filthy thing.

Answ, 1,
If the words be taken properly and without a metaphore, then he speaks not
of defiling by wines, but generally by women, that is, of fornication and
adultery, and it is a fallacy from that which is spoken indefinitely and in
general; to the same taken definitely and for one set part. 2, But if the
place be taken metaphorically, (as the circumstances of the text do altogether
euince) then the text speaks of Idolatry, which the Holy ghost in the
Scripture uses to describe by fornications and adulteries. And so the argument
is as a rope of sand.

8 If a man's issue of seed depart from him, he shall wash all his flesh in
water, and be unclean until the Even. Leuiticus, 15, 16. Therefore the
company of man and wife is not without pollution.

Answ. 1.
The text speaks expressly, not of the lawful companying of man and wife,
but of the issuing out of the seed, which is done in sleep, when the seed is
cast forth without the use of marriage bed, as the whole course of the speech
does there declare. There are therefore four terms, seeing the word, issue
of seed, is ambiguous. 2, Legal^ impurities and pollutions by the ceremonial
law of Moses are not pollutions in manners, else he should sin, that
touches a dead corpse, Leuit, 21. 1. and Number. 5, 2. Where there is the same
commandment concerning uncleanness by touching the dead, as by the issuing
of seed.

9 Abi^elech said to David: if the young men be clean from women, they may
eat. 1, Sam. 21, 4.

Ans, 1, Cleanenesse in the Antecedent is taken for Leuiticall cleanenesse, and
the speech was of the hallowed bread, which was lawful for the priests only
to eat: in the consequent it is taken for cleanenesse before God, which as yet
has place among Christians. There are therefore four terms. 2, Now the
shadows of the Leuiticall Law, are not to be brought again into the clear
light of the Gospel.

10 David divided the Levites into 24. companies, that they might do their
office by course, least they should be driven to minister when they were
polluted. 1, Chro, 24.

Answ, 1, It is a fallacy taking that for the cause, which is not the cause,
for we do no where read that this was the cause of the division, but it is
apparent to be done for excellency, and order and comeliness sake, as also
that none of the Levites should be quite excluded from the ministry. 2.
Neither do we read that those companies had need to purify themselves
before their turns came. 3. And if the Papists be so much delighted, to bring
the old Testament into the new; by the same reason let them be circumcised, by
the same reason let them forbid their Priests the use of wine, when they have
the charge of the ministry.

11 Ye husbands dwell with your wi^^s according to knowledge, etc. that your
prayers be not interrupted, 1. Pet. 3. 7.

Ans. He speaks not of the company of man and woman, but of tyrannous
husbands, which handle their wives in servile and violent manner, living in
continual discord* Now that their prayers are hindered by reason of their
heart full of anger. hatred and envy, Christ teaches, Matthew. 5. 23 24, 25. It
is then a fal^acie taking that for the cause, which is not the cause.

^12. Be ye clean. Isal, 52. 11. without spot. Ephesians. ^. 27, etc. therefore
Priests ought to abstain from marriage.

Ans. 1. These places speak of that cleanenes, which ought to be common to
all Christians, that they be pure and clean from wickedness and sins: If
these places then do^ rightly conclude, then generally all Christians should
abstain from marriage. 2, Or if in the place of Isaie, there be enioined any
Leviticall purification beside to the Levites, that belongs not to Christians.

Therefore the lawful companying of man and wife is not a polluted thing, and
so neither is Matrimony it self impure or polluted, but lawful, holy,
undefiled, honorable, and unspotted. Heb. 13. 4. Albeit all men be polluted
and infected with original sin: which pollution the holiness of Christ imputed
by faith unto us, does cover, so that the heavenly Father does acknowledge us
for pure and holy.

Question, 2.
The qu^stion is, whether before God (especially in the article of
Justification) single life be more holy and do des^rue more, than the state
of Matrimony. Our Adversaries do so much admire and extol single life, that
in the mean while they do debase the state of Matrimony. And in former time
the School men have taught by writing that the least and meanest works (as
standing, sitting, eating, drinking and such as follow heerevpon) which are
done by Monks in single life, are more acceptable to GOD, than are the
greatest works of the first and second table, which are done by married men. We
do no way disallow honest single life, neither do we deny, but that it is
in many things more commodious and happy than Matrimony, if a man have the
gift of continency: but we allow not of that superstitious loud extolling of
single life, but we do believe that both the single and the married men are
before GOD accepted with like favor, by faith in Christ; and that no man
meriteth any thing more by single life, than those that live godlily and
faithfully in wedlock.

Because, (as before was said) the holy men

Because we are not justified by single life, nor any other work, but by faith
alone. Doubtless neither single life, nor marriage does make us either the more
or the less accepted with God.

Paul does so compare marriage and single life together, that he does detract
nothing

1, It is better to marry, than to burne^ verse, 9.

2, As the Lord ha^h called every one, so let him walk and so ordain I in all
Churches; verse, 17.

3, Let every man abide in the same vocation, wherein he was called. verse,
20. And again,

4, Brethren, let every man, wherein he was called, therein abide with God.
verse, 24.

5. Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed. verse, 27.

6, If thou take a wife, thou sinnest not: and if a virgin marry, she
sins not. verse, 28.

7, If any man think it is uncomely for his virgin, if she pass the flower
of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sins not. let
them be married. verse, 36.

8. So then, he that gives her to marriage does well, but he that gives her
not to marriage, does better. verse, 38.

Moreover, when as Paul does seem to prefer single life before marriage, he
does it

1, I suppose this be good for the present necessity: I mean, that it is good
for a man so to be; verse, 26.

2. Such (that is, those that be married) shall have trouble in the flesh: but I
spare you^ verse, 28.

3, I would have you without care, verse, 32.

4. This I speak for your commodity, not to tangle you in a snare, but that
ye follow that which is honest, and that ye may cleave fast unto the Lord
without separation. verse, 35.

5. But she (a widow) is more blessed, if she so abide in my judgment.
verse, 40. Now he speaks here of temporal happiness.

There is no difference of respect before God, either of those that be single,
or those

1. God is no accepter of persons: but in every Nation he that fears him,
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Act: 10. 32.

2. As Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping
of the commandments of God. (1, Cor. 7, 19.) So is it rightly said of single
life and marriage, seeing we do not please God, either because we live
single, or because we are married, but because we are in Christ by faith.

3. Their is neither Jew, nor Grecian: there is neither bond, nor free: there
is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Galat. 3, 28.

Married persons have so great promises in marriage, as our Adversaries will
never

1, The woman shall be saved through bearing of children, if they continue in
faith, and love, and holiness with modesty. 1, Tim. 2, 15.

2. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his ways, etc.
thou Blessings of godly marriage.
shall be blessed and it shall be well with thee, etc. Lo, thus the man is
blessed, that fears the Lord: the Lord out of Sion shall bless thee, and
thou shall see the Spiritual blessing out of Sion.
wealth of lerusalem all thy life: thou shall see peace upon Israel, thy wife
shall be as the fruitful vine. Psalm. 128.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. I would that all men were, even as I my self ^m. 1, Cor. 7, 7.

Ans. The Apostle does not say this, as if single men were more perfect or
acceptable before God, but as Paul says, I spare you, because of the
tribulation of the flesh. It is therefore a fallacy from that which is spoken
but in part and some respect, to the same taken absolutely, and in all respects.

2. It is good for a man so to be, that is unmarried. 1, Cor: 7. 26.

Ans: 1. Good is not there opposed to evil: for then this should be the
conclusion: Single life is good; therefore marriage is evilll: but this would
turn to the contumely of the Author of Matrimony. 2, Here be four terms:
for the Antecedent speaks of a corporal felicity or good, and the
consequent of a spiritual.

3. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. 1. Cor. 7, 27.

Answer, 1. Paul adds forthwith; If thou take a wise, thou sinnest not:
therefore the single man is not more perfect than the married. 2. Still they
commit the fallacy of taking that absolutely, which is spoken but in part and
some respect only: neither do they consider the words of Paul, where he
says; for the present necessity, not for any future excellency in heaven.

4, They which have wives, let the^ be as though they had none. 1, Cor. 7, 29.

Ans. Paulspeaketh not in this place of the company of man and wife, but
admonishes the married, that in those perilous times, (wherein the confession
of the truth of the Gospel is required) they should not have more care of
their wives, than of Gods glory, and their own salvation.

5. The unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord: but he that is married cares for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife. 1, Cor. 7, 32.

Ans. 1. He speaks not of perfection or imperfection before God, but of
commodities and discommodities, or certain Impediments which use to happen in
marriage, for that the married has care and charge of providing necessary
things of this life for his family: which care who so might be freed from,
without some greater or as great inconvenience on the other side, might have
the more time and opportunity to bestow himself wholly on heavenly
Meditations: but the like does befall in all other estates, wherein men have
to deal with the affairs of this life: So the Magistrate because of his great
business in the commonwealth, has not so much liberty to apply himself to
religion. 2, A married man may also ser^e God nevertheless: Otherwise Zachary
and Elizabeth could not have been called just before God, Luke, 1, 6. Neither
does every conueniency in a state make it by and by a more perfect state, for
else riches were a more perfect state, than poverty, because a man has means
to provide necessaries for his profession, the more liberty to intend matters
of religion, and may be liberal t^ the poor, yet the papists will not say
that the state of rich men is a state of greater perfection, than the state of
poor men.

6 The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy
both in body and spirit, 1, Cor, 7, 34.

Answ, 1, This objection is all one with that, which went next before, and
therefore let the former answer serve for it also. 2, In the mean time, let
the unmarried papists, which vaunt so of their single life, remember that they
are commanded to be holy in body and Spirit; that they do not burn with
lustful cogitations.

7 He that gives her to marriage does well, but he that gives her not does
better, 1, Corinth, 7, 38.

Ans, 1, It is a fallacy taking that absolutely, which is spoken but in part
and some respect. For it is not of it self and simply better, but with a
restriction, it is better and more commodious, for the present necessity, that
they may cleave to the Lord without hinde^ance. In the mean while it is say de
to all Christians. He that cannot contain, let him mary; and it is better to
mary than to burn:

8 She (a widow) is more blessed, if she so continue. 1, Cor, 7, 40.

Answer, She is more blessed with a temporal blessing, as Christ calle^h the
barren blessed, Luk; 23, 29. There are therefore ^oure terms.

9 The barren is blessed, which is undefiled, and knows not the sinful
bed: she shall have frui^ in the visitation of souls. Wisd, 3, 13. Therefore
single life is before God more blessed, than ma^rimony.

Ans, 1, The text speaks of a married woman that is barren: but our
Adversaries speak of one that is v^maried: for there ca^ be known no
barrenness, where there has not been the company of man and woman. 2, The
text speaks of a woman which refraineth from adultery: this is showed by the
words: She knows ^ot the sinn^full bed: Our adversaries speak of a woman,
which abstaineth from lawefull marriage: There is therefore a confusion of many
terms, which ^ang not together, and a fallacy taking that absolutely, which is
spoken in part only. 3, And the book is Apocriphall.

10 Let not the Eunuch say, Behold I am ^ d^y tree. For thus says the Lord to
the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the thing that pleases me, and
take hold on my covenant, as if priests and monks were Eunuchs, and did not
rather fill the world with bastards*
even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place, etc.
Isay, 56, 3, 4, 5. The^fore single life is before God more excellent tha^
marriage.

Ans. 1, It is a fallacy taking that absolutely, which is spoken but in part
only. In the old Testament those that were barren thought themselves neglected
of GOD. These the Prophet comfort, because before GOD there is no difference
between the barren and the fruitful, for that all which believe, are
indifferently received into the Kingdom of God. Now that which the Prophet
says shall not hinder them, that our Adversaries do fondly turn into a
prerogative. 2, The contrary rather follows from this place, to wit, that
both the fruitful and the barren, the married and the unmarried are alike
esteemed of God, if they believe on the Messiah, and take hold of the Lords
covenant.

11 There is no weight to be compared to the continent mind. Eccles, 26, 15.

Ans, The whole text speaks of an honest and chaste married woman, who does
not defile her bed with adultery. This is then a rope of sand. 2, And the
book is Apocriphall.

12 Who said to his Father and to his Mother, I know you not, and to his
brethren, I am ignorant of you; and they knew not their own sons etc, These
have kept thy Word, Deuteronomy, 33, 9.

Answ. 1.
The translation is false. Which according to the hebrew is thus: Who, (that is
Leui) said unto his Father and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither
knew he his brethren, nor knew his own children. For they obs^rued thy Word
and kept thy covenant; they shall teach Jacob thy judgments. That is the
Levites were inflamed with such a zeal against the transgressors of Gods law,
that they neither spared kindred, no^ parents, nor brethren, nor their own
sons, but killed them as though they had not seen them, or known them. And
that for this exploite, whereby God was appeased, they were fit men, to whom
the ministry should be committed in their generations for ever. As the story,
whereunto Moses alludeth, is at large described (Exodus, 32, 26, 27, 28. etc.) 2,
He says not, they begat not sons, but they knew them not, that is, they had
no respect of persons. 3, And with all, this is taught us, that those are fit
ministers and worthy commendation, that thoroughly and manfully do their duty
in the Church with great zeal, not passing for it, that they bring sorrow or
loss of goods (by reason of persecutions arising thereupon) to their parents,
wife, or children. But what is this to popish single life? This argument then
hangs together like sand.

13 Marie says, I know not man, Luke, 1, 34. as having respect to the vow of
perfection, to wi^, single life.

Ans, 1, The text shows the contrary, saying that she was affianced to a
man, (Luk, 1, 27.) and so that Mary and Joseph should have come together
(Ma^^hew, 1, 18.) unless God had forbidden it, because our Savior was to be
borne of Mary.

14 Some have made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew, 19, 12.

Answ, The Kingdom of God signifies the dispensing of the Gospel, in
performing whereof that they might be less hindered, some remained unmarried,
as Paul. But this is nothing as concerning any prerogative with God: neither is
single life therefore of it self more holy before God, than is honest
matrimony.

Here follow certain other general arguments of our Adversaries for the
prerogative. of single life.
1 Paul bids the married to abstain from companying together for a time,
that they may give themselves to prayer. 1, Cor, 7, 5. But pries^s and
monastical persons ^ught to give themselves at all times to prayer: Therefore
they ought always to ab^^aine from marriage.

Answ. 1. Paul there speaks not of ordinary and daily, but of ^olemne prayers
in the time of perils of imminent persecutions: For which prayers sake the
married priest may abstain for a time, no less then the laick. 2 Though the
Laickes also ought as well to pray always, (for, pray always, continually,
says Paul, Ephesians, 6, 18. 1, These, 5, 17.) yet they are not bidden therefore to
remain always unmarried. 3, Here is a fallacy, taking that for the cause,
which is not the cause, For Paul bids the^ not abstain for a time, by reason
of any uncleanness in matrimony, but that being hindered with none other outward
or wordly thing, they might more conveniently give themselves to prayer.

2 No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
because he would please him, that has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2, Timo,
2, 4. But priests are Gods Soldiers.

Answ, 1.
Here only is reproved that carfulness, whereby Christians do over much
meddle with worldly affairs. 2, Married men also are Gods Soldiers, though
they live not single. For which warrefare Paul does arm all Christians with
spiritual weapons (Ephesian, 6). 3 And that the Minister of the Church be not
compelled to care at home for the things of this life, he may be ^ased of
this care by his wife.

3 The Woman is bound by the law while her husband lives. Rom, 7, 2. 1,
Corin, 7, 39. But Christ, who is the Husband to priests, lives forever.
Therefore priests may never be joined in matrimony.

Ans, 1,
It is an argument from a spiritual conjunction to a corporal: therefore
there are four terms: 2, Spiritual marriage with Christ does not take away
corporal matrimony: otherwise all married Christians should be spiritual
adulterers: which our Adversaries dare not in such gross manner utter, though
perhaps they think not much better.

4. I have prepared you for one husband, to present you a pure virgin unto
Christ. 2, Corinthians, 11. 2.

Answ. 1, Paul writes here to all the Corinthians, whether single or married,
whether Lay men or Ministers of the Church; all them he calls a pure
virgin. Therefore this text is nothing to the single life of Priests. 2, It is
a metaphorical speech, which besides the metaphorical signification
concludes nothing: but marriage and single life are used of our Adversaries
without any metaphore: therefore they dispute by four terms.

5. The Father has right to keep his virgin unmarried, as please himself.
1. Cor. 7, 36, 37. 38. But the Church has the right and authority of a Father,
over Ministers; therefore it has right to forbid Priests to marry.

Ans. 1, That the Church has not power simply at her own pleasure, but a
limited and restrained power, was proved in the common place of the Church. 2,
The right and power of a Father also is limited so, that Parents are bound to
have consideration of their children, that they constrain not them to
contain, which have not the gift of continency, and by this occasion expose
them to unchaste lusts. Which seeing it is not observed by the Church of Rome,
they do not rightly use their right of fatherhoode: but they use the right, or
rather the wrong of Tyrannes. Then the mayor proposition is not universally
true, especially seeing it is contrary to the saying of Paul: He that cannot
contain, let him marry. 3, In the same place Paul leaves all this matter at
men's liberty: Seeing then the Church of Rome does in this matter bereave such,
as belong unto her, of that liberty, contrary to the doctrine of Paul, the
place of Paul has not affinity or coherence with the purpose of the Papists.

Question. 3.
The question is, Whether it be lawful for every one to vow continency or
single life. Our Adversaries affirm, and we deny it for these reasons.

The nature of vows is this, that first they be not contrary to the word of
God: then

1, All men cannot receive this thing. He that is able to receive this, let
him receive it. Math. 19, 11 12.

2, Every man has his proper gift of God (not of himself, or of his own free
will) one after this manner, and another after that. 1, Cro. 7, 7. Where the
Apostle does expressly speak of continency.

3, As God has distributed to every man. 1, Cor. 7, 17. where he speaks of
the same matter.

Paul's doctrine of continency is such, It is very clear, that in Paul's time;
the vows of single life were altogether unknown:
by vow.

1, If they cannot abstain, let them marry: for it is better to marry, than
to burn. (1, Cor. 7, 9.) Contrary to this our Adversaries teach thus. If they
cannot contain, yet let them not marry; for it is therefore the vows, which
Priests now vs^, are not Apostolical.
better that Priests should burn, and become who remongers and adulterers,
than that they should be joined in honest matrimony.

2. This I speak for your commodity, not to tangle you in a snare. 1, Cor. 7,
35, but our Adversaries lay snares upon men's consciences.

3. If any man think it is uncomely, etc: let him do what he will 1, Corinth.
7, 36. Note if the Father thought it but uncomely, he was bound no further.

Because by this vow of continency many thousand souls are thrust down
into eternal

This vow does cause many hidden sins Balaeus in the preface to the lives of
the Bishops of Rome.
verses of Mantuan, who himself was a Papist, and of Iacobus Actius
Sannazarius, of Marcellus Palingenius, of Franciscus Petrarcha^ as also the
book of John Della Casa, ^e Sodomiae encomio: all which the day of the Lord
shall once disclose, and shall repay them upon their heads, who have been the
Authors and maintainers of this tyrann^ussi^ imposed vow.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1. Vows are to be kept. And here they heap up many sayings to no purpose,
Deuteronomy. 23, 21. Leui* 27; 2, 10. Numb: 6, 2, Psalm: 75, 12, Eccles, 5, 3;

Ans. 1. There be four terms in the argument, because the Mayor speaks of
vows, which are not out of our own power, but of lawful and approved vows,
which were not repugnant to the rules delivered, Numb. 6. and 30 Chapter; such
as were the vows of the Nazarites, of offerings, etc. but the minor means a
vow not allowed of, nor commanded, and such a vow as is not in our power to
keep.

2. Though every one have not the gift of continency, yet we may obtain it by
prayers; for what soever ye shall ask, ye shall receive. John, 16. 23, 24.

Ans. 1. If God had appointed, the praying for the gift of continency, as an
effectual and sufficient remedy against burning, then the argument would
follow: but because God has appointed another remedy, for the avoiding of
fornication, to wit, lawful matrimony (according to these sayings: It is
better to marry, than to burn: if they cannot contain, let them marry: and
for avoiding of fornication, let every man have his wife:) therefore there is
no consequence in the Papists argument 2, We have an assured promise to obtain
those things by prayer, which do directly pertain to the salvation of our
souls; but seeing we may be saved in honest Matrimony, without the obtaining
of the gift of co^tinencie, God is not tied to hear our prayers, when we
desire the gift of continency. 3, And if every man may obtain by prayer the
gift of continency, why not also the gift of tongues? or, why not the gift of
healing also?

3. Refuse the younger widows: for when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry, having damnation because they have broken the first
faith (that is their vow.) 1, Timo. 5, 11. 12. Therefore the vow of
continency cannot be broken, upon any pre^ense of not being able to contain.

Answer. 1, It cannot by any one word be prooved, that these widows made
vows, that they would not afterward marry: this place then is wrongfully
wrested to Popish vows of continency. 2, These widows are not reproved, for
that they marry, but for that they secretly play the harlots, and then seek
for marriage for a pretense to cover their naughtiness. 3, The first faith is
not any vow, but the first faith that was given to Christ in Baptism: this is
the first faith, which they break, while they make the members of Christ, the
members of an harlot. 4, And Paul bids these younger widows marry, in the
same place: he should then bid them break their vow, if these widows had
made any vow: which our Adversaries will not willingly grant. 5, If this place
be understood of vows, it follows against the Papists, that they offend, in
laying vows upon the^, which are not yet come to three^core years of age: for
Paul would have such chosen, as be threescore years old.

4. The vow which Priests make of chastity, is a free vow of their own
accord; neither does any man compel them to it.

Ans. 1. This we deny: for those that will be admitted into holy Orders, have
none other entrance, but by vowing. A man that is admitted, if he marry, is
removed from his calling, and is punished in his body: what a kind of liberty
is this? It is therefore a loud lie.

5, Paul (1, Timo. 4, 1, 3.) does not speak of the Pope, that he holds the
doctrine of Devils, but he means the Tatian^ and Encr^ti^ae her^tikes.

Ans. 1. Paul says of them: forbidding to marry, but the Pope forbids to
marry: therefore etc. 2, It follows not, the Tatiani forbad marriage:
therefore the Pope, which forbids it too, is not to be reprooved. There is
the like judgment of like things. 3, Though the Pope do not forbid marriage to
all persons* yet he forbids it; and therefore he is rightly condemned by
Paul with the Tatiani and Encratitae.

CHAP. 22. Of the Popish Fastes.
IN this chapter the controversy is not, whether Christians ought to fast.
(For none of our side does deny that) but the question is, whether the popish
fastes, such as are in use amongst our Adversaries, be to be approved and
necessary to be observed. But because so many things meet together in the
popish fastes, which are repugnant to the holy Scripture, let us treat of them
all severally.

(1) Error 1
And first of all, our Adversaries do place their fastes, not in sobriety, or
temperance in meat and drink; neither in a total absta^ing from all meat and
drink for a certain time, which was used of the Ancients; but in abstinence
from flesh, and white meats, etc. only putting a difference betwixt meats.
And they press that difference to be observed with such severity, that amongst
them he is accounted to commit a more heinous crime, who should taste flesh
upon the days forbidden; than he that should be taken in adultery, or other
wickedness: And in some places (especially of Italy and Spain (men are in
greater danger for tasting flesh upon the days inhibited, than for committing
capital crimes. We disallow and reiecte this observation and preposterous
choice of meats, for these reasons.

Because there is not any either commandment or example, in the whole
Scripture

1, Teach them to observe all things that I have commanded you, Matt, 28, 20.

2, Of such like observations Christ says: In vain they worship me, teaching
for doctrines, men's precepts, Matthew, 15, 9.

In the New Testament those Leuiticall differences of meats are taken away,
which after a sort are brought in again of our adversaries.

1, The things that God has purified, pollute thou not, Act, 10, 15.

2, Whatsoever is set before you, eat, 1, Cor, 10, 27.

3, That which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man, Matthew, 15, 11.

4, Meat makes us not acceptable to God: for neither if we eat, have we the
more: neither if we eat not, have we the less. 1, Cor, 8, 8.

5, The Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the Holy ghost, Rom, 14, 17.

6, It is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with
meats, which have not profited them, that have been occupied therein, Heb,
13, 9.

By this difference and choice of meats laid upon the Church, as if it were
necessary, Christian liberty is impugned.

1, In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed
unto spirits of errors, and doctrines of devils, which speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot iron, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be
received with giving thanks of the^ that believe and know the truth: for every
creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving. 1. Tim, 4, 1, 2. etc.

2, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not, and let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats, Rom, 14, 3.

3, Let no man condemn you in meat or in drink, etc. Colos, 2, 16.

4, If ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the World, why as though
ye lived in the World, are ye burdened with traditions? As, touch not, taste
not, handle not. Which all perish with the using, and are after the
commandments and doctrines of men: which things have indeed a show of wisdom,
in voluntary religion and humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body:
neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh, Coloss, 2, 20,
etc.

5, Unto the pure are all things pure, Titus. 1, 15.

6, Whatsoever is soulde in the shambles eat ye, and ask no question for
conscience sake, 1, Corinth, 10, 15.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1 Obedience is due to the Church but the Church has ordained such fasts.
Therefore, etc.

Answer, 1, In customs and indifferent ceremonies for orders sake, obedience
is to be performed to the Church, but not in matters of necessity and articles
of our belief, unless it be vpholden by the authority of the scripture,
whereof we have spoken in the beginning of this book. Thither we refer the
Reader. 2, Neither is that rightly ascribed to the Church, which is tyrannously
obtruded to be observed of Christians by superstitious men under the name of
the Church.

2 He that is weak, eats herbs, Romans 14. 2. Therefore the eating of flesh
may rightly be forbidden for the weak ones sake.

Answ, 1, Paul speaks of those that be weak: but the Church respects not
the weak, but only their own tyranny, which they would establish by such
superstitious precepts. 2, Paul adds presently upon it, let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not, etc. Now if our Adversaries think he spoke
these words of the choice and difference of meats, why do they not leave the
use of meats in men's liberty? and, why do they not take away the difference
between him that eats, and him that eats not? 3, Seeing Paul speaks of a
thing, which he leaves in free choice, and our Adversaries of a thing not
left at liberty, this allegation of Paul is impertinent. And there be 4.
terms.

3 It is good not to eat flesh, Rom, 14* 21.

Ans, 1, Paul speaks of the moderating of Christian liberty, (whereof there is
no controversy) which seeing our Adversaries do wrest to the abrogating of
Christian liberty, there is more in the conclusion than in the premises, and
there is committed the fallacy of taking that absolutely, which is spoken but
in part only. 2, If these words of Paul do bind us to a choice of meats,
then it will follow, that we must not drink wine neither, For Paul joins
these together: It is not good to eat flesh nor to drink wine. Whence one of
the two does follow; that either these words are alleged impertinently, or
that the Church of Rome does err in not forbidding the use of wine. The latter
our Adversaries do not grant. Therefore needs they must grant the former.

4 If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the World stands
that I may not offend my brother, 1, Cor, 8, 13.

Ans, 1, Paul does not speak of the popish difference of meats (wherein the
use of all flesh generally is forbidden) but of things sacrificed to idols.
Therefore it is nothing to the purpose. 2 Even this moderating of our liberty,
is it self a temporal precept (as appears Acts. 15, 29) the Popes
prohibition then, seeing it is perpetual, has no affinity with this precept
of Paul's. And seeing there be two terms in this argument, which have
equivocation in them, there arise five terms

5 In the Old Testament there was always a difference made of some meats,
before and after the floode, and in the time of the law.

Answ, 1, These for the most part were shadows of things to come. Therefore they
be long not to us in the new Testament. 2, Then there was an express
commandment of God: which we do not only want in the new Testament, but we
have also the contrary commandment of Paul, Coloss, 2, 20. etc.

6 Daniel fasted with choice of meats, Dan, 1, 8, and 10, 3.

Answ, 1, This was partly (Dan, 1, 8.) by the commandment, (Leu, 11.) partly
of his own free accord (Dan, 10. 3) and not of superstition: but it was rather
a fast of sobriety and temperance, all which have no affinity with the popish
fast, especially seeing Daniel abstained also from wine: which the popish
Prelates, Priests and Monks, would be loath, I warrant you, to observe.

7 The choice and difference of meats has ground in scripture, Leuit, 11,
Deuteronomy, 14.

Answer, 1, They were Leuiticall precepts, abrogated by God. Acts, 10, 15. By
the Apostles, Act, 15, 10, 19, 20, etc. By Paul Coloss. 2, 16, 17, 20. etc, and
(Heb, 13. 9.) 2, And that Leuiticall difference of meats was not in this,
whether it were lawefull to eat flesh or fi^h: but there was difference put
between the clean and unclean living creatures. Wherefore that Leviticall
difference of meats is fondly wrested to the Popish difference and choice of
meats: and there be five terms in this argument.

8, The Apostles did forbid to eat blood, or that which was strangled, Act.
15. 29.

Answ. 1, It was a temporal commandment for the moderating of Christian
liberty, unto the edification of the weak; but the Popish difference and
choice of meats does not moderate, but abrogate Christian liberty, neither is
it for any weak ones sake, but for obtaining of tyranny in the Church. 2; The
Apostles did not forbid them flesh at all, but blood and that which was
strangled, which many men at this day also by nature think abominable to be
eaten. It is nothing therefore to the purpose.

9 The Nazarites abstained from certain meats and drinks, Numb. 6, 3.

Ans. 1. The vow of the Nazarites did belong to a certain abstinence for one
set time: but herein it agree^h not with the Popish choice and difference of
meats. 2. It was a Leviticall ceremony, which ought to cease among
Christians. 3, The law of Nazarites did forbid the use of wine also, which
notwithstanding our Adversaries do retain in their fast*

10. The Rechabites abstained from wine. Ier. 35. 6. 10.

Answ. 1. They did it not to merit the favor of God: but they had received a
commandment from their Father, that they might the more easily abstain from
drunkenness and the vices, which follow drunkenness. Neither would their Father
prescribe a law to others, but to his sons. It is then a fallacy taking that
absolutely, which is spoken but in part. 2. We dispute of flesh and they answer
of wine:

11. It is not read that Christ did eat flesh, but that he did eat bread and
fish, etc.

Answ. 1, As if the Pascall Lamb had not been flesh. 2. We should not
therefore have an example to imitate, if it were never so plain, that Christ
did abstain from flesh. 3. But neither do we read, that Christ did eat
herbs, nuts, spices, nor that he drank beer.

12. The earth was cursed by God. Genes. 3, 17. but beasts live of the earth:
therefore there should be an inhibitio^, that they be not eaten*

Ans. 1 By this reason all flesh at all times should be forbidden. 2, That
curse is but in part, namely, that it should be barren, and bring forth thorns
and thistles. 3, So, should we not eat herbs neither, which spring immediately
out of the earth.

13. Because flesh is most nourishing, and brings forth the pricks of
Concupiscence, we ought to abstain from flesh at that time, which is
appointed for the taming of our flesh.

Answer. 1. These are the precepts which have a show of wisdom in
will worship. (Coloss. 2, 23) and wine should be forbidden rather than flesh;
as that which inflameth men to Inst and other vices, as it is said. Prou: 23,
31, 32, etc.

14. The Apostles fasted. Acts. 13, 2. 3* and 14. 23. And fasting is commended.
Matthew. 6 16: Mark, 9. 29. Io^l. 1. 14. Zachar. 7, 5. and 8. 19. Jonah, 3, 5,
7.

Answer. 1. That Christians should fast in their kind in due sort and manner,
no man denies, but without the loss of Christian liberty; those things then
are brought for arguments, which are out of controversy. 2, But whiles the
argument is from a true manner of fasting, to the Popish hypocritical manner
of fasting, there arise four terms. For the fasting of the Apos^les did not
consist in the difference of meats: but they that fasted in the old Testament,
abstained from all meat, and drink a whole day until evening: Such a fast
the Popish Priests and Monks will never be persuaded to practice.

(2) Error.
Whereas in the Church of God it is left at liberty for any man to fast at any
fit time: yet the Papists are so bound to their fastes by laws at set times,
that he may incur the danger of his head, who shall break his fast at those
times. Which also is repugnant to Christian liberty.

Let no man condemn you in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or
of the

(3) Error.
The Papists teach that fasting has the nature of a merit, and that it is a
satisfaction for actual sins and punishments. This is repugnant to the
doctrine of the merit and one only satisfaction of our Savior, and to the
article of Justification, as was declared in his proper place.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1, The Ninivites and others have by fasting obtained a mitigation of
punishments: therefore fasting is meritorious.

Ans. 1. They that obtained the spiritual grace of God obtained it by faith:
for without faith no man can please God (Heb. 11. 6.) 2, And whereas others
obtained a mitigating or deferring of temporal punishments, it belongs not to
this disputation, wherein the question is not of temporal grace, but of the
grace of justification. So the wicked King Ahab, by fasting and humbling
himself in sackcloth, obtained the deferring of temporal evils, but escaped
not eternal punishments. 1, King. 21, 29.

(4) Error.
Here in the Papists err also, that of a wrong zeal they thrust upon the
Church, the fast of Lent without any authority from God.

Contrariwise our Adversaries do reason.
1. Christ fasted forty days. Matthew. 4, 2. but every action of Christ is our
instruction; therefore etc.

Ans. 1. This fast was miraculous, neither is there any thing in it, which
agrees with the Popish fast. But and if every action of Christ be our
instruction, then we must work miracles too. 2. We should also in like manner
abstain 40 days altogether from all meat. 3, We have no commandment, to
imitate this fact of Christ. 4. And, if we must imitate every action of Christ
in particular, then we should with a whip scourge the Popish Merchants of holy
things out of the temples. But woe to the Pope with his Simoniacal mates, if
this dealing should be used.

2. Moses and Elias fasted 40 days.

Ans. 1, If their example should bind others to imitate them, then the fast of
Lent should have been instituted in the old Testament also: which seeing it
was not done, the vanity of this argument is apparent. 2, Both their fastes
were miraculous and inimitable.

3, Lent fast is the tithing of the days of the year; Therefore it was well
ordained of the Church.

Ans. These be fictions of idle brains, without the word of God. Will-worships
therefore to be condemned.

4, The Canons of the Apostles do commend the fast of Lent.

Ans. 1, They be counterfeit Canons: which our Adversaries themselves dare not
altogether deny, unless they they be without both judgment and shame. 2,
There are many things in those Canons, which the Papists themselves at this day
do reject.

(5) Error.
He that violateth the law of fasting or of Lent, is sorer punished amongst our
Adversaries, than he that transgresses the law of God.

Why do ye transgress the commandment of God, for or by your tradition?
Mat. 15, 3.

(6) Error.
There are many mockeries in this Popish Lent fast.

They permit most delicate fishes to be eaten, which are more dainty than any
beef men, or perhaps of noble personages. It is a fit course forsooth to tame
the flesh by dainties.

In the mean while they refrain not from wine, but reserve the strongest wine
for Lent

That the hypocrites may seem to fast till evening, they sing their Evensong
at dinner

In the evening they make a Collation (so they call it) with diverse delicate
sawces, confections,

They sell Indulgences for money, to eat butter, flesh, eggs, white meats,
etc. in

The judgment of the holy Ghost of such manner of Fastes.
Cry aloude, spare not: lift thy voice

When ye fast, look not sour as the

Bodily exercise profi^eth little, 1, Tim, 4,

A Popish shifte.
The Pope does not say, that meats are evil. Therefore the place of Paul. (1,
Tim, 4, 1, 3.) belongs not to him.

Answ. 1. Neither does Paul say, that erroneous spirits shall say that meats
are evil, but that they shall bring in an abstinence from certain meats,
under what pre^ense of Religion soever it be done. 2, And the place (Coloss,
2, 20, etc) which we cited, is more clear, than that it can be shifted off.
The Pope therefore remains a Doctor, that teaches the doctrine of devils.

CHAP. 23. Of Repentance.
WHereas the Pope of Rome has thrust, his errors into the article of
Repentance also, we will likewise briefly propose them.

(1) Error.
Contrition (which otherwise neither ought, nor can be excluded from
repentance) is required by our Adversaries not simply in Repentance, but they
teach that sins are blotted out and satisfied for, by contrition, which we
ascribe to Christ alone (who was wounded for our transgressions, Isa, 53, 5)
according as the Scripture teaches us, as has been sufficiently declared in
the article of Justification: and the sayings of Scripture, Acts, 4, 12. 1,
Ioh, 1, 7. and 2, 1, 2. do witness.

(2) Error.
They appoint a certain measure to contriti^ on, and do teach that unless it
be sufficient, there is no remission of sins granted. We reject this doctrine
of sufficient contrition.

Because it breeds a perpetual doubting

Neither can his Confessor free him from all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ.

By this doctrine of sufficient contrition the

1, Who can understand his faults? cleanse me from my secret faults, Psalm, 19,
12.

2, Thou have set our secret sins in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 90, 8.

(3) Error.
They require satisfaction in their repentance or penance, not the satisfaction
of Christ, but their own, which the priest receiving confession must lay upon
him that confesses, that hereby satisfaction may be made to God by the sinner
for his sin. Which same also cannot stand with the one alone satisfaction of
Jesus Christ, nor with the article of free justification; nor with the
imperfe^tion of our good works. Add heereto, that those works of satisfaction,
are for the most part works of their own devising, which for that very respect
are hateful to God. Which seeing they have been sufficiently handled before
in their proper place, it is not needful now to repeat the same: Let it
suffice only to note and reckon up their errors. The explication thereof the
Readershall find before in their due place.

(4) Error.
In reckoning the parts of repentance they omit faith, and take away as it
were the soul or life of true Repentance.

For Contrition without faith is desperation, as we are taught by the most
woeful

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Rom, cannot please God, that sins may
beforginen.

Repentance without faith profited Esau nothing, Heb, 12, 17.

(5) Error.
Men's Consciences also with our Adversaries are most miserably tormented, while
they drive them that confess to a particular rehear^ing of all and every of
their sins, and that with every circumstance of the fact (fondly affi^ming
that this same particular confession is meritorious by reason of the shame that
is joined with it) which vexing of men's consciences in the Church of God, is
not to be borne with, for these reasons.

^ Because it has no precept nor example of Christ or his Apostles.

Such auricular confession (as they call it) has no promise of grace in the
Word of

The Gospel is turned into the law, whiles the desert of remission of sins
is placed in

The Conscience is brought into perpe^uall doubting, and at length into
desperation, on, while a man fears lest he have forgotten some of his sins,
or lest he have not rehearsed his sins with all circumstances necessary, to
the remission of his sins. And therefore he must always doubt of the
remission of his sins: which how terrible a torment of Conscience it is, men of
conscience may easily judge. Hence it came to pass, that superstitious men in
Popery, could scarce ever make any end of confessing, and yet still there
arose new pricks of conscience.

Agai^^ men's works, which cannot stand

The doubtful cons^ience is dri^en to an

Contrariwise our Adversaries do dispute.
1 In the Primitive Church public confession of ^innes by circumstances was
required.

Answer, 1, It was a part of ec^lesiasticall discipline, which was wont to be
performed before the whole Church by such persons as had grievously fallen,
before the Church had any Christian Magistrates. But that popish auricular
confession was unknown to all antiquity. There are therefore four terms.

2 God exercised private confession in Adam, when he said, Adam, where art
thou? and in Cain, when he asked, where is Abel thy brother? Gen, 3, 9, and 4,
9.

Answ. 1. Those places prove nothing less. For Neither did Adam nor Cain
reckon up their sins, but endeavor to cloak them. But to prea^h to the
impenitent the acknowledging of their sins, and to receive confession in the
care; are things very far different. 2. Neither did either Adam or Cain deserve
any thing by that confession which was with much a do wrunge from them: For
Caine despaired, and Adam believing on the promised seed of the woman, was
saved by faith. not by the confession of his sin. The Argument then hangs
not together.

3, He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. Prou. 28, 13. When I held my tongue, my bones
consumed, Psalm. 32, 3. If we acknowledge our sins, etc. 1. Ioh. 1, 9.
therefore Auricular confession is grounded on the Scripture.

Ans, 1. Seeing there is not one only manner of confession, but diverse, they
argue from that which is spoken indefinitely to the same taken definitely, and
from a particular as from an universal: for there is a confession before God;
there is a general confession, there is a particular, before the Ministers,
before the Church, before our brethren, whom we have offended, etc. All these
things our Adversaries do fondly confound together.

4. The Jews were baptized of John and confessed their sins; therefore he
speaks of Auricular confession. Math. 3, 6:

Answer. 1, There is more in the conclusion than in the Premises: for it
follows not; they confessed themselves to be sinners therefore they confessed
every one of their sins on the Popish manner. 2, The text says, that
Jerusalem and all Jury, and all the region about Jordan went out unto John,
etc. of how much time then, and how many ten years had John need of, if he
would have heard the particular and secret enumeration of all and every their
sins: nothing therefore follows.

5. Christ says: Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them:
and whosesoevers sins ye retain, they are retained. Ioh. 20, 23. That it
may therefore be known what sins ought to be retained, what not; it is
needful there should be a particular enumeration of them.

Answ. 1. There is more in the conclusion than in the Premises: for sins may
be remitted to them, which confess themselves to be sinners, and seriously to
repent. Although there be made no particular enumeration of all sins, yet we
keep a good custom in The churches of Germany.
our Churches, thinking it meet, that the Minister, before he gives
absolution, should try whether he that confesses, understand the doctrine of
the acknowledgement of sin, of Redemption, of Grace, and Justification, etc,
But that this should be done by that auricular circumstantiall enumeration of
sins, there is no whit contained in Christ's words* Now as concerning
retaining of sins, that belongs to impenitent sinners; but we may not
practice it upon them that confess their sins. What needs then for this
retaining of sins, any enumeration of sins, in them, to whom Christ bids
us apply the key of loosing? 2, Against the Popish auricular confession we have
an example of Peter, who having heard the general and devout confession of the
sins of the Jews, did not seek after particulars any more, but gave unto
them Absolution and Baptism. Act, 2, 38, 41.

6. Christ says to the Leaper: go, show thy self unto the Priest. Matt^. 8,
4. therefore he bids him confess his sins to a Priest.

Ans. 1. There is not any syllable in the text concerning any manner of
confession. It is then a rope of sand. 2, The cause of sending him to the
Priest was not any confession, but for a witness unto them, that they might
not be able afterward to deny or cavil at Christ's miracles. 3, And at that
time, by the custom and commandment of the law of Moses; the judging of
leaprous persons belonged to the Priests: which at this day is committed to
Physicians. Here then is a fallacy taking that for the cause, which is not
the cause.

7. A^ the Surgeon ought first to vie we and search the wounds, that he may
apply necessary plasters: so it is needful that the Priest take a particular
view of the wounds of conscience, before he give absolution.

Ans: 1, Similitudes prove nothing. 2, Here is great difference and unlikeness:
for it is needful that the Surgeon do look upon the wounds, because he
ought to apply several plasters according to the diversity of the wounds:
neither are all plasters fit for all diseases, which in spiritual wounds of
conscience is not so: for there all and every disease is cured with one and the
same plaster, to wit, the blood of the son of God: 1, Ioh: 1, 7, and 2, 2.

8. He that desires absolution, may deceive the Minister, therefore auricular
confession is better.

Answ. 1, And he that confesses may deceive the Priest in auricular
confession: for who can assure the Priest, that he that confesses, has kept
back nothing, or that he has not told some untruth in the circumstances. 2,
This evil ought to be met withal, not by auricular confession, but by a grave
and serious admonition: namely that God searches the hearts of all men, and
though the Ministers, his Mess^ngers be deceived, yet that he cannot be
deceaved, who will inflict most grievous punishments upon the unrepentant.

9. Acknowledge your sins one to another. Iam. 5, 16.

Ans: 1. It is an argument from a particular, as if it were an universal: for
it does not follow that James does no^ speak here of any other kind of
confession, but of that auricular. 2, He says, Confess one to another: he
does not therefore speak of auricular confession before a Priest, but of a
mutual confession of them, who have been offended one by another. And it is
all one with that of Christ, concerning reconciling our selves with our brother
offended. Matthew. 5, 23, 24. Here are therefore four terms, and ropes of
sand, as are almost all our A^uersaries arguments.

The Conclusion.
The godly and intelligent Reader will mervaile perhaps, that our Adversaries,
the plaisterers over of Popish errors, are not afraid to bring to light with
such earnestnes, such trifles for the defense of Popish errors, and that in so
great light of the Gospel and such a learned age. But he will cease to mervaile,
if he shall consider with himself, that the Papists for mere want of good
arguments are driven to that necessity, that whiles they cannot resist the
heavenly truth, whatsoever coms in their way, (how absurd soever it be) that
they lay hold on for a dart, and throw it against the doctrine of the Gospel.
And that befalls them, which Virgil writes: Furor arm a ministrat: Fury
finds out weapons. The Lord bring again to a right mind so many of our
Adversaries, as have not sinned unto death, Amen.

FINIS.

