The sixth Book of the Myrrour of Knighthood. Being The first Book of the
third Part, immediately follovving the fourth and fifth Books printed.
Containing the Knightly actions and amorous conuersations of Rosicleer and
Rosabel his son, with diverse other their princely Friends and Kinsmen.

Translated out of Spanish by R.P.

LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Curthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his
shop nere the Royal Exchange. 1598.

The Printer to the Reader.
COst more than ordinary, and travel exceeding expenses have I bestovved to
get together all the parts of this excelent History. If a quick Term pay the
expense of a dead Vacation, I vvil within the month play the Conney, and bring
forth another Part: but if ye prove niggards to buy, what I have dearly
bought to sell, I will learn of the Camel, to be three years in bringing
forth my next birth, though I buy the long bearing very dear.

Yours C. B.

The first Book of the third Part of the Myrrour of Knighthood: wherein is
declared the high and mighty deeds of the Sons and worthy Nephews of
Trebatio: and other mighty Princes and Knights: with the valiant deeds of
Knighthood of Claridiana, and other heroicke Ladies.
The end of that perilous and bloody Combat between Rosicleer Prince of
Constantinople, and Fangomadan King of the Forbidden Island, about the liberty
of Meridian Prince of Scythia, Floralinda Princess of Macedon, and the Troyan
Oristides: and what after happened more to them.

Cap. 1.
THe Battle between Fangomadan and Rosicleer continued with no less fury,
than that vreasonable begun Combat of the Lapythes and Centaures, at the
marriage of Pyrithous, the Companion of Hercules: and with like noise, or more
violence, did their strokes redouble one upon an other, battering and
shiuering their armor, and staining the pauement of the Court (wherein they
contended) with their bloods: either so impatient of delay, and desirous to see
the others downfall, that they envied at the breathing time, which both their
necessities made them glad to take. Yet (of the two) there appeared a greater
and more apparent defect in Fangomadan than the Prince. For the Giant with his
own unreasonable hugenes and intolerable weight of his armor was most
oppressed: and Rosic^eer by his agili^ie and nimblenes, had more than ordinary
advantage: nevertheless he entered not and retired so at his ease, but with his
armours burden, the Giants blows, and his exceeding travel, his flesh was
greatly bruised.

At this time, two things much auayled the prince: the one the excellent temper
of his armor, fashioned by the wise Artemidoro, the other his unmatchable
sword sent him from Queen Iulia: for no force had force to enter the armor,
nor no armor had strength to resist the sword, especially weelded by so strong
an arm.

Two weary hours were past, when as these worthy Warriers (impatient to see
their fortunes stand on such doubtful terms) with both hands met with their
swords aloft, in such furious manner, that the Beholders (though some of them
were undoubtedly very valiant) were so amazed, that their blood retired to
their affrighted hearts. The Pagan was quick in the execution of his blow,
which was the cause that it did little offend his Adversary, only it caused
his eyes to flash fire like lightening: but the prince settled his blow so
furiously upon the Giant, that if his steely helm had not been three fingers
thick, it had parted his head, yet it made him fall upon the neck of his
Elephant, and Trebatioes Son redoubling another upon him, Fangomadan had
fallen out of the saddle, if he had not prevented it by crossing his arms.

This worthy Prince (descended from Achilles) might then have concluded the
Battle, when as the Moore was in this perplexity, but he would not, because
it was against gentillitie and knighthood. Long it was not that he paused, for
Fangomadan coming to himself threw from him that which remained of his
shield, and with his sword in both hands went against his Contrary: who
committing himself unto God, ran in with a thrust at him, and saved his life,
for that the Giaunt could not fasten a full blow on his helm, but it glaunced
down on the Horse head, which being parted in two, beast and Lord fell to the
earth: which grieved Floralinda, who with her Hus^and from a high gallerie
beheld this mortal contention. Yet went he not without his payment, for there
was no ^nchantment could resist Rosicleers Sword, nor the Guider of that well
tempered weapon: but with unmatchable force it passed through his gorget to his
throat: which the Giant feeling, he gave back, otherwise he had presently
dyed.

Although the Son of Trebatio was a foot, yet did not his valiant heart fail
him, but with a gallant demeanor he abode the coming of his enemy: in such
sort that the Giant staid to behold him. The Prince seeing him stay, said:
What do thou mean thou devilish Fury: ^was becomes a Knight, for in
killing my Horse thou art by custom bound to give me another, or else to alyght
from thine.

No such courtesy (said the Giant) makes me pause: but I think one of the Gods
are descended in thy shape, but neither his nor any other force will deliver
thee from my deathfull resolution. And there with he would have ouerthrown him
with his Elephant: but the Prince stepped aside, and as the Giant passed by, he
stroke him such a blow, that the sword pared away the armor and part of his
arm: so that with great pain he was able to rule his sword. Yet this
treacherous Moore returned again to ouer-run him, and the Greek abode him with all the dexterie that might be: and at his second passing by, he assailed him
as a tiger does his pray, laying his strong hands on him with such force, that
he pulled his furious Adversary quite out of his saddle.

The Giant seeing he must fall, was subtle and cunning, and clasped in the
Prince, as the Yuie twisteth about the Dake, because that in their falling he
should not take any advantage of him, so that they came both to the ground:
whereas might have been seen the gallantest wrestling in the world. For
although the Giant were huge and deformed, our Knight was as well set and as
strong as any in the world, not being a Giant.

It gave great con^ent to the Beholders, to see what art and policy either of
them used to get advantage of his Contrary. The Pagan in this wrestling lost
very much blood, and wexed weak by reason of the wound in his throat: which
caused him to let loose the Prince, whose flesh and bones were very much
bruised. But seeing it was not then time to loose any opportunity, they
returned to their Battle again with so great fury and quicknes, as though it
had then but new begun, till such time as very wearines did inuit them to
leave of, even for a little breathing: which was not without need, for they
had sought four hours together, without taking any kind of rest.

Those that were present did very much extol the fortitude of the pagan, in
that he could so long endure against the Prince: for that they knew by
experience how far the strength of his arms extended. And the Prince unto
himself sought by what means he might overcome his Enemy without killing
him: for that he seemed to be one of the most valiantest that ever he proved:
and still he thought that he exceeded the dexterity of the mighty Gran
Campeon, that was slain in the Wars of Greece, by the hand of the said
Prince. Likewise he remembered the many and great affairs he had to do in
other Parts: but that which grieved him most, was that so long time he had not
heard of his beloved Oliuia. The which thought kindled in him such cholar, that
like unto lightening he went to the Pagan, first demanding whether he would
yield himself for overcome, and leave the Battle in the state it was?

But this blasphemous King with a voice that feared them all said? Uile
creature, is it possible that the Gods will consent being armed in the field,
so poor a Knight as thou for pure sorrow and grief should desire to leave off
the battle, and yet wish me to yield as overcome? I do now perceive that all
your deities are vile, and that your power is but small, that one alone Knight
dare attempt to do this. Come down you thieves from those celestial houses
that you have stolen and usurped, and I will give you to understand that I am
Fangomadan? And therewith raging like a Tiger, he assalted that warlike Prince,
and gave him such a violent blow upon his helm, that he made him stoop and
put his hands to the ground, and doubling the same he stroke him overthwart,
that it descended on his left shoulder, which the Prince felt very grievous,
and seeing himself so entreated, considering withal, that the force of his
adversary was increased, he began to hammer blows on him in such sort,
that he made him seem all bathed in blood, puffing and blowing like a bayted
bull.

The Pagan would have given him a down right blow purposing therewith to
conclude the battle: But the Prince being warned by that which before had
passed, made show as though he would abide it, yet when it did descend, with
all the lightness in the world he avoided and made him strike upon the stones
so furiously, that when the swoorde fell it broke off a great piece.

This lover of Oliuia was not iole on so good occasion, but stroke the Giant
such a blow and with such good order on his shoulder, that he did not only
disarme the place but also made therein a great wound, out of which began to
flow a great quantity of black blood. And this victorious Greek withdrew
himself when he saw the wound he had given him.

It cannot be imagined what great anger possessed the Giant, for like unto a
wounded Lion (although somewhat weary) he assalted Rosicleer: who had no care
to strike him, but to delay him with his lightness, for that he knew well it
would shortly tire him. And so using his wonted dexterity, he only avoided the
blows of his enemy.

Those that were beholders hereof did well perceive the intention of this
baptized knight: but yet he could not still so avoid it, but that the giant
seized on him such a blow, that he made him somewhat to loose his memory, and
to void blood out at his mouth, the which Rosicleer took to be perilous, and
let fly three or four blows on high to amaze his contrary, and therewith
thrust at him with his sword in such sort that he hit him on the thigh, and
the point passed to the bone.

The Moore did not think it to be great, till such time as assaying to follow
him, he fell-downe upon his hands, but he was not so soon down, as with the
quickness of his thought he was a foot again, flourishing with his
unmeasurable sword.

This valiant brother to the Knight of the sun could very well have overcome
him in thus detaining him, but he suddenly conceived it to be cowardice, and
therefore determined to put the state of the battle in one blow, and as the
giant was striking at him a mighty stroke, he entered within him, thinking to
overthrow him, but he found him like a rock: therefore being together he gave
place to the Moore to benefit himself of time and occasion.

But the giant leaving his great fauchion, seized on the Prince with his
heavy arms, and rescused him in such sort, that it seemed he would break all
his members, so that they must needs return again to a perilous wrestling, in
so much that with the heat of the battle and with weariness, they fell both
on the ground, and enforcing one to get the other under, they both lacked
breath and the giant blood, through which faintness they both sounded, the
unhappy giant never again reviving. And this is always to be looked for of
those, who lived as he did, making his own content a God, and worshipping his
only pleasure.

All that were above would have descended to them, but there was none that
could forsake the place where as they were.

For that incontinent the heaven was covered with a thick and black cloud,
with such thundrings and lightnings that it seemed that all the firmament would
fall to the earth, in the which was heard the bleating of beasts and other
heavy groans in the said court for the space of one hour, till such time as
the storm was past, and the heavens became clear as they were before.

Now looking for the warriors they only saw the Prince, as one amazed new
come to himself, and as though his adversary had been before him, he gave
assault till such time as he was wholly in his remembrance, and saw not the
giant.

But that which grieved him most was that he lacked his good sword, which he
won with so dear experience, as was said in the first book. And looking
about for the giant, he saw on the one side of the court, a sumptuous edifice
like to a sepulcher, which was sustained with four deformed Lions made of
alablaster, the Sepulcher it self was all of Crystal, so clear, that all
might be very well seen which was within, and marking it well, he knew that
it was the bodies of the giants and their mother who lay as though they had
been alive with their eyes open, and every one a very long scrole or writing
in their hands, which declared the cause of their deaths: but that which made
the invincible Prince Rosicleer most to marvel was to see his good sword sent
from Queen Iulia smitten quite through one of the four pillars that sustained
the covering of the sepulcher which pillar seemed to be of very fine Iaspar
stone.

And having desire with great joy to pull it out, he no sooner laid hand on
it, but there came forth so great a flame that it seemed to have burned him,
till such time as he let it go again, and then the grief went away, and he
saw hanging at it a parchment wherein was written letters of blood, which he
could not stand to read, for that they did all descend and received him, and
asked him how he did feel himself? But the excellent and fair Infant, with
a gallant and sovereign behavior said.

If you should have hoped worthy Prince for my help, as you in descending to
the battle told me, I fear me the Fight had been more dangerous: but thanks
be to the powers of heaven, it was concluded by your own excellent force. Nay
rather Madame (said Rosicleer) next to the heavens have your distress and
beauty praise for this unexpected Uictorie: for by them was powerful ability
added to my weak strength to defend the one, and relieve the other.

Let us leave this talk said Floralinda, and go we to see the sepulcher, for
I believe you have lost something therein, for that it seems the fire does
defend it.

Then said the Knight of Cupide, were the loss very much, I should think it
paid, having finished this adventure for the liberty of the Prince your
spouse, although it was not little grief that my sword should be taken away.
Such deeds have you done therewith said the Lady, that I marvel they did
not take away your life, although I believe to see you accompanied with so
many, they durst not.

They all laughed at that the Infant had said, yet they did grieve at heart for
the loss of the Princes Sword. And so they went with a great desire to see
where it was, and beheld a marvelous Adventure, for they saw in the Pillar
five pommells of swords, every one with his scroll hanging thereat, which
declared whose it was. The swords being one above the other, on the highest
part was that of the Prince Rosicleer, whose scrole was written in this manner.

This was the sword of the Prince of Constantinople, Rosicleer, the which he
lost at the defended Island, putting to death with it Fangomadan and his sons,
and shall here remain till such time as the brave Tiger with the untamed
Lyones does overcome the guarders and keepers of my Castle, getting without
arms or order of knighthoode the entry thereof, and for himself the two
swords nearest, swearing to revenge the death of the unhappy king.

They remained all amazed to see the boldness of the writing, and reading
down lower the second was thus.

None be so hardy or bold with order of knighthood, or being a man, to touch
the sword of the worthy Camilla, for that he shall remain in perpetual
prison, till such time as the rigorous Lyones does take him out, swearing in
the hands of the furious Tiger the reuengement.

They were much more amazed at the second writing, in seeing that alone a woman
and without arms was granted the sword. Whereon sudden passions came unto ^he
fair infant Floralinda for her lost infants, doubting whether they spoke of
them or not. But dissembling her grief, they read the third which said.

The sword of the famous Telarmonio shall be granted unto none, till such time
as the hid and unknown Basiliske does descend from my dwelling place, and get
the sword without arms, and swear the like.

It could not but grieve the Greek Prince in seeing that all those must be
accounted with the other enemies: but animating himself he said, few armours
they have left me, who against me has sought so many, but there shall not
lack other to supply that of the first. And for all that they did importune
him to take his ease, they could not persuade him, but to read on the other
scroles, which said.

When the swift leopard goes forth of my delightful dwelling, and wins
the key of my Castle, then shall be granted him the sword of Astrusia King of
the Medes, swearing in the claws of the Ownce, to procure my reuengement.

It seems unto me said the warlike Trojan, that according as the wise man
does show, there remains yet more wars for us to end then those that are
past, for that he puts five for one alone offender. It is not to be
marueiled at said Meridian, that when one alone is able to offend and defend
himself, the adversary seeks many to assault him, but there shall not lack
other two to shut up the number with us, and to count us so many as our
enemies. It seems that me alone he does threaten said Rosicleer, and therefore
I will see the fifth sword that shall smite me, and reading it said.

When that the sword of the famous and feared Milon, shall come into the hands
of the hid youth, who in my dwelling was nourished with the furious ownce, she
not knowing thereof, then shall rest the great wise man Gelasio Lord of the
covered Island, having for certain the reuengement of his beloved sister and
friends that suffered by the hands of the cruel greek. And thou worthy youth
do not forget to respect the covetous ownce, although it be to thy cost, for
it will be the more for thy glory.

They could not understand any more what the writings did signify. And so
with great grief unto ye Prince for his good sword they departed. Although he
was comforted to see that it should come to the hands of one that should pull
it out or else die in change thereof. All were joyful to see the adventure
ended and they set at liberty, yet ye wounds of the Prince was a grief unto
the fair Floralinda who cured them jointly with her spouse, with whom he
passed the time as you shall hear in the second Chapter.

The Prince Rosicleer was healed of his wounds, and gave liberty to
Brandafidell the son of Fangomadan. Floralinda declared to her spouse the
loss of her sons: they all returned toward Greece.

Chap. 2.
WIth zealous care the fair Princes of Macedonia did cure the wounded greek,
and comforted the weakness of her beloved spouse with her presence, and would
not absent her self til she saw him whole and sound. She greatly rejoiced to
see the knight of Cupide, unto whom that she might show her self thankful,
she cured him with her own hands, and never would consent that any other
should do it, for all his often modest desires to the contrary. Sometimes they
would al three descend and see that fair castle, and pass away the time in
the fresh gardens that were there, and often behold the superbious edifice and
curious sepulcher which the pagan had. It so fell out that one day he being
altogether recovered of strength, the prince Meridian calling unto him his
spouse and the Trojan Oristides, carried them to the chamber of the Prince, who
was then up and walked, although not out of his chamber, for that he was
somewhat lean. He seeing them coming, received them with that gallant grace
(with the which above all the rest he was indewed) and said unto the fair
Prince.

It well appears worthy Lady that you take liking not to come very often unto
my simple lodging, now those delicate hands has so soon put me in such
estate that I am not as I was wont to be visited. To whom she said* Sir Knight
if this way you will carry it, I well could long ^re this have given you entire
health, but I receiving content in your company have delaied the cure: at which
fault of mine, it seems you are malecontent, neither can I blame you* seeing
the gallant Oliuia is not here by whom you should receive all the contentment
that may be given.

You do well fair Princess said Rosicleer so to put it off, that I may more
and more protest the services I have sworn to the beauteous Floralinda, which
if weakness hinder not, I will on any occasion perform.

Cease now to talk of occasions said Floralinda, I know ye have been always
a professed servant to fair Ladies, and therefore worthily were you called the
Knight of Cupide, and in their defenses have you shown your self a second
Mars. But tell me certainly sweet Prince, now Mars is unarmed of his good
sword, were it not a fair sight to see Oliuia his Venus by his side?
Impossibilities said the Prince are not to be expected, Oliuia is too far
from hence distant to be here with wishing: but should the Knight of Cupide
wish for Venus, she were not far to seek, Floralinda of Macedon being so
nere. With your leave great Prince said Meridian, if this be Venus, and you
Mars, I dare engage my honor the old fable will prove false: for neither
will you forsake Oliuia for this face; nor my Venus make Meridian Vulcan for
your valor.

Let us leave these iestes said Floralinda, if we run into such co^parisons:
for if the Prince or I had that intention, yonder shines the same glorious Eye
of day that discovered to all the Gods the lustful Mars and his fair minion
in an iron net, and the same sun would surely show our sin to all the earth.
But the Grecian Prince will never prove ye Mars (said Rosicleer) nor Floralinda
so light a Venus. Enough, enough, said the Trojan Ori^tides, Meridian is
disposed to stand on nice terms, it was not long since he was otherwise
employed: but liberty now and the possession of his fair Love, makes him
secure. The Greek Prince has lost his Sword, and his Oliuia is far distant,
Meridian may therefore be much merrier than his famous Rescuer. Let us intend
our journey toward Greece: and therefore worthy Knight of Cupide, dispose we
pray thee of this Castle and the courteous Giant, as to thy bounty best seems.

I will give unto the Giant (said Rosicleer) that which his bounty and virtue
deserves, being there too urged by Meridian, Floralinda, and your self.
Therefore I pray you call him, that we may finish our affairs here.

The Nephew of the Troyan was not slothful to fetch the Giant: who till that
time would not speak with any, neither come forth of his chamber with the
grief he conceived for the loss of his Father and Brethren: and all that
while his Sister did cure him, and give him diet. He came in a gown of russet
velvet cut upon purple, and the Giant Lady with him: who although she was
great, yet was she well proportioned. At their coming, all the Princes arose
up, which argued in them great and high courtesy* and being all set again,
the Greek address^d his talk unto the Giant.

I do well understand (virtuous Brandafidell) that neither the death of your
Father and brethren, neither to see your self overcome and in prison, and your
Castle in the power of a strange owner, has bin occasion to alter your heart:
as one that knows unto what man is subject, living under the continual
chance and change of fortune. It shall not therefore be needful for your
comfort, to lay before you any example of him, that in one day was a King,
and in the same was thrown into a cage or prison. This I speak (worthy
Knight) for that you should accept this present fortune as a thing you looked
for: and so you shall see that the evil shall never grieve you, because it
comes as a thing expected before. The death of them all is a grief unto me,
and I should have been very joyful, if there had been any other mean to
have prevented it, but the imprisonment of these Princes being between,
deserved that a better esteemed life then mine should be adventured for their
liberties.

It is now done, and there could be no less don. Therefore confirm your self
unto that which fortune does offer which is the freendship of these Princes and
mine: and if there be any other thing requisite and necessary for the
satisfaction of the dead, you are at liberty and Lord of the Castle as
before, for that these worthy Princes do think it convenient, and seeing you
are a near neighbor unto the Princes Country, acknowledge him for your
friend, and he will favor you in all he may. And in satisfaction of the pain
and grief they suffered in the enchantment and the loss of my esteemed
sword, he shall at our entreaty tell us who is this great wise man, and
where he dwells, that in way of prophecy thus foretells wonders. And
therewith the Prince concluded his speech, giving contentment unto them all.

Then the stout Pagan aunsweared, with a kind of humility which proceeded
from his virtuous disposition, I will not ^^ower of Knighthood, for this
present nor for that which is past, newly bind my self to be more
affectioned, neither heerwith more extol the nobleness which you do use, in
doing that which is common to so sovereign a Prince. I lived in security and
you being the victor, I cannot say I am overcome. And being conquered by those
warlike hands, I do extend that nothing could to me be more glorious then
to have put my self in the field against him, that Mars himself dare not
contend with. The liberty which you and these Lords do give, I so esteem of
it as is good reason I should, but I would change it howsoever, to be always
in your company, and employ it (as experience should manifest) in your
service, while life lasted, ending therewith my sweet bondage, I acknowledge
all you my kind Lords and friends for that you demand touching the
inchauntment. Many days past, my mother did tell us that in the Grecian house
was borne my fathers death, and now it is well seen for that you have given it
him: and she said, that with very grief to see my father slain she should
dye, and that I should see in her revenge, running brooks of Grekish blood,
for that she had an Uncle, the wisest man that is to be found in all those
parts, who never would carry us to see his dwelling, which is called the
hidden Island, and they say that it was never seen of any since he dwelt in it:
And that for this reuengement, he will join together the greatest part of all
the Pagans, nourishing and maintaining five Knights which shall be those which
shall swear the reuengement, to whom he will give armor and horse, wherewith
they shall fight against the Grecian princes, and that the sword of one of
them should be that which most blood shall shed, and it seems unto me that
in part it is performed, and I do believe that he has with him those
youths. And at his departure he told me that I should be constrained by the
Greekish virtue to be on that part, against whom he will procure my
reuengement, which he calls present death: and that I should remain the
keeper of this Castle, for defense of all such as should procure the adventure
of the swords (for so the Castle is called) and likewise that there should
be hear in fast keeping, two Ladies the most principalest in all the world
till such time as a Maiden child in equal battle does overthrow me, and he
said that forthwith I should tell you who it was. This is princely Lords, all
that which I do know of this adventure, or my evil fortune, for that I find
my self friend to the Greeks, and must see their bloudes spilt for my cause,
but in shedding of mine own, and loosing my life in your defense, it seems
unto me that I do that which I am bound to do.

All the Princes remained content with the reasons of this most valiant and new
Greek (for so we will call him from this time forwards) for that Lyrgandeo
does make of him great mention, comparing him with Brufaldoro, and says that
he did exceed him in strength, yet the dexterity of the other, supplied his
want of strength.

You have well showed heroy^all Knight (said the Trojan) the noblenes of your
worthy heart, for that you bear it so well against the variable chances of
Fortune: and there is no doubt you know that unto whosoever she has showed her
self friendly, she has also made him know the mutabilitie of her wheel. And
yet for all this the Greeks will not let but to be as they were, and to have
courage to oppose themselves against any in the world that shall offend them.
For my part I account it glory for them who like you have obtained their
friendship. For who is more bound to be their Enemy than I, in calling to mind
that they raced my first City, and killed so many and worthy Knights my
predecessors as there perished: but now knowing their virtue, I see no reason
but to imploye my self in their friendship. And therefore from this time
forwards I do receive you into the number of the Grecian Band, and I give my
self to you for one of your most friends. Heerewith they embraced one another,
there remaining between them such love and f^^ndship that endured to the
death, as you shall understand hereafter: and for his excellent virtues, they
called the Giant, the Greek Knight.

That day they dined altogether, and the Giants Sister was very much
comforted. But all dinner time the Princess Flora^inda (remembering the loss
of her beloved Children) was so sad, that they which were at the Table did
perceive it, and with great instance requested her to tell them from whence
proceeded that new care and grief. Her Husband with the rest urging her, she
was forced to tell them. So beginning with a thousand sighs and christaline
tears which did solemnize her grief, she said*

It well appears loving Lord and husband to see you without danger, and at
liberty, that it is the greatest content that can come unto me, yet fortune
has been so contrary unto me, that me think I am not bound to give her any
great thanks, for you shall understand that the fruit of our loving marriage,
before I could embrace them* were taken from me, so that only I know I lack
a Son and a daughter.

The afflicted Lady could not speak any word more, neither had she any
space, for that they saw the walls of the chamber to open, and there entered
four deformed serpents, every one of them embrasing one of the Knights,
leaving the Princess all alone, whom a terrible and fearful Griffon took
up in his claws, in such sort that the cries unto her loving spouse for help
could not profit her, for that the knights were not able to move from the
place where the Serpents laid hold of them: which Serpents seeing the other
beast gone, let loose the Princes, with such grief that they were ready to
burst because they could not aid and help the Princess, neither saw they
any more of the Serpents, but they found a letter upon the board, the which the
Troyan took and read: the contents being as follows.

The Letter of the wise Gelasio.
TO the sovereign prince of the Scythians, and Rosicleer the Destroyer of my
blood, with the rest of the new Greeks, health or hate. If his desire who with
all his wisdom and art does strive to procure thy death, in satisfaction of
that which thy untamed arm has done, thou need not desire to have the
sight of thy sword, till such time as thou feel the loss of thy blood, so
that the having it at that time shall be cause that thou can did no more
outrage. And thou Prince Meridian, shall now pay my sorrow for my lost neuewes,
with like grief for want of thy beloved wife: until such time as the furious
Ownce does overcome in equal battle that new Knight thy now Friend, my
unworthy neuew: to whom I will add no more grief, but that he sh^l be
overcome in manner aforesaid. And thou Troyan sha^t loose thy liberty, putting
thy head in the power of thy most cruel enemy.

Gelasio.


WIth great paint this valiant Knight concluded the reading of the letter,
giving shows of the grief he felt at his heart. Then gentle Brandafidel did
comfort them, promising that he would serve the Princess, with all things
necessary, and very shortly disinchaunt her and bring her forthwith to
Greece.

This was a great comfort to the Princes, and forthwith they would not stay
any longer in the Castle, whereas so many disgraces came unto them, but being
provided of horse and armor they took the way to Greece, very much
recommending the Princess unto the Moore their friend, who promised unto
Rosicleer forthwith to become a Christian, and gave him a sword one of the
best in the world, which was that of King Portias, a great friend unto the
Greeks. And therewith they came to the Sea, taking their way toward Grecia,
whereas we will leave them, to entreat of the great wise man Gelasio.

Who Gelasio was, what adventure brought him to the hidden Island: and the
reason he had to rob and take away Infants.

Chap. 3.
YOu do remember in the first part of this mighty history, Rosicleer
(calling himself the Knight of Cupide) slew the furious Mandroco, nigh the
Grecian Empire. This as says the wise Lirgandeo (whom we do follow in this
history) had an Uncle, brother unto his Father called Gelasio, of high and
sharp understanding, as much given unto study as his brother was to arms. So
soon as the news came to Parato (for so was Mandrocos Fathers name) the
grief was such that he dyed presently, Gelasio not being there, for that he
was gone into Egypt to consult with a wise man, was notwithstanding forthwith
certified thereof by the wise Lupertio (for so was the Master of Gelasio
called) namely that all his brothers and friends were slain, saving one near
a Giantesse his sister of a goodly proportion, the which he brought with him
in company of Lupertio, and would not return unto the Island whereof they were
Lords: for that forthwith Trebatio did fortify the same, ^ut s^ayed them with
him, till he had commensed farther in his ^ote, and he was so diligent that he
came to be one of the most famous in Egypt.

Then forthwith making signs and coniurations to know in what place he might
inhabit best for to make reuengement and follow his (...)* he learned that it
should be in the defended Island, whereof was (...) a young Giant called
Fangomadan, one of the most strongest amongst all the Giants.

He forthwith concluded with him friendship, helping him with his learning,
till such time as he had brought himself thither and the Giantesse. And
finding the country so fit for his purpose, he wrought so much that this
fierce Giaunt fell in love with his Sister, till they were married together: of
whom he begat the Giants which were slain by the Greek prince and Meridian:
who until that time did always live by robbing of the country, till such
time as he apprehended those princes, and put them in that inchauntment. And
straightwaies he departed from his brother in law, for that he understood the
destruction of his Castle would come, and ordained his habitation more inwards
upon the highest parts of the rocks in the most delightful and freshest air
that was in the whole world: and he knew that he who should race out his
generation, should be the same Knight that slew the most valiant Mandroco.
Whereat he felt so great grief that he w^nt about to prevent the reuengment,
before the death of his Kindred. At last by art he came to knowledge, that of
the first and fairest Lady that he apprehended, should be borne a Son and a
Daughter under such a Sign and planet, that they should prove the most
valiantest princes in the world: and how that in the parts of famous Assyria
should be borne another prince that in force should be equal with the Greek
princes: and at the same time in Phoenicia another, and a fifth begotten by the
mighty Sophy: all of such excellent valor, force and strength, that they
should be the parties able to promise him reuengement.

When he had certain knowledge of these things, and was assured that
Floralinda was Fangomadans prisoner, he tarried the time of her delivery*
which chanced unto her with great pains and throws* but all turned to her
content, when she saw the fairnes of the Children: although this joy endured
so small a time, that the remembrance thereof passed away, for having them in
her arms, there entered in two furious Lions with terrible roaring, and took
them from her, leaving the feeble Lady with great grief as you may imagine, to
be in prison without her children of whom the wise man had as great care, as
though they had been his neuewes. Yet to make them to be the more fierce and
furious, they were nourished in hardness, and given them mingled with their
nurses milk, the milk of Lions and furious beasts: and they were nourished
in such sort, that the wise and learned man did recover a great part of his
lost comfort.

He gave them names convenient to the content of their parents, for the Prince
they named the hidden Celnido, and his sister, Floralisa, whom others did call,
the rigorous. For that til such time as she was wounded with amorous passions,
she was very cruel, as you shall hear.

At the same instant in the figure of diverse beasts he brought the other
infants. The Assirian he called Don Clarisell of Assiria, who died for the love
of Floralisa, as you shall hear.

The Phoenician he named Don Argente of Phoenicia, and that of the Sophy, for
that he was the goodliest in ye world, he named him the gentle Torisiano. He
nourished and brought them up with so great care, that there was nothing too
dear for their comfort.

The three infants were together, in places different from the brother and
sister, who increased in fairness and wit, in such sort that the wise man
lived the meriest man in all the world.

When they came unto six years of age, it was a heavenly thing to see them by
reason of their beauty, and either of them seemed to be of more years. They did
never see the one the other, till they won the swords as shall be told you. He
exercised them in learning, and all languages of the world, and the worthy
Floralisa learned in such sort, that she grew equal with her brother. When
they entered more in years he gave them bows to shoot with, and some days
carried them to the mountains, and had a great delight to see with what bravery
they would attempt to hunt with their mountain knives, in this sort they
passed their life in great delights. The brother and sister would never depart
the one from the other their love was such* neither could the one live without
the other.

They called the wise man father, and so did the other Princes, who increased
in like manner in all knowledge: and were brought up in the exercise of hunting,
always respecting them, as to such Princes it was convenient. Above the two he
did prefer the Assirian youth, who seemed to be no other but an angel in his
beauty and sovereign disposition. Unto them all the wise man gave hunting
apparel, whereof they were very glad, for that they much reioysed in that
life, and when they did kill any wild beast, they brought it home with great
joy and content.

One day he would show them the strange things of his house, and the chambers
of the fair brother and sister? and for the same, the day before he invited
the two Scithians to the hunt, telling them, that he would send them to other
new places whereas was great store of venison.

So the next day, the amorous Delphian pastor showing his face, the two well
agreeing youths came forth with two pages which were nourished with them, of
the most principal of the Scithians, the page of the Prince was called
Atlante, and that of his sister was called, Severo, who carried with them
somewhat for their sustentation for that day, for that they would not return
till the evening. Their iackets were of green cloth of gold, cut upon white
tinsell, and wrought with curious works, but the Lady by reason of her hair
wore a garland with an infinite number of pearls set with diverse colors, and a
gallant quiver at her back and crimson buskins after the manner of the Spartans.

The wise man seeing them in this order so gallantly suited could not choose but
say. Oh Jupiter, I give thee thanks, for that thou have suff^red me not only
to see, but to entertain as my children, such divine youths. And he went to
the Lady and said. Oh flower of all the Pagans, wherewith can I pay the Gods
this courtesy for to have in my arms the ^amer of the most brauest Lions.
Happy Gelasio that has such a one, and happy age wherein lives such a
Princess? Courage my loving children, for this is that which is needful for
your shamed Father.

Well-beloved Father the Lady answered, we cannot choose but esteem very much of
that which you have done in our nourishing and bringing up, neither will my
brother nor I employ our lives but in your service, and end them in putting
our selves in whatsoever danger for your good. And if our age be sufficient to
put it in practice, there rests no more but to declare how we may revenge
your grief, seeing it is all that remains, and what we cannot perform it
shall not be for lack of willingness.

I do clearly understand and know (answered the old man) that from such a
heart as yours can proceed no other intents.

And my services shall not be so small, but I will one day deliver you from
death, which is but my duty, in reward of many things that you must do for
me, and now it is time for you to know somewhat of the world. And first of that
which is bred in this hidden Island. So bringing them forth at the accustomed
door, which opened toward the sea, he left the^ to follow their game: the
wise man returning to that which he had before determined.

So they went forth leading in a lease two most fair Irish Gray-houndes more
whiter then the pure Snow whereas we will leave speaking of them, who
quickened their wonted pace, because that they heard the roarings of wild
beasts, and taking that way from whence the noise was heard. And now we will
declare what happened with the other three Princes, whom the wise man called and
said.

Loving sons, seeing you be now of good discretion, I must show you the
secrets of my dwelling, for the many things that you must do for me. So taking
the Assirian by the hand, to whom for his gallantnes he was most inclined, he
brought them into the great court of the house, which was four square, and
compassed about with fair galleries* wrought with diversities of works. In
the midst of the court there was a christaline fountain with twelve great
spoutes of water, which running out orderly made a gallant consorted harmony.

The Princes did behold the strange work of the fountain recreating their
sights thereon, but more admired when at the farther end they saw a Nymph,
that on her breast did show five pearcing wounds, so cruel, that the entrance
of the weapons were not closed, having in her hand a writing to this effect.

None howsoever valiant, hardy, bold,
Shall dare to taste the water of my fount:
Until the closed Scythian womb unfold,
A light that shall Apolloes light surmount.
Valor and beauty shall ^his work begin,
And all else fail that it attempt to win.
The Princes did not understand the obscure writing. Then the gentle Torisiano
said: of truth loving father we should receive content if you would declare
unto us the meaning of this scrole, or else tell us how we may ease the grief
of this wounded Nymph.

Well beloved sons said the wise man, the desire of things honorable, I do
very well believe is in your worthy breasts: but the time and your tender age
does not consent that you should now prove any adventure, till such time as
the fair Lioness, being chafed with amorous heat do come to drink of this
fountain with the cost of her blood.

And so because they should not stay herein, he passed with them forwards, and
brought them into a fair quadrangle, so richly covered with gold, as heart
could possibly imagine, having four grates, which opened to a delightful
garden, replenished with so great variety of fruits that it caused great
admiration: but much more woondrous was the intricate knots, which were so
curious that they ravished the sight of the beholders. All the quadrangle was
full of figures, with Emblemes that declared who they were: all of them were
the most famous Captains and Emperors of the world.

There was seen the desired face of Constantine the great, and that of happy
Alexander, the famous African with all his armor bloody, yet gallantly
inam^led: and in his ^ou^tenance a certain show of his brave courage.

Ther^ was ^he h^rdy (...) joyful of his pray, which was so dear to Troy.
There the loved Aeneas with his swor^ in his hand over the rash and vnadu^sed
^urnus: nigh unto him the am^rous He^cules, in woman's habit d^^ing on Iole.

There was the mighty Theseus and in his hand the Cretane A^iadne: there the
rough and strong hus^and in flames of fire, exclaiming on the shirt sent him by
his C^ntaure-deceiued wife. And nigh unto him was seen all the Grecian
Princes, and the mighty Alicandro. The figure of the renowned Trebasto was in
red armor, in such sort as he went out of Tynacria the great, whose aspect,
was so maiestical, that these gallant and young youths staid there to read his
Posie, which was.

Trebatio would not leave this coast for shame,
Were not his lingering here his honors blame.
There was next unto him a sorrowful Lady, her Motto could not give them to
understand what it did signify, but it was straight told them, not without
great compassion of the Princes, promising her aid to her amorous anger. Nigh
unto that was the three Lights of knighthood, the great Alphebo, Rosicleer and
Claridiano, they were all touching one target which had this saying*

Three worlds for these three,
Scarce sufficient be.
They seemed so goodly of disposition, that they gave high content unto the
Princes, and they were a great while beholding their ^^llant and gentle
countenances. Not far from this was the furious Tinacrian, in the beginning
of his knighthoode, with an ore bank in his hands, and a precious sword at
his side, against a strong Knight, with this device.

Nor earth nor sea my fury can assuage.
Against each Element contends my rage.
This strange saying made them more wonder then all the rest, and asking who he
was, the wise man told them al his birth? and concluding with a sigh he said:
Were it not for him my reue^gement were certain, but this knight without blow
of spear or sword shall overcome him who has all my hope and by whom I
doubted not to have remedy.

From that they saw many knights, and because they were known, and to avoid
tediousness I leave to name them. At the farthest part of all the quadrant in
a thick and delightful grove, appeared two fair and gallant youths
apparelled in green* each of them with a knife in their hands, stained with
fresh blood, and each of them a scrole showing their names.

On the first was writ Don Celthdo the hidden. And the figure of the fair
Floralisa seemed the most excellent in the world, and by the gallant hair
which was more yellow then that of Apollo, they perceived and knew her to be a
woman, and for her name she had only these letters, F. and L. But between
them both, there was a scutchen, whereon was this written.

To change the sea is not sufficient,
But the green earth shall stream with purple gore:
When the three brethren fierce and violent,
Intend their slaughters on the sea and shore.
As this gallant and gentle Assirian was beholding this warlike Princess,
there increased within him, a thousand thoughts, and that alone sight caused
that to succeed which seemed impossible, I mean the subjection of a heart more
free then ever yet was known in the Assirian nation. And with great affection
he asked of the wise man, who that divine Lady should be? To whom Gelasio
answered laughing. Loved son it is not convenient to know who she is at this
present, to avoid the knowledge of death, before you see the cause thereof.
But the time will come, that you shall swear in her hands my reuengement, and
vow to be hers, although first it will cost you full dear.

A little more forwards from those gallant youths they saw painted upon a
sea stained with blood this writing which the Phoenecian Prince read.

Mars ore the new world gives me victory,
And swears no strength shall pass my chiualry.
With a gallant demeanor said the Phoenecian Prince, of truth discreet father,
there must be more experience of our persons ere we be exercised in the sight
of such rigorous figures as these be? Let not this grieve you answered Gelasio,
for he that did paint it, did not ground his painting upon the work, but upon
the deeds which unto these three as a favor from heaven granted them, shall be
attributed, being so many that the seas vast spaciousnes shall be filled with
wonder, yet every one for his part must enamell it with some of his own blood?
And when this shall happen, the brave Torisiano shall loose his liberty.

At the end of all, he showed a rough youth, one of the b^^t proportioned in
all that quadrant, although the last, with this device: his feet, were settled
upon a world like unto a gloa^e, all embrued in blood, as a victor thereof,
and in his left hand a banner where in was this written.

Mars ore the new world give me victory,
And swears no strength shall pass my chiualry.
In his right hand he had a sharp dagger, turned with the point against his
own heart, with this writing.

What does avail my pur^hast sovereignty?
When of my self my self shall butcher be.
With a hearty sigh did the wise man solemnize the leaving of these Emblemes
saying Loving sons, this is he of whom I tremble in my hidden dwelling? This
is he that together with his brethren, shall not care to give battle to all
the Pagan country? this is he whom I fear, to whom destiny at his birth did
promise triumph and victory of the universal world? This is he whom the world
shall fear, till such time as the little tame lamb shut up in the incha^ted
tower (for that she had him in his arms being a child) he do acknowledge her
for his owner, swearing at her first sight, that he is the same that so long
time past was promised unto her. So of this furious youth I can say no more.

All the Princes exceedingly rejoiced to behold so fair figures, and thought
the time long to see themselves armed Knights to go forth into the world to
seek out such valiant Youths, as were there shown, to prove themselves with
them. And so being dinner time, they went into an Arbor, and Gelasio commanded
their meat to be brought thither in such princely manner, as though they had
been in their Fathers Palaces. Dinner being done, they there passed away the
day, till their wonted time of walking: Gelasio not suffering them to see the
palace, where as the Brother and Sister were: for that the two Princes
Torisiano and Don Argente of Phoenicia should undertake shortly a great
Adventure.

NOw am I carried with a swift course to the two gallant Youths, the Brother
and the Sister: who after the great roaring they heard, let slip their
greyhounds, and with their blades in their hands, they pass^d thorough a great
thicket, and came into a Plain nigh the sea side: whereas they saw two
deformed Satyrs, who had slain a Knight that came thither in a a Bark, at
which deed the monsters (taking great content) made those horrible outcries,
and detested roarings.

These two Princes very much mused to see people of that shape, for that they
had never beheld other, but the Wiseman and their Pages: yet not forgetting
the generositie of their courageous hearts, with their swords in their hands,
they went against those devilish monsters, as though they had been very well
armed, and long exercised to their weapons.

Now want I excellence of Art to describe the heroike resolution of this young
Princess. O happy Satyr, that deserves to receive blows of so glorious a
Damsel. The swift Chariot Driuer of the Sun (sometimes the Shep^ard of
Admetus, in his course, the better to behold this battle. The deformed beast
would have caught her in his arms. But this Scithian Lady would not give him
that favor, which Jupiter himself hardly deserved, but put her sword
between them, and hit him in the breast such a furious blow, that there issued
great abundance and flakes of blood. It seemed not strange unto the Amazonian
warrier (equalling in strength the ancient Bellona) to see that great wound,
which would have caused a thousand fair Ladies to have sowned: But she who
was borne to give it, did second another with such swiftnes, that the Satyr
was not able to defend it, but she have him ^ wonderful wound upon the thigh,
which done she retired with the swifnes of an Eagle, leaving her enemy very
sore hurt.

So ravished am I with declaring the deeds of this excellent Floralisa, that I
remembered not the new and fearce Mars her brother Don Celindo, whose battle
was worthy to be recorded by the divine Pierides, or by some (if any such could
be) more excellent Poet that sense rauishing Homer.

With an admirable swiftnes did he encounter the other mighty Satyr, who
with a knotty oak, stroke at him a wonderful blow: and this hardy youth
without experience abode the same with such gallant semblance that Mars in his
glorious Orb had envy at it, and at the fall of that mighty clubbe, with a
light leap on the one side, closing with him, he stroke him with his short
sword on his right wriste, that he cut it clean a sunder, and the mizerable
Satyrs deformed right hand and his great and mighty Clubbe fell both to the
ground together.

The worthy Gentleman seeing the good success he had against the monster,
seconded his first blow courageously, and pared away a piece of the Satyrs
leg: the devilish fury finding himself so wounded, would gladlye have fled
from the valiant Celindo, but his wounds weakened his pace, and the swift Youth
fastened on him such and so many violent blows, that the hideous monster fell
groueling to the ground, with a most horrible and fearful cry.

At the same instant, the gallant and heroicke Princess his sister, had
brought her adversary into like extremity: for returning upon him with an
invincible courage she wounded him so sore in his legs and thighs, that she
had easy means by his fainting to cast a deadly thrust at him, which entering
the bot^ome of his detested and hideous womb, he staggered awhile, and fell to
the earth with a more exceeding clamor, than his horrible and hateful
companion.

At the fall and cry of the first Satyr, their two Pages came unto them, and
seeing the Princes against such dreadful adversaries, they fearfully
exclaymed, making the most grievous moan that might be, for fear of the
danger that might ensue to their most beloved Lord and Lady.

No sooner did the last Satyr fall, which the admyred Floralisa overthrew, but
with angry countenance she returned to the heartlesse Pages, and thus
reprehended their cowardice.

What mean ye, you soft hearted and timorous wretches to use these
exclamations? what danger do you see us in, that you thus cry out? turn, and
behold our faint overthrown adversaries: where with turning about, the bodies
of the Satyrs were vanished, and an enchanted Castle erected in the place,
with a pillar before the gate having this inscription.

The Grove of Meruailes discoouered by the most excellent Brother and Sister,
shall be here til^ the Ownce which was at the Discovery, does return and make
entry in company with the furious Lioness, and being plagued with mad
ielouzie, does seek her remedy, making free the en^rie to all with the rigor
of her arm, and then shall every ^ne know here, in what degree they are
beloved: for so will ^he ancient Medea that it should be.

And more lower was this inscription written.

From this time forwards may those that be overcome with love, prove the
Adventure of the enamoured, which was discovered by the hidden Prince in his
infancy and prime of arms, being the first blood that ever he shed, even the
blood of my Sagittaries: who shall nevertheless be the guarders of my dwelling
house, till such time as returning to enter they win the arms of the careless
and loved Jason, whe^ewith he won the Golden Fleece from the I Will of Colchos.

The Princes remained amazed to see the things that there happened unto them,
and determining to return for that is was late, they saw coming toward the^
in great have the reverend wise man: who they went to meet, and he embrasing
them said* O* felicity of this present age, with what praise shall I exalt the
beginning of your most highest deeds, that ever were done by Knights: in truth
I know not how to perform it with this my rude tung. But here will remain a
memory so long as the World shall endure: and there shall not lack Adventures
for any Knight wherein to employ himself, whosoever comes this way.

So taking them by the hands they returned: and he told them that there was an
Enchantment, but he knew not that they should discover it, neither that it was
in that place, for that it was of more antiquity than his. Yet for all this,
you shall not go from hence (my loving children, said the wise man) if all
things happen not as you desire: for unto this and more am I bound: and so he
carried them home, leaving first (by his art) on the pillar, these verses
ingraued.

Lovers that long to know with what regard
Their dear loved Ladies them do estimate,
Shall here perceive their scorn or their reward,
To ease or end their sorrows passionate.
This (as a glass) to every Lovers eye
Shall show his Ladies love, or iealozie.
Th'vntamed Hidden with the tender Lamb
First found this wonder and adventure rare:
Lovers may bless the time they hither came,
For in this place* Loves chiefest secrets are.
Here shall they learn to fly and to pursue,
To crave and give, to yield and to subdue.
This writing (said Gelasio) for a token of the high and worthy beginning, in
which you have made experience of your valors. And I do not doubt, but they
which have gotten such an Adventure as this is, shall have all other affairs
for their contents, although not to mine: but it is so ordained by my destenies.

Discreet Father (said Celindo) the Gods will not that we should atchiue any
thing wherein we should receive content, and the same redownd to your
coffeehouse, to whom we are so much indebted.

If it were in your hands (answered the wise man) in good security might
Gelasio live to see his reuengement. But shortly Celindo shall you see that
which has caused my pain, and parents death: and so shall you excellent
Lady, but your affections shall be wounded, you shall often wish death which
will avoid you, and fly good fortune that shall follow you, yet your heroicke
deeds shall win you immortality, therefore let not your hearts fail you.

And in telling them this, he brought them unto their chamber, which was of
diverse colors: and in the walls innumerable precious stones so placed, that
they gave light to all the chamber. Round about it were diverse figures of
Ladies, who in times past and at that time also flourished and were most
famous. There was the fair ^u^^a, and the constant Penelope with her amorous
web: there was the affectionate Porcia, with so many shows of beauty, that
it caused in the princes great admiration. Nigh unto her they saw the negligent
Egyptian Cleopatra, at whose feet were three Imperial Crowns, with this
saying.

Crown, Rule, Fame, Love, and glorious Emperie,
I sought, scornd, won, and lost ingloriously.
The next unto her was fair Campaspe, with whom Great Alexander fell in love:
and she was hand in hand with beauteous Helena, who seemed to speak unto
Campaspe in this sort, Once did my face consume Dardania,
When I was rapt by wanton Alexander:
But thine burns him that burned Persia,
And of the utmost Inde was Conqueror.
My Alexander was his Countries Firebrand:
Thine burned others, but preserved his Land.


On the second side was the mighty Empress of Constantinople, Briana: and
nigh her the fair Lindaraza. The Empress was compassed about with russet
Crowns, betokening her troubles for Trebatioes absence: with this Motto.

Crossed Love embracing gentle Patience,
(Though long) at last receives Loves recompense.
This is she loving Children (said the wise man) that brought forth the death
of my royal blood: of her were borne those untamed Lions, that have raced out
my Lynage.

More lower on the third side of that chamber was the ^aire Claridiana and the
princess Oliuia, with joyous countenances in that they inioyed their desired
Loves: and Oliuia seemed thus to say.

Thine is Alphebo, mine is Rosicleer:
Thine match to mine, mine thy Alpheboes peer.
They received great content to see these two Ladies, especially when they knew
who they were, and what stout Husbands they had.

In the same quadrant was the worthy Arguisilora armed against the brauest
Knight in the World, with her beauer up, the knight seeming to speak thus.

Beauty once Conqu'ror,
In vain is Valor.
The knight seemed so beauteous, that the Princess by his Figures sight
entertained amorous affections, and asked of the wise man who they were? He
answered, I am unwilling (fair Daughter) to tell ye, yet I will satisfy your
request. This Lady is the worthy Queen of Lydia, being in the Field, she
will combat with Mars himself: and you shall have no better experience of her
valor* than to see her in Fight with this Knight of Tinacria, whom I most
fear. It was oil to the valiant Ladies fire, to hear the Lydian Queen so
much praised.

Then began to work in her thought a thousand amorous conceits, proceeding
from that sight: and she proved the most perfect Lover in the world, as shall
be hereafter declared.

I am grieved (said the wise man) for you Floralisa, to see how you are entered
into Loves sea, where fair weather is painful, the tempest perpetual,
calmnes continuing with a thousand doubtful hopes: and yet for all this thou
need not fear drowning, though the Navigations prove more violent than
death. Oh poor Lady, yt neither thy own beauty, tender age, nor strong
heart can win thee to leave love, but carelessly thou admittest entrance to
thy own care. Thou have desire to love, and wilt grieve that the reward will
not be correspondent to thy entire affections: but be contented, such are the
variable effects of furious Love. Oh that I could favor and help thee in thy
ensuing pain and grief. I do foresee it so much and sorrow does so increase
in me to utter it, that I must of necessity pass from this place to the next
room: where I will show you another excellent figure of a fair Shepherdess.
This the wise man did not for that the Lady should loose her new thought, but
that her Brother should bear her company. So passing to the last wall, they
did see so beautiful a Figure of the fair Rosaluria, in the habit of a
Shepherdess, that the tender young Prince Celindo at that sight made her owner
of his heart, in such sort as death alone was able to take away the thought
there^f. At her feet was this saying.

Lowly habit hides not beauty,
Love in Kings and Clownes does reign:
To win love, and show his duty,
Phoebus was a Shepherds Swaiue.
You may well believe that this new lover did read it with a thousand colors
changing in his tender face, at first rather desirous to be jealous, then
fearful, if he attained sight of his well-beloved: but before he can live with
his joy, with fear to loose her he shall see much of his blood spilt, and make
his eyes clear fountains, hoping for a remedy at her hands that never
accustomed to regard complaints. With this new imagination, they came unto the
last Lady, which was called Lindabthdes, who was figured within the enchanted
tower, and at the gate a stout and strong knight assaying to open it: on which
gate was this inscription.

Love that lives here obscured,
To these pains has me inured.
The wise man did declare unto them all the enchantment and that the knight was
Alphebo, whereat they received new passion and grief, but not in such sort that
it did take away that which they had before conceived.

So they went out of that palace with less liberty then when they entered. Now
they received content to be alone, that before thought it death to be
separated. They love solitariness wherein they find ease to meditate of
absent beauty, which but by figure they never saw: where we will leave them
till their fit time, for that we have a large course to run.

What happened to the Dacian Prince, Don Heleno, in France.

Cap. 4.
WE left the Dacian Prince in the forest of Ardenia nigh the fountain called
the Disamorous; because it changes lovers thoughts. He sat upon the stock
of a wind broken tree, tossing a thousand imaginations in his mind: For his
Florisdama, he now lamented not, neither did Lydias beauty any whit disturb
his thoughts: but a fiery and high kindled resolution lifted up the noble heart
of this long distressed Dacian; and of his solitary life, he was exceedingly
ashamed. Now he determines to visit the courts of Princes that before
frequented forsaken caves: he purposes now to continue in peopled Cities, that
not long since loved the inhabitable deserts. Hereto he was encouraged by
infinite weighty and necessary considerations: first the long absence from his
country, the disgrace he lived in with his friends, his rash and unadvised
abuse of the invincible Emperor his Uncle Trebatio, which most of all he
seemed to lament. Breefely our Dacian was unlike the old Eleno, that made
trees, brooks, beasts, fowls, fountains, secretaries of his unseen
griefs, but as one that had long bin captive having broken his bonds and
conquered his cruel master, makes his voice the mirthfull expressor of his
hearts joy, that in his bondage had often manifested the moanings of his soul:
so this Dacian that had long been Loves prisoner, having now got freedom;
took his Lute, his Lute that many times had yielded sad sounds to the woeful
accents of his voice: and finding his music in another key, he carroled out
this ditty in Loves disgrace.

Let him that longs to know where love does dwell,
What God he is, what Lordly sovereign,
Attend to me: who having learnt can tell,
His slightes, his shifts, his smiles, and his disdain.
His habitation is the fondlings thought,
His godhead forged, and his power weak:
Fled he will follow, fly when he is sought,
His praise alone do fools and madmen speak.
They that adore him most, yet term him boy:
But I conclude Love is an idle toy.
As he was laying down his Lute, he saw a Damsel making great complaint, who
hasted as fast as her palphrey could run. The Prince purposed to stay her,
being desirous to know her grief, promising to help her in all that was
needful. So he went to meet her on his enchanted horse, and when she came
nigh him he sa^de, Damsel, as you would that fortune should favor you, tell
me part of your evil, for I promise you, I will put my life in hazard to do
you any pleasure you shall lawfully desire.

Sir Knight I give you great thanks (said the woeful Damsel) for your gentle
offer, for any of l^sse courage then so noble a person as you seem to be
cannot help me: my grief is so great, that whatsoever narration must be made
in seeking remedy, it more and more aggrauateth it, for that my heavy lot has
determined the time so short, that within these four days of force I must
meet with one in whom I may with security put all my hope: and I fear none
can help me, but the Prince Clauerindo our Kings son, or the sovereign
Emperor Alphebo, his great friend.

And it has been told me, that he was seen and one of his mighty brethren
here at the skirt of this mountain: so I go with all the speed possible, to
see if I can meet with any of them.

Fair Damsel (answered the Dacian) I would gladly that you might meet with
one of those famous Princes, but this is of certainty that where as I left
them, you cannot come thither in one month, though you make never so much have
were ye better horst: but for the duty I owe unto those knights, although in me
there is not that force and strength that is in them, yet I will offer that
little which I have with so good will, as would your beloved Prince if he
himself were here. Sir Knight good fortune reward you for that which you have
said, and understand yt it is so heavy a business that if it proceed forwards,
our Prince and his friends shall receive great grief thereby: and seeing they
are not here, whom I seek, I will put into your hands the most lamentable
adventure in all France: but the Justice which you shall have on your part,
will give you strength needful, yea although the mighty Alphebo or Rosicleer
should enter into battle against you, they were not able to approve the
accusation laid against the most virtuous and the unhappy sister of
Clauerindo, Princes of France.

The circumstance I will declare unto you, for in two days we may return into
Paris.

The Prince received great contentment at the words of the Damsel, and to
hear her grief with every circumstance he returned with her to the pleasant
fountain, wherein his judgment (and in that he erred not) he received new
life. And alighting there they left his horse and her palphrey to graze and
feed. And they sat themselves down upon the fresh and green grass very
nigh unto the Christaline water of the fountain of forgetfulness.

There the Prince, took off his helm by reason of the great heat,
discovering his beauteous face, much bettered by his new thoughts, which gave
great content unto the Damsel (who was of her self gracious) to see him so
fair and young, wherewith she said, by God S. knight with a better good will I
commit unto you my whole power for the battle, for that I likewise am she
that must loose if any do thereby, for I am assured that in him whom the
heavens has indewed with so great beauty, cannot choose but be equal force and
strength.

At other times those commendations of his beauty were pleasant to him, when
he felt the wrongs of love: but now he only procured to favor and help those
that were in necessity of his strength, and regarded neither his own face nor
the bravery of Ladies.

Wherefore he said, Yo^ have good security fair Damsel in the confidence of
your justice: and my desire to help your right is no less then that, which
should be don by those Princes that you so much enquired after: therefore
without circumstance, go to the matter.

The Damsel answered? I do believe fair knight, that nothing can proceed
from those hands that will not bring content unto them for whom they shall
undertake combat: and I know your pains shall not be vngratefied, although
those which are like unto you do expect no reward, but of their own bounty,
are Champions for the distressed.

Therefore gentle knight you shall understand that at such time as our Prince
was brought up with the unknown Emperor the mighty Alphebo of Trabysond in
the ancient and well fortified City of Babylon, in company with that stout
Brandizell Prince of Persia. The king our sovereign lived in the greatest
grief yt might be imagined, for that he could not know nor understand where
his child Clauerindo was.

For the Queen his mother in that she had no other, and he also her first
borne it is not to be doubted but that she loved him as her self, and that his
absence did grieve her very soul.

They passed with this grief till such time as the high giver of comfort, did
bestow on them a daughter so abounding in fairenes and beauty, that she was
holden for more then humane.

This was an occasion to lighten their age, and to ease their grief whereby
they might the better suffer the absence of the Prince her brother. They made
great reioicings at her birth, and there came thither (as was reason) all the
friends and vassals of Oristeo the King of France, (for so he was called) to
celebrate that happy day, and give great honor to the Queen Olinda.

The Parents received as I say some comfort in possessing such a daughter, for
the loss of the Prince.

And fair Grisalinda (for so is she named) as she increased in years, she grew
so excellent in beauty, that she is ^steemed for one of the fairest that
lives within the universal world.

Now Fortune (to show all her bounties at once) brought the Prince accompanied
with the Persian into France, unknown, and they were called the Knights of the
Flower de Luces: and they did such worthy deeds in the Country, that it
seemed impossible they should by humane persons be performed. Within a while
they entered into Paris, whereas they sustained a long and dangerous Iustes: in
the which our Prince slew a strong and mighty giant, which done, they made
themselves known. At whose discovery (fair knight) I leave it to your
discreet consideration, if the Prince were received with joy or no, for whose
absence there was such coffeehouse. Forthwith they went to see their friend
of Grecia, whereas Clauerindo was married with the sister of ye said knight, who
was called the fair Lindaraza, and she was delivered of two sons at one
birth of so excellent beauty being children, as was the Prince their father.
Who to give contentment unto his ancient parents, sent to our king one of the
children, with whose presence, the grandfather and grandmother were almost
ouerioyed, and rested not in giving thanks unto God, by whose means there
came unto them that great benefitte: he was nourished and brought up in the
court as the son of so worthy a father, and was most courteously used of this
fair and unfortunate Aunt.

Now at this time fortune waxing weary of so long enduring joy, began to
return to her accustomable change, and would now in the end of our Kings
days, determined to vex him with the greatest disgrace in all the world. And
thus it grew.

By reason of the coming of the Kings young neuew, there assembled together
much people, amongst whom were certain of Alexandria; who with more than
ordinary eyes did behold the beauty of Grisalnida our Princess, and did
publish the same unto their Prince: who being a young man, and one that knew
what belongdd to fair Ladies, demanded of them in more particular, and their
description was such a bait, that it wholly concluded to subject this
passionated young Prince, who only by hearing did aff^ct her in such sort, that
he did neither sleep nor eat without imagination of his Lady. Till such time
as his passion increasing and his senses failing, he was brought very low,
insomuch that for his comfort they caused a painter (an excellent workman) to
offer himself that he would draw her counterfeit, who gave him great thanks,
and esteemed it as was reason.

Into France came the judicial workman, no whit inferior to Apelles, and
took the counterfeit of the Lady, with such art and curiosity, as it seemed
the heavens had communicated their life giving power unto his working hand. And
forthwith he returned unto his Lord, who judged the small moment of his tarying
to be many years, till such time as he did see the fair face of the Princess,
which was a new inticement to his prepared heart: in such sort, that what he
thought would be a lightning or ease unto him, fell out to be the increasing of
his grief: and in such sort the amorous passion did lay hold on him, that he
left Alexandria pretending to go see an uncle of his. With whose counsel and
determination they departed in the habit of merchants, and came into Paris to
the feasts that were made for the entertainment of the prince. The jewels
they brought was the occasion that the Princess and her Damsels sent for him
to buy them, and made the price at their pleasures, without contradiction of
this merchant who without seeing her, at the first report did yield her his
heart: and therefore he regarded not his precious iems. It was a thing worthy to
be noted, to see what passed about the buying of his jewels, and I as an eye
witness can scarce believe it, although I saw it.

To conclude, he with the price of his jewels did see at his pleasure the owner
of his free will, remaining there with great content, glad that he employed his
thought in such a place, counting it a reward sufficient for all his wealth.

In brief he departed from thence very heavily, and to remedy his grief, he
had the courage to put in practice such a thing, which to think upon I am
af^aid, much more affrighted when I saw it done. And this it was, he having a
confidence in his beauty, wherewith indeed he was much indewed, put himself in
woman's apparel, and seemed therein as beauteous and gallant as our Princess.
Oh how many times worthy knight did I confer and was conversant with him in
that fained habit, taking such content when he entertained us, with his
singing and playing, as was sufficient to bring him to be the most private
Damsel that attended our Princess over all those that waighted in the court,
he never showing any suspicion, that should offend the honor of Grisalinda.

Being in this content, it fortuned there came to the court the fearful
Partomio King of little Britain, a young knight, and the most valiant that is
to be found in all these parts, who when he came made show of his great
valor. The King who knew how to entertain and honor such, did lodge him in
the palace which was the occasion he often frequented to my Lady and mistress
and conferred with her publicly, but never could have opportunity in secret.
To be short he grew amorous of her, with such feruency, that he yielded
himself to serve her although the v^rtuous Lady did give him to understand, by
neglecting his services, that he should not weary nor trouble himself, and
that it was labor lost he not being such a one as she could affect seeing his
huge greatness: for although he was not a giant, he was very little less.

Yet notwithstanding this blinded youth alone to himself became so passionate,
that although we did not know the occasion yet we did see the effect that
wrought in him, for he begun to loose his beauty, and to go continually in
habiliments of sorrow.

You may imagine sir Knight (if you have ever loved) in what estate this
amorous young Prince was: and so weak he grew, that he kept his chamber, and
(among other) was in courtesy visited of our most gentle princ^sse. At whose
entrance, blood retyring into his pale cheeks from his reviving heart, he
took her aside unto a window and besought her to sit down, and by her sight
to give ease unto his sorrow. The modest Lady with bashfulnesse granted his
request, and desired him to be brief. Who preparing the passage for few words
with a million of broken sighs, confusedly delivered his affections, and
abruptly desired her favor: begging with a piteous look a kind reply.

To this unlooked for request the princess graciously answered, (because she
would not add sorrow to his grief) willing him that he should not despair,
though yet she were able to give him no sign of hope: her mind being subject
to no passion, but v^terly unacquainted with the thought of love. So taking her
leave, she felt Partomio in some hope, insomuch that he soon recovered his
wonted strength.

But the princess hating his importunity, determined (while he remained in
the Court) no more to come publicly abroad, but kept her chamber: and when
Partomio offered to see her, she would in no case be visited. For which he
conceived such hate against the Princess, that without any respect of
knighthood, or his ancient royal parentage, trusting in his own force and
strength, he came to accuse our Princess of treason and and disloyalty, and
that she had little respect to her honesty and honor whereunto she was bound.

The King of force must give ear unto it, for that he was a King yt made the
accusation. When we understood the manner thereof, it is not be believed what
great lamentation we all made: for that it is a law in the Kingdom of France,
that if the Woman accused of unchastity within thirty days brings not one
or more which will defend her honor, she shall at that time be consumed in
fire.

I will not (for avoiding my own grief) detain my self in telling you how
her Parents did take it: but it seemed that all the Palace was on fire, by
reason of ye great lamentation which was made, for that fifteen days were
past, and there was none so hardy as to appear for her, they so much feared
that unreasonable Knight. Till such time as the masked Alexandrian did talk
with his Lady, before he went about to accomplish the same.

I, who knew the tract of them, for that my Mistress had made me acquainted
with his secret love for to her he had discovered himself, heard her answer,
which was to dissuade him from that danger: but no request could persuade him
to leave off that difficult adventure, replying unto her.

Now Lady and Mistres, shall you live in security of my honorable and
unspotted affection: for that it constrains me boldly to adventure my life
for your unstained honor.

Then said the Princess, if in yielding mine again were a satisfaction,
assure ye Prince Arlando, I would do it. But if you love me, you would not
have any liking, that with the price of my fame I should pay so great debt.
Touching the battle, which you intend to attempt for my honors defense, I
appeal to your own self, that have tried my unspotted chastity. Yet I urge
not this in my own behalf, but it is any Knights duty whatsoever to help a
wronged Lady that stands in necessity with his sword.

This courageous Youth was somewhat comforted, although he little enjoyed that
comfort, for the fury of that untamed King required a greater resistance,
although the battle was very well fought: but in the end he took away his
life and love at one instant: wherewith the grief of our Princess increased
the more, who from a high gallerie sorrowfully beheld the mortal contention
between the two lovers.

She then well understood that the Pagan would go thorough with his
business, that so soon had cleared and freeed himself of the Prince, in
whose death she would have been a companion: not for that she loved him, but to
end her trouble and grief.

Now I would you should consider what the sorrowful Princess suffered, who
living in hope from the 18. day, (on which we sent out a Damsel to seek her
worthy Brother) till this, which is the 24. and yet she is not returned. I
know not any so hard hearted, but would take compassion of so virtuous lady,
that so unjustly does suffer affliction. Therefore (fair knight) I seeing the
other Damsel returned not, imboldened my self in the right and justice of
this poor Princess, to put away all childish and womanly fear, and come
forth into these solitarye ways, publishing my misaduenture. And now seeing I
have no reason to doubt, having met so gallant a Warrier as (it seems) you
are, I will not loose my hope, but see how your worthy arm will return
vengeance for the infamy of that poor lady. And having so great equity on
our behalf, there is no doubt it will little avail the unjust and proud
accuser, though his huge proportion and strength were doubled.

Here you understand (sir knight) the assured cause of my lamentation, which
deserves to be pitied the more, in regard of the ^louds of tears, which
every day are shed in the woeful and afflicted Court of France. And if (as
most constantly my mind persuades me) there be in you the valor which
appears by that worthy countenance, Fortune can never offer you so good
occasion as this to show it.

Here the heavy Damsel stayed, ending her talk with a thousand sighs,
accompanied with pearly tears that distilled down her cheeks: which caused
great compassion in the free breast of the Dacian Prince, who answered.

Of a truth fair Damsel, you have reason to seek punishment for so great an
evil as this is: for there is no credit to be given to so unreasonable a
Knight as that false Pagan, especially against the Daughter of so great a King.
But sure it greeueth me, that she suffered the amorous young Prince of
Alexandria to enter into that deadly combat: although not long since I did know
a Knight, that would have envied him, for to have ended with his death a great
number of griefs, that by his means he suffered. But for the principal
matter, though I loose my life in seeking to defend your Lady, I do
accomplish no more than that which I am bound unto: and now seeing it is more
than time that we were on our way, let us travel forward, for I hope to give
comfort unto the Princ^sse. And therewith he called his Page Fabio to bring to
them his horse and the Damsells palfray: and leaping into their saddles, they
took the direct way toward Paris.

This furious Dacian traveled on a better horse than any of the steedes of
Titan, who in their course do compass daily the circle of the Earth: the
French Damsel carried his helme^, as well to honor him, as for the desire she
had to behold his excellent beauty. And as they rid, she noted the Device
upon his armor, and gessing him a discontented Lover, with some grief at his
sorrow she said.

In truth sir Knight, if your Mistres be the occasion that you bear this sad
Device, she is without reason, in that she has not attained to know the much
love, which the proportion of your person deserves. Herein judge I that she is
in fault, because it seems unto me that you lack nothing to make you a
perfect Lover, but some experience to make you show the strength that Love
requires, and follow the fashion, which courtly Ladies in that case expect.

At another time could this gallant Youth have answered with more passion than
now, when as his liberty was in the hands of them that made a jest of it: but
finding himself more at ease, he answered.

Of truth fair Damsel, you had reason to say, that it is more needful to
have strength than any other thing against this furious frenzy of Love: for
that I had a friend who while he thought to have cure in love, found first the
overthrow of reason, enforcing his sense contrary to that which he willed,
rather than unto the good which was ordained: although I now can boldly say
both for him and my self, we know not to what part of loves rules to incline
our selves.

Then it appears that you are not amorous said the Damsel.

No verily (answered the Prince) for that I could never know what it was to be
beloved: therefore as ^ never enjoyed the name of a beloved, I hate longer to
be called a Lover, for that he is not equally to be judged wise, that passes
his time celebrating always with joy ye evening of death: but rather I account
him that lives in this sort, a wilful fool than a discreet lover. For each
man should endeavor to lessen his grief, and cheer up his fainting spirits,
scorning to hope for or covet that desired gold which only covers the bitter
pills, that by their hateful operation purge the sense of all reason and
understanding.

The Damsel speedily to this thus replied. In another School have you learned
this erroneous doctrine, and not in Loves University at Paris, which through
all the world is so much esteemed. I am sorry that I carry with me a Knight,
which esteems not a Lover to be most discreet. What creature have you in the
world that lives without love? What picture does give contentment to the eye,
if (by the beauty) the beholder presume not that the painter was enamoured of
his work, using affection as his pensill. It is well seen that where love
dwells, gentleness and valor have their habitation. What has been the
occasion that the Greek Princes have filled the world with their worthy
acts, but that they have been amorous?

Against these fair Damsels (answered the free Dacian) my judgment reasons
not, for that love did give them always abundance of assured hopes, easing
therein and lightning the excessive pain which the disdained Lover does
receive. But the accustomable conceit reigning among beloved ladies, is self
opinion of their own worth, a sovereign desire to be faithfully served, a
glory and pride in their Knights valor: but when the full payment of his
deserts (as a true fee for Knights service) is required, then is the Ladies
beauty muffled with clowdy discontent. If she speak, she checkes his
audaciousnes: if she look, she darts vengeance from her eyes: and all the
reward the Lover has is this, that others pity him, and are eyewitnesses of
his true service: which she will scarce vouchsafe to acknowledge.

This greeueth me more than the rest (said the gracious French Lady) to see
how you are utterly fallen out with love, in that you cannot obtain to be the
only chief in account for the service of Ladies. Tell me (I pray you) is it
not a high reward for a Lover, to have one gracious look from his beloved
Lady? nay, is it not a salve for many sustained sorrows, if he but once
attain her desired sight?

Yes, it were well (answered the Prince) and excellently for a Lovers
contentment, to pass the heat of the day privately in such contemplation,
where the Gallant may (without let) salute his Mistres: but when such audacious
entry is made without the ladies special license, I do judge it to be one of
the most errors which is committed in the ordinary erring School of Love.
But let us reckon the best meede the Lover has for all his moan. Does she
bestow a smile? Oh then he is a happy man: that one false sunshine is a
sufficient comfort against many bitter showers: but if she vouchsafe a kind
word, a gentle touch, or some little idle conference, our kind young lover is
transported beyond all compass, he writes pure Castalian, walks no where but
in Tempe, dwells with the Muses, sings with Apollo Io Paeans in Loves praise.
Anon (in the midst of all this iollitie) on goes his Ladies frowning kercher,
and then his Eulogies are turnde to Elegies, his mirthes to moan: an uncouth
cave couers his disgraced head, a dark and queachie grove his pleasant garden,
the air his counselor, Echo his scoffer, tears his drink, care his food:
and such a deal of foolerie v^xes this loving fool, that I must needs
conclude him to be either desperately mad, or (questionless) a very Idiot.
Therefore of Love and Lovers this is my absolute judgment.

Love is a busy troublous foolishnes,
Those that commend it, mad and reasonles.
With this amorous conversation they traueled toward Paris, when upon the right
hand of the Forest they heard the swift running of a horse: who came in such
have* that before the Prince could put on his inchaunted helmet, the furious
Rider was in sight, who seemed rather a Devil than a Knight.

The occasion thereof was the reflection of the Sun upon his armor, which
was of shining steel, and colored black, and so was his horse, who made no
show of steps upon the grass whereas he trod, by reason of his swiftness.

The gallant demeanor which this Knight showed, did give great content unto the
Dacian Prince. And here we think it good to leave him, with earnest desire to
know what that Knight was: and we will get before him to Paris, where we lef^
the courageous Knight of the Images, Torismondo, Prince of Spain, who was
healed of his wounds, but not of the grief he received in the battle with the
mighty Alpbebo.

This Torismond went out of Paris with purpose to seek some of his own people,
and till he met them, to travail a few days in those mountains, and to
conclude many adventures: so that in Paris there was no other talk but of the
Knight of the Images.

As he traveled, he oftentimes sent unto the Court, to know and learn some
news of his Lady by the Posts that came from Spain, and oftentimes he
tarried for his Pages return at the Fountain of Merlin, being the resting
place for Knights adventurers, traveling in that Forest.

One day as he was expecting news from Spain, he saw his Page coming with a
countenance different from that he was wont to have, for that he came making of
great lamentation: which caused some suspicion in the amorous Spaniard. For
always a timorous heart touching a man's own evil, does prophecy (as it
were) ensuing mischief, as to affrighted Torismond at this time it proved,
who gazing steadfastly on Arsilo, thus questioned him.

What means thy sadness Arsilo, have the heavens deprived me of all my good,
and left poor Torismond to ^ament his Ladies absence?

This youth did confirm his suspicion in that he did not answer one word. The
Prince as one wholly beside him self, said, ah fortune, thou have now showed
thy self who thou art, now I fear not thy strength, for that which I most
feared, with all thy malice is certainly befalne me. Conclude Arsilo, and
declare unto me these news that must redowne unto my death. What should I say
sovereign Prince (answered the page) but that it is as you suspect? death,
pale meager death has seized o^ your souls content.

This amorous and afflicted youth did not hear the rest, for that he fell upon
the grass without any sense or feeling, til such time as his page brought him
to himself again.

Who in recompense said unto him. Oh unfaithful, why have thou called me from
my ease, what do thou imagine that there is strength in me to live, without
the life of her, whom rigorous death has taken from me? I cannot nor I will
not although I may live, being without that good, which was my comfort? How can
he live that only did sustain his life, in yielding it into the hands of her
who did receive it with equal comfort. Oh my chief good, because I should know
the despite of fortune she has taken thee from me. Oh dear dear love, how I
do number my wants, exceeding all number with the only lack of thy
sovereign beauty. Oh mournful earth wherefore beginst thou not to lament thy
lost ornament, for my loss reaches farther then the grief of unhappy
Torismondo. Oh warlike Spain, how may thou from this time forwards leave
off thy glorious name, for that she who was the cause of al your courage is now
conquered, by all devouring death. Oh worthy knights with what reason may you
from this day forwards live without courage, since she who with her beauty did
recreate you all, fair heaven has took away that heaven might be only fair.

Oh divine Floriana thou art a creature ordained to extol the cunning work of
humane nature, but the dieties envying that earth should bear such perfect
excellence, found means for to undo so perfect a figure, carrying with it all
the grace, beauty and perfection of the world, jointly with the soul of this
unhappy body. You ladies, that were envious at the bravery of mine, fortune had
compassion of your griafe. Thou had reason divine Floriana to remain
doubtful of seeing me at thy departure. How often did thou urge me with my
plighted faith, the which I will keep till such time as I am in thy estate,
without any fear to loose thee, but to see thee with these eyes, wherewith I
now do celebrate thy death. Oh most happy land of Cantabria in times past,
pitiful to my lamentations, how may thou from this day forwards begin to
mourn for the lack of such a Lady and Mistress? Now my loving father, may
you live content with my fortune, to see me live without my Floriana, who was
so odious in your eyes, for that I loved her. I am vexed still that you do no^
conceive it was life to me to love her, and a sweet ease to suffer for her.
Now here I swear by my high thoughts, not to return to Spain, but to
destroy it once again, if any therein were the occasion of the death of my
loves life, although it were my natural father. Oh my Floriana, what can I do
to live content, or who is able to give it me but death only? the which if I
suffer for thy sake, I will receive it gladly. And having a desperate will, he
pulled out his sword saying. O happy sword, being the sword of my Gods: with
thee at her hands I received the order of knighthood: I swear by her beauty
that none shall be able to disturb me, til this unhappy body does accompany her
in death, that did give it so excellent a life. At that instant he would have
lifted up the skirt of his shirt of male, to have thrust his sword in thereat,
If the discreet Arsilo had not thrown himself before him, and pulled it out of
his murdring hands.

Then this grieved youth came to himself and said: Oh my Arsilo, is this the
love you bear me, to hinder me that I go not to accompany in death, that which
never departed from me living? my friend permit it as thou would the heavens
to be more favorable to thee, then they have been unto the sorrowful
Torismundo.

Worthy Prince and my Lord (answered the discreet page) I should offend much
therein, in the duty that I owe unto you and your generous father, and you
offend more your own discretion, for that you cannot suffer that which the
heaven does ordain, the fair Duchess was not for you, for that the
commander of all beauty had chose her for himself.

Amongst worthy persons, there is nothing more to be praised then to know how
to bear and suffer the disgraces of fortune, with such courage as they do her
favors: consider how little ease it should be to your grief, in killing your
self.

Do thou call it little (said the grieved Knight) that alone is sufficient
to succor me? wherewith should I end so many deaths which waited on me, but in
giving my self one, for the conclusion of all: this did evil agree unto the
service that thou owe me, since to die is only profitable.

At this time answered the page, I will die ere you shed one drop of blood.
Hear me a little my beloved Lord, that I may set before your eyes examples
for your comfort.

The Phrigians had exceeding cause to bewail the death of valiant Hector, and
they did fill the air with immeasurable lamentations; yet not one of them, no
not his Andromache, though being dear to all, to him she was most dear, not
one of them I say despairingly slew himself, but armed their resolutions
against their enemies.

Who could wail a lovers loss, more than Venus her sweet Adonis; whom she
found discolored and dead, his fair body rent by a foul Boar: yet she
despaired not amidst her lamentations. Sorrow for separated friends I deny not
is necessary: but to die because they die is devilish and damnab^e.

Despair depriueth al grace, doubts of immortality: and let not your
excellence wrong Floriana so much, to make qu^stion of her immortal being.
Suppose her gone unto a Princely habitation, having enjoined you to perform
adventures for her love. Let your little short span of life, be the progress
to that house: your iourny done, you shall enjoy her sight.

Therefore consider worthy Prince, and besides these reasons, remember the
royal blood from whence you descend, and the harm you should do to many by
your death, who have need of that life that you so little esteem? Celebrate
the death of your Mistress, and let me be the first in death, if it may be any
comfort unto you? But I am sure that it is rather an anger to Floriana, who
enjoys a better estate than ours.

Therefore return unto your reasonable senses beloved Prince, and con^ider
that it is the ordinance of heaven, for that you against the will of your
father, would love her, and might have sought an other equal unto your estate.

This grieved youth received great comfort by the discreet reasons of his
page, but not in such sort that it caused him to forget the grief he felt. The
page seeing that he was somewhat quieted and eased, drew forth a letter
saying: This is the last work that came from the hands of your Lady. This
worthy Spaniard did take it (...) kissed it a thousand times, and bedewing it
with tears, he opened it, and read as follows.

The letter of Floriana the Duchess of Cantabria to Torismundo Prince of Spain.
Understand from me well-beloved Prince, that I draw nigh unto a new estate,
being appointed by the heavens: and remembering with what truth you answered my
firmness, almost life scarce suffering me to write these few lines, I took
strength to write unto thee, only for to desire thee by the faith which thou
plightedst to be mine, to pass thy life in my absence with discretion, as is
required: and Torismundo, let not my death be occasion of thy indiscreet
dealing. I would well-beloved Prince, that I might in this world call thee my
own, but to thy comfort in the other world I will: thither goes thy beloved
Floriana, hoping to see thee, when as the powers of heaven will stand our
friend. I can say no more, for that my senses fail. To God I leave my beloved
Torismundo.

Dying Floriana.


This afflicted Gallant concluded the reading of the letter giving a hearty
sigh, saying. Oh chance, and is it possible, that now should be showed unto me
so much evil, and that she commands me to live, and I must perform it. Oh my
dear Mistress how can I live, who lived only with your presence? Oh Fortune
with how much discontent do thou give a little contentment. Oh unhappy heart
so cruelly used in the beginning of thy age, and tormented with thy excessive
torments. Ah Floriana to remain with life will be death unto me: but seeing
that you receive content therein, I will live, employing the rest of my life,
to love in absence, in the ^ame degree as when I triumphed in your sovereign
beautye.

Now you may worthy Spaniard (said the Page) understand the discontent that
Floriana should receive by your death, and the wrong you shall commit in not
sustaining your life? And therewith the page caused him to eat of such food
as he brought, although it was with an evil will. But yet the heavens did
ordain a remedy worthy to comfort this woeful Prince, for by reason of his
great wearines he fell a sleep a while, although it was not much, for that
with a sudden anger he arose up saying: Ah my Goddess, and is it possible
that there shall remain no memory of thy glory and my torment, this comes
not of the love I bear unto thee? But I do promise to solemnize thy feast,
returning into Spain, and give the world to understand with what affection
Torismundo loved thee, and in saying this, he went unto a great and mighty
Poppler tree, on whose bark he fixed with his dagger these verses.

Ye Fawnes, and Satyrs servants to great Pan.
And old Syluanus, all assemble ye,
Ye lightfoote Nymphs assist a woeful man,
Of wood or water whether ere ye be.
Wild Forest beasts shall help you in your song,
And roar a base to thunder out my wrong.
Not one must sing a mean in my lament,
Except the still stream gliding on the pebble;
Thus will we carroll out my discontent,
My woeful self will sing or cry the treble.
Or if ye will confusion mar our song:
For we are all confounded by deaths wrong.
On the other side of the Fountain there was a rough and knottie ash, whereas
he descyphred the sweet name of his fair mistress, and concluded with this
Ode.

Floriana had not dyed,
Had not Fates her Love enuyed:
Torismundo impartial Fate,
With a deadly killing hate:
Sought to punish, but could find
Nothing to torment his mind:
Till the fatal Sisters fell,
Worse than those three hags of hell,
Chancing to behold Cantabria,
And her Sovereign Floriana:
Heard her praise the Prince of Spain,
Heard her for his lack complain,
Heard her say she was his joy,
Heard her swear that no annoy
Could to Torismund betyde,
If she liude to be his Bride.
Where withal from her lives clue,
Hastily the thread they drue:
And with speed they cut the same,
When they heard my hateful name.
So because I was envied,
Gentle Floriana dyed.
This worthy lover being somewhat quieted depared and coming to the
Christaline water, he washed his blubbred face and hands, and drunk of the
virtuous Fountain: which so quickly did work his necessary effect, that
before he departed from the water, he knew not what had passed with him, but
the amorous life that before seemed to be a dream: although he remembered all,
yet not in such sort that the death of the fair Floriana should give him any
particular grief, but rather seemed that he did wrong unto Spain, that so
quickly left it, for blind affection.

Being in this new and free estate, he saw coming out of the thickest of the
mountain a Damsel mounted on a mighty black horse, with a Lion before her:
who at her arriual, with a gallant demeanor alighted, and coming to the Prince
she said in the Spanish tongue: Ualardus Torismundo, a wise man who desires
thy good, as to himself, commanded me to bring thee this armor and horse, and
although their colors are now contrary, to the new and pleasant time, and
free state which thy destiny has brought thee; yet the troubles are so many
that you must pass, in tormenting your courageous heart, that you may from this
present, bear a de^ice conformable unto that grief, and in recompense he will
desire no more, but that your heart fail not, but always have in memory, the
noble blood from whence you descend, till such time as the tame Lioness nigh
to the place whereas now you understood of the death of Floriana meet thee,
then shall thou know of the free life that shall be admitted thee, and then thou
shall leave this black armor, putting on with better reason this which thou
now wearest, the which shall remain upon that poplar, till all be finished
that I have here rehearsed unto thee, for so it is ordained.

This swift Damsel tarried for no answer, but with the speed of an Eagle she
put her self into the Forest: presently this young Mars, did put of his
precious and green armor, with the which he did encounter the mighty Alphebo,
and hung it on the poplar whereas he found this saying.

He that takes thy armor hence,
which thou leauest for this black:
Shall again in recompense,
give thee joy which thou will lack.
With great joy did this worthy Spaniard leave his precious armor, and armed
himself in the black armor, of truth, for that there were few like unto it.
The arms (as I say) were all blacks, but only in the midst of the shield
was painted Hope and Fortune, Fortune saying thus.

With the turning of my Wheel
all estates of men do change:
Grief or joy (they used to feel)
on a sudden seems strange.
He had not well concluded the perusing of the shield with the device, when
that somewhat a far off he heard a great troop of horse, and sometimes the
noise of Women, which seemed that they were by force constrained: which was the
occasion that he leapt upon his inchaunted horse, and went into the high way,
with all speed possible. But by reason it was night, and the Moon went very
low, he could not see nor know what people they were, til such time as clear
Day appeared from the East: and then from a little hill (whereon he ascended
for to learn what it should be) he discovered a mighty wagon, drawn with
six swift horse, being full of people, and to the number of 30. Knights with
them, and two furious Giants: by which he conceived that those in the wagon
were carried prisoners. Wherewith he descended from that little mountain like
an arrow out of a bow, and ran with his horse after them till it was in the
afternoon, and then he was constrained somewhat to rest his horse in which
time the Giants got vantage of the way, for that the horses in the waggen were
very good.

After he had a while refresht his horse, this warlike Youth went from thence
more swift than the stone out of the sling, till such time as (in traveling)
he saw a gentle Knight with russet armor, and his shield of the same, and in
it the device of Cupide with two faces, different unto that he was wont to
bear, for that they were now both closed.

This was the free Dacian (if you do remember) in amor^^us conference with the
French Lady, on their journey toward Paris: the Prince (by the virtuous
Fountain^) changed had on his shield this Emblem written by the wise Lyrgandeo.

Since my liberty is gained,
Close those eyes my heart that pained.
The Prince received great contentment when he saw the shield with that posie,
and willed the Pages that they should follow him softly after, and spurring his
enchanted horse, he ran with more swiftnes, than an arrow out of a Scythian
bow, enlarging his pace to know that well proportioned and gallant armed
warrier, till such time as Apollo lacked little to leave the world as an
orphane, by want of his shining face: and then (in the midst of a great
Plain) he ouertooke the Chariot with many gallant Knights on horseback
garding it, among whom (...) dealt in such sort* that he quickly gave them to
understand of what courage he was, to their speedy hurt. For that incountring
with the first, (who was a bold knight) he ran him thorough with his lance,
for his presuming to meet him: and therewith drew out his good sword, and so
behaved his arm amongst that treacherous company, that it was great damage to
every one of them that did withstand his fury.

So valiantly he behaved himself, that when the Giants and another gallant
Knight (big set and in rich armor) returned to see what the noise was which
they did hear behind the Chariot (for that they were then before) this
warlike Spaniard had slain (...) Knights, and did such ^aliant deeds, that
the furious Mars was not worthy of his credit^.

It is not possible to express with what violence the Giants, the big knight,
with other six and twenty that remained (seeing what had passed) began to
assail and incompasse this young Prince, in such sort, that it seemed by their
fury they had bin able to have broken in pieces a very strong rock they were
so valiant: but this worthy and valorous Torismundo did sustain himself in
such sort, that (by the force of his arm) they received a bloody payment.

At that time his new well tempered armor and horse did stand him in good
steed, who was so light and nimble on the one side and on the other, as thought
could be no swifter, which was the occasion that the battle continued in a
most honorable sort: yet notwithstanding it could not be but that he had need
of succor in a Fight so dangerous, for the warriers with whom he dealt were
very valiant.

Such was his fortune, that then the free Dacian did set spurs to his horse,
and came at that instant, when as he was executing such fury as the enraged
Pirrhus did upon the Phrigian people.

The Dacian greatly wondered at this enclosed Knight, being very much affected
to his valiantnes, for that he made no reckoning of the other knights,
although they were strong and stout, but still assailed the Giants and that big
knight, in such sort, that he made them fear his great and mighty blows,
having overthrown twelve other knights.

Then could not Eleno stay, but pricked forward his good horse, and with his
happy lance in his hand thrust himself among the knights, and joining nigh
unto the valiant Spaniard, he said: Upon them good knight, for they are but a
few, although they seem to be brave and stout, for our justice and their pride
will give them into our hands.

This saying was scarce ended, neither had ye Spaniard answered it* when as
with double courage he incountred one of the Giants on the one side in such
sort, that he made him to accompany those thot were fallen dead, betng quite
thrust thorough and thorough, wherewith he gave a fearful shreeke.

At which strange encounter, Torismundo greatly admyred, and was very glad of
that gentle succor in time of so great necessity. And for to give his
unknown friend knowledge of what valor he was, he threw his shield on his
shoulder, and went against the great Knight, (who troubled him most) and
struck him such a mighty blow upon the helm, that he made him fall upon his
horse neck, voyding great quantity of blood at his traiterous mouth.

At hand was the worthy Eleno, and beholding it he meruailed at taat blow:
and seeing that great knight so ^igh him, and in that sort, his horse also so
astonished that he could not stir, he stroke him such an overthwart blow, that
seazing on the inlacings of his helm, helm and head fell into the green
field, whereat all that were in the chariot wondered.

This blow was not so soon given, but Torismundo (who the while was busy with
the Giants knights, and had not noted what the Dacian had done) willing to
conclude that which was begun, stroke the dead body which lay headless on the
horse so furiously on the back, so that passing thorough it, it passed to the
horse neck, and cutting it asunder, all fell together to the earth: wherewith
one of the Ladies that were in the chariot gave a great shreek saying.

O glorious God, what great force is in this knight, that is not only able at
one blow to cut in sunder the Rider, but the horse also?

The valiant Spaniard turned his head toward the Chariot, imagining that some
knight would have done injury unto the Ladies, and in the chariot discovered
one of the fairest Ladies in the world, judging her great beauty exceedingly
to exceed that little, which he saw before in Floriana: wherew^^^ he received a
greater blow at the heart, than that which he had given on the body of the
mighty Knight.

Here he that had sworn firmness to his Lady, does now strive to dispense
with vows: he calls the heaven unjust, in showing him first but part of
beauty, his valor wexed weak, and his powers for awhile failed, and feign he
would have spoken to her, that so thoroughly had subjected him, giving her in
change of her first sight, his loue-sicke wounded so^le.

With this new desire and amorous passion, he thrust himself amongst those
few that remained, and saw the Giant in sharp battle with the Dacian Knight:
but he accounting the affairs belonging to that Lady, proper to himself,
and conceiving her to be the agreeued and injured Mistres of the rest, he began
a fresh to dispatch more of the Giants Knights, to carry news into hell of
his new change.

In this time was not the magnanimous Dacian idle, for that he was in battle
with one of the most brauest Giants of all his Nation: but having a marvelous
good horse he entered in and out at his pleasure, till such time as he saw the
stout Spanish Warrier how worthilye he behaved himself against the other
Knights, wherewith a kind of honorable envy so pressed him, that like a
furious Lion he encountered the Giant, who came toward him, striking one the
other such heavy and furious blows, that it caused the worthy Spaniard to
stay his battle, for to look on them: but he saw that the Giant had the
worst, for that he faintly trauersed the field, stretching himself with the
pangs of death: and being ashamed to see so few Knights so long to endure, in
the time that the courageous Dacian Prince came unto himself (for that he was
somewhat astonished) he behaved himself in such sort, that he left not one
alive, but only two, which he received to mercy, for to be informed who they
were, that attempted this outrage.

A good while before this battle was ended, came thither the Page of the
Dacian with his French Damsel, who received great contentment in beholding the
valor of her Knight, and rejoiced that she carried in her company so good a
warrant in the right of her Mistres Grisalinda.

The new and valiant Lover Torismundo being at liberty, came unto the Chariot,
whereas their Pages had freeed all that were therein of their ungentle bands,
and pulling off his helm (his face being by reason of the heat somewhat
inflamed) he showed himself to be one of the fairest knights that was to be
found, and very young: for (as before it was said) his beard did not yet
appear. Coming to the Chariot, he kneeled down before the Lady, saying.

Pardon (fair Lady) my delay in greeting you, for I could do no more than was
in my power, the offense arises not from want of good will: vouchsafe therefore
to receive this small service of him, that is ready to put his life in any
adventure that redoundeth to your content, and to account it as his own.

The Lady did well understand the affection wherewith he spoke it, but (being
restrained by the inseparable yoke of marriage with the Prince of Geneua, who
was present) she answered: The heavens reward you worthy knight, one of the
most valiant you are that ever I have seen: what you have done for my husband
and me, heaven will requite. It is sufficient joy to us, that you have showed
your self so valiant, that we may thankfully attribute the reward only to your
worthiness, as a thing admirable unto us.

It cannot be imagined what greef this passioned youth received, in seeing his
remedy impossible, whereby he perfectly understood the true sayings of the
wise man, that he should see himself in excessive troubles, accounting this (at
this present) to be one of the greatest adversities, that might chance him: yet
notwithstanding, because he would not give them knowledge thereof, he
dissembled his grief and answered.

It were unequal glory unto me gallant Lady, to attribute unto my Arm, that
which with so great reason is dew to this stout warrior, unto whom with
greater right you ought to give the thanks for your aid and succor, as unto
one of the mightiest Knights that ever bore armor.

And at this instant the Dacian Prince was with them, but with his helm on,
because they should not know him. for that it seemed unto him, he had before
seen the Prince, spouse to the fair Duchess of Sauoy called Orosia, and
greatly marvelled at the beauty and worthiness of the Prince of Spain.

So after there had passed many reasons with those Ladies, they did importune
him much for to discover himself: which he refused to do, for that he said he
had given his word unto the Damsel, not for to disarme himself, neither to
enter into any public enterveiw with any till such time as he had finished an
adventure whereon he then went. Without impeach of this promise Sir knight said
the fair Duchess, I hope it will not be out of your way to bear us company
unto the city of Paris.

Then answered Don Heleno, I do swear unto your beauty, worthy Lady, that
it is not in my power, for I have put my liberty into the hands of this
Damsel that comes with me.

Well, seeing it is so answered the Prince of Geneua, we shall receive great
content if that at your coming to Paris we may chance to see you, that in
some part wea may gratify the great good which you have done for us, which
will be joyful unto us all.

The like was promised by the worthy Torismundo, who was greatly affectioned
to the gentle disposition of the Dacian* and would have remained with him to
have known who he was.

Afterward, inquiring of one of the Prisoners, who his Lord should be? He
said, that it was the furious Tilmon, Son unto the mighty Brandafuriel,
whom Clauerindo the Prince of France slew, and left this but a very young
Youth: but when he grew great and big in years, he received the order of
knighthood, and became the most hardiest knight in all that Country, living in
such valiant sort, that he was esteemed for a more worthy man than his father.
Which Tilmon (purposing to be revenged for his Fathers death) came from the
Towred Island, whereof he was Lord, and brought those Giants in his company,
the better at his ease to seek reuengement. And after we had disimbarked our
selves on shore, we went through the Country in secret, till yesterdaye we
met with this Chariot, which was going toward Paris: and understanding the
grief that the king would receive for the imprisonment of his Nephews (as
both the prince of Geneua and his Wife were) he did apprehend them, to procure
some occasion (through sorrow) to kill ye French king.

I give great thanks unto God and unto these worthy knights (said the fair
Orosia) that your evil pretense took no effect. So for that it waxed late,
they took their leave of the knights, and iournied toward Paris, where they
arrived the next day, and were received with great joy and content by the
king, unto whom they declared what had happened unto them by the way, and how
they were set at liberty by two alone knights: whereat the king greatly
meruailed, and could not imagine who they should be of so great power and
strength, that alone durst give battle unto so many together, and against
such deformed Giants.

He was somewhat comforted to see his well-beloved Neuewes: yet not in such sort,
but that he felt in his soul the grief concerning his daughter, which in
conclusion he was constrained to make the Dukes pertakers thereof: who although
it were a grief unto them (as it was reason) yet they studied to dissemble it,
and to comfort their Uncle in all that was possible, and determined that the
Prince of Geneua should go disguised and seek those valiant Knights, and to
give them understanding of all that passed, that they might frustrate that
great evil which was raised against the Infant Grisalinda.

The which Knights, after they were departed from the Chariot, entered into the
thick grouie Country, till they came unto a fair Fountain, whereas they
lighted: and the Spaniard cast his arms upon the Prince, and said: Sir Knight,
show not me so much iniurye as you did unto that precious Lady, in not
declaring to me your name: for in doing so, I shall remain without gratifying
of the aid and succor you did unto me.

Worthy Knight (answered the discreet Dacian) I should be very ill advised,
if I should not acknowledge the great good which is gotten, in making him
pertaker of my thoughts, that is of such desert and so desirous: and if I did
use my strength, it was not for that you were in necessity thereof, but the
affection which I received did constrain me to join with the brevity of the
time, that I might (if it were not a grief unto you) demand what you were,
and likewise advertise you of the most secret things of my heart.

Sir Knight (said Terismondo) I give you great thanks for that you have said:
as for the rest, it is very apparent my necessity needed your strength, and to
both we may attribute the ransom of those Ladies: for my name, I answer you
as you do me: it is not justice to deny a thing to him that has so much
desire to make me pertaker who he is.

Know then that I am Torosmondo Prince of Spain, whom fortune (that never
cease to be mutable) has brought as vanished into this country, being
tormented with amorous fire: and there he declared unto him all his life and
amorous dealings: wherewith the Dacian was bound to declare unto him of his
loves, and the great troubles that he received.

At the which the Spaniard remained greatly contented, and they were marvelous
affectioned the one unto the other, and the friendship that was between them,
did so far extend, that it endured to the death, which was the alonely mean
able to separate their love, and not the rigorous battles which they performed
(as shall be told you) were not sufficient, but that they were the greatest
friends in all the world, for that in one age, and in one Country, and at one
self time: fortune had given them remedy of their grief.

With this the Dacian told him the lamentable occasion wherefore he went to
Paris: at the which the Spanish Prince rejoiced at the heart, for that he
should once again see the gallant Duchess: who was no less delighted with
his great beauty, th^n he was ravished and enamoured with hers.

They passed all that night one declaring to the other their former Loves, till
such time as the Spaniard did tell him of the great affection he had to the
Duchess: but the Dacian seeing that it was not good for him, (she being a
married Lady) did cause him to leave it off. Which was no small matter: for
that a new passion (if once it be grapled to the heart) will sooner make an
end of one, than leave him: but for that the remedy was at hand, it was easy
to be forgotten, At which conceit they did not a little laugh, both of them
knowing the wonderful effect of the fountain.

The Damsel that vnderheard some of their amorous discourses, said unto them.

Of truth fair knights, it was no small grief which the wise man did to
disdainefull Ladies, which found so good a remedy against their strangenes. Of
my self I say, that if I were beloved, I would not use (as commonly it is
seen now among Ladies) to dissemble so much, that it causes wings to be added
unto knights thoughts, to seek out so unsavory a Fountain: for that it
feemeth to me by the known virtue of this place, it will fall out that she
shall remain forsaken by her dissembling, and her gallant knight shall live
content to see her just pain and grief: a worthy reward for proud
statelines. For if a Lady love, wherefore does she dissemble? and if she hate,
wherefore does she not make it known? But we women are so strange of
condition, that we think that it is sufficient to be women, that all the world
may serve us. This is a thing too usual, which ought not to be accepted
amongst discreet people, although it may seem that she only is discreet, who
often does use this false dissimulation: Considering that he who loves, and
is not dissembled with, does not deserve the name of a Lover.

This has place with them that are strange and give not part of joy to
mitigate the grief of the heart which loves them, and I hold that Knight
careless, who may be remedied if he will urge it, and yet simply bearing
wrong, rejoices in his grief, being content to be dissembled with.

Oh fair Lady answered the tender Spaniard, how sweet should a Lovers life
be, if all were of your opinion? and how many greefes might they daily avoid?
for that Ladies do dissemble the affection which they bear their Lovers, and
unjustly entreat them to whom they have given their hearts.

Henceforth let all Ladies deal with me so, said the Dacian.

Peace Cynicke said the Spaniard, let me go forward.

It is good a Lady should be circumspect^^ yiedling her honor on any terms,
and to esteem it, when all the world does know that she is fair: but to use
it in such sort, to make her Lover suffer grief, she her self being
passioned, and yet makes rigorous shows. Fair Damsel, I take this to be one
of the greatest tyranyes that may be used either to Knights or against
themselves* considering Knights to gratefie their Ladies, every moment put
their lives at deaths door: And should the Lady then be coye in his love
whom she loves with all her heart? if so she deal, who can condemn him
truly that leaves to know her? for her own frowardnes is cause of her
forgetfulness.

You have great reason on your side, answered the gracious Damsel, but these
so costly hopes I like not of, that when they come, they are with pure hope
loathed: for to my judgment (and I believe all those that try shall find) that
the best of all hope in love, is bought for more then it is worth. In these
reasoninges they passed away a great part of the night, till such time as the
two new friends being weary, they laid their heads upon their helmets to
take rest, so likewise did the Damsel and their Pages.

The Iusting which Don Heleno and Torismundo, had at their entering into Parris,
and what more chanced unto them.

Chap. 5.
APollo had scarce showed himself at his golden window, beholding the large
Circle that he had to run, when as the two valiant friends did arm
themselves with their strong and inchaunted armor, and mounted upon better
horses, then those which the amorous shepparde did show, and began to travel
toward Paris, with great desire to be revenged for the Infant Grisalinda.

In this sort they traveled, till after a little more then two miles they came
unto a great and fair bridge, for to pass the mighty River of Some, nigh
unto the high walls which compassed the City. There they saw many Knights
staying for to have passed, and some of them were in battle.

These furious friends pricked forwards, for to see the good Iusting that was
there: And asking of one wherefore those Iustes were, it was told them that
the valiant Alsino did make the Iustes, defending the beauty of a Lady, that a
little before was come unto the Court. This was the Duchess of Sauoy, and he
was the Nephew of the redoubted King Partomio, that accused the Princess: who
seeing that there lacked but one day, did think to carry her away with him, and
the proud Alsino the Duchess.

The Dacian whose bounty was well known, did very earnestly require
Torismundo that they would let him free the bridge. The Spaniard did it with a
very evil will, for that it gave him great grief when as it was told him
Alsino was in love with the Sauoyan Lady. The Pagan gloried that he had slain
very many: and straight way they saw when as he had concluded to overthrow
those which were there to prosecute their Journey, they sent unto Alsino a Page
to know the condition of the defense, the which gave the Knights great cause of
laughter, and the Dacian turning to the Spaniard said.

It seems that if we had not drunk of the water of the fountain, we should
not have had contention about the iustifiyng of the beauty of your ancient
Mistress. Although this were not, said the French Damsel unto Don Heleno, I
would command you in recompense of the sudden passions which I had in
beholding the passed battle, that you should do it in my name.

The Prince received great content in that which the damsel said: and
therewith shaking his Lance he entered (...)

But I am most certain more than ordinary sorrow took seazure of her heart
for the amorous Princes death. So much for her I dare affirm: for my self to
be plain with ye, I had rather never have a lover than to dissemble his
reward: for I delight not in their mourning sonnets, neither am I pleased that
every eye should be fixed on his dispairing face, and every finger point at my
disdainefull folly. If I perceive he deserve love, I will crown him with
Loves garland: but if I find him halting, he shall be sure to know that I can
play the cripple. But fair Knights, I am yet no Mistress of any amorous
gallant, my thoughts are not captiued, only I find my self to your worths so
many ways bound, as till I dye I will endeavor to deserve it with duty. And
indeed she proved as good as her word, as ye shall after hear in the love of
Torismund and Grisalinda.

In this sort at ten of the clock in the morning they came unto the great
City of Paris, at such time as all the place was full of people, abiding the
coming forth of the mighty Partomio, for that according to the laws of the
realm, the Princess not finding within the term set, any to come and conquer
the accuser, the King was to pronounce the sentence. All the windows and
galeries of the Palace were hanged with black, and a heavy and sad rumor was
heard amongst the people, at which time the two valiant Friends entered the
place: whom the eyes of those that were present did much behold, wondering to
see their armor and horse.

They were straight ways known by them that were at the bridge, and they began
to say, there comes the valiant warrier, that at one encounter, made the
Lover that kept the bridge see stars upon the ground.

The Damsel went very gallantly between them that were the flowers of
Knighthood, with her face covered, in such sort that it made the people to
suspect her to be^ more fairer then she was.

Almost all the people in the place followed them, imagining wherefore they did
come: and at the Palace gate they alighted from their horses, with so gallant
demeanor, that every one meruailed at them.

The worthy Spaniard did take the Damsel in his arms from her horse, and so
with them she went up into the great Hall, at such time as the King was going
forth all in mourning apparel, so sad and heavy, that the princes to see him
had great compassion. And for they would not delay the time, the mighty Dacian
did somewhat lift up his beauer, the better to express his words, saying very
courteously.

God keep and deliver thee from traitors, thou mighty king of great France.
The fame of a wrong that is done to thy only Daughter, came unto the Country
where I dwell: and it seeming unto me a thing impossible, that the daughter of
so royal a king should be careless in any thing that is agreeable to her
honor and honesty, it did constrain me to come, having better confidence in
her right, than in my valor: but such as it is, I will employ it in her
defense. Affirming that she did not commit any such thing: and besides, that it
is evil and dangerous, that so rigorous a law cannot be referred into the
kings hand: but to give credit to whosoever (without any more consideration)
that either for passion or for that a Ladies will is not answerable to their
loathsome demands, will then forsooth (false knights as they are) be so bold
to use their slanderous tongues even against Princesses, and the royal chaste
Daughters of holy and Imperial Fathers.

But least these traytrous accusers should say, that ^nely with arms I come to
defend that which is put to the trial of battle, cause him to come forth
that does accuse the princess, seeing time does pass away, and I will with
arms answer him.

And heerewith he concluded his reasons, leaving all, but especially the King
very well satisfied with his words and gallant disposition.

In return of answer the King said, Sir Knight I do esteem as it is reason,
the travail which you have taken for my cause, and the battle which you will
undertake for my daughter: and believe me gentle Knight, I do live deuoide of
care, for that I know truth or falsehood will have success answerable to their
deserts: but for that he who does accuse her is a King, and a person that in
all things is to be creditted, and on the other side my law has admitted it
to battle, I hoped always that some would be found which would combat for
her, and in sign of the confidence I have in her right and your valor, I refer
all into your hand, being persuaded your desert to be much more.

I do kiss your Royal hands, answered the Dacian for the confidence you
have in me, but whether it be much or little all is at your service.

There was ye Prince of Geneua and his Duchess, who came in with the Princess,
when they understood there was a knight that took upon him her battle, he
came and saluted the Prince of Spain, knowing him by his black armor, and
offered unto him his lodging for the aid and succor which he had done unto
them.

Unto whom the gentle Torismundo surrendered thanks, but could not proceed
any further, for that they saw coming the mighty king Partomio, and his
Nephew the s^out Alsino, who for that they were lodged in the Palace, came
forth without armor: and when he came where as the king was, he said with a
loud voice.

I do much reioce king of France, that you have knights that will accept this
battle, and I come to give them knowledge that whatsoever Partomio does
speak in palace, he knows how to defend it in field.

The wrathful Dacian did put himself before him, saying in this manner to his
furious and proud adversary.

Truly valorous king, having such confidence in your strength, you had no need
to raise any slander against so excellent a Lady.

Thou art very bold answered the pagan, the cause of it is, in that thou see
me without armor: and to be plain, I put not on my arms, for that I judged
how that only in beholding me, thou would gladly leave off thy enterprise.

Thy pride is not small answered the Dacian in hoping to do that without
armor, which is impossible for thee to perform, being armed and at thy best
advantage.

Thou may well talk here said the pagan, until the hour of thy death
approach. I wish of all my Gods that you were more, that I might give ye your
payments together.

The choleric Spaniard could not endure any longer, but as one wholly and
justly incensed with wrath, he thus said.

Those who have little faith (as thou have) do invade knights with advantage,
and not they which do govern themselves with reason: and because thou art
unjust and reasonlesse, thou do imagine my companion will suffer me to
help him. But thus much (on his part) I let thee understand, that before thou
partest with him, thou will rather wish for help, than desire to have any more
adversaries.

Nigh unto Partomio was the bold and stout Alsino, who with a deuelish fury
would have laid hand on his sword saying.

By high Jupiter I swear to thee thou babbling knight, if I did not assure my
self that the king my Uncle is sufficient for thee and this cowardly knight, I
would never put on armor.

Thou may well go and put it on, thou unmannerly knight, unworthy of a
knights name (said the Spaniar^) and hereupon I defy thee forthwith, that thou
may help thy Uncle, in whom thou put too great trust: and with a gallant
and sovereign iesture, he presently shut down his visor.

Then the devilish Alsino took hold of the Princes skirt of mayle, and pulled
so strongly that he drew the Prince after him, saying: It is honor enough that
Fortune has permitted thee to defy and challenge him, that will not refuse to
combat with Mars.

The Dacian was nigh unto them, who seeing his discurtesie, would not remit his
payment till the battle, but lifting up his fist, he stroke him such a blow
upon the forehead, that he overthrew him at the Kings feet, saying:
Uncourteous knight, before the King do thou use this boldness. Did not I
forthwith stay for the battle, I would give thee the payment that thy folly
does deserve.

The wrathful king when he saw his well-beloved Nephew lie along the ground,
like a fury went against the Dacian with his sword in his hand.

The Spanish Prince was nothing dismayed at his devilish rage: but with two
light leapes he put himself by his well affectioned and new friend, leaving all
that were present greatly amazed at his dexterity.

Then the King of France came between them: which was the cause that this
furious Giant did not there end his life: and king Oristeo commanded Partomio
forthwith to be armed, and his Nephew also, who was then come to himself,
and seeing himself in that case, there was no Hircane Tigers fury to be
compared unto his: but that forthwith reuengement should be made (as he
thought) he went with his uncle.

Then the King commanded the Princess to come before them for to give the
knights thanks, and accept them for her Champions: wherewith the poor Lady
apparelled all in black appeared: yet was not she able with her sad looks to
cover and hide some part of her great beauty, which was such, that the
courageous Spaniard had not power to resist the entry thereof into the secret
part of his heart: and it was of such effect, that he accused himself, and
said it was lost time that he spent without loving of his Grisalinda, whom he
worships, and acknowledges her for his lives owner. This was such a wound,
that neither water nor the wisdom of Merlin was sufficient to heal.

The gracious Princess in few words (yet excellently couched) gave power to
these knights to become her champions, against the false accusing king and his
fierce Cousin. The Princes humbled themselves with such grace, somewhat
inclining, so that easily might be seen their gallant disposition and
demeanor: but especially ye Spaniard: who was the gallantest knight in the
world. Long communication they would not abide, till such time as for the
victory they had done their best: therefore they descended into the court,
whereas they viewed their armor, because no oversight should appear in them.
When this was done, (without putting their foot in stirrup) they leaped on
their well prepared horses, making them give a thousand coruettoes, with so
gallant a grace, that all said they were knights of great worth: and the eyes
of the people were set upon them with great content, but the encounter with so
valiant Enemies, they that had best hope, somewhat doubted.

The worthy Spaniard did first enter into the Lystes, and seeing that their
Contraries were not come, he with a loud voice said. What, do they not come
that wished we were more? it seems to me that their works are not agreeable
to their proud words, and I believe they will not do what they speak: and if
they durst, I hardly imagine their fury being so great, they would thus slack
their presence.

Thereby was a Knight, no less huge of body than Alsino, and something a kin
to him, but at least his especial great friend, with whom he did communicate of
his loves, or (better to term it) his foolish desires, who said: Proceed not
so forward, thou ill advised Knight, for that shortly thou shall think this
place too little for thee, when as thy hands must be thy defense, and not thy
tung. Well, for that thou shall understand my little fear (answered the
valiant Spaniard) go and take thy armor, for I do give thee license to help
thy cousin the prince of pride, and then thou shall see who shall think the
place too little: and therewith he cast his gauntlet in token of defiance. But
all that were in the place thought it folly, knowing with whom they should have
to do, and yet so boldly give them a companion. The Dacian was nothing
agreeued thereat, for that he knew the new passion of his friend, and did intend
to help him to the death.

During the time that they stayed for this so much doubted Moore, this new
Lover could not find any better exercise, than contemplation on his Goddess,
fixing the end of his spear upon the ground, and his eyes whereas his heart
was. The Duchess of Sauoy stood in a round tower all covered with black, and
with her the Princess, who seemed no less fair, than heavy and sad. And
while the prince was beholding them, there issued the deformed kinsmen, richly
armed: the Kings armor was Lion color, with suns of gold, on his shield
Revenge with this posie.

Revenge against one is insufficient,
One death cannot my rage content.
He was mounted on a furious horse, colored dapple gray, and all his
trappings suitable: he had under his armor a shirt of mayle, and was appointed
in such sort, that it caused a cold fear in all the beholders, to see with
what bravery the Pagan did put himself into his station.

There came after him that valiant and proud Alsino, all armed in yeolow
armor, full of precious stones and flower de luces amongst them. In the
midst of his shield there was a Lady painted, with this posie.

Did I but grace his valor, Mars should fall:
But he will win, despite of me, and all.
The choler was so great that entered into our Spaniard when he saw that loving
Posie, understanding unto what end it was written, together with the wrong
that was done to the fair Grisalinda, without any fear he went to him and
said. Now is the time (discourteous knight) that shall be seen whether I have
hands here as I had a tongue in the palace to defend me: and I will make
thee unsay the falsehood which thou intendest in this device thou bear. When
he was touched with that, the amorous Moore could abide no more reasons, but
turning his horse about, he put himself against his Enemy.

Now would I that I were inspired with some divine favor, to declare the most
furious Battle, that ever was seen in the palace of ancient Paris: the
weakness of my Muse has no power to express the worthiness thereof. If some
excellent spirit now assisted me, with what content should I prosecute the most
heavy and amorous battle of these furious Warriors? Who at the sounding of
the trumpets, parted with so great a noise, as though the under earth had
trembled, being oppressed with the fury of their courageous horses, on whom
they made their incounters in the midst of their course, with no less
violence, than if two rocks (removed with the sea) had rushed together.

The spear of the mighty Partomio took no hold on the Magical shield, but
it was given with so great force and strength, that it made the Dacian double
with his body, and to loose one of his stirrops, and the reins of his horse
out of his hand, but not his memory: which in that extremity did much help
him, so that at the staying of his horse he had recovered al, and returning
with great swiftnes, he drew out his sword, and went against his Enemy: with
whom he had encountered so strongly, (although he could not seize on him a full
blow in the midst of his shield, for that it was of magical mixture) that he
stroke him such a violent blow upon the breast, which took away part of his
breath by bending and brusing of his harness: and his spear (running
forwards) shiuered in pieces, a splinter wounding him in the throat in such
sort, that if it had had a little more force, it had cut his throat asunder:
yet notwithstanding he wounded him, whereof his issuing blood gave testimony,
and made him to embrace the neck of his great horse.

The wonder was great that they all received, to see so furious a blow, and
from that time forwards they did behold the Battle with more attention,
perceiving by that beginning, the Moore (for all his brags) would surely have
the worst.

The gentle Spaniard and his Enemy made their encounter in the midst of the
carreere, with so great force, that it seemed by the rumor of this course,
some great edifice had fallen. The encounter of our baptized Knight was somewhat
low, for that he would not err: yet for all this, his adversaries shield and
harness failed him, and he gave him a little wound, which troubled him: and
they rushed together with their shields and helmes, and with their horses so
furiously, that the Moore fell (out of all sense) with his horse dead between
his legs unto the ground. Likewise the Christian (being bruised with that
encounter) was forced to do the like, but his horse escaped, nevertheless he
thought with the fall he had broken his body in pieces.

Yet for all this he began to bussell and make himself ready to go against
his enemy with an admirable quicknes, saying: it stood him in hand, being
before his Mistress, and in defense of so fair beauty. All that were in the
place did very much rejoice at the good success of him with the black armor:
but by and by he was troubled in that he saw the third defied Knight come
swiftly with his spear in his rest against the Lover. This wrathful youth
did not fear him, but before the Moore would pass, seeing the Prince make
show as though he would abide him, he somewhat stayed his horse, because he
would not miss, and coming near him, he bare his spear low, intending to
carry him away at that thrust. But the Spaniard commending himself to God, at
such time as he delivered his Spear, put himself on the one side, laying
hold thereon with so great quicknes and strength, that he forced him to let it
loose, because else he should have fallen, and so the Moore passed forwards:
carried with the fury of his horse.

This new Lover, having gotten his Spear in his hand, and won it in such
order, would show some of the antiquity and blood whereof he came. Therefore
he did toss and shake it before his fair Lady, that beheld him fixing her
eye on the place where he was, and he perceiving that she did look upon him,
as indeed all the people did, noting with what bravery he did it: even as if
he had been upon his good horse, he went after him that then was returned and
coming to ouerrun him with his horse, which caused great laughter and noise in
the place, till such time as they were advertised what was done. Then they saw
that the Spaniard firmed his feet on the ground, and threw the Spear with so
great strength that he stroke him in the midst of his shield, and made him
fall over the crouper of his horse, whereas against the ground his head
received a great and greenous fall, and besides he carried a tronchon of the
spear in his breast, whereout began to run much blood. Presently amongst the
people there arose a great noise saying, He with the black armor does begin to
quail the pride of the kinsmen. The fury of this famous Prince of Spain did
not here rest, for when he saw him with the Lance overthrown, and that the
other could not clear himself from under his horse, he went unto the last,
and took him by the legs, drawing him unto the place whereas the proud
Alsino lay blaspheming his Gods that had given such force to one Knight, at two
blows to bring them into that estate. And when he came to Alsino he said:
Now beast thou may see that it is better to put more hands to the battle
than so much pride, I will not help thee from under thy horse, till such time
as this champion does come to himself, that shall bear thee company in
death: so he laid him by him, and left them in that sort, causing great
laughter among them all, and pleasing the innocent Princess, who then began to
feel some new alterations, judging with some passion, that which all men
publicly spoke of the valiantnes of the Spaniard: who as though he had done
nothing, threw himself over the Pomell of his sword, and so backed his horse
that came unto him, which was esteemed of all for high noblenes. After he had a
while beheld the place where his Goddess was, a thousand imaginations working
upon the new forge of his thought, he returned to see his companion: who at
this time with his swoorde in his hand (very joyous to see the gallantnes of
the new lover) went against the redoubted Moore, who unsheathing his great
fauchion and blaspheming his Gods, they settled such blows on their enchanted
helmets, that all the compass did sound thereof. They were some what amazed,
but the Moore had the worst, by reason that the enchantment of the Dacians good
sword, was of more antiquity and better than that of the Pagan, so that the
magical temperature of his helmet doing him little good, his sword must needs
enter in thereat more tha^ two fingers, whereat Partomio was greatly amazed: but
remitting to the force of his arm what lacked on the helm they began to strike
in such sort that their armor s^emed a new forge for Vulcan, approouing each of
them with costly experience to show his enemy his force and strength. In this
the King seized on the heroycall Dacian such an untoward blow, with so great
force, that he made him decline his head to the horse neck, renewing the blow,
he seconded another, that if it had hit right, it would not have gone well with
him: but it served only to inflame cholar in the Prince, and made him more
quickly to come unto him self: wherewith he assailed the Moore, raising
himself in his stirrops with his sword aloft, with so gallant demeanor, that
it caused the stout heart of the Pagan to fear the blow, and to put his shield
before for his defense, although it were but little help, for that the fury
of the Dacian was so great, that hitting it he cut it in two pieces, and
descending down by his breast to his shield hand: hand, shield and reins of his
horse came all to the ground, and his horse with fear not feeling the bridle,
striued to go forth of the impalement^, if the lame rider had not given him
such a blow on the head that he cleue it in pieces, faling with him to the
ground, hard by ye spaniard, who at the noise of the fall came to himself,
being before in an ecstasy with beholding the fair Lady. They might well have
killed him, although with great lightness he went from his horse, and at the
same instant the proud Alsino (with the help of his cousin) was clear from
under his horse, and seeing himself a^oote, he pulled out his mighty sword,
and came against the Spanish Prince: who received them all three through the
great courage he had, whilst the Prince his friend did alight from his horse,
and although it were done in great have, yet could he not come so quickly, but
that the Spaniard had assalted the feared Partomio, for that he should not go
before he had first proved the sharp edge of his sword.

And for that he had no shield he at his ease stroke him such a blow upon his
arm that the force of his armor could not r^sist his sword, but it must
needs cut his infidel flesh, and charged him so sore, that it made him put both
hands and knees to the ground, and he said: Now thou shall understand furious
Pagan what I said to thee? That thou should see thy self in that extremit,
ythat thou should have need of help.

At this time approached his courageous Friend, and almost envious at that the
new lover had done, intending to requite him with the like, he assailed Alsino
that was on the one side, and lifting up his swoorde with both his hands, he
stroke him such a side blow upon his helm, that he little enjoyed his
standing, but he ouerthrewe him side-longs with a great fall, so that all that
were in the place began to say: long live so good friends that know how to
revenge the dishonor of our Princess. The King did very well hear it, and
although he commanded them to hold their peace, it did little profit.
Therefore turning to the Prince of Sauoy he said: Of truth if these two be not
the Greek Princes I cannot imagine who they should be that have so great
force. Let not your highness marvel (answered the Prince) for as I told you, I
saw them against the Giants deal such blows, that if I had not beh^lde it I
could not have believed it, and I do persuade me that the black Knight is
none of the Princes of Greece, for that he is very young, and so I believe is
his companion.

Then it came to the Kings imagination that it should be the Prince of Spain:
but that thought left him, for that he did see him overcome at one blow in the
same place.

And turning to behold the battle, they saw the black Knight come upon
the Pagans cousin, and strike him such a sound blow that he made him to stacker
backward, three or four reeling paces, and following the same stroke him
another on the helm, in such sort that he gave him a deep wound, wherewith
the stout Alsino gave the Spaniard such a blow, that he made him stoop with
one of his knees: but it was little for his good, for that with a light leap
he freeed himsefe from between them, and seeing how the Dacian did deal with
the Giant, he began to flourish with his sword and to part them from the place
where they two made their battle, and this expert youth (awayting his time)
closed with the cousin of Alsino, and thrust him through to the back, and
overthrew him on the hard ground, saving himself with a light leap, so that
Alsino could not reach him: if the Princess rejoiced at this, I need not
persuade the reder, that has had any experience of the sweet wound of love.
This loving Lady could not dissemble, but turning to the fair Orosia of Sauoy
she said. It seems unto me gentle cousin, that your coming hither, has begun
all my good fortune by the force of that Knight, which as I believe does all
this in your service.

It is not to be doubted (answered the Lady) being satisfied of your beauty,
that he does this for you: having already done as much for me to set me at
liberty. Happy Duchess of Sauoy (answered the Princess) that you obtained
such a Knight for your defense, and much more happy may the Princess of
France be, to obtain such knights to defend her honor being endued with such
excellency.

And as they thus conferred, being young and kinswomen, their new change
appeared, and it was no grief unto them to favor the knight with the black
armor, in in that they were bound unto it: so looking into the combat place,
by reason of a great noise that was amongst the people which said. From the
Heavens descend the reward of such a knight that so does honor the French
court. They perceived that the valiant Dacian at one irefull blow, had
overthrown the King upon the earth and cut off his head, at that time that the
cholorick Spaniard had done the like to Al^ino, and rouled them out of the
place with great contentment unto the King. Then the Spaniard went unto the
Dacian, who upon his knees gave him thanks, that with so great honor had
helped him. The gentle Spaniard did the like, and cast his arms upon his
neck, saying: Pardon me (my entyre friend) in that you have seen my follies.
Whereto the Dacian answered: Whatsoever error has been committed, it
brings a pardon with it self: and whatsoever you have done, has been to me
great content, for that I perceive your Lady does receive the like pleasure.
And from this time forth, let us entreat of your matters with such wisdom,
as is required in such a case as this is: and if it be requisite to carry her
out of France, I profer my self in your service. Torismundo did much esteem
this aid promised, binding himself to more than to venture his life for him.
And coming unto the Damsel they said: For that she had done them so great
friendship, and kept them so good company, that whatsoever she would willingly
should be done, she should express it. The French Damsel being somewhat
abashed, said. I am sorry sir Knights, that you do renew in me that,
whereunto I am so much bound: but the duty that has wanted in me, my Mistres
will perform in such measure as is reason. Fair Damsel (said the Spaniard)
this alone is sufficient to leave me in everlasting bondage to you, if you
procure your Lady (finding my heart true) to be entreated to yield such
pity, as true love requires: and when ye would speak with us, you may
always come unto the Forest, whereas we dined to day. She said, she would
do so. At that they could not talk any more, for that the King came in
company with all those mighty Princes and Knights, that were with him. And
when he approached, as these two friends were kneeling down to kiss his hands,
he raised them, and embraced them, saying. I will not sir knights, that you
suppose my coming is to reward that which you have done: for I cannot pay so
great a debt: my only desire is, that ye would command my person and estate,
in any thing ye please, and I will procure it, as if it were for Clauerindo
my dear Son. We do well know courageous prince (said the Spaniard) that
whom God has endued with so much virtue he will not leave him without so much
grace but that all the world shall desire to serve him: our reward is
sufficient, in that ye have admitted us for your knights in this cause,
wherefore in all other things I and my companion are at your commandment. And
now seeing there is no more to be done, give us leave (we pray you) to depart.
You will not deal so discourteously with me sir knights (said the king) to take
from us the bond wherein we are so much bound, as to go away, and not to take
your rest, and ease your selves in this our palace. I do assure you worthy
king (answered the Dacian) that we cannot tell you who we are, neither can we
tarry with ye without breach of our honor: and this we hope you will not
permit, only for the desire we have to employ our lives in your service. For my
part (said the king) you shall not be importuned, only my desire is, that you
pull off your helmes and speak unto the princess, for it is she who is most
bound for this deed, The Spaniard answered, (faining his voice, for that he
would not be known). We may as ill yield to this, as to the other, by the order
of knighthood which we have received, and very much shall we be blamed, if we
make so long tariance, as to speak with the princess: but having
opportunity, we will return and serve you in all that you will command us.
The king answered: With this I remain content, although I shall not forget the
wrong, till such time as you perform that which you have last promised: and
taking them by the hands, he lead them thither whereas the princess was, and
her well-beloved Mother, who could not satisfy her self in embracing her, as if
she had been new risen from death.

And when they came thither the King said, Daughter I cannot entreat these
Knights to remain in our Court, that they might receive the graces and thanks
for that which they have done for you. I would feign see if the request of
Damsels were of more effect than that of Kings. It is not possible, well-beloved
Father (answered the unacquainted Lady) that they will loose the debt wherein
they have bound us, in going away without telling us who they are.

Most fair Princess (answered the Dacian for that the Spaniard was not able
to move himself): The heavens do know what grief my self and my companion
do feel, in that we cannot receive the courtesy of so high a Princess, in
remaining in this Court* but it would be an occasion for us to falsify our
promise, if we delay any longer time. Touching our names, we are of far
Countries, and of so little fame, that if we should tell you, only it would be
cause for us to loose somewhat of that which we have gotten. Touching your
father and Court we have not deserved any thing, but occasion being offered,
here we give you our faithes to return and serve you. I will be surety for this
your promise, said the fair Duchess. I am content therewith (answered he in the
black armor) making strength of weakness, and see well that our faith receives no
wrong, although we go secure that you will have compassion thereon. So making
their obeisance unto the Ladies, they took their leave and descended, much
against the will of the Spaniard. And mounting upon their horse, they took
their leave of the Damsel* who made her self to be known unto the King and the
Princess, whereof they received high and great content, and asked her who they
were, but she told them what they had concluded, but never would say what they
were: where as we will leave them in their suspision, for to speak of the
three princes, whom we left in the way toward Greece.

Of the adventure that happened unto the Princes, Rosieleer, Meridian, and
Oristides the Troyan* nauigating by Sea.

Chap. 6.
THese three stout warriers were far ingulfed into the Sea, on the way
toward the Grecian Empire, full of greefes, the Troyan for his Country: the
knight of Cupid for his fair Oliuia: and the mighty Prince of the Scythians,
not alone for his fair Floralinda, but for his well-beloved children, not
knowing when he should see them again: but somewhat comforted for that there
remained in their company and as their keeper their new friend Brandafidel,
who made him promise that so soon as the strong inchauntment was finished, to
return and bring them to Greece: whereas the Princes will was he should abide
his coming. They saw that their shipp made such great way, that it seemed it
did ^lie, bearing most toward the Orient, to the parts of the desert of
Arabia.

In this sort they nauigated five days, till the sixth, when as the golden
heaven began to show her fairness, they discovered not far from them, a
boat which sailed that course which they did: and by reason that their Ship
sailed so swiftly, in a moment they ouertook it, and in it discovered a mighty
Knight with white armor quartered with blewe, full of many and costly stones,
and a green hat upon his head of a strange work, with many feathers full of
spangles of gold, which caused the lookers on to wonder: he was to seem but
of few years, but more brown than white of color: he was with a Lute in his
hand, as one that was intended to sing and play: but when he saw the Princes in
their ship likewise armed and* well proportioned, he rejoiced much at their
gallantnes, but could not imagine who they should be, for that either of them
had russet couerings upon their armor, and couers likewise for the devises on
their shields. The Princes were very joyful, when they saw that well
proportioned knight, who entered under hatches and came forth again with his
helm on his head, and on his arm a shield of the same color of his armor
very gallant, in whose field was portraied a Lady with a sword in her hand,
and at her feet a knight with the same armor that he wore, who was kneeling on
his knees with this posie.

My service shall approve,
That I deserve thy love.
The Princes received great pleasure at the device of the stout Knight. The
Troyan did request the other two Princes (for that all the Country was fildwith
their valors, that they would suffer him to answer whatsoever that Knight
should demand. The princes with very good will did grant it unto him: and in
joining their boat unto his, there came forth from behind, a weeping Lady,
that caused great compassion: who seeing that the knights did cause them that
governed their inchaunted boat to join with them, and being nigh she said.
Worthy knights, as you would fortune to give you rest in your desires, tell me
some news of the Greek Princes, or of some of their friends, for that I do
come in their demand from a far country, because I was given to understand,
that they alone do protect and defend those that cannot help themselves of
which number I am one, and she that sent me to seek them, another.

Coming from the mighty City of Lira in the kingdom of Lacedemonia, and
going to Sea I met with this gentle Knight, who demanded of me wherefore I
came. And giving him to understand my necessity, he made me answer, Well
seeing that those whom I came to seek were so mighty as all the world does
know, that although he went to receive the order of Knighthood by the hands of
the mighty King of Mauritania, who is the most famous Pagan that is now
known, yet he ioyed to change his pretense, and caused me to enter into his
boat, saying, that he likewise would seek them, and demand of them the order
of Knighthood, that of their great valors somewhat might come unto him. So it
is answered this gentle youth, as the Damsel has said, and it shall be
greatly to our content to tell us that we demand.

The knights greatly rejoiced with the demand of the Knight, and the Troyan
answered him, Of truth gallant Knight, you could not have met any, that so
perfect news could give you of these Princes as I, for it is not long since my
companions and I did depart from one of them, although I believe it will be
difficult to find them now, for that they go in secret on a certain
adventure. For the rest I believe that there is none more friends to them the^
we three, for that their bounty is as an adamant to the will of him that will
imitate them in their proceedings.

The Knight with the white armor answered, Sir Knight I give you great thanks
for the news you give me of them, and for that the finding of them is
difficult it is sufficient for me to have met some of their friends for to
give me the order of Knighthood, and therefore I do request you Sir Knight,
to give it me forthwith, although I have not done you any service, for I have
so much to do, that the little time I am detained, will be the occasion of my
eternal lamentation.

Therefore do it forthwith, and I shall receive great content therein, for
that you are the first Knight, that I have met of the Christian sect, and he of
whom I have demanded first this thing.

Then the Troyan said, I would gentle Knight as I am their friend, that one of
these Princes of Greece were here for to make more certain your honor, as to
receive the order of knighthood at their hands: yet seeing it cannot be
otherwise, but I must be he that must receive the courtesy to give you that
which you demand, with license of my companions (although it were better to be
done by them) I do give you leave for to show your power, in defending all
such as are in necessity of your person: And therewith he kissed him on the
cheek, and he remained armed the best knight of all the Pagans, although
without the feasts requisite for so high a Prince, yet for all this the Sea
did celebrate the day, with bearing the name from that time forwards of Happy,
which endured a great time until it was stained with blood, as shall be told
you in the fourth part of this history.

This furious Moore was joyful and content that he was an armed Knight, and
rendering thanks to the gentle Troyan he said Gentle Knight, Jupiter reward
you the honor which you have done me, in performing that which my soul so much
des^red: but although this exceeding great courtesy binds me to serve you al
my life, yet I beseech you receive no grief at that which I shall say, for so
I am commanded, and I well understand that the cause is more difficulte, seeing
by this charge I may assail all the world. But it is better to perform my
word though my heart dye: than not performing it, to live without honor in
perpetual infamy and disgrace of my Lady, which I esteem worse then rigorous
death. So setting apart whatsoever perrill, and the duty I owe you, I say
from this time forth I defy in mortal battle, he that will deny that the
fair and sovereign Princess Flora of Argentaria does not exceed all that
live and have lived in fairenes and beauty, and this I will defend, against
the princes of Greece so esteemed in the world.

The cholar was great that entered into the Knight of Cupid, and a thousand
times he was about to answer him but that he remembered he should wrong the
Troyan, unto whom was leave given to answer all. But the Grecian needed not to
meddle: for the Nephew of Priamus with great mildness, (that better showed his
valor) did answer: Of truth sir knight, you love your Lady very much, and
it seems to me, that she ill rewards so great affection, to put you in a
demand so perilous: for the Greek Princes and their Friends will defend the
same, although they had no Ladies. And seeing it is her will, it were better
that she did come with you, that in seeing her beauty, without any strife may
be granted that which you do publish of her. For I do know two (and the
chief Ladies of the Grecian Empire) that will not consent to any such thing,
neither will their princes: in whose name (I say) that I am ready for the
battle. This amorous Moore answered not, for that (with the swiftness of an
Eagle embracing his shield) he lept into the Bark of the Troyan: who at his
entry with his Sword in both his hands gave him such a blow, that by reason
he was but young to receive such buffets, it made his teeth chatter, one
against another, till such time, as he firmed himself well, and made him
ready (without drawing his sword) for the battle? The Troyan was not a Knight
for to assault any upon advantage: but seeing that he drew not out his sword,
he said. What sir Knight, will you conclude the battle without sword? if you
had the weapon of the furious Achilles, it would be somewhat difficult, much
more without it, and you also being without experience. Worthy Knight answered
the courteous Pagan, I do well conceive it to be as you say: but this is the
means which I was commanded to use: so that there rests no more for you but
that you attempt to do your best, and I will defend my self.

The boldness and courage of the Youth, caused admiration in the princes, that
he would make battle without sword with the Troyan: who said unto him. Sir
knight, either let us leave off the battle, or seek somewhat to defend thee,
for that the Friends of the Grecian Princes do not accustom to fight with
any, except it be with great equality.

It is not in my power (answered the Moore) therefore thou need not observe
with me these respects. I know they are good: but for this battle, it is
enough for me to go thorough with it, so as I may perform the commandment
of my Mistres.

The Troyan was kindled like fire, and said: Well, look to thy self young
Knight, since it must be done without swords.

O Muses, might I now wet my tongue in your sacred Fountain, then should I
artificially declare the rigorousnes of this battle. For as though they had
had swords in their hands, or their hands had bin swords, they began to strike
in such sort, that quickly both the one and the other were assured of their
adversaries strength. But at the assault, for that the Moore was of bigger
body than the Troyan, he might at his ease strike him upon his magical
helmet, beating out so many sparkles, as though it had been with his sword,
and made him to decline on both his knees: but the Troyan rose up very
furiously, and being nigh, he grapled with him, and in entering, he stroke him
upon the breast of the harness such a blow with his fist, that by reason the
place is there most perilous for his breath, it lacked but little that he had
not stricken out his life: and found time (by reason of his amazednes) to lay
his strong hands on him with so great force, that if he had wrested a little
more to the left side, he had overthrown him. With this, the courageous Pagan
came to himself, and returned more furious than the lion on his pray, and
caught his Contrary by the middle, so that he carried him three or four
paces, without putting his foot on the ground, leaving him bruised, and the
Princes satisfied of his strength. Then they returned unto their contentious
battle, with so great a noise, that it seemed to be an hundred Knights. It
was a thing worthy to note the dexterity with discreet retyring and bold
entering in of these rare Warriers: strange it was, and more bruised their
bodies, than if it had been with swords. At this time the Moore stroke his
Contrary such a blow with his fist upon his arm nigh to his elbow with so
great force, that he had thought he had broken it: and the grief was so great
that he could not return his payment. The Pagan did not let pass the
occasion, seeing that it did behooue him, but doubled another blow upon his
shoulder, as if a rock had fallen upon him.

They were wonderfully amazed to see the fury of the pagan, saying within
themselves: that he was one of the most valiantest in all the world, and that
if he should come to have the experience and use of arms, he would prove
therein most excellent.

It was great reason they should so think, for of this pagan Lyrgandeo
speaks many things: making many times mention of him in this great
History, and of his deeds that were diverse for the love of his Flora. And
seeing this battle was for her, and the first that he fought for the reward
so much expected, it was without comparison to remember the courage wherewith
he executed it: which made the victory to be doubtful, and the Troyan amazed
to see how well his Contrary defended himself, and offended him.

Being therefore ashamed that one alone Pagan should hold him so, he set upon
him, and struck him so strange a blow upon the forhead, that he made him to
loose the sight of his eyes, wherewith he clasped him in his arms: but thereby
the Troyan could get nothing, for that the Moore was bigger of body, and
younger, so that what the one did by dextertie and experience, the other did
with youthful courage.

In this manner they came sometimes above and sometimes under in the Boat,
procuring on both parts to conclude the Battle: and it had been ended with
both their deaths, if the Scythian Prince had not put himself between, and
parted them to hear him speak, knowing with himself that his Friend should
do much better with his sword. He then said: Sorry I am sir Knights, that in
this sort you give the world to understand your valor, and not as they that
intend to end their battle with an honorable conclusion: I speak not this to
have it quyte left, but request you that you would not now end it, till such
time as this knight may do it with the sword. They being both as well endued
with courtesy as with force and strength, at one instaunt parted, and the
Troyan said: Most valiant knight, I am content to leave it off with the
condition you have named, for to give you content, if my competitor be so
agreed. The worthy Pagan answered: I would be very glad to do that which you
demand, but the one is contrary to the other, for if I do not conclude this
way, I cannot lay hand on my sword: so that it cannot be otherwise, and
therefore pardon me, who till now never denied any thing that was requested
of me. The prince answered: I will give a remedy for the same, if it be
offense to none, and take your hazard upon my self. I am content said the
Moore, because you shall perceive that I will not refuse to give you
contentment: and howsoever it be (being from hence) I will hold you for my
friend, for that it seems to me your worthiness and courtesy does deserve it.
Let it be so answered Meridian, (being much pleased with the gentle answer of
the Moore) and let us go thither where your Lady is, although it hinder us of
our journey, and there we will condition with her, how this battle shall be
concluded. This gives me greater content said the Moore, for that the Goddess
of Beauty shall fully satisfy you with what great reason I do defend her
excellence. Well seeing it is so said the prince, I will embrace you for a
friend, holding now in mine arms one of the best knights in the world. It is I
that does profit thereby (said the Pagan) to see me in the conversation of
such companions.

There they all imbrased the one the other, and Rosicleer took off his helm,
and discovered that divine countenance, which was such, that the Moore said:
without all doubt, this knight is one of the Princes of Greece, or else Mars
himself, for such proportion and show of valor I know not who has attained
except it be those, whose fame in all the world is in equal degree both for
fairenes and valor. In me Sir knight (the prince answered) is not that which
you speak of, yet at least I have good will (though I lack force) to employ
it in your service: and I am very glad that this battle remains to be yet
decided, that we may rejoice our selves in your company, all the time that we
shall spend till we come thither. And I believe in this our boat we shall go
more at our content, and to me and my companions a farther rejoicing (setting
all anger apart) if it will please you to serve your self of that we have.

I give you great thanks gentle knight (answered the Pagan) for the company
you do offer me: for although there is not in me any good part to deserve it,
yet there shall not lack gratitude for to acknowledge it in such degree as it
is reason. And therewith he caused his Page and People for to pass all into
their ship: but the Damse^ seeing that it would somewhat disturb her going
into Argentaria in time of so great necessity, said that she would depart and
take her journey toward Greece, for that if she should tarry so long, she
should fall into rebuke. The which she would have done, if the Troyan Oristides
had not stayed her, and told her in secret that there was Rosicleer the Prince
of Greece (whereof she was very glad, that she had so good success) and
advised her to hold her peace and be still till he told her more: so therewith
she was quieted and put a fardle which she brought with her into the beat, the
which (with the swiftnes accustomed) began to nauigate the right way to
Argentaria.

In this sort went these four stout warriers in the boat debating of diverse
things: and finding fit opportunity for the same, the Prince Meridian (in the
name of the rest) did request the Moore that he would certify them who he
was. The courteous Moore answered, I cannot but in all give ye content, seeing
such Knights does demand me.

You shall understand, gentle and well disposed knights, that I am the Prince
of Tharsis, the only Heir of the kingdom after the death of my father, and
being a child, I was told by wise men that in the beginning of my knighthood,
I should pass many perrils for love: and it seems to me that it goes
forward accordingly, this being the first which this Knight has put me in. I
being in the Court of my Father, the King of Argentaria passed by one part that
lies upon our Kingdom, and brought with him his daughter, of few years, but
the fairest that ever nature framed, the which Lady I being a child, not
knowing then what I did (but now I should kill my self if I performed it not)
without any more consideration but with the content I received, I made her a
mansion in my breast: where so long she endured, that in good earnest she has
wholly possessed my soul. Our Fathers were great friends together at such time
as they were aduenturous Knights, which was the occasion that he detained
them in Tharsis a long time, but yet very short for poor Lisarte (for so I am
called). I am persuaded gentle knights, that she did not grieve to see with
what truth I did love her, she would never make any show thereof unto me. I
might have demanded her of her Father, and an easy thing it had been to have
attained her for the release of my grief, considering the great friendship that
was between them, but I did it not, neither will I, for that thereby I should
offend the affection I have to her, to procure love by any other means, than
the right passions of a lover. To conclude, my fortune was such, that her
Father carried her to his kingdom.

I will not declare unto you what grief we two felt at our departure, it were
but to fill you with amazmentes, but they shall well feel it that have known
what benefit or loss comes to be alienated, or accompanied with the beloved.
I judge as the one is a life, the other is a death, for the life I have passed
in her absence brings no content, for that I was clear without her sight:
and I believe it is an ordinary thing with Lovers.

Now about a month past there came messengers from Argentaria to my Father,
demanding succor, for that a furious and fierce Giant, being affectioned to
the fair Flora, does demand her in marriage (and I do believe that the
heavens has created us for one). To which she answered, that first she would
tear her self in pieces rather the^ marry to him. At which answer he was so
angry, that at the instant he joined together more then thirty thousand men,
and fierce giants, with whom he has begun to spoil the Country.

My father for that he was bound, went in person with much people, and came
thither in good time, in such sort that they kept the Giant busy.

Amongst other things there came a letter unto me from the fair Princess, ye
which does ease her absence when as it troubles me. And for that I know you
will receive content thereby, I will read it, and then you shall see the reason I
have to love her: they al said that they should receive great pleasure to hear
it, and therewith he read it as follows.

The letter from the Infant Flora of Argentaria, to the Prince Lisarte of
Tharsis.
Well-beloved Prince, if my absence has caused in thee any firmnes toward her
that so long since professed her self to be thine, never can there be greater
occasion to show it, tha^ now fortune, making me need help when I began to love
thee, did live without care of any change, thinking my self most free, and
making a jest of my hearts strange imprisonment, assured in all good being
thine. But proud fortune envious of this my quietness (which was the greatest
felicity I had) has given me rigorous experience of her turning wheel, and
so ordered, that the proud King of Cilicia has beseidged my City with purpose
to carry away the spoils of my small beauty, that is due to you: and now
seeing in what necessity she remains, whom you called the owner of your
heart, according to the promise you once gave me, there is no need of
persuasion I hope but that you will come: for now (being a woman) I put my
confidence in your strength, as when I was a child I trusted in your promis.
And although it be somewhat out of the way, receive the order of Knighthood by
the hands of the King of Mauritania, for that according to the fame as is here
reported, he is the flower of Knighthood among the Pagans, and till you come
to me let none girt on your sword. The Gods be your guide, and give me life
to imploye it in your love.

Flora the Princess of Argentaria.


You may well understand worthy kinghts (said the loving Pagan) that I have
reason to love her, who when I thought she did abhor me, has certified me of
her affection with so loving a style, and judge it not pride in me to defend
her worthiness, whichin al ye world is a thing worthy to be known. And I do hope
though I am in defiance with this knight, it is no let that he should help to
raise the seidge of my Lady.

I warrant you (answered the worthy Greek) although I defend the valor and
beauty of Ladies, yet shall not my arm be the last in so just an aid. And I
did hope no less of you (said the beloved Lizarte) but that your valor should
be equal to the noblenes of your mind, and yet being well co^sidred, it is not
worthy much thanks, for that you do only what a knight is bound unto: with this
and such like they traveled, and passed away the loathsome and weary
navigations, till the fourth day that the Bark arrived at a fresh and
delightful Country, which gave great content unto the Princes, for that they
were wearied with the sea. Forthwith they disimbarked their horses, and a
palfry for the Damsel, who was very joyful to go in company with such
knights. She went with her face covered, and the knights with their visors
open upon their mighty horses, they being so gallant and the Sun shining on
their rich armor, it was a heavenly thing to behold them, and the sight
thereof did dasell the eyes of the Beholders. They commanded them that had the
government of their bark to stay for them: so they began to travel, receiving
great content to see the freshnes of the Country. The furious Pagan if any
occasion should be offered of assalt for himself, broke down half an oak,
and laying it upon his shoulder he began to travel with it, that it greatly
delighted them to behold him: and as they rid, they passed away the time with
him with sweet and amorous conversation, for that he was so good a servant to
Cupide, till such time as they came into a great plain, where as they saw more
then forty knights in a troop traveling by the way, and in the midst
amongst them, was some on horseback without armor, which gave them great
desire to know what they were. And when they came more nigher, they saw that
they were two knights, the one of middle age, the other somewhat entered in
years, which had their hands bound behind them, which caused in the Pagan
great compassion, for that he was by nature virtuous, who with his oak came
unto one that went somewhat behind, and said. Sir knight, if it be not much
grief unto you, my companions and I shall receive great content, that you would
give us to understand, what country this is, and what people they are that
thus travail.

The courteous demand of the Tharsian did bind the knight, to answer, who
said: sir Knight, this is the mighty kingdom of Argentaria, a fruitful
country. And those knights that are Prisoners, are Uncle and Cousin to the
Princess Flora, whom the fearful Arlante Lord of the Cilicia does demand in
marriage, and for that her father did deny it, he has made war against him,
and had it be^ne ended, but that the King of Tharsis came with a mighty power
to aid the King of this Country, and yesterday was the first battle that was
given, in the which was many of our people slain, for that the Tharsians did
show themselves what they were: yet for all this, four Giants that he brought
with him, at the retiring of the people apprehended the Kings brother, Uncle
unto the Princess and his Son, for the which our Arlante rejoiced much, but
he would not put them to death, because he would not anger his Lady, knowing
that in the end, they should do by force, that which now they will not do,
being so much desired.

Oh infernal furies, I believe the rage is little among you to be compared
with that which entered into the affectioned youth: for that without any more
speaking, he lift up his fyst, and stroke him such a blow that he made both
brains and eyes to fly out of his head, and spurred his horse with so great
speed as might be devised. And ouertaking the^ in the midst of that plain
(the sith does not so swiftly enter into the tender grass) as this devilish
youth entered with his knottie oak, overthrowing both horse and knights, with
such quicknes that it was a pleasure to behold him, whose beauty caused great
affection in the princes. Then the noble troyan, the more to satisfy the Moore
of his worthynes, pressed forth his furious horse, and entered among them in
such sort that they seemed wolves amongst sheep. In the mean time that these
two were occupied for to dispatch this bloody war, their Pages did untie the
hands of the prisoners, who were astonished to see the great force of those
knights* who the one with his sword and the other with his oak* so handled
these miserable people, till only two remained, who thinking to find more
help in their horse than in their force, began to fly with as much speed as
they could: but the wrath of the Tharsian was such in that extremity, that he
followed after them without admitting any mercy (the which he otherwise much
esteemed): but for that it was in business which touched his beloved Flora, and
that she had received grief, for the lack of her Uncle and Cousin, he gave
them their payment as the rest and returned with a quiet pace unto his
Companions who abode his coming with the prisoners, and they received him with
great content, and very glad they were come in the Country, whether as they
were bound. The prisoners did yield them great thanks for the succor they
gave them. Then the Troyan asked how far it was to the Camp? The prisoners
said that it was little more than a mile: then they entered in among the trees,
and lighted, but pulled not off their helmes, using no more speech but that
they were wandering knights who hearing of the unreasonableness of the Cilician,
came to help the Lord of the Country.

The knight that was prisoner did much esteem it, and gave them great thanks
in the name of his brother the King.

There they consorsed that forthwith, through the thickest of that mountain,
the two Knights with all their pages and the Damsel should enter into the
City, for that they four would first see the situation of their enemies
Camp. The Father and the Son would very gladly have borne them company
(for they were both good knights) but they would not consent thereunto.

So they began to go forwards being armed with other armor of the Moors, not
without grief of the Damsel, but she seeing that Argolio, Page to the Greek
Prince went with her, she was comforted.

Being departed from them, the three friends a new praised much the Pagan, and
he answered them with great discretion, wherewith he was endued more then all
other Pagans. They pulled off their helmes for to eas^ themselves till it was
night, for that then they would set upon the camp, for that they had informed
themselves of the way, and had agreed with them that went unto the city of
Napea, whereat was encamped all the enemies, that at the beginning of the night,
the gate which opened unto the camp should be left unlocked, for that they
would bend their course thither: so taking their watch word, because they would
not be dispersed, which was, Troy, they mounted on their horse and rid
toward the City, at that time when as the Sun had altogether hid his face
under the deepest caves of the earth, and came at such tim^ as they were all at
rest, and were sure that few would trouble them, because they were al wearied
with the battle.

The two first watches of the night was past, when as these four most strong
warriers, did enter into ye careless camp of their enemies, and agreed to go
unto the tent of the brave Cilician King. And concluded amongst them that the
Grecian should remain at the entry door, and the other three should enter in.

With this agreement they went unto the great tent (and for that the Moon did
show her self more fairer then she did to her beloved Endimion) they might go
straight thither without speaking to any, for that the watch thought they were
of the Royal guard.

At one instant they all alighted, and left their horses at the door in the
keeping of the Greek Prince: they entered in the company of other Cilicians,
and came when there sat in counsel with the King, the four mighy Giants
armed with rich and shining armor: and at that time they concluded the next
day to give assalt unto the City.

But brave Knights said the pagan King, be advertised that if it may be
possible, kill not any, whereby discontent should redound to my beloved Flora,
whom I would not offend in any thing.

It is impossible to note the anger that this amorous Tharsian received, to
hear that deformed Giant talk of Flora, as a Lady proper unto himself: and
not having power longer to hide his intent, he tossed about with his knottie
staff, and with a loud voice said: Tarry awhile (false King) before thou
do enjoy her excellence, thou shall feel the weight of my oak. Then
without considering in what danger he put himself, he stroke him so strong a
blow upon the helm, that he made him (against his will) to leave the seat
where he sat: his two Companions were not slothful, with the security they
had of the keeper they left at the door, but with their cuttyng swords laid on
those Knights in such sort, that before they could turn them, they had left
but some few, and those very sore hurt, being the most principal in all the
camp: but by reason that the Giants were very strong and well armed, they
joined with them a well fought and entangled battle.

The valorous Lover of Oliuia, was not idle, for that at the door (like a good
and faithful Porter) he let none enter, but that he left his life in
recompense: till such time that at the noise there came upon them so much
people, that the Troyan was constrained to give out the sign, and to go
forth at the door, whereas with the Giaunts they were in great trouble for
mounting their horses: but with the help of the Greek they at last got up.
Lisarte carried in triumph a heavy Mace of the kings, which when he fell from
his seat he took from him: with the which it was a marvelous thing to
behold the hard and lamentable blows that he stroke upon those evil armed
people. In this sort went these four Friends thorough the camp, overthrowing
horse and knights, and amongst them ^he well corded tents: so that it seemed a
great Army had bin joined together, the rushing of these four was so great.
In this sort they crossed the Camp, leaving dead and evil wounded, more than
three hundred men, besides the principalls of the Council of war. Those were
they, which the pagan King grieved most to loose. And when he came unto
himself (as a man out of his wits) he began to make a noise, reuiling and
forsaking his false Gods, and entering into the room whereas they were, he
said: Now you evil Gods, may you seek those knights that favor you, in whom
you have put so much power, and began with a club to beat his poor Gods,
paying them that which he deserved. At last he vowed that he would not unarm
himself, nor suffer any to enter to see him, till he had been revenged on
those rebellious Knights, that so much at their ease were departed. Who leaving
the whole Camp afraid, they came unto the bridge of the City, whereas they
found to the number of ten thousand men, ready to come forth, if need had so
required, and for Captain of them a worthy Tharsian, somewhat a kin to the
fierce Lisarte, who was so angry, that he would have returned with those
people upon the Camp. Which had been no small advantage: but yet his friends
did stay him, saying: that the next day he should not lack occasion for the
same. With this the choleric Youth was pacified and entertained the Captain
of the people very courteously, and he them likewise, and guided them unto the
palace, whereas the Kings did tarry for them, and the gallant Flora. The
heroycal Tharsian was imagining what to do, and doubted he had done little in
her service that night in that he had left him alive, that judged himself
worthy to deserve her: yet for all this he encouraged himself, and purposed
not to be known, till he had overcome that furious Giant, and presented his
head to his Lady. The King received them with great thanks, for that in all
respects he was a good Knight, and friendly to honor such as came unto him, and
very thankfully gratulated the succor they offered and had made to him and
unto his daughter: yet would not they suffer themselves to be known, although
the Princess did desire them very much. There was appointed for them a
lodging where they should take their rest: where they were served with many
dainties, which the Princess sent them, who imagined that her Prince was
amongst them.

These four Companions supped with great contentment, and for to please the
Moore, all the supper time they talked of Flora, declaring the reason he had to
love her, for that she was so fair. And they were not deceived, for she was
one of the comeliest in the universal world, and for her sake the Tharsian put
himself in great dangers as shall be told you.

When they had done, they went to rest, but sent that night order unto the
Kings, that early in the morning all his people should be armed. By and by it
was noysed abroad in the City, what aid and succor there was come, for the
which all the night great fire lights were made for joy, and accounted the
wars to be ended, having those four Knights.

The end of the Battle between the Tharsian and his Companions against their
adversaries.

Chap. VII.
THe Lover of Daphne had begun to renew his light over the world with his hot
presence, when as those four Friends mounted and armed went unto the palace,
leading after them all the people of the City voluntarily, who seeing them so
gracious, said.

The Gods have well ordained, that for four Devils have sent us four Angels
to deliver us from their hands. Then they came unto the Palace, whereas the
kings and the princess were tarrying for them, very joyful to see their
gallant demeanor. Whereas forthwith (because they would loose no time, they
agreed, that the Grecian and Prince of Tharsus, should go forth into the
Camp, and that the rest should be aloof off, to yield their help when need
required.

They all rejoiced at the agreement: wherewith the common people began to place
themselves upon the walls of the City, the better for to see what these
knights did* The like did the princess and her damosells, from that part of
the palace that looked toward the Camp: there they tarried the coming of
the two Friends, her heart working with exceeding joy and desire to behold the
battle, as one that had no small interest in the action.

These two passed through the streets so pleasantlye, that which way soever
they went, the Ladies gave them a thousand blessings, and the people with high
voices gave testimony of that they desired. The Tharsian was mounted on his
mighty horse, and at the pommell of his saddle did hang that bloody Mace that
he won the night before, with a spear that seemed to be a beam of an oak
tree, and a gallant horn at his neck that became him well. They all meruailed
at the furious countenance they both showed: for although the Grecian was not
so great, being about three fingers less than the prince of Tharsus, yet he
was altogether as well set, and rid in such sort, that all did esteem him for
a stout knight, when they saw his gallant disposition.

Forthwith they went forth into the Camp, and when they had passed the
bridge a bow shot, the Tharsian lift up his visor, and began to blow his horn
with so great force, that he made it to be heard throughout all the Camp, and
said.

O furious and fierce Pagan, is it possible that he who would have the fair
Flora for wife should be so careless, his enemy being in the field? Come, if
thou will have the weapon that thou did loose yesternight, and be revenged:
for here I do tarry for thee. The Princess did very well from the place
whereas she was, hear what the Knight said, being very joyous that so good
help was come unto her.

The Tharsian seeing that he came not, blewe his horn again and said. O vile
Moore, wherefore do thou stay and not come forth into the field, thy Lady
being there? Come* come for it is now time for to make show that thou do
love, and the effect of all thy force.

The Pagan tarried not long, but put himself at the door of his Tent, mounted
on a proud and mighty horse, armed in black armor, full of red knots, which
caused fear to them that did behold them. There were two Giants that would not
agree that he should go forth, and for that they were armed, and mounted upon
great beasts, they said to him: stay mighty Arlante, for we will go and
bring unto thee those discourteous knights, disturbers of our quietness, for it is
no right to give them so honorable a death as to die by your hands.

So pulling down their visors they went without company from the bridge,
whereas they caused more to be in a readiness, when it was needful. It did not
grieve these two friends to see them come in that sort, being so big that they
seemed great Pine trees.

At their coming the biggest of them who was called Fermonte said: what is it
that you would have Knights, that so early have risen for to disquiet the King
Arlante our Lord? if you come to seek your death for the offense which you
committed yesternight, he does not come to give it you, for that he will not
give you so much honor.

The Tharsian took in hand to answer him, and said, thou discourteous beast, if
the tyrant have any anger against us, and so much delights to make war
with them that never did him wrong, it were better for him to take revenge
himself, or else peradventure he means to take vengeance of his wrath and
your deaths together. So without any more words they turned their horses, and
made their encounter in the midst of their carreere with such a noise, that
it seemed four furious rocks had met together, their incounters were such.

The valiant Tharsian seeing that it was the first lance that he ran with in
all his life, and being also before his fair Mistres, he commended himself
to Mahomet for help, and incountred the fierce Giant with such a blow, that
with a truncheon of the lance in his breast, he made him fall to the ground,
so that he moved neither hand or foot, with so great wonder unto them that
were present, that they forgot the wondrous blow that was given by the warlike
Grecian: who (as though the fair Oliuia had been present) encountered the Giant
so strongly, that he made him to fall over the horse crupper, pierced thorough
and thorough: and he was incountred in such sort, that it made him stagger in
the saddle, and the Tharsian failed his stirrops with his strong encounter: but
in recovering himself, he stayed to behold with what gallantnes the Grecian
returned, more esteeming him then than he did before.

From the City there was heard a great noise of mirth, the people saying, We
have one devil less.

The two good Friends of these stout Warriers came forth of the City, for that
they saw the other two Giants did make themselves ready for to encounter them,
and that out of the Court of Guard came forth the fierce Arlante, mounted on a
mighty Elephant, and at his saddle bow another mighty mace of steel
hanging, whereby it did appear, he was very cunning in using of that kind of
weapon.

The two Giants seeing their companions on ye ground at one blow, without
keeping the law of Knighthood, came with their spears to encounter the two
good Friends, who did abide them without any fear, the one with his new sword,
and the other with his mace. When they came to make their encounter, it was a
sight worthy to be seen: for even as though they should strike upon a rock,
in such sort the Giants moved the Knights, passing the one by the other
without any staggering. Forthwith they returned with their mighty fawchions
in their hands: and all of them at one time smit such blows, that it was
marvel they fell not all to the ground.

Somewhat more did the Princes show themselves, for that the Tharsian (with his
heavy mace) reached on the helm of his Enemy such a blow, that he made him
decline his head to the saddle bow, and coming with another, if he had hit him
full on the head, he had ouerthrown him: yet (for all that) he gave him such a
blow upon the shoulder, that (with very grief) he could no more move his
shield arm. But the Giaunt (roaring like a Bull) struck such a blow, that
(lighting upon the Tharsians helm) it made him fall upon his horse neck
without any sense, and it seemed that he was dead, for that his horse carried
him about the field, till he came unto the place whereas the first fierce
Giant lay astonished with his encounter.

The Giant being now come to himself, arose up, and seeing his mortal Enemy
in that sort, he assayed for to take him in his arms: and he had done it, if
at that time the Lover of Floralinda had not come, who seeing the discourteous
dealing of the Giaunts, (having a good horse) came at such time as this wretch
was laying hold of the Prince, and gave him such a thrust with the breast of
his horse, that the vnweeldie Monster fell down upon the ground.

Now was the courageous Youth come unto himself, and acknowledging his estate,
he humbled himself to the Prince for his aid and succor, and therewith he
lift up his mace, and went to the other Giant, who came and received him with
his fauchion aloft: but this beloved youth did execute his blow in such sort,
that he made his brains fly out of the s^ull, and ou^rthrew the Giant to ye
ground. And when he saw that the Scythian prince would a light from his horse,
he came to him and said: Worthy knight, let this reuengement be mine, for that
it touches me, and I will procure to execute it, and therewith he leapt as
swift as an Eagle upon her pray: which caused all that were in the City to
marvel, and likewise his Lady, who remembered her Lisarte, and prayed God that
he were one of those Knights.

The Greek prince used his adversary in such sort, that he could not rule his
sword: which being perceived of the prince, he closed with him, and caught hold
on his healme with so great quicknes and strength, that he pulled it off, and
struck him withal such a blow, that he overthrew him at his horse feet. By
which time, the Tharsian had cut off the head of his Enemy, with great content
unto them al, and praised the Moore when they saw him mount on his horse
without putting his foot into the stir^op. With many requests he took the
spear of the Troyan, who let him have it being greatly affected to the
valiantnes of the Youth.

At this time came forth the stout Arlante, saying: Come to me all ye weak
knights, for of you all I purpose to take reuengement.

The worthy prince of Tharsus put himself first forwards, and said: Stay
proud king, thou shall perceive that thou dealest not with knights which do
use to combat with any such advantage: for every one of himself is
sufficient (by the help of the immortal Gods) to make a more misshapen wight
than thou sweat drops of blood.

And all this might have been excused, if thou had don like a Knight to have
come forth, when I de^ied thee but thou would needs send three Giants, to
make them pay that which thou owe: and seeing that thou art so angry with
that knight that stroke thee yesternight and took away thy weapon, look upon
him for I am he, and if thou will assure me from thy other knights, I will make
equal battle with thee, with condition* that if I overcome thee, thou shall
forthwith raise thy seidge, and if thou ouercomest me use thou thy will on
me, and my companions shall return to the City, and thou shall have time to
do that which thou do intend. Well said Arlante, I would that Mars himself
would come to help thee, and yet for all that I should not think my self
revenged: and turning about his horse he would have assalted him. But the
gentle Lisarte said, stay King, for first I will give them to understand, to
whom my heart is bound of this battle that I summond, for if I had the
liberty as thou have, I would make an end of it forthwith, but thou must give
me sureties for thy word, and swear before some that thou will accomplish it,
and I will do the like.

Thou make many excuses said thee Pagan, and I believe thou do it because
thou will not perform it.

The gallant Lover was much vexed thereat, and therefore requested the Troyan to
go and make the Kings acquainted of this agreement: but they would not consent
thereunto, for that it seemed they were some what wearied of their days work,
whereat the two Knights received grief.

But seeing it could not be otherwise, the Giant returned to his Camp
blaspheming his Gods: and our knight with his companions, went into the City,
whereas the Kings came forth to meet and receive them, wherea^ passed between
them many matters important, which for to avoid tediousnes I do let pass,
neither what the true Lover felt when he was before his Flora, who received
them with so great joy and content: but yet they would not pull off their
helmes till the battle was ended. So they went to take their rest, tarrying
till the morning, al praying unto God to give them victory against so great an
enemy.

When as the gallant Tytan had left the morning comforted, and went to Thetis
with new shows of fairenes, these four warlike youths, being armed with
their shyning armor, went forth into the Market place of their City,
whereas the Kings and knights did abide their coming, and did bear them
company unto the bridge, leaving the Princess with a thousand suspicions in
her loving imagination, whether he that put himself in so great peril and
danger, were the knight whom she had printed in her heart, or not: yet for to
give them content and show forth her gallantnes, she apparelled her self al
in blew, wrought upon Salamander skins, then being many bright shining
Carbunkelles, embroydred thereon with diverse Laces of her own hair (which we
may equal with the thrids of gold which the Nymphs of Arcadia did spinne) she
made a sightly garland, with so strange kind of working, that I know not what
Artist could equal it. She greatly contented her Lover in sending him a Beuer
of blew, like unto her garment, by her damsel, who said unto him with great
courtesy, Sir knight my Mistress the Princess Flora commends her unto you,
and for that you do go to make battle for her, desires that you would
vowchsafe to carry this favor, for she cannot as she would help you with
more than with this.

The loved Tharsian answered, fair Damsel say unto your Mistress the
princess, yt he which so long time past does live bound to her perpetual
service, has little need of such curtisie, but being encouraged by her gift
to present her the head of the King of Cilicia in recompense for the Beuer, or
in the demand to loose mine own life, and being for such a Lady I account my
death happy. And therewith she returned to the Princess, who considered much
of the answer of the Knight, concluding to confirm in her amorous suspicion,
that it should be her beloved prince Lisarte.

And therewith she went unto the window with her Damsels to see the battle,
with more fearful care then ever she had til that time, cursing a thousand
times that Giant, that had done them so great wrong, till such time as she did
see coming her well-beloved Lover, who was the ioyfullest man in all the world,
for the favor which the Princess had sent him. And when he passed by the
window, he did obeisance and made his great horse to ^ow his knees with such a
grace, that made all the Ladies much affected to him, to see his gallant
demeanure. At his entering into the field, he put for judge on his part, the
Kings brother and his Son, unto whom he had given liberty, and caused all
the army be in a readiness if need required.

The gallant Tharsian put his horn to his mouth, making it to sound throughout
all the Camp, to advise the King of his coming, who came armed with his
accustomed armor, saving that on his shield there was a Serpent carrying in
his claws a Lady which he took from a fierce crowned Lion that had her, with
this Posie.

Stronger from strong does take,
The pray he nill forsake.
This valiant youth did well understand to what end he had that devise, and
for that the possession of her should be gotten by strength of arm, and not
with reasoning when he came nigh him he said: Giant it seems guiltines in him
yt professes to be a seruer of ladies to be negligent: And having such
confidence in your strength, you might have come sooner and assured your
happiness with my death.

And now seeing there is no more to do, because thou shall understand how
little I esteem thee, these knights shall be witnesses and judges on my part,
whom I command, that if the Gods being envious at me, do help thee, that they
raise the siedge.

The courageous Prince of Tharsis, looked for no other thing, but turning about
his horse, he beheld his Flora, from whence he knew should come his courage
and strength, and prepared his spear against the Pagan, who likewise came
against him.

Now have I good occasion discreet Thalia, to have my rude tongue forged, for
that it is so blunt, that I believe I cannot show how these valiant Pagans,
incountered in the midst of their swift course, with so great force, that
Mars himself would have doubted to have met with them: and for that they were
both strong, without any moving in their saddles, they both passed the one by
the other upright without receiving any hurt, making the shiuers of their
spears swift messengers of their strengths. At one time they returned with
their heavy Maces, settling such blows that both of them gave show of their
valors, and fell both upon the pommels of their Saddles as dead men, and their
horses carried them about the field, til such time as the Tharsian came unto
himself, and like a Lion he went against his enemy, with his uttermost
strength, and before that he recovered himself from that troublesome blow,
he gave him another upon his shield so great that it sounded as though he had
stroke upon a bell, breaking it all to pieces in his hand. Who seeing that it
was not for defense he let it fall, and assalted the Tharsian with force, and
with both his hands settled such a blow upon his shield, that he made it to
recoyle on his breast, that almost with the great pain he was without sense,
and therewithal staggred in his saddle, but recovered it, it was the occasion
that he was wholly kindled in quick choler, and stroke so thick upon the
cruel Pagan that he seemed to grind and bruise both bones and flesh, entering
and going back with such dexterity, that all who did behold the battle
greatly marvelled, that they so long endured in equal degree, without
acknowledging any bettering between them.

But she who received most blows was the fair Flora, who seeing her Knight
before such an enemy, and thinking him to be the same he was, her color went
and came in her face diverse times, showing sadness at every blow which her
knight received: which were such and so many, that if she had not been the
reward of the battle, he could not have sustained them: but reinforcing his
courage, he gave such a blow on the left side of his enemies helm, that it
lacked little to have overthrown him from his horse, and made him to give a
fearful shrieke with the grief thereof.

The furious Giant did return him an answer in such sort, that it seemed to
disquiet him, it was so cruel: there anew began their furious combat, so that
it seemed all the servants of Cyclopian Vulcan were there joined together. The
brave Pagan did lift up his Mace and went to the gentle Lover, who withstood
him, and put himself so much forwards at the receiving of the blow, that he
could not reach him but with his arms, and let fall that heavy weapon with the
strength of the blow, leaving the poor Knight that he seemed as though he had
been stonned, and being so nigh, the King saw he could not hurt him with
weapon, he laid hands on him, and griped him in such sort that he made him to
do the like, whereas was seen a gallant wrestling, and by reason they were
both of great force, the one could not recover of the other any advantage but
were forcing each other with the contention of their wrestling, that they made
their horses to stoop on their knees. They were but mortal, and to show they
were such it was not much after four hours battle, so well fought (that
Mars would have bin weary) that they loosed one from the other, and breathed a
while: then taking again their Maces, they began to lay on without any pity,
procuring the speediest way they could overcome: it chanced that the Tharsian
did look up to the window where as his Lady was, and seeing that she stirred
not, leaning with her cheek on her hand, he thought it was because she saw
in him some weakness: wherewith he pr^ssed to his enemy, and stroke him upon
the helm such a blow that he voyded blood at his mouth, and fell upon his
saddle bow. Every one thought he had been dead for that they saw his horse
carry him about the field: but within a while he came to himself, without
comparison much more malicious then the angry Uiper in the sandy Libia, and
with both his hands he gave an answer to his contrary so rigorously, that
hanging down his arms and voyding blood, it made him in that state that his
horse carried him toward the window whereas the Princess was, who seeing her
Lover in that case, her heart would not suffer her to see so heavy a sight, but
she turned her back, at such time as the grieved youth came unto himself, and
seeing the back of his Flora, considering from whence it did proceed, he
pricked forth his great horse, and assalted the Pagan, and raising himself in
his stirrops, with both his hands he gave him such a blow upon the crest of
his helm, that he buckled it unto his head, wherewith he had a great fall to
the ground with so great grief unto his people, that it forced them against
reason, and without considering what their Lord had commanded, trusting in
their great multitude, to give an assalt, saying: Strike down and make dye
that evil knight that has slain our Lord: but that encouraging was to their
hurt and damage, for yt the valiant lover seeing them to be a vile kind of
people, returned to them so rigorously, that quickly he made a broad way
whereas he went. Those of the City were not forgetful, nor the valiant
Princes, for in a moment they opened the gates of the City, whereout came all
the knights, and before them the three pillars of Knighthood, and set upon
their enemies (who were without Captain) making great slaughter, wounding and
killing with such force, that quickly the field was witness of their cruelty,
all to besprinckled with Cilician blood, and in such sort they did press
them, that at the evening they had almost none to fight with, and followed the
chase unto the seaside: there it was that the Argentarians, did most at their
content make reuengement, and remained rich with the spoils for many years:
and being honored forever, they returned to their City with little loss: yet
they slew that day more then thirty thousand men, besides a great number of
captives. They were all amazed to see the Knightly deeds of Rosicleer, whom
they esteemed in equal degree with Mars. The Kings received them all with that
content, as they were wont to receive such as were victors, increasing more
their joy with the hope they had to know what they were, who said that it
should be done in the palace. Then the gentle Lisarte caused to cut off the
Pagans head, and made his Page to keep it til he came at the Palace, whither
they went. And being all set down, the valiant Tharsian rose up, and with the
head in his hand, went and kneeled down before his Lady, who was the ioyfullest
woman in the world, saying Sir Knight, Jupiter reward you for that you have
done this day for me; for me to reward you I will not bind my self thereunto,
neither do I believe that if I should venture my life for you it would be a
just reward, considering what for me and my father this day has bin done by
you and your valorous friends, whom and you in the behalf of these kings, I
desire to pull off your helmes, and tell us who you are, which shall be in
regard of no duty, for that which is done is sufficient, but to leave us a
memory of your virtue and noblenes.

I am therewith content fair Princess, said Lisarte more than this does the
time that you spent, when we were nourished together, bind me unto I am
Lisarte the Prince of Tharsis, and have not made my self known till such time
as I had concluded this little service, which has been according unto my
strength, but not comfortable to your desert. And therewith he pulled off his
helm, which caused great consentment to all that were present, and his father
had no end of joy, in that he knew his son to be so valiant.

The King (Father unto the Princess) seeing that the Prince of Tharsis was a
mean to raise the siedge from his City, and to obtain so glorious a victory,
he went unto the Princess and taking her by the hand, he gave her for spouse
unto the valiant Tharsian, whereof he was wonderful joyous, and she no less
delighted, which joy I leave to the consideration of true Lovers.

This gallant Lisarte when he saw his fortune sure, turned to his new and
well-beloved spouse, and said for that worthy Princess you shall be more
certified of my firmnes, and with what truth you are esteemed: I have tarried
unto this time, for to have you girt me with my sword, although this Knight
(pointing to the Troyan) gave me the order of Knighthood: he would not,
neither I my self would suffer it, but at your hand: yet forthwith I defied
him to mortal battle. Then he told them the occasion of the battle, and
the agreement, whereat they all marvelled. But the fair Princess because she
would not be ungrateful for that which the three knighets had done for her,
said with a sovereign grace. Well-beloved Lord I am content, you know that if I
loved you, I do love you should make it manifest to all the Knights in the
world. But yet I do conclude this battle, in that I see you have better
occasion to make long friendship, then breed any rigorous enemitie, in seeing
what this knight and his friends has done for you, it is no justice yt you so
evil reward the^: and the rather, in that he loves and esteems his beloved
Lady, which is reason, and lives to honor her, which is his duty: and it
were a fault not to defend her to ye death: for there is no better love, than
that which is confirmed with deeds. And for that both of you are such Lovers,
I shall receive great content that you d^o confirm true friendship with him:
and I will swear the sin unto his Lady, till such time as my fortune grants
that I may see her to confirm it: and on this condition I do girt ye with
this sword, not to offend but defend so meritorius a knight. So taking him up,
she caused them all four to embrace, uniting undivided friendship, as Lisarte
and h^s people expressed in the great wars at Constantinople, where he
showed his love to the Troyan: who (with the rest) greatly thanked the
Princess for confirming that league. The Princes would forthwith have
departed about the Damsells business: but at the request of the betrothed Lady,
they tarried ten days. In which time the Troyan maintained a gallant Just.

The new betrothed princes in this time used such cunning (although but young
beginners in Lovers in wished delights) yt then was begotten one of the
mightiest knights among the Pagans, proouing so valiant, that he was held for
one of the Greek Princes, with whom he had great friendship, but especially
with Claramante, as shall be declared in the second Book of this third Part.

The ten days ended, the Princes undertook their journey, with great grief
unto the fair Flora, who affected them greatly. The new married Lisarte did
greatly desire them to let him go in their company, but they would not
consent thereunto. At their parting, the brave Greek did declare unto them who
he was: whereat they much grieved, seeing they had not done him ^he honor he
deserved. In recompente whereof Lisarte promised to visit him in the Empire of
Grecia, although he could not perform it so soon as he intended: but when he
went, it was in company with his Sun, and they were called the Knights of
the Sun: under which name they did wondrous deeds.

Many rich gifts being bestowed on the three Princes, they took their way
with the Damsel (in Rosicleers enchanted Boat) toward the famous City of
Lyra in the Kingdom of Lacedemonia: where we will leave them, and return into
France, to see what amorous adventures there happened.

What chanced to Torismundo Prince of Spain in the Kingdom of France, the
end of his love, with the departure of Don Heleno Prince of Dacia.

WE left the fair Princess Grisalinda, amorously passionated with meditation
only on the Knight in the black armor: which thought had so possessed her
heart, that her chaste desires could no longer resist: for this amorous fire
where it finds resistance, burns with more fury. In such sort it troubled
this tender Lady, that the conversation of the Ladies was nothing pleasant
unto her, all her content is now to confer with her cousin the Duchess, and
Alcisa (for so was the Damsel called) about her unknown beloved. Alcisa
comforted her with many examples of Ladies, who merely hid their amorous
grief, and obtained a quiet and honorable end, as the fair Oliuia, and the
worthy Claridiana: for says she, in the sea of Love they alone can tell how
to sail in fair weather, that patiently endure the tempests, knowing that in
the end they shall attain the desired port. I my Alcisa (said the Princess)
if there were any hope of obtaining, it were somewhat like: but for a Lady to
love, and take delight in her own affection, the beloved not knowing her
faith, what comfort can sustain her? or expressing first her affection, how
can it be but she erreth against ye modest order of Ladies, who know by
experience they are beloved, before they make any show of thankfulness. This
(said the Damsel) is the greatest error that is made in Loves war: for some
in setting before them the simple point of honor, have converted their joy
into lamenting, and dyed solitary, for that they would not live company. How
much more does the royal privilege of love stretch farther than this? not
judging it dishonor to put back a little honorable fame, for the content
which love brings. Leave off then Madam this wayward nicenes, and be not
ashamed to utter what your heart feels. If you will assure me to comfort this
worthy Knight, and honor him with your love, I will go seek him in the
Forest, and make him the happiest among men. Do good Alcisa (said the
Princess) and bind me ever to be thine: but I pray thee be not too lavish to
utter my affection, yet bring him to the Court, and see how I will reward thee:
nay, rather say my self will be his reward, than he should be slack in
coming. Alcisa promised to go, wherewith the amorous Lady was somewhat
comforted, and dissembled the grief that she suffered for his absence, and
received content to see the Iustes and Tornayes that were made for her sake.

Then flourished Knighthood in that Court more than in any in all the world:
the occasion was, that the King did entreat Strangers very well, in giving
honor unto those that deserved, lodging them within his Palace: insomuch that
all the Court was full of Knights, who came at the fame and report of those
Triumphs, and to behold the fair Grisalinda.

They who showed themselves most excellent, were the Princes of Geneua and of
Claramonte, the last being a rough youth, and very amorous of the Geneua
princes sister, that was in company with Grisalinda* also the Duke of Pera,
all valiant Knights. But above all for bravery was the courageous Duke of
Soma, a young Knight and a valiant, who served the Daughter of Armineo the Kings
Brother. She was very fair, and called Liciana, nothing agreeued to be
beloved of such a Knight, making show of her affection upon all occasions. To
this great Court did the prince of Phrigia come, being a young knight and of
great strength: who traveling to seek adventures, heard of triumphs, and
purposed to show his Knighthood. Thither came also the King of Carthage, called
Pontenio, a valiant Youth, and of the race of Giants. The prince Riendarte of
Phrygia, when he saw the great beauty of the princess, affected her
entyrely, but dissembled it till he had made show of his person.

The Challengers were the Dukes of Soma and Pera, and great prizes were
ordained by the King, to be given to the best Deseruer. The Iustes were
ordained to begin the first of May, and end at Midsummer, by which time they
expected the prince Clauerindoes coming.

When the appointed time was come, it seemed that Paris was a celestial
City, so much and so excelent music was heard therein. The same day early
the King banquetted all the princes, that they might have time for the Iustes:
which banquet ended, the Challengers armed themselves, and came forth
conformable to their estates. Both had green armor full of Flower de Luces,
and many precious stones amongst them, with their capparisons of the same:
each had to attend them fifty pages in green velvet, cut upon gold Tinsell. In
their shields was all their difference: the Duke of Soma for that he lived
beloved, had on his shield his Lady painted, with a crown of fragrant lillies
on her head, and this posie for the border.

Crowned for courtesy and beauty,
By desert and my bound duty.
He rode gallantly forwards, making obeisance to the Ladies, the high Constable
of France carrying his shield and spear.

The courageous Duke of Pera had on his shield a heart pierced thorough, with
this posie.

She is fair whom I regard,
Yet thus she does my heart reward.
The Duke of Bauier did carry his shield, and another Nobleman his helm.
When they came to their standing, many Knights as well Naturals as Strangers
(desirous of honor) came forth unto the Iusts. The Duke of Soma was the first
that began, against whom came a French Knight called Raymiro, on whom all
people fixed their eyes. They each assaulted other with the force of their
arms and swiftnes of their horse, till in the midst of the great place they
made their encounter so mightily, that the Duke failed one stirrup, yet passed
by, and overthrew the Frenchman with a great fall unto the ground. Then they
greatly esteemed the Duke of Soma, for that the French Knight was known to be
valiant. Then came forth a Spanish Knight, called the stout Salandrio, who
clasping well his legs, went against his Contrary, where they made terrible
encounters: the Spaniard lost his reins, which was the occasion for them that
knew him, the more to esteem the Duke of Soma. They recovered each of them
again a great spear, and with double courage assaulted one the other, that the
people were all in doubt, till that in the midst of their course they
incountred in such sort, that the strong Spaniard lost his saddle, and the
Frenchman his stirrops: yet in recovering, he leapt up on his horse again
very lightly, giving great content unto his Lady, who was joyful of that
which her gallant Knight had done. She was talking with the fair Orosia, who
was desirous to see what her Prince could do.

Then the Duke of Soma left the List, and gave place for the brave Duke of
Pera, who for that he was in disgrace of his Lady, his blows were mortal, so
that in ten courses he overthrew eight Knights dead to the ground: till such
time as on the one side of the place, came in that stout Pagan Pontenio King of
Carthage, all in blew armor with white bends, and mounted upon a mighty Roan
horse.

Of this Moore speaks Artemidoro, who made promise unto his Lady, to travel
in the world two years in praise of her beauty, and to carry to Carthage al ye
names of them he should overcome, where she remained all the time that he
traveled in performing that rigorous and hard promise. And for that he was
absent, he wore his armor of that color, and on his shield the picture of
Faith placed in the heavens, with this posie.

More than humane is thy hope,
my assurance is divine:
Faith and vows in heaven are fixed,
Thine am I, and thou art mine.
This Kingly Moore caused much expectation of valiantnes at sight of his
person: who entering the List took a great spear, and spurring his fierce
horse, they came and made their encounter in the midst of their course, with so
mighty blows, that the Moore passed forwards upright, without any
staggering, which made them all glad: but he of Pera made a little moving in
his saddle. Forthwith they took other spears, and with double courage they
made their encounter, in such sort that ye Duke came to the ground, the gyrths
broken, and the saddle between his legs, whereunto was attributed his fall. The
Moore crossed to the counter list, his horse doubling under him, but he
recovered him very lightly. The Duke put the fault in the gyrths, and would
have returned to the just again, whereupon they had like to have come
together, till such time as the Judges did determine that it was an overthrow.
Then did they sound an infinite number of instruments, and (being a foot) the
Moore mounted on his horse without putting any foot in stirrup.

There he did tarry the coming forth of the other Maintainer of the Lysts:
who came forth with so much cholar, that all stood still to behold him: and
not without some doubt to the fair Liciana, fearing to see him in some peril.

They encountered with the swiftnes of their horses, and joined shiuering their
spears into small splinters, and passed by well settled. Other spears they
took, and did the like, till such time as the Moore being angry at so much
delay, chose a great spear, and incountered the courageous Duke so strongly,
that it did not profit him to be beloved or amorous, but he must come to the
ground: neither went the Pagan free, but received one of the greatest
encounters that ever he sustained in all his life, so that if he had not
embraced his horses neck, he had fallen as well as the Duke did. But in settling
himself, he began to do many gallant tricks in the field, at the sounding
of the instruments.

In such sort he behaved himself, that before evening he overthrew to the
ground more than thirty well approved Knights, whereby he was esteemed to
be one of the most valiantest Knights in all the world. And for that it was
very late, there was not any Prince of worthiness or estimation, that would
make proof of his valor till the next day.

With great care was the discreet Alcisa all that day about that which she had
promised unto the Princess Grisalinda, and for to put it in effect, she
intended the next day to go forth unto the place appointed between her and
the friendly Knights. Who (so soon as they were forth of the City) went with
their Pages into the wood to rest themselves, whereas before they did eat.

The night being well spent, they returned unto ye City, and lighted at a
house, whereas they left their horses in good order: so they pulled off their
helmes, and with their strong habergins which they wore and their swords they
went forth to walk: and for that there was so much people, they were not
looked at, neither their entering into the Palace marked, whereas the brave
Spaniard contented himself with the sight of his Lady and Mistres, and
understood the success of the Iustes, with purpose to return thither within
two days. At their coming in the tables were taken up, which was the
occasion, that they might at ease content themselves in the sight of the
ladies, for that the king did admit Dancing that Night. They being there in
this sort, the King of Carthage entered, and for that the knights did not give
him way at the first, he being somewhat proud (which obscured his deeds) he
said: Do you not see knights who enters, for to show the courtesy that
becomes ye. The Spaniard was gentle by nature, but being in high and lovely
imaginations, he answered: And thou knight, endued more with pride than good
manners, do not thou see us that are here, and ask license for to come in.
The Moore would not endure that answer even of Mars himself: and therewith
laid hand on his sword, as also did three or four of his knights that came
with him. But when the Dacian did see that all the mirth was turned vpside
down, he quickly made a large way, for that at two blows he overthrew two
dead to the ground, and recovered the door, because they should not be
compassed about. The Spaniard who was very desirous the Carthaginian, reached
him a little blow on the head, which was the occasion that all the kings Guard
were in an vproare. The which these two Friends seeing with a trice they were in
the Court yard: and making so good shift as they could, they left six dead,
and so went toward their lodging, til such time as the people in the palace
were in quiet.

The King straight ways commanded search to be made who it should be that
were the doers: br but reason there were so many, it could not be known who
they should be. The tumult was only that night, for that from that time
forwards, there should none enter into the Palace with armor no^ without
license, on any day that daunces were admitted.

The Spanish and Dacian Knights as they were young men, and that their blood
wrought more in them tha^ sleep, would not go to rest, till they had gone
round about the Palace, and for that it butted upon so gallant and delightful
gardens, they might there pass away the time, till the night were farther
spent, and drew nigh to that quarter whereas the Ladies were, which butted
toward the gardens.

The Prince of Spain knew it, for that he was there before: and coming more
nigher, they heard a divine voice, which at the recording of a Base, did sound
very sweetly, which gave great comfort unto the Princes: they were very
light, and giving the one the other their hands they leapt into the Garden:
being within they went by little and little till they came so nigh the windows,
that they might discern who played, which were three Ladies that stood at an
Iron grate window in the Moone-light: the one of them had a Lute, and beginning
a new to sing, they came so nigh, yt not only they heard the music, but also
what they did talk: and they heard one of them say. Fair Grisalinda if the
Knight with the black armor were so fully certified, how you love him, as we
are of your voice, there should not need any other help but his presence for
you to ease your sorrowful life. The Princess answered: Ah Orosia I am so
fortuneles that I believe none is able to certify what my soul requires, or
what my heart does suffer, for as yet I know not whom to love: it may be the
Empress of Trapisonde, or the peerless Queen of Lira, who has taken that
armor, and pitying my necessity has taken upon them the battle. Of this
you may live well assured, said the Damsel Alcisa, for they are men, although
in grace and beauty, they may be compared with these worthy Ladies.

Well if it be so (answered the afflicted Lady) how can they live, who so
truly love, and have so little hope, or none at all of remedy? for by his
absence it appears he has a mistress, to whom he does pay the true
tribute of his thought, and this is the cause that I only in the world am
fortunelesse. I am persuaded (answered the other Lady) that he respects
something in this Palace: for that if you remember at such time as he looked
toward the place whereas you were, he was intranced in his imagination, which
is a plain show that there is something that causes his grief in our
company. I beseech God said the Princess, that it prove s^, then shall I live
in hope to see him: but in the mean time give me that instrument, for I will
make these trees witnesses of my grief, and the birds that build in them:
with this she playde like a second Orphens, and to the instrument she song this
song, with an Angellicall voice.

If Mars unbind these bands of Venus Son,
Wherein the boy entangled has my thought,
Joy and delight unto my heart will come:
Else valors sight I have too dearly bought,
And ceaseles I (compelled) must complain,
Love laid the plot to kill me with disdain.
Or if brave knight thou twist thee in these bands,
That me ensnare and nere will be vntwinde:
I Will yield mine honor to thy princely hands,
Or dye distressed, if thou do prove unkind.
And Swanlike sing upon my dying day,
Of life and love no more, no more* away.
This Lady concluded her song with (...) earnest sigh, so that I know not any
but would have been moved thereat, and after a small pause she said. Oh
Princess of France, how is it that in thy tender age thou beginnest to feel
loves laws? Little (but cruel) God, why have thou made me subject, I know not
to whom? Ah now I perceive my life is but short, seeing in the beginning
thereof, so much grief has been reserved for me.

If thou delight proud Love to have me serve thee, why have thou bound me to
one whom I know not where to find? What triumph have thou in such my
affliction? Ah fair Orosia, help me to ban this false bewitching boy, this
thief of hearts: but all is vain, he will bewitch, and we must honor him:
all our exclaimes are idle and bootlesse passions. Then taking the Lute she
again sung as follows.

Gentle Love commands me,
To his hests I must agree:
Though my love I never see,
Yet must I his lover be.
Sweet love from this rigor stay:
No no no no thou must obey.
If I yield how can I tell
Where my wandering love does dwell?
His regard would please me well,
His disdain prove wor^e than hell.
Love then from this rigor stay.
No no no no thou must obey.
If I yield I thee inioyne,
By thy Psiches gentle eyne,
And thy beauteous Mothers shrine,
That my loved may be mine.
Else thy cruel rigor stay,
No no no no thou must obey.
She ceasing this sweet and amorous song, they heard the other Lady said. Hope
(fair Grisalinda) in thy good fortune: what, comfort your grief with courage,
seek help of the beloved, which must remedy you of all pain, other hopes
but illusiue.

If this werr so, answered the Infant, that I knew where to seek reamedy, my
grief should not hurt me. It is not so uncertain, answered Alcisa, for I will
tomorrow seek these Knights, and if occasion be offered, I will certify your
Knight the pain that for his sake you suffer.

Ah my Acilsa said the Princess, if you do so you may revive soul: for now
living I dye, having surrendered my will have no power, but to love, and there is
no end set for this tempesttuous travail of my thought, I do believe said
Alcisa, that at these new triumphs, they being Knights and desirous of honor,
first they will show their valiantnes in the Court before they will depart out
of the Country, whereas I know they have found some remedy for the grief
they brought.

Then they are amorrous answered the ielous Princess. No said the Damsel, but
I heard them praise a Lady much, and said they should never forget her, if
memory did not fail them, to remember the good which by her they had
received. But seeing it grows somewhat late, it shall be good that we depart,
whereby the Ladies do not conceive any thing of our long being here, for it
will be no small occasion of suspicion.

So they departed, leaving the two friends in obscure darkness, seeing her
absent that with her presence did ease those inward desires which the Spaniard
suffered, although he was greatly content to have seen by experience the love
which the Princess did bear him, that without knowing who he was, or any
farther consideration she was so wholly surrendered to him, and feared he would
not omit her faith.

Then the worthy Dacian said, Lord Torismunde, we may now go with great
security, and work some means to comfort your Lady, and it shall be some
ease to your grief, in reviving her: to morrow we will be at the fountain
against the Damsel come, and of her we shall understand the order that we
must use in this our business, for by her help we shall make the way easy to
take her from France, carrying her for Spain, and considering with whom she
is, her father will easily pardon her: and if it do not chance to your
content, they shall cut in pieces the Dacian Prince before they shall have her
from our power. With this they turned out of the garden, and went toward their
lodging, where as their Pages tarried for them, with great grief for their
long absence: but when they saw them they were glad, and slept quietly the rest
of the night that remained: but at the break of the day covering their armor
because they would not be known, they went into the Forest where as the
Damsel should come, to give the^ knowledge what had passed in the court: Who
in the morning being masked went forth upon her Palfrey, right unto the place
appointed, but missing a little the way in wandering amongst the trees, four
knights met with her, who seeing her beauty and disposition, they would have
unhorsed her, but she using the usual weapon of women, cried out, and the
Princes did hear her, who were hard by.

The brave Spaniard finding himself fullest armed, a foot as he was went unto
them: they were all alighted with the poor Damsel, who cried out for succor.
And when he came thither he knew her not, but being choloricke, he put
himself amongst them with his sword in his hand, saying: Away vile Knights,
and lay no hands on the Damsel, if you do you shall dye for it, and
reaching the first upon the head, in reward of his folly he cut it down to the
shoulders.

The three which remained, seeing the death of their companions, and that he
was but one only, drew their swoords and went to him.

But this warlike youth so behaved himself amongst them, that he stroke the
second such a blow upon the arm that arms and sword fell both to the ground,
who seeing himself lamed, he began to cry out and run into the forest,
whereas within a while after he yielded up the ghost: the other two purposing
to be revenged, they assalted him. He seeing their overmuch contempt, paid
them in such sort, that at two blows he made them bear the first company,
with great content to the Damsel, for that she saw it was her knight. And
taking off her mask she went unto the Knight with her arms open, saying: I
did well know Sir knight, that if any succor did come unto me, it should be
from this mighty arm. Happy Alcisa that has come to know the best amonst
knights in her behalf.

This amorous Torismunde rejoiced in his soul when he saw the Damsel and
knew her, and said unto her with great content, those false Knights fair
Damsel did not so much esteem you as I do, that so against your honor and my
content would have displeased you. Thanks be to God Sir Knight, and your
strength said she, which gave them their payment as they deserved, and
according to my will, which shall be always ready in whatsoever for your
content. At this time came the worthy Dacian with his sword in his hand,
whereat they did not a little laugh: and the Damsel said unto him. It well
appears sir knight, who has most care to do me friendship, for if I should
have tarried for you, I believe mine honor had bin lost, and now I say that the
lack of care in the service of Ladies is very evil, for at such time as it
may be lacked, that after it cannot be remedied with life, the which I would
have dispatched if these false knights had gone forwards with their rigorous
intent: but seeing that between you two there is so great friendship, it seems
that being remedied by your companion, I am bound to serve you both, which I
will do to my power. And therewith she declared why she came to seek them, and
gave them to understand of all that passed in the Court, and what the Prince of
Phrigia purposed in love toward Grisalinda. At which the Spaniard was so angry
that he said, I vow that I will no more put on armor if this go forwards, and
forthwith I will go pay him the reward of his boldness. The Dacian when he
saw him so determined, said, that he should quiet himself, for that in these
matters have is not profitable. This knight is in France, and he cannot be so
strong to resist us: and seeing you have not gone forth to the Just you may
go thither and deal with him. This Irefull Youth was somewhat appeased, but
not in such sort, but that the Damsel plainly saw the good will which he had
unto the Princess, and seeing it would not be taken in evil part she said.
What is it to you gentle knight that the prince does imploie his thoughts upon
Grisalinda? The Prince answered, to see the evil he does to an other in
procuring to love where he deserves not. And how are you certain (answered
the Damsel) of this evil which he does? My poor arms gives testimony
thereof (answered the Spaniard). Then sir knight you are he that exceeds the
prince of Phrigia in love. Not him alone answered the youthful prince, but all
the world: and upon this I will enter into the field with all the world. Now am
I glad answered the Damsel, for that you shall have need of Alcisa. And how is
it yt he must have need said the Dacian, what are you so much in favor with
the Princess touching this knight, it is due to our desire in procuring her
content with the earnest truth of our souls? I should do very evil worthy
knights (said the Damsel) if I knew not my duty therein, and I will put my life
in hazard for your co^tents and for that you shall be certified of al, know that
your companion is beloved, my Mistres affects him without knowing who he is:
there is no need to keep in secret who ye are.

And there with she declared unto them all that passed the night before, and
all was to know who they were: but the Prince desired her on his part, to do
his commendation unto the gentle Duchess of Savoy, and to certify her what he
pretended to do in her service. Then they agreed that the Damsel should
return, and certify them that they would be at the iustes. So putting
themselves in a secret place of the forest to repair their armor, they saw
come forth of the fame, a Damsel mounted on a great horse, and before her a
fardell, and when she came unto them she said unto the Dacian. Worthy Heleno,
the wise man my Lord and thy faithful friend does send thee this armor, for
that thou should this day in the French Court, show the royal blood from
whence thou did proceed. And to you Prince of Spain for that he understands
you shall give him great aid and succor, he sends you another where with
you shall make the beginning of your ease: and all other matters he wishes you
to leave to his power, for that he will do therein as for myself. So without
tarrying any answer she returned like the wind, and they lost the sight of
her quickly: with great joy the knights took the armor, and left theirs
hidden amongst the bushes, and with the help of the Damsel they were armed,
that she might know them and give advise unto the Princess when they came
thither: so with this agreement they took their leave of her, and returned to
rest themselves a little, and eat of that which their Pages had brought, ere
they went to the Iustes, the which at that time was begun so strongly that it
gave content to all the beholders: for the mighty King of Carthage was one of
the strongest in all the country of Moors, This gallant Moore changed his
armor, and put on one of a russet color striped with green, bordred with blew
upon his shield was there a Phoenix hard by his Lady, with this Posie.

The Knight and Lady both may live secure.
When he is valiant, she a Phoenix pure.
This gallant Carthaginian entered to be looked on: and after he had compassed
the Court, with a fierce countenance he put himself at the List end to abide
the Iusts. There wanted no Knights to be in readiness, and the first that would
prove himself was the famous Lord of Claramonte, armed with strong armor,
mounted on a mighty horse: who taking a spear, came and encountered his
Contrary so strongly, that they both staggered in their saddles, and the
French Knight lost one stirrup. But for that he was valiant, they iusted
again: but it happened otherwise than he thought, for he fell on the ground
with shame. Straight there entered in his place a gentle knight of Almaine
called Agesilaus, who had three courses with the King, but in the end he left
his saddle. Then entered the mighty Baldomes, armed in carnation armor, and
his device in his shield was a bloody sword. He being known of all, they
said that there would be the best iusts of all that day. They met together with
all their forces, without any moving, the like happened the second and third
courses: but at the fourth, he came to the ground with a great fall, and the
Moore remained somewhat weary with those strong incounters, yet pass^d
forwards with a slow pace, at whose valor they all rejoiced. And from that
time he began to do such wonders, yt before it was one a clock in the
afternoon, he had overthrown sixteen knights. Then changed he his horse,
and tarrying the Just with a great spear, he saw enter on the one side of the
place two knights, the gallantest proportioned that he had seen, and mounted
upon mighty horses. He on the right hand seemed to be most corpolent, and was
armed with a shining armor of an evil colored yeolow, but in riches very
strange. All the buttons and works were of white and red, which in the Sun
showed gallantly, and could not be well discerned for the rich stones it had.
There was a Grove painted on his shield, out of the which came forth a Lady
with a sword in her hand, as though she would wound a Knight who was on his knees
before her, showing his heart, with this Emblem.

If thou will smite, behold my heart:
Be kind, or kill; death eases smart.
His Companion (who showed no less grace and gallantnes than the first) was
armed in armor quartered like a chesse with blue and gold: there was set about
the quarters diverse kinds of precious stones, and all ye ioints were lion
tawney, and on his shield a shining heaven, and in the midst a Pelican,
cherishing her birds with her own blood, having this Motto.

Open thy breast, thou gentle Pelican,
And change we hearts: else dies a fainting man.
These gallant Knights at their entry gave great hope: who crossing ye place
with their spears tipped with sharp and bright steel, rid till they came to
the galleries, whereas the Princess was, who was feeding her sight with that
joyful object. Unto whom, the two Knights (when they passed by) did their
obeisance with a sovereign gallantnes: whereat the Ladies did somewhat raise
themselves from their seats. The discreet Alcisa did very well know them, for
that she saw them armed in the Forest: and now having occasion to speak for
her Knights, for that the passionated Princess did ask her if she knew
them? she answered: Madam, I do know them: for he with the Pelican is that
happy Knight of the black armor, to whom are due all good adventures in the
world, and whom of right I am bound to serve, for that he did not only deliver
me yesterday from death, but did also defend my honor from four rude knights
that were desirous to spoil it: and in payment of their boldness he slew them,
giving me afterward plainly to understand, that he does live amorous, and will
have no other content, but yt which comes of love, accounting you for his
natural owner, not desiring other reward, more than the glory of your
thought. I did well believe my Alcisa (answered the amorous Lady) that in
yielding my affairs to your charge, there could nothing redownd unto me, but
that which should be comfortable: and there is small need to persuade me to
that which I esteem as my life. I perceive said the fair Duches, that Alcisa
will show her duty unto the Knight of the Black armor, seeing she did not
only learn of him that he loved, but also I believe she told him that he was
beloved. Alcisa answered, I will stand for my knight, and deal in his affairs
as for mine own, and more earnestly, having occasion. But this I would that
you would consider of, for I told him that he might come this night and talk
with us by the Garden, whereas yesternight we were singing. Ah speak no such
thing answered Grisalinda, for to imagine it is a grievous offense to my
reputation. There can be no offense nor danger said the Damsel, seeing you
love and they know the place. For you shall understand, that yesternight they
heard all your singing and conference. Therefore seeing your affection is to
him manifest, let me persuade you to meet and confer, whereby you may know
who he is, and if there be no disparagement in his birth, I know not wherefore
you should refuse to receive him for the knight of your service. And now let us
look what they do, for I am certainly assured that these Iustes will be
lamentable to some.

So all three (the better to talk of their love) did put themselves together,
and beheld the knights, at such time as the mighty knight of the Grove (for so
we will call the Dacian) came and talked with the knight of the Pelican,
(which was the Spanish Prince): and his conference was to this effect, that he
would let him have the first Iustes, in the mean time yt he contemplated on his
Lady, who apparelled all in russet tinsell with many and costly stones, was
leaning on her breast at the window, and a garland upon her hair, which seemed
like Ariadnes Coronet that beautifies the heaven. The bodies of her gown were
somewhat open, and part of her snowie breast appeared to her knight, who had
pitched the great end of his spear on the ground to behold that sweet
prospect, with so great negligence, that it caused all the people to say, he
seemed as good a Lover as a Warrier.

With this the worthy Dacian came to the victorious Pagan, and said: Gentle
knight, seeing this is the office of Gallants in service of Ladies, I would
know if the Iusts be free for all perils? So that you would agree (answered the
Moore) that it might be from the Tilt, I am content. You understand me right
said the Dacian, let it be at your pleasure: and therewith they went into ye
great Court, taking big spears with bright steely heads: so that all had
great regard unto their incounters, and imagined that the knights were of great
force.

Being in the great Court, they came to meet with so mighty incounters, that
it seemed unto all and unto themselves especially, that their armor had broken
to pieces. The Moore made his encounter in the midst of the Dacians shield,
with so worthy a blow, that he made him fall backwards on the buttockes of his
inchaunted horse, and if the spear had taken a little more hold, he had
overthrown him: but he incountred the strong Moore in such sort, that
(piercing his breast plate with a little wound) he overthrew him to the ground.
He was no sooner fallen, but he rose up again with all lightness possible with
his sword in his hand, abiding his Contrary, who with an easy pace on his
horse came greatly amazed at that strong encounter: and at his coming the Moore
said unto him. Knight, thou art bound to perform the battle with swords, seeing
it was at all perils. I do not now receive any delight therein (answered the
Dacian) for that we will not trouble other Knights that would just: for they
that do demand battle in general Iustes, make show as if they before had
some particular defiance, which has not been between you and me, but for that
the Tilt was somewhat troublesome, I desired the open place, only at more ease
to prove my lance. This Knight has reason in all his speech said the Judges,
and is not bound to admit the battle, not having any will thereunto. Then you
do me wrong, answered the Moore. Let it not grieve you said the Dacian
Prince, for if you think to receive such pleasure by trial of a battle. I
will abide your coming ten days hence within the woods of Ardenia, where if
you do not ease your stomach, it shall be your own fault, and none in me
for the performing of my word. Let it be as thou will answered the Moore,
although I should receive greater pleasure if it might be now. Well, since
thou will needs said the Prince, mount upon thy horse, and he that first
loses his saddle or any part thereof, let him be overcome, and remain at
the will of the other. This is great courtesy said the Moore, and so with a
trice he mounted his horse, and put hand to his sword, and embracing his shield
he went against the Dacian: who met him, and together they struck such blows,
that they humbled themselves to their saddle bows. All that were in the great
palace stood still to behold that cruel battle, saving only the amorous
Spaniard, whose powers of his body were all in suspense, remaining only glad by
sight to get ease for his soul. Whereat the gracious princess received no
small content, to see him so busied only in beholding her beauty. The worthy
Heleno raised up himself very angerly for the great blow he had received, and
seeing that in giving and receiving of blows was only a delay of the
battle, and a cause not to give place to his Friend for to do that which was
reason, he determined to adventure it upon one alone blow, trusting in the
strength and nimblenes of his inchaunted horse, and therewith seeing that the
Moore returned more furious than a lion, he made show as though he would
stand and abide him, and at the time he should receive the blow, he spurred
forward his light horse, and made him at a spring to enter so nigh, that the
Moore could not strike him, but with the hilt and pommell of his sword: and
although it was such a blow as the Dacian felt, yet it was more troublesome for
the Moore, for that he felt his wrist thereby greatly pained. This skillful
Youth desired no other thing, but at that instaunt stretching forth his left
arm, he let fall his shield, and having time, he laid his strong hands on the
Moore, and held him so fast, and so quickly spurd forward his furious horse,
that ere he returned to himself, the Prince carried him by the arms out of
the saddle, with a great shout of them that were in the Court, publishing his
valor. In this sort he carried him unto the place whereas the Judges were,
demanding of them if he were bound to do any more? No of truth sir Knight
said they, for yours is the honor of the battle in the face of all the world.
The Pagan made no reply, but desired to return and prove himself again with
the Knight, and defied him to mortal battle, which the Judges would not
suffer. The Prince with quiet pace put himself into the Court, choosing no
iusting spears, but spears of fine and pure steel. There lacked not some
Knights, which were come thither desirous to get honor, who proved their
adventures with the prince, but by reason all went on his side, some he left
without life by his rigorous incounters, and others without any desire to
return and prove him again: till such time as they saw three Knights, every
one in a sundry part to enter into the Court. He that came first was the
proud Tribano King of Argier, although after he humbled himself to the amorous
yoke of Cupide, and thereby lost a great part of his pride: and so now he went
seeking at whose hands he should loose it altogether, and by chance his good
Fortune brought him to the Dacian Youth.

He came armed in purple armor full of green A^tichokes, and of great price.
There was painted upon his shield the God Cupid, with that rigorousnes as in
ancient time he was painted, with his bow and golden arrows, his face somewhat
discovered, and he compassed about with four most furious lions, whom he
seemed to lead bound in a slender third, with this posie.

Love the Lions heart does quail,
No powers against his darts prevail.
All remained greatly delighted with the Device on his shield, as well as at his
gallant disposition: for in showing it he put himself to encounter with the
Dacian, parting the one from the other with the lightness of their horses, and
meeting in the midst of their course, they gave heavy blows, but they
passed with great swiftnes without any moving: the like happened at the second
and third courses. Then taking new lances, they encountered so stronglye, that
their spears with a thousand shiuers flew into the air, and they meeting
together with their horses, it seemed as though a great house had fallen down.
And by reason that ye strength of the princes horse was so great, there was no
resistance found in his contrary, but that he and his Owner came to the
ground, and the prince staggered so on the one side, that he could not stay
himself: and because he would not be noted, he took it for the best remedy
to leap from his horse, the people giving a joyful cry, for they all affected
him very much. By this time the valiant Spaniard had left his loue-trance, and
seeing his friend afoote, spurred his horse with such grace, that the sight of
the ladies followed him. When he came to Heleno, he entreated him to give
place, that he might as well manifest his strength, as he had showen his love.
The Dacian departed the place, and the Spaniard with a great spear in his hand
put himself at the ly^ts end.

There wanted not one to come into the Ly^ts, with desire to get more honor of
that new Knight, than the devil that was past. The first which entered was the
dreadful King of Cyprus, who did meruailously affect the fair Orosia. This
Moore came in red armor, full of golden Suns, their beams stretching forth
with diverse colors which beautefied the show: and on his shield there was a
nosegay of flowers, which a fair hand seemed to give unto a knight that stood
before it, with this posie.

From this hand there comes flowers,
That comfort all my vital powers.
They came the one against the other so fast as their horses could run, and
encountered with so great force, that it seemed to the Spaniard he was run
clean thorough: but the valiant Moore descended to seek flowers in ye field,
having it destined, for that the encounter seemed to come from the hands of
death: and rising up with shame, forth he went, purposing to give as much
occasion of weepyng as there was then of laughter.

There is no question but the princess rejoiced at this, to whom Orosia said:
It seems unto me (fair princess) your knight has handled his affairs to
day with discretion, reinforcing his courage by your beauty in the time he
spent in beholding you, whilst his Friend did keep the place of Iusts. At least
answered the amorous Lady, if the content which he received in the beholding
it, should be the occasion of courages increasing, I do assuredlye believe,
that he alone will overthrow all the knights present.

Forthwith appeared another gallant knight, being a valiant Tartarian, cousin
unto the unhappy Zoylo, that was slain in the woods of Grecia by the hands of
Brufaldoro, about the armor of Bramarant. He came in quest of his kinsman, and
understanding of his death, he returned into Tartarie, for that he did inherit
the kingdom, Zoylo being dead, and remained no less affectioned unto the
Greeks then his cousin, and did show it at due time, that to him they did owe
the restoring of Greece. He was called the courteous Andronio, who came unto the
Spaniard and said, gentle Knight, I shall receive great courtesy that before we
do Just, you tell me, if you be any of the Greek Princes: for that my Lance
shall be more to serve them, then offend them.

Of truth Sir knight (answered the generous Spaniard) I would be one of them
if it were but to enjoy your friendship, I am none of them, although I hold my
self for one of their friends.

Then I request you gentle Knight, that our Just may be with spears of Just,
for that I have sworn by the faith of knighthood, never to them nor to any of
their friends to be contrary for the friendship which they kept and do keep
with the mighty Tartarian Zoylo, whose body they have in their Country. I am
content Sir Knight to do it in this, and in all what you please shall be
granted: so they went to take each of them a Lance, he pendring in his mind of
the force of virtue, that brings with it people of so far and remote
Countries. And taking their Spears they returned the one against the other,
with the swiftnes of their horses, and broke their spears, as though they had
run against a Rock, without any harm doing, and the like unto the third,
then they encountered on their shields so strongly, that they came unto the
ground, although the Spaniard with the reins in his hand, went to help the
Tartare, whose horse was slain with the blow, and had one of his legs under
him. And pulling it out, he gave him the pre-eminence of the battle,
requesting him for to remain in his place. The which although he did esteem
it, yet he would not do it: he was forthwith served of another horse in the
behalf of the King, for that the Spaniard would not mount on his, til such time
as it was brought to him, for he esteemed him much, neither would the Moore go
forth of the place for the content he had of the knight, but forthwith took
of a sandal that was upon his shield, and discovered the fairest figure that
might be imagined. Which was the face of a woman, the most bright and shining
in the world, insomuch that there were few in the place that might behold it,
the brightness was such, and taking it in his hands, he went unto the Spanish
knight, and gave it him, saying: Gentle knight, now is accomplished that which
a wise man of my Country told me, that I should loose my liberty with my
shield, which I should give unto the first knight that should overthrow me,
and now it seems that it is performed. I would it were better for you: for
whereas it was given me, it was in some estimation. Because I will not do any
thing to gainsay your will gentle knight (said the Spaniard) I take it, and I
give you mine to use in exchange, and I would feign win an owner that would
sustain it with the honor as he which does give it has done, and so gave him
his, and took that of the Tartare, and never King received a better gift.

The fair Spaniard rejoiced at the heart, when he saw how well it became
him for his doubtful Love: there was never Lover that had the like, and noting
the fair face that was upon the shield, it seemed it was the face of
Grisalinda. And in reading the Posie that was in it, he understood that it was
agreeable to his imagination, and this it was.

Why should I complain of absence,
Being ioyed with her presence.
There could not be given to this loving youth a thing that did more content
him: so very joyful he was, pransing his horse in the air, he put him self
to abide the Just: then forthwith appeared the worthy Duke of Sauoy, very
joyous of the beauty of the fair Orosia, he entered with the company that his
estate required, with twenty Pages apparrelled all in carnation Ueluet, with
gold parchment Lace, cut upon silver Tinsell, which was very sightfull.

The Duke entered with the same color, mounted upon a mighty, Fleabitten
horse, the best that was in all that place (besides those of the two friends)
with many plumes upon his head and helm. The Duke of Ornos carried his spear,
being an ancient knight.

In this sort he passed by the Ladies, whereas was his fair wife, who knew not
were she was with joy to see her gentle and well-beloved Lord, so well
proportioned. The Irefull Spaniard did know him by his devise, which was a Sea,
and in the midst of it a beauteous gally, and on the one side of it a Lady
who gave her hand to a knight that was in the Sea, with this Emblem.

I shall not sink where my fair beauty sails,
But floate sustaind: so much my love preuailes.
The grateful Spaniard would show unto the Duchess his bounden duty, and how
in earnest truth he honored her: for when he should make his encounter, he
made show as if he erred in the blow, and lifted up his spear for that he
would do the Duke no harm, and received ^he Dukes encounter upon his new and
fair shield, which most grieved him.

The Duke thinking he had failde by chance, commanded other spears to be
brought, and seeing him miss ^he second and third, he said. Sir knight I am
beholding or that which you have done, although here it seems it might be
excused.

The Spaniard answered: My Lance (worthy Duke) is not accustomed, to seize on
that which his master loves, I desire not your hurt, but do offer in what I
may to do you service.

Every one did much praise the knight, imagining certainly who it should be:
but the Duchess when she saw the courtesy that he used with the Duke, said
unto the Princess, from this day forwards fair Grisalinda, if ye were
importuned to favor the knight of the fair portrature (for so we will call
him) do not let this kindness to the Prince my husband be unrequited: for hence
forth for his valor and courtesy I will ever study to give him his desert. For
this Lady (said the Damsel Alcisa) wherefore do you leave me out in so just
a demand: who does owe more unto the Knight of the fair Portrature than I? if
he delivered you from prison, he delivered me from death and dishonor: so that
on this we must contend. And I will call in my aid the Knight of the grove,
for although we are in one opinion, touching love toward him, I know not from
whence is taught this heresy in the law of love, there must only be one
beloved. With such helpers answered the yielded Lady, it is not unlike but that
the Knight shall obtain his meeting* for here is nothing procured but for his
content: yet let some look to the fame of Grisalinda, since now the Princess
of France is in hazard.

Their sweet conversation was cut off, for that the Sun was about to bathe her
self in the West Ocean, and then there entered on the one side of the great
Court, to the number of thirty Knights, al with upper signs of mourning. And
the last was a valiant Knight with the same devise, his visor down, with a
great Spear of clear and sharp Iron, his shield all steel, and in the
midst thereof was painted Ielosic, with this Posie.

My Love looks on me with disdainefull eye,
Which makes me full of watchful Iealosie.
At that instant he was known to be the Prince of Phrigia, for seeing with
what strangnes the Princess did entreat him, he lived the most passioned man
in all the world, and his passion did pintch him so much, that he was
constrained to come, not as unto so joyful feasts and triumphs, but as unto a
rigorous and mortal battle, suspecting that the Princess did love one of
those two Knights. So that he came to defy them to mortal battle.

In passing thorough the place, he went directly unto the Knight of the fair
portrature and said to him. I would know Sir knight the reward that shall be
given to him that shall conclude these feasts. The honor of a victor (said the
Prince) and he to remain as most valiant, which is enough. This is for them
that seek honor (answered the jealous Moore) and not for him that has
attained to the top of honor, so that it seems unto me all your glory is but
little, for that I will deprive ye of it in this place.

Thou come with more confidence than is reason (answered Torismundo) and
seeing thou will challenge me, let our prize be the head each of the other.
Thou art conformable unto my desire (said the Pagan) and turning about his
horse, he went against the Youth, who taking a great Lance, burnished the head
in the sight of his Lady, and knowing that that Moore was he that desired to
be her lover, he made his encounter with so famous a blow, that both Moore and
horse fell both to the ground, having his loving breast pierced thorough with
the spear, whereat all began to make a still murmuring, to see the horse of the
Phrigian Prince over thrown at one blow: those that came with him, who under
their sad devise were all armed, trusting in that they were so many, assalted
the Prince with a heavy lamentation, saying: make dye that evil knight, in
recompense of the death he has given to our well-beloved Lord.

Some encountered with him, and some threw their spears at him so strongly,
that they almost heaued him out of his saddle, but being settled he pulled out
his sword, and went against them, striking the first such a blow, that he made
him bear his master company, cleaving his head down to the neck, and from
that time he so dealt, that heavy it was for him who durst abide him, for
that either without death or a lamentable life in being lame he went not from
him.

The gentle Dacian and the mighty Tartare, seeing the villainy of those
knights, went to aid him, but there had been no need, if the king had not sent
his guard to apprehend them: knowing certainly that it was the prince of
Phrigia that was slain, unto whom he did not bear so evil will, but that he
thought to have bestowed his daughter on him: but the three valiant warriers
began so to use themselves, that very few or none of the Phrigians remained:
but by reason that the number of Courtiers were great, they were driven to
help themselves by the lightness of their horse. The Dacian was behind and the
other two before, returning at fit times with such fury, that still they
overthrew two or three to the ground, till such time as they got forth into
the plain, where pricking forwards with their horses, they were quickly a
good way from them of the City, leaving them matter to talk of for many
days. So they put themselves in the thickest of the mountain, whereas they
stayed to see if they could discern any body: and finding themselves in
security, they alighted, and the two Friends went and embraced the Tartarian
Andronio, to whom the Spaniard said. I would sir knight that this favor, which
fortune has showed us, in giving us your aid, might so continue that absence
might not take it from us. It is I that do gain answered the courteous Tartare,
to enjoy so good copanie* I will not say friendship, for that in me there is no
deserte. I is so great answered the Dacian, that it is a vantage for us to shut
up the perfect number of friends with so great and courteous a knight: and then
they began to give each other to understand of their doings, uniting between
them so great friendship, that endured for ever.

Therewith their Pages took out victuals to eat upon the green grass, such
dainties as the discreet Alcisa had brought them, and so passed away the little
part of the evening that remained, in sweet conversation, which is never more
excellent that among virtuous Friends. So that some ancient writers put humane
felicity in having friends. Alexander the great gave great show of this
content, when it was demanded of him, whether he most rejoiced, in that he was
Lord over all the world, or to have many friends? He answered, to have friends,
for that with them he had gotten the name to be called great. A saying worthy
of such a Prince.

Now returning to the thee that remained in the Forest, having no other desire
amongst them, but the one to give content unto the other.

The Dacian said unto the Tartare: Tell us gentle knight are you in love for?
those that be subject unto the laws of love, cannot possibly pass the night
but in acknowledging where their heart is: and if it be in this Country, you
have no better occasion to speak than now.

I am a stranger in this Country worthy Prince (answered the Tartare) and as
yet I have had no time to behold the beauty which has been told me is
therein, so that I thank you there is no need of this trouble.

If it be so (answered the Spaniard) it would be a grief to request you to
go with us to the City, to help a lover. It shall not be grievous (answered
the courteous Andronio) but rather a joy, to employ my person in your content.

Well then (said the Dacian) we may not stay: and therewith they left their
helmes, and only with their corselets covered with their Pages cloakes and
their swoords, they went unto the City: the which they found all in a uproar
for the death of the Prince of Phrigia and his knights, and none could ever
imagine who they were that should do it: so putting themselves amongst others
they went into the Palace, where as they saw the king, who commanded, that
they should with great diligence seek out the three knights, that he might
know who they were.

There they understood how that the king, to take some refreshing, would the
next day with the Princess go forth to a house of pleasure which was in the
Forest, which gave great content unto the Princes, thereby thinking to have
better opportunity. Thus they passed a great part of the night, till it was
time to go toward the garden, and when they were all three come thither, the
Prince of Dacia leapt upon a wall, and gave his hand to the rest, so they
entered with great content unto the Tartare, that they would admit him in a
business of such import. The two knights went softly toward the windows, where
they heard a noise, by which they thought that Alcisa was tarrying for them,
and the Princes: but it was nothing so, for it was the Queen of Holand, and
her daughter the fair Grisanea, cousin unto Grisalinda (for that their mothers
were sisters) who were in sweet conversation at the windows: and to hear what
they said, they all drew nigh unto a bush of Roses, whereas they might hear
what the French Lady said. It had bin great glory for this Court fair cousin
Grisalinda, if this day you had been here to honor it with your beauty,
although the knights should have received grief at your sight. Whereas your
beauty was gentle princess (answered the free Lady) mine would have made small
show but only increase yours the more.

This is good fair Grisanea, said Orosia to see how you live deceived, in the
great quantity, which nature has bestowed on you, in making you the best and
most esteemed, and now you come to compare with us that have the least. My
Cousin and these Ladies of France are thankful for your long stay, for that
your absence gave place to them to be looked at, yea and esteemed, in drawing
after them the eyes of those brave Adventurers, as well proportioned for love,
as to aid and succor Ladies. Many have told me said Grisanea, that they have
showed themselves both ^ightly and valiant, but especially those two that came
in together last. Of that (said Alcisa) ye death of the Phrigian prince will
give testim^nie, by ye hands of the most valiant in the world amongst Knights,
and fair amongst fair Ladies. If with the like passion that you praise him
(fair Damsel) he regard your beauty said Grisanea, without all doubt he has
born away for reward the freedom of your will. There is no need to give him
that said Alcisa, that so long since has been put into his hands, as into the
hands of the best Knight in all ye world, and he which has most done for the
honor of France: and to serve him all the days of my life shall be my glory,
and I will think all my travel ease. If this Knight had his Lady here said
the Hollandesse, he had little need for to watch, having so earnest a Friend for
him as you, he may live without care of the great woe that those are wont to
have, which he touched with this passion. I perceive by this said the French
Lady, you know well this evil by experience, for that there is none that can
cast these doubts, but they that have felt Loves grief. Things are known lady
said Grisanea, without experience, for we may judge of them by report. Not
touching the evil that Lovers do suffer said Orosia, for that it never comes
to a certain and limited end: for when the Lover thinks his pain is pitied
after he has spent his life therein, he is still abhorred. I believe Madame
said Grisanea, you that have bin such a servant to Love, can tell all the
troubles thereof. Fair Princess answered the Sauoyan Lady, I hope also to see
the time, that you may talk by costly experience, and not be believed so
easily, as you believed me, without knowing my glory or grief. And in
recompense hereof, in the behalf of these Ladies, I do request you to let us
be pertakers of your voice: for according as it is here said, there is not
the like to be heard in this Country. You shall see Madam said Grisanea, I
will obey you in all I may, but I shall now put you out of all doubt my voice
is not so good as it is reported. And there with she took a harp, and began
to tune it with so excellent order and agreement, that her gracing the gracious
concord, began new discords in the princely Tartarian, who prepared his heart to
give in recompense for fair Grisaneas music. Pity it was to see the
amorous Princes new passion, but on these greeefes it is bootlesse to show
compassion, for the beloved only can give ease. The fair Lady began, making
the heavens a witness: who rejoicing at her music, did with their influence
inspire the hearts of all that were present, kindling in them new cares of love,
and more than all the rest the gentle Tartarian was ravished, his magical
armor not being sufficient to withstand it, but her divine voice penetrated
his soul.

Line you secure that I do live secured
From Loves allures, his witchings, and his woe;
I to his guiles will never be inured,
Ne do I long his needless laws to know.
Down down I sing, hey down as merely,
As Lovers sigh and moan incessantly.
Love is a joy ymixt with endless sorrow,
A clowdie heaven, a bright tormenting hell,
To day content, but quite undone to morrow;
A flowring bank that harbors serpents fell.
Down down I sing, hey down as merrily,
As Lovers sigh and moan incessantly.
Thus scorning Loves sad weeping weladay,
I sit secure, and smile at others grief:
And cheerly chaunt a gladsome roundelay,
While they wring hands, and beg refusde relief.
Down down I sing, hey down as merrily,
As lovers sigh and moan incessantly.
This free Lady had scarce concluded to make show of her liberty, being
shortly after taken by the gallant Tartarian, when as the fair Grisalinda
said. We live not here (gallant Princess) with so much freedom, nor in our
Court do we estrange the contents of love: for we see with how much sharpnes
those are chastised that do declare themselves for rebels against imperious
love: but though we be not snared, we fear the time, and so may you shortly
for all your disdain. We have had many amongst us that have to day abhorred
loves laws, and to morrow repented it, accusing their rashness, and
acknowledging the same, as to a Prince, to whom now they pay just tribute. And
for that I do desire it, I should rejoice to see you begin to loose some what
of your strangenes, for that I am persuaded, with some new means Love
pretends to demand account of the time you have spent from under his banner
and service. Let us not put her in so much fear said the fair Orosia, for
that in flying from it she may find a party whereon to employ her thought,
and not finding him, hold her self happy, if she had never known so much
liberty. Then said Alcisa will I rejoice, to see how that is admitted which now
so earnestly she condemns: and taking the harp out of her hand, she gave it
unto the Princess Grisalinda, who took it, saying. I know not (fair Cousin)
whether in behalf of Lovers I can say any thing, with an instrument tuned
with so free hands. The three Knights attended her song, and very earnest was
the Tartarian, who said unto his Friends.

I do not marvel that in France there be so valiant Knights, for that
there be Ladies to animate those whom they love, and kill them that they
scorn. In this sort said the Dacian there is vantage in loving, if from thence
proceeds to be valiant. And perceiving some new passion had happened to him in
hearing them sing, he said: Come nigher, let us hear what they will say in
favor of Lovers. The Tartarian if it had not been for discovering them, would
have exclaimed against love, because yet his wound was green, but so it
festred, that at length he proved the truest lover of his time. The Spaniard
was so desirous to hear his Lady, that he scarce heard what past between
them, yet he and the Moore at last went very nigh the window. When she began
to play, she gave a heavy sigh, as a request to beg attention of him, whom
she little thought to be so near her.

Where Love lackes can be no life,
But an endless dying pain,
Compassed with care and strife,
Idle, bootlesse, wretched, vain.
Love is heavenly, Love is holly,
They that scorn it wait on Folly.
Love combynes two hearts in one,
By sweet Love all joys increase:
Whence Love dwells departs moan,
At his sight does sorrow cease.
Love is heavenly, Love is holly,
They that scorn it wait on Folly.
To be free and not to love,
Savage freedom I it hold:
Yet Loves fire Beasts does move,
Taming Tigers fierce and bold.
Therefore say I Love is holly,
They that scorn it wait on Folly.
I sing this sweet Cousin said the Princess, for that y^ shall understand (as
I told you) how reverently we do esteem of Love. It well appears answered
the Hollandesse, that you acknowledge an Owner: if it be so, let me know it,
for unto me you may disclose the secrets of your heart.

God deliver me (said Orosia) that I should impart my thoughts unto so free a
Lady, for she neither knows how to ease grief, nor rightly to pity the
grieved. When I see (fair Grisanea, said the French Princess) that the
absence of your Lover does pain and grieve you, then shall you find me a
comforter, and I will give you knowledge of that little love I have: and I am
so certain that it will be shortly, that I shall not err ere long to say: God
give you joy of your alteration. Mean while let us depart, for fear we be too
long mist. They gone, the Tartare stood confounded at the grace of Grisanea: at
length he said unto his Friends. Of truth worthy Princes, although I had very
earnestly iniurde you, yet you could not have taken better reuengement, than to
bring me to a place where I have lost my liberty, not knowing who has took
me captive. The harm is so common (sir Knight answered the Spaniard) that it
is esteemed as the most certainest thing among Gallants, which profess the
service of Ladies. But it is so strange to me (answered the Tartarian) that I
cannot judge thereof, but according to ye grief which it causes. Thus
conferring, and on the death of the Phrigian Lord, they tarried the return of
the Damsel, who likewise grieved, that the Princes were forced to give so long
attendance.

At last they came both in their petticoates unto ye window, the princely Lady
trembling to see her self before her beloved Knight, imagining what offense
she did unto her fame, in coming in such sort: but the amorous passion did
overcome all, so that they came unto the window without fear, and made a
little noise for a sign. So the prince came unto the window, which was somewhat
low, and having no power to speak a word, he kneeled on his knees, demanding
her hands to kiss. They both remained silent, which thing is common between
them that love well: for when they meet, their eyes only speak, their tungs
are mute. The Lady, seeing his dumb passion, making strength of weakness,
said: I would not sir Knight, that my coming hither at so unfit an hour
should cause you to judge it rather rashness, than the bond wherein I stand
bound to you for the good you have done me. Besides, Alcisaes persuasion, is
the greatest cause of this boldness. Divine Princess (answered the fearful
Youth) I see well, that your excellence intends everlastingly to bind me
more and more by your many favors. That I should conceive either rashness or
lightness in this your humble visitation of me, were against my soul
irreligious sacrilege, and against your divine courtesy unpardonable
blasphemy. I rather bless my Fates, that have reserved me to this happy
hour, honor your pity that has respected my passions, and acknowledge my
duty to Alcisa for soliciting my suit so effectually. Your own deserts sir
knight said Alcisa, was only the solliciter in your loves suit. I for my life
and precious honors preservation, am till my death your bounden hand maid. And
though upon my soul I durst undertake that never any disloyal thought will
enter into your courageous breast, yet is my Mistres charie of this love
bargain, for gentle knight, many knights have dealt ungently with gentle
Ladies. Therefore ye must protest deeply ere she will believe, and keep
religiouslye what you do protest.

Ah gentle Damsel said the Spanish Prince, to mine hearts sorrow your eyes have
been the witness. And if ye doubt me, I swear by the religion of true
knighthood, by all the unstained honor of rightful arms, by the famous
remembrance of my thrice reverent Predecessors, if Grisalinda will be gracious
to her vowed knight, of a more constant servant should no Lady in the whole
world boast.

I do confess sir knight said the princess that I am infinitely bound unto
you, and your vows I verily believe for true, but you shall pardon me for
setting my affection, much more for plighting my faith to a knight whom I know
not. Sovereign princess said the Spaniard, after I had seen you, and that
this Damsel declared unto me your worthiness, I have procured things that
redound unto your honor, seeking the certainest means to perform the same,
and I have not found any thing with more content than to put my life in your
service, and desire no other payment but your acceptance. Touching my birth, I
assure you I am the Son of a most royal king, and sole Heir of a rich and
populous kingdom, all which hopes with my true hearts spotless love I humbly
offer at your feet.

The Princess held her peace awhile, pondering the weightines of the cause:
but the discreet Alcisa said unto her, You need not Madam make any stay
hereat, but perform his suit, although it be the greatest courtesy yt may be
granted: I will be his surety he will be thankful, and never contradict your
pleasure, seeing with what plainnes you do accept him. And therewithal
perforce she took her hands, and gave them unto the Prince, who enclosed them
in his, not having any power to speak, till ye princess said. At my pleasure
I make no question but I shall be revenged for so manifest wrong done thus
against my will.

The prince seeing her somewhat angry, said: Fair Lady, if the righting of
these wrongs must be satisfied with my death, let me now receive it, and I
will account it welcomer than death. And therefore (answered the princess)
will I not this time with deserved death punish you.

Do not proceed any farther said the Damsel, but pardon us: and therewith he
offered to kiss her hands. Then she told him the next day she should go to a
house of pleasure, charging him not to leave France without her lice^se. Thus
parted they, he returning to his Friends the ioyfulst man living: and so his
passion led him, that he spoke not to them till they came to their pages. The
princes marked it well, and laughed thereat: and the Dacian (though he were
somewhat drowsy) requested to be partner in his joy? He would have answered,
but their desire to sleep, with another accident that happened, which shall be
handeled in the next chapter, brake off his pleasant discourse at that time.

What chanced to the Princes by Brandarte King of Cyprus and his Knights: and
how they delivered out of his power all the Queens and Princesses that he had
taken prisoners.

Chap. 9.
THe worthy Torismundo (ravished with joy to see himself so favored,
intended to partake his joy with two friends: who being weary were laid to
sleep, and he having as much need, meant to bear them company, but they
were scant asleep, when a noise of horses did disturb them, yet they let them
pass, till by and by there followed others, which disquieted the^ in such
sort, that they prepared to take horse and follow them: but on a sudden the
Damsel who before had brought them their armor came forth with a fardle, and
making her self known unto them, she said. The Wiseman my master commends
him to you, and bids you to wear this armor to day: and to you valiant
Tartare (for the aid and help that one day the Empire of Grecia shall have
of you) he does send these arms, for with them shall happen the greatest and
first content that now ye can desire. (And as the other time) without any more
tarrying, she departed: leaving them greatly content, for that the armor was
as good as they had seen. Then they left their other with the beauteous shield
amongst the bushes, and with great speed armed themselves, and mounted on their
horses, they went forth into the high way, and commanded their Pages to come
by little and little toward the bridge Sequana. When they were forth they
mended their paces, but they could not see any body, so for that they would not
loose the way, they alighted, till such time as the careful and amorous
Apollo, purposing anew to salute the Morning hasted him forwards in his course.
At this time the three valiant Friends, being mounted on their light horse,
took the trace of them that had passed: But for that the country was so full
of trees, half the day was past and they had no news of them, till they were
told by a wood maker, that they were passed directly unto the house of
peasure, whether as the king that morning had gone to recreate himself. Almost
deuining how it should be, they went upward into the field, till the hour of
two then they saw a fair Tent armed in the midst of the field, nigh unto the
way that they passed to the house and there stayed certain Chariots that
seemed to be full of Ladies.

The Princes stayed, and the Tartarian requested them that they would let him
alone to go into the field, and that they would tarry for him there. For to
give him content the two friends did grant it, who lighted from their horses,
and when their Pages came, they commanded Fabio the Dacians page, for that he
was most discreet, that he should muffle himself, and go thither, and see
what succeeded unto the Prince of Tartaria. Who with his visor down and his
spear in his hand with a quiet pace, went directly unto the Tent, at such time
as came forth thereof a knight armed with yellow armor bordred with blewe,
mounted on a mighty horse, and in the midst of his shield, at the side of a
mighty River, there was a Lady as though she were a writing, with this Posie
which said.

When my grief I let her know,
In the sand she writes my woe.
The Tartarian received great content at the good disposition of the knight,
and staying to see what he would do he saw that he went unto the first Chariot,
in the which there was alone three ladies, which seemed the most fairest in all
the world, all three apparelled alike in gold tynsell cut upon blewe, and
their hair according to the use of Spain, with sightly locks, which graced
more their fair faces, and coming unto them the knight said.

Fair Ladies, the solitary knight commands me in his behalf, I should
do to you his commendations, and for that he has understood the bravery of
the Ladies of France, and how renouned they are in the world, he gesseth there
will be knights desirous to show their forces in their service. From this
time I defy them in the name of your beauties, maintaining that you alone
deserve the names of fair and beautiful, and to be beloved above all, and I
will run three Spears with every one of them, on condition that he who
falls shall loose his horse and shield, and there to leave his name, and if
unto him it chances otherwise, that fair Tent shall be the reward of his
victory. And I with the same lances do defy all knights, with the condition
aforesaid, that my passions is more just than any that has suffered by love,
my lady being the sole occasion, she and no other deserving to be lady and
Mistress of my thoughts.

It caused the ladies to laugh at that which those two^ knights would defend:
but the answer they remitted to the Duke of Soma, for that he and all the
other Dukes and knights that were at the Just, came for the love o^ the
Princess and the king, who at that time were arrived. The Duke gave them
thanks saying: of truth sir knight, the lady whom this solitary gallant does
serve, seems to be most fair according to his opinion. Yet notwithstanding
neither of them shall lack those that will answer them.

Without any reply or answering, he in the yellow armor bore down his lance,
and put himself in place whereas he and they in the Chariots might see the
Iusts. Then might they see come forth the solitary knight armed in silver
armor full of red listes, and in the midst of his shield a field painted
full of sweet flowers, and he lying in the midst amongst them, with this
Pos^e.

I do live alone content,
In this pleasant languishment.
He was mounted on a great and mighty horse of a brown color, with a gallant
semblance, tarrying to see how his companion did, for that he should run with
two and himself with other two.

The Duke of Samo went forth to the encounter, but although the Moore was one
of the valiantest in his Country: yet at the first encounter he lost the
reins out of his hand, at the third the Duke of Soma went to the ground, his
saddle all in pieces, with grief unto all, for that he was well-beloved.
Forthwith in his place entered the valiant Duke of Pera, assalting the one the
other, the Duke was out of his saddle. Then the Moore put himself on the one
side, that the solitary knight might enter, who entered with a great grace
forcing his horse, till such time as there went two Knights to the encounter,
and the like happened unto them as did unto the rest.

The cunning Moore that first did Just, was making himself ready, tarrying to
see who would come forth, then entered into the field the courteous Andronio,
Prince of Tartaria, mounted on his light horse with the armor which the wise
man had sent him, which was all gilt, and thereon placed many Serpents of
curious work, and on his shield, which was of the same color of his armor,
and thereon M. of color red, with this Posie.

Since I am chanst into deaths fatal lot,
I like my chance if so my Love be got.
All the Ladies and knights fixed their eyes on him, in seeing his gallant
shape, who passing before the chariot, made his horse kneel down, with so
gallant a grace that ye most did affect him, but none more regarded him tha^
the Princess of Holland Grisanea, who by seeing him, yielded in such sort,
that she began to be angry with her self, for that she was so bold to speak
evil of Love the night past. Uerie quickly she made show thereof, for turning
unto the Ladies she said. Let us have good hope in this knight, that will
better defend our beauty than those that are past: with the affection
wherewith she spoke it, it did plainly appear that it did come from her
heart, and therewith the brave French Lady said: I pray God Lady cousin, that
the force of the knight of the Serpents be alone to make free the passage, and
not to leave some of us without liberty.

The Hollandesse did well understand her meaning: but she dissembled, and
answered clean contrary to the matter, saying: I pray God that he be
sufficient to cause them to surrender their armor unto our guarders. They had
made their defiance, and with swift running of their horses they came the one
against the other, and meeting in the midst of the way, they gave such an
encounter, that it seemed they had pierced one an other thorough. The Moore
lost his right stirrup, and in ^^ming of his foot, because he would not fall,
he made a foul wavering, which was seen of all, but purposing to make amends
for the same, he took another great spear, and went against the Tartare, and
encountered him with so great force, that the vexed Moore, lost his Saddle, and
the Tartare his reins, which was the occasion that his horse carried him very
nigh unto the Chariot, but in recovering them, he made him return, and did a
thousand gallant tricks with him, all the which were pleasing actions to the
heart of the fair Grisanea, who could not choose but say. This Knight fair
Cousin, seems much like unto him that yesterday had the praise of the Iustes.
The like thought the other two Ladies: but the Duchess broke it off saying, it
cannot be he for that he would not come without his companion, neither durst
any of them come for the death of the Phrigian Prince.

The proceeding forwards on their talk was cut off by the cruel Iustes of the
two knights, for in the midst of their carreere they met in such sort, that
it seemed it had bin two great rocks, the one passed by the other with great up
rightnes, the one being greatly amazed at the strength of the other: and taking
other great Lances, with all the swiftnes possible, they encountered, and
shiuered them all in pieces, which whirling in the air declared the force of
their rigorous arms. The Moore did a little stagger on the one side, but not
in such sort to be accounted notable, neither so but they did all praise his
great force: but that of the Tartare was judged in favor amongst the Ladies,
and amongst the knights with envy, not only unto them but also to proud Mars
if he were there, for giving them so great force. They returned with the great
fury wherewith they were endued, and encountered in the midst of their
course, shiuering their Lances in small pieces, which was the occasion that it
pierced not their armor, but so oppressed the knights, that the horse of the
Tartare bore backward three or four paces, and settled his buttocks on the
ground, which made them that were present to think that all would have come
together: but he seeing how much it stood him in hand, and more there then in
any other occasion, it was needful for him to profit himself of his strength,
and to hold him fast unto the neck of his inchaunted horse, and pricked him so
stiff, that he made him to leap forwards, which caused the Ladies to be very
desirous to know who he was. The courteous Andronio returned, and thought that
the encounter had been of small effect, wherewith he saw that the fierce Moore
lay along on the ground, and by him his horse that did bear him company, who
with the force of that strong encounter, the one remained without life, the
other without sense: Wherewith very lightly he leapt on foot, and went unto
the yielded pray, and it grieved him for that he thought he had bin dead he lay
in such sort: and when he came unto him, he took his helm from his head to
give him fresh air, so that he might come unto himself, who at his return
seeing himself in the power of his enemy, that willed him to yield, he
answered: Ualiant knight it is not fit, that you should demand more than the
honor which you have got in overthrowing me in this sort, it had been greater
content unto me, that you had ended my life, and sustaining my honor, then to
leave me so void thereof. The Lover Andronio was greatly affected unto the
discreet words of his adversary, and without any more words, he gave him his
hand and helped him from the ground, and craved pardon of him for the death of
his horse.

Nigh unto them there was a French Knight, who was ashamed that he was
overthrown by the Moore, who having no respect unto reason, but unto the
passion which guided him, said: you have not to receive any grief valiant
knight of the Serpents for this, for that it was first ordained* that he who
lost his saddle should loose therewith his horse, and it is rather a vantage,
and that he should not enjoy that which an other inioyeth not. The Tartare
could not but receive grief, to see the signs of sorrow that he made to
receive that shame, which the French knight had used toward him: but Fortune
did quickly give him his hands full of occasion for to be revenged on all.

But the Moore using the license and liberty which the Tartare gave him,
without taking leave of any, took an other horse out of the Tent, and with his
companion entered the same forest, and left the tent for the knight to do
therewith his pleasure: who for that he had surrendered it unto the Ladies of
the Chariot, on foot as he was, for that they sent to call him, he went unto
them. And using great courtesy, whereof they were worthy, comforting his
troubled breast: he said unto them. Fair Ladies although I do not know for
whom I have done this little service, yet I come to ask my discharge, with
offer of my good will, for any other matter of great importance.

Thanks unto you gentle knight (answered the affected Hollandesse) for this
new offer, with security that for so much as you employ your self in showing
your strength in the favor of Ladies, there could not fall better occasion than
is this we have seen, to free this passage, else we should have been driven
to seek others.

The loving French Knights did not let to blush at the words which the
Princess^ said: but dissembling they made no answer, for to hear what
Grisalinda did say vnthe knight.

Worthy Knight of the Serpents, said she, you shall content these Ladies and me
in declaring unto us your name, and who you are.

With a gallant grace (answered the heroycall Tartare) I would willingly fair
Ladies that as fortune has put into my hands, life, for to employ it for your
service, that it would give me strength and power for to do a thing so just,
as to leave my name in your hands.

But fortune envying the glory that should follow heerof, forbids me by a
former charge to tell who I am: for that in telling thereof, it will be more
costly to my fame than unto my life. The Holland Lady, with great content would
have answered him to the purpose (but greatly fearing that her cousin had been
she that had subjected his will) yet seeing that it was impossible to get any
more of the Moore, she said unto him: of truth Sir knight it seems well by
the company that you bring with you upon your armor, that you conform your
self well with them, for they have not used the cruelty as you have done with
those knights in taking from them their honor, and yet will not tell us who you
are. Fair Mistress answered the amorous youth, my small adventure has been
the forger of this device: but I do give you my word, that within three days
(with another device that shall not show so much rigor) to tell my name and
who I am, or else to send you word thereof, if I cannot be the messenger. By
your word Sir Knight, said the Sauoyan Lady, we remain sure it will be so.
Assuredly (answered the amorous Tartare) that with earnest truth I speak it,
and first my life shall fail me, ere I break my word, besides I will leave for
a pawn one of my weapons. And so with a soueraign gallantnes, he took out his
dagger (which the great wise man Gelasio had sent him with the armor) and
kneeling down he put it in the hands of the Princess of Holand, and with it
his heart more amorous then ever any knight of his Country, and said: With
this fair Lady it shall be Justice in you to take reuengement, if I fail in
that I have promised.

It were not amiss Cousin Grisanea (said the amorous French Lady) seeing with
what affection you have taken that dagger, that he which has given you a
gift, should carry in the place thereof an other from us, being bound
thereunto. The fair Duchess in the behalf of the Moore, did help to take a
rich Jewel from the neck of the Princess Grisanea, and with a gallaunt grace
said unto him: Sir Knight, wear this for a remembrance of your promise, and
assure ye that on your Knighthood we expect the performance. I remain bound
(fair Ladies, said the Prince) for this great favor, and on a Knights word I
will keep my word: so mounting his horse, he returned into the thickest of
the Forest, leaving the Ladies praising his discretion and valor. Grisanea
could not hyde her joy, but sportiuely thus began: I am provided Ladies of an
armed Tent and a Dagger, what hinders me now to be a soldier? So pulling the
dagger out of the rich sheath, the pictures of a Knight and a Lady, with
certain Letters were graven thereon, which the Duchess of Sauoy thus read.

Grisanea Princess of Holland, true Owner of the mighty Tartarian Andronio.
Indeed said the French Princess, I see now Cousin you are a soldier, though
dissemblingly you yesterday denied your Captain Cupid: for never would so
worthy a knight have graven your picture on his dagger without your consent. I
shall hardly be believed said the Holland princess, but I protest I never heard
the name, nor spoke with the Knight before: neither do I believe he is a
Tartarian, my Lover (to be plain with ye) I pray God he prove. At this the
other ladies laughed, and she to make them more merry, confessed she was Loves
captive. So (having the rich Tent brought after them) they passed toward the
House of pleasure, nigh which by Sun set they had attained: where a while we
will leave them to tell you of the discontented King of Cyprus.


At the Triumphs in Paris, among many that Torismundo overthrew, the proud
King of Cyprus was one, who left the place, with purpose to be revenged: for as
I told ye before he earnestly loved Orosia Duches of Sauoy. And for that
occasion never fitted him to declare his love unto her, he determined to steal
her away, being boldned by his great force, and the strength of four most
valiant Giants that he brought with him, and a cousin of his that was the
Knight at the Passage, and ambushing the rest of his Company nigh unto the
House of pleasure whether the Ladies went.

These were those that the mighty Andronio overthrew, who intending revenge,
joined with the Giants and ambushed Knights: and this was the noise that the
Princes followed to the fresh and green field, where the Tartarian requested
that he might clear the passage for the Ladies: and having ended so greatly
to his honor, being joyful of that rich jewel, he returned unto the Knights,
and gave them knowledge of all that had succeeded, which delighted them very
much, by reason of their friendship confirmed with the Tartarian. So he alighted
to rest himself, and tarried til it was night, that they might all three go
together to the house.

The fair Moon had scarce begun to impart her light received of the Sun,
when these three Friends rid toward the house of pleasure: yet being uncertain
of the way, they wandered till it was almost midnight, and then came into a
mighty great field, where they be held traveling a very fair Chariot, and
before it two most furious Giants, armed with strong plates of steel, and in
the midst two knights, who seemed to be of great strength and after the Chariot
other two mighty Giants, mounted on light horses, with fearful iauelins in
their hands. When they came nigher unto them, they heard that those which were
within the Chariot made great lamentation, whereby it appeared they were forced.

The enterprise was difficult, yet they determined to succor them, and to
encourage them theretoo, the Dacian said: Worthy and valiant Friends, now is
the time to show the courage of your hearts, in attempting so doubtful an
enterprise: do you two assail those that are before, and I will prove my
fortune with those Giants behind. On this they agreeed, and the Dacian was the
first yt approached with his furious horse: at the noise whereof the two Giants
turned about, and seeing him alone, they thought him a very Fool, and one of
them only went against him, whom the Prince in the encounter overthrew dead to
the ground. By this the two valiant Lovers had entered battle with the other
four, with such a noise as if there had been an host of Knights. The Dacian
heard this fury, being in combat with the other Giant, and considering what
need his Friends had of help, he hasted the battle, giving the giant such a
blow upon the helm, that he took his sense from him: and thinking he had been
dead, he entered like a Lion amongst the Giants and Knights, saying* Upon them
stout and valiant Knights, for they are vile people, and too few to withstand
our forces. That friendly voice was heard as well of ye two princes, as of the
Ladies that were in the Chariot, who judged them to be their lovers, according
unto the Knighthood they showed. At this time the Giant which the Dacian
overthrew, had recovered his heavy fawchion, and with mortal furye came to
the Tartarian, striking him such a wonderful blow, that he made him fall on
his horse neck, voyding blood at his nose and ears. Then passing forwards,
he came unto the two Moors and said: Away with the ladies you like, while my
fellows keep these devilish Knights busied. So the king of Cyprus, his Cousin
and the Giant, went unto the Chariot, and took each of them a lady, lamenting
could not avail them. Yet in this have the king of Cyprus took not his
beloved Duchess, but the princess of France, with whom like an Eagle spurring
his furious horse, he went directly toward the sea side. The mighty Giant
took for his lot, her whom Apollo would have chosen for himself, for with him
he carried the beauteous princess of Holland, and his Cousin the fair Orosia:
at whose shrikes the Tartar recovering his sense, followed the Giant as fast as
his horse could run, thorough a bushie way unto a great plain, where he
ouertooke him two hours before day, and ere the Giant could ^et down ^he
Lady, he smit him so rash a blow, that the princess was in peril to be
trodden under the horse feet, and the Giant remained without sense. Andronio
gave a second blow that wounded the Giant in the neck, which caused him to
come to himself, and like an infernal fury with his dreadful fawchion he
came against the Tartar, and both together stroke such blows upon their
helmes, that they quickly made show of their great force. The noise was such,
that it caused the trembling Lady to come the sooner to her self: and
beholding the battle, she perceived the Knight fought for her liberty
against that monstrous Giant, wherefore on her knees she desired the giver of
strength to strengthen him. When the Tartarian saw the pearly tears distill
from her sun-bright eyes, with the point of his sword he went against the
furious Giant, who with his fawchion aloft came toward him, but by reason of
the swiftnes of his horse, he thrust his sword into the Giaunts body, and
drawing it back drew ^oorth his life withal, the Giant falling to the ground
with so fearful a cry, that the princess trembled, though she were freeed by
the Giants death. With no small joy the prince alighted and comforted her, when
he beheld it was his beloved Lady, and pulling off his helm, he discovered
his fa^e, being high colored with the heat of the battle. No less joyful
was the fair princess, in seeing him so well proportioned a Knight: who when
he came unto her, kneeled down and said. Receive fair princess this small
service, with more entire good will than my tung can express. Then answered the
affected Lady: Ualiant Knight, so much have ye done, that I can no way reward
ye but by publishing ^our force, which is the mightiest that I have seen? and
for that I should esteem, tell me your name, and withal carry me where the
Queen my Mother is, whom I believe remains sorrowful for my absence. Madam
(answered the joyful Tartar) I have no will but to accomplish your will, and
receive great joy that you will employ me in any thing. I am Andronio the Prince
of Tartarie: and in telling you this I do discharge my promise to you
yesterday, when I left my dagger in pawn, and received this rich jewel in
place thereof: which because it has been on that fair neck, added ability
to my weak strength, and boldens me to request ye that I may wear it as your
knight, in whose name I will execute all my doings. The Lady was very joyous
in seeing him she loved to be the Knight that succored her, and said: I crave
pardon worthy prince, in that I have not entreated you according to your
desert: but I am excusable, by reason I knew you not. All is satisfied said the
Prince, if you accept me into your service. You ask quick payment (replied
the Princess) but lest you should condemn me of ingratitude, let it be
according to your wish. This joyful Youth did perforce kiss her hands,
washing them with tears through the content he received: which nothing grieved
the Princess, when she saw with what affection he did it, accompting her self
happy, to be beloved of such a prince. The which this courageous Youth
perceiving, and incited by their solitary being, he said unto her half
trembling. Fair princess, after all this happiness it would grieve me, if
Fortune (envying any good) should tread down my glory, and bestow it on
another: you might if you please (time and place so fitting) assure me of
happiness, and rid nice of all doubt. Your speech is strange to me^ said the
vexed princess, to my reason it seems convenient, being entertained with
this gentleness, you should consent your self. Nothing is more certain fair
Lady (answered this fearful Youth) than the courtesy which you already have
showed me in receiving me for the knight of your service, is suf^icient reward
for more than all my worth, yet to assure my good, make me happy by a husbands
name. Sir Knight said she you are too forward, and if I thought any
misbehauiour in me caused this boldness in you, I would let out that lightness
with my life. These words and the sharpenes of their delivery, so wounded the
Tartarian, that he fell sensles on the princesses lap: who seeing him in ye
case, was ready to bear him company, but with tears and cryings she
recalled him, and he reviving, said. Ah hapless Tartarie, twice bereft of thy
natural Lord, who by disdain in France is seized on by death. Oh my valiant
and new Friends, no more shall I contentedly rejoice with you. And you (cruel
Lady) may triumph in his death, that has defended your honor and life. Ah
worthy knight said she, God knows what sorrow I suffer, for that with my
honor I cannot work your content, there being such difference in our
Religions: yet rather than you shall thus afflict your self, swear to me to be
bap^isde, and I do yield my whole estate into your hands. Express I cannot the
Tartarians joy: he vowed to be baptisde, possessed his wish, and with his
betrothed wife rid toward the house of pleasure, and on the way she told him,
how the Giants first set upon them by the rivers side.

We will leave these Lovers on the way, and declare the end of the battle
between the two princes and the Giants, who held them so hard, that they could
not prevent the carrying away of the Lady. The valiant Dacian to conclude the
battle, stroke the Giant such a blow, that it took away his sight: and at
that time had the Spaniard made his adversary stoop on his saddle bow. And
being nigh the Dacian, he stroke him so surely on the buckling of the helm,
that head and all fell to the ground, and then with two blows they both
together dispatched the other Giant. Then without any stay they followed those
that carried away the Princesses, and ouertaking them at the edge of the
mountain, they cried: False Knights, leave your pray, the same will cost you
your heads. And therewithal they smit two such blows, that they made them
leave their Ladies: and forthwith there was between them a sightly battle,
for that the Moors were the valiantest in all their Country. And for that the
Spaniard did make battle before his Lady, (for at ye time he knew her) he
made so great have, that he overthrew him at his feet, and lighting from his
horse, he cut off his head, at the same instant that the Dacian had given a
mortal wound unto his Moore, overthrowing him with a great fall upon his
back, and by and by he yielded up the ghost. These two perfect Friends when
they saw their work done, went unto the Ladies with their helmes off. The
French princess knowing her well-beloved Lover, received him with the greatest
show of affection that she could, saying: Oh Flower of Knighthood, how shall I
repay you this great good? It is but little fair Princess (said he) that we
have done for your liberty, your worthiness and beauty does deserve it. And
none being by but the prince and the Duchess whom they might trust, they used
very amorous conversation, till such time as the absence of the Princess of
Holland did hasten them to depart. And by reason it was not as yet day, they
lost their way, and found themselves in the morning nigh unto the Fountain,
where ye Prince did leave his green armor, by counsel of the Damsel that
the Wiseman sent: and therewith declared he unto them all his passed estate,
and who he was, whereof she was very joyful. There they joined hands, to
which contract the Tartarian and Grisanea came, who were received with
exceeding joy, the French Princess especially rejoicing, to see her Cousin
Grisanea so quickly changed.

The worthy Spanish Prince pulled off his armor, and laid it aside: being
unarmed, he seemed one of the fairest personages in all the world, which was a
new snare, to cause the gentle French Lady the more to love him. And therewith
they began to provide for their departure, when on a sudden they saw come
forth of the thickest of the Forest a furious Dragon, which amazed these
three princes: yet fearlesly they attempted to defend their Ladies. But the
Monster left them, and went directly to the shield with the fair portraiture,
that the Tartarian had given the prince of Spain, which she took between her
sharp nails, and gave so terrible a cry, that made them all to fall to the
ground: and rising up, they could not see the Dragon, but a pillar standing by
the christaline fountain of Forgetfulness, having an Inscription thereon,
which the Dacian Youth read, as follows.

From this day forwards the water of Merlins Fountain is forbidden to any,
till such time as the Son of the bastard Lioness, in company of the Flower
of the Spanish Nation, the one and the other doubtful, boldened by the keeper,
do take out of the deepest of the Fountain the fair shield; the victory
confirmed in the presence of the amorous Hircan Serpent. But thou Knight that
art desirous before that time to attempt this Adventure, leave thy desire, else
death shall be the reward of thy boldness.

All were wondrously amazed at this new Adventure, and could not imagine to
whom the entry should be granted: yet were they joyful that before the water
was denied, they had understood the effect. And for that it was late, and the
princesses desired to return to the house of pleasure, they took their way
thetherwards, with great content unto the Dacian, to see how well it succeeded
with his Friends, he judging them now not alone for Lovers, but as men secured
from Loves tempests: having a kind of envy at their happy estate. With this
imagination and consideration of the many troubles he had suffered, he kept
no company with the princesses: and that which worst and most grieved him at
the heart was, that he never received any rest: but rather judged that he
should begin a new to suffer greater.

The French Princess seeing him ride so solitarily began thus sportiuely to
talk. I see my handmaide Alcisa sounded your mind my Lord of Dacia: for she
told me, you had forgo^ all love sick passions, and would not be so idle
busied as to intend amorous business. Madam said he, you might rather say I am
now idle, for I protest when I did love (as once I confess, I knew that
madness) never was any so busied as I, night, day in company, alone, I was so
troubled that I account no travel like it, and I hope never again to travel
with that burden. O Sir said Orosia, if ye have loved there is no doubt ye may
again, do not disdain a lovers name: see by example the fair Grisanea, that
was yesterday free, and she forsooth would none of love, singing, saying all
was against love, and now you see the tunes her music in another key. And so
may he said the Holland Princess, but belike he scorneth the French beauty,
and means to seek farther for more fair. So fair and so courteous said he,
have I seld seen, and if I ever affect, I wish it may be here. In this sweet
conversation they traveled, when at the sixth hour, they saw much armed people
traveling the way agallop, right toward the Sea side. They imagined whether
they went, commanding their Pages to go and advise them of the liberty of
the Ladies, that the knights might be quieted. So they prosecuted their way
till they came very nigh the house, whereas they met the King, and all those
mighty Princes which went to seek them. It is not to be expressed to avoid
tediousnes, what joy the King and all those Knights had, and the more when they
knew who they were, and what they had done before for the honor of France. The
same day at the request of the Prince of Dacia, knowing the valor of the
Spaniard, he did so much that the King in public did join their hands, who
in secret had joined their hearts. The Nephew of Franconio rejoiced to give his
daughter unto the descent of Ricardo the Catholic King of Gades, and of the
Kings that succeeded in Spain. A happy conjunction, seeing that from thence
must proceed fruit that will make the world to wonder. In like manner the
Queen of Holland received content to give her daughter, to him who with good
diligence did procure before he was a lover the reward of a Lover. All the
Court did rejoice, and the free Prince of Dacia sustained his liberty. Also
the gallant French Ladies consecrating their fame to immortality. The courteous
Andronio would not depart with his loving spouse, but tarried till she and the
Princess of France were both brought to bed. And when their times came, they
were delivered of two Sons the most fairest in all the world. That of the
French Lady was called Grisaliano at the request of his fair mother. That of
the mighty Tartare, was named Andronisio. These young and new Princes caused
great rejoicing in the Court, and the king showed it by the gifts which he
gave. The Dacian did pass his free time with his well-beloved friends, till on a
day at the taking up of the tables, there entered the Damsel which the wise man
had sent him so many times, who making great courtesy unto the king, she went
unto the prince Heleno, and gave him a letter from the wise Lirgandeo, who did
read it aloude, being as follows.

Remembering and acknowledging wherein. I was bound so long time past unto your
father and you valiant prince, studying how much I may show it for your
conduct. I have found it convenient that you leave the dainties of the Court,
and return to the ancient travels: now void from your warlike mind, and with
the armor which my damsel shall give thee, thou shall depart forthwith,
aduising the Tartare thy friend, that the princess in recovering more strength
to sustain so long a journey, he return thither, whereas with great necessity
he is desired: and to have me in the number of his friends, for I will deal
faithfully in his affairs: he who governs the world be thy keeper, and give
thee forces to suffer that which is tarying for thee.


In concluding the reading of the letter, the Damsel said, that forthwith he
should arm himself, for that it was convenient with all speed he should go
forth of France, whereas so quickly free hearts do humble their necks unto the
amorous yoke of Cupid, and therewith she took out a russet armor, and began
to help to arm him, and gave him a shield, with the ancient device of Cupid
with two faces. They al received content to see the riches of that armor, but
not without grief to consider that the owner should so long be absent: so he
took his leave of them all, not admitting the company of any, he embraced his
good friends, not without some sorrow, but especially to the Ladies. So the
valiant Heleno went out of France, leaving them to talk of his great strength
for many years: and when he came to the Sea side, he found his enchanted
boat, who ingulfed him into the sea in such sort, that he lost the sight not
only of them that did bear him company to the Sea side, but also of the most
highest rocks that were there. All the Knights returned unto Paris, much
lamenting the absence of ye Prince, although it was a joy to see the bringing
up of the young Princes, every day more and more increasing in beauty, till
the time came that the Tartare with his fair wife young Son did imbarke
themselves in a well appointed ship, to sail toward Tartaria, at whose
departure the fair Grisalinda was left solitary, who with motherly affection
did bring up her Son the Prince and her cousin till they came to the age of
fourteen years, who in the bigness of their bodies and gallant disposition
seemed to be of many more years: where as we will leave them, for to tell of
that which happened to the Tartare traveling to his Country.

What happened to the mighty Tartare Andronio at the Sea, with a ship of Rouers,
of the aid and succor that Rosicleer and his companions gave him.

Chap. 10.
Toward Tartaria went this courteous Andronio, with his well-beloved Princess
Grisanea, very joyful for the good chance which fortune had given him in
accomplishing his desires with so little grief unto his mind. In the same
degree of joy was the fair Grisanea, dryuing away the painful voyage with the
presence of her well-beloved Andronio, and the fair Prince Andronisio, from whom
the amorous Lady did never depart, accompting that life to be death with the
absence at least of one of them. So they traveled with prosperous gales,
Aeolus showing to them greart friendship, til the tenth day of their navigations,
they beheld two ships with full sails bearing their course: by and by the
worthy Tartarian began to put in order his knights in the most dangerous parts
of his ship, because they should not come upon them unprovided, not without
many tears of the fair Princess Grisanea, who began to complain on fortunes
mutabilitie. On the contrary her Lover went upon the fore-castle of the Ship,
being armed with his strong and shining armor, and at his going forth met
with his beloved Lady, who greatly increased the courageous mind wherewith he
was endued. At this time the two great Ships were come so nigh that they might
discern who came to them, for at the ships side appeared a furious fierce and
unseemly knight, that lacked little to be a Giant, w^^^ with many more other
knigh^s began with great noise to bid them yield. But the Tartarian seeing
that with such people, it was not boot to reason, answered them with their
swoords in their hands, and caused his ship to be grappled, with that of the
great knight, with more courage then if he had the victory of that battle
secure: so there began between these two, one of the most rigorous battles
that ever was seen at sea. For that the Rouer was one of the most valiantest
amongst the Pagans. At their meeting they settled two so myghtie blows, that
both of them with the grief, gave testimony of the force of his enemy. Our
valiant Andronio, redoubled an other on the deformed knight, which lighted on a
Target of fine steel which he had for a shield, which being done with great
cholar, he saw him to step back three or four paces, wherewith he entered after
him, thinking all had been ended: but in a moment before he could enter into
the Ship of his contrary, he was with a sharp assalt disturbed by the great
Knight, who stroke him upon the shield, and although it could not enter by
reason of the Magical temper, yet he drove it to his helm, with so great
force that it made him not only to loose that which he had got, but all his
standing by the force of the blow, wherewith began such a battle that it
seemed to be of many more Knights. Those on the Tartares side did well defend
themselves, and offended their contraries: but when the second ship came and
boorded her on the other side, it was cause that the courteous Andronio left the
battle with the other, and supplied the greater necessity, and did great
wonders, for whereas he went he made a broad way amongst them that were so
bold in troops to enter into his ship, trusting in their strengths because
they were so many. There he found the lack of help that his good friends had
done for him, and was assured if they had been there, those people had been
but a few to have withstood their forces. Likewise it grieved him to see the
weeping Princess with her Son in her arms from under hatches, beholding the
bloody battle, committing all her charge unto the high maker of all the world,
and that he would not permit the loss of her husband before he were Baptized,
which he had so earnestly promised to perform.

At that time the afflicted Lady did see, that they entered into the ship in
three other places, that she could scar^e suffer so horrible a spectacle, and
the more when as the great Knight with a light leap entered the ship, crying
victory, with the loss of many lives, whom he overthrew with his senseless
blows, all which went unto the heart of the fearful Princess. At the
bustling and noise which the Pagan made, the courteous Tartare returned that way
which he came with his sword colored in blood, and assalting him said. Oh
insatiable fury of Hircania, when will thou conclude thy untamed fury? And
with his sword he stroke him such a blow upon the helm that glanced to the
gorget in such sort that it made a troublesome wound, whereat issued much
blood, which was the occasion that the Moore returned (with much more fury
than the Lion on the yielded pray) and stroke the Tartare such an overthwart
blow on the waste, that he made him to fall upon a bank in the Ship, but as
quick as thought he ^ose up again, and returned on his enemy, and defended
that part: but in the other parts, there were so many more tha^ he had, that
his knights began to be dismayed and to retire to the Castle on the poope,
and defended the Cabin whereas the Lady was, who gave such shreekes that they
reached unto the heavens. And he who never failed them that called upon him in
their necessity, did aid them: In that there came directly unto them the
inchaunted ship of the three courageous Princes, Rosicleer, Meridian and the
heroycke Troyan, that was going unto the kingdom of Lacedemonia: who with the
storms at Sea came that way, whereas the battle was. And seeing the sea
staind with bl^ud, and that there were two ships to one, they determined to
help the weakest, and to do that which they were bound by order of knighthood.
So they grapled their ship with that of the Tartare, and could not imagine, who
that valiant knight should be, that made such defiance against so many: and for
that they would not delay their succor, embracing their shields with their
swords in their hands, they leaped in, and overthrew three that they met at the
entry. The warlike Greek went directly where as the great knight was in
battle, and without stay (for that he imagined he was a Rouer) he gave him so
strong a blow, that he almost divided him in two parts, and overthrew him at
the feet of his enemy, leaving him greatly amazed to see so furious a blow.
And having no more time, seeing so good succor and the victory at hand, he
courageously set upon his enemies, having by him the pillar of Knighthood,
that would not let him strike a blow, he assalted them so fast on every side.
The other two princes were not idle with the rest, but seemed as lightning,
striking on both sides to the grief of those miserable knights, upon whom
came the just judgment of God, conformable unto the life they led, and the
great injuries which they had done both by sea and land without any difference
of nations, paying now all that they enjoyed, for they dealt with knights that
never stroke blow but they killed or maimed an enemy. And the Grecian Mars
being affected unto the valiantnes of the Tartare, said: Upon them stout
knight, for they are before your force vile and base people. And therewith with
a gallant semblance, he threw his shield on his shoulder with his sword in
his hand (that of Queen Iulia was not better) and began to wield his furious
body so hastily, that within one hour they found not one with whom to fight,
although there entered into the ship more then two hundredth knights all chosen
men: but with the help of their friends, did he and the Tartare enter into the
ships of their contraries, and did in strife maine other wonderful maruels till
such time as they saw they could make no resistance, both the one and the other
ship did yield, and craved mercy for their lives of the two valiant warriers:
who using their accustomed clemency, and that which is natural unto worthy
victors, they received them prisoners.

So leaving the Ships with good watch and ward, he returned unto their own,
and met at the entry their two good friends: whereas when they were together,
the valiant Tartare pulled off his helm and went directly unto the Greek and
said. Warlike knight, let my fortune be so good that I may know whom I may give
honor to, as the restorer of my life, in knowing who you are, and the like of
your companions. Gentle knight (answered the beloved of Oliuia) we are of the
country of Greece, and knights of so little fame, that if we should tell you,
we should not thereby be known* Oh mighty Jupiter, with a great voice said
the courteous Andronio, is it possible that I have so great good in my Ship: and
that those who has ventured their lives for my liberty, are of that happy
Country where the Sepulcher of my unfortunate Cousin Zoylo is? worthy knight do
not deny me your names, for you shall declare it unto him that is the greatest
friend to all Grecia. I am the happy Andronio in that I have met with you, and
Cousin to Zoylo a dear friend to the Grecian Princes, and now by my fortune or
better to say misfortune, for lack of such a Cousin, I am come to be King of
the people of Tartary. And now since I have told you my name and who I am, and
with what security you may tell me yours: do not deny it me, for I do imagine
that under these armours goes some of the Princes of Grecia. The heroycke
Rosicleer pulled off his helm and discovered his fair face, being bound by
the good reasons of the Tartare, yet doubtful of that he told touching the
death of his beloved friend Zoylo: and he said, valiant Andronio, it shall be an
unjust part to hide who we are unto him that so plainly has given us to
understand of his doings and who he is, we are bound to do the like, so that
in knowing you shall receive content. I will tell you, This knight (pointing to
Meridian) is Meridian Prince of the Scithians. And this knight is the warlike
Oristides the Troyan, and I am one of those princes of Grecia, to whom you are
indebted so much as you say. I am called Rosicleer, and by an other name the
Knight of Cupid, the greatest friend to the Tartar Zoylo, and you have made me
not a little marvel in saying that he is dead.

With strange content went the courteous Andronio to kiss the hands of the
warlike Greek: who not admitting such costly courtesy, raised him from the
ground, remaining embraced of the Tartare: who with the joy he received
thereof, said: I will not ventrous Prince yt the knowing of you be without
giving part of the joy unto my well beloved Princess. Who having heard that ye
Grecian prince was there, came forth and humbled her self to Rosicleer,
giving him and his Companions hearty thanks for their aid. He graciously
entertained her, yet was he very impatient to hear of the death of Zoylo,
inquiring of Andronio about the circumstances: who having told them, Rosicleer
vowed revenge, wheretoo Meridian and Oristides promised their help. But the
Greek princes sorrow being perceived by the Troyan, he altered their
communication, and incited them to know of the knights that were prisoners, who
was that mighty pyrate? and likewise who fair Grisanea was? Of the last
Andronio resolved them, in manner as you have heard: certefying them beside of
the prince Don Heleno, whereat the Greek did not a little rejoice, for that
since they left Tinacria, he never heard of him.

Now touching the Rouer, a Knight that was prisoner and one that seemed a
principal in that Crew, said: Understand worthy Knights, that the dead Knight
and Owner of these ships and diverse other that range this Coast, was the
furious Bruncaldo, a great Rouer, and feared of all these Islands: for that he
was Lord of one hereby, although a little one, yet the strongest of them al,
for the difficulty of the entry, having at the port one of the strongest
Castles in the earth, called the Doubtful Castle, the Island also taking name
thereof. To keep which when he goes abroad, he leaves two fierce Giants that
married his Sisters: and in that Castle he has many miserable prisoners. The
Princes pitying the estate of the Island, intended to free it and the
prisoners: and in their proceedings were thus advised by the Knight. The best
means to take the Island sir Knights, is to have your ship towed as if she were
taken, and to put out at our tops the common Ensign of victory, which is a
Flag, with the Sun in a black field: for otherwise the entry will be very
difficult, by reason of a chain that crosses from one rock to another. I
being known will tell the warders Bruncaldo is in his bed wounded in taking
the Prize. Of all ways this is the surest, and to this I advise you, as well
for the reverence I bear to your worthiness, as the compassion I have of many
Knights and Ladies that remain there prisoners.

They all liked his advice, and caused the Tartarians Knights to enter the two
ships, and hang out their Ensign of victory, towing the princes ship after
them. The next morning they came within sight of the Castle, which was seated
upon a rock, having a way no broader than for two to pass, cut out of the
same rock. At the entry it had two towers in which the Giants lay, and more
inward was the lodging of Bruncaldo, gallantly built, with stones of diverse
colors: and between these three towers was a large paued court, wherein fifty
Knights might combat on horseback.

So soon as they had sounded victory, they were answered from both the towers
with excellent instruments, for joy to receive their Lord, and to warn them
that kept the chain to open it, which was presently done: whereat the princes
greatly rejoiced, and thanked the Knight, who (lif^ing up his visor) told them
on the shore that their lord was sore wounded. With this they landed, ascending
up by two and two: first Briano the Knight of the Castle and the valiant
Grecian, after them the princess and Damsells, and so the rest in order. In
this sort they ascended the steps, making as if they rejoiced in their booty,
till such time as they were in the highest part of the Castle, unsuspected.
When they came there, the two deformed giants (unarmed) did receive them, very
joyful that their brother in law was come, although grieved that he was so
sore wounded: nevertheless (said they) we will present this Lady to the wife
of Bruncaldo. But said the greatest Giant, I had rather deal with him that had
so much power to wound my Lord and Brother. Briano answered: He paid his
boldness with his life, and lost his Wife (that is this Lady), unto whom my
Lord commands great honor should be done, for her beauty sake, and to be
in company with his Wife, till he comes forth of ye ship. The disguised
knights received great joy to see with what discretion Briano proceeded in his
business, and esteemed him (as indeed he was) to be a perfect good man, and a
just Knight.

The Grecian prince made a sign unto Oristides and Meridian, that each of them
with four of those Knights should (as though they went for some other matter)
take the gates of the two towers, while he and the Tartarian with the two
Giants and the discreet Briano, went unto the higher tower leading the
princess and her damsels as if they had been prisoners, to the great
contentment of the Giants.

Here might the two courageous princes have concluded this adventure without
any molestation, but they accounted it base and void of Knighthood, to
assail them without armor: therefore they passed forwards with all their
company, till they entered into the great Court, at whose rich workmanship
they all wondered. There they saw painted many ancient pictures, the which did
beautify more that sumptuous Court. There were excellently wrought of Jasper
stone two pair of stairs, one right against another.

The princes gazed not at any thing, least the Giants should suspect them, who
gaped so on the princesses beauty that they put her in great fear with their
ugly countena^ces. Then they entered into the hall, which seemed to be fit for
an Emperor, the ceeling being full of gold and stones of rich price. The Wife
of Bruncaldo being there, moved not when she missed her Lord: but (as full of
pride as tyranny) said. I would excuse your coming Woman, so that my husband
were unhurt: but as he was revenged on your husband, so will I revenge me on
you. And therewith she took forth a great bunch of keys, and gave the^ to a
woman to carry the Lady to prison. The anger was so great that Andronio
received to see his Lady thorough fear change color, that without farther
consideration, he pulled the keys from the woman, and throwing them at
Bruncaldos wife, he drove two or three of them into her forhead, and slew her
where she sat. This chance much grieved the Grecian, but it could not be
remedied, and seeing all was discovered, he put the Ladies behind him, and
drew his sword. The wrathful Tartarian was determined to assail the Giants:
who seeing the death of their sister, and how they were betrayed, came toward
the princes with their fawchions aloft. To whom the Grecian said: Stand false
Knights, for we are not accustomed to fight with unarmed men: put on your
armor, for the worthy arm that took away your brothers life, will also take
away yours. Oh vile creatures said the Giant, will you delay my revenge while I
put on armor? I would Mars and all the Gods were before me, and thou should
see I had no need of armor for them, how much less then for you? And in
saying this, he stroke a blow at the Tartar^ unawares, that it was marvel he
had not cut him in pieces: but he arose again, bruised with the fall he gave him
on his back, and was striking at the Giant, but the Grecian put the point of
his sword between, and stayed the execution thereof. And for that the Son o^
Trebatio would not have of them any vantage, he again said: take your armor
furious beasts, for therewith you shall have enough to do to deliver your
selves out of our hands. Yet ceased they not to strike, and they with great
lightness avoided: till one of the Giaunts with a hoarce voice said. Stay
foolish Knights, and you shall see me stay longer in arming my self, tha^ in
taking away your lives. So they descended the stairs, making a great noise,
and at their coming into the Court they met four or five of the Tartarians
knights and slew them, offering as much to the princes at the gates, who letting
slip their blows entered within them, and with their armed fists feld them to
the ground, and would have cut off their heads. At which the Grecian came down
(having left the Tartarian above to keep the tower) and would in no case let
them be smitten unarmed, commanding a Page of the Castle to fetch their
armor, and in the mean time they came to themselves. And considering they
were by two knights overthrown, they blasphemed their Gods, and hasting to
arm one another, the eldest said. Tarry a little ye captive people, and you
shall see how dear I will make you buy this treason. When they were armed,
shaking their bright fawchions, they came against them all. Rosicleer was a
Knight of great patience, but the proud words of the Giant had so earnestly
angered him, that it made him say thus. For that you shall understand how I
esteem ye* come both jointly to me, and you shall find my deeds differ from
my words: and therewith he let fly three or four blows aloft, which made them
seek defense for their heads. When he saw them look aside, he gave the younger
Giant such an overthwart blow on his thigh, that he cut him to the boane: but
the other Giaunt reached him with the point of his fawchion upon his shoulder,
that it made him stoop with his hands to the ground. The principal hall was
toward the court, so that from thence the Tartarian and his Wife saw the valor
of the Grecian: who at this time was more coura^ius, tha^ if he had fought with
one alone Knight. The Tartarian being amazed to see his valiantnes, could not
choose but say: Uerely it seems all the Gods did join together at the birth
of this invincible Warrier, and put in him more strength than remains in them
all. A happy country is it ye eni^^th such Lords: happy Zoylo, that amongst
such friends have found a sepulcher: and happy Andronio, that has seen with
his eyes, what else he would not have believed. Of truth (worthy husband, said
Grisanea) I would gladlye some of those Knights would help the Grecian Prince,
not that his valor has need thereof. but that we should be the sooner rid of
th^se people, for I am not yet free of the fear I received. Oristides had no
need to be entreated, for with a light leap he stepped in, and received on his
shield the second blow that the Giant Tembloso stroke at the Grecian, which
made him bow to the ground. As he arose to revenge it, the Grecian said unto
him: Stand away Oristides, and stain not your sword in so evil blood. And in
so saying he gave a thrust at the furious Tembloso, and returned unto the other
Giant, striking him so mighty a blow upon the helm, that he made him almost
senseless. At the same time had the Troyan stroke such a blow at his hands,
that almost he had parted them asunder, which made him give a fearful shreeke,
where with his Brother stroke the Greek Prince such a blow on the helm, that
if Artemidoroes virtue had not be^n therein, his life had been in great peril.
The Giant was nimble, and would not loose any occasion, therefore he entered,
desirous for to strike him another blow: but the Troyan did break the
execution thereof, which gave the Grecian time to recover himself. The other
Giant by reason of the first wound Rosicleer gave him, fell upon his knees
blaspheming his Go^s. The Ladies of the Princess received great content to see
him fall, and said: It seems to us that one of them does come by little and
little to the ground. The gentle Troyan did very well hear those words, and
went against the hurt Giant, but coming nigh, him, the G^ant with his left
hand laid hold on the skirt of his hab^re^on, and drew him within his arms.
The Troyan knew well in what peril he was, and to be more at liberty, and the
better to help himself, he let his shield fall from his arm. The Giant
seeing that, so crushed him, that ^e verily thought his armor would have
entered into his flesh, his grief was so much: yet for all that he did not
forg^t his dagger, which he thrice stabbed into the Giant, and as often drew it
forth with his blood, and the fourth time he thrust it in under the skirt of
his habergion upwards with so much force, that the murdring blade came to his
heart. Which caused the Giant with ye pangs of death to squeeze him so
strongly, that if it should long have endured, it had not been possible but he
should have been in great peril: but his breath failing him, he opened his
arms, and committed his soul to the devil, and his body to the senseless
earth the Troyan being so faint and weary, that he was forced in great have to
pull off his helm, to take the benefit of the cool air, and sat him down
upon the dead body of the Giant, with great contentment unto them al. And
being a little refresht, he busied his ey^s in beholding the battle between
the invincible Rosicleer and the furious Tembloso: which seemed but then to
begin. Yet the Giant showed himself to be somewhat ^ea^^e, by reason of the
weight of his strong armor, and the great lightness of the Prince: who entering
in and out, made him very weary, which was the occasion that the Prince
assaulted him the oftener, wounding him so on the legs, that all the Court was
stained with his brutall blood* Our valiant Grecian seeing his adversary began
to faint, laid hold v^on his shield with so great strength, that he pulled him
perforce unto the ground with so great a fall, that he was almost without
sense or moving, and before he had any memor^e to recover himself, he stepped
to him and with his left hand pulled off his helm, and cloaue his head to the
neck. Then he sat down to rest himself, and asked the Troyan how he fared?
Well said he, though almost out of breath: but let us meet the Tartarian and
his Wife, who are coming to visit us. With that the fair Princess came, and
said: Thus far (worthy Princes) extends the courages of women, to show
signs of grief or joy, as they do receive cause by the success of the
battle. I thank ye fair Princess for your joy, answered the Grecian. But
their conference was broke off by the many embracings which the Tartare used
to the Grecian, for the friendship which he had with that unfortunate Zoylo,
whom in the face Andronio did much resemble, yet he had more strength than he
that was dead. Then searched they Castle, and found the Wives of the Giants
making great lamentation for the death of their husbands. After they had dined,
they required Briano and some of the Knights of Tartarie, to go and release
the prisoners. All the servants and people when they understood the death of
the Giants, gave their obedience unto the Princes, more rejoicing to receive
them for Lords, than those cruel Giants.

Then they demanded the keys of the prison of one of the Giants Wives: who
seeing themselves in the power of their enemies, joined together with the keys
in their hands at a window that opened unto the sea, wherein desperately they
threw themselves, rather than they would live pitied. It was so high from
whence they fell, that ere they came to the water, they were stark dead. That
rash deed could not but grieve them all, but seeing it might not be remedied,
they commanded that the doors of the prison should be broken open, which was
done by the pages of the Princes very suddenly. They being advertised what
number of prisoners were within the several dungeons, commanded them to be
brought forth into the Court, as well women as men, and many children.

Who when they saw people enter (thinking they were of the Giants sending) they
began to say: When butcherly people, more crueler then the furies, will you
ease so many deaths, with taking away of our lives: what profitte find you in
executing your fury on them that cannot make resistance?

Then said Argolio the Page of the Grecian Prince, we are none of those
perverse people which you think: but we are servants unto certain knights who
have given you liberty. One could not hear another, the noise of pleasure was
so great made by those miserable Captives: some referring it to God like good
Christians, others thinking that it came from Mahomet. So that there was none
but gave thanks unto them whom they acknowledged for their Gods.

With infinite joy and great shows of contentment came forth all those
miserable people, and when they came into the court, and saw the Sun, they
all kneeled on their knees, and gave thanks unto God for their liberty, and
those venterous knights. They were in all more than three hundredth persons,
which caused no small compassion unto the Princes, who with some pitiful
tears did accompany the people. Amongst them there were some knights and people
of respect, principally two women, and three or four men, which were together
on the one side. The valiant Greek went down thither, and with him the other
princes with their helmes off. They received them with so great noise, that the
one could not hear the other, till they all came and kneeled down before the
Grecian. But they who most rejoiced were the company of the two women, that
were separated on the other side: for one of them and a knight holding their
hands together, went a great pace, unto the Greek Lord, and with a loud voice
said: Oh flower of the Greek nation, was it not enough that in the beginning
of your Knighthood, and my tender years you gave me a husband, and defended my
honesty at the cost of your person. Speak unto me Prince of Grecia, for I am
that Linerua your detter of life and honor, I am she for whom you did not
refuse the habit of a woman, to defend my life honor and fame.

This is the husband you gave me, now Lord of the valley of the mountains. The
Prince stayed for to behold them, and by and by he fell into reckoning who they
should be, and did embrace them with great love, as he that had to them great
affection, when he heard that which they declared. And taking her by the hand,
he went with her to the Princess, that she might provide her of apparel and
her companions: and gave charge to the discreet Briano that he should likewise,
provide for all the rest of the people that he had set at liberty. And there
before them all did this Lady tell who she was saying. O valiant Prince, how I
do esteem my self happy, since my eyes have seen that which so long since
I have desired, for since you departed in the habit of a youth from the valley
of the mountains, we never left desiring to know to what end came so high a
beginning as not being an armed knight you did for me: and declared unto him,
that which in the beginning of this great history you have heard, when as he
changed with the apparel of this Lady (who was called Linerua, and slew that
cruel Argion, and made void, that abominable custom which he observed) til
such time as Lelio, my brother and your Page, at his returning from the great
Britain for your absence, told us, he did understand that you were of Grecia
and no less then a Prince: and Son to Trebatio Emperor of Constantinople. If
Linerua and her deer beloved husband Brandidonio rejoiced hereat, you may put
it out of doubt. So forthwith when we knew the happy news of the Prince your
brother, we did procure to see you. Then we left those your Castles in the
guard and keeping of my brother Telio, and with only two Pages and this
daughter, we departed the Ualley toward Grecia in a Ship that was well
provided: but fortune did take from us the good and content which we should
have received in seeing you, and so altered the Sea, that it drove us to th^se
parts, although we have learned, there is no more between this and that
place, but one day and a night sailing being fair weather: we were straight
apprehended with my daughter who was then but little, and we were put in a
dark prison, where as I had no other good but seeing him whom you gave me for
a husband and Lord, and my daughter, which is here. It goes now upon thirteen
years heroycall Prince that we have been in prison, without knowing any thing
of my Father and brother. And heerewith the Lady concluded with tears of joy,
for that she saw the Prince.

He did not so much esteem your virtue as I do (answered the Greek) that so
cruelly has entreated you: but thanks be unto God that has given you
liberty, for us to see one the other: and now you are not to take any grief
for that which is past, but to give order how they may know of you in your
country, and to remain in this till order be taken whether you shall go
thither, or remain here.

The next day he commanded that all those of the Island should join together,
and he made unto them a long oration concerning the hard servitude which they
were freed of by the loss of the Giants. And that he would make them a Lord
and a governor by his own hands, and told them who he was, the more to
rejoice them. And with the consent of them all they married the discreet knight
Briano with the daughter of Linerua, and caused them to swear him for their
Lord.

They all received content with that the Prince ordained, and the new married
couple were very joyful to see the liberality of the Prince, although time
did come when it was gratified and paid.

They were four days in the doubtful Castle: In the end of which, the Princes
did take their leave of those of the Island commending them unto peace. The like
did the three friends unto the Tartarian, which was no small grief unto the
fair Grisanea and the Tartarian: but seeing it could be no otherwise, they
took it forwell. So they set their course toward Tartaria, whereas they were
received with all content possible, worthy of a Prince so well beloved as was
Andronio, of whom in the third and fourth part shall be made large mention,
where as we will leave them, for to declare of the Princes.

What succeeded the three Princes that went with the Damsel into Lacedemonia.

Chap. 11.
THe three courageous warriers ingulfed in the Sea, went toward Lacedemonia,
talking of the Tartare their new friend, and of the gallant and brave discretion
of his Lady. So leaving on the one hand the Ausonian Sea, the eight day early
in the Morning they entered the Port of the City of Archina, for so Strabo does
call it: whereat the Damsel received no small content and said, that from that
place to the great City of Lyra was two days journey. There they disimbarked
themselves and went a Land, with their devises changed, leaving their ancient
and known shields in their inchaunted boat, they had al a like: for in a
green field this alone was written, If against Love we do not fight,
We do not fear our tried might.


The Damsel rejoiced at that Post, it came to good purpose for her business,
and said unto them, Knights o^ reuengement (so we will now call ye, I pray God
that the end be conformable unto the Pos^e and the justice which we have. If
you have Justice answered the Grecian, account your business done, for that is
able to give us forces more than we enjoy. Your strength does well assure use
gentle knights (said she) although it were for a matter more difficult: but
we women have this condition, where we love, we are not in quiet, but when we
see them secure: and I believe that it is general for all that love, never to
be assured of the good, while they live in hope: the like we have in our anger,
for that there was never woman that has been vexed, but would procure at cost
of their lives to recompense their grief, and rather yield unto death then
want reuengement. God deliver me (said the gentle Troyan, unto the Damsel)
from falling into your wrath if you be so froward: and therefore I say he
lives a merry and sweet life, that has neither joy nor grief caused by
women. For first, for to get joy he must serve a world of time, and when he
comes to receive a favor, it is with such trouble that ere he feel it, by
and by with the turn of an eye all is turned to his disgrace: But I believe
women are of the opinion, that grief at their hands, is an ease to a Lovers
heart.

It may be gentle Knight (said the Damsel) that he that pondreth not the
content that the Lover receives (if the Lady beloved be esteemed) being busied
in easy things, but does remit the content only to the odedience promised by
love, and to receive discontent for glory, and for great content the grief
ordained by the Lady, and rigorous thorns for tender flowers, coming from
her hands.

Of truth Damsel answered the Troyan, if this be all the favor that Ladies
do give: and thereby no other dainty to comfort their Lovers, from this time
I say: he that lives of this does not know what is good. She said: It seems
that your companions be of your false league, or else they will make show to
defend my profound opinion, and for this battle I will none of your aid,
except ye be Lovers. There will not lack answerers for you fair Damsel (said
Rosicleer) for I do know some that did live in sorrow in respect of them that
gave it, for it is a sweet discharge for them that love to suffer, if the
mind be constrained by the fairenes of the beloved: and this certain
imagination can do so much, that when sorrow comes, it is not felt, the
reason is, for that the senses are found occupied, with so excessive content,
as comes of a fair sight, that it is not sufficient to vnlodge it out of the
mind. But there be some of so little heart, that at the first encounter they
yield, without considering the grief that is procured to the beutie of his
Lady, giving to understand that he is not able to anymate his heart against the
assalting grief. Who (if he knew how to love) would contend and depart
glorious from this battle, if he esteem this triumph for most honorable.

Then answered the Troyan somewhat touched (if an other should have spoken it,
his sword should have defended it). This is when as the Lady is correspondent
unto her lover with dainty favors, and sorrowful for his grief, and
receives it as her own, then is it no grief that he does suffer, being
certain of his doubt. Then said Meridian, not one (Lord Oristides) being
grieved, did mark the discharge of his grief, for that it should not be
meritorious before the Lady: being certain what he would have, and to lay
before it the reward. This does exclude reason from perfect love, which is the
notablenes of mind, where with good is desired for the beloved, and does
procure it with trouble, and has the reward, not of that which is hoped for,
but of the act wherewith it is done, leaving the reward of his content unto
the generositie of the Lady: then is it given more liberally and more
earnestly, than when the Lover does bind her in declaring what he did suffer.
Now you do understand Sir Knight (said the Damsel to the Troyan) the truth
of my opinion, and ye do wrong to withstand it, being so reproved of all. And
I hope that before you depart from Lacedemonia, you will change your judgment
according to the curiosity, wherewith this truth is declared.

In this communication they spent the morning, till it was high time to go to
dinner: in a fresh and green grove they dined, recreating their sight, with the
pearlye Fountains and sweet Meadows, and their ear^s with the sweet songs of
the little birds, who flying the heat, were there in the shadow, declaring
their griefs with tunable chirpings.

The Princes came to the head or sping of a gallant Crystal Fountain, which
was under certain myrtle trees, and there they alighted, and let their horses
taste of the water of that sweet and clear spring and the green grass that
was there. Then did their Pages bring forth such victual as they brought from
the doubtful Castle, making on the green grass a more dainty Table than
they had in Grecia, and they passed Dinner with as great content: if that
Meridian had not disturbed it with the remembrance of the loss of his wife,
although he was somewhat eased with the confidence in Brandafidell: and they all
no less rejoiced at the sweet music which the birds made in the shadow, than
of that which they were wont to have in the Royal Palaces: but the one and
the other they did leave, for to hear a delicate voice, which at the sound of
a Harp they did hear not far off, and considering what it should be, they
heard that it began with a prosound sygh in this sort.

Though I be scornd, yet will I not disdain,
But bend my thoughts fair beauty to adore.
What though she smile when I sigh and complain,
It is I know to try my faith the more.
For she is fair, and fairenes is regarded,
And I am firm, firm love will be rewarded:
Suppose I love and languish to my end,
And she my plaints, my sighs, my prayers despise,
O it is enough when Fates for me do send,
If she vouchsafe to close my dying eyes.
Which if she do, and chance to drop a tear?
From life to death that balm will me vpreare.
With an other sygh no less than the first did the woeful voice conclude,
which gave occasion to the free Troyan to arise, and taking his shield he
desired them to tarry for that he would know who he was that with so great
grief did publish his sorrow, and went directly thither whereas the voice was,
and under a high and great pine tree, he saw lying along, a knight armed in
armor all plated silver like, full of green Roses, without his helm, which lay
by him, and a shield of the color of his armor, and in the midst of the
field in place of the flower, was this Posie.

Nor frowns nor scorns prevail,
Resolved love to quail.
The knight was very young, and one of the fairest that ever he saw, his eyes
were swollen with weeping. The Troyan had great desire to know who he should
be, but stayed for that he saw he would return to his doleful song, in this
manner.

Let heaven and earth, let Gods and men conspire,
To add more grief unto my grieved mind:
So my fair Saint do know my true desire,
I have enough, content therein I find.
Loves bonds are heaven, dull freedom is a hell,
Come all worlds woe, yet love can make it well.
This loving Youth intended only to make the air pertaker of his grief: so
turning himself upon the green grass, he said: Oh Love, why in the beginning
of my ^e^der years have thou made me place my felicity in a person that hates
me? Ah sweet Mistres, I do acknowledge your desert, and give my grief to
witness it: yet, if I may say it without offense, as you are rare in beauty, so
I am a Phoenix in love. Oh that it pleased the heavens I might show you my
loving heart? there should you see how faith sustaineth the same, against the
extremity of all your cruelty.

This afflicted Youth could proceed no further, for that he was disturbed by
the Troyan: who (desirous to know what he was) in this sort saluted him. I
would fain fair Knight, know what has brought you into this estate, and if
you stand in need of my person, I will employ it in your help. I need not your
company (said this disturbed Lover) much less your help: depart I pray you,
for your presence does me wrong. Thou art discourteous (answered the Kinsman of
Hector) so to reply unto my Knightly offer. Nay then I perceive (said the
Youth) you are ignorant what pleasure solitarines brings to the passionated
Lover. I (answered the Troyan) and hope ever to be ignorant of such pleasing
sorrow. O heavens! how have thou lived said the Youth, and art not amorous? Now
God defend me (said Oristides) from that madness. O generous thoughts of mine,
replied the Youth, is it possible that Rosabel should live, and hear Love
slandered? tarry thou false Knight, for with thy blood I trust to write upon
these trees the glory of them that be Lovers. And therewith like a viper
trodden on he arose up to lace on his helm, and suddenly cast a thrust at ye
Trojan, that he made him retire back three or four paces, almost past
memory. Ere he recovered, the Youth struck him so on the Uisor, that he
made him see stars in his dark helm: and doubled another upon his shoulder,
that shrewdly pained him. By this the Troyan did plainly see, that the Knight
with whom he dealt was as well Mars his son, as Cupids servant, and therefore
rowsing himself, he smit him such a blow upon the shield, that he made him put
one knee upon the ground. The Youth was cunning, and at the discharge of ye
blow, hurt the Troyan so on the legs, that his red blood distained the green
meadow. With exceeding fury took Oristides his sword in both his hands, and
doubled two such extreme blows, that the young Knight knew not where he was:
but quickly recovering himself, he returned a double payment. A thousand
thoughts came unto the Trojan in imagining who this valiant Youth might be,
yet so he dealt with him, that he made him sweat drops of blood. At the noise
of this rigorous battle came the two Princes, at which instant the Youth had
feld the Troyan to the ground: whence quickly recovering, and with his sword
seeking to revenge, the Princes stepped between them, saying: Part Knights, it
is not just to permit this battle to come to an end, without knowing the
cause. It is (said the Youth) because this Knight counts a Lovers life
unhappy, which occasion is not so small, but if I live, with his life he shall
answer it. Sir Knight (said Meridian) let not this flight quarrel hinder our
important business: the matter being no more, but you think Loves bondage
sweet, and he in liberty finds his content. But that you shall perceive doubt
of his ablenes is no cause of this, I will warrant that (within these ten
days, either here or where else soever you will appoint) this Knight shall end
the battle. I am content (answered the young Knight) for that your gentle
disposition does more bind me, than this Knights arrogancy: therefore let
the battle be here, where only accompanied with my solitary thoughts, I will
attend you. Stand aside said the valiant Troyan; in cases that concern my own
honor, I am more bound, than to wait on strangers: therefore there is no
reason to disturb us, till the battle be ended. It cannot be said Rosicleer,
for you have given your word unto this Damsel in a time limited, wherein if
you fail she loses her credit, and she that sent her her honor: and for
this business, without impeach of your honor, you may leave it till another
time. The Troyan would not deny the prince, so they parted, and left the Youth,
much praising his valiantnes: and thereof the Troyan thus said. The beauty
which he has and his few years makes me to doubt, for that in all my life I
have not seen a fairer Creature: what he should be I cannot imagine, except he
be a kinsman to the Grecian prince, for he resembles much the prince of the
Sun your Brother. All were doubtful whom he should be, but most of all the
Grecian, for that his heart did give him inwardly that he should be of his
blood. With this suspicion they came to their pages, and fell to such victuals
as they had, and determined to loose no more time, because ye next was their
uttermost day. When dinner was done, they demanded the matter of ye adventure:
the which (after she had cured the Troyans leg, and told her judgment of his
liberty) she began with a gallant grace to declare in this manner.

You shall understand worthy Knights, that of this mighty Kingdom of
Lacedemonia is King a most virtuous knight, called Astrafio, worthy of much
praise for the prudent government of his Commonwealth: and as he deserved, so
had he the love of all his people. It was the will of heavens high Commander to
bless him with two Daughters at a birth: so like, that the difference is only
between them in their names: and so exceeding fair they were, that they
rather were esteemed of all to be celestial Angels, than humane Uirgins. They
were both brought up and nourished in the royal palace of their ioifull
Father, who was so delighted in their excellent perfections, that he had no
other joy or contentment, but to behold them, and to be conversant in their
companies. The eldest is called Thomiriana, and the youngest the fair Sarmacia:
who so delights in hunting and arms, that she is among Knights compared with
the Empress Claridiana. When she was of age to wear armor, she was knighted
by her own Father, and maintained a mighty Iustes, to her eternal honor. So
far was the praise of these two sisters spread, that Liuio the prince of
Laodicea (calling himself the knight of the Crowns) came thither with one
alone page, and fell in love with Thomiriana the eldest Sister: his affection
so increasing, that he was forced to discover it both to her self and to her
Father: who rejoiced and the Lady likewise, that she was affected of so
excellent a prince. All the Court was with their love delighted, and she that
most seemed to delight in it, was the warlike Sarmacia, who dailye conuerst
with Liuio and her Sister, when they were in their amorous conversation. So
long she dallyed in beholding their dalliance, that all her thoughts were
captiued with Liuioes perfections: and the more she striued, by reasons of
wrong against her Sister, trespass against her Father, and injury against her
own fame, to suppress this fire, the violenter it raged. Solitarines contents
Sarmacia, if any thing could content her: but nothing can content her, till
Liuio know her hearts affection. So one day as they wore a hunting she
discovered it to him, whereat the prince did not a little marvel, but
dissembled it, giving her kind words, somewhat to quench her burning desire:
but when this noble prince came unto his Thomiriana, he confirmed the faith he
had given her, with earnester shows of affection than before: The ielous
Sarmacia was in presence, and not able to endure the sight, went forth and
wept: but Liuio (like a constant prince) the more to assure his Thomiriana,
demanded her of her Father in marriage: who gladly granted it. But when the
prince would have kissed the kings hands as a Father, ye furious Sarmacia stepped
between them, and said: Loving father, it is not convenient for the honor of
Lacedemonia, to give my Sister to a Knight so disloyal: who to your courtesy
being bound, is notwithstanding most unjust. And this I will maintain against
all the world. The Lord of Laodicea, did well understand the cause of her
accusation, and thus answered* Ualorous Princess, your too much unjust rage
causes ye to do me wrong, which in my honors defense (much against my will,
you being a Woman) I will approve. That may not be Prince Liuio said the
King, for by our law the accused may not enter battle with the accuser, but
within two months bring one to answer for him. It is no small wrong answered
the Prince, that being accused, I cannot defend my self. I am the gladder said
the Lady, for I am willinger to punish some other for your injustice than your
self, because my Father loves ye. Ah Lady said the Prince, you know I know
the reason of this falsehood, but I will not publish your fault. I know well
said she, thou art impudently audacious: and were not my Father present, I
would presently be revenged. The King commanded them asunder, till the 2.
months or the trial were past. You may well guess at my Lady Thomirianaes
grief: who taking me into her chamber, (after many showers ofteares) thus
said. O my faithful Damsel, how do the heavens divide my life in parting me
from Liuio, by the tyranny of my cruel Sister? Hasten my death, O you
destinies, if I may not live to rejoice with so loyal a Prince: for I vow if
he be not Owner of my will, to be Deaths bride ere I marry any other living on
the earth. What have thou got Sarmacia by this cruelty? Is this my reward for
participating with thee my hearts secrets? Well thy gain is, that thou have
got the name of a cruel Sister: and my hope is, that I shall find one able to
disprooue thy falsehood. After this passion, she coniured me with many
ceremonious protestations, that I should with all diligence seek her a knight
to combat her Sister, whereby she might obtain Liuio for her husband. So I
promised her, that no other than the princes of Grecia or some of their friends
I would bring for so just a defense, although therein I lost my life. And now
seeing my fortune has favored me to bring such high princes, it is time for
you to show that which you have promised to all women that should have need of
your forces: for on this depends the life of the Princess Thomiriana and the
noble Prince Liuio. Fair Damsel said the Troyan, your demand is just: for it
is no part of a sister to take away the content her sister receives, for she
was rather bound to keep it secret and further her, that made her partaker
thereof. And though it be a hard thing to enter in battle with a woman, yet I
will take it upon me if these valiant Princes be therewith content. Many
thanks sir knight (said the Damsel) I give ye, and I do receive it for the
greatest courtesy that now you can show me, in that the business of my Lady is
so dangerous, and seeing so ventrous and valiant a knight as you are do deal
in it, I am secure: and I do believe your companions will think well of it.
And to show the valor of their persons they shall not lack occasions in this
country: for it is said by wise men, there are herein marvelous adventures.
They al rejoiced in that the Troyan Prince would take upon him the battle for
the Princess. And Meridian said: it seems unto me fair Damsel, that this
knight feels the effect of the Country, seeing he has begun to follow your
band in putting his life in adventure for women: a thing which before seemed
impossible. And I believe worthy Prince (said the Damsel) he will show more
than this, it may be we shall see him leave the battle, or if he over come,
be overcome by his enemy: many more free than he have lost their liberty in
this country of Lacedemonia, and it shall be no strange thing unto her to
subject such a free heart, as he has seemed to have, for I am certain in
seeing him of so gallant disposition he will be amorous: then shall be see^e
the truth that a while since he reproved. At this time they began to discover
the populous City whether as they iourneyed, and therefore took their helmets
which their Pages carried, and pulled down their vizors, they kissed her on the
cheek, aduis^ng her not to tell who they were: so they took the most sweetest
way to the City, and came thither at the third hour, when the king as yet had
not gone out of the Palace. They entered in at a gate called the serpent gate,
the people that were in the streets following them, and the eyes of Ladies
waiting on their gallant proportion: yet not any able to imagine what knights
they should be. In this order they arrived at the Palace, where as they
alighted, and mounted into the Royal hall, where as they did see a great number
of Ladies and Knights: the Ladies in company with the Queen and her
daughters, and Knights did accompany the virtuous King. The entering of these
three warriers did not a little trouble the whole Hall, for that they knew not
what they would have: but when they saw them go directly to the King, they all
pacified themselves.

So when as the heroycke Troyan had done his bounden duty, in lifting up
somewhat his visor, he directed his talk unto the King in this manner. Worthy
King of Lacedemonia, my companions and my self traveling to seek adventures
to procure fame, as Knights should, did hear somewhat far off from this place,
that in your Court is great wrong done unto the Prince Liuio of Laodicea and
unto your daughter Thomiriana. For as it has been told us, you granted your
daughter to him with great joy: whereat arose your second Daughter (with
confidence of her own strength) and made contradiction thereof: whereas of
right she should have procured the effect, for many reasons that she has
known. And so although I never combated against any woman: here I say, that
I will defend the Princess cause against whom soever, from the Sun rising
to Sun set, if he be content to commit it into my hands. Sir knight said the
king, for your commendations of my virtue, I thank you: but for the rest, it
is put to the order of battle: so that there is nothing to stand upon, but to
see if the prince will admit you for his Champion. Therewith came forth the
prince, apparelled in crims^n taffeta cut upon cloth of gold, richly laced,
with so great gallantnes, that the princes did all affect him. All did unto him
courtesy, which he graciously returned: and humbly thanking all the knights for
their great travel, he said unto the Troyan. Sir, I refer to you my whole
right, although (if it pleased the king that I might defend mine own cause) I
would be loath to indaunger any knight: but he says, it is against his law.
That law said the Grecian prince, is very prejudicial in a Commonwealth: for
some may be accused, that can find none to defend the^. This is not to be
judged by you sir knight (said the king, somewhat angerly) for those that
ordained the law, did it with more reason than you have showed to contradict
it. The Greek prince being vexed, thus answered: All that you say sir king, in
your person I gainsay not: but I defy any other, that thinks I presume to
judge any thing which I will not defend. Neither do I believe said the king,
that there will want knights to answer you, if ye make any Challenge: and
therefore you may use your discretion. Then answered the Grecian, your person
excepted (for the virtue which thereof has been reported) I do defy two
knights together, so they be naturally borne in this kingdom, that will
affirm this law to be good and just. And I do defy other two said the
prince of the Scythians, that will maintain there has been used justice
(according to the right of Nations) toward the prince of Laodicea, but rather
great and manifest wrong. Which Challenge we will forthwith defend by arms,
because will not multiply their anger by delay, yt be affected to maintain
this most unjust, violent and intolerable law.

There did not lack four knights that came forth of the Principallest and
most valiant in all the Kingdom, such as were jealous of the honor of their
king, and gave their gages unto the Princes, thinking thereby to get great
honor. Then came the fair Sarmacia, not adorned in her shining armor, but in
a gown of blew cloth of goldfull of Precious stones: upon her head she wore a
veil so white that through it was plainly seen her golden hair: about her
neck hung a rich sword by a red sendall, and although it were upon the
garment, yet it seemed to be wrought in it. Ind this sort she passed by all the
knights, who gave her way to pass where the Princes were, who greatly
marvelled to see her gallant disposition. And when she came to them (being
affected to their gallant proportion) she said: which of you gentle Knights is
he that must make battle with me. All of us (answered the heroycke Grecian)
are Knights fair Lady to defend your beauty: but he whom fortune has made
choice of for this, is this Knight (pointing to the gentle Troyan.) She judged
him of high valor, and he could scarce turn his head to behold her, his
senses were ravished in such forte that he knew not what thing could give him
content, but to serve that gracious Princess, and it seemed to him that she
came from heaven to make conquest of his heart, and perform that which the
Damsel has said. Oh false and rigorous Cupid, shall I not put my hand to my
pen, but thou must put thy self before me with thy cruel effects? and that
to Mars cannot be granted to draw his sword, but thou will lay hold on his
shield? and that one drop of blood goes not out, but it must be done by thy
hand? It is well seen in the Nephew of Troylus, that only sight could humble to
the rigorous yoke the high neck of that most free knight: who with Mars
himself would battle, about the good he found in his freedom. The new Lover
could not speak, and love alone left him courage for to seek means how he
might not offend her whom he worshipped. The experimented Lady did very well
mark his disturbance, and would not suffer it to proceed any further, but
said: when will you Sir knight that we make our battle? By and by said the
valiant Troyan* for that when death is looked for, to hasten it, is life. The
Lady did well understand it, and it grieved her nothing at all, for that it
seemed she never saw a better proportioned knight. Then came the four knights
armed with their armor, and went into the court where as the warriers did abide
their coming. The six knights at the sound of the the trumpets, did meet,
and made strong encounters: but the two which they hit, they overthrew to the
ground both horse and man, without any moving of hand or foot, they no more
moving than a rock, and the two which remained on horseback, returned upon
them with their swoords in their hands: but the Grecian Prince, would not that
his delaying should be any hindrance unto the Troyan, without drawing his
sword, he went to one, and taking him in his arms, he pulled him out of his
saddle, as though he had been a child, and quesed him so hard that he made him
to cry out. And he carried him directly unto the standing where as the king
was. At that instant came his friend Meridian with his foe, leaving the place
for the noise of the people, in praising the strength of the two friends. In
this sort they came before that noble king: and the Grecian said, mighty King,
although the virtue which we have heard of you, does bind us to be your
friends and to serve you in whatsoever shall be offered: yet the rigorous law has
made us to pass the sound purpose which we brought with us. Therefore we will
not that hereof any thing should ensue: but that you should behold it with
eyes of reason. Most valiant knights (answered the courteous Lord) although it
seems not so evil as you do judge of it, I will make it void, only for to
perform that which knights of so great strength and courtesy require. And so
from this day forwards I do it hold for nothing: but will that the contrary be
observed. By this means most noble King, answered Meridia is the right way to
atchiue to be well beloved, and not only to be feared. Then did the Judges
bring forth the Princes with great honor, and left them with the amorous
Troyan, who had his eyes fixed that way, whence should come the Robber of his
heart, till they saw her come accompanied with the most principallest of all
the kingdom. What may the Troyan hope after, in that he found himself
overcome, and how shall he defend for the Prince of Laodicea, when as striking
his lady is more than death? This new servant of Cupid* had such variable and
contrary thoughts, that he knew not where to begin. Till in the end he
determined not to hurt his Lady in any sort that she should receive anger, as
you shall understand in the Chapter following.

What the end of the battle was, between the Troyan Oristides and the fair
Sarmacia: and also what happened to Rosicleer with the knight of the Forest.

Chap. 12.
A Thousand suspicions wrought in the Troyans heart when he saw the Soueraign
Princess of Lacedemonia Sarmacia, armed with fresh shining armor all full of F
S. gilt, and the field of them blew, with so many precious stones that there
was no Prince in the world but would esteem her, her helm and shield of the
same, had each a plume of feathers, and on her shield the same devise of armor,
with F S. and this Posie.

Firm faith will discover,
The intention of a Lover.
She entered in, forcing her horse with such a grace, that all the Princes said,
she much resembled the Empress Claridiana in her gallant proportion, when the
worthy Princess came she said, come forth knights, for now you may show how
you can defend your Justice. It is hard to me (answered the timorous youth) for
that my fortune has brought me to be against them whom I worship. The
gentle Lady made no answer, but turned about her horse and came against the
Troyan, who made show of the like: but at the encounter he lifted up the point
of his Lance, but she showing the promptnes of her balor, made her encounter
in the midst of his shield so strongly that it made him somewhat to decline
backwards upon his h^rse crouper, and passed forwards with a slow pace, till
being settled, he returned and threw his spear from him a good way off, which
was noted of al them that were in the place, neither would he draw his
sword. The Grecian seeing occasion to effect what he determined, did come to
the Meridian and said. It seems unto me that Oristides has met with one
which brings him out of the opinion wherein he was, and I believe he will not
now fight with the knight of the Forest: whether I request you, in the
conclusion of this, that you will bring him, where as that fair youth does
tarry for us, where I will stay for you without fail: and it is not
convenient that you go with me, for any thing that might here happen* The
Prince promised to follow the Grecian, who as swift as an Eagle, took up a
Lance which one of the knights left, and threw his shield at his back, he
went through the company of people upon his inchaunted horse, leaving them all
maruelling at his gallantnes: but their desire to see the battle of the
Princess did take from them that immagination. The warlike matron when she
came nigh unto him said: That knight who has taken upon him the business of
Ladies, what so little oversight he ouerslips is a notable fault, how much more
this which you hau^ done, for it is noted of all. This were Lady (said the
Lover) if the battle were made with knights and not with Angels, against whom
my Lance and sword have no power, neither may my self do less then worship
the^. You do me wrong Sir knight said she, so to drive off the battle. But it
is more wrong said he, that I should enter in combat with her I so affect. The
Lady somewhat angry, stroke him such a blow upon his shield, that it seemed a
rock had fallen upon him: and seconded another with a thrust, that she made him
almost to loose his saddle, and gave him the third with so great courage nigh
unto the skirt, that she disarmed all that part: yet for all this the Troyan
did nothing but break her blows, and put a side his body by the lightness of
his horse. The minds of some that were present were in doubt, although the
Prince of Laodicea was secure. Contrary thoughts were in the rigorous Damsel,
who made so great have, that sometimes it took away her breath. The Troyan did
bear her a mighty blow, and in crossing his sword for that it was of better
mettle than the Ladies, it cut hers asunder in the midst, whereat he received
great discontent, for that which his Goddess should receive: but love wroght so
in that small time, that it forced him to show a gentle trick, and gave great
suspicion to all that did behold it. Which was, he separated himself a little,
and took his sword by the point, and offered it unto his Lady, saying: Let
your highness pardon me in that you have lost your sword by my occasion, with
this you may conclude the battle, in taking away my life: which is the most
readiest in all the world to serve you. I have no need of other weapons
(answered the valorous Damsel) having a dagger wherewith to succor me, you have
not any thing to do but with your sword to do your best. It is not used,
goddess of my life, said he, in our Country, to make any battle with weapon
of advantage: and therewith he put it up into the sheath, whereat they all
marvelled, and also the king, who could not refrain but say. This knight does
much esteem of women, for that he has no power against them, not attributing
it unto her new affection. Now does the Troyan fully understand the letter
which the wise Gelasio did send, when they were upon departure from the Island
of Fangomadan, that he should see his head in the hands of his most cruel
enemy. And for that it might the sooner ve accomplished, he closed with the
Infant, and laid his amorous arms on her: but he found a contrary answer in
the angry Lady, blaming her own oversight, she did wound him cruelly with her
dagger between the joints of the vambrace, that it made him give a pitiful
groan, which caused the Lady the more to respect him, as though be had done all the service possible. And it could not be but that the gentle Sarmacia when she
saw the blood of him that loved her, upon her dagger, ^ut that she took some
new compassion, and although it was but a little it increased so much that it
endured to the death. The amorous Troyan seeing himself hurt, took hold of
her dagger by the hylt, with so great force that he wrung it out of her hands,
and left her without, and offered his unto her saying: it does not profit
gentle Lady, the procuring of reuengement with your weapons, for if you will it
must be with mine, although unworthy for that they are dedicated to your
service. In this contention and amorous wrestling, they continued till Sun
set, which gave him occasion for to leave his Lady, and a ligh^ing from his
horse, went whereas the Judges were, who gave him the glory of the victory, at
the sound of an infinite number of instruments: but seeing that with reason
his Lady might be greened, he would not leave her so, but went whereas she was,
and kneeling down, gave her his weapons for to do with them and himself her
pleasure. I for this time (said the somewhat affectioned Sarmacia) will none of
your weapons, neither accept you till such time as with mine own, I take
reuengment to your cost. For the rest the Prince of Laodicea is free, the
heavens has ordained it, and my sister wife to him that I loved more than my
soul: but I will first pull it out with my own hands, than love him that does
not consider my desert. Neither do I think to put on any more harnes, if I
do not let him understand the evil he has used toward me. And therewith so
fast as her horse could run she went forth, the same way which the Grecian
went, and none was able to stay her, although the King cried out that they
should do it: for she rid threatening of them that did offer it, and knowing
her will they did let her pass, where as the Prince within a little while did
see her enter into the Forest that was so nigh unto the City. The worthy
Lady being departed out of the place, leaving the Lover in obscure darkness with
the absence of his Sun, he went unto the King, requesting that forthwith
they might be married, having confidence that Liuio the prince of Laodicea had
committed no offense. There needed no great persuasions, for the king greatly
loved the Youth. Every one requested him to pull off his helm, and to tell
them who he was: but he seeing that Rosicleer was lacking, and that it would be
troublesome to stay, he excused it as well as he could, remitting it unto the
Damsel, of who^ he took his leave and said, that she should tell them whom he
was the next day, for that he would not meet with them. She did promise him not
with a few tears, to see her self absent from so valiant and worthy Princes:
but for that she could do no otherwise, she forth with made them to be known
unto her mistress Thomiriana, that accepted it with great content, requesting
her not to make it known unto any til that day was past. All rejoiced with the
new Prince, for he was of all well-beloved, and remained greatly bound unto the
princes, when as he knew who they were, where as we a while will leave them.

Of the great battle, that Rosicleer the Prince of Grecia had with the knight
of the Forest, and what happened.

Cha. 13*
WIth new and careful thoughts, went the Grecia^ Prince forth of the Court of
Lira, and could not tell who that fair and tender Youth should be, that was
so valiant. He knew not whether his horse did carry him, neither what he did,
he was so trobled in his imagination till such time as he heard a rusling
amongst the bushes: and looking with more attension then before he did, he
heard a voice which said unto him. Worthy Son of Trebatio, wherefore do
thou hasten to seek the Knight, for the blows thou smitest on his body, thou
give to Oliuias soul. The obscure words did cause him more to suspect, and
he could not imagine from whom it was spoken, but not reckning of them, he
pricked forwards his horse with more hafte, directly whether as he thought he
had left the knight: but he had not ridden many paces when he heard the same
voice, which said. Knight of Cupid, is this the love thou have unto thy Oliuia,
behold if thou do this, thou go against her will. Although I loose my life
and all the Grecian estate, (answered somewhat alowd the angry Prince) I will
go forwards to see who this Knight might be. The voice said. O evil knight
that for so many favors given by thy Oliuia, thou will now pay her so evil,
rejoicing to go to shed her blood. This gave him a greater desire to know who
the youth should be, and could not imagine that it should be his Son, for
then he thought Oliuia would have told him of it. In this doubt, the night
ouertooke him, not far from a sheephouse, where hearing noise, he went thither,
and asked part of their poor sustentation: to whom they gave it with great
good will, for that he was of a gallant proportion and well armed. He sat down
with them to supper: and when he pulled off his helm, they received great
content, to see him so fair and Maiesticall: being at Supper, the cheifest
said unto an other Shepherd: have you seen one so like the knight that was
here yesterday? The Prince did well understand them for that he could speak
the language, and asked them where he might find that knight they talked of? It
may be said the shepherd, yt he will be here to night, for he told us
yesterday, that he must remain hereabout a few days. Can you tell me said he,
whom he is? No, answered the Shepherd, only somewhat of his valor we can
tell. For one day being here at dinner, there came a chased Liones, who would
have run upon us, and without doubt have slain us, if he had not been here:
who arose up, and at one blow cut her in two pieces, and sat down as though he
had done nothing. We carried the Liones for a present to our holy Temple: and
at our return, we saw him overthrow two Knights at one Encounter, the one with
his lance, the other with his armed fist, and without more tarrying, he put
himself into the thickest of the Wood. The prince rejoiced at that he heard,
imagining him to be his Brothers Son. So passing away a good part of the
night, he parted from the Shepherds, leaving his horse with them, and went a
good way off, putting his shield under his head, he fell asleep: till Cynthia
gessing the young knight (who lay not far off) to be Endimion, shined with
more than ordinary brightness, and with her light beams awaked both the
knights at once: the young knight bidding sleep farewell with a great sigh.
Then taking a Harp, he began to sing so sweetly, that ye Greek prince with
heedfull attention hearkened to his song.

Of Loves great power, eternal be my Song,
His praise be still the subject of my verse:
And as I sing, let me the praise rehearse
Of my hearts Sovereign, though she work my wrong.
Be still my ^ung, thou speak blasphemy,
Wrong is not offered by her Deity.
She looks strange, because I should entreat,
For it is reason mortals suppliant be
To Saints, indude with heavenly Majesty,
And such is Liriana, or more great:
Therefore I must not count it injury,
What seeming harm so ere she offers me.
The amorous Youth with new sighs concluded his sweet song, and then thus
complained: Ah Liriana, what has Rosabel deserved, that thus he must live a
dying life, banished from your presence? If it be that hereby you desire to
have your beauties fame spread by my hearts affection, let me be a little
comforted by knowing that I am affected. Now would the Nephew of Achilles have
gone unto him, but was again stayed by his sweet and delicate voice, that
sounded in this manner.

Let be my greefes, why do you me assail?
In vain in vain my death you do intend:
My thoughts alone my feeble life defend,
And cheer my dying heart, when it would quail.
Then Grief avoid, since thou can not prevail,
For why my thoughts my absent Lady see:
And that conceit alone gives life to me.
It gives me life, a weary weary life:
Come therefore grief, thou may at last have gain,
For my heart faints afflicted by disdain.
Sad hope yields up unto the murdring knife
Of black despair, whose terrors still are rife:
And drive all joy from wretched wretched me,
Because my thoughts no smiles but frowns do see.
But Grief away, again I bid adieu,
No more no more I will thee intertaine,
I will embrace my freedom once again:
No more will I desire her face to view,
Whose wrongs so long I bootlesly did rue.
But live I will contemning lovers life,
Wherein all good is geason, wrong is rife.
O impious blasphemer! (suddenly cride out this youth) shall Rosabell ever
presume again to see the Sun, that against Loves power has so blaspheamed?
Repent thee Rosabel, repent thee: wherewith he again thus sung*

Sweet Love show pity, show pity:
For I have thee offended*
I do disclaim my hateful dittie,
Which I so rudely ended.
Thou art almighty (Love) alone,
Life without thee there is none.
The Lover of Oliuia would no longer stay, but pacing swiftly to the Youth,
counterfetting his voice somewhat like the Troyan, thus said: Up Knight, and
defend thy loving life, for I am come without my company, because I would not
be parted til I have proved liberty the sweetest life. I do much esteem of
you sir Knight (said the unknown Nephew of Trebatio) not only for coming,
but for coming thus unto me alone: and therewith lacing on his helm, he
assailed the Greek Prince in such sort, that at three resistlesse blows he
overthrew him to the ground. O infernal Furies, to which of you shall I
compare our Prince, when he saw himself by one alone Knight so handled? for
rising again, at two blows he left him almost senseless: but recovering,
there began the greatest battle in the world. Witnesses they wanted not any,
for the Forest Nymphs and Satyrs, beasts tame and wild were their
beholders: the Shepherds also, awaked with the noise of their strokes, stood
wondering at their furious fight. Four hours the fair Moon gave light to
their heavy blows: and then leaving the worlds charge to her amorous br^ther,
she left (for pity) the ^ight of that pitiless battle, the contenders
being so weary, that they were forced to breath themselves: the courageous
young Knight imagining, that (except some devil had possessed him) it could not
be the knight with whom he combatted the night before, touching true love and
free liberty. So thought the Greek prince himself, for never any but his
brother brought him to that estate. With this conceit his choler so increased,
that without speaking any word he went against his Enemy, whom he found not
unprovided, and together they stroke such blows, that they both stooped on
their knees. Four hours they thus continued, much wearied, but nothing
discouraged. And in the midst of this contention, the wise Lyrgandeos Damsel
came forth of the Forest, and put her self between the^, saying: Stay
Knights awhile, and hear me speak, for having done ye both service, I am
come to ask a boon of you. Both the Knights knew her, and presently granted
it. Leave off your battle then said she: and though it be my request, yet is
it for both your benefits. Rosicleer was somewhat moved, yet at last he said:
Damsel, for your sake I am content, if this knight be so pleased. I am not
pleased said the young knight, to have the battle cease. I will exclaim on you
said the Damsel if you do proceed, to be a false knight and recreant of your
word. For you promised me when I guided you to the Cave of ye wise Artidon,
(where you demanded the end of your love, and whose Son you were) that you
would never deny me a lawful request: and this is most just, for it requisite
that between you there be eternal friendship, and here I am certain it must
begin. And in ending these words, she vanished away, leaving them much amazed.
Both of the knights put up their swords, and the Grecian thus began. Most
valiant knight, it seems this Damsel knows more of our estate than we our
selves: and seeing she says we must be friends, for my part I offer it you with
most entire affection, being likewise heretoo moved with certain inward
motions, which I cannot express. Invincible knight, answered the fair Youth,
great is my benefit to have friendship with the best knight in the World: and I
may well say they told me true, that certefied me my best good should meet me
in Lacedemonia And here look I for as much good as I have in Grecia, though
there remain my Sovereign Oliuia, whom you (for then had the young Knight took
off his helm) so much represent, as were it not that I know she is not given
to arms, I should believe it were her self: therefore fair Sir, resolve my
suspicious heart, of whence you are? What my self knows I will acquaint you
with replide the Youth. The Sultan of Niquea brought me up, in company of
Doriano his Son, and Liriana (my divine Mistres) his matchless Daughter.
Till I was of age to bear arms, I took the Sultan for my Father: who then
knighting me thus said Rosabel, thy Parents are to me unknown, for a lioness
brought thee to me an infant, and by a white Rose on thy breast thou had thy
name: a Scroll she brought in her mouth, which said thou should be my
greatest enemy, till the Swan put peace between us. Though it somewhat grieved
me to be of unknown Parents, yet my hope to enjoy Liriana, possessed me with
joy: and she a little cherished my hope, till on a sudden she forbad me to
soll^cite her with love, and with her coyness banished me the Country. So
(discontent) I embarked my self for Russia, purposing there at the Cave of the
wise Artidon to enquire touching my birth: but I was driven by tempest on this
Coast, where I was no sooner landed, but I heard a voice that said. Welcome the
glory of Greece and honor of great Britain, the greatest Friend your Father
has sends you this armor, and wills you to leave off that you wear. And
seeing no body, this armor was laid by me, which you see fitteth my body as
it had been made for me. While I was arming me therewith, a Dwarffe came unto
me, and said: Take courage Rosabel, for you shall in this armor meet one of
the valiantest knights in the world, and him shall thou assail with bitter
hate, being most bound to yield him love. After the Dwarffe departed, came the
Damsel that parted our battle, saying to me: Rosabel, grant me a boon, and I
will bring you to the wise Artidon. This being the thing I most desired, I
promised her any just thing: whereupon immediately she brought me thither.
Being there, the wise man unto my demand thus answered: That it was not
convenient as yet to know my parents, but he said they were such as in Grecia
most flourished for arms: that my love should in the end after many sorrows
prove succesfull. And for a token of the truth, he said that I should meet
in Lacedemonia the Knight that discou^red the Cave, whom verily I guess to be
your self, and desire thereof to be resolved: for of my self I have said all
I know. With great affection the Greek Prince answered: Were the discovery
death fair Knight, yet would I satisfy you in that ye ask. Know then, that
I am Rosicleer, Brother to Alphebo Emperor of Trapisond, and he that
discovered the Cave of Artidon, when once I departed discontent out of Great
Britain from Oliuia the Princess thereof, now my beloved Wife. The content
that Rosabel received exceeded: and in his joyful passion he brake out. O that
Fortune so favored me (right worthy Prince) that I might call you Father: in
the mean time, let me honor is as my Lord. And therewith would have kissed
his hands, but Rosicleer kissing his cheek, said: Were I blessed with such a
Son, I would think the heavens on earth had given me all happiness. But I
will entreat you to go into Greece with me, where of Oliuia we shall be
resolved: and I will afterward with all my Friends go with you to Niquea,
whence (if she consent) we will bring the Lady you so much love. Oh with what
content remained Rosabel! he could not but embrace his suspected Father: who
with like affection infolded him. As they sat thus ioyously together, Meridian
and Oristides came to ye place, who wondered to see the Grecian so familiar with
ye young Knight. But Rosicleer resolved them of his suspicions, and began to
persuade the Troyan, that he should not offer to proceed with the battle in
defense of free life: for (says he) I persuade me this Knight will put the
matter into my hands. So will he too doubt ye not said Meridian, for O^istides
is already Loves sworn Champion. Therewith alighting, and all fitting
together, the gentle Scythian discoursed from point to point the whole manner
of the Combat between the changed Troyan and the fair Sarmacia; whereat
Rosicleer exceedingly laughed, but Rosabel rose up, and embracing the Troyan
said: Being Friend to this worthy Greek Prince, I am bound to you in duty:
but being a true Conuerti^e in recanting the heresy you held yesterday, and
becoming Loves servant, my love to you is more increased. As the Troyan began
to reply, he was disturbed by the swift coming of a very well proportioned
Knight in black armor: who being near them, said. Worthy Knights, by your
armor I see you are the same that yesterday in the Palace of Lira wrought
meruailes. Far off is my native Country, where that I might justly report I
have dealt with such a Knight, my desire is to prove my selfwith him that made
the last battle. The Troyan stepped forth and said: I am the Knight ye look
for. It seems you are indeed said the black Knight, therefore mount you, and
defend this that you shall hear: You did not in the Combat yesterday the part
of a Defendant, ye should have forced your adversary to confess the wrong
done to the accused, and not have so delayed the time to make an end without
victory. Do you know sir Knight said the Troyan, who was my contrary? A
woman said the other Knight, but that is not a whit material: the right of the
battle thou performedst not, and thereupon grows my defiance, which if thou
be a just Knight thou will answer. Else (said the Troyan) let Sarmacias fair
eyes never give end to the begun sorrow of my heart, if thou be not answered
and chastised also for thy presumption. And therewith the furious Trojan
mounted his horse, and assailed his Contrary, using all able violence he
could both with sword and spear. But this black Knight used the like courtesy
with him, as he had done unto the fair Sarmacia, for indeed it was she: and
neither with point of spear nor edge of sword did she return him blow, but
only for four hours defended her self against his fierce assaults: and then
finding opportunity, she cloased with him, saying. Be not so hasty warlike
Knight, I come not to v^x you, but quit your kindness showed me yesterday at my
Fathers Court. At this, the Troyan suddenly retired, and the Lady vnarming her
head, said: Now am I out of your debt. And out of yours shall I never be said
Oristides (trembling with fear of her indignation), but pardon me divine
princess, and receive my sword that has offended you, and with it the Owners
heart. I receive it said the Lady, and give you mine in pawn, till we meet
again, as meet we will: and in saying this, she returned as swift as wind,
leaving the princes not a little wondering and rejoicing, but especially
Rosabel, who highly delighted in the Trojans change. And as they were bidding
God give him joy of his sword, they discovered a Bark that came swiftlye
toward them:: and from under the hatches appeared a Damsel resembling her
that parted their battle, ye said. Worthy Princes, the wise Lyrgandeo needs
your help, and desires you to enter this Bark. Rosabel was nearest, who with
his horse presently leapt in, saying: I will be the first, to show my duty to
your Lord. He was no sooner entered, but the boat removed from land, and the
damsel cried alowd to them. Now Rosicleer will thy mortal enemy Gelasio work
that vengeance on thy Son and Oliuias, which on thee he could not, in the
Island of Fangomadan: and thou Troyan, look to have all thy content turned into
lamentation: and with this ye boat and all departed out of sight, leaving the
Princes so grieved, that if the true messenger of Artemidoro had not comforted
them, their peril had been great. Here must we awhile leave them, to tell you
what happened to the prince of Dacia.

Of the adventure which happened to the Prince of Dacia on the Sea.

Cha. 14.
THe worthy Dacian, glad of the happy fortunes of Torismund and Andronio his
new friends, sailed in his inchaunted boat from France with great swiftness,
till coming where he might behold part of Sauoy and Spain, his bark made
some small stay, that his kind eyes might gratify with their loving looks
the Countries of the fair Duchess whom in France he rescued, and his kind
Torismund he so much loved. And being ready to break forth in passion to
praise their happy Princes, he was disturbed by a violent whirling of the
water: from the midst thereof arose a Sea-nymph, sitting on a Dolphin, who
said. The content is great (gentle Knight) which the fight of these dainty
Countries do give you: but I tell you, their best fortune shall be when the
great Lion of Spain, shall send his deer and hidden Tiger (who till then shall be
nourished in base clothes) for a scurge to his beloved Country, filling the
Ausonian lake with strange blood. This shall be he who in his tender years
shall conclude things that shall be more esteemed than those that are past: and
so far he shall extend his arm, that the destinies with pure envy shall
triumph over him, to triumph of the victory due unto him, attributing to his
power that which the rigorous Tiger had got. And this shall not be the last
good, which the heavens does promise unto Spain: neither do they so much
forget Sauoy, for the most and the best good of Spain shall come unto Sauoy,
and that land shall be equal with the most aduantaged, and may the^ be called
the fresh flower of Spain, her good coming by courteous using of the venterous
Lion, who being retired into his little Cave, shall rejoice in the tender
little Lamb, who with his meekenes does subject the untamed nations. This
said, the Nymph tuning a harp, began to sing as follows.

Not those fair three in Ida that contended,
To win the Ball, the Shepherd Venus gave,
Whereat the other two became offended:
In all their worths fair Catalinas have.
For it is she alone, and none but she,
Excelles the graces of those gracious three.
Having finished her song, she said: by this beauty shall Spain be blessed
and you shall shortly loose your freedom. Wherewith the Nymph vanished, and
the enchanted Bark kept course into the Italian Sea: the Dacian sailing
somewhat troubled* though never persuaded again he should be a lover. The fourth
day of his navigations, the swift Bark ran a shore in Italy: and the Dacian for
that he was weary of the seal, forthwith caused his inchaunted horse Tirio to
be taken forth. With this the warlike Youth armed himself, and mounted upon
his horse desirous to meet some people to be informed what country it was. With
this desire he passed till it was mid day, following the current of a brook,
till such time as he came to the head spring: there he washed and refreshed
himself of the heat, and did eat of that which Fabio brought with him: then
returning to his begun Journey, he heard not far off blows of a combat, then
he took his Lance and with a light pace followed the way from whence he
heard the noise, till such time as he saw amongst the trees, two knights in
battle, and near them a Damsel bound unto a knotty Ash making great
lamentation. Not with a little grief came the pitiful Prince unto the
Damsel, who seeing him so well proportioned, said. Ah Sir knight if there be
in you the strength (which your person shows) deliver me from th^se two false
knights, who are in controversy which shall defile me. The Prince was so angry
that without remembering to unloose her, he returned against them, saying. Back
Knights, for so unjust a cause you should not make battle: more justly either
of you should help women, and not seek to dishonor them. Much less care have
thou of her (they answered) that with out any more consideration leauest her to
the mercy of our swoords: and without any more respect, they both returned
against the Dacian, malice making the^ quickly friends. The Dacian would not
with the point of his Spear, take reuengement of such people, but with the end
he had in his hand, he stroke one such a blow upon his harnes, that he buckled
it to his breast in such sort that it took away his vital breath, where with
he fell dead to the ground: and returning to the second he stroke him so on the
head, that he made his brains fly in the field, therewith quenching the
desire they had unto the Damsel. In the mean time Fabio his Page had untied
her, who greatly marvelled at the valiantnes of the knight, and came unto him
saying. The heaven (Sir Knight) reward you for this you have done for me. For
from thence comes the reward of them that give such succors, which with my
life likewise I will repay. I give you thanks fair Damsel said the prince:
but I pray you tell me what was the occasion that these Knights did thus
misuse ye, as also what Country this is where I am? The Damsel humbling her
self, said: most valiant Knight, for evil persons to put in execution their
kankred will, little or no occasion at all serves. So it is, as I walked on my
way in this Forest, I met with them, and laying hold upon me, without any
other occasion, they put me in that sort as you found me, and by and by began
their battle to try who should first make spoil of my honor. And to the ^est
touching this Country; you shall understand wor^hy Knight, that you are very
nigh unto the great ^ittie of Rome, for in two days journey you may ^^me
thither.

The gentle Dacian was joyful to be in that famous Country, so praised
thoroughout all the world: with many thanks he departed, leaving the Damsel
much bound to his service, and very joyful that she had seen so warlike a
knight, she went onwards on her way. The Dacian took his way toward Rome, and
came that night unto a fair and delightful grove of poplers, where he
intended to pass away the night, being summer: so there he alighted from his
horse, and made his Target his pyllowe: but about aleuen a clock at night he
was waked by the noise of two shepherds, who not far from him were a
talking: but he imagining it to be some other thing, buckled on his helm, and
went by little and little amongst the trees to see who they were y^ talked, til
by the light of the Moon he saw two shepherds set down under a huge pine tree
talking together. And as one that was free from the grief of amorous cares, he
received content to hear their talk, the one who seemed to be younger then the
other, with some show of anger said. It is not to be doubted, friend Lisio that
the bravery of my shepperdesse exceeds, for only with her beauty, has
nature atchiued the name of famous. Which causes Aliano to affirm his
shepperdesse is she that deserves Apollo for her shepherd. If he receive
content to come forth it is only to behold her, but not to give her light, for
he does well know the eyes of my shepherdess exceeds his beams brightness.
And this will I defend, against them that be honored for Goddesses in the great
Tinacria. And therewith taking forth his well tuned rebecke, he began this song
with great sweetness.

My Love is of the Heard beloved,
Yet by his tears she is not moved.
In the sand his words she writes,
And rends the songs that heinditeth
O this she me with scorns requires:
If I say I will not love her,
My eyes tears my griefs discover,
I must love though she do hate,
Sue though she disdain my state,
And sing in tears; this life me best delights.
At the end of this song, thus answered the other Shepherd. Aliano thou do
love, and take it for the best life: I do not condemn thee, but rather
conceive as thou desire the fame due to thy Shepherdess. For this is the
course of every lover, to say that his Shepherdess is a Phoenix, and for such
a one does hold her, his crow must needs be a swan who ever gainsaie it: and
yet there can be but one excellent, and if yours be she, whom do all other
Shepherds praise, especially Poncenio. The cholar of the amorous shepherd
would not let him proceed any farther, but he said. It is sufficient friend
Lisio, I can with my rough crook make known that Poncenio is an heryticke, in
affirming that his Shepherdess deserves the merit of mine: and being
overcome with cholar, at two leapes he put himself nigh unto Poncenio with his
knottie crook in one hand, and in his other his Ierkin, and said. Defend thee
shepherd, for it is time to see, if thou have hands to maintain that which
thou have so falsely published. Poncenio was not a shepherd, that would take
such reproachful words: so with the swiftnes of a hawke he put himself in the
same order as his contrary was, where you should have seen one of the
prettiest contentitions in the world: for as the shepherds did esteem
themselves to be lovers, they did not forget to be valliant. The Dacian Prince
rejoiced in beholding them, and greatly wondered at the power of Love, that
amongst shepherds showed this rigor: but he suffered them not to proceed
forwards, for that the contention would be perilous. And so with a quick pace,
came amongst them saying: give way gentle Shepherd, it is not just that this
contention should go forwards. Valiant knight answered Poncenio, it is not so
small a matter as you think, if you have fasted love, you can say it is the
greatest and most just quarrel and rather to choose death, than in this case
to leave off contention: yet for all this, for my love (said the Dacian) I will
that ye would be friends. Of truth gentle Knight (answered Poncenio) many days
past have I procured this friendship with all plainnes in ye world, and I
believe because it was so simple, it has bin occassion that this shepherd
does think I do it of necessity, he knowing which all the world shall know,
that if he love, I live by loving a shepherdess, who in beauty, discreation
and proportion, equalleth the most excellent. I cannot (said Aliano) but
acknowledge the many good parts of your shepherdess brother Poncenio: yet for
all this you know, that my shepherdess has caused her to yield. These are
passions (sir knight) said Lisio, so long time past, that it would be tedious
to declare them: But since you have taken the matter in hand, I pray you
persuade them to leave off contentions past and become friends: for friendship
does ease the sower troubles of this amorous evil. And therewith the Dacian
Lord went directly unto the Shepherds, very joyful that he had seen that
controversy, and he took them perforce by their hands, and made them friends,
which endured unto death. And the more to bind their friendship, they all four
together sat down on the green and fresh grass, making a sign unto Fabio,
to bring the horses, and likewise to enjoy the friendship of the shepherds. The
gallant Youth did pull off his helm, and showed forth his fair countenance,
but he had not so soon pulled it off, when as the shepherd Lisio fell down at
his feet, saying. O warlike Prince of Dacia, what a happy day has this been
unto me? wherein I have seen that which I so much desired ever, him whom the
gallant country of Tinacria worshipeth for their God, as a restorer of their
lost content. The prince caused him to arise, wondering how he was known in
those parts: and demanding of him, how he knew him. The Shepherd answered,
Worthy warrier, I am a natural Tinacrian, and have there fed and kept Cattle,
and came many times unto the City, whereof the whole Country bears the name,
there I have seen in the Palace portrayed your figure, and the Emperor
Alphebos of Trapisond, unto whom those of Tinacria are so much bound. And your
figure and his I so earnestly printed in my heart, that I desired above all
things in the world to see the substances. I give you great thanks (said the
Prince) for the good will which you have showed unto the Emperor and me, and
in any thing I may, command me. Great pleasure I shall take if you declare
unto me any news from those parts, for since I departed from Rosicleer the
Prince of Grecia, I have not heard any thing thence for traveling in strange
Countries. That which I can say (answered the shepherd) is the joy which the
Emperor of Constantinople your Uncle has, for the acknowledging of the Princes
of Trapisonde to be the sons of the mighty Alphebo, although I believe it will
be no less joy to know the Prince of Tinacria, Poliphebo, who they say is
equal in valor to all the rest of the brethren: for being called the knight of
the silver branch in all parts whereas he has traveled, he has left the
world full of his fame. The Dacian courteously thanked Lysio, and was joyful at
his news: and after some earnest persuasions of them to continue friends, he
prepared to ride toward Rome, the Shepherds bringing him on his way within
the sight of the Common way, and were grieved to part with him. Which he
seeing, promised if occasion served he would again see them* at which
rejoicing, they returned to their Foldes: where we will leave them, to tell
what happened to the Prince on his way to Rome.

What happened to the Prince Heleno, with the Emperors daughter of Rome Roselia:
and her guarders.

Chap. 15.
THe morning star, had scarce showed it self, when as the Lord of Dacia, in
Iorneying toward the mighty City of Rome, stayed to refresh himself at a
clear fountain, preparing his armor, til it was time to ride, for that he
began to discover the City and to meet with much people: so he traveled till
it was two a clock, when being not far from the City, he saw coming by a
great and broad way, a troop of people, where he imagined it should be needful
to take his spear of Fabio his Page, aduising him that in no case he should
tell who he was, till he aduized him. In this sort he went nigh unto the tumult
of people, where ^e might discover a great and sumptuous Coatch, which was
drawn by twelve white horses, al their trappings and furniture full of precious
stones and upon them twelve dwarfes, all apparelled in green cloth of gold,
according to the color of the coach, wherein came three Ladies, in his opinion
the fairest that he had seen. She in the midst (who seemed to be chief)
was in green likewise, but so full of precious stones, that it dazeled his
sight. This gallant Lady was with her hair loose, with a rich Fan in her
hand, and upon her gilted head a garland of fine gold, wherein was set a
shining Carbuncle, which of it self gave a great light. The two Ladies were in
red, cut upon blew Tinsell, full of gold lace with curious works, their gowns
somewhat low collars in such sort, that their snowy breasts were discovered:
behind the Coatch came twelve knights, armed in fresh and shining armor, and
before it as many all with green Beuers, full of figures, which signified the
Ladies name, Nigh unto the side of the Coatch came three knights, the best
proportioned in the world, the one with green armor, the richest (except his
own and his Friends) that he ever saw. In his shield was painted a Ladies face,
with this posie.

This fair fire is the light
That gives brightness to each sight.
He was gallantly mounted, his horse trapped sutably in green. The other two
were in shining red armor, and on their shields both had one device, being a
sea covered with a net, and at the end thereof a fair Lady, with this Motto.

Love the erst did glory get,
Cannot escape fair Beauties net.
As the Dacian admired them, so wondered they at him: and on the sudden came a
Damsel to him, and with gallant courtesy said. The three knights that are the
keepers of yonder Ladies, gessing you a knight amorous, desire you to just with
one of them. I would satisfy that request said he, but I pray you certefie them
I am not amorous. It is like (said the Damsel) you love your Lady little,
that dare not for her hazard a fall: but you shall just ere ye go, or show
great signs of cowardice. And therewyth she rid swiftly to the Knights and
Ladies, who laughed exceedingly, especially when she told them he bare Cupid
for his device, and yet denied to be amorous. Back they sent her again with
this message. Sir, our knights send you choice of three things: whether you will
just with the^, loose your shield, or blot out the device, for with that shield
they swear you shall delude no more. They have the advantage (answered the
prince) for Lovers are made hardy by their Ladies favors. The Damsel thinking
him a pure coward, said: Therein they shall have no advantage, here, take this
rich jewel for my favor, on this condition, that if you be overthrown, you
surrender it to the victor. Agreed said the Dacian: and with great gallantnes
he stood ready for the Iusts: all the three knights having received favors of
ye Ladies, to give if he were victor. The first yt came against him was one of
the red knights, whom the Dacian overthrew to the ground, being himself
thereat no more moved than a rock: then came the other red knight and was
served in the same order, to the great amazement of all the beholders. Heleno
being nere the damsel said: I want a spear (fair damsel) for this green
Knight, play you the Page and choose me a good one, and you shall see me well
defend your jewel. The joyful Damsel chose two of the best spears, and
giving him one, he went against the green Knight, that stayed for him: and in
the encounter both brake, and with their horses rushed so together, that the
green Knight with his horse dead between his legs came to ye ground. The
prince coming to the overthrown Knights said: Of this evil your selves are
guilty, hereafter jest not at them whose strength ye know not. The green
knight courteously yielded his jewel, but the red Knights defied him to mortal
battle, but the Ladies in the Chariot forbad it: and unto the Dacian the
Damsel thus said: Roselia the Emperors Daughter (being the Lady in green,
accompanied with the Princesses of Scotland in red) desires to know your name,
and that you would accompany her to the Emperors palace. The Da^ian being
nigh the Coach showed his fair face, and at his eyes drew to his heart her
fairnes, both being enamoured either of other: at length with very great
reverence he said. Sovereign Ladies, pardon I beseech you the unwilling greef
I have given unto these knights, the favors are this Damsells that favored me^
with hers: and where your Excellency asks my name, and commaudeth my
unworthy attendance, this is humbly my answer: I am bound from both, till I
have finished an adventure, which ended, I will both answer and attend on you.
On that condition said the princess, we are this favor, giving him a jewel,
and be as speedy as you may, for I will expect your return. The Dacian
boowing himself promised his attendance: and so parting, he put himself into
the thickest of the woo^, and they wondering at his worthiness, returned toward
the City. Our Dacian being in the wood and alighted, could not forget the
beauty of Roselia: yet loath to entertain love thoughts, he took his Lut^,
and to the sound thereof sung in this manner.

Fond affection, hence and leave me,
Try no more for to deceive me.
Long ago thou did perplex me,
Now again seek not to vex me.
For since thou leftst off to assail me,
Power nor passion could not qua^le me.
As the Lamb the Wolf I fly thee,
As my foe Love I defy thee:
Wend a way, I care not for thee,
Childish tyrant I abhor thee.
For I know thou will deceive me:
Hence away therefore, and leave me.
Till evening in contrary imaginations he rested, and was then disturbed with
the noise of two Giants and four knights, who were come so near him, that he
might easily hear one of the Giants say: Are you sure our princes of Gibia are
acquainted with our coming? They are said the other Giant, but will not be
seen till we have taken away the Ladies. Then said the first Giant, let us
have to the palace, for as I get the Scottish Ladies for our princes, so will
I have the Emperors daughter Roselia for my Son: and in this talk they
poasted toward the City. Our Dacian (glad of this occasion) was not far
behind, but at the entering of the gate rushed among them. To whom one of the
Giants said: For thy have fond hardy knight, either tell us what thou meanst
to make such speed, or leave with us thy horse for thy presumption. My horse I
will neither leave (said he) nor tell ye my business. But thou shall said the
other Giant tell me, and as he was laying hold on the princes arm, with the
great end of his spear he overthrew him to the ground, and with a light leap
cleared the gate for his page and himself, stepping aside, to see which way
they took. The Giants thought him some devil, and by reason of their business
would not follow him: but being guided by a knight that knew the way, they went
directly to the palace Orchard, and mounted the wall, sending their horses to
a place appointed. Always the prince was within the hearing, and leaving his
horse with Fabio, followed them over the wall: by which time they had reared a
ladder up to the Princess chamber window, and one of the Giants being almost
at the top, the nimble Dacian ran and overthrew the ladder, so that with the
fall the Giant brake both his legs, making such a cry, that the Court was
straight in an vprroare. Our Gallant in this time was not idle, for that
between him and the other Giant began a rigorous battle, which he had
quickly ended, but that the four knights who were very strong, greatly
troubled him: but he soon dispatched two of them, and in the seconds fall, the
Giant smit the prince so rudely on the helm, yt made him to kiss the earth:
but it was little for his good, for as he thought to catch him in his arms,
the Prince arose with ye point of his sword upright, which under the skir of
his armor passed through his heart. As he was falling, the other cripple Giant
full of malice, came creeping to do a mischief: but the prince quikly divided
his head from his body, whereat ye knights vainly sought to flee, for the
heroicke Eleno stepped before them, and parted one to the breast, the other
falling at his feet he took to mercy, because he should reveal the treason
to the Emperor: before whom and the prince of Almaine, who were now with
twenty armed knights come, and before the Ladies that from the windows beheld
the battle, all was by the knight confessed: and the manner of the princes
following them by himself told. Whereat the Emperor standing amazed, ye
Dacian kneeled down, and to the Prince of Almaine he said: Receive (worthy
Prince) this little service, for the greef I put ye too yesterday. When the
Prince perceived it was the Knight that overthrew him, he embraced him, saying:
valorous knight use to me no such courtesy, for I am infinitely bound unto you,
for this service done unto my Lord the Emperor. The Emperor having heard of
him before, and beheld the mighty strokes on the dead giants and knights,
could not speak for joy, but taking him by the hand, led him to his Daughters
chamber, and finding her with the two Princesses of Scotland, he said:
Daughter, I have brought you this knight prisoner, keep him safe, but use him
well, for I know you are not ignorant of his desert. And turning to the Dacian,
he said: Where my best joy is* there I leave you, and I de^^re ye to tell me
your name? I am of Tartarie, and called the Knight without love. My small
desert most royal Emperor, meriteth not this gracious favor, but your
kindnesses are everlasting bonds to bind me to your service. The Emperor left
him to his rest, his lodging being appointed hard by the princesses: but
neither he nor she possessed their wonted rests, Merlins water having now in
his breast lost the operation, and Dianaes rules beginning to dye in hers.
Arbolinda the Scottish Princess was Roselias co^forter, but our Heleno was
alone: till careful Fabio maruelling at his masters long stay, knocked alowd at
the Court gate, and made earnest inquiry for his master. The Emperor had
understanding thereof, who caused him to be conveyed to his master, that was
not a little joyful of his coming. Being in the chamber, and suspecting no
hearkners to be nigh: Fabio said the Prince, in any case confess not that I
am Heleno Son to the King of Dacia, but call me the Knight with out love of
Tartarie, for so to ye Emperor have I named my self: for between his Majesty
and my Father was a great quarrel when they were Knights Adventurers, which is
not yet ended. The amorous Roselia and Arbolinda heard all ioyously, but she
was more delighted, when the prince took a Lute and thus expressed his love
passions.

Yield up thy life into the hands of Love,
For fair Roselias beauty bids thee so:
Poor Dacian prince, her curteons favor prove,
Live if she grant, or dye if she say no.
For in her smile or frown is set the date,
Of thy heavens bliss or ever dying fate.
But Fondling, how can thou expect such joy?
A stranger and desertlesse of her grace,
But do exclaim against that cruel boy,
That bound thy freedom to her Angels face,
And rather dye than thy hearts pride discover,
In daring thoughts to be a Goddess Lover.
Yet is she fair, and fairenes should be mild,
She Princely is, and free are Princes hearts,
With thoughts ingrate they will not be defilde,
But give large gifts for very small desartes.
O then make suit, she may perchance regard,
And for thy small desert give rich reward.
The princess was so ouerioyed, that she retired to her chamber, and thus
requited his affected Sonnet.

Tears in mine eyes, suspicion in my heart,
And modest shame deny what I desire:
Feign would I joy* but still appears smart,
And threatens pain if I come near this fire.
Wherein God wot I burn and it in me.
Perforce I yield a yielding love to be.
Sweet Cytherea charge thy gentle Son,
That he be kind and I will thee adore,
With myrtle boughs I Will to thy altar run,
And praise the Paphian Goddess evermore.
White doves I Will daily offer at her shrine,
If this fair Prince prove firmly to be mine.
But if like Ariadne he me leave,
When I have made him Master of my heart,
I must exclaim Love teaches to deceive,
And is unjust to recompense desert:
O far far off* be such a thought I crave,
From him who for my Lord I mean to have.
Having finished her Song, she was encouraged by Arbolinda to go through a
secret door into the Princes chamber, which with some fear she attempted:
and being at the door, they stayed to hear him again thus sing.

If I must (sweet Love) obey,
Be pitiful to me I pray.
And let me have my Loves reward,
With pity let her me regard,
And then thy quiver I will fill
With arrows to content thy will.
I for thee will I ever fight,
My name shall be Loves martial knight,
On my shield thee will I wear,
Still thy colors will I bear.
If thou help my heart distressed,
Thou shall be ever blessed.
To my fair I will appeal,
That with me she gently deal,
Farewell hope love will not yield,
Yet I bear him in my shield,
The toward boy is too too cross,
And delights in my loss.
The princess at the songs end, by Arbolindas means entered, and thus the
Scottish princess began merrily to queststion him.

Sir* like diligent Warder^ we come to hearken of your health: and being but
awhile since near your door, we heard one name himself Heleno Prince of
Dacia, who if he be your Friend, is hither welcome, if otherwise, he shall not
here abide to vex you. The Prince perceiving how he was discovered, remained a
while confounded: but intending to dissemble it if he might, he said. Fair
Lady, than my self and my Page in this place till your coming I assure ye
this night there has been none: and where ye tell me of a Prince of Dacia, I
assure ye I know not any such. It is very likely said Roselia, you are
unacquainted with him, your Countries are so far asunder, and your affections
farther: he being a Dacian and a lover, you a Tartarian, and without love.
Leave off this trifling said Arbolinda, we know you (gentle Prince) to be
Heleno: but be secure, for the Princess comes not to meddle about your
parents business, but to give kind answer to your hearts desire, if your tung
lately delivered not dissembling passions. If it did answered Heleno, let me
for ever be tunglesse: but pardon me divine princess, that so rudely have
attempted to name your excellence. If impatience at my presumption trouble your
gentle heart, discover Heleno to the Emperor (for I am he) that he may
revenge his hate against my Father, and the harm offered to your Highness. Your
desert sir knight is great, and your desire much, ungrateful I will not be,
but intertain you for my Knight: and as you better deserve, expect reward.
Withal I enjoin you, that for my sake ye attempt an Adventure in this
City. So least we be all ouerheard, as lately we ouer-heard you, we will for
this time part. Thus went the Princess away happy by her knights affection,
leaving him in a paradise of content: where it is reason that till the Sun
arise we let him rest, and in the next Chapter you shall hear of his most
admirable adventure.

Of the accusation that the Prince of Dacia made of the Princes of Gibia, and
the end of the adventure that was in the place.

Chap 16.
NO sooner had the Sun beautified the morning but the Emperor commanded the
Princes of Gibia to appear in the great hall: whether himself with his
daughter, the Prince of Almaine, and the Princesses of Scotland conducted the
amorous Dacian: who in that great presence discovered y^ treason of the Princes
of Gibia, how they had consented with the Giants to steal away the Princess
of Scotland, and to give the daughter of the sacred Emperor to a base and
hideous Giants Son: which accusation the knight prisoner confessed. And when
the Princes denied it, the Lord of Dacia chalendged them to mortal battle, the
one to fight two hours and then the other to help him. Which they accepting,
the combat was presently appointed: to the great grief of the Princesses of
Scotland, who not withstanding considering the violence intended, were somewhat
pacified, and by Roselia persuaded to hope for better Princes: and so they
agreed to stand with her to see the combat, the Prince Heleno being already
entered the li^^^, and not perceiving his adversaries ready, busied himself to
be hold a marvelous chapple on one side the Court, seated upon four pillars
of white Jasper, and all the covering of the same: in the midst seemed a
Knight to be thrust thorough with a sword, the richest that ever the Prince had
seen, and his armor of the same work that his was, but far richer, and
upon his shield he had the ancient devise that he was wont to have, which gave
him no small content, and reading a writing it declared the adventure, and was
this. At such time as the favored Swan shall show her valor in this mighty
place, commanded by the simple Dove, a knight shall get the armor of the
unhappy Brutus, who gave himself a lamentable death with his own sword. The
Prince of Dacia would forthwith have proved the adventure, but he was advised
by the sign, that his enemi^s were in the place. And therewith he turned
about his horse with a gallant demeanure. There came with them many of the
Court, and the eldest first put himself right against the Dacian, the younger
remaining still at the beginning of the Listes, tarying till two hours were
past to help his brother. So when the fearful sign was made, the one came
against the other as fast as their horses could run, and encountered with all
their force in the midst of their careere: but that of the Prince of Dacia
was the greatest, for striking him in the midst of his shield it made both
him and his horse come to the ground, with great admiration to all them of the
Court. The Dacian would take no advantage of him, but alighted from his horse,
and tarried til that the Prince was clear of his, who very courageously with
his sword in his hand came against the Dacian, giving him so great a blow,
that he made him stoop with one hand to the ground, and turning to renew the
same he stroke him so upon the right shoulder that don Heleno felt it evil:
but rising up he approached with so rigorous an answer, that he made him give
three or four steps backwards ready to fall, and followed him so, that if he
of Gibia had not been cunning, he had overthrown him: for he seeing his
intent, put the point of his sword forwards, and as he was earnest to come on,
if his armor had not been magical, our Dacian had not gone free, for hitting
him in the buckling of the breast plate his sword did somewhat enter, so that
it was needful for him to bear backwards because he would not be hurt: but he
returned with great cholar, and closed with his enemy, both giving together so
heavy blows, that he of Gibia was forced to put both his hands to the ground
to keep him from falling, and the Dacian Lord, made an unmeasurable staggering.
From that time they continued with great force, no advantage appeering between
them, he of Gibia maintaining himself for more then one hour with great honor
against Heleno: yea half of the second hour was past, when as the cholar of
the Dacian was turned into living blood, and throwing his shield at his back,
he took his sword in both his hands, and gave him of Gibia so strong a blow
upon his helm that he cloue his head, and overthrew him dead at his feet,
breaking his sword in three pieces, the pommell only remained in his hands. I
will let pass the grief that the fair Arbolinda sustained and leave her in a
sound in the Princess lap, who was busied in beholding the knighthood of the
Dacian Lord, who had no time to secure himself, when as like the wind the
second Prince of Gibia came forth with desire to revenge the death of his
brother: and more respecting rage than the order of Knighthood, he came behind
the gentle Dacian with the breast of his horse, with so strong an encounter,
that he laid him on the ground, passing over him with his horse, and left him
almost without breath: but in recovering himself, more furious than a viper of
Hircania, he abode the coming of his enemy, who came with so great swiftnes,
that it was miraculous the Dacian eff^cted that which he did. For as he passed
by, he threw the pomell and hylt rf the sword, with so great strength as if it
had bin forced out of a piece of ordinance, and stroke him on the helm so
untoward a blow, that whether he would or no, he made him leave his saddle,
and without sense to fall to the ground. The content was great that all
received at so venterous a blow: and if thereat the worthy Roselia did rejoice,
there is no doubt, and the more when as she saw that the prince, as one that
had done nothing, went directly unto the edyfice with an ireful pace, with the
trunk of a spear in his hand: but he was not so soon come thither, when as
between the pillars, the earth did open, and there came forth a serpent, as
long as a lance: who beating the ground came against the Prince, that with no
little fear did abide her coming. At first she rose up so high that he could
not strike her head, but her body the trunk was so short, but the serpent
stroke him with her tail, with so great force, that she threw him a good way
from the pillars, giving him a grievous fall to the ground: which did not a
little grieve the Emperor and al those that desired to see an end of the
adventure. The Dacian was so kindled in cholar, that he wished it had been two
serpents: and with a light leap assalted the serpent, who giving wonderful
shrikes came to catch him with her claws: but before she could fasten her
tallants, our Heleno did execute his blow with the trunk of the Lance upon her
head, with so great force, that he made her fall to the ground and followed
her to have stricken another blow, at such time as she did incorporate herself
in such sort, that he could not hit her but on the neck, breaking al in pieces
the trunk of the Lance: but he went not away boasting of that blow, for the
Serpent set her furious nails upon his shield, and pulled it so strongly,
that she got it and brake it, which made the prince the more to wonder, for
that he thought his shield had been magical. And so with a new fear, his
Lady bearing him company with a thousand sighs, he did abide the Serpent with
his armed fist, for he had no other armor left, and as she came aloft, without
any fear he went unto her, and lifting up his hand, he stroke her such a blow
upon the head, that he made her loose her blow, but yet she caught him
between her claws with so great rigor ye it seemed she had thrust them into
his bowels. He thinking that he had bin wounded to death, quickly drew out his
dagger, and with the point nailed her in the head two or three times, and made
her to stretch forth her self with the pangs of death, in the midst of the
edyfice. The Dacian arose up so weary and wounded, that all were greatly
admired, how he could sustain himself on his feet: but as though he had been
whole, he assalted the shape that had the armor, and upon a soddaine there
passed before him, a furious Giant saying. Stand cowardly knight, for first
thou must know the sweetness of my fauchion, and therewith gave him such a blow
upon the helm that half his head was unarmed. The Dacian was in great fear of
death, in seeing the small defense which his armor had, to that which the
Giant had, and then found the lack of his good sword: but considering who did
behold him, he went unto the Giant, who again was lifting up his heavy
fauchion: the Youth making show as though he would abide it, but at the fall,
he closed with him and his dagger in his hand, and never left stabbing til he
fell down dead. Then assailed he again the portrature, when suddenly a tempest
filled all the place, so that the Prince could not be seen, and in the
thicknes of this storm the great wise man Nabato apeared to the Prince, giving
him the armor and weapons of the portrature, and charging him not to stay
after he had overthrown the prince of Gibia, but hye to the sea where was his
enchanted bark: for said the wise man in this storm Roselia and her friend the
princess of Arbolinda are taken away: but at last you shall meet with your
content. With that the storm cleared, the Edifice was vanished, the two
princesses among the Ladies missed, and the Dacian overthrowing the prince of
Gibia for dead, poasted away like lightning on his horse Tirio, his page
following him to the inchaunted Bark, leaving the Court in a confusion, till
the Emperor was comforted by the wise Nabato; who told him though the taking
away of his Daughter were grievous, and by her love much blood should be shed:
yet should it be in the end joyous, and for the honor of the Empire. The
Emperor knowing Nabato ever to have had care of his affairs, gave credit to
him, but yet retired with the prince of Almaine, both very sad into the
palace. The wise Nabato had in his power Roselia and Arbolinda, and making
the^ by his art forget all feminine fear, he apparrelled them pages, and sent
them in quest of the Dacian, which they desired: intending to see what other
Lady he loved, and to revenge the disgrace (as they took it) done them by his
sudden departure Them will we leave, and turn to the five Princes left with
Gelasio: and of the maidenhead of their knightly adventures.

What happened to the Princes in the defended Island, brought up by the wise
Gelasio.

Chap. 17.
THe wise Gelasio seeing the Princes in years increase, and in valor to be
excellent, sent first forth Celindo and his Sister, he apparelled like Apollo
she like Pheobe: but mounted on two fierce horses spotted black and white,
who joyful to sit such beasts, with boar Spears in their hands, went on
their wonted hunting, and followed their game so long till they came to the
Castle of Fangomadan: where reading the writing that promised the adventure to
them that durst attempt it without arms: and also that there were weapons
within, the Princess winded the horn so shrilly that all the place rung
thereof* When suddenly the mighty Fangomadan with an iron mace in his hand, and
a sword by his side all armed issued forth, and in his company a deformed
Sagittary, with arrows of Iron and a bow of steel. The Giant seeing those
fair youths commanded them away, telling them he was not to try the adventure
with such Infants: when Celindo and his Sister with their fistes at once
struck the Sagittari^ and him two such blows on the wast (for higher they
could not reach) that they retired four or five p^ces back, the which so
incensed Brandafidell, (being led to fury contrary to his nature by,
inchauntment) that he sought to take the Lady in his arms, but she closing
with him drew out his sword and said: Now furious beast am I weaponed, and thy
advantage of weapons shall be to thy hurt, and therewith she cut him on the
thigh to the bone: and with a light leap stepped to the Sagittarie wounding him
in the arm, as he was ready to shoot one of his arrows at Celindo. For
which her brother was nothing pleased, but to quit her stepped to Brandafidell,
and smit him so on the knee, that he could scarsly stand: wherewith Celindo
entered the Court, and came to the sepulcher, and in dispite of the Sagittarie
that followed him drew out the sword which Rosicleer lost in the battles
conclusion with Fangomadan, and therewith returning, he encountered his
adversary, with admirable boldness. Mean while the Giant and the princess
were close, and endured an admirable wrestling. To behold which the Princess
Floralinda was gotten to the windows, and knowing the battle was for her
delivery, she prayed to the heavens to aid those amiable younglings. Whom
(though unknown) she affects as her Children. By this the Sagittarie
thinking to gripe Celindo, was prevented by a deadly wound given him in his
breast, which made him fall, and the Prince without fear did sit on his
senseless trunk to behold the end of the dangerous wrestling between his
Sister and the giant: who left him with her strong resistance nigh dead on the
Pauement: with whose fall there happened so great a noise that it frighted the
young Princes, and Divine Floralisa, looking for enemies stepped to the
sepulcher, and drew thence the sword of Camilla. But presently sweet music
altered that fear, and the gentle Brandafidell the new Greek awaked from his
inchauntment, and coming directly to Floralisa, whom she doubted for an
enemy, he said. Divine Princess pardon mine error in offering blows to a
Youth of so excellent prowess: the good ye have done me with this contention
no tongue can tell: for now is the inchauntment ended.

With this Floralisa left, and then Floralinda the princess of Macedonia
descended the stairs giving praise to God for ending the adventure: and
looking on Celindo she thought upon her Lord Meridian, and in his sisters face
she seemed to see her self: with all motherly affection she embraced them,
saying: O that you were the lost Children of the Scythian prince and Macedonian
princess: and so with many joyful tears she entreated them to tell where they
were born? To whom the young princess answered: Divine Lady, of our birth we
are ignorant, only nursed in this Island by the wise Gelasio. Infinite joys at
once possessed Floralinda with this answer, for she made no question they were
her children: and no less joyous they were of their weapons and her freedom.
At length they both importuned the Giant to give them the order of Knighthood:
which he willingly did, and the mother girded on the daughters sword, and the
sister her brothers. There vowed they friendship to the Giant. Who told them it
was now time to part, for the imprisoned Lady must be freeed to go see her
husband: and wishing them to commend him to the wise man his Uncle, whom they
called father, they all parted joyfully: the Castle gate shutting with a great
noise of a battle, which caused ye brother and sister to stay, the Giant and
princess found themselves at the Seaside, and there entered a ship to sail
toward Grecia. Where we will leave them, to tell you how the other three
princes Argante, Clarisell and Torisiano were welcomed at the Castle of
Fangomadan: who following their hunting as the brother and sister did, came
directly where they read the writing which said: No knight nor person weaponed
must attempt to enter. Whereupon with an excellent courage they stuck their
boar spears in the earth, and hanging their swoords at their saddle bows,
they came to the Castle gate which suddenly opened, where at entered, and found
three Arkes, and in each of them an armed Knight, and on their helmes their
names, the first was Milo of Rome, the second Astrusio King of Media, the third
Telamon of Greece, Milo out of the pillar in the inchaunted sepulcher had
drawn his sword, and began a most rare battle with unarmed Clarisell, who with
great lightness cleared himself, and closing with Milo wrung from him perforce
his sword, and therewith assailed the other two knights that were entered combat
with Argante and Torisiano: who without respect of knighthood, left the
unweaponed youths and assailed Clarisell: who so defended him that the noise of
the battle was dreadful. This was the noise that Celindo and his sister
heard, and coming within sight, they thought to assist the youth, when
sod^inly a Cave opened, whereout issued a hideous monster, that clasped Celindo
and ran in with him: but Floralisa followed so near that the monster had no
time to shut the Cave. Argante and Torisiano this while came to the sepulcher*
and offering to draw the two swords out of the pillars, they were hindered by
the violence of fire: And suddenly came before them two mighty giants each
with a long key at his girdle, off^ing to take the young princes in their arms,
but between them four began a most perilous and dangerous wrestling wherein
the princes being almost wearied, they suddenly broke the keys from the Giants
girdles and smiting the^ in the forheads with a horrible cry they fell down
dead. Then went the Youths again unto the Sepulcher, and Torisiano drew out ye
sword of Astrusio and Argante Telamonios, for with the two Giants deaths the
enchantment ceased. Then went th^se joyful princes, and with the key^s opened
the door where Clarisel was maintaining the battle against the three
enchanted knights: who seemed like furies when they perceived the youths
possessed of their swords, and for three hours they maintained a doubtful
battle, but being all by the princes overthrown, they vanished away, leaving
their armours, wherewith the princes armed one another, finding the armours so
fit, as if it had been made for them. Being armed said Clarisel unto his
companions: In such a Castle as this, it is very like there are more keepers.
Being better provided of armor, our care is the less said Argante. So they
searched about the Castle, but could find no body, only they did hear the
furious blows of a battle, that seemed by the hollownes of the sound, to be
fought in some vault of the Castle. This was the battle between the beauteous
Floralisa and the enchanted Camilla. For the princess following the Monster
that bore away her brother, at ye foot of a dark pair of stairs ouertooke
him, and parted his head from his shoulders. When Celindo was about to render
thanks for his rescue, he was hindered by the descending of the furious
Camilla, who forced both brother and sister thorough a long entry into an open
Court: where she fought almost six hours. O that I had sufficient art to
describe the excellence of this fight, and to quote the vnbeleeueable
dexterity of this excelling Damsel, as well in giving as avoiding dangerus
blows. The last that of this long fight made an end, was a desperate thrust
cast under the gorget of Camilla, that parted her throat, and unarmed her
head: where with falling down, the princess in sted of joy mourned, to behold
so beautiful a face as Camillas stained in blood. But on a sudden the body
vanished, and a voice said: Knight, arm thy self, and pity not me, for I
am unhurt. With more content the Lady took up the armor, and by her brothers
help was armed therein. And so they joyfully ascended the stayres, and in the
Court fo^nd the three fair princes with the wise Gelasio: being so joyful,
that he continued a long time in embracing them. Though the princes had never
seen one another before, yet by the pictures they remembered one another
countenance: the young Assyrian at the fight of Floralisa making such fuel of
his heart, as loves fire and his lives light, were either at once extinguished,
so long his affection continued. The Wiseman caused Celindo to knight them
all, and Floralisa to girt their swords* and and so he brought them home, and
after they had dined, he brought the brother and sister out at the door that
conducted them to the sea side, where they slew the Sagittaries the first day
they hunted: and the wise man said, follow this way Celindo, and win armor.
Being come to the place, they read this writing on a pillar.

Who ever does intend to have;
The armor kept within this Cave,
Which kind Medea forgd by Art,
For Jason false, that slew her heart,
Let him attempt a danger great,
Through unseen fire and sure felt heat.
Before he bring it to an end,
With monstrous shapes he must contend.
Fierce beasts, foul fends the porters be,
To bar him from his entery:
Yet is there granted unto one,
To win this armor, else to none.
That shall be called the hidden youth,
To him it is granted of a truth.
And a little lower there was on the same pillar this inscription.

The youth must enter and no other,
The Sister may not help the brother.
If she attempt she must return,
Else ceaselesse shall our fire burn.
For neither strength nor hardines*
Prevails in this business.
Be warned therefore and take heed,
For only he of this must speed.
Floralisa careless of the writing, went in with him; but they were so
afflicted with heat, that they has returned. I perceive Sister said Celindo,
that as the writing says, I must enter alone: therefore I pray you stay at the
entry with our horses. I would gladly have borne you company said she, but
seeing it may not be, heavens Guider prosper you in the adventure. So entered
this valiant and courageous Youth, as boldly as if he had had on his sisters
armor: but he had not gone far, when suddenly one laid hold of his sword,
and pulled it from him perforce, and a voice joyfully said: He must have a
greater care of his own weapons, that seeks to win others. The prince with
his swords loss and violence of the heat, doubted to go forward with the
enterprise: but coming to a door that opened into a great Court the heat left
him, and a furious Griffon came against him, whose brains with his shield flat
in both hands, he at the first blow beat out. He had no sooner done it, but he
beheld before him one like a mighty fury, who said: Think not unhappy
Knight, to win easily the victory: and therewith lifted up a huge mace, having
also Celindos sword at his girdle: which the Prince espying, joyfully ran
within him, but could by no means recover his sword, which so vexed him that
he laid hold on his mace, and continued struggling with him for it more than an
hour, at which time the fury vanished, leaving his sword on the ground, which
he took up with no less joy than when he first won it. So being very weary,
he rested awhile in the midst of the Court, and wondered at the gallant
building: at last he rose, and came to a gate of steel, that had thereon this
writing. Whosoever will win the Armor of the beloved Jason, let him knock with
the pomell of his sword, and he shall find the entrance dangerous. Celindo (for
all the threatening) knocked presently, and the gate opened: but on either side
stood two deformed Sagittaries, with hatchets of steel in their hands ready
to strike having their arms aloft. At which sight the Prince was somewhat
amazed, but taking courage, he ran under one of the Sagittaries arms, which
did not only cause the Sagittarie to loose his blow, but both his hands: for
his fell^w ouer-reaching to hit the Prince, pared them away by the wrists,
while the prince giving the Sagittary on the further side a blow on the thigh,
that almost parted the bone, rusht into the hall: whether the one handlesse,
the other half leglesse followed him, both who^ at two deadly thrusts he left
dead, and stopped to a Table whereon lay the richest armor ye was ever seen:
which before he could well touch, there issued a Lady with two fair Children
to him, saying: It repents me not that this armor made for the faithless
Jason, that forsook me and these two children, fitteth such a knight. I charge
you to be confident in service of Ladies, especially your own Lady, and let
my example which I will in this ditty decypher, be to you a looking glass.
With which word excellent music sounded and the Lady thus sung: I was of
Colchos the admired,
Wherein the fleece of gold (desired,
Of many knights their lives that lost)
Remaind vntucht, the seekers crossed
With bloody death, till I did see
The face that won my liberty.
O my fortune fortunelesse,
To love so soon my hearts distress.
Old Aesons snone whom I revived,
Of life and beauty me deprived,
The Dragons fierce for him I quaild;
Against the keepers he preuaild;
All my dear Country I forsook,
And him for all I gladly took,
O my fortune fortunelesse.
To love so soon my hearts distress.
For when I thought I was beloved,
And for his good my Art had proved:
To Creufa he his savor lent,
And falsely from Medea went.
Who justly moved with kindled ire,
Slew these two Babes, burnt her in fire.
O my fortune fortunelesse;
To love so soon my hearts distress.


Then discoursed she to him all the story of Iasons love to her, (for she was
the inchaunted Medea) and remember (said she) the Lady you shall love is of
Grecia. To the Prince of Scythia have respect, for by Nature you are thertoo
bound: and how ever by Gelasio you are charged to the contrary, yet love the
Grecian princes, and much good fortune follow you. Herewith she and the
Children vanished, and he ascended armed up unto his Sister, who thought long of
his coming, but at his sight was exceeding joyful, especially embracing him
for performing the Adventure. When either had sufficiently delighted themselves
in saluting other, they returned to the Castle, not entering by the ordinary
gate, but by the Fountain Court, where were the precious Daggers, which
Floralisa won for all her Companions, by the death of a Sea monster* that
assailed her as she passed by the Fountain. The wise Gelasio brought all the
princes, (for by then Clarisel Argante and Torisiano were returned from hunting)
into the chamber where the pictures were: where, Floralisa fixed her eyes upon
the Image of the Tinacrian Poliphebo, Clarisell gazed on her, and Celindo on
Rosaluiras Counterfeit. Who knowing his love was of Grecia, determined to
travel thither, and to this the Wiseman agree^d, for that they should defy
the princes. Clarisel went alone, full of passion, and solitarines best fitted
his disquieted thoughts. The Brother and Sister went the next day, and the day
after their departure Argante and Torisiano followed, having first vowed
eternal friendship. Them will we now leave, till time give us leave to talk of
them, and return to the fair Roselia and Arbolinda of Scotland, that followed
Heleno prince of Dacia, apparelled like pages:

What chanced Roselia and Arbolinda, in seeking Heleno Prince of Dacia.

Cap. 18.
YOu are not ignorant I am sure, that of all greefes none equalleth the sorrow
we receive to be separated from those we do affect: nor any pain is easier
ouerpassed, than the travel to follow them whom we desire to see. Roselias
example and Arbolinda her kind Friends may serve for proof: for they pursued
the Dacian through all dangers of sea and land, Roselia led by love of him, and
Arbolinda by affection to her. One day (the Dolphins dancing on the untroubled
waters) there came a ship hulling along by the bark wherein these boy-like
Ladies sailed* in which ship were Lisarte prince of Tharsus, and Florisarte his
Son: who beholding the beauty of the two pages, (for so they took the
princesses to be) caused their ship to stay, and Lisarte thus said. Fair
pages, do this young Knight and me so much favor, as to tell us to what
Knights you do belong, and in what Country you were borne? Arbolinda (who at
the sight of young Florisarte was enamoured) thus answered: Fair sir, we have
no Masters, but were borne in Thracia, and are now going toward Scotland to
certain Triumphs, where we hope (if good Fortune provide not better for us
before) to find some famous Knights that shall be our Lords. I would (said
Florisarte with an affectionated sigh) that my Father the King of Tharsus and
Florisarte his son were so happy to entertain ye. Arbolinda noting the
affection the prince spoke with, replied: We shall be happy to be entertained of
such royal Masters. Lisarte like one ouerioyed embraced them both, and
discharging the Mariners, they took the Princesses aboard their ships, and
demanded their names? Mine said Arbolinda is Artimio and this my fellows is
Roselio* Lisarte took Roselio for his Page, and Florisarte entertained
Arbolinda, in whom he so delighted that he wholly to her surrendered his heart,
not knowing whom he loved: yet promised he to love none but whom Artimio his
page appointed. Who thereof exceeding joyful; gave him her own picture in a
table, whereon he daily contemplated. Lisarte ioyed no less though far in
other sense in his Page, and as they sat sweetly conferring, the Dacian passed
swiftly by in his enchanted boat, to whom Roselia cried: Knight stay for them
that follow thee Arbolinda seeing her faint, and the Princes wondered at her
sudden change, cherished her up first and told Lisarte, that the Knight in the
russet armor had done his fellow and him much wrong. Artimio, said Lisarte, I
will not live if I revenge not your wrong. Roselia greeuing to hear the Dacian
threatened, said: many have said much and failed in the enterprise, And while
they were in this conference, came by the gentle Brandafidell, who was going
with Floralinda into Greece: the Princess sitting above hatch somewhat
discontent, being grieved at her long being at Sea. Lisarte noting the Giants
^ignes and the Ladies sadness, gessed she had some wrong: therefore taking his
sword in his hand, and his shield on his arm, he called, saying* ^ady if you
be distressed, speak, and I will deliver you: knight, said the Giant* you are
more forward than you need, if the Lady wanted help, it is like the would demand
it. And then artmore discourteous than thou needst answered Lisarte, for if she
be not dis^rest, yet I deserve thanks for my good will, and that shall thou
know if thou dare abide. O how full of fury was Brandafidell! with a
fearful voice he commanded the ships to be grapled. The fair Floralinda
was notable to disturb the battle, for she saw the Giant so angry, that she
durst not come nigh him. He quickly put on his helm and took a great heavy
mace, at whose point did hung other six bullets of steel, and with a furious
aspect tarried for his enemy. The warlike Tharsian came against him, but was
received with such a blow, as had almost cost him his life. But returning to
himself, he repayed it so on the helm that it made him stagger on the one
side two or three paces, and entering with the swiftnes of an Eagle, with a
stiff arm, he gave him such a thrust upon the breast that he made him recoyle
back two or three paces, and with this would have entered the bark with a light
leap: but although the blow was great, yet it did not take away sense from the
Giant he put his left leg forwards, and enlarging his arm, with a close fist
he stroke the Tharsian such a blow upon the breast, he over threw him on his
back in the midst of his bark, and with the quicknes of a thought he put
himself in the same order as he was before, abiding his enemy, who full of
anger returned, and between them continued a grievous fight, for more then
three hours: but Lisarte was likely not to get much, for that the place was
narrow, and the Giants weapon unreasonable. The gentle Tharsian was a shamed,
to acknowledge the vauntage that his enemy had in the str^^itnes of his place
and would have given half his kingdom to end the battle with him upon firm
land. In this time the courteous Brandafidel was not (...)* having a desire to
conclude the battle, and that the Princess should understand what a good keeper
she had, he whirl^d his weapon about over his head, making show as ^^ough he
would strike him. The gentle Lisarte did abide him, till he saw it coming
making an internal noise, rattling the one with the other, and in passing be
would have stricken a ^hwart blow at his arms: but the giant was so politic
that in giving an other turn helping it with some what yielding his body, he
forced two bullets into his shield with so deuilish a fury that it pulled it
out of his hands, and threw it a great way off, and left him so astonished,
that he thought verily he had also away his arm. The furious Lisarte like a
serpent returned, bearing his body low, fearing the second blow, and with both
his hands seized a blow hard by the Giants elbowes, and although he did not
cut him by reason of the finenes of the armor, yet he tormented them in such
sort ye his devilish weapon fell from him. The courteous Giant had thought his
arms had been off: but the excessive greef being past, putting back his left
leg, he drew out his fauchion, no less fearful then the mace, for that was by
Lirgandeo warranted: you may well understand the joy that the Tharsian received
when that fierce weapon was gone, and so firming his foot he joined with him,
where began so sightly a battle that it amazed the beholders: till the Sun
declined they fought, and then with loud voices they called for lights: but the
sovereign Lord, knowing what those knights should do in the augmenting of
his faith, apparted the battle with equal honor unto the^ both, for at the
bringing forth of lights, they were all put out with a easterly wind, which
rushing between the barks, did part them a good way the one from the other,
in such sort, that by no means they could join, the Giant cried out that he
would tarry, and the other that he did abide him: yet at the rising of the
Moon, they were six miles the one from the other, with so great grief unto
the Tharsian that he would not believe but that he had lost honor with his
enemy: so there was not any that durst speak unto him, no not his Son. But the
fair Roselia did bolden her self and said. Ualiant Prince abate your Ire, and
be fully certified, that if your contrary has got any honor, it was not with
any loss of yours: but rather as I imagine, had the battle bin on land, we
should have remained with the palm of victory. So without anger, they supped
with great content, praising the bravery of the Giant.

The gallant adventure that happened unto the Princes, about the liberty of a
Knight.

Chap. 19.
WE left the fair Florisarte joyful of the picture when he knew not the
person: and with inward sighs began to say. Ah tender years that so truly are
brought under the yoke of Cupid. With how much reason may the world complain
of me, to see me yielded without knowing who is my owner? Ah Princess Flora,
your sorrowful Son, desires love and has put his liberty he knows not
where, and has given it to one absent, and suffers mortal grief without any
hope of ease. Who could ever be a perfect lover, if he had not fed and
contented his eyes on his beloved? Oh cruel discretion to love I know not
whom, and therewith, with no less grace than he that brought stones to be
molified in hearing his song, he began to sing in this sort.

Pigmalion like I love a senseles thing,
In hope the substance one day will appear,
Of this sweet shape which I do hold so dear,
Which sight content unto my heart will bring.
And rid my soul of sad dispairing fear*
O happy then, I happy should be named:
But I believe her like was never framed.
She was not far that should remedy him, and might have done it with loving
him: yet she entered into the chamber, dissembling her grief, and with a loving
boldness said. I would not Prince of Argentaria ye the picture which I gave you
should be the occasion of your unquietness: there is no doubt (...) with me your
sorrow must be departed: and seeing it is so dangerous for us both, it were
better to loose the memory of the lady, the^ to have for her absence such
disco^fort. I say that this worthy Prince that you might enforce your courage
for that these wounds of Love many times do so earnestly tread down the
strength and reason of the Lover, that when he returns to himself he has no
force for the same, and this does happen unto them, that fears to be loved:
but unto you what thing is there, that can give you any grief being fully
certified that you are beloved, and they who sent you this figure do live by
your affection. Ah Artimio my well beloved brother, answered the afflicted
Prince, how is it that I know not my self, neither can I give my self any
testimony, with this new change: I feel it will end me, and I know not to
whom I shall acquaint my grief, neither know I who is the occasion: and if I
do persevere herein, according to the force wherewith it is begun, there is no
doubt but the grief will afflict me in such sort that I shall dye with the
most grievous passion that ever lover suffered. The amorous Arbolinda with her
eyes full of water, answered saying: Let pass this grief, and to assure ye
shall have comfort of your Lady, wear this jewel, which has many years hung
about your Ladies neck. And therewith she took from her neck, a worthy and
esteemed Diamant, and put it on the Princes neck, which gave him the greatest
content that might be imagined. Being in this sweet conversation, the Pilot of
the Bark entered, and said that he had discovered a fair adventure at the Sea,
where with they armed themselves with their rich and shining armor, and went
forth to the Barks side to see what it should be. And they saw a thing that
made them not a little marvel, for that not far from their bark, they saw
a Tower so bright, that it seemed to be of Crystal, it was seated upon four
Pillars, more firm then if it had bin on the land: with great desire they
hastened on their journey, til about the third hour, they drew nigh unto the
Pillars, who seeing the great richnes and workmanship, did judge tha^ divine
hands had done it and not humane. They wen^ round about it, to see if there
were any way to mount into it, but they found none, but coming nigher unto it,
they might see certain letters graven in gold on one of the pillars, which the
valiant Lisarte read in this manner. If any has a desire to give liberty to
the flower of great Britain doing greater service unto Grecia, putting a side
all fear: let him blow this horn, he shall find the entry easy, but the
coming forth dangerous. There needed no more for the valiant Lisarte to
endanger his life, understanding that it redounded for content unto Grecia. So
putting on his helm, he blew the horn with so great noise as does Eolus when
out of his dark jaws he issues to give battle against all the world. He
had not well taken it from his mouth, commending himself unto the God that
Rosicleer did worship, when as he laid hold on a Ladder that was thrown from
the top of the Castle, by which he mounted more swifter then a bird. He had
not well put his feet on the Christaline flower when three furious Giants
fiercely assalted him: the first he cut a sunder in the wast, when much to his
amazement the two parts suddenly became two Giants: and pittilesly assailed
him, till his good chance suffered him to wring from one Giant that had the
enchanted life a heavy mace, with which he so bestirred himself that he made
that cursed company fly from him amai^^. But when he thought the victory sure,
there came forth a goodly knight, saying. Thou shall not slay my kind keepers
and take me from my pleasant dwelling, and there with doubled so many blows upon
Lisarte, that he left him on the floor almost without life, and the enchanted
knight took the prince in his arms purposing to throw him out at the window:
but Lisarte being recovered and closed in that sort, pulled off the inchaunted
knights helm, whose face when he saw, he guest it to be Rosicleer, and said.
Alas my Lord Rosicleer, what has the Prince of Tharsus deserved, that you
should use him so ungently? When the Knights helmes was off the inchauntment
ceased. And he said: Knight your valor has delivered me from this enchantment,
for which I rest bound unto you. I am suspected indeed to be the Princes son
you name: but my weakness approoues me unworthy of so excellent a Father.
Lisarte remembering the words on the pillar, and beholding his countenance,
assured him he was the Son of Rosicleer: and there they embraced, Lisarte
discoursing what happened to them in Argentaria, and Rosabel what chanced in
Lacedemonia. So a while we will leave them and follow the gallant Brandafidell
and the Princess Floralinda.

What happened in Greece to the gentle Brandafidell and Floralinda.

Chap. 20.
WIth many mild persuasions did Floralinda mittigate the rage of Brandafidell,
being parted by the tempest from Lisarte: and in short time they both landed
in Grecia: where Brandafidel expected store of adventures: so causing the
Princess to be mounted on a milk white Palfrey, he himself bestrid his
huge Alfana, (being a beast bred in the mountains of Barbary,) with a huge
Lance in his hand, and his dreadful mace at his saddle bow: On the tenth day
as they iourneyed toward Constantinople, they met a mighty great Knight and
with him twenty knights in troop, and coming near them, the great Knight,
said: I can hardly be persuaded Giant that this Lady goes with thee
willingly: but if she do she is unfit for thee, therefore deliver her unto
me, and this horse which seems to be good. You ask much said Brandafidell:
but would ye not be content to leave the Lady, so I gave you the horse. No
said the great Knight, and therewith one of his troop laid hold on Floralinda,
which made her give a great shreeke. Not the violent lightning with more
swiftnes breaks out of the clouds than the rage of Brandafidel sent death to
that presumptuous knight and three of his companions, for with his lance cast
violently from his hand he overthrew four dead that sat in rank, and with
four bullets of his dreadful ma^e made four more at one blow to bear them
company. But the great Knight entered within him, and stroke so dangerous a
blow, that the Giant well perceived he had a strong adversary: but with the
end of his mace on his breast plate Brandafidell gave such a foyne, that he
overthrew him senseless to the earth. By this the other twelve Knights had
round inco^passed him, but like the Cyclops hammers fell his heavy bullets on
the weak anuyles of their heads, that here some brainlesse there others
senseless lay dead on the ground. When he thought all had been ended, the
great Knight recovered, and between the^ continued a battle no less furious
than the dreadful contention between Anteus and Hercules. On foot they
fought, for Brandafidell would have no advantage, and in the courage of his
enemy he took pride: but remembering his presumption against the Princess,
he whirled his dreadful mace, and parted with two bullets his head in pieces.
At the knights fall Floralinda ioyed, but Brandafidel left not till he had
slain all the wounded Knights but one, whom he charged to confess the truth
what that great knight and his company were.

The mizerable man shaking and trembling with dread of death, delivered this
answer: The dreadful Friston Lord of the Islands of Tamixio, with Frinto his
brother, and this Knight their Nephew whom you you have slain, hearing of the
tryumphs in Greece, came with more than three score knights and other
servants, and surprised a Castle here in Grecia very suddenly, being of
great strength: whether for this ten days they have brought many prisoners,
which they do in despite of the Greek Princes.

I and my fellows were their servants, and now another troop are abroad with
Friston and his brother, meaning to take any coming to these triumphs* and
for the Ladies sake assailed you. And for your outrages said Brandafidel, bear
your companions company: wherewith he dashed out his brains. Then coming to
Floralinda, he besought her to repose her self, and not to go to
Constantinople till the triumphs did begin. To this she agreed, and having
refreshed themselves, Brandafidel went up to the side of a hill, and thence
discovered a Chariot wherein were many that made great lamentation, and two
mighty knights with twenty other knights. The courteous Giant persuaded
himself, those were the proud brethren, and they in the Chariot prisoners:
wherefore placing Floralinda and the Pages within the thicket where unseen
they might see the battle, he crossed toward the Chariot, mounted and armed at
all points, and thus said to the two brethren being foremost: Knights in this
free Country why guard ye any that complain? give me a good answer, or in
the name of the Greek Princes I defy you. The pride and wrath of Friston
would not suffer him to answer, but in his rashness ran to meet with
vengeance, for in the encounter Brandafidel overthrew him with his horse upon
him, whose weight pressed out his infernal soul: but Brandafidel had like
likewise to have fallen, for the reue^gefull Frinto with all the other knights
ran on him at one encounter. But having settled himself he came like a
ravening Lion on the heard of Dear, making them dearly buy the cowardice of
that encounter. Yet was the battle very doubtful, till on a sudden a
goodly knight in precious armor came by, and demanded of the prisoners in the
Chariot the cause of the battle, the chief of them said. The Giant with the
dreadful mace (Sir knight) seeks our liberty: for coming to visit the
Emperor of Greece, the Knights that fight and their companions, unjustly
seized on us. Without more reasoning the Knight in rich armor ran to the proud
Frinto, and at one stroke parted his helm and head. Brandafidell being
wearied, was glad of such aid, and tossing his heavy mace about, left but fi^e
knights able to fit on horseback; who trusting better to flight than fighting,
gave the raines to their swift steedes, whom the Knight in the rich armor so
far followed, that he returned no more to the Chariot. The Giant sorrowed that
he could not know him: but coming to the Chariot, he unbound the prisoners,
wherein fair Floralinda (that like amiable Phoebe issued from the thornie
closset of the wood) assisted him. Being free they gave the Lady and Giant many
thanks: and being questioned of their estate, thus said the chief of them. My
name is Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania, this Lady my wife is Archirosa Queen
of Thessaly, are come to visit Rosicleer prince of Greece: and fearelesse of
all treachery in this Country came sporting from our Knights unarmed as you
see, and were suddenly surprised. O ye Gods said Brandafidel, how happy am I
to deliver the innocent, being the friends of my dear friend Rosicleer. With
this came 50. knights of Lusitania, and the Princess Archirosa said. I see
brave Giant, we shall not need what we most wished, I mean your warlike company
to guide us unto Constantinople, for now our own Knights like rain when corn is
ripe come to small purpose to accompany us. I am glad they are come said the
Giant, for I have this princely Lady that I must guide thither* meaning
Florinda: who still was masked, because she would not be known, with great
courtesy they all parted, wondering at the Giants valor, but more at his good
disposition. Being all clear departed, the Giant thanked Floralinda humbly,
for (said he) your gracious sight gave me this noble victory: wherewith she
took a precious jewel from her neck, saying. Knight refuse not to wear this
favor, for your comfort well deserves a greater gift, The Giant proud thereof
humbled himself unto her, beseeching her to mount her Palfrey: for says he,
God willing we will free the prisoners in the Castle that these false Knights
have taken, and there will we rest to night. The Princess bad him do his
pleasure. So setting forward, they attained sight of the Castle a little before
Evening, and the Giant (putting on the Helmet of Friston) called to them within
to open the gate, saying he was Friston their Master, wearied with combat, and
had brought a Lady and a rich Prize with him. To whom the Knight that opened
the gate said: Welcome my lord, here have we also a Knight in rich armor, who
slew five of your Knights within sight of the Castle, and him have we trained
in, and shut into your chamber. Use courteously this Lady said the Giant, and
some of you bring ye key, that I may chastise him with death, before I put off
my armor. This was no sooner commanded, but it was done, and Brandafidel
perceived it was the Knight that assisted him in the battle, yet faining his
intent, he said: Proud Knight, that have entered my Castle without my license,
come take thy weapons and descend into ye court, that I may punish thee for
murdring my servants. Thou speak something like a Knight said the Prisoner,
but I hope to punish thee, for maintaining such false cowards as these are. So
they descended together, and as they were going down the stairs, Brandafidel
with his mace brayned two Knights that attended them, and turning to the Knight
that went with him, he said: Assist me sir knight, as you did to day assist me
in the battle at the chariot, and you shall see we will not leave alive one of
these evil people: therefore I pray you go unto the gate, that none escape
you. The Knight perceiving who it was, ioyfullye took possession of the gate,
while Brandafidel like a hungry Wolf raged up and down the Castle, and so
chased them, that fearful to be all slain, they ran unto ye gate, thinking to
get forth: but there death likewise encountered them, sitting imperiously on ye
Knights sword in the rich armor, whom they had trecherously imprisoned. In
brief, they slew all that could resist, only a few servants they saved, who
seemed joyful to be delivered from their tyrant masters. Then went they both
to Floralinda, and before her the Giant said: Knight, be yet so kind unto us
after all your passed kindnesses, as to tell Brandafidel (the vowed Friend to
prince Rosicleer, Meridian. Orides, and all the Greek princes Friends) who thou
art? I am (said the Knight) Sarmacia Daughter to the King of Lyra, who come in
quest of that Oristides you named unto me, who with Rosicleer and Meridian I
left departing toward Greece out of my Fathers kingdom: and with this she
discovered her beauteous face, excelling Mineruas in her greatest bravery.
Floralinda admiring her excellence, gave infinite commendations of the Troyan
Oristides.

O iealozie, how desperate are thy effects, how full of devilish distrust? No
sooner did Sarmacia hear Floralinda praise Oristides, but a gloomie discontent
shaddowed the former beauty of her amiable countenance, and neither answering
nor demanding any thing more, she called for her horse: who was no sooner
brought, but ere they being a foot could hinder her, she had left the Castle,
and put her self among the thickest trees, who with the glyding snakes and
dumb worms became that night her secretaries. The Giant wondered at her
soda^ne departure, but Floralinda gessed at the cause, saying: Surely the Lady
is amorous, and jealous of my speech about Oristides. At last (with some grief
passing her sudden departing from them) they took their repose, and in the
morning sent the prisoners to the Emperor of Greece, charging them to offer
themselves to be disposed of at his pleasure, and to tell him how the proud
Brethren were suppressed: which they did, and the Emperor rejoiced at the news,
for he was preparing himself to come against them. And he could not but
marvel what one alone it was that had performed so much.

In this Castle will we leave Brandafidel and Floralinda, and return to tell
what happened to Lisarte in the enchanted Tower with Rosabel.

What succeeded Rosabel, Lisarte and Florisarte after the enchantment was
finished.

Chap. 21.
WHile Rosabell, Lisarte and his Son were in great content in the enchanted
Tower, there appeared an old man before them with a little book in his hand:
who cried out on Lisarte, said. Think not to glory in my misery, for thou
have taken from me the Son of Rosicleer my enemy, but on him and all the
friends of Greece by help of this book will I be revenged. Rosabel being near
him snatched away the book, and said: By this book thou shall not be revenged
devilish inchanter, and were thou not privileged by age I would end here thy
evil life. So being about to throw the book into the Sea, the wise Lirgandeo
appeared, and charged him to give him the book, and to commit Gelasio his
Fathers and Mothers enemy into his custody. And then he told Rosabel from
point to point how Gelasio had used his mother in taking him away, wronged his
father with all hate, and all his friends. Roselia was amazed, and somewhat
doubtful that all had been deceit, yet remembering his many goods done by
Lirgandeo, he gave the book and Gelasio unto him with this charge, that though
he were wicked he should use him well. Then Lirgandeo aduising them to hasten
presently to Niquea, the old man vanished away, and the Princes descended the
enchanted tower, and on a pillar read this writing: The rough Tower shall
remain, til the ancient crowned Lion, set at liberty the lamb and Lioness.
The Princes could not understand the meaning, but hasting toward Niquea, they
recovered land within four days, being to Rosabels imagination the most
pleasant Country in the earth. Rosabels Page carried his helm, Roselia
Lisartes, and Arbolinda Florisartes: and the two Ladies coming somewhat
behind, the beauteous Roman thus said. Ah Princess of Scotland; what a
painful service have we gotten? I promise you I am weary of this lackying.
Rest your helmet on your palfrey said Arbolinda: for it is better he dye than
you be wearied. And yet perchance your mind tyreth ye, being discontent.
Therefore be advised, hate to remember your inconstant Dacian, and see if
Florisarte will affect you. You do wrong me said Roselia (somewhat angerly) to
(...) braid my knight, and flout me with yours. Nay said Arbolinda, if you will
quarrel, look for a bloody fray, and so prettily parted her horse that
Roselia could not choose but smile. By this they came somewhat nigh the Princes,
who were plotting about their affairs in Niquea, and in the midst of their
conference they met twelve knights, whom Rosabel saluted in their language,
and courteously demanded of them some news. One of them answered: Our news
now is that the Sultan of Egypt is with many Giants come to a fire the fair
Liriana in marriage* And Marcello the Sultan her father thinking it convenient,
agrees thereunto: and for the same the Egiptian has published Turnayes within
these 20* days, Rosabell answered, Sir knights we thank you, and for this
kindness if there rest in me or my companions any power, command us. The
Knights parted: and the Princes seeing Rosabel somewhat sad, comforted him, and
Lisarte would have no nay but that Florisarte should of Rosabell receive the
order of knighthood: and for w^nt of a Lady to girt the sword, Florisarte would
needs have Artimio girt his sword^ which she denying often, and being still
urged, she brought forth the sword of Don Heleno, and said: Fair Sir, I gird
ye with the sword of one of the valliantest knights living. This gift made at
wonder and have joy at (...) thereof only Roselia sorrowed to see her knights
sword at an others side, but Arbolinda easily answered that matter. Florisarte
being knighted they plesantly reposed that night in a grove of Pines: and in
the morning they were no sooner mounted and entered into the way, but they saw
near them a troop of two thousand knights, and in the midst as Generals two
goodly knights in red armor striped with blew, and the Princes gessing them to
be of great account stayed to give them way, when suddenly a knight in name of
their Lords challenged them to Just. Florisarte was appointed to give answer,
who said: So it might proceed no farther than the Iustes he was content: and
presently they made themselves ready, overthrowing at six encounters eighteen
of the squadron. Wherewith the two chief knights set forwards, whom Rosabel
and Florisarte encou^tred so strongly, that they overthrew them, and lifting up
their visors alighted themselves to help them up. The two knights no sooner
saw Rosabel, but they cast off their helmes and embraced him: who called to
remembrance they were his old companions in the court of Niquea, sons to the
King of Celandia. Lisarte and the Pages coming together were glad to see this
new friendship, at which time Salernio the elder brother said: Now we are sure
Lord Rosabel to perform that which we were doubtful of before, seeing you and
these brave knights are in our company: for being certified by our sister that
is in the Court of Niquea, how well the Princess Liriana loves you, and what
moan she and her cosins make to be married to the Sultan of Egypt and his
Nephews against their likings, we have attempted with these knights at the
Turney to take the^ away, having to that end twenty thousand more knights in
readiness at Sea: and in the tumult also to bring away our sister, and to have
sought you through the world. Rosabel was so glad to hear that Liriana loved
him, and so thankful to the Princes ye his inward affection to all appeared in
his silent embracing. And while he was preparing fit words to gratulate such
favor, a Page came riding to them from a goodly proportioned knight, whose
armor was very precious, and two Lions in his shield, and challenged them all
to the Iustes. The younger brother of Celandia would needs begin, but was
overthrown in the encounter, Salernio had the like success, Lisarte lost his
saddle, and the strange knight his stirrops: and Florisarte and he passed each
by other like two invincible rocks. Then Rosabel prepared himself, but the
knight lifting up his Beuer said: Far be it from Oristoldo son of Sacridiro
king of Thessaly, to run against any that so much resembles his fathers
dearest friend. For know Sir knight in my other encou^ters I marked your
beauteous face, while the visor of your helm was up, and saw you to be so
like the picture of Rosicleer Prince of Greece, that I offer my small abilities
to your service, beseeching pardon for Iusting against your friends. O heavens,
how happy am I said Rosabel, to be counted the son of a father so much loved?
And therewith they al embraced Oristoldo, and acquainting him with their
business, he vowed the adventure of his life. Then spoke Lisarte who had most
experience and thus advised them: We will take shields like unto Rosabels,
(whose devise was iealozy leaning upon faith) and we six will only enter the
Iustes, taking with us one Page to certify this host of knights that shall
attend us somewhat near the City of our proceedings. At the turney we will be
against the Sultan of Egypt, whom about Sun set we will find occasion to kill,
and then when the tumult is greatest ascend the gallerie, (for in some gallerie
it is like the Ladies shall stand) and bring away the Ladies: which to effect,
if we want help, the page shall certify these two thousand knights, who being
fresh and courageous, will assure our enterprise. Al liked this Counsel: so
leaving Artimio and Roselio with the two thousand knights, they took Alirio
Rosabels page: and entered Niquea when the Turnayes were ready to begin.

It pleased the Sultan of Egypt for so requested the Sultan of Niquea, that the
Egiptian knights and the Giants he brought, should join with his courtiers:
and the Captains of the knights strangers should be the Kings of Media, of
Garamancia, and Armenia. The king of Garamancia was all in Lion colored
armor, and on his shield a knight moving a Globe, with this posie: I fear not
strength but Fortune. The other two kings were in armor full of pierced hearts
and on their sh^ews the same device with this posie. Forgetfulness of love is
cause of death. They had following them ten thousand knights and some Giants:
among whom our five princes put themselves. The^ entered on the other side the
knights Courtiers being so magnificent, that it showed manifestly the great
majesty of their Prince. After the^ followed the Sultan of Egypt, all his
furniture being red, set with a number of precious stones: his devise was a
Lady apparrelled in the color of his armor, and a knight holding her by the
hand having at his feet Love and Fortune with this Posie, Commanding these,
this is mine own. His Nephews were armed in silver colored armor, Love
smiling being painted in their shields. Then came the Sultan of Niquea, and
after him divine Liriana, with her Cosins and the Princess of Celandia, with
such admirable beauty and excellent sound of instruments, as if they had been
Angels, and the place celestial. But the Sultan of Niquea, the Ladies and
other aged Princes unfit for fight were no sooner placed, but the drea^full
trumpets sounded the encounter. Against the Sultan of Egypt and his Nephews,
^an the kings of Garaman^ia, Media and Armenia and at the first encounter
tumbled their proud bodies on the earth: which so enraged the Sultan, that he
^^fied them to mortal battle: where 30 sierce Giants rushed in on his part,
and overthrew many of the knights strangers putting the king of Garamantia in
great distress being unhorsed: then stepped Rosabel unto him and lighting from
his horse perforce mounted him thereon, which the king and all his knights
took very gently, but especially when they saw his manner of mounting,
Rosabel went to a huge Giant and pulled him to the earth, mounting in his
saddle, and doing such wonders that on him and his fellows, (who by this time
at three encounters had overthrown twelve Giants) all the beholders eyes were
^ixed. The Sultan of Egypt grew to impacient, that neglecting the duty of
arms, he turned the joyful Turneyes to a battle most dangerous: and
calling for a huge and mighty Giant named Penastrol that entered like a mighty
Pine, having also in his hand, a spear bigger than an Argosies maine mast,
ouerthrewe an infinite number of the knights strangers. But Rosabel beholding
Liriana put himself before this fury, and as he had been a warrier sent from
the clouds, pierced the bosom of this deformed Penastrol, that he fell upon the
ground, covering a great part thereof with his unproportionable bugenesse. All
the beholders shouted at the fall and c^yed: Invincible are the knights of
iealozie, and the great Gods bless the^ with ^auours, the power of stends cannot
stand against the^. The Princess of Celandia and her sad neeces being near
her, Liriana said unto them. My mind gives me you knight that ouerthr^w
Penastrol with the d^uice of iealozie is Rosabel, for still his eye is on this
place. As they were answering her, they were disturbed by the noise of the old
Sultan of Niquea, who cried from his seat, saying: knight save his life for it
is my Son. And looking what it was, they saw Rosabel having unarmed the
Sultan of Egipts head (and making himself deaf at the old Soldans crying) cut
off h^s head, and vaunting before Liriana, (...)* (...) see how thy forced Love
speedeth. And at the same in^tant, Oristaldo and Florisarte had dispatched his
two ne^hewes: When Lisarte like wise rescued the two brethren (...) Celandia
from two furious Giants, that had unhorsed them: at two strokes dispatched
their (...). The furious Sultan seeing the death of him he meant to make his
Son in law, came down in his armor, and sent to raise all his Knights.
Lisarte perceiving rage to grow unreasonable, and glimmering twilight ready to
draw the obscure curtains of night whereby their purpose might be shadowed, he
with the youngest of the Celandian Princes (his son and Oristoldo following
them) mounted in to the gallerie, and seized on the Princesses, who sounding
through fear, had no use of speech to call for rescue, nor if they had cried
could they have been heard, the noise and tumult was so great: for the Ladies
that waited on them sent out shrill cries able to have pierced the clouds, but
the heavy groans of dying men, and deadly brayings of wounded horses, so
filled the place, that ^ootlesse were all their lamentations. For now Rosabel
was mounted and Liriana before him, the two Brethren had her two Kinswomen,
and Lisarte their Sister. Before them rid Oristoldo and Florisarte, filling the
jaws of death with heaps of dying men, that fondly sought to hinder their
swift escape. For Marcello had commanded the chains that served for pales to
the place of Tornay to be taken down, that all the City being armed, might
enter and enclose the Knights strangers, to revenge the death of the Egyptian
Solda^: the gates indeed it was folly to close, because a great wall was
overthrown, to join the field adjoining to the Palace green, that the Court
for Tornay might be more spacious. Through this place passed our six Princes,
all men making means to give them way, but not one so mad to follow them. And
quickly coming to the place where they left their knights and pages: there
they set down their amazed Ladies, who began lamentably to complain. But when
they knew what Knights they were, their fear was turned unto joy, and Liriana
above the rest, rejoiced in her Rosabel. Nevertheless, considering the danger
wherein the Souldan her Father was, it was thought necessary that Rosabel,
Florisarte and Oristoldo should return to the battle: whereupon
determining, they changed their horses, helmes and sheelds, because they would
not be known, and posted to Niquea with all speed. In the mean time the
pleasant Celandian princess (to cheer up Liarana that drooped for the absence
of Rosabel,) carrolled out this sweet dittie in praise of Fortune.

When Tyrants will had near constraind
Our Virgins state to hapless stay,
And in our hearts we all were paind,
With thinking on the wedding day.
Then Fortune turned our distress,
To endless joy and happiness.
The hateful objects of our hearts,
Plumde in their pride did threat the sky:
And them we liked for deserts,
As exiles forced were to fly.
Yet Fortune that our griefs did see,
Provided us of remedy.
She sent our friends that quaild our foes,
She gave us life when death was nigh,
To joy she turned all our woes.
Down cast with grief, she raisd us high*
Her Godhead therefore we adore,
And praise sweet Fortune evermore.
By this the three princes entered the Battle, finding the Sultan unhorsed,
defending himself against two giants, whom Rosabel at two strokes cut in
sunder. With this ye King of Garamantia approached, saying: Sultan retire thy
knights, and if I or my fellow kings be guilty of this days tumult, or thy
daughters rape, let us die. He speaks reason said Rosabel, hear him great
prince. For your desert I will said the Sultan, on that condition, and
therewith he caused retreat to be sounded. And so the kings submitting
themselves to be tried that they were innocent of conuaying the Princesses
away: they were delivered unto an aged Prince to keep; and the three Princes
with swift speed returned to their Loves* where in the midst of their delight
a cross accident barred their pleasure as shall be expressed in the next
Chapter.

How the Princess Liriana and her companions, sweetly conuersing with their
loves and brethren, were suddenly surprised by the wise Lupercio and inchaunted.

Chap. 22.
THis vain world wherein pleasures are gotten with much pain, gives no
certain continuance of the good we toil for: but rather an hours storm of
evil, snatcheth from us all the content that in a whole age with care we have
gathered. Experience of this, these Princes sudden griefs shall be, who had
scarcely obtained a breathing time of joy, but a world of sorrow was heaped on
their heads.

If you be remembered in the beginning of this history where Brandafidel
described the estate of Fangomada^ and the cause of the inchauntment, to
Rosicleer, Meridian and Oristides, after ye death of his Brother, he tells
the^ of one Lupercio a wise man in Egypt that was master of his Uncle Gelasio,
and taught him his deuilish Arts. This Lupercio, being acquainted with the
success of all things at Niquea by his Art, and knowing also where the
Princes and Princesses were; put himself into an enchanted Chariot, drawn
with four furious Griffons: and departing from his deuilish habitation, came
near the pleasant place where these Princes (fearelesse of such execrable
evil) were delighting themselves with amorous conversation. Neither did this
Lupercio hate them for any other thing than because his scholar Gelasio was by
them so crossed and imprisoned. It was about the hour of twelve at midnight,
when after long toil the Knights intended to take rest, the Ladies offering to
watch and be their keepers, Liriana begun a ditty to bring them all a sleep, in
whose vndersong Roselia, Arbolinda, the Soldans neeces, and the Princess of
Celandia assisted her with voice and music.

Sleep while we sit and be your Guard,
Your tired lims rest in our laps:
Your endless faith be our reward,
Then care we not for after haps.
Like you lay Mars on Venus knee,
While she did sing her Lullabee.
Lullaby Lulla Lullaby,
So sweetly War with Love does lie.
Thou were the substance of my grief,
But art the ground work of my joy.
Thy absence causd my sorrow chief,
But now thy sight exiles annoy:
I mournd for thee, thou weptst for me,
Yet sing I now joys Lullabee,
Lullaby Lulla Lullaby,
So sweetly War with Love does lie.
The Knights had not closed their eyes, nor the music fully closed in due
strains with the conclusion of the Ladies song, when suddenly a fiery chariot
drawn by ^oure Griffons descended, and out of the chariot issued two fearful
Centaures, that snatching under either arm a Lady, carried away to the Chariot
Liriana, her two Cosins, and the Princess of Celandia, with such swiftnes that
the Princes were not able to rise ere the Chariot was mounted in the air, the
Ladies making such lamentation, as the senseless trees assisted by the
whistling of the wind among their leaves, seemed to sigh for their sorrow:
Liriana being heard alowd to cry. Oh Rosabel, why am I taken from thee, when in
thee was all my joy? And with this the chariot and Ladies were out of sight. O
tragic Sister, that beutifiest thy writings with griefe-discoursing lines, a
little lend me thy all able help, that in concluding this book I may strain
tears from the pitying eyes of the Readers when they shall conceive the sorrow
that the princes conceived at this sudden accident. All of them so grieved, as
the dull earth drunk with their tears, sent forth from her pierced bosom
salt and brackish springs, that yet remain in the forests of Niquea as
endless testimonies of that sad midnights misaduenture: the chaste Moon
clouded her bright countenance, and sweet Venus in her sphere looked more
discolored, than when the son of Mirrha was murdered by a savage Boar, and the
Day Star refused to lead back the host of heaven, to give way to the next
days morning: but mourned in the skies even as when Ceyx his son was
drenched in the Seas. But if all these Planets, Earth, Springes and Princes
sorrowed, ye grief and rage of Rosabel so much exceeded all, as neither the
fortunelesse Mother of those fourteen Sons and Daughters slain by the son and
Daughter of Latona, could with her grief equal his sorrow: nor the wrath of
Alcides when he sacrificed himself on the mountain of Oeta be compared to
this young princes rage. And surely had not the wisdom of Lisarte prevailed,
he had desperately ended his life: who persuading him and the other princes,
that by the words on the Christaline pillar, which supported the tower where
Rosabel was enchanted, it was very likely they were borne thither: and therewith
combining themselves never to cease travel til they had found them out: both
Rosabel and the other princes were somewhat quiet. So parting themselves two
and two: Rosabel and Oristoldo went back to Niquea, to answer for the
imprisoned kings, and there to hearken if they might hear of the Ladies: the
two princes of Celandia sent home their ships and knights and only with two
pages followed this adventure: so did Lisarte and his son another way
accompanied only with the two disguised Ladies their pages. And seeing their
heavy parting has tired my wearied spirits, I will end this book (after that
for your better memory) I have collected the places together where we left our
knights and Ladies.

The gallant Torismundo prince of Spain we left rejoicing with Grisalinda the
princess of France and his young son, the valiant Tartarian with Grisanea
princess of Holland and their son, traveling to his country, from the
doubtful Island where Rosicleer made Lord (after the death of Bruncaldo the
Rouer and his brethren the Giants) the discreet knight Briano, giving him to
wife the imprisoned Damsel daughter to Rosicleers old friends the Lord and Lady
of the valley of the mountains. Rosicleer, Meridian, and the new Lover
Oristides, we leave going to Sea from Lacedemonia, full of sorrow for the loss
of Rosabel. The fair Sarmacia full of jealous passion we left in ye forests of
Grecia, and not far off Brandafidel and Floralinda in the Castle they had
gotten from Friston: the inchanter Gelasio inprisoned by Lyrgandeo: Liriana,
her Cousins, and the Celandian princess borne away in the Chariot. How Rosabel
and his friends parted, you heard before: only we have not been copious enough
in expressing Roselias sorrow for the Dacians absence, whom she last saw
passing by Lisartes ship in his enchanted boat: where also we last left him.
And here will we leave off, intending with him to begin our next Book.

FINIS.

