A TRVE COPY OF THE LATIN ORATION OF THE EXcellent Lord George Ossolinski,
Count Palatine of Tenizyn, and Sendomyria, Chamberlain to the Kings Majesty of
Poland, and Suethland, and Ambassador to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.

As it was pronounced to his MAJESTY at White Hall by the said Ambassador, on
Sunday the 11. of March. 1620.

With the Translation of the same into English.

Commanded by his Majesty to be published in Print.

printer's device of William Lee (similar to Robert Estienne's) with olive
tree, branches falling and a man NOLI ALTVM SAPERE

LONDON, Printed for William Lee: and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleetstreet, near Sergeants Inn, at the sign of the golden Bucke. 1621.

Serenissime REX,
SAcra, Regia Poloniae, and Sueciae Maiestas, Dominus meus clementissimus
integram diuturnamque valitudinem, foelicissimos votorum omnium euentus,
florens ac tranquillum latissimarum ditionum Imperium, M. V. precatus,
singularem fraterni animi, and rerum, M. V. studiosissimi, propensionem, maxima
qua potest particularis erga M. V. affectus testificatione declarat, ac his
obstring it literis. Quibus praeuiis, vt reliqua Legationis meae expedienti
mihi, M. V. benignas aures praebere dignetur, humilime postulo.

TAndem erupt Ottomanarum iam diu celatum pectore virus, and deposita simulatae
multis abhinc annis amicitiae larua, publico Barbarorum furore, validissimum
Christiani orbis antemurale, petitur Polonia. Perstrepit bellico apparatu
Oriens, onerantur classibus maria, iungitur Europae Asia, Africanarum si quid
est virium in nostram armatur perniciem. In societatem tanti belli veniunt
haereditarij nominis nostri hosts, Scythiae; venit and vterque Dacus; Seruij,
Bulgari, Bosnenses, Illyrij, Thraces, Epirotae, quicquid ferarum vsquam est
gentium, vi, praemijs, pollicitationibus, spe praedae, cupiditate vindictae
cogitur, pellicitur, accenditur. Paratus nuper lamentabilis cruentae tragoediae
prologus; hausit immitis primum cruorem Dacia, cum perfidus hostis veterum ac
recentium solenni iureiur ando firmatorum immemor foederum, innumeris copijs
Regiae Maiestatis Domini mei clementissimi petens ditiones, appositam sibi
paruam quidem, sed bellicosissimam nostrorum manum caecidit, ingenti
Christianae Reip. detrimento.

Creueru^t etenim ea victoria barbari spiritus, and tam faustis insolentes
primordijs vniuersam spe co^cipiunt Europa^, eo prouecti vel arrogantiae, vel
amentiae, vt nec assentiente quidem Deo, delere gentem nostram se posse
arbitrentur. Tanto non suarum duntaxat, sed Christianarum omnium prouinciarum
commota sacra Regia Maiestas Dominus meus clementissimus discrimine, eo fuit
animo, vt and reliquos Principes impendentis metus commonefaceret, and inprimis
ad M. V. nulla interposita mora, referret.

Sed ea est M. V. singularis vigilantia, tantum communis Christianorum boni
studium, vt and illos, ad quos ipsa potissimum vel temporum, vel locorum
ratione pertinent pericula, animaduertat. Anteuertit M. V. and hunc Serenissimi
Regis mei nuncium, idque vltro praestitit quod postulandum erat, cum eidem
hosti se Regiae M. Domini mei clementissimi amicum esse, nec ei vllo in
discrimine deesse posse, nunciauit. Qua in re agnoscit R. M. vere magnum, vere
regium, vere Christianum M. V. animum; agnoscit fraternum ergase affectum, quem
gratissimi testificatione animi prosequitur, ac profitetur, nihil tam grave,
nihil tam difficile, nihil tam periculosum fore, quod vicissim M. V. causa
aggredi recuset. Moueantur vtinam tam praeclaro M. V. exemplo reliqui
Christianorum Principes, velintque potius tam gloriosi laboris esse
cooperatores, quam segnes and otiosi spectatores alieni periculi, pessundaturi
quandoque propria, dum vicina negligunt. Id vero vsu venire nostro, si Dijs
placet, credant cautiores, exemplo, quos neglecta Graecia, deserta Pa^nonia, in
has coniecit angustias. Et nos quidem eam quam coelum tulerit, sortem feremus,
renouaturi Saguntinorum fidei, Tyriorum constantiae, and si quid vsquam
fortiter actum, exempla; caeterum vicini nostri prouideant, quaratione animos
firmare possint, ad fimiles, vel (auertant omen superi) grauiores casus
tolerandos. Neque putent tyrannum, euius animuum humiles Sarmatarum casae ad
tam detestandum impulerunt periurium, sanctiora habiturum vicinitatis iura quae
cum eis iecerit, quorum vrbibus mercatura florentissimis, opibus
praestantissimis, aedificiorum cultu splendidissimis, iamdudum inhiat. Non
detinebunt haec, sed allicient, non extinguent, sed infla^mabunt, sacrilegam
per nefas propagandi imperij sitim. Quis enim non videt hoc vnum Tyrannum
intendere, quod in maioru^ eius multo tempore agitatum constet fuisse confilio,
vt occupata patentissima in omnes Europae parts regione, omnis grani
feracissima, omnium ad classem instruendam, armandamque necessariorum
refertissima, innumeris suis copijs opima apperiat horrea, nauium ingentem
praeparet copiam, quibus Balthicum occupet sinum, transiturus in Oceanum, vt
sic binis classibus, velut alis, ab vtroque mar. Europam premat, and opprimat;
terrestres copias per apertissimos, qua Poloniam spectat, campos, in Germaniam
effundat, qua euntem non montium claustra retinere, nonfluminum rapacitas
poterit retardare? Voluebat haec Solymannus animo, agitabanteius posteri, nec
vlla alia ab eo consilio deterritos eosfuiss* constatratione, quam quod
crederent vniuersos conspiraturos Christianos, ad tuendum hoc Regnum, excuius
salute totius Europae pendeat integritas. Nedeerantillo uotam magnanimi
Principes, qui maluissent opum, ac vitae propriae detrimentum facere, quam
vicini sibi populi salutem periclitantem deserere. Haec nostra aetate, proh
dolor! multi non intelligunt, negligunt nonnulli, and quod dolendum magis,
accersunt vltro ad communem omnium perniciem, persidum nominis Christiani
hostem, indigni Christiano nomine, Barbaris ipsis execrabiliores. Vnum Te
habent, Serenissime Rex, haec nostra tempora, qui pro singulari tua prudentia
animaduertisti, and iudicasti per latus Poloniae vniuersam peti Europam, ac
eius periculum ad omnes pertinere Christianos; solenne Ottomanorum esse bella
ex bellis quaerere, and regna regnis cumulare, qui non contenti Asiae, Africae,
and maioris Europae partis imperio, quicquid reliquum est praedae destinant:
nec sibi per religionem licere aliter posse opinantur.

Videt haec M. V. singula, vnde and hanc gloriam est consecuta, ambigentibus
caeteris Principibus quid sentirent, solam M. V. quid Christianae Reip.
expediret, maxim and vidisse, and eligisse, autoremque reliquis extitisse, vt,
dum licet, mutuis auxilijs, communibus subsidijs tantae imanissimi hostis
obuiam eant libidini, cuius opes intestinis ipsorum dissidijs eo creuerunt
potentiae.

Perge porro, Inuictissime Rex! and hanc dextram non armis magis quam pietate
notam, tuam sidem imploranti, porrige Poloniae. Defensor fidei es, commune
Numen ne blasphemetur, provide; imitere maiores tuos, quibus haud grave fuit e
proprijs Barbaros eruere latebris, and vltimae Syriae finibus Britannici
nominis gloriam terminare. Abunde amplissimis Maiestatis Vestrae ditionibus
suppetunt, quaecunque ad reprimendas potentissimi hostis vires requiruntur.
Procerum copia, populi multitudo, omnis generis apparatus, vis immensa; ne
patiatur Maiestas Vestra peritissimos rei militaris Anglos, bellicosissimos
Scotos, Hybernos ferocissimos, coniunctissimi May. Vestrae Regis, and
amicissimae gentis, discrimina spectare otiosos, ac tam late serpens incendium
in propria potius opperiri domo, quam in vicina, dum licet, restinguere. In
alieno discrimine propria curare pericula, nec praesentia duntaxat intueri, sed
futura prospicere, erit celebratae Maiestatis Vestrae prudentiae, erit and
magnanimitatis, quam vterque admirabitur orbis, quam sera praedicabit
posteritas, quam seruata venerabitur Polonia. Serenissimus vero Rex meus vti
nunc particularem Maiestatis Vestrae erga se affectum, qua potest maxima animi
gratitudine, complectitur, it a in posterum cum se May. Vestrae declarabit
amicum, qui and secundis Maiestatis Vestrae rebus ex animo faueat, and
aduersis, si quae impendeant, non secus quam proprio commoueatur discrimine.

Most Renowned KING,
THE sacred, royal Majesty of Poland, and Suethland, my most gracious Lord and
Master, wishing unto your Majesty perfect, and long health, most happy success
in all your desires, a flourishing, and peaceful government over your most
large dominions, declares, by the most ample testification he may of
particular affection to your Majesty, the singular propension of a mind,
brotherly, and most studiously addicted to your Majesty's affairs, and
obliges himself by these Letters. And this Preface past, I most humbly
beseech your Majesty, while I briefly declare the rest of my Embassage, to
vouchsafe me your benigns attention.

THE long concealed poison in the breast of the Ottomans, has now at length
broke forth, and the mask of many years feigned friendship laid aside,
Poland, the strongest bulwark of the Christian world, is assaulted with the
universal fury of the Barbarous. The East is filled with noise of preparation
for War, the seas are laden with Nauies, A^^a is joined to Europe, and what
forces Africa affoords, are armed for our destruction. Into the society of so
great a War there come the hereditary enemies of our name, the Tartars; there
comes also both the Dacians; the Seruians, Bulgars, Bosnians, Illyrians,
Thracians, Epirotes, al wild, and barbarous people whatsoever, by force,
rewards, promises, hopes of prey, desire of revenge, are compelled, allured,
enraged. A lamentable prologue to this bloody tragedy has lately bin acted;
cruel Dacia has greedily drunk the first blood, where the perfidious enemy
mindlesse of his past and present leagues solemnly sealed, and sworn,
inuading with innumerable troops the territories of the King, my most clement
Master, slew, to the singular loss of the Christian Commonwealth, our small,
but most warlike Army opposed against him. For by that victory the courage of
the Barbarous, ^ chief ^ at the ^can^^, ^^ainst ^^ans, ^^lemn ^^eir ^ for
^^cesse ^e, the ^rke ^ them, ^ with from were ^r own ^^stroy ^ian^.
increased, and they grown insolent with so happy beginnings, have in hope
devoured all Europe, being so far transported either with arrogance, or
madness, that even without a Gods assent, they believe themselves able to
destroy our Nation. With so great a danger not only of his own, but of all
other Christian provinces, the Sacred Majesty of my most gracious Master being
moved, has determined with himself to forewarne other Princes of the imminent
peril, but especially, all delay set apart, to refer it to your Majesty.
But such is the singular vigilance of your Majesty, so great is your study of
the common good of Christians, that you do advertise them, to whom the dangers
in respect either of time, or place chiefly belong; and your Majesty
preuenteth even this message of my most renowned King, and of your own accord
You have offered what we should have sought, when to this selfsame enemy,
you declared your self Friend to the Regal Majesty of my most gracious
Master, and that you would not forsake him in any danger. Wherein his Regal
Majesty acknowledges your truly great, truly royal, truly Christian
mind; wherein he acknowledges your Majesty's brotherly affection, which
with the testification of a most thankful heart, he embraces, and professes
there is nothing so grievous, so difficult, so dangerous, which he would not
likewise for your Majesty's cause undertake. I would to God other Christian
Princes might be moved by this most famous example of your Majesty, and that
they would rather be fellow laborers in so glorious a work, then idle and
slothful spectators of others danger, since by neglecting their neighbors,
they cannot but at length ruin themselves. Which how likely it is to come to
pass, they may, if Heaven be pleased, believe, forewarned by the example of
our selves, whom neglected Greece, forsaken Hungary have cast into these
present straights. And surely we shall suffer whatsoever Heaven imposes
with resolution to renew the examples of the Saguntines faith, Tyrians
constancy, or of what fortitude has else been found; but let our neighbors
forethinke how they shall prepare their minds to endure the like, or (which
Heaven forbid) greater calamities. Neither let them once imagine the Tyrant,
whose mind the poor Sarmatian cottages drew to so detestable perjury, will
esteem more holy the rights and laws of neighborhood which he shall make
with them, after whose cities most flourishing in Merchandise, most excelling
in riches, most beautiful in buildings, he has long gaped. These things
will not keep back, but draw him on, they will not quench, but inflame his
sacrilegious thirst of enlarging his Empire by all both inhumane, and
irreligious wickedness. For who sees not the Tyrant only to intend that
which is known to have been long time debated in the counsel of his
predecessors, that by possessing a country yielding easiest access into all
parts of Europe, most fertile of all kind of grain, most replenished with all
necessaries to build, and arm a Navy, he might open plentiful granaries to
his numberless Armies, and prepare infinite shipping, by which being Master
of the Balthike Sound, he might pass into the Ocean, and so with two Nauies,
as it were with two wings, by both the Seas, press, and oppress Europe; that
he might through most open Countries, and Plains power into Germany, by those
quarters it bordereth with Poland, his Land forces, where are no closure of
Mountains to restrain, no swiftness of Rivers to fore-slowe his journey?
This, long since, Solomon and his successors cast in their mind, neither were
they, as it is manifest, by any other reason deterred from that purpose, then
for that they believed, all Christians would conspire to defend that Kingdom,
on whose safety the good estate of all Europe depended. Neither did there want
in that age Princes so magnanimous, that they rather chose to suffer loss of
substance, yea of life, then to forsake the endangered safety of their
neighbor Nation. But many in this our age apprehend not, with grief I speak
it, these things, some neglect them, and which is more to be lamented,
industriously inuit this faithless enemy of the Christian name, of which
they are unworthy, and then the Barbarous themselves more execrable, to the
common destruction of all. These our times, most Renowned King! find only
You, who in your singular wisdom have considered, and understood that all
Europe is struck at through the sides of Poland, and that the danger touches
all Christians; that to seek Wars after Wars, and heap Kingdoms to
Kingdoms, is customary with the Turks, who, not satisfied with the Empire of
Asia, Africa, and greater part of Europe, design what e're remains for prey,
and according to their religion, imagine it is not lawful for them to do
otherwise. All these things your Majesty well sees, and thereby has attained
the glory, whiles other Princes stand doubtful what to think, alone to have
understood, and chosen what was behouefull for the Christian Commonwealth, and
to have been Author to the rest, of resisting, by mutual aides, and common
succors, the so great rage of a most cruel enemy, whose fortunes have grown
unto this height of power by their intestine discords. Proceed then, O most
invincible King! and reach out this your hand, not more known by Arms then
Piety, to afflicted Poland imploring your help. You are Defender of the Faith;
take then care that our common Deity be not blasphemed; imitate your
Predecessors, who held it not burdensome to rowze the Barbarous out of their
own dens, and stretch unto the bounds of farthest Syria, the glory of the
British name. In your Majesty's most ample Territories all things abound which
are required to repress the force of the most potent enemy; store of Nobility,
multitude of people, provisions of all kind, immeasurable power. Let not your
Majesty suffer the English most experienced in military affairs, the most
warlike Scotsh, the fierce and most courageous Irish idly to behold the dangers
of a King most joined in friendship, and of a Nation most-affected to your
Majesty; and rather to expect in their own roofes so large a spreading flame,
then, whiles they may, extinguish it in their Neighbors. To provide in others
danger for your own, nor to cast your eye only on present, but also on future
things, belongs to your Majesty's celebrated Wisdom, belongs to your
Magnanimity, which either world shall admire, which long posterity shall
report and praise, which preserved Poland shall reverence. And my most Renowned
King, as for the present he imbraceth with all possible thankfulness, the
particular affection of your Majesty toward him, so in all time to come, he
will declare himself that Friend, which shall from his soul both favor your
Majesty prosperous successes, and in adverse, if any such should chance, be no
less moved then with his proper danger.

FINIS.

